"Settled!" said the Harvester. "Jupiter! I wish my troubles were that
nearly finished! Wish I knew where she is and how to find my way to her
lips! Wonder if she will come when I call her. What if I should
find her, and she would have everything on earth, other lovers, and
indifference worse than Madam Dove's for me. Talk about bitterness! Well
I'd have the dream left anyway. And there are always two sides. There is
just a possibility that she may be poor and overworked, sick and tired,
and wondering why I don't come. Possibly she had a dream, too, and she
wishes I would hurry. Dear Lord!"

The Harvester began to perspire as he strode down the hill. He scarcely
waited to hang the harness properly. He did not stop to unload the wagon
until night, but went after an ax and a board that he split into pegs.
Then he took a ball of twine, a measuring line, and began laying out his
foundation, when the hard earth would scarcely hold the stakes he drove
into it. When he found he only would waste time in digging he put away
the neatly washed kettles, peeled the spice brush, spread it to dry, and
prepared his dinner. After that he began hauling stone and cement for
his basement floor and foundation walls. Occasionally he helped at
hewing logs when the old man paused to rest. That afternoon the first
robin of the season hailed him in passing.

"Hello!" cried the Harvester. "You don't mean to tell me that you have
beaten the larks! You really have! Well since I see it, I must believe,
but you are early. Come around to the back door if crumbs or wheat will
do or if you can make out on suet and meat bones! We are good and ready
for you. Where is your mate? For any sake, don't tell me you don't know.
One case of that kind at Medicine Woods is enough. Say you came ahead
to see if it is too cold or to select a home and get ready for her. Say
anything on earth except that you love her, and want her until your body
is one quivering ache, and you don't know where she is."


CHAPTER IV. A COMMISSION FOR THE SOUTH WIND

The next morning the larks trailed ecstasy all over the valley, the
following day cuckoos were calling in the thickets, a warm wind swept
from the south and set swollen buds bursting, while the sun shone,
causing the Harvester to rejoice. Betsy's white coat was splashed with
the mud of the valley road; the feet of Belshazzar left tracks over
lumber piles; and the Harvester removed his muck-covered shoes at the
door and wore slippers inside. The skunk cabbage appeared around the
edge of the forest, rank mullein and thistles lay over the fields in
big circles of green, and even plants of delicate growth were thrusting
their heads through mellowing earth and dead leaves, to reach light and
air.

Then the Harvester took his mattock and began to dig. His level best
fell so far short of what he felt capable of doing and desired to
accomplish that the following day he put two more men on the job. Then
the earth did fly, and so soon as the required space was excavated the
walls were lined with stone and a smooth basement floor was made of
cement. The night the new home stood, a skeleton of joists and rafters,
gleaming whitely on the banks of Loon Lake, the Harvester went to the
bridge crossing Singing Water and slowly came up the driveway to see how
the work appeared. He caught his breath as he advanced. He had intended
to stake out generous rooms, but this, compared with the cabin, seemed
like a big hotel.

"I hope I haven't made it so large it will be a burden," he
soliloquized. "It's huge! But while I am at it I want to build big
enough, and I think I have."

He stood on the driveway, his arms folded, and looked at the structure
as he occasionally voiced his thoughts.

"The next thing is to lay up the side walls and get the roof over. Got
to have plenty of help, for those logs are hewed to fourteen inches
square and some of them are forty feet long. That's timber! Grew with
me, too. Personally acquainted with almost every tree of it. We will bed
them in cement, use care with the roof, and if that doesn't make a cool
house in the summer, and a warm one in winter, I'll be disappointed.
It sets among the trees, and on the hillside just right. We must have a
wide porch, plenty of flowers, vines, ferns, and mosses, and when I get
everything finished and she sees it----perhaps it will please her."

A great horned owl swept down the hill, crossed the lake, and hooted
from the forest of the opposite bank. The Harvester thought of his dream
and turned.

"Any women walking the water to-night? Come if you like," he bantered,
"I don't mind in the least. In fact, I'd rather enjoy it. I'd be so
happy if you would come now and tell me how this appears to you,
for it's all yours. I'd have enlarged the store-room, dry-houses and
laboratory for myself, but this cabin, never! The old one suited me as
it was; but for you----I should have a better home."

The Harvester glanced from the shining skeleton to the bridge of gold
and back again.

"Where are you to-night?" he questioned. "What are you doing? Can't you
give me a hint of where to search for you when this is ready? I don't
know but I am beginning wrong. My little brothers of the wood do
differently. They announce their intentions the first thing, flaunt
their attractions, and display their strength. They say aloud, for all
the listening world to hear, what is in their hearts. They chip, chirp,
and sing, warble, whistle, thrill, scream, and hoot it. They are strong
on self-expression, and appreciative of their appearance. They meet,
court, mate, and THEN build their home together after a mutual plan.
It's a good way, too! Lots surer of getting things satisfactory."

The Harvester sat on a lumber pile and gazed questioningly at the
framework.

"I wish I knew if I am going at things right," he said. "There are two
sides to consider. If she is in a good home, and lovingly cared for, it
would be proper to court her and get her promise, if I could----no I'm
blest if I'll be so modest----get her promise, as I said, and let her
wait while I build the cabin. But if she should be poor, tired, and
neglected, then I ought to have this ready when I find her, so I could
pick her up and bring her to it, with no more ceremony than the birds."

The Harvester's clear skin flushed crimson.

"Of course, I don't mean no wedding ceremony," he amended. "I was
thinking of a long time wasted in preliminaries when in my soul I know I
am going to marry my Dream Girl before I ever have seen her in reality.
What would be the use in spending much time in courting? She is my wife
now, by every law of God. Let me get a glimpse of her, and I'll prove
it. But I've got to make tracks, for if she were here, where would I put
her? I must hurry!"

He went to the work room and began polishing a table top. He had bought
a chest of tools and was spending every spare minute on tables,
chair seats, and legs. He had decided to make these first and carve
candlesticks later when he had more time. Two hours he worked at the
furniture, and then went to bed. The following morning he put eggs under
several hens that wanted to set, trimmed his grape-vines, examined the
precious ginseng beds, attended his stock, got breakfast for Belshazzar
and himself, and was ready for work when the first carpenter arrived.
Laying hewed logs went speedily, and before the Harvester believed it
possible the big shingles he had ordered were being nailed on the roof.
Then came the plumber and arranged for the bathroom, and the furnace
man placed the heating pipes. The Harvester had intended the cabin to
be mostly the work of his own hands, but when he saw how rapidly
skilled carpenters worked, he changed his mind and had them finish the
living-room, his room, and the upstairs, and make over the dining-room
and kitchen.

Her room he worked on alone, with a little help if he did not know how
to join the different parts. Every thing was plain and simple, after
plans of his own, but the Harvester laid floors and made window casings,
seats, and doors of wood that the big factories of Grand Rapids used in
veneering their finest furniture. When one of his carpenters pointed
out this to him, and suggested that he sell his lumber to McLean and use
pine flooring from the mills the Harvester laughed at him.

"I don't say that I could afford to buy burl maple, walnut, and cherry
for wood-work," said the Harvester. "I could not, but since I have it,
you can stake your life I won't sell it and build my home of cheap,
rapidly decaying wood. The best I have goes into this cabin and what
remains will do to sell. I have an idea that when this is done it is
going to appear first rate. Anyway, it will be solid enough to last
a thousand years, and with every day of use natural wood grows more
beautiful. When we get some tables, couches, and chairs made from the
same timber as the casings and the floors, I think it will be fine.
I want money, but I don't want it bad enough to part with the BEST of
anything I have for it. Go carefully and neatly there; it will have to
be changed if you don't."

So the work progressed rapidly. When the carpenters had finished the
last stroke on the big veranda they remained a day more and made flower
boxes, and a swinging couch, and then the greedy Harvester kept the best
man with him a week longer to help on the furniture.

"Ain't you going to say a word about her, Langston?" asked this man as
they put a mirror-like surface on a curly maple dressing table top.

"Her!" ejaculated the Harvester. "What do you mean?"

"I haven't seen you bathe anywhere except in the lake since I have been
here," said the carpenter. "Do you want me to think that a porcelain
tub, this big closet, and chest of drawers are for you?"

A wave of crimson swept over the Harvester.

"No, they are not for me," he said simply. "I don't want to be any more
different from other men than I can help, although I know that life in
the woods, the rigid training of my mother, and the reading of only the
books that would aid in my work have made me individual in many of my
thoughts and ways. I suppose most men, just now, would tell you anything
you want to know. There is only one thing I can say: The best of my soul
and brain, the best of my woods and store-house, the best I can buy with
money is not good enough for her. That's all. For myself, I am getting
ready to marry, of course. I think all normal men do and that it is a
matter of plain common-sense that they should. Life with the right woman
must be infinitely broader and better than alone. Are you married?"

"Yes. Got a wife and four children."

"Are you sorry?"

"Sorry!" the carpenter shrilled the word. "Sorry! Well that's the best
I ever heard! Am I sorry I married Nell and got the kids? Do I look
sorry?"

"I am not expecting to be, either," said the Harvester calmly. "I think
I have done fairly well to stick to my work and live alone until I am
twenty-six. I have thought the thing all over and made up my mind. As
soon as I get this house far enough along that I feel I can proceed
alone I am going to rush the marrying business just as fast as I can,
and let her finish the remainder to her liking."

"Well this ought to please her."

"That's because you find your own work good," laughed the Harvester.

"Not altogether!" The carpenter polished the board and stood it on end
to examine the surface as he talked. "Not altogether! Nothing but good
work would suit you. I was thinking of the little creek splashing down
the hill to the lake; and that old log hewer said that in a few more
days things here would be a blaze of colour until fall."

"Almost all the drug plants and bushes leaf beautifully and flower
brilliantly," explained the Harvester. "I studied the location suitable
to each variety before I set the beds and planned how to grow plants
for continuity of bloom, and as much harmony of colour as possible.
Of course a landscape gardener would tear up some of it, but seen as a
whole it isn't so bad. Did you ever notice that in the open, with God's
blue overhead and His green for a background, He can place purple and
yellow, pink, magenta, red, and blue in masses or any combination you
can mention and the brighter the colour the more you like it? You
don't seem to see or feel that any grouping clashes; you revel in each
wonderful growth, and luxuriate in the brilliancy of the whole. Anyway,
this suits me."

"I guess it will please her, too," said the carpenter. "After all the
pains you've taken, she is a good one if it doesn't."

"I'll always have the consolation of having done my best," replied
the Harvester. "One can't do more! Whether she likes it or not depends
greatly on the way she has been reared."

"You talk as if you didn't know," commented the carpenter.

"You go on with this now," said the Harvester hastily. "I've got to
uncover some beds and dig my year's supply of skunk cabbage, else folk
with asthma and dropsy who depend on me will be short on relief. I ought
to take my sweet flag, too, but I'm so hurried now I think I'll leave it
until fall; I do when I can, because the bloom is so pretty around the
lake and the bees simply go wild over the pollen. Sometimes I almost
think I can detect it in their honey. Do you know I've wondered often
if the honey my bees make has medicinal properties and should be kept
separate in different seasons. In early spring when the plants and
bushes that furnish the roots and barks of most of the tonics are in
bloom, and the bees gather the pollen, that honey should partake in a
degree of the same properties and be good medicine. In the summer
it should aid digestion, and in the fall cure rheumatism and blood
disorders."

"Say you try it!" urged the carpenter. "I want a lot of the fall kind.
I'm always full of rheumatism by October. Exposure, no doubt."

"Over eating of too much rich food, you mean," laughed the Harvester.
"I'd like to see any man expose his body to more differing extremes of
weather than I do, and I'm never sick. It's because I am my own cook
and so I live mostly on fruits, vegetables, bread, milk, and eggs, a few
fish from the lake, a little game once in a great while or a chicken,
and no hot drinks; plenty of fresh water, air, and continuous work out
of doors. That's the prescription! I'd be ashamed to have rheumatism at
your age. There's food in the cupboard if you grow hungry. I am going
past one of the neighbours on my way to see about some work I want her
to do."

The Harvester stopped for lunch, carried food to Belshazzar, and started
straight across country, his mattock, with a bag rolled around the
handle, on his shoulder. His feet sank in the damp earth at the foot of
the hill, and he laughed as he leaped across Singing Water.

"You noisy chatterbox!" cried the man. "The impetus of coming down the
curves of the hill keeps you talking all the way across this muck bed to
the lake. With small work I can make you a thing of beauty. A few bushes
grubbed, a little deepening where you spread too much, and some more
mallows along the banks will do the trick. I must attend to you soon."

"Now what does the boy want?" laughed a white-haired old woman, as the
Harvester entered the door. "Mebby you think I don't know what you're
up to! I even can hear the hammering and the voices of the men when the
wind is in the south. I've been wondering how soon you'd need me. Out
with it!"

"I want you to get a woman and come over and spend a day with me.
I'll come after you and bring you back. I want you to go over mother's
bedding and have what needs it washed. All I want you to do is to
superintend, and tell me now what I will want from town for your work."

"I put away all your mother's bedding that you were not using, clean as
a ribbon."

"But it has been packed in moth preventives ever since and out only four
times a year to air, as you told me. It must smell musty and be yellow.
I want it fresh and clean."

"So what I been hearing is true, David?"

"Quite true!" said the Harvester.

"Whose girl is she, and when are you going to jine hands?"

The Harvester lifted his clear eyes and hesitated.

"Doc Carey laid you in my arms when you was born, David. I tended you
'fore ever your ma did. All your life you've been my boy, and I love you
same as my own blood; it won't go no farther if you say so. I'll never
tell a living soul. But I'm old and 'til better weather comes, house
bound; and I get mighty lonely. I'd like to think about you and her, and
plan for you, and love her as I always did you folks. Who is she, David?
Do I know the family?"

"No. She is a stranger to these parts," said the unhappy Harvester.

"David, is she a nice girl 'at your ma would have liked?"

"She's the only girl in the world that I'd marry," said the Harvester
promptly, glad of a question he could answer heartily. "Yes. She is
gentle, very tender and----and affectionate," he went on so rapidly that
Granny Moreland could not say a word, "and as soon as I bring her home
you shall come to spend a day and get acquainted. I know you will love
her! I'll come in the morning, then. I must hurry now. I am working
double this spring and I'm off for the skunk cabbage bed to-day."

"You are working fit to kill, the neighbours say. Slavin' like a horse
all day, and half the night I see your lights burning."

"Do I appear killed?" laughingly inquired the Harvester.

"You look peart as a struttin' turkey gobbler," said the old woman. "Go
on with your work! Work don't hurt a-body. Eat a-plenty, sleep all you
ort, and you CAN'T work enough to hurt you."

"So the neighbours say I'm working now? New story, isn't it? Usually I'm
too lazy to make a living, if I remember."

"Only to those who don't sense your purceedings, David. I always knowed
how you grubbed and slaved an' set over them fearful books o' yours."

"More interesting than the wildest fiction," said the man. "I'm making
some medicine for your rheumatism, Granny. It is not fully tested yet,
but you get ready for it by cutting out all the salt you can. I haven't
time to explain this morning, but you remember what I say, leave out the
salt, and when Doc thinks it's safe I'll bring you something that will
make a new woman of you."

He went swinging down the road, and Granny Moreland looked after him.

"While he was talkin'," she muttered, "I felt full of information as a
flock o' almanacs, but now since he's gone, 'pears to me I don't know a
thing more 'an I did to start on."

"Close call," the Harvester was thinking. "Why the nation did I admit
anything to her? People may talk as they please, so long as I don't
sanction it, but I have two or three times. That's a fool trick. Suppose
I can't find her? Maybe she won't look at me if I can. Then I'd have
started something I couldn't finish. And if anybody thinks I'll end
this by taking any girl I can get, if I can't find Her, why they think
wrongly. Just the girl of my golden dream or no woman at all for me.
I've lived alone long enough to know how to do it in comfort. If I can't
find and win her I have no intention of starting a boarding house."

The Harvester began to laugh. "'I'd rather keep bachelor's hall in Hell
than go to board in Heaven!'" he quoted gaily. "That's my sentiment too.
If you can't have what you want, don't have anything. But there is no
use to become discouraged before I start. I haven't begun to hunt her
yet. Until I do, I might as well believe that she will walk across the
bridge and take possession just as soon as I get the last chair leg
polished. She might! She came in the dream, and to come actually
couldn't be any more real. I'll make a stiff hunt of it before I give
up, if I ever do. I never yet have made a complete failure of anything.
But just now I am hunting skunk cabbage. It's precisely the time to take
it."

Across the lake, in the swampy woods, close where the screech owl sang
and the girl of the golden dream walked in the moonlight the Harvester
began operations. He unrolled the sack, went to one end of the bed and
systematically started a swath across it, lifting every other plant
by the roots. Flowering time was almost past, but the bees knew where
pollen ripened, and hummed incessantly over and inside the queer
cone-shaped growths with their hooked beaks. It almost appeared as if
the sound made inside might be to give outsiders warning not to poach
on occupied territory, for the Harvester noticed that no bee entered a
pre-empted plant.

With skilful hand each stroke brought up a root and he tossed it to one
side. The plants were vastly peculiar things. First they seemed to be a
curled leaf with no flower. In colour they shaded from yellow to almost
black mahogany, and appeared as if they were a flower with no leaf.
Closer examination proved there was a stout leaf with a heavy outside
mid-rib, the tip of which curled over in a beak effect, that wrapped
around a peculiar flower of very disagreeable odour. The handling of
these plants by the hundred so intensified this smell the Harvester
shook his head.

"I presume you are mostly mine," he said to the busy little workers
around him. "If there is anything in my theory of honey having varying
medicinal properties at different seasons, right now mine should be
good for Granny's rheumatism and for nervous and dropsical people. I
shouldn't think honey flavoured with skunk cabbage would be fit to eat.
But, of course, it isn't all this. There is catkin pollen on the wind,
hazel and sassafras are both in bloom now, and so are several of the
earliest little flowers of the woods. You can gather enough of them
combined to temper the disagreeable odour into a racy sweetness, and all
the shrub blooms are good tonics, too, and some of the earthy ones. I'm
going to try giving some of you empty cases next spring and analyzing
the honey to learn if it isn't good medicine."

The Harvester straightened and leaned on the mattock to fill his lungs
with fresh air and as he delightedly sniffed it he commented, "Nothing
else has much of a chance since I've stirred up the cabbage bed. I can
scent the catkins plainly, being so close, and as I came here I could
detect the hazel and sassafras all right."

Above him a peculiar, raucous chattering for an instant hushed other
wood voices. The Harvester looked up, laughing gaily.

"So you've decided to announce it to your tribe at last, have you?"
he inquired. "You are waking the sleepers in their dens to-day? Well,
there's nothing like waiting until you have a sure thing. The bluebirds
broke the trail for the feathered folk the twenty-fourth of February.
The sap oozed from the maples about the same time for the trees. The
very first skunk cabbage was up quite a month ago to signal other plants
to come on, and now you are rousing the furred folk. I'll write this
down in my records----'When the earliest bluebird sings, when the sap
wets the maples, when the skunk cabbage flowers, and the first striped
squirrel barks, why then, it is spring!'"

He bent to his task and as he worked closer the water he noticed
sweet-flag leaves waving two inches tall beneath the surface.

"Great day!" he cried. "There you are making signs, too! And right! Of
course! Nature is always right. Just two inches high and it's harvest
for you. I can use a rake, and dried in the evaporator you bring me
ten cents a pound; to the folks needing a tonic you are worth a small
fortune. No doubt you cost that by the time you reach them; but I fear
I can't gather you just now. My head is a little preoccupied these days.
What with the cabbage, and now you, and many of the bushes and trees
making signs, with a new cabin to build and furnish, with a girl to find
and win, I'm what you might call busy. I've covered my book shelf.
I positively don't dare look Emerson or Maeterlinck in the face. One
consolation! I've got the best of Thoreau in my head, and if I read
Stickeen a few times more I'll be able to recite that. There's a man for
you, not to mention the dog! Bel, where are you? Would you stick to me
like that? I think you would. But you are a big, strong fellow. Stickeen
was only such a mite of a dog. But what a man he followed! I feel as
if I should put on high-heeled slippers and carry a fan and a lace
handkerchief when I think of him. And yet, most men wouldn't consider my
job so easy!"

The Harvester rapidly pitched the evil-smelling plants into big heaps
and as he worked he imitated the sounds around him as closely as he
could. The song sparrow laughed at him and flew away in disgust when he
tried its notes. The jay took time to consider, but was not fooled. The
nut-hatch ran head first down trees, larvae hunting, and was never a
mite deceived. But the killdeer on invisible legs, circling the lake
shore, replied instantly; so did the lark soaring above, and the dove of
the elm thicket close beside. The glittering black birds flashing over
every tree top answered the "T'check, t'chee!" of the Harvester quite as
readily as their mates.

The last time he paused to rest he had studied scents. When he
straightened again he was occupied with every voice of earth and air
around and above him, and the notes of singing hens, exultant cocks, the
scream of geese, the quack of ducks, the rasping crescendo of guineas
running wild in the woods, the imperial note of Ajax sunning on the
ridge pole and echoes from all of them on adjoining and distant farms.

"'Now I see the full meaning and beauty of that word sound!'" quoted
the Harvester. "'I thank God for sound. It always mounts and makes me
mount!'"

He breathed deeply and stood listening, a superb figure of a man, his
lean face glowing with emotion.

"If she could see and hear this, she would come," he said softly. "She
would come and she would love it as I do. Any one who understands,
and knows how to translate, cares for this above all else earth has to
offer. They who do not, fail to read as they run!"

He shifted feet mired in swamp muck, and stood as if loath to bend again
to his task. He lifted a weighted mattock and scraped the earth from
it, sniffing it delightedly the while. A soft south wind freighted with
aromatic odours swept his warm face. The Harvester removed his hat and
shook his head that the breeze might thread his thick hair.

"I've a commission for you, South Wind," he said whimsically. "Go find
my Dream Girl. Go carry her this message from me. Freight your breath
with spicy pollen, sun warmth, and flower nectar. Fill all her senses
with delight, and then, close to her ear, whisper it softly, 'Your lover
is coming!' Tell her that, O South Wind! Carry Araby to her nostrils,
Heaven to her ears, and then whisper and whisper it over and over until
you arouse the passion of earth in her blood. Tell her what is rioting
in my heart, and brain, and soul this morning. Repeat it until she must
awake to its meaning, 'Your lover is coming.'"


CHAPTER V. WHEN THE HARVESTER MADE GOOD

The sassafras and skunk cabbage were harvested. The last workman was
gone. There was not a sound at Medicine Woods save the babel of bird and
animal notes and the never-ending accompaniment of Singing Water. The
geese had gone over, some flocks pausing to rest and feed on Loon Lake,
and ducks that homed there were busy among the reeds and rushes. In
the deep woods the struggle to maintain and reproduce life was at its
height, and the courting songs of gaily coloured birds were drowned by
hawk screams and crow calls of defiance.

Every night before he plunged into the lake and went to sleep the
Harvester made out a list of the most pressing work that he would
undertake on the coming day. By systematizing and planning ahead he was
able to accomplish an unbelievable amount. The earliest rush of spring
drug gathering was over. He could be more deliberate in collecting the
barks he wanted. Flowers that were to be gathered at bloom time and
leaves were not yet ready. The heavy leaf coverings he had helped
the winds to heap on his beds of lily of the valley, bloodroot, and
sarsaparilla were removed carefully.

Inside the cabin the Harvester cleaned the glass, swept the floors with
a soft cloth pinned over the broom, and hung pale yellow blinds at the
windows. Every spare minute he worked on making furniture, and with each
piece he grew in experience and ventured on more difficult undertakings.
He had progressed so far that he now allowed himself an hour each day on
the candlesticks for her. Every evening he opened her door and with soft
cloths polished the furniture he had made. When her room was completed
and the dining-room partially finished, the Harvester took time to stain
the cabin and porch roofs the shade of the willow leaves, and on the
logs and pillars he used oil that served to intensify the light yellow
of the natural wood. With that much accomplished he felt better. If she
came now, in a few hours he would be able to offer a comfortable room,
enough conveniences to live until more could be provided, and of food
there was always plenty.

His daily programme was to feed and water his animals and poultry,
prepare breakfast for himself and Belshazzar, and go to the woods,
dry-house or store-room to do the work most needful in his harvesting.
In the afternoon he laboured over furniture and put finishing touches on
the new cabin, and after supper he carved and found time to read again,
as before his dream.

He was so happy he whistled and sang at his work much of the time at
first, but later there came days when doubts crept in and all his will
power was required to proceed steadily. As the cabin grew in better
shape for occupancy each day, more pressing became the thought of how he
was going to find and meet the girl of his dream. Sometimes it seemed to
him that the proper way was to remain at home and go on with his work,
trusting her to come to him. At such times he was happy and gaily
whistled and sang:

     "Stay in your chimney corner,
          Don't roam the world about,
       Stay in your chimney corner,
          And your own true love will find you out."


But there were other days while grubbing in the forest, battling with
roots in the muck and mire of the lake bank, staggering under a load
for two men, scarcely taking time to eat and sleep enough to keep his
condition perfect, when that plan seemed too hopeless and senseless to
contemplate. Then he would think of locking the cabin, leaving the drugs
to grow undisturbed by collecting, hiring a neighbour to care for his
living creatures, and starting a search over the world to find her.
There came times when the impulse to go was so strong that only the
desire to take a day more to decide where, kept him. Every time his mind
was made up to start the following day came the counter thought, what
if I should go and she should come in my absence? In the dream she came.
That alone held him, even in the face of the fact that if he left home
some one might know of and rifle the precious ginseng bed, carefully
tended these seven years for the culmination the coming fall would
bring. That ginseng was worth many thousands and he had laboured over
it, fighting worms and parasites, covering and uncovering it with the
changing seasons, a siege of loving labour.

Sometimes a few hours of misgiving tortured him, but as a rule he was
cheerful and happy in his preparations. Without intending to do it
he was gradually furnishing the cabin. Every few days saw a new piece
finished in the workshop. Each trip to Onabasha ended in the purchase of
some article he could see would harmonize with his colour plans for
one of the rooms. He had filled the flower boxes for the veranda with
delicate plants that were growing luxuriantly.

Then he designed and began setting a wild-flower garden outside her door
and started climbing vines over the logs and porches, but whatever he
planted he found in the woods or took from beds he cultivated. Many of
the medicinal vines had leaves, flowers, twining tendrils, and berries
or fruits of wonderful beauty. Every trip to the forest he brought back
a half dozen vines, plants, or bushes to set for her. All of them either
bore lovely flowers, berries, quaint seed pods, or nuts, and beside the
drive and before the cabin he used especial care to plant a hedge of
bittersweet vines, burning bush, and trees of mountain ash, so that
the glory of their colour would enliven the winter when days might be
gloomy.

He planted wild yam under her windows that its queer rattles might amuse
her, and hop trees where their castanets would play gay music with every
passing wind of fall. He started a thicket along the opposite bank of
Singing Water where it bubbled past her window, and in it he placed in
graduated rows every shrub and small tree bearing bright flower, berry,
or fruit. Those remaining he used as a border for the driveway from the
lake, so that from earliest spring her eyes would fall on a procession
of colour beginning with catkins and papaw lilies, and running through
alders, haws, wild crabs, dogwood, plums, and cherry intermingled with
forest saplings and vines bearing scarlet berries in fall and winter. In
the damp soil of the same character from which they were removed, in
the shade and under the skilful hand of the Harvester, few of these
knew they had been transplanted, and when May brought the catbirds and
orioles much of this growth was flowering quite as luxuriantly as the
same species in the woods.

Oyer has long been a technical term in English law; and it is almost
unnecessary to explain, that it is old French for _to hear_--_oyer and
terminer_ meaning, to hear and determine. The same inscrutable
reasons which make the evidence so imperfect against the chief
offenders, affect the whole of it. But while the exact causes of the
death of Sir Thomas Overbury may be left in doubt, as well as the
motives which led to it, enough is revealed in the trials of the
minor offenders to throw a remarkable light on the strange habits
of the time, and especially on the profligacy and credulity of the
court of King James.

The first person put to trial was Richard Weston, who had been appointed
for the purpose of taking charge of Sir Thomas Overbury. If he had been
murdered by poison, there could be no doubt that Weston was one
of the perpetrators.

He had been brought up as an apothecary; and it was said that he was
selected on account of his being thus enabled to dabble in poisons.
The charge against him is very indistinct.

He was charged that he, 'in the Tower of London, in the parish of Allhallows
Barking, did obtain and get into his hand certain poison of green and
yellow colour, called rosalgar--knowing the same to be deadly poison--and
the same did maliciously and feloniously mingle and compound in a kind
of broth poured out into a certain dish.' Weston long refused to plead
to the indictment. Of old, a person could not be put on trial unless
he pleaded not guilty, and demanded a trial. The law, however, provided
for those who were obstinate a more dreadful death than would be
inflicted on the scaffold.

To frighten him into compliance, the court gave him a description
of it, telling him that he was 'to be extended, and then to have
weights laid upon him no more than he was able to bear, which were
by little and little to be increased; secondly, that he was to be
exposed in an open place near to the prison, in the open air, being
naked; and lastly, that he was to be preserved with the coarsest
bread that could be got, and water out of the next sink or puddle.'

He was told that 'oftentimes men lived in that extremity eight or nine
days.' People have sometimes endured the _peine forte et dure_, as it
was called, because, unless they pleaded and were convicted, their
estates were not forfeited; and they endured the death of protracted
torture for the sake of their families. Weston's object was supposed
to be to prevent a trial, the evidence in which would expose his great
patrons the Earl and Countess of Somerset. The motive was not, however,
strong enough to make him stand to his purpose. He pleaded to the
indictment, was found guilty, and executed at Tyburn.

The next person brought up was of a more interesting character--Anne
Turner, the widow of a physician. It is stated in the Report, that
when she appeared at the bar, the chief-justice Coke said to her:
'that women must be covered in the church, but not when they are
arraigned, and so caused her to put off her hat; which done, she covered
her hair with her handkerchief, being before dressed in her hair with
her handkerchief over it.' Although Mother Turner's pursuits were of
the questionable kind generally attributed to old hags--she dealt in
philters, soothsaying, and poisoning--she must have been a young
and beautiful woman.

In some of the letters which were produced at the trials, she was called
'Sweet Turner.' In a poem, called _Overbury's Vision_, published in
1616, and reprinted in the seventh volume of the Harleian Miscellany, she
is thus enthusiastically described--
'It seemed that she had been some gentle dame; For on each part of
her fair body's frame Nature such delicacy did bestow, That fairer
object oft it doth not shew.

Her crystal eye, beneath an ivory brow, Did shew what she at first had
been; but now The roses on her lovely cheeks were dead; The earth's
pale colour had all overspread Her sometime lovely look; and cruel
Death, Coming untimely with his wintry breath, Blasted the fruit
which, cherry-like in show, Upon her dainty lips did whilome grow.
Oh, how the cruel cord did misbecome Her comely neck! And yet by law's
just doom Had been her death.'

It might be said to be Mrs Turner's profession, to minister to
all the bad passions of intriguers. The wicked Countess of Essex employed
her to secure to her, by magic arts and otherwise, the affection of
Somerset, and at the same time to create alienation and distaste on the
part of her husband. Among the documents produced at her trial was one
said to be a list of 'what ladies loved what lords;' and it is alleged
that Coke prohibited its being read, because, whenever he cast his eye
on it, he saw there the name of his own wife. Some mysterious articles
were produced at the trial, which were believed to be instruments of
enchantment and diabolical agency. 'There were also enchantments shewed
in court, written in parchment, wherein were contained all the names
of the blessed Trinity mentioned in the Scriptures; and in another
parchment + B + C + D + E; and in a third, likewise in parchment, were
written all the names of the holy Trinity, as also a figure, on which
was written this word, _corpus_; and on the parchment was fastened a
little piece of the skin of a man. In some of these parchments were
the devil's particular names, who were conjured to torment the
Lord Somerset, and Sir Arthur Manwaring, if their loves should not
continue, the one to the Countess, the other to Mrs Turner.'

Along with these were some pictures, as they were termed, or, more
properly speaking, models of the human figure. 'At the shewing,' says
the report, 'of these, and inchanted papers, and other pictures
in court, there was heard a crack from the scaffolds, which caused
great fear, tumult, and confusion among the spectators, and throughout
the hall, every one fearing hurt, as if the devil had been present,
and grown angry to have his workmanship shewed by such as were not
his own scholars

.'[4]
The small figures, which appeared to have created the chief consternation,
were, we are inclined to believe, very innocent things.

There was, it is true, a belief that an individual could be injured
or slain by operations on his likeness. There was, however, another purpose
connected with Mrs Turner's pursuits to which small jointed images,
like artists' lay figures, were used.

This was to exhibit the effect of any new fashion, or peculiar style
of dress.

In this manner small figures, about the size of dolls, were long used in
Paris. We have seen people expressing their surprise at pictures of
full-grown Frenchwomen examining dolls, but in reality they were not
more triflingly occupied than those who now contemplate the latest
fashions in their favourite feminine periodical. Mrs Turner was very
likely to have occasion for such figures, for she was, with her other
pursuits, a sort of dressmaker, or _modiste_; in fact, she seems to
have been a ready minister to every kind of human vanity and folly, as
well as to a good deal of human wickedness. In the department of dress,
she had a name in her own sex and age as illustrious as that of Brummel
among dandies in the beginning of this century. As he was the inventor
of the starched cravat, she was his precursor in the invention of the
starched ruff, or, as it is generally said, of the yellow starch.

The best account we have of the starched ruff is by a man who wrote to
abuse it. An individual named Stubbes published an _Anatomy of Abuses_.
Having become extremely rare, a small impression of it was lately
reprinted, as a curious picture of the times.

Stubbes dealt trenchantly with everything that savoured of pride
and ostentation in dress; and he was peculiarly severe on Mrs
Turner's invention, which made the ruff stand against bad weather.

He describes the ruffs as having been made 'of cambric Holland lawn; or
else of some other the finest cloth that can be got for money, whereof
some be a quarter of a yard deep; yea, some more--very few less.' He
describes with much glee the elementary calamities to which, before the
invention of the starch, they were liable. 'If Æolus with his blasts,
or Neptune with his storms, chance to hit upon the crazy barque of
their bruised ruffs, then they goeth flip-flap in the wind, like rags
that flew abroad, lying upon their shoulders like the dish-clout of a
slut.' Having thus, with great exultation, described these reproofs
to human pride, he mentions how 'the devil, as he, in the fulness
of his malice, first invented these great ruffs, so hath he now
found out also two great pillars to bear up and maintain this his
kingdom of great ruffs--for the devil is king and prince over all
the kingdom of pride.'

One pillar appears to have been a wire framework--something, perhaps,
of the nature of the hoop. The other was 'a certain kind of liquid matter,
which they call starch, wherein the devil hath willed them to wash
and dye their ruffs well; and this starch they make of divers colours
and hues--white, red, blue, purple, and the like, which, being dry,
will then stand stiff and inflexible about their necks.'
Mrs Turner, at her execution, was arrayed in a ruff stiffened with the
material for the invention of which she was so famous. She had for her
scientific adviser a certain Dr Forman--a man who was believed to be deep
in all kinds of dangerous chemical lore, and at the same time to possess
a connection with the Evil One, which gave him powers greater than those
capable of being obtained through mere scientific agency.

Had he been alive, he would have undoubtedly been tried with the other
poisoners. His widow gave some account of his habits, and of his wonderful
apparatus, such as 'a ring which would open like a watch;' but the
glimpse obtained of him is brief and mysteriously tantalising.

We remember that, about twenty-five years ago, this man was made the
hero of a novel called _Forman_, which contains much effective
writing, but did not somehow fit the popular taste.

Notwithstanding the scientific ingenuity both of the males and females
concerned in this affair, the poisoning seems to have been conducted
in a very bungling manner when compared with the slow and secret
poisonings of the French and Italians.

It is believed that a female of Naples, called Tophana, who used a
tasteless liquid, named after her _Aqua Tophana_, killed with it
600 people before she was discovered to be a murderess.

The complete secrecy in which these foreigners shrouded their operations--people
seeming to drop off around them as if by the silent operation of
natural causes--was what made their machinations so frightful.

Poisoning, however, is a cowardly as well as a cruel crime, which has
never taken strong root in English habits; and, as we have observed, the
poisoners on this occasion, notwithstanding the skill and knowledge
enlisted by them in the service, were arrant bunglers. Thus, the confession
of James Franklin, an accomplice, would seem to shew that Sir Thomas
Overbury was subjected to poisons enough to have deprived three
cats of their twenty-seven lives.

'Mrs Turner came to me from the countess, and wished me, from her, to get
the strongest poison I could for Sir T. Overbury. Accordingly, I bought
seven--viz., aquafortis, white arsenic, mercury, powder of diamonds,
_lapis costitus_, great spiders, and cantharides. All these were given
to Sir T. Overbury at several times. And further confesseth, that the
lieutenant knew of these poisons; for that appeared, said he, by many
letters which he writ to the Countess of Essex, which I saw, and
thereby knew that he knew of this matter. One of these letters I read
for the countess, because she could not read it herself; in which
the lieutenant used this speech: "Madam, the scab is like the
fox--the more he is cursed, the better he fareth."

And many other speeches. Sir T. never eat white salt, but there
was white arsenic put into it. Once he desired pig, and Mrs Turner put
into it _lapis costitus_. The white powder that was sent to Sir T.
in a letter, he knew to be white arsenic. At another time, he had
two partridges sent him by the court, and water and onions being the
sauce, Mrs Turner put in cantharides instead of pepper; so that there
was scarce anything that he did eat but there was some poison mixed.'[5]

It is impossible to believe that the human frame could stand out for weeks
against so hot a siege. It would appear as if Franklin must really have
confessed too much. It has already been said, that the confused state of
the whole evidence renders it difficult to find how far a case was
made out against the Earl and Countess of Somerset.

Such a confession as Franklin's only makes matters still more confused.
That Sir Thomas Overbury really was poisoned, one can scarcely
doubt, if even a portion of what Franklin and the others say is
true; but the reckless manner in which the crime was gone about,
and the confusion of the whole evidence, is extremely perplexing.

Not the least remarkable feature in this tragedy is the number of
people concerned in it.

We find, brought to trial, the Earl and Countess of Somerset and
Sir Thomas Monson, who, though said to be the guiltiest of all,
were spared: Weston, Franklin, and Mrs Turner, were executed:
Forman, and another man of science who was said to have given aid,
had gone to their account before the trials came on.

Then, in Franklin's confession, it was stated that 'the toothless
maid, trusty Margaret, was acquainted with the poisoning; so was
Mrs Turner's man, Stephen; so also was Mrs Home, the countess's own
handmaid;' and several other subordinate persons are alluded to in
a similar manner.

The quietness and secrecy of the French and Italian poisonings have
been already alluded to.

The poisoners, in general, instead of acting in a bustling crowd, generally
prepared themselves for their dreadful task by secretly acquiring
the competent knowledge, so that they might not find it necessary
to take the aid of confederates.

They generally did their work alone, or at most two would act
together.

It certainly argues a sadly demoralised state of society in the
reign of King James, that so many persons should be found who would
coolly connect themselves with the work of death; but still there
was not so much real danger as in the quiet, systematic poisonings
of such criminals as Tophana and the Countess of Brinvilliers.

The great Oyer of poisoning was, however, calculated to make a very
deep impression on the public mind.

It filled London with fear and suspicion. When rumours about poisonings
become prevalent, no one knows exactly how far the crime has proceeded,
and this and that event is remembered and connected with it. All the
sudden deaths within recollection are recalled, and thus accounted for.
People supposed to be adepts in chemistry were in great danger from
the populace, and one man, named Lamb, was literally torn to pieces
by a mob at Charing-Cross.

The people began to dwell upon the death of Prince Henry, the king's
eldest son, who had fallen suddenly. It was remembered that he was a
youth of a frank, manly disposition--the friend and companion of
Raleigh and of other heroic spirits.

He liked popularity, and went into many of the popular prejudices of the
times--forming altogether in his character a great contrast to his
grave, dry, fastidious, and suspicious brother Charles, who was to succeed
to his vacant place. He had died very suddenly--of fever, it was said;
but popular rumour now attributed his death to poison. Nay, it was said
that his own father, jealous of his popularity, was the perpetrator;
and it was whispered that _this_ was the secret which King James
was so afraid his favourite Somerset might tell if prosecuted to
death.

In a work called _Truth brought to Light_, a copy was given of an alleged
medical report on a dissection of the body, calculated to confirm
these suspicions: it may be found in the _State Trials_, ii. 1002. Arthur
Wilson, who published his life and reign of King James during the
Commonwealth, said: 'Strange rumours are raised upon this sudden
expiration of our prince, the disease being so violent that the
combat of nature in the strength of youth (being almost nineteen
years of age) lasted not above five days.

Some say he was poisoned with a bunch of grapes; others attribute it to
the venomous scent of a pair of gloves presented to him (the
distemper lying for the most part in the head.)

They that knew neither of these are stricken with fear and amazement, as
if they had tasted or felt the effects of those violences. Private
whisperings and suspicions of some new designs afoot broaching
prophetical terrors that a black Christmas would produce a bloody
Lent, &c.'

Kennet, in his notes on Wilson's work, says that he possesses a
rare copy of a sermon preached while the public mind was thus
excited, 'wherein the preacher, who had been his domestic chaplain,
made such broad hints about the manner of his (Prince Henry's)
death, that melted the auditory into a flood of tears, and occasioned
his being dismissed the court.'

But suspicion did not stop here.

When King James himself died in much pain, his body shewing the
unsightly symptoms consequent on his gross habits, poison was again
suspected; and as it had been said on the former occasion, that the
father had connived at the death of his son, it was now whispered
that the remaining son, anxious to commence his ill-starred reign,
was accessory to hurrying his father from the world.

The moral character of Charles I. is sufficient to acquit him of
such a charge.

But historians even of late date have not entirely acquitted his
favourite, Buckingham, who, it was said, finding that the king was
tired of him, resolved to make him give place to the prince, in
whose good graces he felt secure.

The authors of the scandalous histories published during the Commonwealth,
said that the duke's mother administered the poison externally in the
form of a plaster.

FOOTNOTES:

[4] _State Trials_, ii. 932.

[5] _State Trials_, 941.

NEURALGIA.[6]

Obstructives and sceptics are in one sense benefactors: although they
do not generally originate improved modes of thought and action, they
at least prevent the adoption of crude theories and ill-digested
measures.

To meet the criticism of these opponents, inventive genius must more
carefully bring its ideas and plans to the test of practical experiment
and thorough investigation; and as truth must ultimately prevail,
it cannot be considered unjust or injurious to insist upon its
presenting its credentials.

This is, we submit, one of the benefits resulting from schools,
colleges, and guilds: it is difficult to impress them with novel
truths; but in a great degree they act as breakwaters to the waves
of error.

In no department of social life is this doctrine better illustrated than
in the medical profession, which is among the keenest and most
sceptical of bodies in scrutinising novelty; but it has rarely
allowed any real improvement to remain permanently untested and
unadopted.

We believe this to be the fair view to take of a class of scientific
men who have certainly had a large share of sarcasm to endure.

General readers, for whom we profess to cater, take no great interest
in medical subjects and discussions; but as historians of what is
doing in the world of art, science, and literature, we think it our
duty to record, in a brief way, any information we can collect that
may be beneficial to the suffering portion of humanity; and in this
'miserable world' it is most probable that one-fourth part of our
readers are invalids.

Why should they not have their little troubles, whims, and maladies
studied and cared for?

The disease which gives a title to this short notice is perhaps one
of the most mysterious and vexatious to which our nature is liable;
both its cause and cure are equally occult, and its _modus operandi_
is scarcely intelligible.

A contemporary thus playfully alludes to the subject in terms more
funny than precise:--'What is neuralgia?

A nervous spasm, the cause of which has, however, not been satisfactorily
and conclusively demonstrated; but we may, perhaps, obtain a clearer
view of its nature, if we look upon it as connected with "morbid nutrition."
Every one knows that the system is, or ought to be, constantly subject
to a law of waste and repair; and if the operation of this law is impeded
by "cold," "mental excitement," or any other baneful condition, diseases
more or less unpleasant must ensue. The _vis naturæ_ uses certain
particles of matter in forming nerves; others in forming membrane,
bones, juices, &c.; while used-up particles are expelled altogether
from the system.

We can readily conceive that each order of atoms is used by a distinct
function, and has a different mission; and any morbid perversion or
mingling of their separate destinies must end in disorder and
suffering--nature's violent endeavour to restore the regularity
of her operations.

A cough is simply an effort of the lungs or bronchiæ to remove
some offending intruder that ought to be doing duty elsewhere; and
may we not call neuralgia _a cough of a nerve_ to get rid of a
disagreeable oppression--nature's legitimate _coup d'état_ to put
down and transport those "_red socialist_" particles that would
interfere with the regularity of its constitution?

Let us fancy, for a moment, a delicate little army of atoms marching
obediently along, to form new nerve in place of the substance that is
wasting away: another little army of carbonaceous particles have
just received orders to pack up their luggage and be off, to make
way for the advancing nerve-battalion; but in their exodus they are
met by a fierce destroyer, in the shape of an east wind--a Caffre
that suddenly throws the ranks of General Carbon into disorder, and
drives them back upon the brilliant and pugnacious array of General
Nerve: a battle-royal is the result.

General Nerve immediately places lance in rest, and advances to the charge
with the unsparing war-cry of: "Mr Ferguson, you don't lodge here!"

Since he had seen the Girl that room was so hers that he was hesitating
about entering because of this fact. It was as if the tall, slender form
stood before the chest of drawers or sat at the dressing table and he
did not dare enter unless he were welcome. Softly he closed the door and
went away. He wandered to the dry-house and turned the bark and roots on
the trays, but the air stifled him and he hurried out. He tried to work
in the packing room, but walls smothered him and again he sought the
open.

He espied a bundle of osier-bound, moss-covered ferns that he had found
in the woods, and brought the shovel to transplant them; but the
work worried him, and he hurried through with it. Then he looked for
something else to do and saw an ax. He caught it up and with lusty
strokes began swinging it. When he had chopped wood until he was very
tired he went to bed. Sleep came to the strong, young frame and he awoke
in the morning refreshed and hopeful.

He wondered why he had bothered Doctor Carey. The Harvester felt able
that morning to find his Dream Girl without assistance before the day
was over. It was merely a matter of going to the city and locating a
woman. Yesterday, it had been a question of whether she really existed.
To-day, he knew. Yesterday, it had meant a search possibly as wide
as earth to find her. To-day, it was narrowed to only one location so
small, compared with Chicago, that the Harvester felt he could sift
its population with his fingers, and pick her from others at his first
attempt. If she were visiting there probably she would rest during the
night, and be on the streets to-day.

When he remembered her face he doubted it. He decided to spend part
of the time on the business streets and the remainder in the residence
portions of the city. Because it was uncertain when he would return,
everything was fed a double portion, and Betsy was left at a livery
stable with instructions to care for her until he came. He did not know
where the search would lead him. For several hours he slowly walked the
business district and then ranged farther, but not a sight of her. He
never had known that Onabasha was so large. On its crowded streets he
did not feel that he could sift the population through his fingers, nor
could he open doors and search houses without an excuse.

Some small boys passed him eating bananas, and the Harvester looked at
his watch and was amazed to find that the day had advanced until two
o'clock in the afternoon. He was tired and hungry. He went into a
restaurant and ordered lunch; as he waited a girl serving tables smiled
at him. Any other time the Harvester would have returned at least a
pleasant look, and gone his way. To-day he scowled at her, and ate in
hurried discomfort. On the streets again, he had no idea where to go and
so he went to the hospital.

"I expected you early this morning," was the greeting of Doctor Carey.
"Where have you been and what have you done?"

"Nothing," said the Harvester. "I was so sure she would be on the
streets I just watched, but I didn't see her."

"We will go to the depot," said the doctor. "The first thing is to keep
her from leaving town."

They arranged with the ticket agents, expressmen, telegraphers, and, as
they left, the Harvester stopped and tipped the train caller, offering
further reward worth while if he would find the Girl.

"Now we will go to the police station," said the doctor.

"I'll see the chief and have him issue a general order to his men to
watch for her, but if I were you I'd select a half dozen in the down
town district, and give them a little tip with a big promise!"

"Good Lord! How I hate this," groaned the Harvester.

"Want to find her by yourself?" questioned his friend.

"Yes," said the Harvester, "I do! And I would, if it hadn't been for
her ghastly face. That drives me to resort to any measures. The
probabilities are that she is lying sick somewhere, and if her comfort
depends on the purse that dressed her, she will suffer. Doc, do you know
how awful this is?"

"I know that you've got a great imagination. If the woods make all men
as sensitive as you are, those who have business to transact should stay
out of them. Take a common-sense view. Look at this as I do. If she was
strong enough to travel in a day coach from Chicago; she can't be so
very ill to-day. Leaving life by the inch isn't that easy. She will be
alive this time next year, whether you find her or not. The chances are
that her stress was mental anyway, and trouble almost never overcomes
any one."

"You, a doctor and say that!"

"Oh, I mean instantaneously----in a day! Of course if it grinds away
for years! But youth doesn't allow it to do that. It throws it off, and
grows hopeful and happy again. She won't die; put that out of your
mind. If I were you I would go home now and go straight on with my work,
trusting to the machinery you have set in motion. I know most of the
men with whom we have talked. They will locate her in a week or less.
It's their business. It isn't yours. It's your job to be ready for her,
and have enough ahead to support her when they find her. Try to realize
that there are now a dozen men on hunt for her, and trust them. Go back
to your work, and I will come full speed in the motor when the first man
sights her. That ought to satisfy you. I've told all of them to call me
at the hospital, and I will tell my assistant what to do in case a call
comes while I am away. Straighten your face! Go back to Medicine Woods
and harvest your crops, and before you know it she will be located. Then
you can put on your Sunday clothes and show yourself, and see if you can
make her take notice."

"Idiot!" exclaimed the Harvester, but he started home. When he arrived
he attended to his work and then sat down to think.

"Doc is right," was his ultimate conclusion. "She can't leave the city,
she can't move around in it, she can't go anywhere, without being seen.
There's one more point: I must tell Carey to post all the doctors to
report if they have such a call. That's all I can think of. I'll
go to-night, and then I'll look over the ginseng for parasites, and
to-morrow I'll dive into the late spring growth and work until I haven't
time to think. I've let cranesbill get a week past me now, and it can't
be dispensed with."

So the following morning, when the Harvester had completed his work at
the cabin and barn and breakfasted, he took a mattock and a big hempen
bag, and followed the path to the top of the hill. As it ran along the
lake bank he descended on the other side to several acres of cleared
land, where he raised corn for his stock, potatoes, and coarser garden
truck, for which there was not space in the smaller enclosure close the
cabin. Around the edges of these fields, and where one of them sloped
toward the lake, he began grubbing a variety of grass having tall stems
already over a foot in height at half growth. From each stem waved four
or five leaves of six or eight inches length and the top showed forming
clusters of tiny spikelets.

"I am none too early for you," he muttered to himself as he ran the
mattock through the rich earth, lifting the long, tough, jointed root
stalks of pale yellow, from every section of which broke sprays of fine
rootlets. "None too early for you, and as you are worth only seven cents
a pound, you couldn't be considered a 'get-rich-quick' expedient, so
I'll only stop long enough with you to gather what I think my customers
will order, and amass a fortune a little later picking mullein flowers
at seventy-five cents a pound. What a crop I've got coming!"

The Harvester glanced ahead, where in the cleared soil of the bank grew
large plants with leaves like yellow-green felt and tall bloom stems
rising. Close them flourished other species requiring dry sandy soil,
that gradually changed as it approached the water until it became
covered with rank abundance of short, wiry grass, half the blades of
which appeared red. Numerous everywhere he could see the grayish-white
leaves of Parnassus grass. As the season advanced it would lift
heart-shaped velvet higher, and before fall the stretch of emerald would
be starred with white-faced, green-striped flowers.

"Not a prettier sight on earth," commented the Harvester, "than just
swale wire grass in September making a fine, thick background to set off
those delicate starry flowers on their slender stems. I must remember to
bring her to see that."

His eyes followed the growth to the water. As the grass drew closer
moisture it changed to the rank, sweet, swamp variety, then came
bulrushes, cat-tails, water smartweed, docks, and in the water blue flag
lifted folded buds; at its feet arose yellow lily leaves and farther out
spread the white. As the light struck the surface the Harvester imagined
he could see the little green buds several inches below. Above all arose
wild rice he had planted for the birds. The red wings swayed on the
willows and tilted on every stem that would bear their weight, singing
their melodious half-chanted notes, "O-ka-lee!"

Beneath them the ducks gobbled, splashed, and chattered; grebe and coot
voices could be distinguished; king rails at times flashed into sight
and out again; marsh wrens scolded and chattered; occasionally a
kingfisher darted around the lake shore, rolling his rattling cry and
flashing his azure coat and gleaming white collar. On a hollow tree
in the woods a yellow hammer proved why he was named, because he
carpentered industriously to enlarge the entrance to the home he was
excavating in a dead tree; and sailing over the lake and above the woods
in grace scarcely surpassed by any, a lonesome turkey buzzard awaited
his mate's decision as to which hollow log was most suitable for their
home.

The Harvester stuffed the grass roots in the bag until it would hold no
more and stood erect to wipe his face, for the sun was growing warm. As
he drew his handkerchief across his brow, the south wind struck him with
enough intensity to attract attention. Instantly the Harvester removed
his hat, rolled it up, and put it into his pocket. He stood an instant
delighting in the wind and then spoke.

"Allow me to express my most fervent thanks for your kindness," he said.
"I thought probably you would take that message, since it couldn't mean
much to you, and it meant all the world to me. I thought you would carry
it, but, I confess, I scarcely expected the answer so soon. The only
thing that could make me more grateful to you would be to know exactly
where she is: but you must understand that it's like a peep into Heaven
to have her existence narrowed to one place. I'm bound to be able to
say inside a few days, she lives at number----I don't know yet, on
street----I'll find out soon, in the closest city, Onabasha. And I know
why you brought her, South Wind. If ever a girl's cheeks need fanning
with your breezes, and painting with sun kisses, I wouldn't mind, since
this is strictly private, adding a few of mine; if ever any one needed
flowers, birds, fresh air, water, and rest! Good Lord, South Wind, did
you ever reach her before you carried that message? I think not! But
Onabasha isn't so large. You and the sun should get your innings there.
I do hope she is not trying to work! I can attend to that; and so there
will be more time when she is found, I'd better hustle now."

He picked up the bag and returned to the dry-house, where he carefully
washed the roots and spread them on the trays. Then he took the same
bag and mattock and going through the woods in the opposite direction
he came to a heavy growth in a cleared space of high ground. The bloom
heads were forming and the plant was half matured. The Harvester dug a
cylindrical, tapering root, wrinkling lengthwise, wiped it clean, broke
and tasted it. He made a wry face. He stood examining the white wood
with its brown-red bark and, deciding that it was in prime condition, he
began digging the plants. It was common wayside "Bouncing Bet," but the
Harvester called it "soapwort." He took every other plant in his way
across the bed, and when he digged a heavy load he carried it home,
stripped the leaves, and spread them on trays, while the roots he
topped, washed, and put to dry also. Then he whistled for Belshazzar and
went to lunch.

As he passed down the road to the cabin his face was a study of
conflicting emotions, and his eyes had a far away appearance of deep
thought. Every tree of his stretch of forest was rustling fresh leaves
to shelter him; dogwood, wild crab, and hawthorn offered their flowers;
earth held up her tribute in painted trillium faces, spring beauties,
and violets, blue, white, and yellow. Mosses, ferns, and lichen
decorated the path; all the birds greeted him in friendship, and
sang their purest melodies. The sky was blue, the sun bright, the air
perfumed for him; Belshazzar, always true to his name, protected every
footstep; Ajax, the shimmering green and gold wonder, came up the hill
to meet him; the white doves circled above his head. Stumbling half
blindly, the Harvester passed unheeding among them, and went into the
cabin. When he came out he stood a long time in deep study, but at last
he returned to the woods.

"Perhaps they will have found her before night," he said. "I'll harvest
the cranesbill yet, because it's growing late for it, and then I'll see
how they are coming on. Maybe they'd know her if they met her, and maybe
they wouldn't. She may wear different clothing, and freshen up after her
trip. She might have been car sick, as Doc suggested, and appear very
different when she feels better."

He skirted the woods around the northeast end and stopped at a big bed
of exquisite growth. Tall, wiry stems sprang upward almost two feet in
height; leaves six inches across were cut in ragged lobes almost to the
base, and here and there, enough to colour the entire bed a delicate
rose or sometimes a violet purple, the first flowers were unfolding. The
Harvester lifted a root and tasted it.

"No doubt about you being astringent," he muttered. "You have enough
tannin in you to pucker a mushroom. By the way, those big, corn-cobby
fellows should spring up with the next warm rain, and the hotels and
restaurants always pay high prices. I must gather a few bushels."

He looked over the bed of beautiful wild alum and hesitated.

"I vow I hate to touch you," he said. "You are a picture right now, and
in a week you will be a miracle. It seems a shame to tear up a plant for
its roots, just at flowering time, and I can't avoid breaking down half
I don't take, getting the ones I do. I wish you were not so pretty! You
are one of the colours I love most. You remind me of red-bud, blazing
star, and all those exquisite magenta shades that poets, painters, and
the Almighty who made them love so much they hesitate about using them
lavishly. You are so delicate and graceful and so modest. I wish she
could see you! I got to stop this or I won't be able to lift a root. I
never would if the ten cents a pound I'll get out of it were the only
consideration."

The Harvester gripped the mattock and advanced to the bed. "What I must
be thinking is that you are indispensable to the sick folks. The steady
demand for you proves your value, and of course, humanity comes first,
after all. If I remain in the woods alone much longer I'll get to the
place where I'm not so sure that it does. Seems as if animals, birds,
flowers, trees, and insects as well, have their right to life also. But
it's for me to remember the sick folks! If I thought the Girl would get
some of it now, I could overturn the bed with a stout heart. If any one
ever needed a tonic, I think she does. Maybe some of this will reach
her. If it does, I hope it will make her cheeks just the lovely pink of
the bloom. Oh Lord! If only she hadn't appeared so sick and frightened!
What is there in all this world of sunshine to make a girl glance around
her like that? I wish I knew! Maybe they will have found her by night."

The Harvester began work on the bed, but he knelt and among the damp
leaves from the spongy black earth he lifted the roots with his fingers
and carefully straightened and pressed down the plants he did not take.
This required more time than usual, but his heart was so sore he could
not be rough with anything, most of all a flower. So he harvested the
wild alum by hand, and heaped large stacks of roots around the edges of
the bed. Often he paused as he worked and on his knees stared through
the forest as if he hoped perhaps she would realize his longing for her,
and come to him in the wood as she had across the water. Over and
over he repeated, "Perhaps they will find her by night!" and that so
intensified the meaning that once he said it aloud. His face clouded and
grew dark.

"Dealish nice business!" he said. "I am here in the woods digging flower
roots, and a gang of men in the city are searching for the girl I love.
If ever a job seemed peculiarly a man's own, it appears this would be.
What business has any other man spying after my woman? Why am I not down
there doing my own work, as I always have done it? Who's more likely to
find her than I am? It seems as if there would be an instinct that
would lead me straight to her, if I'd go. And you can wager I'll go fast
enough."

The Harvester appeared as if he would start that instant, but with lips
closely shut he finally forced himself to go on with his work. When he
had rifled the bed, and uprooted all he cared to take during one season,
he carried the roots to the lake shore below the curing house, and
spread them on a platform he had built. He stepped into his boat and
began dashing pails of water over them and using a brush. As he worked
he washed away the woody scars of last year's growth, and the tiny buds
appearing for the coming season.

Belshazzar sat on the opposite bank and watched the operation; and Ajax
came down and, flying to a dead stump, erected and slowly waved his
train to attract the sober-faced man who paid no heed. He left the roots
to drain while he prepared supper, then placed them on the trays, now
filled to overflowing, and was glad he had finished. He could not cure
anything else at present if he wanted to. He was as far advanced as he
had been at the same time the previous year. Then he dressed neatly and
locking the Girl's room, and leaving Belshazzar to protect it, he went
to Onabasha.

"Bravo!" cried Doctor Carey as the Harvester entered his office. "You
are heroic to wait all day for news. How much stuff have you gathered?"

"Three crops. How many missing women have you located?"

The doctor laughed. There was no sign of a smile on the face of the
Harvester.

"You didn't really expect her to come to light the first day? That would
be too easy! We can't find her in a minute."

"It will be no surprise to me if you can't find her at all. I am not
expecting another man to do what I don't myself."

"You are not hunting her. You are harvesting the woods. The men you
employ are to find her."

"Maybe I am, and maybe I am not," said the Harvester slowly. "To me
it appears to be a poor stick of a man who coolly proceeds with money
making, and trusts to men who haven't even seen her to search for the
girl he loves. I think a few hours of this is about all my patience will
endure."

"What are you going to do?"

"I don't know," said the Harvester. "But you can bank on one thing
sure----I'm going to do something! I've had my fill of this. Thank you
for all you've done, and all you are going to do. My head is not clear
enough yet to decide anything with any sense, but maybe I'll hit on
something soon. I'm for the streets for a while."

"Better go home and go to bed. You seem very tired."

"I am," said the Harvester. "The only way to endure this is to work
myself down. I'm all right, and I'll be careful, but I rather think I'll
find her myself."

"Better go on with your work as we planned."

"I'll think about it," said the Harvester as he went out.

Until he was too tired to walk farther he slowly paced the streets of
the city, and then followed the home road through the valley and up the
hill to Medicine Woods. When he came to Singing Water, Belshazzar heard
his steps on the bridge, and came bounding to meet him. The Harvester
stretched himself on a seat and turned his face to the sky. It was a
deep, dark-blue bowl, closely set with stars, and a bright moon shed a
soft May radiance on the young earth. The lake was flooded with light,
and the big trees of the forest crowning the hill were silver coroneted.
The unfolding leaves had hidden the new cabin from the bridge, but the
driveway shone white, and already the upspringing bushes hedged it in.
Insects were humming lazily in the perfumed night air, and across the
lake a courting whip-poor-will was explaining to his sweetheart just
how much and why he loved her. A few bats were wavering in air hunting
insects, and occasionally an owl or a nighthawk crossed the lake.
Killdeer were glorying in the moonlight and night flight, and cried in
pure, clear notes as they sailed over the water. The Harvester was tired
and filled with unrest as he stretched on the bridge, but the longer
he lay the more the enfolding voices comforted him. All of them were
waiting and working out their lives to the legitimate end; there was
nothing else for him to do. He need not follow instinct or profit by
chance. He was a man; he could plan and reason.

The air grew balmy and some big, soft clouds swept across the moon. The
Harvester felt the dampness of rising dew, and went to the cabin. He
looked at it long in the moonlight and told himself that he could see
how much the plants, vines, and ferns had grown since the previous
night. Without making a light, he threw himself on the bed in the
outdoor room, and lay looking through the screening at the lake and sky.
He was working his brain to think of some manner in which to start a
search for the Dream Girl that would have some probability of success to
recommend it, but he could settle on no feasible plan. At last he fell
asleep, and in the night soft rain wet his face. He pulled an oilcloth
sheet over the bed, and lay breathing deeply of the damp, perfumed air
as he again slept. In the morning brilliant sunshine awoke him and he
arose to find the earth steaming.

"If ever there was a perfect mushroom day!" he said to Belshazzar. "We
must hurry and feed the stock and ourselves and gather some. They mean
real money."


CHAPTER VII. THE QUEST OF THE DREAM GIRL

The Harvester breakfasted, fed the stock, hitched Betsy to the spring
wagon, and went into the dripping, steamy woods. If anyone had asked him
that morning concerning his idea of Heaven, he never would have dreamed
of describing a place of gold-paved streets, crystal pillars, jewelled
gates, and thrones of ivory. These things were beyond the man's
comprehension and he would not have admired or felt at home in such
magnificence if it had been materialized for him. He would have told
you that a floor of last year's brown leaves, studded with myriad flower
faces, big, bark-encased pillars of a thousand years, jewels on every
bush, shrub, and tree, and tilting thrones on which gaudy birds almost
burst themselves to voice the joy of life, while their bright-eyed
little mates peered questioningly at him over nest rims----he would have
told you that Medicine Woods on a damp, sunny May morning was Heaven.
And he would have added that only one angel, tall and slender, with the
pink of health on her cheeks and the dew of happiness in her dark eyes,
was necessary to enter and establish glory. Everything spoke to him that
morning, but the Harvester was silent. It had been his habit to talk
constantly to Belshazzar, Ajax, his work, even the winds and perfumes;
it had been his method of dissipating solitude, but to-day he had no
words, even for these dear friends. He only opened his soul to beauty,
and steadily climbed the hill to the crest, and then down the other side
to the rich, half-shaded, half-open spaces, where big, rough mushrooms
sprang in a night similar to the one just passed.

He could see them awaiting him from afar. He began work with rapid
fingers, being careful to break off the heads, but not to pull up the
roots. When four heaping baskets were filled he cut heavily leaved
branches to spread over them, and started to Onabasha. As usual,
Belshazzar rode beside him and questioned the Harvester when he politely
suggested to Betsy that she make a little haste.

"Have you forgotten that mushrooms are perishable?" he asked. "If we
don't get these to the city all woodsy and fresh we can't sell them.
Wonder where we can do the best? The hotels pay well. Really, the
biggest prices could be had by----"

Then the Harvester threw back his head and began to laugh, and
he laughed, and he laughed. A crow on the fence Joined him, and a
kingfisher, heading for Loon Lake, and then Belshazzar caught the
infection.

"Begorry! The very idea!" cried the Harvester. "'Heaven helps them
that help themselves.' Now you just watch us manoeuvre for assistance,
Belshazzar, old boy! Here we go!"

Then the laugh began again. It continued all the way to Onabasha and
even into the city. The Harvester drove through the most prosperous
street until he reached the residence district. At the first home
he stopped, gave the lines to Belshazzar, and, taking a basket of
mushrooms, went up the walk and rang the bell.

"All groceries should be delivered at the back door," snapped a pert
maid, before he had time to say a word.

The Harvester lifted his hat.

"Will you kindly tell the lady of the house that I wish to speak with
her?"

"What name, please?"

"I want to show her some fine mushrooms, freshly gathered," he answered.

How she did it the Harvester never knew. The first thing he realized was
that the door had closed before his face, and the basket had been picked
deftly from his fingers and was on the other side. After a short time
the maid returned.

"What do you want for them, please?"

The last thing on earth the Harvester wanted to do was to part with
those mushrooms, so he took one long, speculative look down the hall and
named a price he thought would be prohibitive.

"One dollar a dozen."

"How many are there?"

"I count them as I sell them. I do not know."

The door closed again. Presently it opened and the maid knelt on the
floor before him and counted the mushrooms one by one into a dish pan
and in a few minutes brought back seven dollars and fifty cents. The
chagrined Harvester, feeling like a thief, put the money in his pocket,
and turned away.

"I was to tell you," said she, "that you are to bring all you have to
sell here, and the next time please go to the kitchen door."

"Must be fond of mushrooms," said the disgruntled Harvester.

"They are a great delicacy, and there are visitors." The Harvester ached
to set the girl to one side and walk through the house, but he did not
dare; so he returned to the street, whistled to Betsy to come, and went
to the next gate. Here he hesitated. Should he risk further snubbing at
the front door or go back at once. If he did, he only would see a maid.
As he stood an instant debating, the door of the house he just had
left opened and the girl ran after him. "If you have more, we will take
them," she called.

The Harvester gasped for breath.

"They have to be used at once," he suggested.

"She knows that. She wants to treat her friends."

"Well she has got enough for a banquet," he said. "I--I don't usually
sell more than a dozen or two in one place."

"I don't see why you can't let her have them if you have more."

"Perhaps I have orders to fill for regular customers," suggested the
Harvester.

"And perhaps you haven't," said the maid. "You ought to be ashamed not
to let people who are willing to pay your outrageous prices have them.
It's regular highway robbery."

"Possibly that's the reason I decline to hold up one party twice," said
the Harvester as he entered the gate and went up the walk to the front
door.

"You should be taught your place," called the maid after him.

The Harvester again rang the bell. Another maid opened the door, and
once more he asked to speak with the lady of the house. As the girl
turned, a handsome old woman in cap and morning gown came down the
stairs.

"What have you there?" she asked.

The Harvester lifted the leaves and exposed the musky, crimpled, big
mushrooms.

"Oh!" she cried in delight. "Indeed, yes! We are very fond of them. I
will take the basket, and divide with my sons. You are sure you have no
poisonous ones among them?"

"Quite sure," said the Harvester faintly.

"How much do you want for the basket?"

"They are a dollar a dozen; I haven't counted them."

"Dear me! Isn't that rather expensive?"

"It is. Very!" said the Harvester. "So expensive that most people don't
think of taking over a dozen. They are large and very rich, so they go a
long way."

"I suppose you have to spend a great deal of time hunting them? It does
seem expensive, but they are fresh, and the boys are so fond of them.
I'm not often extravagant, I'll just take the lot. Sarah, bring a pan."

Again the Harvester stood and watched an entire basket counted over and
carried away, and he felt the robber he had been called as he took the
money.

At the next house he had learned a lesson. He carpeted a basket with
leaves and counted out a dozen and a half into it, leaving the remainder
in the wagon. Three blocks on one side of the street exhausted his
store and he was showered with orders. He had not seen any one that even
resembled a dark-eyed girl. As he came from the last house a big, red
motor shot past and then suddenly slowed and backed beside his wagon.

"What in the name of sense are you doing?" demanded Doctor Carey.

"Invading the residence district of Onabasha," said the Harvester.
"Madam, would you like some nice, fresh, country mushrooms? I guarantee
that there are no poisonous ones among them, and they were gathered this
morning. Considering their rarity and the difficult work of collecting,
they are exceedingly low at my price. I am offering these for five
dollars a dozen, madam, and for mercy sake don't take them or I'll have
no excuse to go to the next house."

The doctor stared, then understood, and began to laugh. When at last he
could speak he said, "David, I'll bet you started with three bushels and
began at the head of this street, and they are all gone."

"Put up a good one!" said the Harvester. "You win. The first house I
tried they ordered me to the back door, took a market basket full away
from me by force, tried to buy the load, and I didn't see any one save a
maid."

The doctor lay on the steering gear and faintly groaned.

The Harvester regarded him sympathetically. "Isn't it a crime?" he
questioned. "Mushrooms are no go. I can see that!----or rather they are
entirely too much of a go. I never saw anything in such demand. I must
seek a less popular article for my purpose. To-morrow look out for me.
I shall begin where I left off to-day, but I will have changed my
product."

"David, for pity sake," peeped the doctor.

"What do I care how I do it, so I locate her?" superbly inquired the
Harvester.

"But you won't find her!" gasped the doctor.

"I've come as close it as you so far, anyway," said the Harvester. "Your
mushrooms are on the desk in your office."

He drove slowly up and down the streets until Betsy wabbled on her legs.
Then he left her to rest and walked until he wabbled; and by that time
it was dark, so he went home.

At the first hint of dawn he was at work the following morning. With
loaded baskets closely covered, he started to Onabasha, and began where
he had quit the day before. This time he carried a small, crudely
fashioned bark basket, leaf-covered, and he rang at the front door with
confidence.

Every one seemed to have a maid in that part of the city, for a freshly
capped and aproned girl opened the door.

"Are there any young women living here?" blandly inquired the Harvester.

"What's that of your business?" demanded the maid.

The Harvester flushed, but continued, "I am offering something
especially intended for young women. If there are none, I will not
trouble you."

"There are several."

"Will you please ask them if they would care for bouquets of violets,
fresh from the woods?"

"How much are they, and how large are the bunches?"

"Prices differ, and they are the right size to appear well. They had
better see for themselves."

The maid reached for the basket, but the Harvester drew back.

"I keep them in my possession," he said. "You may take a sample."

He lifted the leaves and drew forth a medium-sized bunch of long-stemmed
blue violets with their leaves. The flowers were fresh, crisp, and
strong odours of the woods arose from them.

"Oh!" cried the maid. "Oh, how lovely!"

She hurried away with them and returned carrying a purse.

"I want two more bunches," she said. "How much are they?"

"Are the girls who want them dark or fair?"

"What difference does that make?"

"I have blue violets for blondes, yellow for brunettes, and white for
the others."

"Well I never! One is fair, and two have brown hair and blue eyes."

"One blue and two whites," said the Harvester calmly, as if matching
women's hair and eyes with flowers were an inherited vocation. "They are
twenty cents a bunch."

"Aha!" he chortled to himself as he whistled to Betsy. "At last we have
it. There are no dark-eyed girls here. Now we are making headway."

Down the street he went, with varying fortune, but with patience and
persistence at every house he at last managed to learn whether there was
a dark-eyed girl. There did not seem to be many. Long before his store
of yellow violets was gone the last blue and white had disappeared. But
he calmly went on asking for dark-eyed girls, and explaining that all
the blue and white were taken, because fair women were most numerous.

At one house the owner, who reminded the Harvester of his mother,
came to the door. He uncovered and in his suavest tones inquired if
a brunette young woman lived there and if she would like a nosegay of
yellow violets.

"Well bless my soul!" cried she. "What is this world coming to? Do
you mean to tell me that there are now able-bodied men offering at our
doors, flowers to match our girls' complexions?"

"Yes madam?" said the Harvester gravely, "and also selling them as fast
as he can show them, at prices that make a profit very well worth while.
I had an equal number of blue and white, but I see the dark girls are
very much in the minority. The others were gone long ago, and I now have
flowers to offer brunettes only."

"Well forever more! And you don't call that fiddlin' business for a big,
healthy, young man?"

The Harvester's gay laugh was infectious.

"I do not," he said. "I have to start as soon as I can see, tramp long
distances in wet woods and gather the violets on my knees, make them
into bunches, and bring them here in water to keep them fresh. I have
another occupation. I only kill time on these, but I would be ashamed to
tell you what I have gotten for them this morning."

"Humph! I'm glad to hear it!" said the woman. "Shame in some form is a
sign of grace. I have no use for a human being without a generous supply
of it. There is a very beautiful dark-eyed girl in the house, and I will
take two bunches for her. How much are they?"

"I have only three remaining," said the Harvester. "Would you like to
allow her to make her own selection?"

"When I'm giving things I usually take my choice. I want that, and that
one."

"As my stock is so nearly out, I'll make the two for twenty," said the
Harvester. "Won't you accept the last one from me, because you remind me
just a little of my mother?"

"I will indeed," said she. "Thank you very much! I shall love to have
them as dearly as any of the girls. I used to gather them when I was a
child, but I almost never see the blue ones any more, and I don't know
as I ever expected to see a yellow violet again as long as I live. Where
did you get them?"

"In my woods," said the Harvester. "You see I grow several members of
the viola pedata family, bird's foot, snake, and wood violet, and three
of the odorata, English, marsh, and sweet, for our big drug houses. They
use the flowers in making delicate tests for acids and alkalies.
The entire plant, flower, seed, leaf, and root, goes into different
remedies. The beds seed themselves and spread, so I have more than
I need for the chemists, and I sell a few. I don't use the white and
yellow in my business; I just grow them for their beauty. I also sell my
surplus lilies of the valley. Would you like to order some of them for
your house or more violets for to-morrow?"

"Well bless my soul! Do you mean to tell me that lilies of the valley
are medicine?"

The Harvester laughed.

"I grow immense beds of them in the woods on the banks of Loon Lake,"
he said. "They are the convallaris majallis of the drug houses and I
scarcely know what the weak-hearted people would do without them. I use
large quantities in trade, and this season I am selling a few because
people so love them."

"Lilies in medicine; well dear me! Are roses good for our innards too?"

Then the Harvester did laugh.

"I imagine the roses you know go into perfumes mostly," he answered.
"They do make medicine of Canadian rock rose and rose bay, laurel, and
willow. I grow the bushes, but they are not what you would consider
roses."

"I wonder now," said the woman studying the Harvester closely, "if you
are not that queer genius I've heard of, who spends his time hunting and
growing stuff in the woods and people call him the Medicine Man."

"I strongly suspect madam, I am that man," said the Harvester.

"Well bless me!" cried she. "I've always wanted to see you and here when
I do, you look just like anybody else. I thought you'd have long hair,
and be wild-eyed and ferocious. And your talk sounds like out of a book.
Well that beats me!"

"Me too!" said the Harvester, lifting his hat. "You don't want any
lilies to-morrow, then?"

"Yes I do. Medicine or no medicine, I've always liked 'em, and I'm going
to keep on liking them. If you can bring me a good-sized bunch after the
weak-kneed----"

"Weak-hearted," corrected the Harvester.

"Well 'weak-hearted,' then; it's all the same thing. If you've got any
left, as I was saying, you can fetch them to me for the smell."

The Harvester laughed all the way down town. There he went to Doctor
Carey's office, examined a directory, and got the names of all the
numbers where he had sold yellow violets. A few questions when the
doctor came in settled all of them, but the flower scheme was better.
Because the yellow were not so plentiful as the white and blue, next day
he added buttercups and cowslips to his store for the dark girls. When
he had rifled his beds for the last time, after three weeks of almost
daily trips to town, and had paid high prices to small boys he set
searching the adjoining woods until no more flowers could be found, he
drove from the outskirts of the city one day toward the hospital, and as
he stopped, down the street came Doctor Carey frantically waving to him.
As the big car slackened, "Come on David, quick! I've seen her!" cried
the doctor.

The Harvester jumped from the wagon, threw the lines to Belshazzar, and
landed in the panting car.

"For Heaven's sake where? Are you sure?"

The car went speeding down the street. A policeman beckoned and cried
after it.

"It won't do any good to get arrested, Doc," cautioned the Harvester.

"Now right along here," panted Doctor Carey. "Watch both sides sharply.
If I stop you jump out, and tell the blame policemen to get at their
job. The party they are hired to find is right under their noses."

The Harvester began to perspire. "Doc, don't you think you should tell
me? Maybe she is in some store. Maybe I could do better on foot."

"Shut up!" growled the doctor. "I am doing the best I know."

He hurried up the street for blocks and back again, and at last stopped
before a large store and went in. When he returned he drove to the
hospital and together they entered the office. There he turned to the
Harvester.

"It isn't so hard to understand you now, my boy," he said. "Shades of
Diana, but she'll be a beauty when she gets a little more flesh and
colour. She came out of Whitlaw's and walked right to the crossing. I
almost could have touched her, but I didn't notice. Two girls passed
before me, and in hurrying, a tall, dark one knocked off one of your
bunches of yellow violets. She glanced at it and laughed, but let
it lay. Then your girl hesitated stooped and picked it up. The crazy
policeman yelled at me to clear the crossing and it didn't hit me for a
half block how tall and white she was and how dark her eyes were. I was
just thinking about her picking up the flowers, and that it was queer
for her to do it, when like a brick it hit me, THAT'S DAVID'S GIRL! I
tried to turn around, but you know what Main Street is in the middle
of the day. And those idiots of policemen! They ordered me on, and I
couldn't turn for a street car coming, so I called to one of them that
the girl we wanted was down the street, and he looked at me like an
addle-pate and said, 'What girl? Move on or you'll get in a jam here.'
You can use me for a football if I don't go back and smash him. Paid him
five dollars myself less than two weeks ago to keep his eyes open. 'TO
KEEP HIS EYES OPEN!'" panted the doctor, shaking his fist at David. "Yes
sir! 'To keep his eyes open!' And he motioned for things to come along,
and so I lost her too."

"I think we had better go back to the street," said the Harvester.

"Oh, I'd been back and forth along that street for nearly an hour before
I gave up and came here to see if I could find you, and we've hunted it
an hour more! What's the use? She's gone for this time, but by gum, I
saw her! And she was worth seeing!"

"Did she appear ill to you?"

The doctor dropped on a chair and threw out his hands hopelessly.

"This was awful sudden, David," he said. "I was going along as I told
you, and I noticed her stop and thought she had a good head to wait a
second instead of running in before me, and there came those two girls
right under the car from the other side. I only had a glimpse of her as
she stooped for the flowers. I saw a big braid of hair, but I was half a
block away before I got it all connected, and then came the crush in the
street, and I was blocked."

The doctor broke down and wiped his face and expressed his feelings
unrestrainedly.

"Don't!" said the Harvester patiently. "It's no use to feel so badly,
Doc. I know what you would give to have found her for me. I know you did
all you could. I let her escape me. We will find her yet. It's glorious
news that she's in the city. It gives me heart to hear that. Can't you
just remember if she seemed ill?"

The doctor meditated.

"She wasn't the tallest girl I ever saw," he said slowly, "but she was
the tallest girl to be pretty. She had on a white waist and a gray skirt
and black hat. Her eyes and hair were like you said, and she was plain,
white faced, with a hue that might possibly be natural, and it might be
confinement in bad light and air and poor food. She didn't seem sick,
but she isn't well. There is something the matter with her, but it's not
immediate or dangerous. She appeared like a flower that had got a little
moisture and sprouted in a cellar."

"You saw her all right!" said the Harvester, "and I think your diagnosis
is correct too. That's the way she seemed to me. I've thought she needed
sun and air. I told the South Wind so the other day."

"Why you blame fool!" cried the doctor. "Is this thing going to your
head? Say, I forgot! There is something else. I traced her in the store.
She was at the embroidery counter and she bought some silk. If she ever
comes again the clerk is going to hold her and telephone me or get her
address if she has to steal it. Oh, we are getting there! We will have
her pretty soon now. You ought to feel better just to know that she is
in town and that I've seen her."

"I do!" said the Harvester. "Indeed I do!"

"It can't be much longer," said the doctor. "She's got to be located
soon. But those policemen! I wouldn't give a nickel for the lot! I'll
bet she's walked over them for two weeks. If I were you I'd discharge
the bunch. They'd be peacefully asleep if she passed them. If they'd let
me alone, I'd have had her. I could have turned around easily. I've been
in dozens of closer places."

"Don't worry! This can't last much longer. She's of and in the city or
she wouldn't have picked up the flowers. Doc, are you sure they were
mine?"

"Yes. Half the girls have been tricked out in yours the past two weeks.
I can spot them as far as I can see."

"Dear Lord, that's getting close!" said the Harvester intensely. "Seems
as if the violets would tell her."

"Now cut out flowers talking and the South Wind!" ordered the doctor.
"This is business. The violets prove something all right, though. If she
was in the country, she could gather plenty herself. She is working at
sewing in some room in town, either over a store or in a house. If she
hadn't been starved for flowers she never would have stopped for them on
the street. I could see just a flash of hesitation, but she wanted them
too much. David, one bouquet will go in water and be cared for a week.
Man, it's getting close! This does seem like a link."

"Since you say it, possibly I dare agree with you," said the Harvester.

"How near are you through with that canvass of yours?"

"About three fourths."

"Well I'd go on with it. After all we have got to find her ourselves.
Those senile policemen!"

"I am going on with it; you needn't worry about that. Lucretia Pegley
(authoress of "Woman's Wrongs," "The Weaker Sex?" "Eve _v._ Adam,"
etc., etc., editor of "Woman's Sphere," and chief contributor to the
"Coming Era;" her friends called her a Boadicea, and denied that she
had withdrawn from the study of medicine because she had fainted at
her first operation),--Mrs. Pegley observed her friend's shortness of
temper, and took her to task about it. "Ellen Tarbell," she said,
"you surprise me very much.

Do you wish to give the impression that your motives are purely
personal and--forgive me, but the word is necessary--selfish?

that you have no interest in the movement in which you are a pioneer?

that your heart is not with the cause which after so many years of weary
waiting looks to you for advancement? Mr. Botts is a most worthy and
indefatigable man; perhaps a trifle too much addicted to repetition for
the sake of rhetorical effect,--a thing, I admit, very trying; but
it is of the highest importance (I say this between ourselves, of
course, and you may imagine that I would not give publicity to such
a statement),--it is of the _highest_ importance that the feelings
of our--hem--masculine colleagues should not be--"
"Yes, yes," interrupted Mrs.

Tarbell hastily, "I appreciate that fully, I assure you. But yesterday
evening I was rather tired, and I--"
"Tired!" said Mrs.

Pegley, in the voice of acute anguish which caused her to be known as a
woman of the most extraordinary intensity of convictions. "It is a
wonder we are not all in our _graves_," she added, in tones whose
sombre depth was brightened by a little colloquial levity, for she
felt that she had been too severe with Mrs.

Tarbell.
"Still," she continued, "after Mr.

Bott's _very_ flattering remarks you might have spoken with a little
more--er--_earnestness_ and--er--_vigor_ yourself, you know. And for
such an audience as we had last night, three minutes is really--"
After this, Mrs.

Tarbell resolved that her next effort at public speaking should be made
before an American jury, or not at all. Indeed, she went so far as to
think it a great mistake to suppose that woman's cause could not
be advanced without calling meetings and haranguing them till eleven
o'clock at night.

Very likely her ideals were still of the highest order, and certainly
she still hoped that when women were allowed to practise law the law
would be so changed that you would hardly recognize it; but she wanted
to carry on her part of the work occultly and quietly.

She had got over a good many of her own illusions, and she was taking a
more practical view of life.

She smiled when she thought of the prophecies which had been made
about her, and she no longer read the paragraphs about herself in
the newspapers.

She kept her brother's dockets and drew his papers. Alexander frowned a
good deal, and said it wasn't necessary, but she insisted that she
must pay him in some way for her education. She put his desk in order
and gave him new papers every other day, which practices he never could
get her to forego. In short, she settled down into a routine of study,
office-work, and regularly recurring attempts to _get in_. And when she
finally did get in, she had become a cynic.

Everybody remembers, of course, how at the end of his last term
Judge Oldwigg announced his intention to retire into private life
and decline a reelection, and how the managers of the party in power
chose Judge Measy as their candidate for the vacant place.

The prospective judge was waited on privately by a deputation of Mrs.
Tarbell's friends, headed by Mrs.

Pegley, and asked to define his position on the Tarbell question. The
deputation did not contain many voters, and no bargain which Mr.

Measy, as he then was, could have made with it would have increased his
majority very largely: as he was pretty sure of a majority, he must be
cleared of all suspicion of making a bargain. But he did deliver to Mrs.
Pegley an oracular answer, which was in course of time interpreted in
Mrs. Tarbell's favor. She came up before him; Mr. Juddson made the
motion which he had so often made before, and made it, I regret to say,
in rather hurried tones, when, to everybody's surprise, Judge Measy
produced a manuscript and read it out, and proved that a lawyer was a
person who practiced law, and that therefore, as a woman was a
person, she could be a lawyer, interspersing his remarks with
graceful historical allusions and several profound reflections upon
the design of Nature in creating the female sex.

Then, acting as man, not judge, he descended to the side-bar,
beckoned to Mrs.

Tarbell, grasped her by the hand, and made her a speech. "Madam," said the
courtly judge, "Mrs.

Tarbell, I congratulate you,"--which was one for himself as well,--"and
let me add that it gives me the sincerest satisfaction to be able to
testify in this manner to the veneration which I have always entertained
for woman; and I am quite sure that in no long space of time you will
have proved to us that the law cannot say it has nothing to gain from
her refining influence. For I remember my _own_ mother, Mrs. Tarbell,"
said Judge Measy. The bar listened in awed admiration. Mrs. Tarbell
bit her lips, bowed, and thanked his honor as best she could.

The idea of suggesting that she was anybody's mother, or that even if
she had a family that was any reason for permitting her to be a
barrister!

But from the other side of the court-room was heard an expressive
rustling, and audible whispers of satisfaction were wafted across
the lawyers on their chairs. Mrs. Pegley and her train were sitting
by, radiant, triumphant, majestic.

The dignity of motherhood was vindicated.

And now that Juddson and Tarbell were moving to their new offices, who
should also at the very same time become a tenant of the Land and
Water Insurance Company but the Honorable Franklin Blood Pope? The Land
and Water Company's new building was in a very desirable locality, and
several lawyers deserted their old nooks and corners to occupy its
spacious and well-calcimined apartments.

Juddson and Tarbell took the rooms on the back of the third floor,
Mr.

Pope those on the front ditto:
they were very near neighbors. In former days Mrs. Tarbell had often
complained to her husband of Mr. Pope's success. It was an argument
that men had not as much common sense as they pretended to have, she
said, or else they would see through Franklin B----'s absurd pretensions.
"Even I can perceive that the man is a humbug," she continued. "In
fact, any woman could. Why is he successful, then? Why has he an
enormous practice? Why has he been sent to Congress? If it is because
he has a majestic appearance and can talk a great deal, women certainly
can fulfill these conditions, and that by your own account of
them."

To which Mr. Tarbell would answer, "Exactly, my love, by all means; and
so is your friend Mrs. Pegley a great talker, and a fine-looking woman."

"Then give her all the rights you give to Mr. Pope," cried Mrs.
Tarbell.

"She shall have 'em, and welcome," said Tarbell; but he did not
tell his wife that he had voted for Mr.

Pope on the opposition ticket, and had even consulted him on matters
of business,--once going so far as to suggest to him that a certain
proposed alteration in the tariff would seriously affect the mourning-goods
industry,--from which it may be gathered that it was not from any lack
of prudence that Mr. Tarbell died a bankrupt and left his widow to become
a lady-lawyer.

Mr. Pope himself it was who betrayed Mr. Tarbell's confidence and opened
Mrs. Tarbell's eyes. "Your husband was my very good friend, my dear
madam," said the Honorable Franklin, "and I was proud to call him my
client. Yes, I had the honor of advising him in several matters and of
carrying through some rather delicate negotiations for him.

A man of the strictest integrity, ever genial and urbane, of sound
judgment and independent views, endowed with strong common sense and
quick perceptions. You see, I had the highest opinion of Mr. Tarbell,
and have often wished to tell his widow--alas that I should have
to call her so!

--how certain I am that she will succeed in the career she has
chosen, and how deeply I grieve that her husband could not have lived
to find in her a better adviser than I ever could have been to him."

Messrs.

--I mean Mrs. and Mr.--Tarbell and Juddson were just moving into their
new offices when Mr. Pope uttered these kind wishes. He met Mrs.
Tarbell on the door-step: he was standing there, indeed, when she
came in. He was always standing on the door-step: he carried on most
of his business, especially with the politicians, in public. "I beg
that you will use my library on all occasions," he continued,
raising his voice a little.

"If I may say so myself, it is rather comprehensive; in fact, I am very
proud of it. And any assistance which I can give you in any way, my
dear madam, will, I need hardly say, be given most heartily."
Use his library, indeed! Mrs. Tarbell would have been as likely to go
to the Vatican and ask Pope Leo for the loan of a few works _contra
hæreticos_. Why had she and her brother ever come to the Land and Water
Company's building? The idea of meeting the Honorable Pope every day, of
every day beholding his portly figure, statesman-like features, and
lion mane, and acknowledging his bland bows and salutations, was
inexpressibly odious. And, what was worse, Mr. Pope continued to flourish
like a green bay-tree, or like the proprietors of a patent medicine or
a blackguard newspaper, or any other comparison you please.
Feet tramped along the hall, hands knocked at his door, lips
innumerable whispered into his ears, and Mrs. Tarbell sat and looked
at her sign, wondering what had become of all the women who were to have
employed her. She had not said, "Walk in, madam," to one of them; and
Mr.
Juddson's clients all regarded her as if she were a curiosity.

Mrs. Tarbell looked, in fact, like the president of a Dorcas society or
a visitor of a church hospital. She had pleasing features, dark hair,
slightly touched with gray, as became a lawyer of thirty-five, and
dignified manners. She dressed very plainly in a black dress with just
one row of broad trimming down the front, and, though she felt that it
was an abuse of authority, she drew her hair straight back from her
forehead. This question of her hair had given her some little anxiety,
and it had cost her some time to decide what kind of hat or bonnet she
should wear. Alexander said she might use her riding-hat for the sake
of economy, but she had decided on a tweed walking-hat, which could
be taken off very quickly in the court-room. For, whatever she
might do in church, it was now impossible for her to remain covered
before the bench of judges.

Mrs. Tarbell's desk was in the middle of the back room,--she could just
see the outer door obliquely through that of her partition,--and Mr.
Juddson's was in a similar position in the front room. This was not a
very good arrangement. Mrs.

Tarbell could not very well be put in the front room with the
office-boy, and yet the proximity of the office-boy was not agreeable
to Mr.

Juddson either. Then, too, most of the books were in the back room, and
so was the sofa: altogether it looked as if Mrs. Tarbell were the senior.
Mr. Juddson was thinking seriously of having another partition built,
and that would at any rate save him from being asked "if Mr. Juddson
were in," for, as every one knows, there is a vast difference between
being asked "if Mr. Juddson be in," and "is this Mr. Juddson?" But Mr.
Juddson had the picture of Chief-Justice Marshall and the map of the
battle-field of Gettysburg, so he was not so badly off; and Mrs.
Tarbell was very comfortable.

She was just musing over her future, and saying to herself, "When I die,
I _know_ that they will call a bar-meeting, and that Mr. Pope will
make a eulogy on my character," when the door opened, and Mr.

Juddson came in. Mrs. Tarbell returned to business-life immediately.

"Did you find Mullany?" she said.

Mr. Juddson, a tall, black-whiskered man of about fifty, rubbed his hands
for a moment over the fire, and then answered shortly that he _had_
found Mullany.

"What did he say?"
"Oh,--what I expected," said Mr. Juddson, turning over the papers on
his table. He disliked unnecessary questions. Mrs. Tarbell had no
interest in Mullany, and the most she ought to do was to ask about him
in an off-hand way in the street-car on the way home. Mr. Juddson
discovered the paper for which he was searching, and turned toward the
door.

"Are you going out?" said Mrs. Tarbell.

The door was already half open.

"Reference before Murray. Back at one," was all Mr. Juddson deigned
to say.

"Alexander!" cried Mrs. Tarbell,--when the office-boy was in, she called
her brother Mr. Juddson,--"Alexander!"
"_Well_?" said Mr. Juddson. He was late as it was.

"You will make the office very cold if you leave the door--but never mind.
Don't let me keep you. I only wanted to tell you that I should like
to talk to you about something some time to-d--" The rest of the sentence
was lost upon Mr. Juddson, who had already shut the door behind him,
and Mrs. Tarbell felt aggrieved.

So much aggrieved, in fact, that she found it impossible to return to
the law-journal.

"I suppose I need a sedative," she said to herself. "If I were a man, I
would put my feet up on the table and light a cigar, or--no! I
would never practise that vilest form of the vice." (What she meant
by this last phrase I cannot imagine, unless she referred to something
which Mr.
Juddson had been driven to do because he could not very well smoke
while his sister was in the office.) "What," continued Mrs. Tarbell,
"what can there be to recommend the position?" She looked at the desk.

"Is it an easy position?" she said. She looked down at her feet.

"Is it even a graceful position?" She swung herself to and fro on her
revolving-chair.

She looked about her.

The office was empty; the office-boy had gone on a very long errand.
"I will try it," she said, with determination.

She removed all the books and papers on the right side of the table
to the left side.

Then she tilted back her chair, elevated her left foot cautiously, put
it down, and elevated her right, placed it determinedly on the table,
crossed the other foot over it, leaned forward with some difficulty to
arrange her skirts, leaned back again.

"My book seems to lie very easily in my lap," she said to herself. "And
the leaves turn over quite willingly."
One page, two pages, three pages. "After all," said she,--"after all--if
one were quite alone--and had been sitting for a long time in another
attitude--"
Tap-tap! came a timid knock at the door.

"Come in!" cried Mrs. Tarbell, resuming her former position in a
great hurry, and dropping the law-journal.

Tap-tap!
"Come in!" said Mrs. Tarbell, picking up the law-journal. "_Come
in_!" she said.

And the door opened slowly.
"Well?" said Mrs. Tarbell.
"Is Mrs. Tarbell in?" said the party of the knocks.
"I am Mrs. Tarbell. Come in, please. What can I do for you?"
"I wanted to see you, ma'am." 
"Take a chair. Well?"
"I suppose it's April weather," said the new-comer; "but the rain
is right chilly, so it is; like it was a November rain, somehow.
Will I put my umbreller right down here? The spring is dreadful
late, and the farmers is all complainin', they tell me."
Mrs. Tarbell shuddered.
The new-comer was tall and gaunt and thin; her shoulders sloped,
she stooped, her chin was up in the air, and she peered through
spectacles.Then, with swift strokes of his light mattock, he lifted
the roots, crammed them into his sack, whistled to Belshazzar, and going
back to the wagon, drove away. Reaching home he washed the ginseng,
and spread it on a tray to dry. The first time he wanted the mattock
he realized that he had left it lying where he had worked. It was an
implement that he had directed a blacksmith to fashion to meet his
requirements. No store contained anything half so useful to him. He had
worked with it for years and it just suited him, so there was nothing to
do but go back. Betsy was too tired to return that day, so he planned
to dig his ginseng with something else, finish his work the following
morning, and get the mattock in the afternoon.

"It's like a knife you've carried for years, or a gun," muttered the
Harvester. "I actually don't know how to get along without it. What made
me so careless I can't imagine. I never before in my life did a trick
like that. I wonder if I hurried a little. I certainly was free to
take it. He always wanted the stuff dug up. Of all the stupid tricks,
Belshazzar, that was the worst. Now Betsy and a half day of wasted time
must pay for my carelessness. Since I have to go, I'll look a little
farther. Maybe there is more. Those woods used to be full of it."

According to this programme, the next afternoon the Harvester again
walked down the embankment of the mourning river and through the ragged
woods to the place where the ginseng had been. He went forward, stepping
lightly, as men of his race had walked the forest for ages, swerving to
avoid boughs, and looking straight ahead. Contrary to his usual custom
of coming to heel in a strange wood, Belshazzar suddenly darted around
the man and took the path they had followed the previous day. The animal
was performing his office in life; he had heard or scented something
unusual. The Harvester knew what that meant. He looked inquiringly at
the dog, glanced around, and then at the earth. Belshazzar proceeded
noiselessly at a rapid pace over the leaves: Suddenly the master saw the
dog stop in a stiff point. Lifting his feet lightly and straining his
eyes before him, the Harvester passed a spice thicket and came in line.

For one second he stood as rigid as Belshazzar. The next his right arm
shot upward full length, and began describing circles, his open
palm heavenward, and into his face leapt a glorified expression of
exultation. Face down in the rifled ginseng bed lay a sobbing girl. Her
frame was long and slender, a thick coil of dark hair; bound her head. A
second more and the Harvester bent and softly patted Belshazzar's head.
The beast broke point and looked up. The man caught the dog's chin in a
caressing grip, again touched his head, moved soundless lips, and waved
toward the prostrate figure. The dog hesitated. The Harvester made the
same motions. Belshazzar softly stepped over the leaves, passed around
the feet of the girl, and paused beside her, nose to earth, softly
sniffing.

In one moment she came swiftly to a sitting posture.

"Oh!" she cried in a spasm of fright.

Belshazzar reached an investigating nose and wagged an eager tail.

"Why you are a nice friendly dog!" said the trembling voice.

He immediately verified the assertion by offering his nose for a kiss.
The girl timidly laid a hand on his head.

"Heaven knows I'm lonely enough to kiss a dog," she said, "but suppose
you belong to the man who stole my ginseng, and then ran away so fast he
forgot his----his piece he digged with."

Belshazzar pressed closer.

"I am just killed, and I don't care whose dog you are," sobbed the girl.

She threw her arms around Belshazzar's neck and laid her white face
against his satiny shoulder. The Harvester could endure no more. He took
a step forward, his face convulsed with pain.

"Please don't!" he begged. "I took your ginseng. I'll bring it back
to-morrow. There wasn't more than twenty-five or thirty dollars' worth.
It doesn't amount to one tear."

The girl arose so quickly, the Harvester could not see how she did it.
With a startled fright on her face, and the dark eyes swimming, she
turned to him in one long look. Words rolled from the lips of the man in
a jumble. Behind the tears there was a dull, expressionless blue in the
girl's eyes and her face was so white that it appeared blank. He began
talking before she could speak, in an effort to secure forgiveness
without condemnation.

"You see, I grow it for a living on land I own, and I've always gathered
all there was in the country and no one cared. There never was enough in
one place to pay, and no other man wanted to spend the time, and so
I've always felt free to take it. Every one knew I did, and no one ever
objected before. Once I paid Henry Jameson for the privilege of cleaning
it from these woods. That was six or seven years ago, and it didn't
occur to me that I wasn't at liberty to dig what has grown since. I'll
bring it back at once, and pay you for the shrinkage from gathering it
too early. There won't be much over six pounds when it's dry. Please,
please don't feel badly. Won't you trust me to return it, and make good
the damage I've done?"

The face of the Harvester was eager and his tones appealing, as he
leaned forward trying to make her understand.

"Certainly!" said the Girl as she bent to pat the dog, while she
dried her eyes under cover of the movement. "Certainly! It can make no
difference!"

But as the Harvester drew a deep breath of relief, she suddenly
straightened to full height and looked straight at him.

"Oh what is the use to tell a pitiful lie!" she cried. "It does make a
difference! It makes all the difference in the world! I need that money!
I need it unspeakably. I owe a debt I must pay. What----what did I
understand you to say ginseng is worth?"

"If you will take a few steps," said the Harvester, "and make yourself
comfortable on this log in the shade, I will tell you all I know about
it."

The girl walked swiftly to the log indicated, seated herself, and
waited. The Harvester followed to a respectful distance.

"I can't tell to an ounce what wet roots would weigh," he said as easily
as he could command his voice to speak with the heart in him beating
wildly, "and of course they lose greatly in drying; but I've handled
enough that I know the weight I carried home will come to six pounds at
the very least. Then you must figure on some loss, because I dug
this before it really was ready. It does not reach full growth until
September, and if it is taken too soon there is a decrease in weight. I
will make that up to you when I return it."

The troubled eyes were gazing on his face intently, and the Harvester
studied them as he talked.

"You would think, then, there would be all of six pounds?

"Yes," said the Harvester, "closer eight. When I replace the shrinkage
there is bound to be over seven."

"And how much did I understand you to say it brought a pound?"

"That all depends," answered he. "If you cure it yourself, and dry it
too much, you lose in weight. If you carry it in a small lot to the
druggists of Onabasha, probably you will not get over five dollars for
it."

"Five?"

It was a startled cry.

"How much did you expect?" asked the Harvester gently.

"Uncle Henry said he thought he could get fifty cents a pound for all I
could find."

"If your Uncle Henry has learned at last that ginseng is a salable
article he should know something about the price also. Will you tell
me what he said, and how you came to think of gathering roots for the
market?"

"There were men talking beneath the trees one Sunday afternoon about old
times and hunting deer, and they spoke of people who made money long ago
gathering roots and barks, and they mentioned one man who lived by it
yet."

"Was his name Langston?"

"Yes, I remember because I liked the name. I was so eager to earn
something, and I can't leave here just now because Aunt Molly is very
ill, so the thought came that possibly I could gather stuff worth money,
after my work was finished. I went out and asked questions. They said
nothing brought enough to make it pay any one, except this ginseng
plant, and the Langston man almost had stripped the country. Then uncle
said he used to get stuff here, and he might have got some of that. I
asked what it was like, so they told me and I hunted until I found that,
and it seemed a quantity to me. Of course I didn't know it had to be
dried. Uncle took a root I dug to a store, and they told him that it
wasn't much used any more, but they would give him fifty cents a pound
for it. What MAKES you think you can get five dollars?"

"With your permission," said the Harvester.

He seated himself on the log, drew from his pocket an old pamphlet,
and spreading it before her, ran a pencil along the line of a list of
schedule prices for common drug roots and herbs. Because he understood,
his eyes were very bright, and his voice a trifle crisp. A latent anger
springing in his breast was a good curb for his emotions. He was closely
acquainted with all of the druggists of Onabasha, and he knew that not
one of them had offered less than standard prices for ginseng.

"The reason I think so," he said gently, "is because growing it is the
largest part of my occupation, and it was a staple with my father before
me. I am David Langston, of whom you heard those men speak. Since I was
a very small boy I have lived by collecting herbs and roots, and I get
more for ginseng than anything else. Very early I tired of hunting other
people's woods for herbs, so I began transplanting them to my own. I
moved that bed out there seven years ago. What you found has grown since
from roots I overlooked and seeds that fell at that time. Now do you
think I am enough of an authority to trust my word on the subject?"

There was not a change of expression on her white face.

"You surely should know," she said wearily, "and you could have no
possible object in deceiving me. Please go on."

"Any country boy or girl can find ginseng, gather, wash, and dry it, and
get five dollars a pound. They're as bad as the factories; and _often_
and _often_ when I see those poor creatures that stand behind counters
all day coming home at night and thinking so much about the way their
hair's done, and then consider what slaves they are, and what they're
exposed to, and how many wicked people are on the watch to work
them to death for no pay at all, and bully them, and to lead them all
wrong, if they can, why, it just makes me think how _sensible_ the good
Lord is, that he's able to take care of them so well and look after them
as much as he does. Professor Jamieson has been as kind as could _be_
about Celandine, and said he'd try to get a place for her as teacher;
but you can't do that, you know, Mrs. Tarbell, not onless you've got
friends in politics; and I haven't, not one.

And a governess ain't often asked for; and you need influence for
that, too.

And Celandine, though she would take copying or typewriting, or be a
telegraph operator, her own idea is to be a lawyer. And I just thought,
Mrs. Tarbell, that I'd come to you and ask your advice; for I knew you'd
sympathize."
"I--I don't know," gasped Mrs. Tarbell. The shock was almost as great
as if she had thought Mrs.

Stiles was a client.

And what was she to do?
Mrs. Stiles was not asking her to accept Miss Celandine as a student:
she was asking her whether Miss Celandine ought to study at all.

Mrs.

Tarbell would have given anything to have a few platitudes at her
tongue's end, but her conscience rendered her helpless.Five sounds fabulous to me. I can't believe
that. If you wanted to make money you needn't have told me you took it.
I never would have known. That isn't your reason!"

"Possibly I would like to atone for those tears I caused," said the
Harvester.

"Don't think of that! They are of no consequence to any one. You needn't
do anything for me on that account."

"Don't search for a reason," said the Harvester, in his gentlest tones.
"Forget that feature of the case. Say I'm peculiar, and allow me to do
it because it would be a pleasure. In close two weeks I will bring you
the money. Is it a bargain?"

"Yes, if you care to make it."

"I care very much. We will call that settled."

"I wish I could tell you what it will mean to me," said the Girl.

"If you only would," plead the Harvester.

"I must not burden a stranger with my troubles."

"But if it would make the stranger so happy!"

"That isn't possible. I must face life and bear what it brings me
alone."

"Not unless you choose," said the Harvester. "That is, if you will
pardon me, a narrow view of life. It cuts other people out of the joy of
service. If you can't tell me, would you trust a very lovely and gentle
woman I could bring to you?"

"No more than you. It is my affair; I must work it out myself."

"I am mighty sorry," said the Harvester. "I believe you err in that
decision. Think it over a day or so, and see if two heads are not better
than one. You will realize when this ginseng matter is settled that you
profited by trusting me. The same will hold good along other lines, if
you only can bring yourself to think so. At any rate, try. Telling a
trouble makes it lighter. Sympathy should help, if nothing can be done.
And as for money, I can show you how to earn sums at least worth your
time, if you have nothing else you want to do."

The Girl bent toward him.

"Oh please do tell me!" she cried eagerly. "I've tried and tried to find
some way ever since I have been here, but every one else I have met says
I can't, and nothing seems to be worth anything. If you only would tell
me something I could do!"

"If you will excuse my saying so," said the Harvester, "it appeals to
me that ease, not work, is the thing you require. You appear extremely
worn. Won't you let me help you find a way to a long rest first?"

"Impossible!" cried the Girl. "I know I am white and appear ill, but
truly I never have been sick in all my life. I have been having trouble
and working too much, but I'll be better soon. Believe me, there is no
rest for me now. I must earn the money I owe first."

"There is a way, if you care to take it," said the Harvester. "In my
work I have become very well acquainted with the chief surgeon of the
city hospital. Through him I happen to know that he has a free bed in
a beautiful room, where you could rest until you are perfectly strong
again, and that room is empty just now. When you are well, I will tell
you about the work."

As she arose the Harvester stood, and tall and straight she faced him.

"Impossible!" she said. "It would be brutal to leave my aunt. I cannot
pay to rest in a hospital ward, and I will not accept charity. If you
can put me in the way of earning, even a few cents a day, at anything
I could do outside the work necessary to earn my board here, it would
bring me closer to happiness than anything else on earth."

"What I suggest is not impossible," said the Harvester softly. "If you
will go, inside an hour a sweet and gentle lady will come for you and
take you to ease and perfect rest until you are strong again. I will see
that your aunt is cared for scrupulously. I can't help urging you. It is
a crime to talk of work to a woman so manifestly worn as you are."

"Then we will not speak of it," said the Girl wearily. "It is time for
me to go, anyway. I see you mean to be very kind, and while I don't in
the least understand it, I do hope you feel I am grateful. If half
you say about the ginseng comes true, I can make a payment worth while
before I had hoped to. I have no words to tell you what that will mean
to me."

"If this debt you speak of were paid, could you rest then?"

"I could lie down and give up in peace, and I think I would."

"I think you wouldn't," said the Harvester, "because you wouldn't be
allowed. There are people in these days who make a business of securing
rest for the tired and over weary, and they would come and prevent that
if you tried it. Please let me make another suggestion. If you owe money
to some one you feel needs it and the debt is preying on you, let's pay
it."

He drew a small check-book from his pocket and slipped a pen from a
band.

"If you will name the amount and give me the address, you shall be free
to go to the rest I ask for you inside an hour."

Then slowly from head to foot she looked at him.

"Why?"

"Because your face and attitude clearly indicate that you are over
tired. Believe me, you do yourself wrong if you refuse."

"In what way would changing creditors rest me?"

"I thought perhaps you were owing some one who needed the money. I am
not a rich man, but I have no one save myself to provide for and I have
funds lying idle that I would be glad to use for you. If you make a
point of it, when you are rested, you can repay me."

"My creditor needs the money, but I should prefer owing him rather than
a perfect stranger. What you suggest would help me not at all. I must go
now."

"Very well," said the Harvester. "If you will tell me whom to ask for
and where you live, I will come to see you to-morrow and bring you
some pamphlets. With these and with a little help you soon can earn
any amount a girl is likely to owe. It will require but a little while.
Where can I find you?"

The Girl hesitated and for the first time a hint of colour flushed her
cheek. But courage appeared to be her strong point.

"Do you live in this part of the country?" she asked.

"I live ten miles from here, east of Onabasha," he answered.

"Do you know Henry Jameson?"

"By sight and by reputation."

"Did you ever know anything kind or humane of him?"

"I never did."

"My name is Ruth Jameson. At present I am indebted to him for the only
shelter I have. His wife is ill through overwork and worry, and I am
paying for my bed and what I don't eat, principally, by attempting her
work. It scarcely would be fair to Uncle Henry to say that I do it. I
stagger around as long as I can stand, then I sit through his abuse. He
is a pleasant man. Please don't think I am telling you this to harrow
your sympathy further. The reason I explain is because I am driven. If I
do not, you will misjudge me when I say that I only can see you here.
I understood what you meant when you said Uncle Henry should have known
the price of ginseng if he knew it was for sale. He did. He knew what
he could get for it, and what he meant to pay me. That is one of his
original methods with a woman. If he thought I could earn anything worth
while, he would allow me, if I killed myself doing it; and then he would
take the money by force if necessary. So I can meet you here only. I can
earn just what I may in secret. He buys cattle and horses and is away
from home much of the day, and when Aunt Molly is comfortable I can have
a few hours."

"I understand," said the Harvester. "But this is an added hardship.
Why do you remain? Why subject yourself to force and work too heavy for
you?"

"Because his is the only roof on earth where I feel I can pay for all I
get. I don't care to discuss it, I only want you to say you understand,
if I ask you to bring the pamphlets here and tell me how I can earn
money."

"I do," said the Harvester earnestly, although his heart was hot in
protest. "You may be very sure that I will not misjudge you. Shall I
come at two o'clock to-morrow, Miss Jameson?"

"If you will be so kind."

The Harvester stepped aside and she passed him and crossing the rifled
ginseng patch went toward a low brown farmhouse lying in an unkept
garden, beside a ragged highway. The man sat on the log she had vacated,
held his head between his hands and tried to think, but he could not for
big waves of joy that swept over him when he realized that at last he
had found her, had spoken with her, and had arranged a meeting for the
morrow.

"Belshazzar," he said softly, "I wish I could leave you to protect
her. Every day you prove to me that I need you, but Heaven knows her
necessity is greater. Bel, she makes my heart ache until it feels like
jelly. There seems to be just one thing to do. Get that fool debt paid
like lightning, and lift her out of here quicker than that. Now, we will
go and see Doc, and call off the watch-dogs of the law. Ahead of them,
aren't we, Belshazzar? There is a better day coming; we feel it in our
bones, don't we, old partner?"

The Harvester started through the woods on a rush, and as the exercise
warmed his heart, he grew wonderfully glad. At last he had found her.
Uncertainty was over. If ever a girl needed a home and care he thought
she did. He was so jubilant that he felt like crying aloud, shouting for
joy, but by and by the years of sober repression made their weight felt,
so he climbed into the wagon and politely requested Betsy to make her
best time to Onabasha. Betsy had been asked to make haste so frequently
of late that she at first almost doubted the sanity of her master, the
law of whose life, until recently, had been to take his time. Now he
appeared to be in haste every day. She had become so accustomed to
being urged to hurry that she almost had developed a gait; so at the
Harvester's suggestion she did her level best to Onabasha and the
hospital, where she loved to nose Belshazzar and rest near the watering
tap under a big tree.

The Harvester went down the hall and into the office on the run, and his
face appeared like a materialized embodiment of living joy. Doctor Carey
turned at his approach and then bounded half way across the room, his
hands outstretched.

"You've found her, David!"

The Harvester grabbed the hand of his friend and stood pumping it up and
down while he gulped at the lump in his throat, and big tears squeezed
from his eyes, but he could only nod his proud head.

"Found her!" exulted Doctor Carey. "Really found her! Well that's great!
Sit down and tell me, boy! Is she sick, as we feared? Did you only see
her or did you get to talk with her?"

"Well sir," said the Harvester, choking back his emotions, "you remember
that ginseng I told you about getting on the old Jameson place last
night. To-day, I learned I'd lost that hand-made mattock I use most, and
I went back for it, and there she was."

"In the country?"

"Yes sir!"

"Well why didn't we think of it before?"

"I suppose first we would have had to satisfy ourselves that she wasn't
in town, anyway."

"Sure! That would be the logical way to go at it! And so you found her?"

"Yes sir, I found her! Just Belshazzar and I! I was going along on my
way to the place, and he ran past me and made a stiff point, and when I
came up, there she was!"

"There she was?"

"Yes sir; there she was!"

They shook hands again.

"Then of course you spoke to her."

"Yes I spoke to her."

"Were you pleased?"

"With her speech and manner?----yes. But, Doc, if ever a woman needed
everything on earth!"

"Well did you get any kind of a start made?"

"I couldn't do so very much. I had to go a little slow for fear of
frightening her, but I tried to get her to come here and she won't until
a debt she owes is paid, and she's in no condition to work."

"Got any idea how much it is?"

"No, but it can't be any large sum. I tried to offer to pay it, but she
had no hesitation in telling me she preferred owing a man she knew to a
stranger."

"Well if she is so particular, how did she come to tell you first thing
that she was in debt?"

The Harvester explained.

"Oh I see!" said the doctor. "Well you'll have to baby her along with
the idea that she is earning money and pay her double until you get that
off her mind, and while you are at it, put in your best licks, my boy;
perk right up and court her like a house afire. Women like it. All of
them do. They glory in feeling that a man is crazy about them."

"Well I'm insane enough over her," said the Harvester, "but I'd hate
like the nation for her to know it. Seems as if a woman couldn't respect
such an addle-pate as I am lately."

"Don't you worry about that," advised the doctor. "Just you make love to
her. Go at it in the good old-fashioned way."

"But maybe the 'good old-fashioned way' isn't my way."

"What's the difference whose way it is, if it wins?"

"But Kipling says: 'Each man makes love his own way!'"

"I seem to have heard you mention that name be fore," said the doctor.
"Do you regard him as an authority?"

"I do!" said the Harvester. "Especially when he advises me after my own
heart and reason. Miss Jameson is not a silly girl. She's a woman,
and twenty-four at least. I don't want her to care for a trick or a
pretence. I do want her to love me. Not that I am worth her attention,
but because she needs some strong man fearfully, and I am ready and more
'willing' than the original Barkis. But, like him, I have to let her
know it in my way, and court her according to the promptings of my
heart."

"You deceive yourself!" said the doctor flatly. "That's all bosh! Your
tongue says it for the satisfaction of your ears, and it does sound
well. You will court her according to your ideas of the conventions, as
you understand them, and strictly in accordance with what you consider
the respect due her. If you had followed the thing you call the
'promptings of your heart,' you would have picked her up by main force
and brought her to my best ward, instead of merely suggesting it and
giving up when she said no. If you had followed your heart, you would
have choked the name and amount out of her and paid that devilish debt.
You walk away in a case like that, and then have the nerve to come here
and prate to me about following your heart. I'll wager my last dollar
your heart is sore because you were not allowed to help her; but on the
proposition that you followed its promptings I wouldn't stake a penny.
That's all tommy-rot!"

"It is," agreed the Harvester. "Utter! But what can a man do?"

"I don't know what you can do! I'd have paid that debt and brought her
to the hospital."

"I'll go and ask Mrs. Carey about your courtship. I want her help on
this, anyway. I can pick up Miss Jameson and bring her here if any man
can, but she is nursing a sick woman who depends solely on her for care.
She is above average size, and she has a very decided mind of her own.
I don't think you would use force and do what you think best for her, if
you were in my place. You would wait until you understood the situation
better, and knew that what you did was for the best, ultimately."

"I don't know whether I would or not. One thing is sure: I'm mighty glad
you have found her. May I tell my wife?"

"Please do! And ask her if I may depend on her if I need a woman's help.
Now I'll call off the valiant police and go home and take a good, sound
sleep. Haven't had many since I first saw her."

So Betsy trotted down the valley, up the embankment, crossed the
railroad, over the levee across Singing Water, and up the hill to the
cabin. As they passed it, the Harvester jumped from the wagon, tossed
the hitching strap to Belshazzar, and entered. He walked straight to her
door, unlocked it, and uncovering, went inside. Softly he passed from
piece to piece of the furniture he had made for her, and then surveyed
the walls and floor.

"It isn't half good enough," he said, "but it will have to answer until
I can do better. Surely she will know I tried and care for that, anyway.
I wonder how long it will take me to get her here. Oh, if I only could
know she was comfortable and happy! Happy! She doesn't appear as if she
ever had heard that word. Well this will be a good place to teach her.
I've always enjoyed myself here. I'm going to have faith that I can win
her and make her happy also. When I go to the stable to do my work for
the night if I could know she was in this cabin and glad of it, and if
I could hear her down here singing like a happy care-free girl, I'd
scarcely be able to endure the joy of it."


CHAPTER IX. THE HARVESTER GOES COURTING

"She is on Henry Jameson's farm, four miles west of Onabasha," said the
Harvester, as he opened his eyes next morning, and laid a caressing hand
on Belshazzar's head. "At two o'clock we are going to see her, and we
are going to prolong the visit to the ultimate limit, so we should make
things count here before we start."

He worked in a manner that accomplished much. There seemed no end to
his energy that morning. Despatching the usual routine, he gathered
the herbs that were ready, spread them on the shelves of the dry-house,
found time to do several things in the cabin, and polish a piece of
furniture before he ate his lunch and hitched Betsy to the wagon.
He also had recovered his voice, and talked almost incessantly as he
worked. When it neared time to start he dressed carefully. He stood
before his bookcase and selected several pamphlets published by the
Department of Agriculture. He went to his beds and gathered a large
arm load of plants. Then he was ready to make his first trip to see the
Dream Girl, but it never occurred to him that he was going courting.

He had decided fully that there would be no use to try to make love to
a girl manifestly so ill and in trouble. The first thing, it appeared to
him, was to dispel the depression, improve the health, and then do the
love making. So, in the most business-like manner possible and without
a shade of embarrassment, the Harvester took his herbs and books and
started for the Jameson woods. At times as he drove along he espied
something that he used growing beside the road and stopped to secure a
specimen.

He came down the river bank and reached the ginseng bed at half-past
one. He was purposely early. He laid down his books and plants,
and rolled the log on which she sat the day before to a more shaded
location, where a big tree would serve for a back rest. He pulled away
brush and windfalls, heaped dry brown leaves, and tramped them down
for her feet. Then he laid the books on the log, the arm load of plants
beside them, and went to the river to wash his soiled hands.

Belshazzar's short bark told him the Girl was coming, and between the
trees he saw the dog race to meet her and she bent to stroke his
head. She wore the same dress and appeared even paler and thinner. The
Harvester hurried up the bank, wiping his hands on his handkerchief.

"Glad to see you!" he greeted her casually. "I've fixed you a seat
with a back rest to-day. Don't be frightened at the stack of herbs. You
needn't gather all of those. They are only suggestions. They are just
common roadside plants that have some medicinal value and are worth
collecting. Please try my davenport."

"Thank you!" she said as she dropped on the log and leaned her head
against the tree. It appeared as if her eyes closed a few seconds in
spite of her, and while they were shut the Harvester looked steadily
and intently on a face of exquisite beauty, but so marred by pallor and
lines of care that search was required to recognize just how handsome
she was, and if he had not seen her in perfection in the dream the
Harvester might have missed glorious possibilities. To bring back that
vision would be a task worth while was his thought. With the first faint
quiver of an eyelash the Harvester took a few steps and bent over a
plant, and as he did so the Girl's eyes followed him.

He appeared so tall and strong, so bronzed by summer sun and wind, his
face so keen and intense, that swift fear caught her heart. Why was he
there? Why should he take so much trouble for her? With difficulty she
restrained herself from springing up and running away. Turning with
the plant in his hand the Harvester saw the panic in her eyes, and
it troubled his heart. For an instant he was bewildered, then he
understood.

"I don't want you to work when you are not able," he said in his most
matter-of-fact voice, "but if you still think that you are, I'll be very
glad. I need help just now, more than I can tell you, and there seem to
be so few people who can be trusted. Gathering stuff for drugs is really
very serious business. You see, I've a reputation to sustain with some
of the biggest laboratories in the country, not to mention the fact
that I sometimes try compounding a new remedy for some common complaint
myself. I rather take pride in the fact that my stuff goes in so fresh
and clean that I always get anywhere from three to ten cents a pound
above the listed prices for it. I want that money, but I want an
unbroken record for doing a job right and being square and careful, much
more."

He thought the appearance of fright was fading, and a tinge of interest
taking its place. She was looking straight at him, and as he talked he
could see her summoning her tired forces to understand and follow him,
so he continued:

"One would think that as medicines are required in cases of life and
death, collectors would use extreme caution, but some of them are
criminally careless. It's a common thing to gather almost any fern
for male fern; to throw in anything that will increase weight, to wash
imperfectly, and commit many other sins that lie with the collector;
beyond that I don't like to think. I suppose there are men who
deliberately adulterate pure stuff to make it go farther, but when it
comes to drugs, I scarcely can speak of it calmly. I like to do a thing
right. I raise most of my plants, bushes, and herbs. I gather exactly
in season, wash carefully if water dare be used, clean them otherwise
if not, and dry them by a hot air system in an evaporator I built
purposely. Each package I put up is pure stuff, clean, properly dried,
and fresh. If I caught any man in the act of adulterating any of it I'm
afraid he would get hurt badly--and usually I am a peaceable man. I
am explaining this to show how very careful you must be to keep things
separate and collect the right plants if you are going to sell stuff to
me. I am extremely particular."

The Girl was leaning toward him, watching his face, and hers was slowly
changing. She was deeply interested, much impressed, and more at ease.
When the Harvester saw he had talked her into confidence he crossed
the leaves, and sitting on the log beside her, picked up the books and
opened one.

"Oh I will be careful," said the Girl. "If you will trust me to collect
for you, I will undertake only what I am sure I know, and I'll do
exactly as you tell me."

"There are a dozen things that bring a price ranging from three to
fifteen cents a pound, that are in season just now. I suppose you would
like to begin on some common, easy things, that will bring the most
money."

Without a breath of hesitation she answered, "I will commence on
whatever you are short of and need most to have."

The heart of the Harvester gave a leap that almost choked him, for
he was vividly conscious of a broken shoe she was hiding beneath her
skirts. He wanted to say "thank you," but he was afraid to, so he turned
the leaves of the book.

"I am working just now on mullein," he said.

"Oh I know mullein," she cried, with almost a hint of animation in her
voice. "The tall, yellow flower stem rising from a circle of green felt
leaves!"

"Good!" said the Harvester. "What a pretty way to describe it! Do you
know any more plants?"

"Only a few! I had a high-school course in botany, but it was all about
flower and leaf formation, nothing at all of what anything was good for.
I also learned a few, drawing them for leather and embroidery designs."

"Look here!" cried the Harvester. "I came with an arm load of herbs and
expected to tell you all about foxglove, mullein, yarrow, jimson,
purple thorn apple, blessed thistle, hemlock, hoarhound, lobelia, and
everything in season now; but if you already have a profession, why do
you attempt a new one? Why don't you go on drawing? I never saw anything
so stupid as most of the designs from nature for book covers and
decorations, leather work and pottery. They are the same old subjects
worked over and over. If you can draw enough to make original copies,
I can furnish you with flowers, vines, birds, and insects, new, unused,
and of exquisite beauty, for every month in the year. I've looked into
the matter a little, because I am rather handy with a knife, and I carve
candlesticks from suitable pieces of wood. I always have trouble getting
my designs copied; securing something new and unusual, never! If you can
draw just well enough to reproduce what you see, gathering drugs is too
slow and tiresome. What you want to do is to reproduce the subjects I
will bring, and I'll buy what I want in my work, and sell the remainder
at the arts and crafts stores for you. Or I can find out what they pay
for such designs at potteries and ceramic factories. You have no time to
spend on herbs, when you are in the woods, if you can draw."

"I am surely in the woods," said the Girl, "and I know I can copy
correctly. I often made designs for embroidery and leather for the shop
mother and I worked for in Chicago."

"Won't they buy them of you now?"

"Undoubtedly."

"Do they pay anything worth while?"

"I don't know how their prices compare with others. One place was all I
worked for. I think they pay what is fair."

"We will find out," said the Harvester promptly.

"I----I don't think you need waste the time," faltered the Girl. "I had
better gather the plants for a while at least."

"Collecting crude drug material is not easy," said the Harvester.
"Drawing may not be either, but at least you could sit while you work,
and it should bring you more money. Besides, I very much want a moth
copied for a candlestick I am carving. Won't you draw that for me? I
have some pupae cases and the moths will be out any day now. If I'd
bring you one, wouldn't you just make a copy?"

The Girl gripped her hands together and stared straight ahead of her for
a second, then she turned to him.

"I'd like to," she said, "but I have nothing to work with. In Chicago
they furnished my material at the shop and I drew the design and was
paid for the pattern. I didn't know there would be a chance for anything
like that here. I haven't even proper pencils."

"Then the way for you to do this is to strip the first mullein plants
you see of the petals. I will pay you seventy-five cents a pound for
them. By the time you get a few pounds I can have material you need
for drawing here and you can go to work on whatever flowers, vines, and
things you can find in the woods, with no thanks to any one."

"I can't see that," said the Girl. "It would appear to me that I would
be under more obligations than I could repay, and to a stranger."

"I figure it this way," said the Harvester, watching from the corner
of his eye. "I can sell at good prices all the mullein flowers I can
secure. You collect for me, I buy them. You can use drawing tools; I
get them for you, and you pay me with the mullein or out of the ginseng
money I owe you. You already have that coming, and it's just as much
yours as it will be ten days from now. You needn't hesitate a second
about drawing on it, because I am in a hurry for the moth pattern.
I find time to carve only at night, you see. As for being under
obligations to a stranger, in the first place all the debt would be on
my side. I'd get the drugs and the pattern I want; and, in the second
place, I positively and emphatically refuse to be a stranger. It would
be so much better to be mutual helpers and friends of the kind worth
having; and the sooner we begin, the sooner we can work together to
good advantage. Get that stranger idea out of your head right now, and
replace it with thoughts of a new friend, who is willing"--the Harvester
detected panic in her eyes and ended casually--"to enter a partnership
that will be of benefit to both of us. Partners can't be strangers, you
know," he finished.

"I don't know what to think," said the Girl.

"Never bother your head with thinking," advised the Harvester with an
air of large wisdom. "It is unprofitable and very tiring. Any one can
see that you are too weary now. Don't dream of such a foolish thing as
thinking. Don't worry over motives and obligations. Say to yourself,
'I'll enter this partnership and if it brings me anything good, I'm that
much ahead. If it fails, I have lost nothing.' That's the way to look at
it."

Then before she could answer he continued: "Now I want all the mullein
bloom I can get. You'll see the yellow heads everywhere. Strip the
petals and bring them here, and I'll come for them every day. They must
go on the trays as fresh as possible. His Geoponics (published by Nicholas
Niclas at Leipsic, in 1731, in two volumes, 8vo.) were written
with a view of instructing his subjects in agriculture.

By his direction, a collection of historical examples of vice and
virtue was compiled in fifty-three books, and _Simeon Metaphrastes_,
the great logothete, or chancellor of the empire, composed his Lives
of the Saints.

Several of them were published, with a Latin translation, by the
care of Lipoman, the bishop of Verona.

Cardinal Bellarmin accuses Metaphrastes of giving too much loose to his
imagination.

"He inserts," {025} says the cardinal, "such accounts of conversations
of the martyrs with their persecutors, and such accounts of conversions
of bystanders, as exceed belief.

He mentions many and most wonderful miracles on the destruction of
the temples and idols, and on the death of the persecutors, of which
nothing is said by the ancient historians."

We next come to _Jacobus de Voragine_, a Dominican friar and archbishop
of Genoa, in 1292. His _Golden Legend_ was the delight of our ancestors
during the ages which preceded the revival of letters.

The library of no monastery was without it.

Like the essays of Montaigne, it was to be found on the shelf of every
private person; and, for a long time after the invention of printing,
no work more often issued from the press.
After enjoying the highest degree of reputation, it lost much of
its celebrity, in consequence of the Lives of Saints published by
_Mombritius_ in two immense volumes, in folio, about the year 1480,
from manuscripts in the library of the church of St.

John of Lateran and in consequence of the Lives of Saints published by
_Surius_, a Carthusian monk. The first edition of Surius's work was
published in 1570-75, in six volumes; the second appeared in 1578,
the third and most complete was published, in twelve volumes, in 1615.
That he frequently shows too much credulity, and betrays a want of taste,
must be admitted; but his works are allowed to breathe a spirit of
piety; his candor, and desire to be accurate, are discernible in every
part of his writings; and his learning, for the age in which he
lived, was considerable.

In _Ribadeneira_ the line of ancient Agiographists respectably finishes.

While candor and good taste must allow that, even in the Lest of the
compilations we have mentioned, there is a great want of critical
discernment, and that they are wholly deficient in elegance, and
the artificial beauties of composition, justice requires that their
defects should not be exaggerated.

Still less should an intention to deceive, even on the pretence of
edification, be imputed to them.

Whatever may have been either the error or the criminality of some of her
members, the church herself, in this, as in every other instance, has
always inculcated the duty of sincerity and truth, and reprobated
a deviation from them, even on the specious pretence of producing
good.

On this subject our author thus forcibly expresses himself, in one of
his letters on Mr. Bower's History of the Lives of the Popes: "It is very
unjust to charge the popes or the Catholic church with countenancing
knowingly false legends; seeing all the divines of that communion unanimously
condemn all such forgeries as lies in things of great moment, and
grievous sins; and all the councils, popes, and other bishops, have
always expressed the greatest horror of such villanies; which no
cause or circumstances whatever can authorize, and which, in all
things relating to religion, are always of the most heinous nature.

Hence the authors, when detected, have been always punished with the
utmost severity. Dr. Burnet himself says, that those who feigned a
revelation at Basil, of which he gives a long detail, with false
circumstances, in his letters on his travels, were all burnt at
stakes for it, which we read more exactly related by Surius in his
Commentary on his own times.

The truth is, that many false legends of true martyrs were forged by
heretics, as were those of St. George, condemned by pope Gelasius, as
many false gospels were soon after the birth of Christianity, of which
we have the names of near fifty extant. Other wicked or mistaken
persons have sometimes been guilty of a like imposture. A priest at
Ephesus forged acts of St.

Paul's voyages, out of veneration for that apostle, and was deposed
for it by St. John the evangelist, as we learn from Tertullian. To
instance examples of this nature would form a complete history;
for the church has always most severely condemned all manner of
forgeries.

Sometimes the more virtuous and remote from fraud a person is, the more
unwilling he is to suspect an imposture in others.

Some great and good men have been imposed upon by lies, and have given
credit to false histories, but without being privy to the forgery; and
nothing erroneous, dangerous, or prejudicial was contained in what they
unwarily admitted. However, if credulity in private histories was too
easy in any former age, certainly skepticism and infidelity are the
characters of this in which we live. No histories, except those of
holy scripture, are proposed as parts of divine revelation or articles
of faith; all others rest upon their bare historical authority.

They who do not think this good and sufficient in any narrations, do well
to suggest modestly their reasons; yet may look upon them at least
as parables, and leave others the liberty of judging for themselves
without offence.

But Mr.

Bower says, p. 177, 'The Roman Breviary is the most authentic book
the {026} church of Rome has, after the scripture; it would be less
dangerous, at least in Italy, to deny any truth revealed in the
scripture, than to question any fable related in the Breviary.'

Catholic divines teach that every tittle in the holy scriptures is
sacred, divinely inspired, and the word of God dictated by the
Holy Ghost.

Even the definitions of general councils do not enjoy an equal
privilege; they are indeed the oracles of an unerring guide in the
doctrine of faith; which guide received, together with the scriptures,
the true sense and meaning of the articles of faith contained in
them; and, by the special protection of the Holy Ghost, invariably
preserves the same by tradition from father to son, according to
the promises of Christ.

But the church receives no new revelation of faith, and adds nothing
to that which was taught by the apostles: 2dly, Its decisions are
not supernaturally infallible in matters of fact, as scripture
histories are, but only in matters of faith.

Nor do Catholics say that its expressions, even in decisions of
faith, are strictly dictated by the Holy Ghost, or suggested from
him, by any immediate revelation or inspiration; but only that the
church is directed by his particular guidance, according to his
divine truths, revealed and delivered to his church by his apostles.

As to the Roman Breviary, the prayers consist, for the greatest part,
of the psalms, and other parts of the holy scriptures, to which
the same respect is due which we pay to the divine books.

The short lessons from the Homilies, or other works of approved fathers,
especially those fathers who are mentioned by Gelasius I. in his
decree, carry with them the authority of their venerable authors.

As it was the custom in the primitive ages to read, in the churches or
assemblies, the acts of the most illustrious martyrs, of which
frequent mention is made in those of St.

Polycarp, &c., some short histories of the martyrs and other saints have
been always inserted in the Breviary, to which only an historical
assent is due, whence they have been sometimes altered and amended.

These are chiefly such as are judged authentic and probable by the
cardinals Baronius and Bellarmin, who revised those lessons, in
the last correction under Clement VIII.
Gavant, who was himself one of the revisers of the Breviary, and
secretary to the congregation, writes thus, (in Breviar. sect. 5,
c. 12, n. 15, p. 18:) 'The second lessons from the histories of the
saints were revised by Bellarmin and Baronius, who rejected what
could be justly called in question: in which difficult task they
thought it best to restore the truth of history with the least
change possible, and to retain those things which had a certain
degree of probability, and had the authority of some grave voucher,
though the contrary sentiment had perhaps more patrons.'

In computing the years of the popes, the chronology of Baronius was judged
the most exact, and retained.

Historical facts, nowise revealed or contained in scripture, cannot
be made an object of divine faith.

If edifying histories are inserted in the church-office, they stand
upon their own credit. Such only ought to be chosen which are esteemed
authentic. This rule has been always followed when any were compiled.
If the compilers are found afterwards to have been mistaken, it is nowhere
forbid to correct them.[1] This has been often done by the order of several
popes."
Footnotes:
1. Nimia profecto almplicitate peccant qui scandalizantur quoties audiunt
aliquid ex jam olim creditia et juxta breviarii prescriptum hodiedum
recitandis, in disputationem adduci.

--_Diss.

Ballandic{e}._ vol. 2, p. 140.

IX. 7.

Among the _modern collections of the Lives of Saints_, of which our
authors availed himself, in the work we are speaking of, the histories
which different religious have written of their own orders, hold a
distinguished place.

But he was indebted to no work so much as the _Acta sanctorum of
the Bollandists_.

That noble collection was first projected by Father Roswede of the
society of Jesus.

He died before he had completely digested his plan.

Fortunately for the lovers either of sacred history or sacred literature,
it mm taken up by father Bollandus of the same society, and has been
carried down to the eleventh day of October inclusive.

Those who, after Bollandus's decease, succeeded him in his undertaking,
were from him called Bollandists.

As far as the editor has been able to learn, the work was composed by
the following authors, and published in the number of volumes and
years following:

No. of Vols.

Years of their Months. all in folio. appearance. Authors.

January Two, 1643 ........... Bollandus and Henschenius February Three,
1658 ........... Bollandus and Henschenius March Three, 1668
...........

Henschenius and Papebrochius April Three, 1675 ........... Henschenius
and Papebrochius May Seven, 1680-1688....... Henschenius, Papebrochius,
Baertius, and Janningus
{027}
June Six, 1695--1715...... Henschenius, Papebrochius, Baertius, Janningus,
and Sollerius July Seven, 1719--1731...... Janningus, Sollerius,
Pinius, Cuperius, and Boschinus.
August Six, 1733--1743...... Sollerius, Pinius, Cuperius, Boschius, and
Stiltingus September Eight, 1746--1762...... Pinius, Stiltingus,
Limpenus, Veldius, Suyskenius, Pericrius, and Cleus.
October Five 1765--1786...... Stiltingus, Suyskenius, Perierius, Byeus,
Boæus, Gnesquierus, Hubenus, and Fronsonus.

Antwerp was the scene of the labors of the Bollandists.

They were engaged on them, when the enemies of every thing sacred
arrived there under Pichegrû. The most eminent of the Bollandists
was Father Papebroke, a rival of the Petaviuses, the Sirmonds, and
Mabillons: one of those men who exalt the character of the society to
which they belong, and the age in which they live.

The Spanish Inquisition condemned some of the volumes in which he was
concerned, but afterwards retracted the censure. Several dissertations,
replete with various and profound erudition, are interspersed in the
body of the work; they are equally distinguished by the learning, and the
soundness and sobriety of criticism which appear in them. It would be
an irreparable loss to the Christian world that the work should not be
completed. The principal dissertations have been printed, in three
volumes folio, at Venice, in 1749-59. Those who wish to see an account
of the controversy which produced or was occasioned by the sentence
of the Inquisition, may consult the _Acta Eruditorum_, 1696, p.
132-500.

IX. 8.

Another source of information, of which our author availed himself in
the composition of his work, was the _Acts of the Beatification and
Canonization of the Saints_.

The name of _Martyr_ was given by the ancient church to those who had
suffered death for the faith of Christ; the name of _Confessor_ was applied
to those who had made a public profession of their faith before the
persecutors. It was afterwards extended to those who had edified the
church by their heroic virtues. St. Martin of Tours is generally
supposed to have been the first saint to whom the title of confessor was
applied in the last sense.

Originally, every bishop had the privilege of canonizing saints, or
declaring them entitled to the honors which the Catholic church bestows
on her saints. The council of Cologne, cited by Ivo of Chartres, forbids
the faithful to show any public mark of veneration to any modern saint,
without the permission of the diocesan.

A capitulary of Charlemagne in 801 is to the same effect.

Pope Alexander III. is supposed to have been the first pope who reserved
the exclusive privilege of canonizing saints to the holy see. It was
recognised by the church of France at a council at Vienne, in which the
bishops, addressing themselves to pope Gregory IX., expressly say,
"that no sanctity, however eminent, authorizes the faithful to honor
the memory of a saint, without the permission of the holy see."

The present mode of proceeding in the canonization of saints, principally
takes its rise from the decree of pope Urban VIII., dated the 13th of
March, 1625. By that he forbade the public veneration of every new
saint, not beatified or baptized; and particularly ordered that no one,
even in private, should paint the image of any person, whatever
might be his reputation for sanctity, with a crown or {}e of light
round his head; or expose his picture in any sacred place, or publish
a history of his life, or a relation of his virtues and miracles,
without the approbation of his diocesan: that if, in a work so
approved of, the person were called saint, or blessed, those words
should only be used to denote the general holiness of his life, but
not to anticipate the general judgment of the church.

His holiness adds a form of protestation to that effect, which he requires
the authors to sign, at the beginning and end of their works. This
regulation of pope Urban is so strictly attended to, that a single
proof of the infraction of it, and even the omission of a definite
sentence that there has been no infraction of it, makes the
canonization of the saint impossible, and invalidates the whole of
the proceedings.

The only exception is, in favor of those saints who are proved to
have been immemorially venerated for a hundred years and upwards,
before 1634, the year in which pope Urban's bull was confirmed.

The beatification of a saint is generally considered as a preliminary to
his canonization. It is a kind of provisional permission, authorizing
the faithful to honor {028} the memory of the person beatified; but
qualified as to the place or manner. A decree of pope Alexander VIII.
in 1659, prohibits the faithful from carrying those honors farther than
the bull of beatification expressly permits.

The proceedings of beatification or canonization are long, rigorous,
and expensive. 1st, The bishop of the diocese institutes a process, in
the nature of an information, to inquire into the public belief
of the virtues and miracles of the proposed, and to ascertain that
the decree we have mentioned of pope Urban VIII. has been complied
with: this proceeding begins and ends with the bishop, his sentence
being conclusive. 2dly, The acts of this proceeding, with the
bishop's sentence, are sealed up, then taken to the congregation
of rites: and deposited with the notary. 3dly, The solicitors for
the congregation petition for publication of the proceedings. 4thly,
This is granted; and the proceedings, being first legally verified,
are opened before the cardinal-president of the congregation, 5thly,
The pope is then requested to refer the business to a particular
cardinal to report upon it. 6thly, This being granted, the writings
of the proposed, if he be the author of any, are laid before the
cardinal-reporter. 7thly, He appoints a commission to assist him,
and, with their assistance, makes his report.

If one formal error against faith, one direct opinion contrary to
morals, be round in them, it puts a total end to the proceedings,
unless the author, in his life, expressly retracted it. "A general
protestation;" says Benedict XIV., "the most sincere submission of all
opinions to the authority of the Catholic church, saves the author
from criminality, but does not prevent the effect of this rigorous
escalation." 8thly, Hitherto the proceedings are not in strictness
before the pope; but, from this sage of the business, the affair wholly
devolves on his holiness. He signs a commission to the congregation of
rites to institute and prosecute the process of beatification; but,
before this commission is granted, ten years must have expired, from
the time when the acts of the diocesan were first lodged with the
congregation of rites. 9thly; The congregation of rites appoints commissaries,
whom the pope delegates, to inform themselves of the virtues and
miracles are the proposed. The commissaries usually are bishops, and the
bishop of the diocese where the proposed is buried is usually one of
them; but laymen are never employed. The proceedings of the commissaries
are secret, and carried on and subscribed with the strictest order
and regularity, and in great form; the last step in their proceedings
is to visit the tomb of the deceased, and to draw out a verbal
process of the state in which his remains are found.

The original of the proceedings is left with the bishops; a legalized copy
is taken of them, and returned by a sworn courier to the congregation
of rites. 10thly, The solicitors for the congregation then pray
for what is called a decree of attribution, or that an inquiry may
be made into each particular virtue and miracle attributed to the
proposed: 11thly, Upon this, they proceed to make the inquiry, beginning
with the virtues and ending with the miracles; but of the former they
can take on notice in this stage of the business, till fifty years from
the time of the proposed's decease: in the case of a martyr, his
martyrdom alone, with proof both of the heroism with which it was
suffered, and of its having been suffered purely and absolutely in
the cause of Christ, is supposed to make an inquiry into his virtues
unnecessary. 12thly, The final determination of the cause is settled
in three extraordinary congregations, called the antepreparatory,
the preparatory, and the general.

The virtues to be approved of must be of the most heroic kind:
the number of miracles is, in strictness, limited to two. The pope collects
the vows of the assembly; and two-thirds of it, at least, must agree
in opinion, before they come to a resolution. He then pronounces
what is called a private sentence, before the promoter and the
secretary of the congregation of St.

Peter. 13thly, A general congregation is then held, to determine whether
it be advisable to proceed to the beatification of the proposed.
14thly, Three consistories are afterwards held. l5thly, The pope then
signs the brief of beatification. The publication of it is performed
in the church of the Vatican. The solicitor for the beatification
presents the brief to the cardinal-prefect; he remits it to the
cardinal-archpriest of the church where the ceremony is held.

The cardinal-archpriest reads it aloud; the Te Deum is sung, a
collect in honor of the beatified is read, and mass is solemnized
in his honor. 16thly, When the proceedings for the beatification
are completed, the proceedings for the canonization begin.

But it is necessary that, before any thing be done in them, new
miracles should be wrought.

When the solicitor for the canonization is satisfied that he can prove
by judicial evidence the existence of these miracles, he presents a
petition for resuming the {029} cause. 17thly, Three congregations
extraordinary, a general assembly, and three consistories, are held for
the purpose of pronouncing on the new miracles, and determining whether
it be prudent to proceed to canonization. 18thly, This being determined
upon, the pope issues the brief of canonization, and, soon after,
the ceremonial follows.

It begins by a solemn procession: an image of the saint is painted on
several banners.

When the procession arrives at the church where the ceremony is
performed, the pope seats himself on his throne, and receives the
usual homage of the court.

The solicitor for the cause and the consistorial advocate place
themselves at the feet of his holiness, and request the canonization;
the litanies are sung; the request is made a second time; the _Veni
Creator_ is sung; the request is made a third time; the secretary
announces that it is the will of the pope to proceed immediately
upon the canonization; the solicitor requests that the letters of
canonization may be delivered in due form; his holiness delivers
them, and the first prothonotary calls on all the assembly to witness
the delivery.

The _Te Deum_ is sung, and high mass is solemnized.

The decree of canonization is usually worded in these terms: "To the
glory of the Holy Trinity, for the exaltation of the Catholic faith, and
the increase of the Christian religion: In virtue of the authority
of Jesus Christ, of the holy apostles St.

Peter and St. Paul, and our own, after due deliberation and frequent
invocations of the heavenly light, with consent of our venerable brethren,
the cardinals, patriarchs, archbishops, and bishops, present at
Rome, we declare the blessed N. to be a saint, and we inscribe him
as such in the catalogue of the saints.

In the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Amen."

Such is the outline of the process of canonization.

It must be added, that the strictest evidence is required of every thing
offered in proof.

It is laid down as a universal rule, which admits of no exception,
that the same evidence shall be required, through the whole of the
process, as in criminal cases is required to convict an offender
of a capital crime; and that no evidence of any fact shall be
received, if a higher degree of evidence of the same fact can
possibly be obtained.

Hence, a copy of no instrument is admitted, if the original be in
existence; no hearsay witness is received, if ocular testimony can
be produced.

The rigorous examination of every circumstance offered to be proved
has excited the surprise of intelligent Protestants.

Miracles, which to them seemed proved to the utmost degree of demonstration,
have, to their surprise, been rejected.

Whatever there is most awful in religion, most sacred in an oath, or most
tremendous in the censures of the church, is employed in the process
of canonization to elicit truth and detect falsehood.

Every check and countercheck is used, which slowness of proceeding,
or a repetition of it in other stages and under different forms,
can effect.

The persons employed in it are the members of the Roman Catholic
church, the most exalted by their rank, and the most renowned for
their virtues and talents.

When the proceedings are concluded, they are printed and exposed
to the examination of the whole world.

The sixth volume of the celebrated treatise of Benedict XIV. on the
beatification and canonization of saints, contains the acts of the
saints canonized by himself.

X.

With these helps our author sat down to his work. We may suppose him
addressing to the saints, whose lives he was about to write, a
prayer similar to the beautiful prayer addressed to them by Bollandus
at the end of his general preface, and which may be thus abridged:
"Hail, ye citizens of heaven!

courageous warriors!

triumphant over the world! from the blessed scenes of your everlasting
glory, look on a low mortal, who searches everywhere for the
memorials of your virtues and triumphs.

I have stripped my
mullein beds of both leaves and flowers. I finished a week ago. Beyond
lies a stretch of Parnassus grass that made me think of you, it was so
white and delicate. I want you to see it. It will be lovely in a few
weeks more."

"You never had seen me a week ago."

"Oh hadn't I?" said the Harvester. "Well maybe I dreamed about you then.
I am a great dreamer. Once I had a dream that may interest you some
day, after you've overcome your fear of me. Now this bed of which I was
speaking is a picture in September. You must arrange to drive home with
me and see it then."

"For what do you sell foxglove and mullein?"

"Foxglove for heart trouble, and mullein for catarrh. I get ten cents a
pound for foxglove leaves and five for mullein and from seventy-five to
a dollar for flowers of the latter, depending on how well I preserve the
colour in drying them. They must be sealed in bottles and handled with
extreme care."

"Then if I wasn't too childish to be out picking them, I could be
earning seventy-five cents a pound for mullein blooms?"

"Yes," said the Harvester, "but until you learned the trick of stripping
them rapidly you scarcely could gather what would weigh two pounds a
day, when dried. Not to mention the fact that you would have to stand
and work mostly in hot sunshine, because mullein likes open roads and
fields and sunny hills. Now you can sit securely in the shade, and in
two hours you can make me a pattern of that moth, for which I would pay
a designer of the arts and crafts shop five dollars, so of course you
shall have the same."

"Oh no!" she cried in swift panic. "You were charged too much! It isn't
worth a dollar, even!"

"On the contrary the candlestick on which I shall use it will be
invaluable when I finish it, and five is very little for the cream of my
design. I paid just right. You can earn the same for all you can do.
If you can embroider linen, they pay good prices for that, too and wood
carving, metal work, or leather things. May I see how you are coming
on?"

"Please do," she said.

The Harvester sprang up and looked over the Girl's shoulder. He could
not suppress an exclamation of delight.

"Perfect!" he cried. "You can surpass their best drafting at the shop!
Your fortune is made. Any time you want to go to Onabasha you can make
enough to pay your board, dress you well, and save something every week.
You must leave here as soon as you can manage it. When can you go?"

"I don't know," she said wearily. "I'd hate to tell you how full
of aches I am. I could not work much just now, if I had the best
opportunities in the world. I must grow stronger."

"You should not work at anything until you are well," he said. "It is a
crime against nature to drive yourself. Why will you not allow----"

"Do you really think, with a little practice, I can draw designs that
will sell?"

The Harvester picked up the sheet. The work was delicate and exact. He
could see no way to improve it.

"You know it will sell," he said gently, "because you already have sold
such work."

"But not for the prices you offer."

"The prices I name are going to be for NEW, ORIGINAL DESIGNS. I've got a
thousand in my head, that old Mother Nature shows me in the woods and on
the water every day."

"But those are yours; I can't take them."

"You must," said the Harvester. "I only see and recognize studies; I
can't materialize them, and until they are drawn, no one can profit by
them. In this partnership we revolutionize decorative art. There are
actually birds besides fat robins and nondescript swallows. The crane
and heron do not monopolize the water. Wild rose and golden-rod are not
the only flowers. The other day I was gathering lobelia. The seeds
are used in tonic preparations. It has an upright stem with flowers
scattered along it. In itself it is not much, but close beside it always
grows its cousin, tall bell-flower. As the name indicates, the flowers
are bell shape and I can't begin to describe their grace, beauty, and
delicate blue colour. They ring my strongest call to worship. My work
keeps me in the woods so much I remain there for my religion also.
Whenever I find these flowers I always pause for a little service of my
own that begins by reciting these lines:

     "'Neath cloistered boughs, each floral bell that swingeth
          And tolls its perfume on the passing air,
     Makes Sabbath in the fields, and ever ringeth
          A call to prayer."


"Beautiful!" said the Girl.

"It's mighty convenient," explained the Harvester. "By my method, you
see, you don't have to wait for your day and hour of worship. Anywhere
the blue bell rings its call it is Sunday in the woods and in your
heart. After I recite that, I pray my prayer."

"Go on!" said the Girl. "This is no place to stop."

"It is always one and the same prayer, and there are only two lines of
it," said the Harvester. "It runs this way---- Let me take your pencil
and I will write it for you."

He bent over her shoulder, and traced these lines on a scrap of the
wrapping paper:

               "Almighty Evolver of the Universe:
          Help me to keep my soul and body clean,
     And at all times to do unto others as I would be done by.
                         Amen."


The Girl took the slip and sat studying it; then she raised her eyes to
his face curiously, but with a tinge of awe in them.

"I can see you standing over a blue, bell-shaped flower reciting those
exquisite lines and praying this wonderful prayer," she said. "Yesterday
you allowed the moth you were willing to pay five dollars for a drawing
of, to go, because you wouldn't risk breaking its wings. Why you are
more like a woman!"

A red stream crimsoned the Harvester's face.

"Well heretofore I have been considered strictly masculine," he said.
"To appreciate beauty or to try to be just commonly decent is not
exclusively feminine. You must remember there are painters, poets,
musicians, workers in art along almost any line you could mention, and
no one calls them feminine, but there is one good thing if I am. You
need no longer fear me. If you should see me, muck covered, grubbing in
the earth or on a raft washing roots in the lake, you would not consider
me like a woman."

"Would it be any discredit if I did? I think not. I merely meant that
most men would not see or hear the blue bell at all----and as for the
poem and prayer! If the woods make a man with such fibre in his soul, I
must learn them if they half kill me."

"You harp on death. Try to forget the word."

"I have faced it for months, and seen it do its grinding worst very
recently to the only thing on earth I loved or that loved me. I have no
desire to forget! Tell me more about the plants."

"Forgive me," said the Harvester gently. "Just now I am collecting
catnip for the infant and nervous people, hoarhound for colds and
dyspepsia, boneset heads and flowers for the same purpose. There is a
heavy head of white bloom with wonderful lacy leaves, called yarrow. I
take the entire plant for a tonic and blessed thistle leaves and flowers
for the same purpose."

"That must be what I need," interrupted the Girl. "Half the time I
believe I have a little fever, but I couldn't have dyspepsia, because I
never want anything to eat; perhaps the tonic would make me hungry."

"Promise me you will tell that to the doctor who comes to see your aunt,
and take what he gives you."

"No doctor comes to see my aunt. She is merely playing lazy to get out
of work. There is nothing the matter with her."

"Then why----"

"My uncle says that. Really, she could not stand and walk across a room
alone. She is simply worn out."

"I shall report the case," said the Harvester instantly.

"You better not!" said the Girl. "There must be a mistake about you
knowing my uncle. Tell me more of the flowers."

The Harvester drew a deep breath and continued:

"These I just have named I take at bloom time; next month come purple
thorn apple, jimson weed, and hemlock."

"Isn't that poison?"

"Half the stuff I handle is."

"Aren't you afraid?"

"Terribly," said the Harvester in laughing voice. "But I want the money,
the sick folk need the medicine, and I drink water."

The Girl laughed also.

"Look here!" said the Harvester. "Why not tell me just as closely as
you can about your aunt, and let me fix something for her; or if you are
afraid to trust me, let me have my friend of whom I spoke yesterday."

"Perhaps I am not so much afraid as I was," said the Girl. "I wish I
could! How could I explain where I got it and I wonder if she would take
it."

"Give it to her without any explanation," said the Harvester. "Tell her
it will make her stronger and she must use it. Tell me exactly how she
is, and I will fix up some harmless remedies that may help, and can do
no harm."

"She simply has been neglected, overworked, and abused until she has
lain down, turned her face to the wall, and given up hope. I think it is
too late. I think the end will come soon. But I wish you would try. I'll
gladly pay----"

"Don't!" said the Harvester. "Not for things that grow in the woods and
that I prepare. Don't think of money every minute."

"I must," she said with forced restraint. "It is the price of life.
Without it one suffers----horribly----as I know. What other plants do
you gather?"

"Saffron," answered the Harvester. "A beautiful thing! You must see it.
Tall, round stems, lacy, delicate leaves, big heads of bright yellow
bloom, touched with colour so dark it appears black--one of the
loveliest plants that grows. You should see my big bed of it in a week
or two more. It makes a picture."

The words recalled him to the Girl. He turned to study her. He forgot
his commission and chafed at conventions that prevented his doing what
he saw was required so urgently. Fearing she would notice, he gazed away
through the forest and tried to think, to plan.

"You are not making noise enough," she said.

So absorbed was the Harvester he scarcely heard her. In an attempt to
obey he began to whistle softly. A tiny goldfinch in a nest of thistle
down and plant fibre in the branching of a bush ten feet above him stuck
her head over the brim and inquired, "P'tseet?" "Pt'see!" answer the
Harvester. That began the duet. Before the question had been asked and
answered a half dozen times a catbird intruded its voice and hearing a
reply came through the bushes to investigate. A wren followed and became
very saucy. From----one could not see where, came a vireo, and almost at
the same time a chewink had something to say.

Instantly the Harvester answered. Then a blue jay came chattering to
ascertain what all the fuss was about, and the Harvester carried on
a conversation that called up the remainder of the feathered tribe. A
brilliant cardinal came tearing through the thicket, his beady black
eyes snapping, and demanded to know if any one were harming his mate,
brooding under a wild grape leaf in a scrub elm on the river embankment.
A brown thrush silently slipped like a snake between shrubs and trees,
and catching the universal excitement, began to flirt his tail and utter
a weird, whistling cry.

With one eye on the bird, and the other on the Girl sitting in amazed
silence, the Harvester began working for effect. He lay quietly, but in
turn he answered a dozen birds so accurately they thought their mates
were calling, and closer and closer they came. An oriole in orange and
black heard his challenge, and flew up the river bank, answering
at steady intervals for quite a time before it was visible, and in
resorting to the last notes he could think of a quail whistled "Bob
White" and a shitepoke, skulking along the river bank, stopped and
cried, "Cowk, cowk!"

At his limit of calls the Harvester changed his notes and whistled and
cried bits of bird talk in tone with every mellow accent and inflection
he could manage. Gradually the excitement subsided, the birds flew and
tilted closer, turned their sleek heads, peered with bright eyes, and
ventured on and on until the very bravest, the wren and the jay, were
almost in touch. Then, tired of hunting, Belshazzar came racing and the
little feathered people scattered in precipitate flight.

"How do you like that kind of a noise?" inquired the Harvester.

The Girl drew a deep breath.

"Of course you know that was the most exquisite sight I ever saw," she
said. "I never shall forget it. I did not think there were that many
different birds in the whole world. Of all the gaudy colours! And they
came so close you could have reached out and touched them."

"Yes," said the Harvester calmly. "Birds are never afraid of me. At
Medicine Woods, when I call them like that, many, most of them, in fact,
eat from my hand. If you ever have looked at me enough to notice bulgy
pockets, they are full of wheat. These birds are strangers, but I'll
wager you that in a week I can make them take food from me. Of course,
my own birds know me, because they are around every day. It is much
easier to tame them in winter, when the snow has fallen and food is
scarce, but it only takes a little while to win a bird's confidence at
any season."

"Birds don't know what there is to be afraid of," she said.

"Your pardon," said the Harvester, "but I am familiar with them, and
that is not correct. They have more to fear than human beings. No one is
going to kill you merely to see if he can shoot straight enough to hit.
Your life is not in danger because you have magnificent hair that some
woman would like for an ornament. You will not be stricken out in a
flash because there are a few bits of meat on your frame some one
wants to eat. No one will set a seductive trap for you, and, if you are
tempted to enter it, shut you from freedom and natural diet, in a cage
so small you can't turn around without touching bars. You are in a
secure and free position compared with the birds. I also have observed
that they know guns, many forms of traps, and all of them decide by the
mere manner of a man's passing through the woods whether he is a friend
or an enemy. Birds know more than many people realize. They do not
always correctly estimate gun range, they are foolishly venturesome
at times when they want food, but they know many more things than most
people give them credit for understanding. The greatest trouble with the
birds is they are too willing to trust us and be friendly, so they are
often deceived."

"That sounds as if you were right," said the Girl.

"I am of the woods, so I know I am," answered the Harvester.

"Will you look at this now?"

He examined the drawing closely.

"Where did you learn?" he inquired.

"My mother. She was educated to her finger tips. She drew, painted,
played beautifully, sang well, and she had read almost all the best
books. Besides what I learned at high school she taught me all I know.
Her embroidery always brought higher prices than mine, try as I might. I
never saw any one else make such a dainty, accurate little stitch as she
could."

"If this is not perfect, I don't know how to criticise it. I can and
will use it in my work. But I have one luna cocoon remaining and I would
give ten dollars for such a drawing of the moth before it flies. It may
open to-night or not for several days. If your aunt should be worse
and you cannot come to-morrow and the moth emerges, is there any way in
which I could send it to you?"

"What could I do with it?"

"I thought perhaps you could take a piece of paper and the pencils with
you, and secure an outline in your room. It need not be worked up with
all the detail in this. Merely a skeleton sketch would do. Could I leave
it at the house or send it with some one?"

"No! Oh no!" she cried. "Leave it here. Put it in a box in the bushes
where I hid the books. What are you going to do with these things?"

"Hide them in the thicket and scatter leaves over them."

"What if it rains?"

"I have thought of that. I brought a few yards of oilcloth to-day and
they will be safe and dry if it pours."

"Good!" she said. "Then if the moth comes out you bring it, and if I
am not here, put it under the cloth and I will run up some time in the
afternoon. But if I were you, I would not spread the rug until you know
if I can remain. I have to steal every minute I am away, and any day
uncle takes a notion to stay at home I dare not come."

"Try to come to-morrow. I am going to bring some medicine for your
aunt."

"Put it under the cloth if I am not here; but I will come if I can. I
must go now; I have been away far too long."

The Harvester picked up one of the drug pamphlets, laid the drawing
inside it, and placed it with his other books. Then he drew out his
pocket book and laid a five-dollar bill on the table and began folding
up the chair and putting away the things. The Girl looked at the money
with eager eyes.

"Is that honestly what you would pay at the arts and crafts place?"

"It is the customary price for my patterns."

"And are you sure this is as good?"

"I can bring you some I have paid that for, and let you see for yourself
that it is better."

"I wish you would!" she cried eagerly. "I need that money, and I would
like to have it dearly, if I really have earned it, but I can't touch it
if I have not."

"Won't you accept my word?"

"No. I will see the other drawings first, and if I think mine are as
good, I will be glad to take the money to-morrow."

"What if you can't come?"

"Put them under the oilcloth. I watch all the time and I think Uncle
Henry has trained even the boys so they don't play in the river on
his land. I never see a soul here; the woods, house, and everything is
desolate until he comes home and then it is like----" she paused.

"I'll say it for you," said the Harvester promptly. "Then it is like
hell."

"At its worst," supplemented the Girl. Taking pencils and a sheet of
paper she went swiftly through the woods. Before she left the shelter
of the trees, the Harvester saw her busy her hands with the front of
her dress, and he knew that she was concealing the drawing material. The
colour box was left, and he said things as he put it with the chair and
table, covered them with the rug and oilcloth, and heaped on a layer of
leaves.

Then he drove to the city and Betsy turned at the hospital corner
with no interference. He could face his friend that day. Despite
all discouragements he felt reassured. He was progressing. Means of
communication had been established. If she did not come, he could leave
a note and tell her if the moth had not emerged and how sorry he was to
have missed seeing her.

"Hello, lover!" cried Doctor Carey as the Harvester entered the office.
"Are you married yet?"

"No. But I'm going to be," said the Harvester with confidence.

"Have you asked her?"

"No. We are getting acquainted. She is too close to trouble, too ill,
and too worried over a sick relative for me to intrude myself; it would
be brutal, but it's a temptation. Doc, is there any way to compel a man
to provide medical care for his wife?"

"Can he afford it?"

"Amply. Anything! Worth thousands in land and nobody knows what in
money. It's Henry Jameson."

"The meanest man I ever knew. If he has a wife it's a marvel she has
survived this long. Won't he provide for her?"

"I suppose he thinks he has when she has a bed to lie on and a roof to
cover her. He won't supply food she can eat and medicine. He says she is
lazy."

"What do you think?"

"I quote Miss Jameson. She says her aunt is slowly dying from overwork
and neglect."

"David, doesn't it seem pretty good, when you say 'Miss Jameson'?"

"Loveliest sound on earth, except the remainder of it."

"What's that?"

"Ruth!"

"Jove! That is a beautiful name. Ruth Langston. It will go well, won't
it?"

"Music that the birds, insects, Singing Water, the trees, and the breeze
can't ever equal. I'm holding on with all my might, but it's tough, Doc.
She's in such a dreadful place and position, and she needs so much. She
is sick. Can't you give me a prescription for each of them?"

"You just bet I can," said the doctor, "if you can engineer their taking
them."

"I suppose you'd hold their noses and pour stuff down them."

"I would if necessary."

"Well, it is."

"All right----I'll fix something, and you see that they use it."

"I can try," said the Harvester.

"Try! Pah! You aren't half a man!"

"That's a half more than being a woman, anyway."

"She called you feminine, did she?" cried the doctor, dancing and
laughing. "She ought to see you harvesting skunk cabbage and blue flag
or when you are angry enough."

The doctor left the room and it was a half hour before he returned.

"Try that on them according to directions," he said, handing over a
couple of bottles.

"Thank you!" said the Harvester, "I will!"

"That sounds manly enough."

"Oh pother! It's not that I'm not a man, or a laggard in love; but I'd
like to know what you'd do to a girl dumb with grief over the recent
loss of her mother, who was her only relative worth counting, sick from
God knows what exposure and privation, and now a dying relative on her
hands. What could you do?"

"I'd marry her and pick her out of it!"

"I wouldn't have her, if she'd leave a sick woman for me!"

"I wouldn't either. She's got to stick it out until her aunt grows
better, and then I'll go out there and show you how to court a girl."

"I guess not! You keep the girl you did court, courted, and you'll have
your hands full. How does that appear to you?"

The Harvester opened the pamphlet he carried and held up the drawing of
the moth.

The doctor turned to the light.

"Good work!" he cried. "Did she do that?"

"She did. In a little over an hour."

"Fine! She should have a chance."

"She is going to. She is going to have all the opportunity that is
coming to her."

"Good for you, David! Any time I can help!"

The Harvester replaced the sketch and went to the wagon; but he left
Belshazzar in charge, and visited the largest dry goods store in
Onabasha, where he held a conference with the floor walker. When he came
out he carried a heaping load of boxes of every size and shape, with a
label on each. He drove to Medicine Woods singing and whistling.

"She didn't want me to go, Belshazzar!" he chuckled to the dog. "She was
more afraid of a cow than she was of me. I made some headway to-day, old
boy. She doesn't seem to have a ray of an idea what I am there for, but
she is going to trust me soon now; that is written in the books. Oh I
hope she will be there to-morrow, and the luna will be out. Got half a
notion to take the case and lay it in the warmest place I can find.
But if it comes out and she isn't there, I'll be sorry. Better trust to
luck."

The Harvester stabled Betsy, fed the stock, and visited with the birds.
After supper he took his purchases and entered her room. He opened the
drawers of the chest he had made, and selecting the labelled boxes he
laid them in. But not a package did he open. Then he arose and radiated
conceit of himself.

"I'll wager she will like those," he commented proudly, "because Kane
promised me fairly that he would have the right things put up for a girl
the size of the clerk I selected for him, and exactly what Ruth should
have. That girl was slenderer and not quite so tall, but he said
everything was made long on purpose. Now what else should I get?"

He turned to the dressing table and taking a notebook from his pocket
made this list:

     Rugs for bed and bath room.
     Mattresses, pillows and bedding,
     Dresses for all occasions.
     All kinds of shoes and overshoes.


"There are gloves, too!" exclaimed the Harvester. "She has to have some,
but how am I going to know what is right? Oh, but she needs shoes!
High, low, slippers, everything! I wonder what that clerk wears. I don't
believe shoes would be comfortable without being fitted, or at least the
proper size. I wonder what kind of dresses she likes. I hope she's fond
of white. A woman always appears loveliest in that. Maybe I'd better buy
what I'm sure of and let her select the dresses. But I'd love to have
this room crammed with girl-fixings when she comes. Doesn't seem as
if she ever has had any little luxuries. I can't miss it on anything a
woman uses. Let me think!"

Slowly he wrote again:

          Parasols.
          Fans.
          Veils.
          Hats.


"I never can get them! I think that will keep me busy for a few days,"
said the Harvester as he closed the door softly, and went to look at
the pupae cases. Then he carved on the vine of the candlestick for her
dressing table; with one arm around Belshazzar, re-read the story of
John Muir's dog, went into the lake, and to bed. Just as he was becoming
unconscious the beast lifted an inquiring head and gazed at the man.

"More 'fraid of cow," the Harvester was muttering in a sleepy chuckle.


CHAPTER XI. DEMONSTRATED COURTSHIP

When the Harvester saw the Girl coming toward the woods, he spread the
rug, opened and placed the table and chair, laid out the colour box, and
another containing the last luna.

"Did the green one come out?" she asked, touching the box lightly.

"It did!" said the Harvester proudly, as if he were responsible for the
performance. "It is an omen! It means that I am to have my long-coveted
pattern for my best candlestick. It also clearly indicates that the
gods of luck are with me for the day, and I get my way about everything.
There won't be the least use in your asking 'why' or interposing
objections. This is my clean sweep. I shall be fearfully dictatorial and
you must submit, because the fates have pointed out that they favour
me to-day, and if you go contrary to their decrees you will have a bad
time."

The Girl's smile was a little wan. She sank on a chair and picked up a
pencil.

"Lay that down!" cried the Harvester. "You haven't had permission from
the Dictator to begin drawing. You are to sit and rest a long time."

"Please may I speak?" asked the Girl.

The Harvester grew foolishly happy. Was she really going to play the
game? Of course he had hoped, but it was a hope without any foundation.

"You may," he said soberly.

"I am afraid that if you don't allow me to draw the moth at once, I'll
never get it done. I dislike to mention it on your good day, but Aunt
Molly is very restless. I got a neighbour's little girl to watch her and
call me if I'm wanted. It's quite certain that I must go soon, so if you
would like the moth----"

"When luck is coming your way, never hurry it! You always upset the bowl
if you grow greedy and crowd. If it is a gamble whether I get this moth,
I'll take the chance; but I won't change my foreordained programme for
this afternoon. First, you are to sit still ten minutes, shut your eyes,
and rest. I can't sing, but I can whistle, and I'm going to entertain
you so you won't feel alone. Ready now!"

The Girl leaned her elbows on the table, closed her eyes, and pressed
her slender white hands over them.

"Please don't call the birds," she said. "I can't rest if you do. It was
so exciting trying to see all of them and guess what they were saying."

"No," said the Harvester gently. "This ten minutes is for relaxation,
you know. You ease every muscle, sink limply on your chair, lean on the
table, let go all over, and don't think. Just listen to me. I assure you
it's going to be perfectly lovely."

Watching intently he saw the strained muscles relaxing at his suggestion
and caught the smile over the last words as he slid into a soft whistle.
It was an easy, slow, old-fashioned tune, carrying along gently, with
neither heights nor depths, just monotonous, sleepy, soothing notes,
that went on and on with a little ripple of change at times, only to
return to the theme, until at last the Girl lifted her head.

"It's away past ten minutes," she said, "but that was a real rest.
Truly, I am better prepared for work."

"Broke the rule, too!" said the Harvester. "It was, for me to say when
time was up. Can't you allow me to have my way for ten minutes?"

"I am so anxious to see and draw this moth," she answered. "And first of
all you promised to bring the drawings you have been using."

"Now where does my programme come in?" inquired the Harvester. "You are
spoiling everything, and I refuse to have my lucky day interfered with;
therefore we will ignore the suggestion until we arrive at the place
where it is proper. Next thing is refreshments."

He arose and coming over cleared the table. Then he spread on it a paper
tray cloth with a gay border, and going into the thicket brought out
a box and a big bucket containing a jug packed in ice. The Girl's eyes
widened. She reached down, caught up a piece, and holding it to drip a
second started to put it in her mouth.

"Drop that!" commanded the Harvester. "That's a very unhealthful
proceeding. Wait a minute."

From one end of the box he produced a tin of wafers and from the other
a plate. Then he dug into the ice and lifted several different varieties
of chilled fruit. From the jug he poured a combination that he made of
the juices of oranges, pineapples, and lemons. He set the glass, rapidly
frosting in the heat, and the fruit before the Girl.

"Now!" he said.

For one instant she stared at the table. Then she looked at him and in
the depths of her dark eyes was an appeal he never forgot.

"I made that drink myself, so it's all right," he assured her. "There's
a pretty stiff touch of pineapple in it, and it cuts the cobwebs on a
hot day. Please try it!"

"I can't!" cried the Girl with a half-sob. "Think of Aunt Molly!"

"Are you fond of her?"

"No. I never saw her until a few weeks ago. Since then I've seen nothing
save her poor, tired back. She lies in a heap facing the wall. But if
she could have things like these, she needn't suffer. And if my mother
could have had them she would be living to-day. Oh Man, I can't touch
this."

"I see," said the Harvester.

He reached over, picked up the glass, and poured its contents into the
jug. He repacked the fruit and closed the wafer box. Then he made a trip
to the thicket and came out putting something into his pocket.

"Come on!" he said. "We are going to the house."

She stared at him.

"I simply don't dare."

"Then I will go alone," said the Harvester, picking up the bucket and
starting.

The Girl followed him.

"Uncle Henry may come any minute," she urged.

"Well if he comes and acts unpleasantly, he will get what he richly
deserves."

"And he will make me pay for it afterward."

"Oh no he won't!" said the Harvester, "because I'll look out for that.
This is my lucky day. He isn't going to come."

When he reached the back door he opened it and stepped inside. Of all
the barren places of crude, disheartening ugliness the Harvester ever
had seen, that was the worst.

"I want a glass and a spoon," he said.

The Girl brought them.

"Where is she?"

"In the next room."

At the sound of their voices a small girl came to the kitchen door.

"How do you do?" inquired the Harvester. "Is Mrs. Jameson asleep?"

"I don't know," answered the child. "She just lies there."

The Harvester gave her the glass. "Please fill that with water," he
said. Then he picked up the bucket and went into the front room. When
the child came with the water he took a bottle from his pocket, filled
the spoon, and handed it to her.

"Hold that steadily," he said.

Then he slid his strong hands under the light frame and turned the face
of the faded little creature toward him.

"I am a Medicine Man, Mrs. Jameson," he said casually. "I heard you were
sick and I came to see if a little of this stuff wouldn't brace you up.
Open your lips."

He held out the spoon and the amazed woman swallowed the contents before
she realized what she was doing. Then the Harvester ran a hand under
her shoulders and lifting her gently he tossed her pillow with the other
hand.

"You are a light little body, just like my mother," he commented. "Now I
have something else sick people sometimes enjoy."

He held the fruit juice to her lips as he slightly raised her on the
pillow. Her trembling fingers lifted and closed around the sparkling
glass.

"Oh it's cool!" she gasped.

"It is," said the Harvester, "and sour! I think you can taste it. Try!"

She drank so greedily he drew away the glass and urged caution, but the
shaking fingers clung to him and the wavering voice begged for more.

"In a minute," said the Harvester gently. But the fevered woman would
not wait. She drank the cooling liquid until she could take no more.
Then she watched him fill a small pitcher and pack it in a part of the
ice and lay some fruit around it.

"Who, Ruth?" she panted.

"A Medicine Man who heard about you."

"What will Henry say?"

"He won't know," explained the Girl, smoothing the hot forehead. "I'll
put it in the cupboard, and slip it to you while he is out of the room.
It will make you strong and well."

"I don't want to be strong and well and suffer it all over again. I want
to rest. Give me more of the cool drink. Give me all I want, then I'll
go to sleep."

"It's wonderful," said the Girl. "That's more than I've heard her talk
since I came. She is much stronger. Please let her have it."

The Harvester assented. He gave the child some of the fruit, and told
her to sit beside the bed and hold the drink when it was asked for. She
agreed to be very careful and watchful. Then he picked up the bucket,
and followed by the Girl, returned to the woods.

"Now we have to begin all over again," he said, as she seated herself at
the table. "Because of the walk in the heat, this time the programme is
a little different."

He replaced the wafer box and opened it, filled the glass, and heaped
the cold fruit.

"Your aunt is going to have a refreshing sleep now," he said, "and
your mind can be free about her for an hour or two. I am very sure your
mother would not want you deprived of anything because she missed it, so
you are to enjoy this, if you care for it. At least try a sample."

The Girl lifted the glass to her lips with a trembling hand.

"I'm like Aunt Molly," she said; "I wish I could drink all I could
swallow, and then lie down and go to sleep forever. I suppose this is
what they have in Heaven."

"No, it's what they drink all over earth at present, but I have a
conceit of my own brand. Some of it is too strong of one fruit or of the
other, and all too sweet for health. This is compounded scientifically
and it's just right. If you are not accustomed to cold drinks, go
slowly."

"You can't scare me," said the Girl; "I'm going to drink all I want."

There was a note of excitement in the Harvester's laugh.

"You must have some, too!"

"After a while," he said. "I was thirsty when I made it, so I don't care
for any more now. Try the fruit and those wafers. Of course they are not
home made--they are the best I could do at a bakery. Take time enough to
eat slowly. After hostilities ended in 1988, oil exports gradually increased
with the construction of new pipelines and restoration of damaged
facilities. Iraq's seizure of Kuwait in August 1990, subsequent
international economic sanctions, and damage from military action by
an international coalition beginning in January 1991 drastically reduced
economic activity. Although government policies supporting large
military and internal security forces and allocating resources to key
supporters of the regime have hurt the economy, implementation of the
UN's oil-for-food program beginning in December 1996 helped improve
conditions for the average Iraqi citizen.

Iraq was allowed to export limited amounts of oil in exchange for food,
medicine, and some infrastructure spare parts. In December 1999, the
UN Security Council authorized Iraq to export under the program as much
oil as required to meet humanitarian needs. The drop in GDP in 2001-02
was largely the result of the global economic slowdown and lower oil
prices. Per capita food imports increased significantly, while medical
supplies and health care services steadily improved. Per capita output
and living standards were still well below the pre-1991 level, but any
estimates have a wide range of error. The military victory of the US-led
coalition in March-April 2003 resulted in the shutdown of much of
the central economic administrative structure, but with the loss
of a comparatively small amount of capital plant.

"Where you struck Belshazzar, and it's no wonder," answered the Girl.

Without taking time to ponder that, the Harvester continued:

"But that night the man had a wonderful, golden dream. A beautiful girl
came to him, and she was so gracious and lovely that he was sufficiently
punished for striking his dog, because he fell unalterably in love with
her."

"Meaning you?" interrupted the Girl.

"Yes," said the Harvester, "meaning me. I----if you like----fell in love
with the girl. She came so alluringly, and I was so close to her that
I saw her better than I ever did any other girl, and I knew her for all
time. When she went, my heart was gone."

"And you have lived without that important organ ever since?"

"Without even the ghost of it! She took it with her. Well, that dream
was so real, that the next day I began building over my house, making
furniture, and planting flowers for her; and every day, wherever I went,
I watched for her."

"What nonsense!"

"I can't see it."

"You won't find a girl you dreamed about in a thousand years."

"Wrong!" cried the Harvester triumphantly. "Saw her in little less than
three months, but she vanished and it took some time and difficult work
before I located her again; but I've got her all solid now, and she
doesn't escape."

"Is she a 'lovely and gracious lady'?"

"She is!" said the Harvester, with all his heart.

"Young and beautiful, of course!"

"Indeed yes!"

"Please fill this glass. I told you what I was going to do."

The Harvester refilled the glass and the Girl drained it.

"Now won't you set aside these things and allow me to go to work?" she
asked. "My call may come any minute, and I'll never forgive myself if I
waste time, and don't draw your moth pattern for you."

"It's against my principles to hurry, and besides, my story isn't
finished."

"It is," said the Girl. "She is young and lovely, gentle and a lady, you
have her 'all solid,' and she can't 'escape'; that's the end, of course.
But if I were you, I wouldn't have her until I gave her a chance to get
away, and saw whether she would if she could."

"Oh I am not a jailer," said the Harvester. "She shall be free if I
cannot make her love me; but I can, and I will; I swear it."

"You are not truly in earnest?"

"I am in deadly earnest."

"Honestly, you dreamed about a girl, and found the very one?"

You take the lies out of him, and he'll shrink to the size of your
hat; you take the malice out of him, and he'll disappear.

That "Cyclone" was a rattler to go, and the sweetest thing to steer
that ever walked the waters.

Set her amidships, in a big river, and just let her go; it was all
you had to do.

She would hold herself on a star all night, if you let her alone.

You couldn't ever feel her rudder. It wasn't any more labor to steer
her than it is to count the Republican vote in a South Carolina election.
One morning, just at daybreak, the last trip she ever made, they took
her rudder aboard to mend it; I didn't know anything about it; I
backed her out from the wood-yard and went a-weaving down the river
all serene.

When I had gone about twenty-three miles, and made four horribly
crooked crossings--' 
'Without any rudder?'

'Yes--old Capt. Tom appeared on the roof and began to find fault with
me for running such a dark night--'
'Such a DARK NIGHT ?--Why, you said--'
'Never mind what I said,--'twas as dark as Egypt now, though pretty
soon the moon began to rise, and--'
'You mean the SUN--because you started out just at break of--look
here!

Was this BEFORE you quitted the captain on account of his lying, or--'

'It was before--oh, a long time before.

And as I was saying, he--'
'But was this the trip she sunk, or was--'
'Oh, no!--months afterward. And so the old man, he--'
'Then she made TWO last trips, because you said--'
He stepped back from the wheel, swabbing away his perspiration, and
said-- 
'Here!'

"I am making a pair of maple to stand on a
dressing table I built for her. It is unusually beautiful wood, I think,
and I hope she will be pleased with it."

"Please take these things away and let me begin. This is the only thing
I can see that I can do for you, and the moth will want to fly before I
have finished."

The Harvester cleared the table and placed the box, while the Girl
spread the paper and began work eagerly.

"I wonder if I knew there were such exquisite things in all the world,"
she said. "I scarcely think I did. I am beginning to understand why you
couldn't kill one. You could make a chair or a table, and so you feel
free to destroy them; but it takes ages and Almighty wisdom to evolve a
creature like this, so you don't dare. I think no one else would if they
really knew. Please talk while I work."

"Is there a particular subject you want discussed?"

"Anything but her. If I think too strongly of her, I can't work so
well."

"Your ginseng is almost dry," said the Harvester. "I think I can bring
you the money in a few days."

"So soon!" she cried.

"It dries day and night in an even temperature, and faster than you
would believe. There's going to be between seven and eight pounds of
it, when I make up what it has shrunk. It will go under the head of the
finest wild roots. I can get eight for it sure."

"Oh what good news!" cried the Girl. "This is my lucky day, too. And the
little girl isn't coming, so Aunt Molly must be asleep. Everything goes
right! If only Uncle Henry wouldn't come home!"

"Let me fill your glass," proffered the Harvester.

"Just half way, and set it where I can see it," said the Girl. She
worked with swift strokes and there was a hint of colour in her face, as
she looked at him. "I hope you won't think I'm greedy," she said, "but
truly, that's the first thing I've had that I could taste in----I can't
remember when."

"I'll bring a barrel to-morrow," offered the Harvester, "and a big piece
of ice wrapped in coffee sacking."

"You mustn't think of such a thing! Ice is expensive and so are fruits."

"Ice costs me the time required to saw and pack it at my home. I almost
live on the fruit I raise. I confess to a fondness for this drink. I
have no other personal expenses, unless you count in books, and a very
few clothes, such as I'm wearing; so I surely can afford all the fruit
juice I want."

