Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Sheila Vogtmann
and PG Distributed Proofreaders


TALES AND NOVELS, VOL. III

BELINDA.

BY

MARIA EDGEWORTH.


IN TEN VOLUMES. WITH ENGRAVINGS ON STEEL.


1857.


CONTENTS.

I. Characters

II. Masks

III. Lady Delacour's History

IV. The same continued

V. Birthday Dresses

VI. Ways and Means

VII. The Serpentine River

VIII. A Family Party

IX. Advice

X. The Mysterious Boudoir

XI. Difficulties

XII. The Macaw

XIII. Sortes Virgilianae

XIV. The Exhibition

XV. Jealousy

XVI. Domestic Happiness

XVII. Rights of Woman

XVIII. A Declaration

XIX. A Wedding

XX. Reconciliation

XXI. Helena

XXII. A Spectre

XXIII. The Chaplain

XXIV. Peu à peu

XXV. Love me, love my dog

XXVI. Virginia

XXVII. A Discovery

XXVIII. E O

XXIX. A Jew

XXX. News

XXXI. The Dènouement


BELINDA


CHAPTER I.

CHARACTERS.


Mrs. Stanhope, a well-bred woman, accomplished in that branch of knowledge
which is called the art of rising in the world, had, with but a small
fortune, contrived to live in the highest company. She prided herself upon
having established half a dozen nieces most happily, that is to say, upon
having married them to men of fortunes far superior to their own. One
niece still remained unmarried--Belinda Portman, of whom she was
determined to get rid with all convenient expedition. Belinda was
handsome, graceful, sprightly, and highly accomplished; her aunt had
endeavoured to teach her that a young lady's chief business is to please
in society, that all her charms and accomplishments should be invariably
subservient to one grand object--the establishing herself in the world:

    "For this, hands, lips, and eyes were put to school,
    And each instructed feature had its rule."

Mrs. Stanhope did not find Belinda such a docile pupil as her other
nieces, for she had been educated chiefly in the country; she had early
been inspired with a taste for domestic pleasures; she was fond of
reading, and disposed to conduct herself with prudence and integrity. Her
character, however, was yet to be developed by circumstances.

Mrs. Stanhope lived at Bath, where she had opportunities of showing her
niece off, as she thought, to advantage; but as her health began to
decline, she could not go out with her as much as she wished. After
manoeuvring with more than her usual art, she succeeded in fastening
Belinda upon the fashionable Lady Delacour for the season. Her ladyship
was so much pleased by Miss Portman's accomplishments and vivacity, as to
invite her to spend the winter with her in London. Soon after her arrival
in town, Belinda received the following letter from her aunt Stanhope.

"Crescent, Bath.

"After searching every place I could think of, Anne found your bracelet in
your dressing-table, amongst a heap of odd things, which you left behind
you to be thrown away: I have sent it to you by a young gentleman, who
came to Bath (unluckily) the very day you left me--Mr. Clarence Hervey--an
acquaintance, and great admirer of my Lady Delacour. He is really an
uncommonly pleasant young man, is highly connected, and has a fine
independent fortune. Besides, he is a man of wit and gallantry, quite a
connoisseur in female grace and beauty--just the man to bring a new face
into fashion: so, my dear Belinda, I make it a point--look well when he is
introduced to you, and remember, what I have so often told you, that
nobody _can_ look well without taking some pains to please.

"I see--or at least when I went out more than my health will at present
permit--I used to see multitudes of silly girls, seemingly all cut out
upon the same pattern, who frequented public places day after day, and
year after year, without any idea farther than that of diverting
themselves, or of obtaining transient admiration. How I have pitied and
despised the giddy creatures, whilst I have observed them playing off
their unmeaning airs, vying with one another in the most _obvious_, and
consequently the most ridiculous manner, so as to expose themselves before
the very men they would attract: chattering, tittering, and flirting; full
of the present moment, never reflecting upon the future; quite satisfied
if they got a partner at a hall, without ever thinking of a partner for
life! I have often asked myself, what is to become of such girls when they
grow old or ugly, or when the public eye grows tired of them? If they have
large fortunes, it is all very well; they can afford to divert themselves
for a season or two, without doubt; they are sure to be sought after and
followed, not by mere danglers, but by men of suitable views and
pretensions: but nothing to my mind can be more miserable than the
situation of a poor girl, who, after spending not only the interest, but
the solid capital of her small fortune in dress, and frivolous
extravagance, fails in her matrimonial expectations (as many do merely
from not beginning to speculate in time). She finds herself at five or
six-and-thirty a burden to her friends, destitute of the means of
rendering herself independent (for the girls I speak of never think of
_learning_ to play cards), _de trop_ in society, yet obliged to hang upon
all her acquaintance, who wish her in heaven, because she is unqualified
to make the _expected_ return for civilities, having no home, I mean no
establishment, no house, &c. fit for the reception of company of a certain
rank.--My dearest Belinda, may this never be your case!--You have every
possible advantage, my love: no pains have been spared in your education,
and (which is the essential point) I have taken care that this should be
known--so that you have _the name_ of being perfectly accomplished. You
will also have the name of being very fashionable, if you go much into
public, as doubtless you will with Lady Delacour.--Your own good sense
must make you aware, my dear, that from her ladyship's situation and
knowledge of the world, it will always be proper, upon all subjects of
conversation, for her to lead and you to follow: it would be very unfit
for a young girl like you to suffer yourself to stand in competition with
Lady Delacour, whose high pretensions to wit and beauty are
_indisputable_. I need say no more to you upon this subject, my dear. Even
with your limited experience, you must have observed how foolish young
people offend those who are the most necessary to their interests, by an
imprudent indulgence of their vanity.

"Lady Delacour has an incomparable taste in dress: consult her, my dear,
and do not, by an ill-judged economy, counteract my views--apropos, I have
no objection to your being presented at court. You will, of course, have
credit with all her ladyship's tradespeople, if you manage properly. To
know how and when to lay out money is highly commendable, for in some
situations, people judge of what one can afford by what one actually
spends.--I know of no law which compels a young lady to tell what her age
or her fortune may be. You have no occasion for caution yet on one of
these points.

"I have covered my old carpet with a handsome green baize, and every
stranger who comes to see me, I observe, takes it for granted that I have
a rich carpet under it. Say every thing that is proper, in your best
manner, for me to Lady Delacour.

"Adieu, my dear Belinda,

"Yours, very sincerely,

"SELINA STANHOPE."


It is sometimes fortunate, that the means which are taken to produce
certain effects upon the mind have a tendency directly opposite to what is
expected. Mrs. Stanhope's perpetual anxiety about her niece's appearance,
manners, and establishment, had completely worn out Belinda's patience;
she had become more insensible to the praises of her personal charms and
accomplishments than young women of her age usually are, because she had
been so much flattered and _shown off_, as it is called, by her
match-making aunt.--Yet Belinda was fond of amusement, and had imbibed
some of Mrs. Stanhope's prejudices in favour of rank and fashion. Her
taste for literature declined in proportion to her intercourse with the
fashionable world, as she did not in this society perceive the least use
in the knowledge that she had acquired. Her mind had never been roused to
much reflection; she had in general acted but as a puppet in the hands of
others. To her aunt Stanhope she had hitherto paid unlimited, habitual,
blind obedience; but she was more undesigning, and more free from
affectation and coquetry, than could have been expected, after the course
of documenting which she had gone through. She was charmed with the idea
of a visit to Lady Delacour, whom she thought the most agreeable--no, that
is too feeble an expression--the most fascinating person she had ever
beheld. Such was the light in which her ladyship appeared, not only to
Belinda, but to all the world--that is to say, all the world of fashion,
and she knew of no other.--The newspapers were full of Lady Delacour's
parties, and Lady Delacour's dresses, and Lady Delacour's _bon mots_:
every thing that her ladyship said was repeated as witty; every thing that
her ladyship wore was imitated as fashionable. Female wit sometimes
depends on the beauty of its possessor for its reputation; and the reign
of beauty is proverbially short, and fashion often capriciously deserts
her favourites, even before nature withers their charms. Lady Delacour
seemed to be a fortunate exception to these general rules: long after she
had lost the bloom of youth, she continued to be admired as a fashionable
_bel esprit_; and long after she had ceased to be a novelty in society,
her company was courted by all the gay, the witty, and the gallant. To be
seen in public with Lady Delacour, to be a visitor at her house, were
privileges of which numbers were vehemently ambitious; and Belinda Portman
was congratulated and envied by all her acquaintance, for being admitted
as an inmate. How could she avoid thinking herself singularly fortunate?

A short time after her arrival at Lady Delacour's, Belinda began to see
through the thin veil with which politeness covers domestic
misery.--Abroad, and at home, Lady Delacour was two different persons.
Abroad she appeared all life, spirit, and good humour--at home, listless,
fretful, and melancholy; she seemed like a spoiled actress off the stage,
over-stimulated by applause, and exhausted by the exertions of supporting
a fictitious character.--When her house was filled with well-dressed
crowds, when it blazed with lights, and resounded with music and dancing,
Lady Delacour, in the character of Mistress of the Revels, shone the soul
and spirit of pleasure and frolic: but the moment the company retired,
when the music ceased, and the lights were extinguishing, the spell was
dissolved.

She would sometimes walk up and down the empty magnificent saloon,
absorbed in thoughts seemingly of the most painful nature.

For some days after Belinda's arrival in town she heard nothing of Lord
Delacour; his lady never mentioned his name, except once accidentally, as
she was showing Miss Portman the house, she said, "Don't open that
door--those are only Lord Delacour's apartments."--The first time Belinda
ever saw his lordship, he was dead drunk in the arms of two footmen, who
were carrying him up stairs to his bedchamber: his lady, who was just
returned from Ranelagh, passed by him on the landing-place with a look of
sovereign contempt.

"What is the matter?--Who is this?" said Belinda.

"Only the body of my Lord Delacour," said her ladyship: "his bearers have
brought it up the wrong staircase. Take it down again, my good friends:
let his lordship go his _own way_. Don't look so shocked and amazed,
Belinda--don't look so _new_, child: this funeral of my lord's intellects
is to me a nightly, or," added her ladyship, looking at her watch and
yawning, "I believe I should say a _daily_ ceremony--six o'clock, I
protest!"

The next morning, as her ladyship and Miss Portman were sitting at the
breakfast-table, after a very late breakfast, Lord Delacour entered the
room.

"Lord Delacour, sober, my dear,"--said her ladyship to Miss Portman, by
way of introducing him. Prejudiced by her ladyship, Belinda was inclined
to think that Lord Delacour sober would not be more agreeable or more
rational than Lord Delacour drunk. "How old do you take my lord to be?"
whispered her ladyship, as she saw Belinda's eye fixed upon the trembling
hand which carried his teacup to his lips: "I'll lay you a wager,"
continued she aloud--"I'll lay your birth-night dress, gold fringe, and
laurel wreaths into the bargain, that you don't guess right."

"I hope you don't think of going to this birth-night, lady Delacour?" said
his lordship.

"I'll give you six guesses, and I'll bet you don't come within sixteen
years," pursued her ladyship, still looking at Belinda.

"You cannot have the new carriage you have bespoken," said his lordship.
"Will you do me the honour to attend to me, Lady Delacour?"

"Then you won't venture to guess, Belinda," said her ladyship (without
honouring her lord with the smallest portion of her attention)--"Well, I
believe you are right--for certainly you would guess him to be
six-and-sixty, instead of six-and-thirty; but then he can drink more than
any two-legged animal in his majesty's dominions, and you know that is an
advantage which is well worth twenty or thirty years of a man's
life--especially to persons who have no other chance of distinguishing
themselves."

"If some people had distinguished themselves a little less in the world,"
retorted his lordship, "it would have been as well!"

"As well!--how flat!"

"Flatly then I have to inform you, Lady Delacour, that I will neither be
contradicted nor laughed at--you understand me,--it would be as well, flat
or not flat, my Lady Delacour, if your ladyship would attend more to your
own conduct, and less to others!"

"To _that_ of others--his lordship means, if he means any thing. Apropos,
Belinda, did not you tell me Clarence Hervey is coming to town?--You have
never seen him.--Well, I'll describe him to you by negatives. He is _not_
a man who ever says any thing flat--he is _not_ a man who must he wound up
with half a dozen bottles of champaign before he can _go_--he is _not_ a
man who, when he does go, goes wrong, and won't be set right--he is _not_
a man, whose whole consequence, if he were married, would depend on his
wife--he is _not_ a man, who, if he were married, would be so desperately
afraid of being governed by his wife, that he would turn gambler, jockey,
or sot, merely to show that he could govern himself."

"Go on, Lady Delacour," said his lordship, who had been in vain attempting
to balance a spoon on the edge of his teacup during the whole of this
speech, which was delivered with the most animated desire to provoke--"Go
on, Lady Delacour--all I desire is, that you should go on; Clarence Hervey
will be much obliged to you, and I am sure so shall I. Go on, my Lady
Delacour--go on, and you'll oblige me."

"I never will oblige you, my lord, that you may depend upon," cried her
ladyship, with a look of indignant contempt.

His lordship whistled, rang for his horses, and looked at his nails with a
smile. Belinda, shocked and in a great confusion, rose to leave the room,
dreading the gross continuance of this matrimonial dialogue.

"Mr. Hervey, my lady," said a footman, opening the door; and he was
scarcely announced, when her ladyship went forward to receive him with an
air of easy familiarity.--"Where have you buried yourself, Hervey, this
age past?" cried she, shaking hands with him: "there's absolutely no
living in this most stupid of all worlds without you.--Mr. Hervey--Miss
Portman--but don't look as if you were half asleep, man--What are you
dreaming of, Clarence? Why looks your grace so heavily to-day?"

"Oh! I have passed a miserable night," replied Clarence, throwing himself
into an actor's attitude, and speaking in a fine tone of stage
declamation.

    "What was your dream, my lord? I pray you, tell me,"

said her ladyship in a similar tone.--Clarence went on--

    "O Lord, methought what pain it was to dance!
    What dreadful noise of fiddles in my ears!
    What sights of ugly _belles_ within my eyes!
    ----Then came wandering by,
    A shadow like a devil, with red hair,
    'Dizen'd with flowers; and she bawl'd out aloud,
    Clarence is come; false, fleeting, perjured Clarence!"

"O, Mrs. Luttridge to the life!" cried Lady Delacour: "I know where you
have been now, and I pity you--but sit down," said she, making room for
him between Belinda and herself upon the sofa, "sit down here, and tell
me what could take you to that odious Mrs. Luttridge's."

Mr. Hervey threw himself on the sofa; Lord Delacour whistled as before,
and left the room without uttering a syllable.

"But my dream has made me forget myself strangely," said Mr. Hervey,
turning to Belinda, and producing her bracelet: "Mrs. Stanhope promised me
that if I delivered it safely, I should be rewarded with the honour of
putting it on the owner's fair arm." A conversation now took place on the
nature of ladies' promises--on fashionable bracelets--on the size of the
arm of the Venus de Medici--on Lady Delacour's and Miss Portman's--on the
thick legs of ancient statues--and on the various defects and absurdities
of Mrs. Luttridge and her wig. On all these topics Mr. Hervey displayed
much wit, gallantry, and satire, with so happy an effect, that Belinda,
when he took leave, was precisely of her aunt's opinion, that he was a
most uncommonly pleasant young man.

Clarence Hervey might have been more than a pleasant young man, if he had
not been smitten with the desire of being thought superior in every thing,
and of being the most admired person in all companies. He had been early
flattered with the idea that he was a man of genius; and he imagined that,
as such, he was entitled to be imprudent, wild, and eccentric. He affected
singularity, in order to establish his claims to genius. He had
considerable literary talents, by which he was distinguished at Oxford;
but he was so dreadfully afraid of passing for a pedant, that when he came
into the company of the idle and the ignorant, he pretended to disdain
every species of knowledge. His chameleon character seemed to vary in
different lights, and according to the different situations in which he
happened to be placed. He could be all things to all men--and to all
women. He was supposed to be a favourite with the fair sex; and of all his
various excellencies and defects, there was none on which he valued
himself so much as on his gallantry. He was not profligate; he had a
strong sense of honour, and quick feelings of humanity; but he was so
easily led, or rather so easily excited by his companions, and his
companions were now of such a sort, that it was probable he would soon
become vicious. As to his connexion with Lady Delacour, he would have
started with horror at the idea of disturbing the peace of a family; but
in her family, he said, there was no peace to disturb; he was vain of
having it seen by the world that he was distinguished by a lady of her wit
and fashion, and he did not think it incumbent on him to be more
scrupulous or more attentive to appearances than her ladyship. By Lord
Delacour's jealousy he was sometimes provoked, sometimes amused, and
sometimes flattered. He was constantly of all her ladyship's parties in
public and private; consequently he saw Belinda almost every day, and
every day he saw her with increasing admiration of her beauty, and with
increasing dread of being taken in to marry a niece of "the
_catch-match-maker_," the name by which Mrs. Stanhope was known amongst
the men of his acquaintance. Young ladies who have the misfortune to be
_conducted_ by these artful dames, are always supposed to be partners in
all the speculations, though their names may not appear in the firm. If he
had not been prejudiced by the character of her aunt, Mr. Hervey would
have thought Belinda an undesigning, unaffected girl; but now he suspected
her of artifice in every word, look, and motion; and even when he felt
himself most charmed by her powers of pleasing, he was most inclined to
despise her, for what he thought such premature proficiency in scientific
coquetry. He had not sufficient resolution to keep beyond the sphere of
her attraction; but, frequently, when he found himself within it, he
cursed his folly, and drew back with sudden terror. His manner towards her
was so variable and inconsistent, that she knew not how to interpret its
language. Sometimes she fancied, that with all the eloquence of eyes he
said, "_I adore you_, Belinda;" at other times she imagined that his
guarded silence meant to warn her that he was so entangled by Lady
Delacour, that he could not extricate himself from her snares. Whenever
this last idea struck her, it excited, in the most edifying manner, her
indignation against coquetry in general, and against her ladyship's in
particular: she became wonderfully clear-sighted to all the improprieties
of her ladyship's conduct. Belinda's newly acquired moral sense was so
much shocked, that she actually wrote a full statement of her observations
and her scruples to her aunt Stanhope; concluding by a request, that she
might not remain under the protection of a lady, of whose character she
could not approve, and whose intimacy might perhaps be injurious to her
reputation, if not to her principles.

Mrs. Stanhope answered Belinda's letter in a very guarded style; she
rebuked her niece severely for her imprudence in mentioning _names_ in
such a manner, in a letter sent by the common post; assured her that her
reputation was in no danger; that she hoped no niece of hers would set up
for a prude--a character more suspected by men of the world than even that
of a coquette; that the person alluded to was a perfectly fit chaperon for
any young lady to appear with in public, as long as she was visited by the
first people in town; that as to any thing in the _private_ conduct of
that person, and as to any _private brouillieries_ between her and her
lord, Belinda should observe on these dangerous topics a profound silence,
both in her letters and her conversation; that as long as the lady
continued under the protection of her husband, the world might whisper,
but would not speak out; that as to Belinda's own principles, she would be
utterly inexcusable if, after the education she had received, they could
be hurt by any bad examples; that she could not be too cautious in her
management of a man of ----'s character; that she could have no _serious_
cause for jealousy in the quarter she apprehended, as marriage there could
not be the object; and there was such a difference of age, that no
permanent influence could probably be obtained by the lady; that the most
certain method for Miss Portman to expose herself to the ridicule of one
of the parties, and to the total neglect of the other, would be to betray
anxiety or jealousy; that, in short, if she were fool enough to lose her
own heart, there would be little chance of her being wise enough to win
that of------, who was evidently a man of gallantry rather than of
sentiment, and who was known to play his cards well, and to have good luck
whenever _hearts_ were trumps.

Belinda's fears of Lady Delacour, as a dangerous rival, were much quieted
by the artful insinuations of Mrs. Stanhope, with respect to her age, &c.;
and in proportion as her fears subsided, she blamed herself for having
written too harshly of her ladyship's conduct. The idea that whilst she
appeared as Lady Delacour's friend she ought not to propagate any stories
to her disadvantage, operated powerfully upon Belinda's mind, and she
reproached herself for having told even her aunt what she had seen in
private. She thought that she had been guilty of treachery, and she wrote
again immediately to Mrs. Stanhope, to conjure her to burn her last
letter; to forget, if possible, its contents; and to believe that not a
syllable of a similar nature should ever more be heard from her: she was
just concluding with the words--"I hope my dear aunt will consider all
this as an error of my judgment, and not of my heart," when Lady Delacour
burst into the room, exclaiming, in a tone of gaiety, "Tragedy or comedy,
Belinda? The masquerade dresses are come. But how's this?" added she,
looking full in Belinda's face--"tears in the eyes! blushes in the cheeks!
tremors in the joints! and letters shuffling away! But, you novice of
novices, how awkwardly shuffled!--A niece of Mrs. Stanhope's, and so
unpractised a shuffler!--And is it credible she should tremble in this
ridiculous way about a love-letter or two?"

"No love-letters, indeed, Lady Delacour," said Belinda, holding the paper
fast, as her ladyship, half in play, half in earnest, attempted to snatch
it from her.

"No love-letters! then it must be treason; and see it I must, by all
that's good, or by all that's bad--I see the name of Delacour!"--and her
ladyship absolutely seized the letters by force, in spite of all Belinda's
struggles and entreaties.

"I beg, I request, I conjure you not to read it!" cried Miss Portman,
clasping her hands. "Read mine, read mine, if you _must_, but don't read
my aunt Stanhope's--Oh! I beg, I entreat, I conjure you!" and she threw
herself upon her knees.

"You beg! you entreat! you conjure! Why, this is like the Duchess de
Brinvilliers, who wrote on her paper of poisons, 'Whoever finds this, I
entreat, I conjure them, in the name of more saints than I can remember,
not to open the paper any farther.'--What a simpleton, to know so little
of the nature of curiosity!"

As she spoke, Lady Delacour opened Mrs. Stanhope's letter, read it from
beginning to end, folded it up coolly when she had finished it, and simply
said, "The _person alluded to_ is almost as bad as her name at full
length: does Mrs. Stanhope think no one can make out an inuendo in a
libel, or fill up a blank, but an attorney-general?" pointing to a blank
in Mrs. Stanhope's letter, left for the name of Clarence Hervey.

Belinda was in too much confusion either to speak or think.

"You were right to swear they were not love-letters," pursued her
ladyship, laying down the papers. "I protest I snatched them by way of
frolic--I beg pardon. All I can do now is not to read the rest."

"Nay--I beg--I wish--I insist upon your reading mine," said Belinda.

When Lady Delacour had read it, her countenance suddenly changed--"Worth a
hundred of your aunt's, I declare," said she, patting Belinda's cheek.
"What a treasure to meet with any thing like a _new_ heart!--all hearts,
now-a-days, are second-hand, at best."

Lady Delacour spoke with a tone of feeling which Belinda had never heard
from her before, and which at this moment touched her so much, that she
took her ladyship's hand and kissed it.


CHAPTER II.

MASKS


"Where were we when all this began?" cried Lady Delacour, forcing herself
to resume an air of gaiety--"O, masquerade was the order of the
day---tragedy or comedy? which suits your genius best, my dear?"

"Whichever suits your ladyship's taste least."

"Why, my woman, Marriott, says I ought to be tragedy; and, upon the notion
that people always succeed best when they take characters diametrically
opposite to their own--Clarence Hervey's principle--perhaps you don't
think that he has any principles; but there you are wrong; I do assure
you, he has sound principles--of taste."

"Of that," said Belinda, with a constrained smile, "he gives the most
convincing proof, by his admiring your ladyship so much."

"And by his admiring Miss Portman so much more. But whilst we are making
speeches to one another, poor Marriott is standing in distress, like
Garrick, between tragedy and comedy."

Lady Delacour opened her dressing-room door, and pointed to her as she
stood with the dress of the comic muse on one arm, and the tragic muse on
the other.

"I am afraid I have not spirits enough to undertake the comic muse," said
Miss Portman.

Marriott, who was a personage of prodigious consequence, and the judge in
the last resort at her mistress's toilette, looked extremely out of humour
at having been kept waiting so long; and yet more so at the idea that her
appellant jurisdiction could be disputed.

"Your ladyship's taller than Miss Portman by half ahead," said Marriott,
"and to be sure will best become tragedy with this long train; besides, I
had settled all the rest of your ladyship's dress. Tragedy, they say, is
always tall; and, no offence, your ladyship's taller than Miss Portman by
half a head."

"For head read inch," said Lady Delacour, "if you please."

"When things are settled, one can't bear to have them unsettled--but your
ladyship must have your own way, to be sure--I'll say no more," cried she,
throwing down the dresses.

"Stay, Marriott," said Lady Delacour, and she placed herself between the
angry waiting-maid and the door.

"Why will you, who are the best creature in the world, put yourself into
these _furies_ about nothing? Have patience with us, and you shall be
satisfied."

"That's another affair," said Marriott.

"Miss Portman," continued her ladyship, "don't talk of not having spirits,
you that are all life!--What say you, Belinda?--O yes, you must be the
comic muse; and I, it seems, must be tragedy, because Marriott has a
passion for seeing me 'come sweeping by.' And because Marriott must have
her own way in every thing--she rules me with a rod of iron, my dear, so
tragedy I needs must be.--_Marriott knows her power_."

There was an air of extreme vexation in Lady Delacour's countenance as she
pronounced these last words, in which evidently more was meant than met
the ear. Upon many occasions Miss Portman had observed, that Marriott
exercised despotic authority over her mistress; and she had seen, with
surprise, that a lady, who would not yield an iota of power to her
husband, submitted herself to every caprice of the most insolent of
waiting-women. For some time, Belinda imagined that this submission was
merely an air, as she had seen some other fine ladies proud of appearing
to be governed by a favourite maid; but she was soon convinced that
Marriott was no favourite with Lady Delacour; that her ladyship's was not
_proud humility_, but fear. It seemed certain that a woman, extravagantly
fond of her own _will_, would never have given it up without some very
substantial reason. It seemed as if Marriott was in possession of some
secret, which should for ever remain unknown. This idea had occurred to
Miss Portman more than once, but never so forcibly as upon the present
occasion. There had always been some mystery about her ladyship's
toilette: at certain hours doors were bolted, and it was impossible for
any body but Marriott to obtain admission. Miss Portman at first imagined
that Lady Delacour dreaded the discovery of her cosmetic secrets, but her
ladyship's rouge was so glaring, and her pearl powder was so obvious, that
Belinda was convinced there must be some other cause for this toilette
secrecy. There was a little cabinet beyond her bedchamber, which Lady
Delacour called her boudoir, to which there was an entrance by a back
staircase; but no one ever entered there but Marriott. One night, Lady
Delacour, after dancing with great spirit at a ball, at her own house,
fainted suddenly: Miss Portman attended her to her bedchamber, but
Marriott begged that her lady might be left alone with _her_, and she
would by no means suffer Belinda to follow her into the boudoir. All these
things Belinda recollected in the space of a few seconds, as she stood
contemplating Marriott and the dresses. The hurry of getting ready for the
masquerade, however, dispelled these thoughts, and by the time she was
dressed, the idea of what Clarence Hervey would think of her appearance
was uppermost in her mind. She was anxious to know whether he would
discover her in the character of the comic muse. Lady Delacour was
discontented with her tragic attire, and she grew still more out of humour
with herself, when she saw Belinda.

"I protest Marriott has made a perfect fright of me," said her ladyship,
as she got into her carriage, "and I'm positive my dress would become you
a million of times better than your own."

Miss Portman regretted that it was too late to change.

"Not at all too late, my dear," said Lady Delacour; "never too late for
women to change their minds, their dress, or their lovers. Seriously, you
know, we are to call at my friend Lady Singleton's--she sees masks
to-night: I'm quite intimate there; I'll make her let me step up to her
own room, where no soul can interrupt us, and there we can change our
dresses, and Marriott will know nothing of the matter. Marriott's a
faithful creature, and very fond of me; fond of power too--but who is
not?--we must all have our faults: one would not quarrel with such a good
creature as Marriott for a trifle." Then suddenly changing her tone, she
said, "Not a human being will find us out at the masquerade; for no one
but Mrs. Freke knows that we are the two muses. Clarence Hervey swears he
should know me in any disguise--but I defy him--I shall take special
delight in puzzling him. Harriot Freke has told him, in confidence, that
I'm to be the widow Brady, in man's clothes: now that's to be Harriot's
own character; so Hervey will make fine confusion."

As soon as they got to Lady Singleton's, Lady Delacour and Miss Portman
immediately went up stairs to exchange dresses. Poor Belinda, now that she
felt herself in spirits to undertake the comic muse, was rather vexed to
be obliged to give up her becoming character; but there was no resisting
the polite energy of Lady Delacour's vanity. Her ladyship ran as quick as
lightning into a closet within the dressing-room, saying to Lady
Singleton's woman, who attempted to follow with--"Can I do any thing for
your ladyship?"--"No, no, no--nothing, nothing--thank ye, thank ye,--I
want no assistance--I never let any body do any thing for me but
Marriott;" and she bolted herself in the closet. In a few minutes she half
opened the door, threw out her tragic robes, and cried, "Here, Miss
Portman, give me yours--quick--and let's see whether comedy or tragedy
will be ready first."

"Lord bless and forgive me," said Lady Singleton's woman, when Lady
Delacour at last threw open the door, when she was completely
dressed--"but if your la'ship has not been dressing all this time in that
den, without any thing in the shape of a looking-glass, and not to let me
help! I that should have been so proud."

Lady Delacour put half a guinea into the waiting-maid's hand, laughed
affectedly at her own _whimsicalities_, and declared that she could always
dress herself better without a glass than with one. All this went off
admirably well with every body but Miss Portman; she could not help
thinking it extraordinary that a person who was obviously fond of being
waited upon would never suffer any person to assist her at her toilet
except Marriott, a woman of whom she was evidently afraid. Lady Delacour's
quick eye saw curiosity painted in Belinda's countenance, and for a moment
she was embarrassed; but she soon recovered herself, and endeavoured to
turn the course of Miss Portman's thoughts by whispering to her some
nonsense about Clarence Hervey--a cabalistical name, which she knew had
the power, when pronounced in a certain tone, of throwing Belinda into
confusion.

The first person they saw, when they went into the drawing-room at Lady
Singleton's, was this very Clarence Hervey, who was not in a masquerade
dress. He had laid a wager with one of his acquaintance, that he could
perform the part of the serpent, such as he is seen in Fuseli's well-known
picture. For this purpose he had exerted much ingenuity in the invention
and execution of a length of coiled skin, which he manoeuvred with great
dexterity, by means of internal wires; his grand difficulty had been to
manufacture the rays that were to come from his eyes. He had contrived a
set of phosphoric rays, which he was certain would charm all the fair
daughters of Eve. He forgot, it seems, that phosphorus could not well be
seen by candlelight. When he was just equipped as a serpent, his rays set
fire to part of his _envelope_, and it was with the greatest difficulty
that he was extricated. He escaped unhurt, but his serpent's skin was
utterly consumed; nothing remained but the melancholy spectacle of its
skeleton. He was obliged to give up the hopes of shining at the
masquerade, but he resolved to be at Lady Singleton's that he might meet
Lady Delacour and Miss Portman. The moment that the tragic and comic muse
appeared, he invoked them with much humour and mock pathos, declaring that
he knew not which of them could best sing his adventure. After a recital
of his misfortune had entertained the company, and after the muses had
performed their parts to the satisfaction of the audience and their own,
the conversation ceased to be supported in masquerade character; muses and
harlequins, gipsies and Cleopatras, began to talk of their private
affairs, and of the news and the scandal of the day.

A group of gentlemen, amongst whom was Clarence Hervey, gathered round the
tragic muse; as Mr. Hervey had hinted that he knew she was a person of
distinction, though he would not tell her name. After he had exercised his
wit for some time, without obtaining from the tragic muse one single
syllable, he whispered, "Lady Delacour, why this unnatural reserve? Do you
imagine that, through this tragical disguise, I have not found you out?"

The tragic muse, apparently absorbed in meditation, vouchsafed no reply.

"The devil a word can you get for your pains, Hervey," said a gentleman of
his acquaintance, who joined the party at this instant. "Why didn't you
stick to t'other muse, who, to do her justice, is as arrant a flirt as
your heart could wish for?"

"There's danger in flirting," said Clarence, "with an arrant flirt of Mrs.
Stanhope's training. There's a kind of electricity about that girl. I have
a sort of cobweb feeling, an imaginary net coming all over me."

"Fore-warned is fore-armed," replied his companion: "a man must be a
novice indeed that could be taken in at this time of day by a niece of
Mrs. Stanhope's."

"That Mrs. Stanhope must be a good clever dame, faith," said a third
gentleman: "there's no less than six of her nieces whom she has got off
within these four winters--not one of 'em now that has not made a
catch-match.--There's the eldest of the set, Mrs. Tollemache, what had
she, in the devil's name, to set up with in the world but a pair of good
eyes?Say it, mentor--so harsh and violent!

ADELAIDE.

Worse than that, you were unjust.

COLONEL.

I said the same thing to myself last night, as I went to Ida's room
and heard the poor thing cry.

I was a hurt, angry man and was wrong in the form--but in the matter itself
I was, all the same, right.

Let him be member of Parliament; he may be better suited for it than
I. It is his being a newspaper writer that separates us.

ADELAIDE.

But he is only doing what you did yourself!

COLONEL.

Don't remind me of that folly! Were he as my son-in-law to hold a
different opinion from mine regarding current happenings--that I
could doubtless stand.

But if day by day he were to proclaim aloud to the world feelings
and sentiments the opposite of mine, and I had to read them, and had to
hear my son-in-law reproached and laughed at for them on all sides by
old friends and comrades, and I had to swallow it all--you see
that is more than I could bear!

ADELAIDE.

And Ida? Because you won't bear it Ida is to be made unhappy?

COLONEL.

My poor child! She has been unhappy throughout the whole affair. This
half-hearted way of us men has long been a mistake. It is better to end it
with one sharp pain.

ADELAIDE (_seriously_).

I cannot see that ending of it as yet. I shall only see it when Ida laughs
once more as merrily as she used to do.

COLONEL (_excitedly walking about, exclaiming_).

Well then, I'll give him my child, and go and sit alone in a corner. I had
other views for my old age, but God forbid that my beloved girl should be
made unhappy by me. He is reliable and honorable, and will take good care
of her. I shall move back to the little town I came from.

ADELAIDE (_seizing his hand_).

My revered friend, no--you shall not do that!

Neither Oldendorf nor Ida would accept their happiness at such a price. But
if Senden and his friends were secretly to take the paper away
from the professor, what then?

COLONEL (_joyfully_).

Then he would no longer be a journalist! (_Uneasily_.) But I won't hear
of such a thing. I am no friend of underhanded action.

ADELAIDE.

Nor am I! (_Heartily_.) Colonel, you have often shown a confidence in me
that has made me happy and proud.

Even today you let me speak more frankly than is usually permitted to a
girl. Will you give me one more great proof of your regard?

COLONEL (_pressing her hand_).

    
     Adelaide, we know how we stand with each other.

Speak out!

ADELAIDE.

For one hour, today, be my faithful knight. Allow me to lead you wherever
I please.

COLONEL.

    

What are you up to, child?

ADELAIDE.

Nothing wrong, nothing unworthy of you or of me. You shall not long be
kept in the dark about it.

COLONEL.

If I must, I will surrender.

But may I not know something of what I have to do?

ADELAIDE.

You are to accompany me on a visit, and at the same time keep in mind the
things we have just talked over so sensibly.

COLONEL.

On a visit?

_Enter_ KORB.

ADELAIDE.

On a visit I am making in my own interest.

KORB (_to_ ADELAIDE).

Mr. von Senden wishes to pay his respects.

COLONEL.

I don't wish to see him now.

ADELAIDE.

Be calm, Colonel! We have not time to be angry even with him.

I shall have to see him for a few moments.

COLONEL.

Then I will go away.

ADELAIDE (_entreating_).

But you will accompany me directly? The carriage is waiting.

COLONEL.

I obey the command. [_Exit to the left_.]

ADELAIDE.

I have made a hasty decision; I have ventured on something that was
doubtless too bold for a girl; for now that the crisis is at hand,
I feel my courage leaving me.

I had to do it for his sake and for all our sakes. (_To_ KORB.) Ask Miss Ida
to get ready--the coachman will come straight back for her.

Dear Korb, let your thoughts be with me.

I am going on a weighty errand, old friend! [_Exit_ ADELAIDE.]
KORB.

(_alone_). Gracious, how her eyes shine! What is she tip to? She's
not going to elope with the old Colonel, I hope!

Well, whatever she is up to, she will carry it through. There is only one
person who could ever be a match for her. Oh, Mr. Conrad, if only I could
speak!

[_EXIT_.]

SCENE II

_Editorial room of the Union. Enter_ BOLZ _through the door on the left,
directly afterward_ MILLER.

BOLZ (_at middle door_).

In here with the table!

MILLER (_carries small table, all set, with wine-bottles, glasses and
plates, to the foreground on the left; brings up five chairs while he
speaks_).

Mr.

Piepenbrink sends his regards, with the message that the wine is yellow-seal,
and that, if the Doctor drinks any healths, he must not forget Mr.
Piepenbrink's health. He was very jolly, the stout gentleman. And Madam
Piepenbrink reminded him that he ought to subscribe for the _Union_. He
commissioned me to see to it.

BOLZ (_who meanwhile has been turning over papers at the work-table on
the right, rising_).

Let's have some wine!

[MILLER _pours some in a glass_.]
In honor of the worthy vintner! [_Drinks._]
I treated him scandalously, but he has proved true-hearted. Tell him
his health was not forgotten. There, take this bottle along!--Now, get
out!

[_Exit_ MILLER. BOLZ _opening the door on the left_.]
Come, gentlemen, today I carry out my promise.

[_Enter_ KÄMPE, BELLMAUS, KÖRNER.]
This is the lunch I agreed to give. And now, my charming day-flies, put
as much rose-color into your cheeks and your humors as your wits will
let you. [_Pouring out_.] The great victory is won; the _Union_ has
celebrated one of the noblest of triumphs; in ages still to come belated
angels will say with awe: "Those were glorious days," and so on--see
continuation in today's paper. Before we sit down, the first toast--

KÄMPE. The member-elect--
BOLZ.

No, our first toast is to the mother of all, the great power which produces
members--the newspaper, may she prosper!

ALL.

Hurrah! [_Clink glasses_.]
BOLZ.

Hurrah! And secondly, long live--hold on, the member himself is not
here yet.

KÄMPE.

Here he comes.

_Enter_ OLDENDORF.

BOLZ.

The member from our venerable town, editor-in-chief and professor, journalist,
and good fellow, who is angry just now because behind his back this and
that got into the paper--hurrah for him!

ALL.

Hurrah!

OLDENDORF (_in a friendly tone_.)
I thank you, gentlemen.

BOLZ (_drawing_ OLDENDORF _to the front_).

And you are no longer vexed with us?

OLDENDORF.

Your intention was good, but it was a great indiscretion.

BOLZ.

Forget all about it! (_Aloud_.) Here, take your glass and sit down with us.
Don't be proud, young statesman!

Today you are one of us.
Well, here sits the editorial staff! Where is worthy Mr.
Henning--where tarries our owner, printer and publisher, Gabriel
Henning?

KÄMPE.

I met him a little while ago on the stairs. He crept by me as shyly
as though he were some one who had been up to mischief.

BOLZ.

Probably he feels as Oldendorf does--he is again not pleased with the attitude
of the paper.

MILLER (_thrusting in his head_).

The papers and the mail!

BOLZ.

Over there!

[MILLER _enters, lays the papers on the work-table._]
MILLER.

Here is the _Coriolanus_. There is something in it about our paper.
The errand-boy of the _Coriolanus_ grinned at me scornfully, and recommended
me to look over the article.

BOLZ.

Give it here! Be quiet, Romans, _Coriolanus_ speaks.--All ye devils,
what does that mean?

[_Reads_.] "On the best of authority we have just been informed that a
great change is imminent in the newspaper affairs of our province.

Our opponent, the _Union_, will cease to direct her wild attacks against
all that is high and holy."--This high and holy means Blumenberg.--"The
ownership is said to have gone over into other hands, and there
is a sure prospect that we shall be able from now on to greet as an
ally this widely read sheet." How does that taste to you,
gentlemen?

MILLER} Thunder! KÄMPE.}_(All together_.) Nonsense! BELLMAUS.} It's a
lie!

OLDENDORF.

It's another of Blumenberg's reckless inventions.

BOLZ.

There is something behind it all. Go and get me Gabriel Henning.
[_Exit_ MILLER.] This owner has played the traitor; we have been poisoned.
[_Springing up._] And this is the feast of the Borgia!
Presently the _misericordia_ will enter and sing our dirge. Do me the
favor at least to eat up the oysters before it be too late.

OLDENDORF (_who has seized the newspaper_.)
Evidently this news is only an uncertain rumor. Henning will tell
us there is no truth in it. Stop seeing ghosts, and sit down with us.

BOLZ (_seating himself_).

I sit down, not because I put faith in your words, but because I
don't wish to do injustice to the lunch.

Get hold of Henning; he must give an account of himself.

OLDENDORF.

But, as you heard, he is not at home.

BOLZ (_zealously eating_).

Oh, thou wilt have a fearful awakening, little Orsini! Bellmaus, pour me
out some wine. But if the story be not true, if this _Coriolanus_ have
lied, by the purple in this glass be it sworn I will be his murderer! The
grimmest revenge that ever an injured journalist took shall fall
on his head; he shall bleed to death from pin-pricks; every poodle in the
street shall look on him scornfully and say: "Fie, _Coriolanus_, I
wouldn't take a bite at you even if you were a sausage." [_A knock
is heard_. BOLZ _lays down his knife.] Memento mori_! There are our
grave-diggers. The last oyster, now, and then farewell thou lovely
world!
_Enter_ JUDGE SCHWARZ _and_ SENDEN _from the door on the left; the
door remains open_.

SCHWARZ.

Obedient servant, gentlemen!

SENDEN.
Your pardon if we disturb you.
BOLZ (_remaining seated at the table_).
Not in the least. This is our regular luncheon, contracted for a
whole year--fifty oysters and two bottles daily for each member of
the staff. Whoever buys the newspaper has to furnish it.

SCHWARZ.
What brings us here, Professor, is a communication which Mr. Henning
should have been the first to make to you. He preferred handing
over the task to me.

OLDENDORF.

I await your communication.

SCHWARZ.
Mr. Henning has, from yesterday on, transferred to me by sale all
rights pertaining to him as owner of the newspaper _Union_.

OLDENDORF.
To you, Judge?

SCHWARZ.
I acknowledge that I have bought it merely as accredited agent of
a third person. Here is the deed; it contains no secrets. [_Hands
him a paper_.] 
OLDENDORF (_looking through it, to_ BOLZ).
It is drawn up by a notary in due form--sold for thirty thousand
thalers. [_Agitation among the staff-members_.] Let me get to the
bottom of the matter. Is this change of owner also to be connected
with a change in the political attitude of the sheet?
SENDEN (_coming forward_).
Certainly, Professor, that was the intention in making the
purchase.

OLDENDORF.
Do I possibly see in you the new owner?

SENDEN.
Not that, but I have the honor to be a friend of his. You yourself,
as well as these gentlemen, have a right to demand the fulfilment
of your contracts. Your contracts provide, I understand, for six
months' notice. It goes without saying that you continue to draw
your salary until the expiration of this term.

BOLZ (_rising_).
You are very kind, Mr. von Senden. Our contracts empower us to edit
the paper as we see fit, and to control its tone and its party
affiliations. For the next half-year, therefore, we shall not only
continue to draw our salaries but also to conduct the paper for the
benefit of the party to which you have not the honor to belong.
SENDEN (_angrily_).

We'll find a way to prevent that!

OLDENDORF.
Calm yourself. That kind of work would scarcely be worthy of us.
If such are the circumstances, I announce that I resign the editorship
from today, and release you from all obligations to me.

BOLZ.
I don't mind. I make the same announcement.

BELLMAUS.
KÄMPE}(_together_). We too!

KÖRNER} 
SENDEN (_to_ SCHWARZ).
You can testify that the gentlemen voluntarily renounce their
rights.

BOLZ (_to the staff_).
Hold on, gentlemen, don't be too generous. It is all right for you
to take no further part in editing the paper if your friends
withdraw.
But why abandon your pecuniary claims on the new owner?

BELLMAUS.
I'd rather take nothing at all from them; I'll follow your
example.

BOLZ (_stroking him_).
Noble sentiment, my son! We'll make our way in the world together.
What do you think of a hand-organ, Bellmaus! We 'll take it to fairs
and sing your songs through. I'll turn and you'll sing.

OLDENDORF.
Since the new owner of the paper is not one of you, you will, in
concluding this transaction, find the question only natural--To
whom have we ceded our rights?

SENDEN.
The present owner of the paper is--
_Enter_ COLONEL _through side door on the left_.
OLDENDORF (_starting back in alarm_).

Colonel!

BOLZ.
Ah, now it is becoming high tragedy!

COLONEL.
First of all, Professor, be assured that I have nothing to do with
this whole affair, and merely come at the request of the purchaser.
Not until I came here, did I know anything of what was going on. I
hope you will take my word for that.

BOLZ.
Well, I find this game unseemly, and I insist on being told who
this new owner is who mysteriously hides behind different
persons!

_Enter_ ADELAIDE _from the side door, left._ 
ADELAIDE.
He stands before you!

BOLZ.

I should just like to faint.

BELLMAUS.
That is a heavenly joke!

ADELAIDE (_bowing_).
How do you do, gentlemen! [_To the staff_.] Am I right in assuming
that these gentlemen have hitherto been connected with editing the
paper?

BELLMAUS (_eagerly_).
Yes, Miss Runeck! Mr. Kämpe for leading articles, Mr. Körner for
the French and English correspondence, and I for theatre, music,
fine arts, and miscellaneous.

ADELAIDE.
I shall be much pleased if your principles will let you continue
devoting your talents to my newspaper. [_The three members of the
staff bow_.] 
BELLMAUS (_laying his hand on his heart_).
Miss Runeck, under your editorship I'll go to the ends of the
world!

ADELAIDE (_smiling and politely_).
Ah, no, merely into that room.
[_Points to the door on the right_.]
I need half an hour to collect my thoughts for my new activities.
BELLMAUS (_while departing_).
That's the best thing I ever heard!
[BELLMAUS, KÄMPE, KÖRNER _leave_.] 
ADELAIDE.
Professor, you resigned the management of the paper with a readiness
which delights me. (_Pointedly_.) I wish to edit the _Union_ in my
own fashion.
[_Seizes his hand and leads him to the_ COLONEL.]
Colonel, he is no longer editor; we have outwitted him; you have
your satisfaction.

COLONEL (_holding out his arms to him_).
Come, Oldendorf! For what happened I have been sorry since the
moment we parted.

OLDENDORF.

My honored friend!
ADELAIDE (_pointing to the door on the left_).
There is some one else in there who wants to take part in the
reconciliation. It might be Mr. Gabriel Henning.
IDA _appears at the side door_.

IDA.

Edward!
[OLDENDORF _hurries to the door_, IDA _meets him, he embraces her.
Both leave on the left. The_ COLONEL _follows_.]
ADELAIDE (_sweetly_).
Before asking you, Mr. von Senden, to interest yourself in the
editing of the newspaper, I beg you to read through this correspondence
which I received as a contribution to my columns.
SENDEN (_takes a glance at them_).
Miss Runeck, I don't know whose indiscretion-- 
ADELAIDE.
Fear none on my part. I am a newspaper proprietor, and (_with,
marked emphasis_) shall keep editorial secrets.
[SENDEN _bows_.]
May I ask for the deed, Judge? And will you gentlemen be kind enough
to ease the mind of the vendor as to the outcome of the
transaction?

[_Mutual bows_. SENDEN _and_ SCHWARZ _leave_.]
ADELAIDE (_after a short pause_).
Now, Mr. Bolz, what am I going to do about you?

BOLZ.
I am prepared for anything. I am surprised at nothing any more. If
some one should go straight off and spend a capital of a hundred
millions in painting negroes white with oil-colors, or in making
Africa four-cornered, I should not let it astonish me. If I wake
up tomorrow as an owl with two tufts of feathers for ears and a
mouse in my beak, I will say, "All right," and remember that worse
things have happened.

ADELAIDE.
What is the matter with you, Conrad? Are you displeased with
me?

BOLZ.
With you? You have been generous as ever; only too generous. And
it would all have been fine, if only this whole scene had been
impossible. That fellow Senden!

ADELAIDE.
We have seen the last of him! Conrad, I'm one of the
party!

BOLZ.
Hallelujah! I hear countless angels blowing on their trumpets! I'll
stay with the _Union_!

ADELAIDE.
About that I am no longer the one to decide. For I have still a
confession to make to you. I, too, am not the real owner of the
newspaper.

BOLZ.
You are not? Now, by all the gods, I am at my wit's end. I'm beginning
not to care who this owner is. Be he man, will-of-the-wisp, or the
devil Beelzebub in person, I bid him defiance.

ADELAIDE.
He is a kind of a will-of-the-wisp, a little something of a devil,
and from top to toe a great rogue. For, Conrad, my friend, beloved
of my youth, it is you yourself.

[_Hands him the deed_.]
BOLZ (_stupefied for a moment, reads_).
"Ceded to Conrad Bolz"--correct! So that would be a sort of gift.
Can't be accepted, much too little!
[_Throws the paper aside_.] Prudence be gone!
[_Falls on his knees before_ ADELAIDE.]
Here I kneel, Adelaide! What I am saying I don't know in my joy,
for the whole room is dancing round with me. If you will take me
for your husband, you will do me the greatest favor in the world.
If you don't want me, box my ears and send me off!
ADELAIDE (_bending down to him_).
I do want you! (_Kissing him_.) This was the cheek!

BOLZ.
And these are the lips.
[_Kisses her; they remain in an embrace; short pause_.]
_Enter_ COLONEL, IDA, OLDENDORF.
COLONEL (_in amazement, at the door_).

What is this?

BOLZ.
Colonel, it takes place under editorial sanction.

COLONEL.
Adelaide, what do I see?
ADELAIDE (_stretching out her hand to the_ COLONEL).
Dear friend, I'm betrothed to a journalist!
[_As_ IDA _and_ OLDENDORF _from either side hasten to the pair, the
curtain falls_] 
* * * * *
[Footnote 1: Permission S. Hirzel, Leipzig.] 
* * * * *
DOCTOR LUTHER (1859) 

By GUSTAV FREYTAG
TRANSLATED BY E.H. BABBITT, A.B. Assistant Professor of German,
Tufts College.
Some well-meaning men still wish that the defects of their old
church had not led to so great a revolt, and even liberal Roman
Catholics still fail to see in Luther and Zwingli anything but
zealous heretics whose wrath brought about a schism. May such views
vanish from Germany! All religious denominations have reason to
attribute to Luther whatever in their present faith is genuine and
sincere, and has a wholesome and sustaining influence. The heretic
of Wittenberg is fully as much the reformer of the German Catholics
as of the Protestants. This is true not only because the teachers
of the Catholic Church in their struggle against him outgrew the
old scholasticism, and fought for their sacraments with new weapons
gained from his language, his culture, and his moral worth; nor
because he, in effect, destroyed the church of the Middle Ages and
forced his opponents at Trent to raise a firmer structure, though
seemingly within the old forms and proportions; but still more
because he expressed the common basis of all German denominations,
of our spiritual courage, piety, and honesty, with such force that
a good deal of his own nature, to the present benefit of every
German, has survived in our doctrines and language, in our civil
laws and morals, in the thoughtfulness of our people, and in our
science and literature.Marriott appeared with a face of constrained civility and
latent rage. "Put me to bed, Marriott," said Lady Delacour, with a subdued
voice; "but first light Miss Portman to her room--she need not--yet--see
the horrid business of my toilette."

Belinda, when she was left alone, immediately opened her shutters, and
threw up the sash, to refresh herself with the morning air. She felt
excessively fatigued, and in the hurry of her mind she could not think of
any thing distinctly. She took off her masquerade dress, and went to bed
in hopes of forgetting, for a few hours, what she felt indelibly impressed
upon her imagination. But it was in vain that she endeavoured to compose
herself to sleep; her ideas were in too great and painful confusion. For
some time, whenever she closed her eyes, the face and form of Lady
Delacour, such as she had just beheld them, seemed to haunt her;
afterwards, the idea of Clarence Hervey, and the painful recollection of
the conversation she had overheard, recurred to her: the words, "Do you
think I don't know that Belinda Portman is a composition of art and
affectation?" fixed in her memory. She recollected with the utmost
minuteness every look of contempt which she had seen in the faces of the
young men whilst they spoke of Mrs. Stanhope, the match-maker. Belinda's
mind, however, was not yet sufficiently calm to reflect; she seemed only
to live over again the preceding night. At last, the strange motley
figures which she had seen at the masquerade flitted before her eyes, and
she sunk into an uneasy slumber.


CHAPTER III.

LADY DELACOUR'S HISTORY.


Miss Portman was awakened by the ringing of Lady Delacour's bedchamber
bell. She opened her eyes with the confused idea that something
disagreeable had happened; and before she had distinctly recollected
herself, Marriott came to her bedside, with a note from Lady Delacour: it
was written with a pencil.

"DELACOUR--_my_ lord!!!! is to have to-day what Garrick used to call a
_gander feast_--will you dine with me tête-à-tête, and I'll write an
_excuse_, alias a lie, to Lady Singleton, in the form of a charming
note--I pique myself _sur l'éloquence du billet_--then we shall have the
evening to ourselves. I have much to say, as people usually have when they
begin to talk of themselves.

"I have taken a double dose of opium, and am not so horribly out of
spirits as I was last night; so you need not be afraid of another _scene_.

"Let me see you in my dressing-room, dear Belinda, as soon as you have
adored

    'With head uncover'd the cosmetic powers.'

"But you don't paint--no matter--you will--you must--every body must,
sooner or later. In the mean time, whenever you want to send a note that
shall not be opened by _the bearer_, put your trust neither in wafer nor
wax, but twist it as I twist mine. You see I wish to put you in possession
of some valuable secrets before I leave this world--this, by-the-bye, I
don't, upon second thoughts, which are always best, mean to do yet. There
certainly were such people as Amazons--I hope you admire them--for who
could live without the admiration of Belinda Portman?--not Clarence
Hervey assuredly--nor yet

"T. C. H. DELACOUR."

Belinda obeyed the summons to her ladyship's dressing-room: she found Lady
Delacour with her face completely repaired with paint, and her spirits
with opium. She was in high consultation with Marriott and Mrs. Franks,
the milliner, about the crape petticoat of her birthnight dress, which was
extended over a large hoop in full state. Mrs. Franks descanted long and
learnedly upon festoons and loops, knots and fringes, submitting all the
time every thing to her ladyship's better judgment.

Marriott was sulky and silent. She opened her lips but once upon the
question of laburnum or no laburnum flowers.

Against them she quoted the memoirs and authority of the celebrated Mrs.
Bellamy, who has a case in point to prove that "straw colour must ever
look like dirty white by candlelight." Mrs. Franks, to compromise the
matter, proposed gold laburnums, "because nothing can look better by
candlelight, or any light, than gold;" and Lady Delacour, who was afraid
that the milliner's imagination, now that it had once touched upon gold,
might be led to the vulgar idea of _ready money_, suddenly broke up the
conference, by exclaiming,

"We shall be late at Phillips's exhibition of French china. Mrs. Franks
must let us see her again to-morrow, to take into consideration your court
dress, my dear Belinda--'Miss Portman presented by Lady Delacour'--Mrs.
Franks, let her dress, for heaven's sake, be something that will make a
fine paragraph:--I give you four-and-twenty hours to think of it. I have
done a horrid act this day," continued she, after Mrs. Franks had left the
room--"absolutely written a _twisted_ note to Clarence Hervey, my
dear--but why did I tell you that? Now your head will run upon the twisted
note all day, instead of upon 'The Life and Opinions of a Lady of Quality,
related by herself.'"

After dinner Lady Delacour having made Belinda protest and blush, and
blush and protest, that her head was not running upon the twisted note,
began the history of her life and opinions in the following manner:--

"I do nothing by halves, my dear. I shall not tell you my adventures as
Gil Blas told his to the Count d'Olivarez--skipping over the _useful_
passages. I am no hypocrite, and have nothing worse than folly to conceal:
that's bad enough--for a woman who is known to play the fool is always
suspected of playing the devil. But I begin where I ought to end--with my
moral, which I dare say you are not impatient to anticipate. I never read
or listened to a moral at the end of a story in my life:--manners for me,
and morals for those that like them. My dear, you will be woefully
disappointed if in my story you expect any thing like a novel. I once
heard a general say, that nothing was less like a review than a battle;
and I can tell you that nothing is more unlike a novel than real life. Of
all lives, mine has been the least romantic. No love in it, but a great
deal of hate. I was a rich heiress--I had, I believe, a hundred thousand
pounds, or more, and twice as many caprices: I was handsome and witty--or,
to speak with that kind of circumlocution which is called humility, the
world, the partial world, thought me a beauty and a bel-esprit. Having
told you my fortune, need I add, that I, or it, had lovers in
abundance--of all sorts and degrees--not to reckon those, it may be
presumed, who died of concealed passions for me? I had sixteen
declarations and proposals in form; then what in the name of wonder, or of
common sense--which by-the-bye is the greatest of wonders--what, in the
name of common sense, made me marry Lord Delacour? Why, my dear, you--no,
not _you_, but any girl who is not used to have a parcel of admirers,
would think it the easiest thing in the world to make her choice; but let
her judge by what she feels when a dexterous mercer or linen-draper
produces pretty thing after pretty thing--and this is so becoming, and
this will wear for ever, as he swears; but then that's so
fashionable;--the novice stands in a charming perplexity, and after
examining, and doubting, and tossing over half the goods in the shop, it's
ten to one, when it begins to get late, the young lady, in a hurry,
pitches upon the very ugliest and worst thing that she has seen. Just so
it was with me and my lovers, and just so--

   'Sad was the hour, and luckless was the day,'

I pitched upon Viscount Delacour for my lord and judge. He had just at
that time lost at Newmarket more than he was worth in every sense of the
word; and my fortune was the most convenient thing in the world to a man
in his condition. Lozenges are of sovereign use in some complaints. The
heiress lozenge is a specific in some consumptions. You are surprised
that I can laugh and jest about such a melancholy thing as my marriage
with Lord Delacour; and so am I, especially when I recollect all the
circumstances; for though I bragged of there being no love in my
history, there was when I was a goose or a gosling of about eighteen--
just your age, Belinda, I think--something very like love playing about
my heart, or my head. There was a certain Henry Percival, a Clarence
Hervey of a man--no, he had ten times the sense, begging your pardon, of
Clarence Hervey--his misfortune, or mine, was, that he had too much sense
--he was in love with me, but not with my faults; now I, wisely
considering that my faults were the greatest part of me, insisted upon
his being in love with my faults. He wouldn't, or couldn't--I said
wouldn't, he said couldn't. I had been used to see the men about me lick
the dust at my feet, for it was gold dust. Percival made wry faces--Lord
Delacour made none. I pointed him out to Percival as an example--it was
an example he would not follow. I was provoked, and I married in hopes
of provoking the man I loved. The worst of it was, I did not provoke him
as much as I expected. Six months afterwards I heard of his marriage
with a very amiable woman. I hate those _very amiable women_. Poor
Percival! I should have been a very happy woman, I fancy, if I had
married you--for I believe you were the only man who ever really loved
me; but all that is over now!--Where were we? O, I married my Lord
Delacour, knowing him to be a fool, and believing that, for this reason,
I should find no trouble in governing him. But what a fatal mistake!-a
fool, of all animals in the creation, is the most difficult to govern.
We set out in the fashionable world with a mutual desire to be as
extravagant as possible. Strange, that with this similarity of taste we
could never agree!--strange, that this similarity of taste was the cause
of our perpetual quarrels! During the first year of our marriage, I had
always the upper hand in these disputes, and the last word; and I was
content. Stubborn as the brute was, I thought I should in time break him
in. From the specimens you have seen, you may guess that I was even then
a tolerable proficient in the dear art of _tormenting_. I had almost
gained my point, just broken my lord's heart, when one fair morning I
unluckily told his man Champfort that he knew no more how to cut hair
than a sheep-shearer. Champfort, who is conceit personified, took mortal
offence at this; and the devil, who is always at hand to turn anger into
malice, put it into Champfort's head to put it into my lord's head, that
the world thought--'_My lady governed him_.' My lord took fire. They say
the torpedo, the coldest of cold creatures, sometimes gives out a
spark--I suppose when electrified with anger. The next time that
innocent I insisted upon my Lord Delacour's doing or not doing--I forget
which--the most reasonable thing in the world, my lord turns short
round, and answers--'My Lady Delacour, I am not a man to be governed by
a wife.'--And from that time to this the words, 'I am not a man to be
governed by a wife,' have been written in his obstinate face, as all the
world who can read the human countenance may see. My dear, I laugh; but
even in the midst of laughter there is sadness. But you don't know what
it is--I hope you never may--to have an obstinate fool for a
bosom friend.

"I at first flattered myself that my lord's was not an inveterate,
incurable malady: but from his obvious weakness, I might have seen that
there was no hope; for cases of obstinacy are always dangerous in
proportion to the weakness of the patient. My lord's case was desperate.
Kill or cure was my humane or prudent maxim. I determined to try the
poison of jealousy, by way of an alterative. I had long kept it in petto
as my ultimate remedy. I fixed upon a proper subject--a man with whom I
thought that I could coquette to all eternity, without any danger to
myself--a certain Colonel Lawless, as empty a coxcomb as you would wish to
see. The world, said I to myself, can never be so absurd as to suspect
Lady Delacour with such a man as this, though her lord may, and will; for
nothing is too absurd for him to believe. Half my theory proved just; that
is saying a great deal for any theory. My lord swallowed the remedy that I
had prepared for him with an avidity and a bonhommie which it did me good
to behold; my remedy operated beyond my most sanguine expectations. The
poor man was cured of his obstinacy, and became stark mad with jealousy.
Then indeed I had some hopes of him; for a madman can be managed, a fool
cannot. In a month's time I made him quite docile. With a face longer than
the weeping philosopher's, he came to me one morning, and assured me, 'he
would do every thing I pleased, provided I would consult my own honour and
his, and give up Colonel Lawless.'

"'Give up!'--I could hardly forbear laughing at the expression. I replied,
'that as long as my lord treated me with becoming respect, I had never in
thought or deed given him just cause of complaint; but that I was not a
woman to be insulted, or to be kept, as I had hitherto been, in
leading-strings by a husband.' My lord, flattered as I meant he should be
with the idea that it was possible he should be suspected of keeping a
wife in leading-strings, fell to making protestations--'He hoped his
future conduct would prove,' &c. Upon this hint, I gave the reins to my
imagination, and full drive I went into a fresh career of extravagance: if
I were checked, it was _an insult_, and I began directly to talk of
_leading-strings_. This ridiculous game I played successfully enough for
some time, till at length, though naturally rather slow at calculation, he
actually discovered, that if we lived at the rate of twenty thousand
a-year, and had only ten thousand a-year to spend, we should in due time
have nothing left. This notable discovery he communicated to me one
morning, after a long preamble. When he had finished prosing, I agreed
that it was demonstrably just that he should retrench _his_ expenses; but
that it was equally unjust and impossible that I could make any
reformation in _my_ civil list: that economy was a word which I had never
heard of in my life till I married his lordship; that, upon second
recollection, it was true I had heard of such a thing as national economy,
and that it would be a very pretty, though rather hackneyed topic of
declamation for a maiden speech in the House of Lords. I therefore advised
him to reserve all he had to say upon the subject for the noble lord upon
the woolsack; nay, I very graciously added, that upon this condition I
would go to the house myself to give his arguments and eloquence a fair
hearing, and that I would do my best to keep myself awake. This was all
mighty playful and witty; but it happened that my Lord Delacour, who never
had any great taste for wit, could not this unlucky morning at all relish
it. Of course I grew angry, and reminded him, with an indelicacy which his
want of generosity justified, that an heiress, who had brought a hundred
thousand pounds into his family, had some right to amuse herself, and that
it was not my fault if elegant amusements were more expensive than others.

"Then came a long criminating and recriminating chapter. It was, 'My lord,
your Newmarket blunders'--'My lady, your cursed _theatricals_'--'My lord,
I have surely a right'--and, 'My lady, I have surely as good a right.'

"But, my dear Belinda, however we might pay one another, we could not pay
all the world with words. In short, after running through thousands and
tens of thousands, we were actually in distress for money. Then came
selling of lands, and I don't know what devices for raising money,
according to the modes of lawyers and attorneys. It was quite indifferent
to me how they got money, provided they did get it. By what art these
gentlemen raised money, I never troubled myself to inquire; it might have
been the black art, for any thing I know to the contrary. I know nothing
of business. So I signed all the papers they brought to me; and I was
mighty well pleased to find, that by so easy an expedient as writing 'T.
C. H. Delacour,' I could command money at will. I signed, and signed, till
at last I was with all due civility informed that my signature was no
longer worth a farthing; and when I came to inquire into the cause of this
phenomenon, I could nowise understand what my Lord Delacour's lawyer said
to me: he was a prig, and I had not patience either to listen to him or to
look at him. I sent for an old uncle of mine, who used to manage all my
money matters before I was married: I put the uncle and the lawyer into a
room, together with their parchments, to fight the matter out, or to come
to a right understanding if they could. The last, it seems, was quite
impossible. In the course of half an hour, out comes my uncle in such a
rage! I never shall forget his face--all the bile in his body had gotten
into it; he had literally no whites to his eyes. 'My dear uncle,' said I,
'what is the matter? Why, you are absolutely gold stick in waiting.'

"'No matter what I am, child,' said the uncle; 'I'll tell you what you
are, with all your wit--a dupe: 'tis a shame for a woman of your sense to
be such a fool, and to know nothing of business; and if you knew nothing
yourself, could not you send for me?'

"'I was too ignorant to know that I know nothing,' said I. But I will not
trouble you with all the said I's and said he's. I was made to understand,
that if Lord Delacour were to die the next day, I should live a beggar.
Upon this I grew serious, as you may imagine. My uncle assured me that I
had been grossly imposed upon by my lord and his lawyer; and that I had
been swindled out of my senses, and out of my dower. I repeated all that
my uncle said, very faithfully, to Lord Delacour; and all that either he
or his lawyer could furnish out by way of answer was, that 'Necessity had
no law.' Necessity, it must be allowed, though it might be the mother of
law, was never with my lord the mother of invention. Having now found out
that I had a good right to complain, I indulged myself in it most
gloriously; in short, my dear, we had a comfortable family quarrel. Love
quarrels are easily made up, but of money quarrels there is no end. From
the moment these money quarrels commenced, I began to hate Lord Delacour;
before, I had only despised him. You can have no notion to what meanness
extravagance reduces men. I have known Lord Delacour shirk, and look so
shabby, and tell so many lies to people about a hundred guineas--a hundred
guineas!--what do I say?--about twenty, ten, five! O, my dear, I cannot
bear the thoughts of it!

"But I was going on to tell you, that my good uncle and all my relations
quarrelled with me for having ruined myself, as they said; but I said they
quarrelled with me for fear I should ask them for some of their '_vile
trash_.' Accordingly, I abused and ridiculed them, one and all; and for my
pains, all my acquaintance said, that 'Lady Delacour was a woman of a vast
deal of spirit.'

"We were relieved from our money embarrassments by the timely death of a
rich nobleman, to whose large estate my Lord Delacour was heir-at-law. I
was intoxicated with the idle compliments of all my acquaintance, and I
endeavoured to console myself for misery at home by gaiety abroad.
Ambitious of pleasing universally, I became the worst of slaves---a slave
to the world. Not a moment of my time was at my own disposal--not one of
my actions; I may say, not one of my thoughts was my own; I was obliged to
find things 'charming' every hour, which tired me to death; and every day
it was the same dull round of hypocrisy and dissipation. You wonder to
hear me speak in this manner, Belinda--but one must speak the truth
sometimes; and this is what I have been saying to Harriot Freke
continually, for these ten years past. Then why persist in the same kind
of life? you say. Why, my dear, because I could not stop: I was fit for
this kind of life and for no other: I could not be happy at _home_; for
what sort of a companion could I have made of Lord Delacour? By this time
he was tired of his horse Potatoe, and his horse Highflyer, and his horse
Eclipse, and Goliah, and Jenny Grey, &c.; and he had taken to hard
drinking, which soon turned him, as you see, quite into a beast.

"I forgot to tell you that I had three children during the first five
years of my marriage. The first was a boy: he was born dead; and my lord,
and all his odious relations, laid the blame upon me, because I would not
be kept prisoner half a year by an old mother of his, a vile Cassandra,
who was always prophesying that my child would not be born alive. My
second child was a girl; but a poor diminutive, sickly thing. It was the
fashion at this time for fine mothers to suckle their own children: so
much the worse for the poor brats. Fine nurses never made fine children.
There was a prodigious rout made about the matter; a vast deal of
sentiment and sympathy, and compliments and inquiries; but after the
novelty was over, I became heartily sick of the business; and at the end
of about three months my poor child was sick too--I don't much like to
think of it--it died. If I had put it out to nurse, I should have been
thought by my friends an unnatural mother; but I should have saved its
life. I should have bewailed the loss of the infant more, if Lord
Delacour's relations and my own had not made such lamentations upon the
occasion that I was stunned. I couldn't or wouldn't shed a tear; and I
left it to the old dowager to perform in public, as she wished, the part
of chief mourner, and to comfort herself in private by lifting up her
hands and eyes, and railing at me as the most insensible of mothers. All
this time I suffered more than she did; but that is what she shall never
have the satisfaction of knowing. I determined, that if ever I had another
child, I would not have the barbarity to nurse it myself. Accordingly when
my third child, a girl, was born, I sent it off immediately to the
country, to a stout, healthy, broad-faced nurse, under whose care it grew
and flourished; so that at three years old, when it was brought back to
me, I could scarcely believe the chubby little thing was my own child. The
same reasons which convinced me I ought not to nurse my own child,
determined me, _à plus forte raison_, not to undertake its education. Lord
Delacour could not bear the child, because it was not a boy. The girl was
put under the care of a governess, who plagued my heart out with her airs
and tracasseries for three or four years; at the end of which time, as she
turned out to be Lord Delacour's mistress in form, I was obliged--in
form--to beg she would leave my house: and I put her pupil into better
hands, I hope, at a celebrated academy for young ladies. There she will,
at any rate, be better instructed than she could be at home. I beg your
pardon, my dear, for this digression on nursing and schooling; but I
wanted only to explain to you why it was that, when I was weary of the
business, I still went on in a course of dissipation. You see I had
nothing at home, either in the shape of husband or children, to engage my
affections. I believe it was this 'aching void' in my heart which made me,
after looking abroad some time for a bosom friend, take such a prodigious
fancy to Mrs. Freke. She was just then coming into fashion; she struck me,
the first time I met her, as being downright ugly; but there was a wild
oddity in her countenance which made one stare at her, and she was
delighted to be stared at, especially by me; so we were mutually agreeable
to each other--I as starer, and she as staree. Harriot Freke had, without
comparison, more assurance than any man or woman I ever saw; she was
downright brass, but of the finest kind--Corinthian brass. She was one of
the first who brought what I call _harum scarum_ manners into fashion. I
told you that she had assurance--_impudence_ I should have called it, for
no other word is strong enough. Such things as I have heard Harriot Freke
say!---You will not believe it--but her conversation at first absolutely
made me, like an old-fashioned fool, wish I had a fan to play with. But,
to my astonishment, all this _took_ surprisingly with a set of fashionable
young men. I found it necessary to _reform_ my manners. If I had not taken
heart of grace, and publicly abjured the heresies of _false delicacy_, I
should have been excommunicated. Lady Delacour's sprightly elegance--allow
me to speak of myself in the style in which the newspaper writers talk of
me--Lady Delacour's sprightly elegance was but pale, not to say _faded_
pink, compared with the scarlet of Mrs. Freke's dashing audacity. As my
rival, she would on certain ground have beat me hollow; it was therefore
good policy to make her my friend: we joined forces, and nothing could
stand against us. But I have no right to give myself credit for good
policy in forming this intimacy; I really followed the dictates of my
heart or my imagination. There was a frankness in Harriot's manner which I
mistook for artlessness of character: she spoke with such unbounded
freedom on certain subjects, that I gave her credit for unbounded
sincerity on all subjects: she had the talent of making the world believe
_that_ virtue to be invulnerable by nature which disdained the common
outworks of art for its defence. I, amongst others, took it for granted,
that the woman who could make it her sport to 'touch the brink of all we
hate,' must have a stronger head than other people. I have since been
convinced, however, of my mistake. I am persuaded that few can touch the
brink without tumbling headlong down the precipice. Don't apply this, my
dear, _literally_, to the person of whom we were speaking; I am not base
enough to betray her secrets, however I may have been provoked by her
treachery. Of her character and history you shall hear nothing but what is
necessary for my own justification. The league of amity between us was
scarcely ratified before my Lord Delacour came, with his wise
remonstrating face, to beg me 'to consider what was due to my own honour
and his.' Like the cosmogony-man in the Vicar of Wakefield, he came out
over and over with this cant phrase, which had once stood him in stead.
'Do you think, my lord,' said I, 'that because I gave up poor Lawless to
oblige you, I shall give up all common sense to suit myself to your taste?
Harriot Freke is visited by every body but old dowagers and old maids: I
am neither an old dowager nor an old maid--the consequence is obvious, my
lord.' Pertness in dialogue, my dear, often succeeds better with my lord
than wit: I therefore saved the sterling gold, and bestowed upon him
nothing but counters. I tell you this to save the credit of my taste and
judgment.

"But to return to my friendship for Harriot Freke. I, of course, repeated
to her every word which had passed between my husband and me. She
out-heroded Herod upon the occasion; and laughed so much at what she
called my folly in _pleading guilty_ in the Lawless cause, that I was
downright ashamed of myself, and, purely to prove my innocence, I
determined, upon the first convenient opportunity, to renew my intimacy
with the colonel. The opportunity which I so ardently desired of redeeming
my independence was not long wanting. Lawless, as my stars (which you know
are always more in fault than ourselves) would have it, returned just at
this time from the continent, where he had been with his regiment; he
returned with a wound across his forehead and a black fillet, which made
him look something more like a hero, and ten times more like a coxcomb,
than ever. He was in fashion, at all events; and amongst other ladies,
Mrs. Luttridge, odious Mrs. Luttridge! smiled upon him. The colonel,
however, had taste enough to know the difference between smile and smile:
he laid himself and his laurels at my feet, and I carried him and them
about in triumph. Wherever I went, especially to Mrs. Luttridge's, envy
and scandal joined hands to attack me, and I heard wondering and
whispering wherever I went. I had no object in view but to provoke my
husband; therefore, conscious of the purity of my intentions, it was my
delight to brave the opinion of the wondering world. I gave myself no
concern about the effect my coquetry might have upon the object of this
flirtation. Poor Lawless! Heart, I took it for granted, he had none; how
should a coxcomb come by a heart? Vanity I knew he had in abundance, but
this gave me no alarm, as I thought that if it should ever make him forget
him self, I mean forget what was due to me, I could, by one flash of my
wit, strike him to the earth, or blast him for ever. One night we had been
together at Mrs. Luttridge's;--she, amongst other good things, kept a faro
bank, and, I am convinced, cheated. Be that as it may, I lost an immensity
of money, and it was my pride to lose with as much gaiety as any body else
could win; so I was, or appeared to be, in uncommonly high spirits, and
Lawless had his share of my good humour. We left Mrs. Luttridge's together
early, about half-past one. As the colonel was going to hand me to my
carriage, a smart-looking young man, as I thought, came up close to the
coach door, and stared me full in the face: I was not a woman to be
disconcerted at such a thing as this, but I really was startled when the
young fellow jumped into the carriage after me: I thought he was mad: I
had only courage enough to scream. Lawless seized hold of the intruder to
drag him out, and out he dragged the youth, exclaiming, in a high tone,
'What is the meaning of all this, sir? Who the devil are you? My name's
Lawless: who the devil are you?' The answer to this was a convulsion of
laughter. By the laugh I knew it to be Harriot Freke. 'Who am I? only a
Freke!' cried she: 'shake hands.' I gave her my hand, into the carriage
she sprang, and desired the colonel to follow her: Lawless laughed, we all
laughed, and drove away. 'Where do you think I've been?' said Harriot; 'in
the gallery of the House of Commons; almost squeezed to death these four
hours; but I swore I'd hear Sheridan's speech to-night, and I did; betted
fifty guineas I would with Mrs. Luttridge, and have won. Fun and Freke for
ever, huzza!' Harriot was mad with spirits, and so noisy and unmanageable,
that, as I told her, I was sure she was drunk. Lawless, in his silly way,
laughed incessantly, and I was so taken up with her oddities, that, for
some time, I did not perceive we were going the Lord knows where; till, at
last, when the 'larum of Harriot's voice ceased for an instant, I was
struck with the strange sound of the carriage. 'Where are we? not upon the
stones, I'm sure,' said I; and putting my head out of the window, I saw we
were beyond the turnpike. 'The coachman's drunk as well as you, Harriot,'
said I; and I was going to pull the string to stop him, but Harriot had
hold of it. 'The man is going very right,' said she; 'I've told him where
to go. Now don't fancy that Lawless and I are going to run away with you.
All this is unnecessary now-a-days, thank God!' To this I agreed, and
laughed for fear of being ridiculous. 'Guess where you are going,' said
Harriot, I guessed and guessed, but could not guess right; and my merry
companions were infinitely diverted with my perplexity and impatience,
more especially as, I believe, in spite of all my efforts, I grew rather
graver than usual. We went on to the end of Sloane-street, and quite out
of town; at last we stopped. It was dark; the footman's flambeau was out;
I could only just see by the lamps that we were at the door of a lone,
odd-looking house. The house door opened, and an old woman appeared with a
lantern in her hand.

"'Where is this farce, or freak, or whatever you call it, to end?' said I,
as Harriot pulled me into the dark passage along with her.

"Alas! my dear Belinda," said Lady Delacour, pausing, "I little foresaw
where or how it was to end. But I am not come yet to the tragical part of
my story, and as long as I can laugh I will. As the old woman and her
miserable light went on before us, I could almost have thought of Sir
Bertrand, or of some German _horrifications_; but I heard Lawless, who
never could help laughing at the wrong time, bursting behind me, with a
sense of his own superiority.

"'Now you will learn your destiny, Lady Delacour!' said Harriot, in a
solemn tone.

"'Yes! from the celebrated Mrs. W----, the modern dealer in art magic,'
said I, laughing, 'for, now I guess whereabouts I am. Colonel Lawless's
laugh broke the spell. Harriot Freke, never whilst you live expect to
succeed in _the sublime_.' Harriot swore at the colonel for the veriest
_spoil-sport_ she had ever seen, and she whispered to me--'The reason he
laughs is because he is afraid of our suspecting the truth of him, that he
believes _tout de bon_ in conjuration, and the devil, and all that.' The
old woman, whose cue I found was to be dumb, opened a door at the top of a
narrow staircase, and pointing to a tall figure, completely enveloped in
fur, left us to our fate. I will not trouble you with a pompous
description of all the mummery of the scene, my dear, as I despair of
being able to frighten you out of your wits. I should have been downright
angry with Harriot Freke for bringing me to such a place, but that I knew
women of the first fashion had been with Mrs. W---- before us--some in
sober sadness, some by way of frolic. So as there was no fear of being
ridiculous, there was no shame, you know, and my conscience was quite at
ease. Harriot had no conscience, so she was always at ease; and never more
so than in male attire, which she had been told became her particularly.
She supported the character of a young rake with such spirit and _truth_,
that I am sure no common conjuror could have discovered any thing feminine
about her. She rattled on with a set of nonsensical questions; and among
other things she asked, 'How soon will Lady Delacour marry again after her
lord's death?'

"'She will never marry after her lord's death,' answered the oracle. 'Then
she will marry during his lifetime,' said Harriot. 'True,' answered the
oracle. Colonel Lawless laughed; I was angry; and the colonel would have
been quiet, for he was a gentleman, but there was no such thing as
managing Mrs. Freke, who, though she had laid aside the modesty of her own
sex, had not acquired the decency of the other. 'Who is to be Lady
Delacour's second husband?' cried she; 'you'll not offend any of the
present company by naming the man.' 'Her second husband I cannot name,'
replied the oracle, 'but let her beware of a Lawless lover.' Mrs. Freke
and Colonel Lawless, encouraged by her, triumphed over me without mercy--I
may say, without shame! Well, my dear, I am in a hurry to have done with
all this: though I '_doted upon folly_,' yet I was terrified at the
thoughts of any thing worse. The idea of a divorce, the public brand of a
shameful life, shocked me in spite of all my real and all my assumed
levity. O that I had, at this instant, dared to _be myself_! But my fear
of ridicule was greater than my fear of vice. 'Bless me, my dear Lady
Delacour,' whispered Harriot, as we left this house, 'what can make you in
such a desperate hurry to get home? You gape and fidget: one would think
you had never sat up a night before in your life. I verily believe you are
afraid to trust yourself with us. Which of us are you afraid of, Lawless,
or me, or _yourself_?' There was a tone of contempt in the last words
which piqued me to the quick; and however strange it may seem, I was now
anxious only to convince Harriot that I was not afraid of myself. False
shame made me act as if I had no shame. You would not suspect me of
knowing any thing of false shame, but depend upon it, my dear, many, who
appear to have as much assurance as I have, are secretly its slaves. I
moralize, because I am come to a part of my story which I should almost be
glad to omit; but I promised you that there should be no sins of omission.
It was light, but not broad daylight, when we got to Knightsbridge.
Lawless, encouraged (for I cannot deny it) by the levity of my manner, as
well as of Harriot's, was in higher and more familiar spirits than I ever
saw him. Mrs. Freke desired me to set her down at her sister's, who lived
in Grosvenor-place: I did so, and I beg you to believe that I was in an
agony, to get rid of my colonel at the same time; but you know I could
not, before Harriot Freke, absolutely say to him, 'Get out!' Indeed, to
tell things as they were, it was scarcely possible to guess by my manner
that I was under any anxiety, I acted my part so well, or so ill. As
Harriot Freke jumped out of the coach, a cock crowed in the area of her
sister's house: 'There!' cried Harriot, 'do you hear the cock crow, Lady
Delacour? Now it's to be hoped your fear of goblins is over, else I would
not be so cruel as to leave the pretty dear all alone.' 'All alone!'
answered I: 'your friend the colonel Is much obliged to you for making
nobody of him.' 'My friend the colonel,' whispered Harriot, leaning with
her bold masculine arms on the coach door--'my friend the colonel is much
obliged to me, I'm sure, for remembering what the cunning or the knowing
woman told us just now: so when I said I left you alone, I was not guilty
of a bull, was I?' I had the grace to be heartily ashamed of this speech,
and called out, in utter confusion, 'To Berkley-square. But where shall I
set you down, colonel? Harriot, good morning: don't forget you are in
man's clothes.' I did not dare to repeat the question of 'where shall I
set you down, colonel?' at this instant, because Harriot gave me such an
arch, sneering look, as much as to say, 'Still afraid of yourself!' We
drove on: I'm persuaded that the confusion which, in spite of all my
efforts, broke through my affected levity, encouraged Lawless, who was
naturally a coxcomb and a fool, to believe that I was actually his, else
he never could have been so insolent. In short, my dear, before we had got
through the turnpike gate, I was downright obliged to say to him, 'Get
out!' which I did with a degree of indignation that quite astonished him.
He muttered something about ladies knowing their minds; and I own, though
I went off with flying colours, I secretly blamed myself as much as I did
him, and I blamed Harriot more than I did either. I sent for her the next
day, as soon as I could, to consult her. She expressed such astonishment,
and so much concern at this catastrophe of our night's frolic, and blamed
herself with so many oaths, and execrated Lawless for a coxcomb, so much
to the ease and satisfaction of my conscience, that I was confirmed in my
good opinion of her, and indeed felt for her the most lively affection and
esteem; for observe, with me esteem ever followed affection, instead of
affection following esteem. Woe be to all who in morals preposterously put
the cart before the horse! But to proceed with my history: all fashionable
historians stop to make reflections, supposing that no one else can have
the sense to make any. My _esteemed_ friend agreed with me that it would
be best for all parties concerned to hush up this business; that as
Lawless was going out of town in a few days, to be elected for a borough,
we should get rid of him in the best way possible, without 'more last
words;' that he had been punished sufficiently on the spot, and that to
punish twice for the same offence, once in private and once in public,
would be contrary to the laws of Englishmen and Englishwomen, and in my
case would be contrary to the evident dictates of prudence, because I
could not complain without calling upon Lord Delacour to call Lawless out;
this I could not do without acknowledging that his lordship had been in
the right, in warning me about his _honour and my own_, which old phrase I
dreaded to hear for the ninety-ninth time: besides, Lord Delacour was the
last man in the world I should have chosen for my knight, though unluckily
he was my lord; besides, all things considered, I thought the whole story
might not tell so well in the world for me, tell it which way I would: we
therefore agreed that it would be most expedient to hold our tongues. We
took it for granted that Lawless would hold his, and as for my people,
they knew nothing, I thought, or if they did, I was sure of them. How the
thing got abroad I could not at the time conceive, though now I am well
acquainted with the baseness and treachery of the woman I called my
friend. The affair was known and talked of every where the next day, and
the story was told especially at odious Mrs. Luttridge's, with such
exaggerations as drove me almost mad. I was enraged, inconceivably enraged
with Lawless, from whom I imagined the reports originated.

"I was venting my indignation against him in a room full of company, where
I had just made my story good, when a gentleman, to whom I was a stranger,
came in breathless, with the news that Colonel Lawless was killed in a
duel by Lord Delacour; that they were carrying him home to his mother's,
and that the body was just going by the door. The company all crowded to
the windows immediately, and I was left standing alone till I could stand
no longer. What was said or done after this I do not remember; I only know
that when I came to myself, the most dreadful sensation I ever experienced
was the certainty that I had the blood of a fellow-creature to answer for.
--I wonder," said Lady Delacour, breaking off at this part of her history,
and rising suddenly, "I wonder what is become of Marriott!--surely it is
time for me to have my drops. Miss Portman, have the goodness to ring, for
I _must_ have something immediately." Belinda was terrified at the
wildness of her manner. Lady Delacour became more composed, or put more
constraint upon herself, at the sight of Marriott. Marriott brought from
the closet in her lady's room the drops, which Lady Delacour swallowed
with precipitation. Then she ordered coffee, and afterward chasse-café,
and at last, turning to Belinda, with a forced smile, she said--

"Now shall the Princess Scheherazade go on with her story?"


CHAPTER IV.

LADY DELACOUR'S HISTORY CONTINUED.


"I Left off with the true skill of a good story-teller, at the most
interesting part--a duel; and yet duels are so common now that they are
really vulgar incidents.

"But we think that a duel concerning ourselves must be more extraordinary
than any other. We hear of men being shot in duels about nothing every
day, so it is really a weakness in me to think so much about poor
Lawless's death, as Harriot Freke said to me at the time. She expected to
see me show sorrow in _public_; but very fortunately for me, she roused my
pride, which was always stronger than my reason; and I behaved myself upon
the occasion as became a fine lady. There were some things, however, I
could hardly stand. You must know that Lawless, fool and coxcomb as he
was, had some magnanimity, and showed it--as some people do from whom it
is least expected--on his death-bed. The last words he said were, 'Lady
Delacour is innocent--I charge you, don't prosecute Lord Delacour.' This
he said to his mother, who, to complete my misery, is one of the most
respectable women in England, and was most desperately fond of Lawless,
who was an only son. She never has recovered his loss. Do you remember
asking me who a tall elderly lady in mourning was, that you saw getting
into her carriage one day, at South Audley-street chapel, as we passed by
in our way to the park? That was Lady Lawless: I believe I didn't answer
you at the time. I meet her every now and then--to me a spectre of dismay.
But, as Harriot Freke said, certainly such a man as poor Lawless was a
useless being in society, however he may be regretted by a doting mother.
We should see things in a philosophical light, if we can. I should not
have suffered half as much as I did if he had been a man of a stronger
understanding; but he was a poor, vain, weak creature, that I actually
drew on and duped with my own coquetry, whilst all the time I was
endeavouring only to plague Lord Delacour. I was punished enough by the
airs his lordship doubly gave himself, upon the strength of his valour and
his judgment--they roused me completely; and I blamed him with all my
might, and got an enormous party of my friends, I mean my acquaintance, to
run him down full cry, for having fought for me. It was absurd--it was
rash--it was want of proper confidence in his wife; _thus we_ said. Lord
Delacour had his partisans, it is true; amongst whom the loudest was
odious Mrs. Luttridge. I embraced the first opportunity I met with of
retaliation. You must know that Mrs. Luttridge, besides being a great
faro-player, was a great dabbler in politics; for she was almost as fond
of power as of money: she talked loud and fluently, and had, somehow or
other, partly by intriguing, partly by relationship, connected herself
with some of the leading men in parliament. There was to be a contested
election in our country: Mr. Luttridge had a good estate there next to
Lord Delacour's, and being of an ancient family, and keeping a good table,
the Luttridges were popular enough. At the first news of an election, out
comes a flaming advertisement from Mr. Luttridge; away posted Mrs.
Luttridge to begin her canvass, and away posted Lady Delacour after her,
to canvass for a cousin of Harriot Freke. This was a new scene for me; but
I piqued myself on the versatility of my talents, and I laid myself out in
please all the squires, and, what was more difficult, all the squires'
ladies, in ----shire. I was ambitious to have it said of me, 'that I was
the finest figure that ever appeared upon a canvass.' O, ye ----shireians,
how hard did I work to obtain your praise! All that the combined force of
vanity and hatred could inspire I performed, and with success. You have
but little curiosity, I presume, to know how many hogsheads of port went
down the throat of John Bull, or how many hecatombs were offered up to the
genius of English liberty. My hatred to Mrs. Luttridge was, of course,
called love of my country. Lady Delacour was deified by all _true_
patriots; and, luckily, a handsome legacy left me for my spirit, by an
uncle who died six weeks before the election, enabled us to sustain the
expense of my apotheosis. The day of election came; Harriot Freke and I
mad our appearance on the hustings, dressed in splendid party uniforms;
and before us our knights and squires held two enormous panniers full of
ribands and cockades, which we distributed with a grace that won all
hearts, if not all votes Mrs. Luttridge thought the panniers would carry
the election; and forthwith she sent off an express for a pair of panniers
twice as large as ours. I took out my pencil, and drew a caricature of
_the ass and her panniers_; wrote an epigram at the bottom of it; and the
epigram and the caricature were soon in the hands of half ----shire. The
verses were as bad as impromptus usually are, and the drawing was not much
better than the writing; but the _good-will_ of the critics supplied all
my deficiencies; and never was more praise bestowed upon the pen of Burke,
or the pencil of Reynolds, than was lavished upon me by my honest friends.
My dear Belinda, if you will not quarrel with the quality, you may have
what quantity of praise you please. Mrs. Luttridge, as I hoped and
expected, was beyond measure enraged at the sight of the caricature and
epigram. She was, besides being a gamester and a politician--what do you
think?--an excellent shot! She wished, she said, to be a man, that she
might be qualified to take proper notice of my conduct. The same kind
friends who showed her my epigram repeated to me her observation upon it.
Harriot Freke was at my elbow, and offered to take any _message_ I might
think proper to Mrs. Luttridge. I scarcely thought her in earnest till she
added, that the only way left now-a-days for a woman to distinguish
herself was by spirit; as every thing else was grown 'cheap and vulgar in
the eyes of men;' that she knew one of the cleverest young men in England,
and a man of fashion into the bargain, who was just going to publish a
treatise 'upon the Propriety and Necessity of Female Duelling;' and that
he had demonstrated, beyond a possibility of doubt, that civilized society
could not exist half a century longer without this necessary improvement.
I had prodigious deference for the masculine superiority, as I thought it,
of Harriot's understanding. She was a philosopher, and a fine lady--I was
only a fine lady; I had never fired a pistol in my life, and I was a
little inclined to cowardice; but Harriot offered to bet any wager upon
the steadiness of my hand, and assured me that I should charm all
beholders in male attire. In short, as my second, if I would furnish her
with proper credentials, she swore she would undertake to furnish me with
clothes, and pistols, and courage, and every thing I wanted. I sat down to
pen my challenge. When I was writing it, my hand did not tremble
_much_--not more than my Lord Delacour's always does. The challenge was
very prettily worded: I believe I can repeat it.

"'Lady Delacour presents her compliments to Mrs. Luttridge--she is
informed that Mrs. L---- wishes she were a man, that she might be
qualified to take _proper_ notice of Lady D----'s conduct. Lady Delacour
begs leave to assure Mrs. Luttridge, that though she has the misfortune to
be a woman, she is willing to account for her conduct in any manner Mrs.
L---- may think proper, and at any hour and place she may appoint. Lady
D---- leaves the choice of the weapons to Mrs. L----. Mrs. II. Freke, who
has the honour of presenting this note, is Lady Delacour's _friend_ upon
this occasion.'

"I cannot repeat Mrs. Luttridge's answer; all I know is, it was not half
as neatly worded as my note; but the essential part of it was, that she
accepted my challenge _with pleasure_, and should do herself the honour of
meeting me at six o'clock the next morning; that Miss Honour O'Grady would
be her _friend_ upon the occasion; and that pistols were the weapons she
preferred. The place of appointment was behind an old barn, about two
miles from the town of ----. The hour was fixed to be early in the
morning, to prevent all probability of interruption. In the evening,
Harriot and I rode to the ground. There were several bullets sticking in
the posts of the barn: this was the place where Mrs. Luttridge had been
accustomed to exercise herself in firing at a mark. I own my courage
'oozed out' a little at this sight. The Duke de la Rochefoucault, I
believe, said truly, that 'many would be cowards if they dared.' There
seemed to me to be no physical and less moral necessity for my fighting
this duel; but I did not venture to reason on a point of honour with my
spirited second. I bravadoed to Harriot most magnanimously; but at night,
when Marriott was undressing me, I could not forbear giving her a hint,
which I thought might tend to preserve the king's peace, and the peace of
the county. I went to the ground in the morning in good spirits, and with
a safe conscience. Harriot was in admiration of my 'lion-port;' and, to do
her justice, she conducted herself with great coolness upon the occasion;
but then it may be observed, that it was I who was to stand fire, and not
she. I thought of poor Lawless a billion of times, at least, as we were
going to the ground; and I had my presentiments, and my confused notions
of poetic justice: but poetic justice, and all other sorts of justice,
went clear out of my head, when I saw my antagonist and her friend,
actually pistol in hand, waiting for us; they were both in men's clothes.
I secretly called upon the name of Marriott with fervency, and I looked
round with more anxiety than ever Bluebeard's wife, or 'Anne, sister
Anne!' looked to see if any body was coming: nothing was to be seen but
the grass blown by the wind--no Marriott to throw herself _toute éplorée_
between the combatants--no peace-officers to bind us over to our good
behaviour--no deliverance at hand; and Mrs. Luttridge, by all the laws of
honour, as challenged, was to have the first shot. Oh, those laws of
honour! I was upon the point of making an apology, in spite of them all,
when, to my inexpressible joy, I was relieved from the dreadful
alternative of being shot through the head, or of becoming a
laughing-stock for life, by an incident, less heroic, I'll grant you, than
opportune. But you shall have the whole scene, as well as I can recollect
it; _as well_--for those who for the first time go into a field of battle
do not, as I am credibly informed and internally persuaded, always find
the clearness of their memories improved by the novelty of their
situation. Mrs. Luttridge, when we came up, was leaning, with a truly
martial negligence, against the wall of the barn, with her pistol, as I
told you, in her hand. She spoke not a word; but her second, Miss Honour
O'Grady, advanced towards us immediately, and, taking off her hat very
manfully, addressed herself to my second--'Mistress Harriot Freke, I
presume, if I mistake not.' Harriot bowed slightly, and answered, 'Miss
Honour O'Grady, I presume, if I mistake not.' 'The same, at your service,'
replied Miss Honour. 'I have a few words to suggest that may save a great
deal of noise, and bloodshed, and ill-will.' 'As to noise,' said Harriot,
'it is a thing in which I delight, therefore I beg that mayn't be spared
on my account; as to bloodshed, I beg that may not be spared on Lady
Delacour's account, for her honour, I am sure, is dearer to her than her
blood; and, as to ill-will, I should be concerned to have that saved on
Mrs. Luttridge's account, as we all know it is a thing in which she
delights, even more than I do in noise, or Lady Delacour in blood: but
pray proceed, Miss Honour O'Grady; you have a few words to suggest.' 'Yes,
I would willingly observe, as it is my duty to my _principal_,' said
Honour, 'that one who is compelled to fire her pistol with her left hand,
though ever so good a shot _naturally_, is by no means on a footing with
one who has the advantage of her light hand.' Harriot rubbed my pistol
with the sleeve of her coat, and I, recovering my wit with my hopes of
being witty with impunity, answered, 'Unquestionably, left-handed wisdom
and left-handed courage are neither of them the very best of their kinds;
but we must content ourselves with them _if_ we can have no other.' 'That
_if_,' cried Honour O'Grady, 'is not, like most of the family of the
_ifs_, a peace-maker. My Lady Delacour, I was going to observe that my
principal has met with an unfortunate accident, in the shape of a whitlow
on the fore-finger of her right hand, which incapacitates her from drawing
a trigger; but I am at your service, ladies, either of you, that can't put
up with a disappointment with good humour.' I never, during the whole
course of my existence, was more disposed to bear a disappointment with
good humour, to prove that I was incapable of bearing malice; and to
oblige the seconds, for form's sake, I agreed that we should take our
ground, and fire our pistols into the air. Mrs. Luttridge, with her
left-handed wisdom, fired first; and I, with great magnanimity, followed
her example. I must do my adversary's second, Miss Honour O'Grady, the
justice to observe, that in this whole affair she conducted herself not
only with the spirit, but with the good-nature and generosity
characteristic of her nation. We met enemies, and parted friends.

"Life is a tragicomedy! Though the critics will allow of no such thing in
their books, it is a true representation of what passes in the world; and
of all lives mine has been the most grotesque mixture, or alternation, I
should say, of tragedy and comedy. All this is apropos to something I have
not told you yet. This comic duel ended tragically for me. 'How?' you say.
Why, 'tis clear that I was not shot through the head; but it would have
been better, a hundred times better for me, if I had; I should have been
spared, in this life at least, the torments of the damned. I was not used
to priming and loading: my pistol was overcharged: when I fired, it
recoiled, and I received a blow on my breast, the consequences of which
you have seen.

"The pain was nothing at the moment compared with what I have since
experienced: but I will not complain till I cannot avoid it. I had not, at
the time I received the blow, much leisure for lamentation; for I had
scarcely discharged my pistol when we heard a loud shout on the other side
of the barn, and a crowd of town's people, country people, and haymakers,
came pouring down the lane towards us, with rakes and pitchforks in their
hands. An English mob is really a formidable thing. Marriott had
mismanaged her business most strangely: she had, indeed, spread a report
of a duel--a female duel; but the untutored sense of propriety amongst
these rustics was so shocked at the idea of a duel fought by women in
_men's clothes_, that I verily believe they would have thrown us into the
river with all their hearts. Stupid blockheads! I am convinced that they
would not have been half so much scandalized if we had boxed in
petticoats. The want of these petticoats had nearly proved our
destruction, or at least our disgrace: a peeress after being ducked, could
never have held her head above water again with any grace. The mob had
just closed round us, crying, 'Shame! shame! shame!--duck 'em--duck
'em--gentle or simple--duck 'em--duck 'em'--when their attention was
suddenly turned towards a person who was driving up the lane a large herd
of squeaking, grunting pigs. The person was clad in splendid regimentals,
and he was armed with a long pole, to the end of which hung a bladder, and
his pigs were frightened, and they ran squeaking from one side of the road
to the other; and the pig-driver in regimentals, in the midst of the
noise, could not without difficulty make his voice heard; but at last he
was understood to say, that a bet of a hundred guineas depended upon his
being able to keep these pigs ahead of a flock of turkeys that were
following them; and he begged the mob to give him and his pigs fair play.
At the news of this wager, and at the sight of the gentleman turned
pig-driver, the mob were in raptures; and at the sound of his voice,
Harriot Freke immediately exclaimed, 'Clarence Hervey! by all that's
lucky!'"

"Clarence Hervey!" interrupted Belinda. "Clarence Hervey, my dear," said
Lady Delacour, coolly: "he can do every thing, you know, even drive pigs,
better than any body else!--but let me go on.

"Harriot Freke shouted in a stentorian voice, which actually made your
pig-driver start: she explained to him in French our distress, and the
cause of it, Clarence was, as I suppose you have discovered long ago,
'that cleverest young man in England who had written on the propriety and
necessity of female duelling.' He answered Harriot in French--'To attempt
your rescue by force would be vain; but I will do better, I will make a
diversion in your favour.' Immediately our hero, addressing himself to the
sturdy fellow who held me in custody, exclaimed, 'Huzza, my boys! Old
England for ever! Yonder comes a Frenchman with a flock of turkeys. My
pigs will beat them, for a hundred guineas. Old England for ever, huzza!'

"As he spoke, the French officer, with whom Clarence Hervey had laid the
wager, appeared at the turn of the lane--his turkeys half flying--half
hobbling up the road before him. The Frenchman waved a red streamer over
the heads of his flock--Clarence shook a pole, from the top of which hung
a bladder full of beans. The pigs grunted, the turkeys gobbled, arid the
mob shouted: eager for the fame of Old England, the crowd followed
Clarence with loud acclamations. The French officer was followed with
groans and hisses. So great was the confusion, and so great the zeal of
the patriots, that even the pleasure of ducking the female duellists was
forgotten in the general enthusiasm. All eyes and all hearts were intent
upon the race; and now the turkeys got foremost, and now the pigs. But
when we came within sight of the horsepond, I heard one man cry, 'Don't
forget the ducking.' How I trembled! but our knight shouted to his
followers--'For the love of Old England, my brave boys, keep between my
pigs and the pond:--if our pigs see the water, they'll run to it, and
England's undone.'

"The whole fury of the mob was by this speech conducted away from us. 'On,
on, my boys, into town, to the market-place: whoever gains the
market-place first wins the day.' Our general shook the rattling bladder
in triumph over the heads of 'the swinish multitude,' and we followed in
perfect security in his train into the town.

"Men, women, and children, crowded to the windows and doors. 'Retreat into
the first place you can,' whispered Clarence to us: we were close to him.
Harriot Freke pushed her way into a milliner's shop: I could not get in
after her, for a frightened pig turned back suddenly, and almost threw me
down. Clarence Hervey caught me, and favoured my retreat into the shop.
But poor Clarence lost his bet by his gallantry. Whilst he was manoeuvring
in my favour, the turkeys got several yards ahead of the pigs, and
reaching the market-place first, won the race.

"The French officer found great difficulty in getting safe out of the
town; but Clarence represented to the mob that he was a prisoner on his
parole, and that it would be unlike Englishmen to insult a prisoner. So he
got off without being pelted, and they both returned in safety to the
house of General Y----, where they were to dine, and where they
entertained a large party of officers with the account of this adventure.

"Mrs. Freke and I rejoiced in our escape, and we thought that the whole
business was now over; but in this we were mistaken. The news of our duel,
which had spread in the town, raised such an uproar as had never been
heard, even at the noisiest election. Would you believe it?--The fate of
the election turned upon this duel. The common people, one and all,
declared that they would not vote either for Mr. Luttridge or Mr. Freke,
because _as how_--but I need not repeat all the _platitudes_ that they
said. In short, neither ribands nor brandy could bring them to reason.
With true English pig-headedness, they went every man of them and polled
for an independent candidate of their own choosing, whose wife, forsooth,
was a proper behaved woman.

"The only thing I had to console me for all this was Clarence Hervey's
opinion that I looked better in man's clothes than my friend Harriot
Freke. Clarence was charmed with my spirit and grace; but he had not
leisure at that time to attach himself seriously to me, or to any thing.
He was then about nineteen or twenty: he was all vivacity, presumption,
and paradox; he was enthusiastic in support of his opinions; but he was at
the same time the most candid man in the world, for there was no set of
tenets which could be called exclusively his: he adopted in liberal
rotation every possible absurdity; and, to do him justice, defended each
in its turn with the most ingenious arguments that could be devised, and
with a flow of words which charmed the ear, if not the sense. His essay on
female duelling was a most extraordinary performance; it was handed about
in manuscript till it was worn out; he talked of publishing it, and
dedicating it to me. However, this scheme, amongst a million of others, he
_talked of_, but never put into execution. Luckily for him, many of his
follies evaporated in words. I saw but little either of him or his follies
at this time. All I know about him is, that after he had lost his bet of a
hundred guineas, as a pig-driver, by his knight-errantry in rescuing the
female duellists from a mob, he wrote a very charming copy of verses upon
the occasion; and that he was so much provoked by the stupidity of some of
his brother officers who could not understand the verses, that he took a
disgust to the army, and sold his commission. He set out upon a tour to
the continent, and I returned with Harriot Freke to London, and forgot the
existence of such a person as Clarence Hervey for three or four years.
Unless people can be of some use, or unless they are actually present, let
them be ever so agreeable or meritorious, we are very apt to forget them.
One grows strangely selfish by living in the world: 'tis a perfect cure
for romantic notions of gratitude, and love, and so forth. If I had lived
in the country in an old manor-house, Clarence Hervey would have doubtless
reigned paramount in my imagination as the deliverer of my life, &c. He
sought earnestly to understand all passages in their context, and then
he struck a balance, giving the greatest weight to those which agreed
with each other, and for those which were at variance patiently striving
to find a solution which might reconcile the seeming contradiction. The
resulting conviction he firmly established in his heart, regardless of
temptations, by fervent prayer. With this procedure he was sometimes bound
to reach conclusions which seemed, even to ordinary human understanding,
vulnerable. When, for instance, in the year 1522, he undertook, from
the Scriptures, to put matrimony on a new moral basis, reason and the
needs of the people were certainly on his side when he subjected to severe
criticism the eighteen grounds of the Ecclesiastical Law for forbidding
and annulling marriages and condemned the unworthy favoring of the rich
over the poor. But it was, after all, strange when Luther tried to prove
from the Bible alone what degrees of relationship were permitted and what
were forbidden, especially as he also took into consideration the Old
Testament, in which various queer marriages were contracted without any
opposition from the ancient Jehovah. God undoubtedly had sometimes allowed
his elect to have two wives.

And it was this method which, in 1529, during the discussions with the
Calvinists, made him so obstinate, when he wrote on the table in
front of him, "This _is_ my body," and sternly disregarded the tears and
outstretched hand of Zwingli. He had never been narrower and yet never
mightier--the fear-inspiring man who had won his conviction in the most
violent inward struggles against doubt and the Devil. It was an imperfect
method, and his opponents attacked it, not without success.
With it his doctrine became subject to the fate of all human wisdom.
But in this method there was also a vivid emotional process in which his own
reason and the culture and the inward needs of his time found better
expression than he himself knew. And it became the starting-point
from which a conscientious spirit of investigation has wrought for the
German people the highest intellectual freedom.

With such tremendous trials there came also to the outcast monk at the
Wartburg other minor temptations. He had long ago, by almost superhuman
intellectual activity, overcome what were then regarded with great distrust
as fleshly impulses; now nature asserted herself vigorously, and he several
times asked his friend Melanchthon to pray for him on this account.
Then Fate would have it that during these very weeks the restless mind of
Carlstadt in Wittenberg fell upon the question of the marriage of
priests, and reached the conclusion, in a pamphlet on celibacy, that the
vow of chastity was not binding on priests and monks. The Wittenbergers
in general agreed--first of all, Melanchthon, whose position in this
matter was freest from prejudice, since he had never received ordination
and had been married for two years.

So at this point a tangle of thoughts and moral questions was caused from
without in Luther's soul, the threads of which were destined to involve
his whole later life. Whatever heartfelt joy and worldly happiness was
granted him from this time on depended on the answer which he found
to this question. It was the happiness of his home-life which made it
possible for him to endure the later years. Only in it did the flower of
his abundant affection develop. So Fate graciously sent the lonely man the
message which was to unite him anew and more firmly than ever with his
people; and the way in which Luther dealt with this question is again
characteristic. His pious disposition and the conservative strain in his
nature revolted against the hasty and superficial manner in which Carlstadt
reasoned.

It may be assumed that much in his own feelings, at that particular time,
made him suspicious that the Devil might be using this dubious question
to tempt the children of God, and yet at this very moment, in his
confinement, he had special sympathy for the poor monks behind monastery
walls. He searched the Scriptures. He had soon disposed of the marriage
of priests, but there was nothing in the Bible about monks. "The
Scripture is silent; man is uncertain." And then he was struck by the
ridiculous idea that even his nearest friends might marry. He writes
to the cautious Spalatin, "Good Lord! Our Wittenbergers want to
give wives to the monks too. Well, they are not going to hang one on
my neck;" and he gives the ironical warning, "Look out that you do not marry
too." But the problem still occupied him incessantly. Life is lived
rapidly in such great times. Gradually, through Melanchthon's reasoning,
and, we may assume, after fervent prayer, he found certainty. What settled
the matter, unknown to himself, must have been the recognition
that the opening of the monasteries had become reasonable and
necessary for a more moral foundation of civil life.

For almost three months he had struggled over the question. On the
first of November, 1521, he wrote the letter to his father already
cited.

The effect of his words upon the people was incalculable. Everywhere there
was a stir in the cloisters. From the doors of almost all the monasteries
and convents monks and nuns stole out--at first singly and in secret flight;
then whole convents broke up. When Luther with greater cares weighing
upon him returned the next spring to Wittenberg, the runaway monks
and nuns gave him much to do. Secret letters were sent to him from all
quarters, often from excited nuns who, the children of stern parents,
had been put into convents, and now, without money and without protection,
sought aid from the great reformer. It was not unnatural that they should
throng to Wittenberg.
Once nine nuns came in a carriage from the aristocratic establishment at
Nimpfschen--among them a Staupitz, two Zeschaus, and Catherine von Bora.
At another time sixteen nuns were to be provided for, and so on.
He felt deep sympathy for these poor souls. He wrote in their behalf and
traveled to find them shelter in respectable families. Sometimes indeed
he felt it too much of a good thing, and the hordes of runaway monks were
an especial burden to him. He complains that "they wish to marry
immediately and are the most incompetent people for any kind of
work." Through his bold solution of a difficult question he gave great
offense. He himself had painful experiences; for among those who now
returned in tumult to civil life there were, to be sure, high-minded
men, but also those who were rude and worthless. Yet all this never
made him hesitate for a moment. As usual with him, he was made the more
determined by the opposition he met. When, in 1524, he published the
story of the sufferings of a novice, Florentina of Oberweimar, he repeated
on the title page what he had already so often preached: "God often
gives testimony in the Scriptures that He will have no compulsory service,
and no one shall become His except with pleasure and love. God help us!
Is there no reasoning with us? Have we no sense and no hearing?

I say it again, God will have no compulsory service. I say it a third time,
I say it a hundred thousand times, God will have no compulsory
service."

So Luther entered upon the last period of his life. His disappearance in the
Thuringian forest had caused an enormous stir. His adversaries trembled
before the anger which arose in town and country against those who were
called murderers. But the interruption of his public activity became
fateful for him. So long as in Wittenberg he was the central point of the
struggle, his word, his pen, had held sovereign control over the great
intellectual movement in north and south; now it worked without
method in different directions, in many minds. One of the oldest of
Luther's allies began the confusion. Wittenberg itself became the scene
of a strange commotion. Then Luther could endure the Wartburg no
longer. Once before he had been secretly in Wittenberg; now, against the
Elector's will, he returned there publicly. And there began a heroic
struggle against old friends, and against the conclusions drawn from
his own doctrine. His activity was superhuman. He thundered without cessation
from the pulpit, in the cell his pen flew fast; but he could not reclaim
every dissenting mind. Even he could not prevent the rabble of the towns
from breaking out in savage fury against the institutions of the ancient
Church and against hated individuals, nor the excitement of the people
from brewing political storms, nor the knights from rising against the
princes, and the peasants against the knights. What was more, he
could not prevent the intellectual liberty which he had won for the
Germans from producing, even in pious and learned men, an independent
judgment about creed and life, a judgment which was contrary to his own
convictions. There came the gloomy years of the Iconoclasts, the Anabaptists,
the Peasant Wars, the regrettable dissensions over the sacrament. How often
at this time did Luther's form rise sombre and mighty over the contestants!
How often did the perversion of mankind and his own secret doubts
fill him with anxious care for the future of Germany!

For in a savage age which was accustomed to slay with fire and
sword, this German had a high, pure conception of the battles of the
intellect such as no other man attained. Even in the times of his own
greatest danger he mortally hated any use of violence. He himself did not
wish to be sheltered by his prince--indeed he desired no human protection
for his doctrine. He fought with a sharp quill against his foes,
but he burnt only a paper at the stake. He hated the Pope as he did
the Devil, but he always preached a love of peace and Christian
tolerance of the Papists. He suspected many of being in secret
league with the Devil, but he never burned a witch. In all Catholic countries
the pyres flamed high for the adherents of the new creed; even Hutten was
under strong suspicion of having cut off the ears of a few monks.
So humane was Luther's disposition that he entertained cordial sympathy
with the humiliated Tetzel and wrote him a consolatory letter. To
obey the authorities whom God has established was his highest political
principle. Only when the service of his God demanded it did his opposition
flame up. When he left Worms he had been ordered not to preach--he who
was just on the point of being declared an outlaw. He did not submit to
the prohibition, but his honest conscience was fearful that this might be
interpreted as disobedience.
His conception of the position of the Emperor was still quite the
antiquated and popular one. As subjects obey the powers that be, so the
princes and electors had to obey the Emperor according to the law of the
land.

With the personality of Charles V. he had human sympathy all his
life--not only at that first period when he greeted him as "Dear Youngster,"
but also later, when he well knew that the Spanish Burgundian
was granting nothing more than political tolerance to the German Reformation.
"He is pious and quiet," Luther said of him; "he talks in a year less
than I do in a day. He is a child of fortune." He liked to praise the
Emperor's moderation, modesty, and forbearance.
Long after he had condemned Charles' policy, and in secret distrusted
his character, he insisted upon it among his table companions that the
master of Germany should be spoken of with reverence, and said apologetically
to the younger ones, "A politician cannot be so frank as we of the clergy."

Even as late as 1530 it was his view that it was wrong for the Elector
to take arms against his Emperor. Not until 1537 did he fall in reluctantly
with the freer views of his circle, but he thought then that the
endangered prince had no right to make the first attack. The venerable
tradition of a firm, well articulated federal State was still thus
active in this man of the people at a time when the proud structure of
the old Saxon and Franconian empires was already crumbling away. Yet in
such loyalty there was no trace of a slavish spirit. When his
prince once urged him to write an open letter, his sense of truth rose
against the title of the Emperor, "Most Gracious Lord," for he said
the Emperor was not graciously disposed toward him.
And in his frequent intercourse with those of rank, he showed a reckless
frankness which more than once alarmed the courtiers. In all reverence he
spoke truths to his own prince such as only a great character may
express and only a good-hearted one can listen to. On the whole he cared
little for the German princes, much as he esteemed a few. Frequent and
just were his complaints about their incapacity, their lawlessness, and
their vices. He also liked to treat the nobility with irony; the coarseness
of most of them was highly distasteful to him. He felt a democratic
displeasure toward the hard and selfish jurists who managed the affairs
of the princes, worked for favor, and harassed the poor; for the best of
them he admitted only a very doubtful prospect of the mercy of God. His
whole heart, on the other hand, was with the oppressed. He sometimes
blamed the peasants for their stolidity, and their extortions in selling
their grain, but he often praised their class, looked with cordial sympathy
upon their hardships, and never forgot that by birth he belonged
among them.

But all this belonged to the temporal order; he served the spiritual.
The popular conception was also firmly fixed in his mind that two controlling
powers ought to rule the German nation in common--the Church and the princes;
and he was entirely right in proudly contrasting the sphere where lay his
rights and duties with that of the temporal powers. In his spiritual field
there were solidarity, a spirit of sacrifice, and a wealth of ideals, while
in secular affairs narrow selfishness, robbery, fraud, and weakness
were to be found everywhere.

He fought vigorously lest the authorities should assume to control matters
which concerned the pastor and the independence of the congregations. He
judged all policies according to what would benefit his faith, and
according to the dictates of his Bible.

Where the Scriptures seemed endangered by worldly politics, he protested,
caring little who was hit. It was not his fault that he was strong and the
princes were weak, and no blame attaches to him, the monk, the
professor, the pastor, if the league of Protestant princes was
weak as a herd of deer against the crafty policy of the Emperor.

He himself was well aware that Italian diplomacy was not his strong
point.

If the active Landgrave of Hesse happened not to follow the advice
of the clergy, Luther, in his heart, respected him all the more:
"He knows what he wants and succeeds, he has a fine sense of this
world's affairs."

Now, after Luther's return to Wittenberg, the flood of democracy was rising
among the people. He had opened the monasteries; now the people
called for redress against many other social evils, such as the misery of
the peasants, the tithes, the traffic in benefices, the bad administration
of justice. Luther's honest heart sympathized with this movement. He
warned and rebuked the landed gentry and the princes. But when the wild
waves of the Peasant War flooded his own spiritual fields, and bloody deeds
of violence wounded his sensibilities; when he felt that the fanatics
and demagogues were exerting upon the hordes of peasants an influence
which threatened destruction to his doctrine; then, in the greatest anger,
he threw himself into opposition to the uncouth mob. His call to the princes
sounded out, wild and warlike; the most horrible thing had fallen upon
him--the gospel of love had been disgraced by the wilful insolence of those
who called themselves its followers. His policy here was again the
right one; there was, unfortunately, no better power in Germany than
that of the princes, and the future of the Fatherland depended upon
them after all, for neither the serfs, the robber barons, nor the isolated
free cities which stood like islands in the rising flood, gave any
assurance.
Luther was entirely right in the essential point, but the same obstinate,
unyielding manner which previously had made his struggle against the
hierarchy so popular, turned now against the people themselves. A cry of
amazement and horror shot through the masses. He was a traitor! He who for
eight years had been the favorite and hero of the people suddenly
became most unpopular. His safety and his life were again threatened;
even five years later it was dangerous for him, on account of the
peasants, to travel to Mansfeld to visit his sick father. The indignation
of the people also worked against his doctrine. The itinerant preachers
and the new apostles treated him as a lost, corrupted man.

[Illustration: _Permission F. Bruckmann, A.-G., Munich_ COURT BALL AT
RHEINSBERG Adolph von Menzel]
He was outlawed, banned, and cursed by the populace. Many
well-meaning men, too, had not approved of his attack on celibacy and
monastic life.

The country gentry threatened to seize the outlaw on the highways because
he had destroyed the nunneries into which, as into foundling asylums,
the legitimate daughters of the poverty-stricken gentry used to be
cast in earliest childhood. The Roman party was triumphant; the new
heresy had lost what so far had made it powerful.
Luther's life and his doctrine seemed alike near their end.

Then Luther determined to marry. For two years Catherine von Bora had lived
in the house of Reichenbach, the city clerk, afterward mayor of
Wittenberg. A healthy, good looking girl, she was, like many
others, the abandoned daughter of a family of the country gentry of
Meissen.
Twice Luther had tried to find her a husband, as in fatherly care he had
done for several of her companions. Finally Catherine declared that she
would marry no one but Luther himself, or his friend Amsdorf.
Luther was surprised, but he reached a decision quickly. Accompanied by Lucas
Kranach, he asked for her hand and married her on the spot.
Then he invited his friends to the wedding feast, asked at Court for the
venison which the Prince was accustomed to present to his professors
when they married, and received the table wine as a present from the city
of Wittenberg.

How things stood in Luther's soul at that time we should be glad to
know. His whole being was under the highest tension. The savage
vigor of his nature struck out in all directions.
He was deeply shocked at the misery which arose about him from burned
villages and murdered men. If he had been a fanatic in his ideas, he
would probably have perished now in despair; but above the stormy
restlessness which could be perceived in him up to his marriage, there
shone now, like a clear light, the conviction that he was the
guardian of divine right among the Germans, and that to protect
civil order and morality, he must lead public opinion, not follow
it. However violent his utterances are in particular cases, he
appears just at this time preëminently conservative, and more
self-possessed than ever. He also believed, it is true, that he was
not destined to live much longer, and often and with longing awaited
his martyrdom. He entered wedlock, perfectly at peace with himself
on this point, for he had fully convinced himself of the necessity
and the scriptural sanction of the married state. In recent years
he had urged all his acquaintances to marry--finally even his old
adversary, the Archbishop of Mainz. He himself gave two reasons for
his decision. For many years he had deprived his father of his son;
and it would be like an atonement if he should leave to old Hans a
grandson in case of his own death. There was also some defiance in
it. His adversaries were saying in triumph that Luther was humiliated,
and since all the world now took offense at him, he proposed to
give them still greater offense in his good cause."Why, my dear," said her ladyship, after having listened to all Miss
Portman could say about her love of independence, and the necessity of
economy to preserve that independence, "all this is prodigiously fine--but
shall I translate it into plain English? You were mortally wounded the
other night by some random reflections of a set of foolish young
men--Clarence Hervey amongst the number; and instead of punishing them,
you sagely and generously determined to punish yourself. Then, to convince
this youth that you have not a thought of those odious nets and cages,
that you have no design whatever upon his heart, and that he has no manner
of influence on yours, you very judiciously determine, at the first hint
from him, to change your dress, your manners, and your character, and thus
to say to him, in as plain terms as possible--'You see, sir, a word to the
wise is enough; I understand you disapprove of showy dress and coquetry,
and therefore, as I dressed and coquetted only to please you, now I shall
lay aside dress and coquetry, since I find that they are not to your
taste--and I hope, sir, you like my simplicity!' Depend upon it, my dear,
Clarence Hervey understands simplicity as well as you or I do. All this
would be vastly well, if he did not know that you overheard that
conversation; but as he does know it, trust me, he will attribute any
sudden change in your manners and appearance, right or wrong, to the
motives I have mentioned. So don't, novice as you are! set about to
manoeuvre for yourself. Leave all that to your aunt Stanhope, or to me,
and then you know your conscience will be all the time as white as your
hands,--which, by-the-bye, Clarence Hervey, the other day, said were the
whitest hands he had ever seen. Perhaps all this time you have taken it
into your head that full dress will not become you; but I assure you that
it will--you look well in any thing--

   'But from the hoop's bewitching round,
   The very shoe has power to wound.'

So come down to Mrs. Franks,
and order your birthnight dress like a reasonable creature."

Like a reasonable creature, Miss Portman followed Lady Delacour, and
bespoke, or rather let her ladyship bespeak for her, fifty guineas' worth
of elegance and fashion. "You must go to the drawing-room with me next
week, and be presented," said Lady Delacour, "and then, as it is the first
time, you must be elegantly dressed, and you must not wear the same dress
on the birthnight. So, Mrs. Franks, let this be finished first, as fast as
you can, and by that time, perhaps, we shall think of something
superlatively charming for the night of nights."

Mrs. Franks departed, and Belinda sighed. "A silver penny for your
thoughts!" cried Lady Delacour. "You are thinking that you are like
Camilla, and I like Mrs. Mitten. Novel reading.--as I dare say you have
been told by your governess, as I was told by mine, and she by hers, I
suppose--novel reading for, young ladies is the most dangerous----

"Oh, Clarence Hervey, I protest!" cried Lady Delacour, as he at this
instant entered the room. "Do, pray, Clarence, help me out, for the sake
of this young lady, with a moral sentence against novel reading: but that
might go against your conscience, or your interest; so we'll spare you.
How I regret that we had not the charming serpent at the masquerade the
other night!"

The moment her ladyship mentioned the masquerade, the conversation which
had passed at Lady Singleton's came full into Clarence Hervey's
recollection, and his embarrassment was evident--not indeed to Belinda,
who had turned away to look over some new music that lay upon a stand at
the farthest end of the room; and she found this such a wonderfully
interesting occupation, that she did not for some minutes hear, or appear
to hear, one word of the conversation which was going on between Mr.
Hervey and Lady Delacour. At last, her ladyship tapped her upon the
shoulder, saying, in a playful tone, "Miss Portman, I arrest your
attention at the suit of Clarence Hervey: this gentleman is passionately
fond of music--to my curse--for he never sees my harp but he worries me
with reproaches for having left off playing upon it. Now he has just given
me his word that he will not reproach me again for a month to come if you
will favour us with one air. I assure you, Clarence, that Belinda touches
a harp divinely--she would absolutely charm----" "Your ladyship should not
waste such valuable praise," interrupted Belinda. "Do you forget that
Belinda Portman and her accomplishments have already been as well
advertised as Packwood's razor-strops?"

The manner in which these words were pronounced made a great impression
upon Clarence Hervey, and he began to believe it was possible that a niece
of the match-making Mrs. Stanhope might not be "a compound of art and
affectation." "Though her aunt has advertised her," said he to himself,
"she seems to have too much dignity to advertise herself, and it would be
very unjust to blame her for the faults of another person. I will see more
of her."

Some morning visitors were announced, who for the time suspended Clarence
Hervey's reflections: the effect of them, however, immediately appeared;
for as his good opinion of Belinda increased, his ambition to please her
was strongly excited. He displayed all his powers of wit and humour; and
not only Lady Delacour but every body present observed, "that Mr. Hervey,
who was always the most entertaining man in the world, this morning
surpassed himself, and was absolutely the most entertaining man in the
universe." He was mortified, notwithstanding; for he distinctly perceived,
that whilst Belinda joined with ease and dignity in the general
conversation, her manner towards him was grave and reserved. The next
morning he called earlier than usual; but though Lady Delacour was always
at home to him, she was then unluckily dressing to go to court: he
inquired whether Miss Portman would accompany her ladyship, and he learnt
from his friend Marriott that she was not to be presented this day,
because Mrs. Franks had not brought home her dress. Mr. Hervey called
again two hours afterwards.--Lady Delacour was gone to court. He asked for
Miss Portman. "Not at home," was the mortifying answer; though, as he had
passed by the windows, he had heard the delightful sound of her harp. He
walked up and down in the square impatiently, till he saw Lady Delacour's
carriage appear.

"The drawing-room has lasted an unconscionable time this morning," said
he, as he handed her ladyship out of her coach, "Am not I the most
virtuous of virtuous women," said Lady Delacour, "to go to court such a
day as this? But," whispered she, as she went up stairs, "like all other
amazingly good people, I have amazingly good reasons for being good. The
queen is soon to give a charming breakfast at Frogmore, and I am paying my
court with all my might, in hopes of being asked; for Belinda must see one
of their galas before we leave town, _that_ I'm determined upon.--But
where is she?" "Not at home," said Clarence, smiling. "Oh, not at home is
nonsense, you know. Shine out, appear, be found, my lovely Zara!" cried
Lady Delacour, opening the library door. "Here she is--what doing I know
not--studying Hervey's Meditations on the Tombs, I should guess, by the
sanctification of her looks. If you be not totally above all sublunary
considerations, admire my lilies of the valley, and let me give you a
lecture, not upon heads, or upon hearts, but on what is of much more
consequence, upon hoops. Every body wears hoops, but how few--'tis a
melancholy consideration--how very few can manage them! There's my friend
Lady C----; in an elegant undress she passes for very genteel, but put her
into a hoop and she looks as pitiable a figure, as much a prisoner, and as
little able to walk, as a child in a go-cart. She gets on, I grant you,
and so does the poor child; but, getting on, you know, is not walking. Oh,
Clarence, I wish you had seen the two Lady R.'s sticking close to one
another, their father pushing them on together, like two decanters in a
bottle-coaster, with such magnificent diamond labels round their necks!"

Encouraged by Clarence Hervey's laughter, Lady Delacour went on to mimic
what she called the hoop awkwardness of all her acquaintance; and if these
could have failed to divert Belinda, it was impossible for her to be
serious when she heard Clarence Hervey declare that he was convinced he
could manage a hoop as well as any woman in England, except Lady Delacour.

"Now here," said he, "is the purblind dowager, Lady Boucher, just at the
door, Lady Delacour; she would not know my face, she would not see my
beard, and I will bet fifty guineas that I come into a room in a hoop, and
that she does not find me out by my air--that I do not betray myself, in
short, by my masculine awkwardness."

"I hold you to your word, Clarence," cried Lady Delacour. "They have let
the purblind dowager in; I hear her on the stairs. Here--through this way
you can go: as you do every thing quicker than any body else in the world,
you will certainly be full dressed in a quarter of an hour; I'll engage to
keep the dowager in scandal for that time. Go! Marriott has old hoops and
old finery of mine, and you have all-powerful influence, I know, with
Marriott: so go and use it, and let us see you in all your glory--though I
vow I tremble for my fifty guineas."

Lady Delacour kept the dowager in scandal, according to her engagement,
for a good quarter of an hour; then the dresses at the drawing-room took
up another quarter; and, at last, the dowager began to give an account of
sundry wonderful cures that had been performed, to her certain knowledge,
by her favourite concentrated extract or anima of quassia. She entered
into the history of the negro slave named Quassi, who discovered this
medical wood, which he kept a close secret till Mr. Daghlberg, a
magistrate of Surinam, wormed it out of him, brought a branch of the tree
to Europe, and communicated it to the great Linnaeus--when Clarence Hervey
was announced by the title of "The Countess de Pomenars."

"An émigrée--a charming woman!" whispered Lady Delacour "she was to have
been at the drawing-room to-day but for a blunder of mine: ready dressed
she was, and I didn't call for her! Ah, Mad. de Pomenars, I am actually
ashamed to see you," continued her ladyship; and she went forward to meet
Clarence Hervey, who really made his entrée with very composed assurance
and grace. He managed his hoop with such skill and dexterity, that he well
deserved the praise of being a universal genius. The Countess de Pomenars
spoke French and broken English incomparably well, and she made out that
she was descended from the Pomenars of the time of Mad. de Sevigné: she
said that she had in her possession several original letters of Mad. de
Sevigné, and a lock of Mad. de Grignan's fine hair.

"I have sometimes fancied, but I believe it is only my fancy," said Lady
Delacour, "that this young lady," turning to Belinda, "is not unlike your
Mad. de Grignan. I have seen a picture of her at Strawberry-hill."

Mad. de Pomenars acknowledged that there was a resemblance, but added,
that it was flattery in the extreme to Mad. de Grignan to say so.

"It would be a sin, undoubtedly, to waste flattery upon the dead, my dear
countess," said Lady Delacour; "but here, without flattery to the living,
as you have a lock of Mad. de Grignan's hair, you can tell us whether _la
belle chevelure_, of which Mad. de Sevigné talked so much, was any thing
to be compared to my Belinda's." As she spoke, Lady Delacour, before
Belinda was aware of her intentions, dexterously let down her beautiful
tresses; and the Countess de Pomenars was so much struck at the sight,
that she was incapable of paying the necessary compliments. "Nay, touch
it," said Lady Delacour--"it is so fine and so soft."

At this dangerous moment her ladyship artfully let drop the comb. Clarence
Hervey suddenly stooped to pick it up, totally forgetting his hoop and his
character. He threw down the music-stand with his hoop. Lady Delacour
exclaimed "Bravissima!" and burst out a-laughing. Lady Boucher, in
amazement, looked from one to another for an explanation, and was a
considerable time before, as she said, she could believe her own eyes.
Clarence Hervey acknowledged he had lost his bet, joined in the laugh, and
declared that fifty guineas was too little to pay for the sight of the
finest hair that he had ever beheld. "I declare he deserves a lock of _la
belle chevelure_ for that speech, Miss Portman," cried Lady Delacour;
"I'll appeal to all the world--Mad. de Pomenars must have a lock to
measure with Mad. de Grignan's? Come, a second rape of the lock, Belinda."

Fortunately for Belinda, "the glittering forfex" was not immediately
produced, as fine ladies do not now, as in former times, carry any such
useless implements about with them.

Such was the modest, graceful dignity of Miss Portman's manners, that she
escaped without even the charge of prudery. She retired to her own
apartment as soon as she could.

"She passes on in unblenched majesty," said Lady Delacour.

"She is really a charming woman," said Clarence Hervey, in a low voice, to
Lady Delacour, drawing her into a recessed window: he in the same low
voice continued, "Could I obtain a private audience of a few minutes when
your ladyship is at leisure?--I have--" "I am never at leisure,"
interrupted Lady Delacour; "but if you have any thing particular to say to
me-as I guess you have, by my skill in human nature--come here to my
concert to-night, before the rest of the world. Wait patiently in the
music-room, and perhaps I may grant you a private audience, as you had the
grace not to call it a _tête-à-tête_. In the mean time, my dear Countess
de Pomenars, had we not better take off our hoops?" In the evening,
Clarence Hervey was in the music-room a considerable time before Lady
Delacour appeared: how patiently he waited is not known to any one but
himself.

"Have not I given you time to compose a charming speech?" said Lady
Delacour as she entered the room; "but make it as short as you can, unless
you wish that Miss Portman should hear it, for she will be down stairs in
three minutes."

"In one word, then, my dear Lady Delacour, can you, and will you, make my
peace with Miss Portman?--I am much concerned about that foolish
razor-strop dialogue which she overheard at Lady Singleton's."

"You are concerned that she overheard it, no doubt."

"No," said Clarence Hervey, "I am rejoiced that she overheard it, since it
has been the means of convincing me of my mistake; but I am concerned that
I had the presumption and injustice to judge of Miss Portman so hastily. I
am convinced that, though she is a niece of Mrs. Stanhope's, she has
dignity of mind and simplicity of character. Will you, my dear Lady
Delacour, tell her so?"

"Stay," interrupted Lady Delacour; "let me get it by heart. I should have
made a terrible bad messenger of the gods and goddesses, for I never in my
life could, like Iris, repeat a message in the same words in which it was
delivered to me. Let me see--'Dignity of mind and simplicity of
character,' was not it? May not I say at once, 'My dear Belinda, Clarence
Hervey desires me to tell you that he is convinced you are an angel?' That
single word _angel_ is so expressive, so comprehensive, so comprehensible,
it contains, believe me, all that can be said or imagined on these
occasions, _de part et d'autre_."

"But," said Mr. Hervey, "perhaps Miss Portman has heard the song of--

    'What know we of angels?--
    I spake it in jest.'"

"Then you are not in jest, but in downright sober earnest?--Ha!" said Lady
Delacour, with an arch look, "I did not know it was already come to _this_
with you."

And her ladyship, turning to her piano-forte, played--

    "There was a young man in Ballinacrasy,
    Who wanted a wife to make him un_asy_,
    And thus in gentle strains he spoke her,
    Arrah, will you marry me, my dear Ally Croker?"

"No, no," exclaimed Clarence, laughing, "it is not come to _that_ with me
yet, Lady Delacour, I promise you; but is not it possible to say that a
young lady has dignity of mind and simplicity of character without having
or suggesting any thoughts of marriage?"

"You make a most proper, but not sufficiently emphatic difference between
having or suggesting such thoughts," said Lady Delacour. "A gentleman
sometimes finds it for his interest, his honour, or his pleasure, to
suggest what he would not for the world promise,--I mean perform."

"A scoundrel," cried Clarence Hervey, "not a gentleman, may find it for
his honour, or his interest, or his pleasure, to promise what he would not
perform; but I am not a scoundrel. I never made any promise to man or
woman that I did not keep faithfully. I am not a swindler in love."

"And yet," said Lady Delacour, "you would have no scruple to trifle or
flatter a woman out of her heart."

_"Cela est selon!"_ said Clarence smiling; "a fair exchange, you know, is
no robbery. When a fine woman robs me of my heart, surely Lady Delacour
could not expect that I should make no attempt upon hers."--"Is this part
of my message to Miss Portman?" said Lady Delacour. "As your ladyship
pleases," said Clarence; "I trust entirely to your discretion."

"Why I really have a great deal of discretion," said Lady Delacour; "but
you trust too much to it when you expect that I should execute, both with
propriety and success, the delicate commission of telling a young lady,
who is under my protection, that a young gentleman, who is a professed
admirer of mine, is in love with her, but has no thoughts, and wishes to
suggest no thoughts, of marriage."

"In love!" exclaimed Clarence Hervey; "but when did I ever use the
expression? In speaking of Miss Portman, I simply expressed esteem and
ad--------"

"No additions," said Lady Delacour; "content yourself with
esteem--simply,--and Miss Portman is safe, and you too, I presume.
Apropos; pray, Clarence, how do your esteem and _admiration_ (I may go as
far as that, may not I?) of Miss Portman agree with your admiration of
Lady Delacour?"

"Perfectly well," replied Clarence; "for all the world must be sensible
that Clarence Hervey is a man of too much taste to compare a country
novice in wit and accomplishments to Lady Delacour. He might, as men of
genius sometimes do, look forward to the idea of forming a country novice
for a wife. A man must marry some time or other--but my hour, thank
Heaven, is not come yet."

"Thank Heaven!" said Lady Delacour; "for you know a married man is lost to
the world of fashion and gallantry."

"Not more so, I should hope, than a married woman," said Clarence Harvey.
Here a loud knocking at the door announced the arrival of company to the
concert. "You will make my peace, you promise me, with Miss Portman,"
cried Clarence eagerly.

"Yes, I will make your peace, and you shall see Belinda smile upon you
once more, upon condition," continued Lady Delacour, speaking very
quickly, as if she was hurried by the sound of people coming up
stairs--"but we'll talk of that another time."

"Nay, nay, my dear Lady Delacour, now, now," said Clarence, seizing her
hand.--"Upon condition! upon what condition?"

"Upon condition that you do a little job for me--indeed for Belinda. She
is to go with me to the birth-night, and she has often hinted to me that
our horses are shockingly shabby for people of our condition. I know she
wishes that upon such an occasion--her first appearance at court, you
know--we should go in style. Now my dear positive lord has _said_ he will
not let us have a pair of the handsomest horses I ever saw, which are at
Tattersal's, and on which Belinda, I know, has secretly set her heart, as
I have openly, in vain."

"Your ladyship and Miss Portman cannot possibly set your hearts on any
thing in vain--especially on any thing that it is in the power of Clarence
Hervey to procure. Then," added he, gallantly kissing her hand, "may I
thus seal my treaty of peace?"

"What audacity!--don't you see these people coming in?" cried Lady
Delacour; and she withdrew her hand, but with no great precipitation. She
was evidently, "at this moment, as in all the past," neither afraid nor
ashamed that Mr. Hervey's devotions to her should be paid in public. With
much address she had satisfied herself as to his views with respect to
Belinda. She was convinced that he had no immediate thoughts of matrimony;
but that if he were condemned to marry, Miss Portman would be his wife. As
this did not interfere with her plans, Lady Delacour was content.


CHAPTER VI.

WAYS AND MEANS.


When Lady Delacour repeated to Miss Portman the message about "simplicity
of mind and dignity of character," she frankly said--

"Belinda, notwithstanding all this, observe, I'm determined to retain
Clarence Hervey among the number of my public worshippers during my
life--which you know cannot last long. After I am gone, my dear, he'll be
all your own, and of that I give you joy. Posthumous fame is a silly
thing, but posthumous jealousy detestable."

There was one part of the conversation between Mr. Hervey and her ladyship
which she, in her great discretion, did not immediately repeat to Miss
Portman--that part which related to the horses. In this transaction
Belinda had no farther share than having once, when her ladyship had the
handsome horses brought for her to look at, assented to the opinion that
they were the handsomest horses she ever beheld. Mr. Hervey, however
gallantly he replied to her ladyship, was secretly vexed to find that
Belinda had so little delicacy as to permit her name to be employed in
such a manner. He repented having used the improper expression of _dignity
of mind_, and he relapsed into his former opinion of Mrs. What do they
want? Pleased to see them!

[_Exit_ CARL.]
Allow me to have them shown in here, children. Senden never stays
long. He is a roving spirit.

[_The ladies rise._]
IDA.

The hour is again spoiled for us.

ADELAIDE.

Don't mind it; we shall have all the more time to dress.

[_Exeunt_ IDA _and_ ADELAIDE _on the left._]
_Enter_ SENDEN, BLUMENBERG, _a third gentleman._
SENDEN.

Colonel, we come on behalf of the committee for the approaching election
to notify you that that committee has unanimously voted to make
you, Colonel, our party's candidate.

COLONEL. _Me?_

SENDEN.

The committee begs you to accept this nomination so that the necessary
announcement can be made to the voters at this evening's fête.

COLONEL.

Are you in earnest, dear Senden? Where did the committee get such an
idea?

SENDEN.

Colonel, our president, who had previously agreed to run for our town,
found that it would be more advantageous to be candidate from a provincial
district; apart from him no one of our townsmen is so well known and so
popular with the citizens as yourself. If you accede to our request our
party is certain of victory; if you refuse, there is every probability that
our opponents will have their own way. You will agree with us that
such an eventuality must be avoided under all circumstances.

COLONEL.

I see all that; but, on personal grounds, it is impossible for me to help
our friends in this matter.
SENDEN (_to the others_).
Let me explain to the Colonel certain things which will possibly
make him look favorably on our request.
[_Exeunt_ BLUMENBERG _and the other gentlemen into the garden, where
they are visible from time to time._] 
COLONEL.
But, Senden, how could you put me in this embarrassing position!
You know that for years Oldendorf has frequented my house and that
it will be extremely unpleasant for me openly to oppose him.

SENDEN.
If the professor is really so devoted to you and your household,
he has now the best opportunity to show it. It is a foregone
conclusion that he will at once withdraw.

COLONEL.
I am not quite so sure of that; he is very stubborn in many
ways.

SENDEN.
If he do not withdraw such egotism can scarcely still be called
stubbornness. And in such a case you would scarcely be under
obligations to him; obligations, Colonel, which might work injury
to the whole country. Besides, he has no chance of being elected
if you accept, for you will defeat him by a majority not large but
sure.

COLONEL.

Are we so perfectly certain of this majority!

SENDEN.
I think I can guarantee it. Blumenberg and the other gentlemen have
made very thorough inquiries.

COLONEL.
It would serve the professor quite right if he had to withdraw in
my favor.--But no--no; it will not do at all, my friend.

SENDEN.
We know, Colonel, what a sacrifice we are asking of you, and that
nothing could compensate you for it save the consciousness of having
done your country a great service.

COLONEL.

To be sure.

SENDEN.
It would be so regarded in the capital, too, and I am convinced
that your entering the House would also cause pleasure in other
circles than those of your numerous friends and admirers.

COLONEL.
I should meet there many old friends and comrades. (_Aside_.)"Very likely--no doubt"--interrupted Lady Delacour; "but if you would only
open your eyes, which heroines make it a principle never to do--or else
there would be an end of the novel--if you would only open your eyes, you
would see that this man is in love with you; and whilst you are afraid of
his contempt, he is a hundred times more afraid of yours; and as long as
you are each of you in such fear of you know not what, you must excuse me
if I indulge myself in a little wholesome raillery."--Belinda
smiled.--"There now; one such smile as that for Clarence Hervey, and I'm
out of debt and danger," said Lady Delacour.

"O Lady Delacour, why, why will you try your power over me in this
manner?" said Belinda. "You know that I ought not to be persuaded to do
what I am conscious is wrong. But a few days ago you told me yourself that
Mr. Hervey is--is not a marrying man; and a woman of your penetration must
see that--that he only means to flirt with me. I am not a match for Mr.
Hervey in any respect. He is a man of wit and gallantry--I am unpractised
in the ways of the world. I was not educated by my aunt Stanhope--I have
only been with her a few years--I wish I had never been with her in my
life."

"I'll take care Mr. Hervey shall know that," said Lady Delacour; "but in
the mean time I do think any fair appraiser of delicate distresses would
decide that I am, all the circumstances considered, more to be pitied at
this present moment than you are: for the catastrophe of the business
evidently is, that I must pay two hundred guineas for the horses somehow
or other."

"I can pay for them," exclaimed Belinda, "and will with the greatest
pleasure. I will not go to the birthnight--my dress is not bespoke. Will
two hundred guineas pay for the horses? Oh, take the money--pay Mr.
Hervey, dear Lady Delacour, and it will all be right."

"You are a charming girl," said Lady Delacour, embracing her; "but how can
I answer for it to my conscience, or to your aunt Stanhope, if you don't
appear on the birthnight? That cannot be, my dear; besides, you know Mrs.
Franks will send home your drawing-room dress to-day, and it would be so
foolish to be presented for nothing--not to go to the birthnight
afterwards. If you say _a_ you must say _b."_

"Then," said Belinda, "I will not go to the drawing-room."--"Not go, my
dear! What! throw away fifty guineas for nothing! Really I never saw any
one so lavish of her money, and so economic of her smiles."

"Surely," said Miss Portman, "it is better for me to throw away fifty
guineas, poor as I am, than to hazard the happiness of my life. Your
ladyship knows that if I say _a_ to Mr. Hervey, I must say _b_. No, no, my
dear Lady Delacour; here is the draught for two hundred guineas: pay Mr.
Hervey, for Heaven's sake, and there is an end of the business."

"What a positive child it is! Well, then, it shall not be forced to say
the a, b, c, of Cupid's alphabet, to that terrible pedagogue, Clarence
Hervey, till it pleases: but seriously, Miss Portman, I am concerned that
you will make me take this draught: it is absolutely robbing you. But Lord
Delacour's the person you must blame--it is all his obstinacy: having once
said he would not pay for the horses, he would see them and me and the
whole human race expire before he would change his silly mind.--Next month
I shall have it in my power, my dear, to repay you with a thousand thanks;
and in a few months more we shall have another birthday, and a new star
shall appear in the firmament of fashion, and it shall be called Belinda.
In the mean time, my dear, upon second thoughts, perhaps we can get Mrs.
Franks to dispose of your drawing-room dress to some person of taste, and
you may keep your fifty guineas for the next occasion. I'll see what can
be done.--Adieu! a thousand thanks, silly child as you are."

Mrs. Franks at first declared that it would be an impossibility to dispose
of Miss Portman's dress, though she would do any thing upon earth to
oblige Lady Delacour; however, ten guineas made every thing possible.
Belinda rejoiced at having, as she thought, extricated herself at so cheap
a rate; and well pleased with her own conduct, she wrote to her aunt
Stanhope, to inform her of as much of the transaction as she could
disclose, without betraying Lady Delacour. "Her ladyship," she said, "had
immediate occasion for two hundred guineas, and to accommodate her with
this sum she had given up the idea of going to court."

The tenor of Miss Portman's letter will be sufficiently apparent from Mrs.
Stanhope's answer.

MRS. STANHOPE TO MISS PORTMAN.

"Bath, June 2nd.

"I cannot but feel some astonishment, Belinda, at your very extraordinary
conduct, and more extraordinary letter. What you can mean by principles
and delicacy I own I don't pretend to understand, when I see you not only
forget the respect that is due to the opinions and advice of the aunt to
whom you owe every thing; but you take upon yourself to lavish her money,
without common honesty. I send you two hundred guineas, and desire you to
go to court--you lend my two hundred guineas to Lady Delacour, and inform
me that as you think yourself bound in honour to her ladyship, you cannot
explain all the particulars to me, otherwise you are sure I should approve
of the reasons which have influenced you. Mighty satisfactory, truly! And
then, to mend the matter, you tell me that you do not think that in your
situation in life it is necessary that you should go to court. Your
opinions and mine, you add, differ in many points. Then I must say that
you are as ungrateful as you are presumptuous; for I am not such a novice
in the affairs of the world as to be ignorant that when a young lady
professes to be of a different opinion from her friends, it is only a
prelude to something worse. She begins by saying that she is determined to
think for herself, and she is determined to act for herself--and then it
is all over with her: and all the money, &c. that has been spent upon her
education is so much dead loss to her friends.

"Now I look upon it that a young girl who has been brought up, and brought
forward in the world as you have been by connexions, is bound to be guided
implicitly by them in all her conduct. What should you think of a man who,
after he had been brought into parliament by a friend, would go and vote
against that friend's opinions? You do not want sense, Belinda--you
perfectly understand me; and consequently your errors I must impute to the
defect of your heart, and not of your judgment. I see that, on account of
the illness of the princess, the king's birthday is put off for a
fortnight. If you manage properly, and if (unknown to Lady ----, who
certainly has not used you well in this business, and to whom therefore
you owe no peculiar delicacy) you make Lord ---- sensible how much your
aunt Stanhope is disappointed and displeased (as I most truly am) at your
intention of missing this opportunity of appearing at court; it is ten to
one but his lordship--who has not made it a point to refuse your request,
I suppose--will pay you your two hundred guineas. You of course will make
proper acknowledgments; but at the same time entreat that his lordship
will not _commit_ you with his lady, as she might be offended at your
application to him. I understand from an intimate acquaintance of his,
that you are a great favourite of his lordship; and though an obstinate,
he is a good-natured man, and can have no fear of being governed by you;
consequently he will do just as you would have him.

"Then you have an opportunity of representing the thing in the prettiest
manner imaginable to Lady ----, as an instance of her lord's consideration
for her: so you will oblige all parties (a very desirable thing) without
costing yourself one penny, and go to the birthnight after all: and this
only by using a little address, without which nothing is to be done in
this world.

"Yours affectionately (if you follow my advice),

"SELINA STANHOPE."

Belinda, though she could not, consistently with what she thought right,
follow the advice so artfully given to her in this epistle, was yet
extremely concerned to find that she had incurred the displeasure of an
aunt to whom she thought herself under obligations. She resolved to lay by
as much as she possibly could, from the interest of her fortune, and to
repay the two hundred guineas to Mrs. Stanhope. She was conscious that she
had no right to lend this money to Lady Delacour, if her aunt had
expressly desired that she should spend it only on her court-dress; but
this had not distinctly been expressed when Mrs. Stanhope sent her niece
the draft. That lady was in the habit of speaking and writing ambiguously,
so that even those who knew her best were frequently in doubt how to
interpret her words. Yet she was extremely displeased when her hints and
her half-expressed wishes were not understood. Beside the concern she felt
from the thoughts of having displeased her aunt, Belinda was both vexed
and mortified to perceive that in Clarence Hervey's manner towards her
there was not the change which she had expected that her conduct would
naturally produce.

One day she was surprised at his reproaching her for caprice in having
given up her intentions of going to court. Lady Delacour's embarrassment
whilst Mr. Hervey spoke, Belinda attributed to her ladyship's desire that
Clarence should not know that she had been obliged to borrow the money to
pay him for the horses. Belinda thought that this was a species of mean
pride; but she made it a point to keep her ladyship's secret--she
therefore slightly answered Mr. Hervey, "that she wondered that a man who
was so well acquainted with the female sex should be surprised at any
instance of caprice from a woman." The conversation then took another
turn, and whilst they were talking of indifferent subjects, in came Lord
Delacour's man, Champfort, with Mrs. Stanhope's draft for two hundred
guineas, which the coachmaker's man had just brought hack because Miss
Portman had forgotten to endorse it. Belinda's astonishment was almost as
great at this instant as Lady Delacour's confusion.

"Come this way, my dear, and we'll find you a pen and ink. You need not
wait, Champfort; but tell the man to wait for the draft--Miss Portman will
endorse it immediately."--And she took Belinda into another room.

"Good Heavens! Has not this money been paid to Mr. Hervey?" exclaimed
Belinda.

"No, my dear; but I will take all the blame upon myself, or, which will do
just as well for you, throw it all upon my better half. My Lord Delacour
would not pay for my new carriage. The coachmaker, insolent animal, would
not let it out of his yard without two hundred guineas in ready money. Now
you know I had the horses, and what could I do with the horses without the
carriage? Clarence Hervey, I knew, could wait for his money better than a
poor devil of a coachmaker; so I paid the coachmaker, and a few months
sooner or later can make no difference to Clarence, who rolls in gold, my
dear--if that will be any comfort to you, as I hope it will."

"Oh, what will he think of me!" said Belinda.

"Nay, what will he think of _me_, child!"

"Lady Delacour," said Belinda, in a firmer tone than she had ever before
spoken, "I must insist upon this draft being given to Mr. Hervey."

"Absolutely impossible, my dear.--I cannot take it from the coachmaker; he
has sent home the carriage: the thing's done, and cannot be undone. But
come, since I know nothing else will make you easy, I will take this
mighty favour from Mr. Hervey entirely upon my own conscience: you cannot
object to that, for you are not the keeper of my conscience. I will tell
Clarence the whole business, and do you honour due, my dear: so endorse
the check, whilst I go and sound both the praises of your dignity of mind,
and simplicity of character, &c. &c. &c. &c."

Her ladyship broke away from Belinda, returned to Clarence Hervey, and
told the whole affair with that peculiar grace with which she knew how to
make a good story of a bad one. Clarence was as favourable an auditor at
this time as she could possibly have found; for no human being could value
money less than he did, and all sense of her ladyship's meanness was lost
in his joy at discovering that Belinda was worthy of his esteem. Now he
felt in its fullest extent all the power she had over his heart, and he
was upon the point of declaring his attachment to her, when
_malheureusement_ Sir Philip Baddely and Mr. Rochfort announced themselves
by the noise they made on the staircase. These were the young men who had
spoken in such a contemptuous manner at Lady Singleton's of the
match-making Mrs. Stanhope and her nieces. Mr. Hervey was anxious that
they should not penetrate into the state of his heart, and he concealed
his emotion by instantly assuming that kind of rattling gaiety which
always delighted his companions, who were ever in want of some one to set
their stagnant ideas in motion. At last they insisted upon carrying
Clarence away with them to taste some wines for Sir Philip Baddely.


CHAPTER VII.

THE SERPENTINE RIVER.


In his way to St. James's street, where the wine-merchant lived, Sir
Philip Baddely picked up several young men of his acquaintance, who were
all eager to witness a trial of _taste_, of epicurean taste, between the
baronet and Clarence Hervey. Amongst his other accomplishments our hero
piqued himself upon the exquisite accuracy of his organs of taste. He
neither loved wine, nor was he fond of eating; but at fine dinners, with
young men who were real epicures, Hervey gave himself the airs of a
connoisseur, and asserted superiority even in judging of wine and sauces.
Having gained immortal honour at an entertainment by gravely protesting
that some turtle would have been excellent if it had not been done _a
bubble too much_, he presumed, elate as he was with the applauses of the
company, to assert, that no man in England had a more correct taste than
himself.--Sir Philip Baddely could not passively submit to this arrogance;
he loudly proclaimed, that though he would not dispute Mr. Hervey's
judgment as far as eating was concerned, yet he would defy him as a
connoisseur in wines, and he offered to submit the competition to any
eminent wine-merchant in London, and to some common friend of acknowledged
taste and experience.--Mr. Rochfort was chosen as the common friend of
acknowledged taste and experience; and a fashionable wine-merchant was
pitched upon to decide with him the merits of these candidates for
bacchanalian fame. Sir Philip, who was just going to furnish his cellars,
was a person of importance to the wine-merchant, who produced accordingly
his choicest treasures. Sir Philip and Clarence tasted of all in their
turns; Sir Philip with real, and Clarence with affected gravity; and they
delivered their opinions of the positive and comparative merits of each.
The wine-merchant evidently, as Mr. Hervey thought, leaned towards Sir
Philip. "Upon my word, Sir Philip, you are right--that wine is the best I
have--you certainly have a most discriminating taste," said the
complaisant wine-merchant.

"I'll tell you what," cried Sir Philip, "the thing is this: by Jove! now,
there's no possibility now--no possibility now, by Jove! of imposing upon
me."

"Then," said Clarence Hervey, "would you engage to tell the differences
between these two wines ten times running, blind-fold?"

"Ten times! that's nothing," replied Sir Philip: "yes, fifty times, I
would, by Jove!"

But when it came to the trial, Sir Philip had nothing left but oaths in
his own favour. Clarence Hervey was victorious; and his sense of the
importance of this victory was much increased by the fumes of the wine,
which began to operate upon his brain. His triumph was, as he said it
ought to be, bacchanalian: he laughed and sang with anacreontic spirit,
and finished by declaring that he deserved to be crowned with vine-leaves.

"Dine with me, Clarence," said Rochfort, "and we'll crown you with three
times three; and," whispered he to Sir Philip, "we'll have another trial
after dinner."

"But as it's not near dinner-time yet--what shall we do with ourselves
till dinner-time?" said Sir Philip, yawning pathetically.

Clarence not being used to drink in a morning, though all his companions
were, was much affected by the wine, and Rochfort proposed that they
should take a turn in the park to cool Hervey's head. To Hyde-park they
repaired; Sir Philip boasting, all the way they walked, of the superior
strength of his head.

Clarence protested that his own was stronger than any man's in England,
and observed, that at this instant he walked better than any person in
company, Sir Philip Baddely not excepted. Now Sir Philip Baddely was a
noted pedestrian, and he immediately challenged our hero to walk with him
for any money he pleased. "Done," said Clarence, "for ten guineas--for any
money you please:" and instantly they set out to walk, as Rochfort cried
"one, two, three, and away; keep the path, and whichever reaches that elm
tree first has it."

They were exactly even for some yards, then Clarence got ahead of Sir
Philip, and he reached the elm tree first; but as he waved his hat,
exclaiming, "Clarence has won the day," Sir Philip came up with his
companions, and coolly informed him that he had lost his wager--"Lost!
lost! lost! Clarence--fairly lost."

"Didn't I reach the tree first?" said Clarence.

"Yes," answered his companions; "but you didn't keep the path. You turned
out of the way when you met that crowd of children yonder."

"Now _I_," said Sir Philip, "dashed fairly through them--kept the path,
and won my bet."

"But," said Hervey, "would you have had me run over that little child, who
was stooping down just in my way?"

"_I_!' not I," said Sir Philip; "but I would have you go through with your
civility: if a man will be polite, he must pay for his politeness
sometimes.IDA.

On the one hand the father, on the other the lover--how will it end?

ADELAIDE.

Do not worry. The one is an old soldier, the other a young statesman;
two types that we women have wound around our little fingers from
time immemorial! [_Both leave_.]

SCENE II

_Side room of a public hall. The rear wall a great arch with columns,
through which one looks into the lighted hall and through it into
another.

On the left, toward the front, a door. On the right, tables and chairs;
chandeliers. Later, from time to time distant music. In the hall
ladies and gentlemen walking about or standing in groups_.

SENDEN, BLUMENBERG, _behind them_ SCHMOCK _coming from the hall_.

SENDEN. All is going well. There is a splendid spirit in the company.
These good townspeople are delighted with our arrangements.

    It was a fine idea of yours,
    Blumenberg, to have this fête.
    

BLUMENBEEG. Only hurry and get people warmed up! It's a good thing to begin
with some music. Vienna waltzes are best on account of the women.
Then comes a speech from you, then some solo singing, and, at supper, the
introduction of the Colonel, and the toasts. It can't help being a success;
the men must have hearts of stone if they don't give their votes
in return for such a fête.

SENDEN. The toasts have been apportioned.

BLUMENBERG. But the music?

--Why has the music stopped?

SENDEN. I am waiting for the Colonel to arrive.

BLUMENBERG. He must be received with a blare of trumpets. It will
flatter him, you know.

SENDEN. That's what I ordered.

Directly after, they start up a march and we bring him in procession.

BLUMENBERG. First rate! That will lend solemnity to his entrance. Only
think up your speech. Be popular, for today we are among the rabble.

_Enter guests, among them_ HENNING.

SENDEN (_doing the honors with BLUMENBERG_). Delighted to see you here! We
knew that you would not fail us. Is this your wife?

GUEST. Yes, Mr. von Senden, this is my wife.

SENDEN.

You here, too, Mr. Henning? Welcome, my dear sir!

HENNING. I was invited by my friend and really had the curiosity to
come. My presence, I hope, will not be unpleasant to any one?

SENDEN. Quite the contrary. We are most pleased to greet you here.

[_Guests leave through centre door_; SENDEN _goes out in conversation
with them._] 
BLUMENBERG.

He knows how to manage people. It's the good manners of these gentlemen
that does it. He is useful--useful to me too. He manages the others,
and I manage him. [_Turning, he sees_ SCHMOCK, _who is hovering near the
door_.] What are you doing here? Why do you stand there listening? You are
not a door-keeper! See that you keep out of my vicinity. Divide yourself
up among the company.

SCHMOCK. Whom shall I go to if I know none of these people at all? You are
the only person I know.

BLUMENBERG. Why must you tell people that you know me? I consider it no honor
to stand next to you.

SCHMOCK. If it is not an honor it's not a disgrace either; But I can stay
by myself.

BLUMENBERG. Have you money to get something to eat? Go to the restaurant-keeper
and order something charged to me. The committee will pay for it.

SCHMOCK. I don't care to go and eat. I have no need to spend anything.
I have had my supper.

[_Blare of trumpets and march in the distance. Exit_ BLUMENBERG.
SCHMOCK _alone, coming forward, angrily_.]
I hate him!

I'll tell him I hate him, that I despise him from the bottom of my
heart!

[_Turns to go, comes back._]
But I cannot tell him so, or he will cut out all I send in for the
special correspondence I write for his paper!

I will try to swallow it down!

_[Exit through centre door_.]
_Enter_ BOLZ, KÄMPE, BELLMAUS _by side door_.

BOLZ (_marching in_). Behold us in the house of the Capulets!
[_Pretends to thrust a sword into its scabbard._] Conceal your swords under
roses. Blow your little cheeks up, and look as silly and innocent as
possible. Above all, don't let me see you get into a row, and if you
meet this Tybaldus Senden be so good as to run round the corner.

[_The procession is seen marching through the rear halls_.]
You, Romeo Bellmaus, look out for the little women. I see more fluttering
curls and waving kerchiefs there than are good for your peace of mind.

KÄMPE. I bet a bottle of champagne that if one of us gets into a
row it will be you.

BOLZ. Possibly. But I promise you that you shall surely come in for your
share of it. Now listen to my plan of operations.

You Kämpe--[_Enter_ SCHMOCK.] Stop! Who is that? Thunder! The factotum of
the _Coriolanus_!

Our _incognito_ has not lasted long.

SCHMOCK (_even before the last remark, has been seen looking in at
the door, coming forward_).

I wish you good evening, Mr.

Bolz.

BOLZ. I wish you the same and of even better quality, Mr.
Schmock.

SCHMOCK. Might I have a couple of words with you?

BOLZ. A couple?

Don't ask for too few, noble armor-bearer of the _Coriolanus_! A couple of
dozen words you shall have, but no more.

SCHMOCK. Could you not employ me on your paper.

BOLZ (_to_ KÄMPE _and_ BELLMAUS). Do you hear that? On our paper? H'm!
'Tis much you ask, noble Roman!

SCHMOCK. I am sick of the _Coriolanus_. I would do any kind of work you
needed done. I want to be with respectable people, where one can earn
something and be treated decently.

BOLZ. What are you asking of us, slave of Rome? We to entice you away from
your party--never! We do violence to your political convictions?
Make you a renegade? We bear the guilt of your joining our party? No,
sir!

We have a tender conscience. It rises in arms against your proposition!

SCHMOCK. Why do you let that trouble you? Under Blumenberg I have learned
to write whichever way the wind blows.

I have written on the left and again on the right. I can write in any
direction.

BOLZ. I see you have character. You would be a sure success on
our paper. Your offer does us honor, but we cannot accept it now. So
momentous an affair as your defection needs deep consideration.

Meanwhile you will have confided in no unfeeling barbarian. (_Aside to
the others_.) We may be able to worm something out of him. Bellmaus, you
have the tenderest heart of us three; you must devote yourself to
him today.

BELLMAUS. But what shall I do with him?

BOLZ. Take him into the restaurant, sit down in a corner with him, pour
punch into every hollow of his poor head until his secrets jump out like
wet mice. Make him chatter, especially about the elections.

    Go, little man, and take good care not to get overheated yourself
and babble.

BELLMAUS. In that case I shall not see much of the fête.

BOLZ. That's true, my son! But what does the fête mean to you? Heat, dust,
and stale dance-music. Besides, we will tell you all about it in the
morning; and then you are a poet, and can imagine the whole affair
to be much finer than it really was.

So don't take it to heart. You may think you have a thankless role, but
it is the most important of all, for it requires coolness and
cleverness.

Go, mousey, and look out about getting overheated.

BELLMAUS. I'll look out, old tom-cat.--Come along Schmock!

[BELLMAUS _and_ SCHMOCK _leave_.]
BOLZ. We might as well separate, too.

KÄMPE. I'll go and see how people feel. If I need you I'll look you up.

BOLZ. I had better not show myself much. I'll stay around here.

[_Exit_ KÄMPE.]
Alone at last!

[_Goes to centre door_.]
There stands the Colonel, closely surrounded.

It is she! She is here, and I have to lie in hiding like a fox under
the leaves.--But she has falcon eyes,--perhaps--the throng disperses--she
is walking through the hall arm-in-arm with Ida--(_Excitedly_.)

They are drawing nearer!
(_Irritably_.) Oh, bother! There is Korb rushing toward me! And just
now!

_Enter_ KORB.

KORB. Mr. Conrad! I can't believe my eyes! You here, at this fête!

BOLZ (_hastily_). Hush, old chap! I'm not here without a reason. I can trust
you--you're one of us, you know.

KORB. Body and soul. Through all the talking and fiddling I've kept
saying to myself, "Long live the _Union!"_ Here she is!

[_Shows him a paper in his pocket_.]
BOLZ.

Good, Korb, you can do me a great favor. In a corner of the refreshment
room Bellmaus is sitting with a stranger.

He is to pump the stranger, but cannot stand much himself and is likely to
say things he shouldn't. You'll do the party a great service if you will
hurry in and drink punch so as to keep Bellmaus up to the mark.

You have a strong head--I know it from of old.

KORB (_hastily_). I go! You are as full of tricks as ever, I see. You
may rely on me. The stranger shall succumb, and the _Union_ shall
triumph.

[_Exit quickly. The music ceases_.]
BOLZ. Poor Schmock! [_At the door_.]
Ah, they are still walking through the hall. Ida is being spoken to, she
stops, Adelaide goes on--(_Excitedly_.) she's coming, she's coming
alone!

ADELAIDE (_makes a motion as though to pass the door, but suddenly
enters_. BOLZ _bows_). Conrad! My dear doctor!

[_Holds out her hand_.

BOLZ _bends low over it_.]

ADELAIDE (_in joyous emotion_). I knew you at once from a distance.
Let me see your faithful face. Yes, it has changed but little--a scar,
browner, and a small line about the mouth. I hope it is from laughing.

BOLZ. If at this moment I feel like anything but laughing it is only a
passing malignity of soul. I see myself double, like a melancholy Highlander.
In your presence my long happy childhood passes bodily before my eyes.
All the joy and pain it brought me I feel as vividly again as though I
were still the boy who went into the wood for you in search of
wild adventures and caught robin-red-breasts. And yet the fine creature
I see before me is so different from my playmate that I realize I am
only dreaming a beautiful dream. Your eyes shine as kindly as ever,
but--(_Bowing_.) I have scarcely the right still to think of old
dreams.

ADELAIDE. Possibly I, too, am not so changed as you think; and changed though
we both be, we have remained good friends, have we not?

BOLZ. Rather than give up one iota of my claim to your regard, I would write
and print and try to sell malicious articles against myself.

ADELAIDE. And yet you have been too proud all this time even to come
and see your friend in town. Why have you broken with the Colonel?

BOLZ. I have not broken with him. On the contrary, I have a very estimable
position in his house--one that I can best keep by going there as
seldom as possible. The Colonel, and occasionally Miss Ida, too, like to
assuage their anger against Oldendorf and the newspaper by regarding me
as the evil one with horns and hoofs. A relationship so tender must be
handled with care--a devil must not cheapen himself by appearing every
day.

ADELAIDE. Well, I hope you will now abandon this lofty viewpoint. I am
spending the winter in town, and I hope that for love of your boyhood's
friend you will call on my friends as a denizen of this world.

BOLZ. In any role you apportion me.

ADELAIDE. Even in that of a peace-envoy between the Colonel and Oldendorf?

BOLZ. If peace be at the cost of Oldendorf's withdrawal, then no.
Otherwise I am ready to serve you in all good works.

ADELAIDE. But I fear that this is the only price at which peace can be
purchased. You see, Mr. Conrad, we too have become opponents.

BOLZ. To do anything against your wishes is horrible to me, son of perdition
though I be. So my saint wills and commands that Oldendorf do not
become member of Parliament?

ADELAIDE. I will it and command it, Mr. Devil!

BOLZ. It is hard. Up in your heaven you have so many gentlemen to bestow
on Miss Ida; why must you carry off a poor devil's one and only soul, the
professor?

ADELAIDE. It is just the professor I want, and you must let me have
him.

BOLZ. I am in despair. I would tear my hair were the place not so unsuitable.
I dread your anger. The thought makes me tremble that you might not
like this election.

ADELAIDE. Well, try to stop the election, then.

BOLZ. That I cannot do. But so soon as it is over I am fated to mourn
and grow melancholy over your anger. I shall withdraw from the world--far,
far to the North Pole. There I shall end my days sadly, playing dominoes
with polar bears, or spreading the elements of journalistic training
among the seals. That will be easier to endure than the scathing glance
of your eyes.

ADELAIDE (_laughing_). Yes, that's the way you always were. You made every
possible promise and acted exactly as you pleased. But before starting
for the North Pole, perhaps you will make one more effort to reconcile
me here.

[KÄMPE _is seen at the door._]
Hush!--I shall look forward to your visit. Farewell, my re-found
friend!
[_EXIT_.]
BOLZ. And thus my good angel turns her back to me in anger! And
now, politics, thou witch, I am irretrievably in thy power!
[_Exit quickly through centre door._]
_Enter_ PIEPENBRINK, MRS. PIEPENBRINK, BERTHA _escorted by_ FRITZ
KLEINMICHEL, _and_ KLEINMICHEL _through centre door. Quadrille
behind the scenes._
PIEPENBRINK. Thank Heaven, we are out of this crowd!
MRS. PIEPENBRINK. It is very hot.
KLEINMICHEL. And the music is too loud. There are too many trumpets
and I hate trumpets.
PIEPENBRINK. Here's a quiet spot; we'll sit down here.
FRITZ. Bertha would prefer staying in the ball-room. Might I not
go back with her?
PIEPENBRINK. I have no objection to you young people going back
into the ball-room, but I prefer your staying here with us. I like
to keep my whole party together.
MRS. PIEPENBRINK. Stay with your parents, my child!
PIEPENBRINK. Sit down! (_To his wife._) You sit at the corner, Fritz
comes next to me. You take Bertha between you, neighbors. Her place
will soon be at your table, anyway.
[_They seat themselves at the table on the right--at the left corner_
MRS. PIEPENBRINK, _then he himself_, FRITZ, BERTHA, KLEINMICHEL.]

FRITZ. When will "soon" be, godfather? You have been saying that
this long time, but you put off the wedding day further and
further.

PIEPENBRINK. That is no concern of yours.
FRITZ. I should think it is, godfather! Am I not the man that wants
to marry Bertha?
PIEPENBRINK. That's a fine argument! Any one can want that. But
it's I who am to give her to you, which is more to the point, young
man; for it is going to be hard enough for me to let the little
wag-tail leave my nest. So you wait. You shall have her, but
wait!

KLEINMICHEL. He will wait, neighbor.
PIEPENBRINK. Well, I should strongly advise him to do so. Hey!
Waiter, waiter!
[Illustration: _Permission F. Bruckman, A.-G. Munich_ ON THE TERRACE
ADOLF VON MENZEL]
MRS. PIEPENBRINK. What poor service one gets in such places!
PIEPENBRINK. Waiter!

[_Waiter comes._]
My name is Piepenbrink. I brought along six bottles of my own
wine.
The restaurant-keeper has them. I should like them here.
[_While the waiter is bringing the bottles and glasses_ BOLZ _and_
KÄMPE _appear. Waiter from time to time in the background._]
BOLZ (_aside to_ KÄMPE). Which one is it?
KÄMPE. The one with his back to us, the broad-shouldered one.
BOLZ. And what kind of a business does he carry on?
KÄMPE. Chiefly red wines.
BOLZ. Good! (_Aloud._) Waiter, a table and two chairs here! A bottle
of red wine!
[_Waiter brings what has been ordered to the front, on the left._]
MRS. PIEPENBRINK. What are those people doing here?
PIEPENBRINK. That is the trouble with such promiscuous assemblies,
that one never can be alone.
KLEINMICHEL. They seem respectable gentlemen; I think I have seen
one of them before.
PIEPENBRINK (_decisively_). Respectable or not, they are in our
way.

KLEINMICHEL. Yes, to be sure, so they are.
BOLZ (_seating himself with_ KÄMPE). Here, my friend, we can sit
quietly before a bottle of red wine. I hardly dare to pour it out,
for the wine at such restaurants is nearly always abominable. What
sort of stuff do you suppose this will be?
PIEPENBRINK (_irritated_). Indeed? Just listen to that!
KÄMPE. Let's try it.

[_Pours out; in a low voice._]
There is a double P. on the seal; that might mean Piepenbrink.
PIEPENBRINK. Well, I am curious to know what these greenhorns will
have to say against the wine.
MRS. PIEPENBRINK. Be quiet, Philip, they can hear you over there.
BOLZ (_in a low tone_). I'm sure you are right. The restaurant takes
its wine from him. That's his very reason for coming.
PIEPENBRINK. They don't seem to be thirsty; they are not drinking.
BOLZ (_tastes it; aloud_). Not bad!
PIEPENBRINK (_ironically_). Indeed?
BOLZ (_takes another sip_). A good, pure wine.
PIEPENBRINK (_relieved_). The fellow's judgment is not so bad.
BOLZ. But it does not compare with a similar wine that I recently
drank at a friend's house.

PIEPENBRINK. Indeed?
BOLZ. I learned then that there is only one man in town from whom
a sensible wine-drinker should take his red wine.
KÄMPE. And that is?
PIEPENBRINK (_ironically_). I really should like to know.
BOLZ. It's a certain Piepenbrink.
PIEPENBRINK (_nodding his head contentedly_). Good!
KÄMPE. Yes, it is well known to be a very reliable firm.
PIEPENBRINK. They don't know that their own wine, too, is from my
cellars. Ha! Ha! Ha!
BOLZ (_turning to him_). Are you laughing at us, Sir?
PIEPENBRINK. Ha! Ha! Ha! No offense. I merely heard you talking
about the wine. So you like Piepenbrink's wine better than this
here? Ha!
Ha! Ha!
BOLZ (_slightly indignant_). Sir, I must request you to find my
expressions less comical. I do not know Mr. Piepenbrink, but I have
the pleasure of knowing his wine; and so I repeat the assertion
that Piepenbrink has better wine in his cellar than this here. What
do you find to laugh at in that? You do not know Piepenbrink's wines
and have no right to judge of them.
PIEPENBRINK. I do not know Piepenbrink's wines, I do not know Philip
Piepenbrink either, I never saw his wife--do you hear that,
Lottie?--And when his daughter Bertha meets me I ask, "Who is that
little black-head?" That is a funny story. Isn't it,
Kleinmichel?

KLEINMICHEL. It is very funny! [_Laughs._]
BOLZ (_rising with dignity_). Sir, I am a stranger to you and have
never insulted you. You look honorable and I find you in the society
of charming ladies. For that reason I cannot imagine that you came
here to mock at strangers. As man to man, therefore, I request you
to explain why you find my harmless words so astonishing. If you
don't like Mr. Piepenbrink why do you visit it on us?
PIEPENBRINK _(rising_). Don't get too excited, Sir. Now, see here!
The wine you are now drinking is also from Piepenbrink's cellar,
and I myself am the Philip Piepenbrink for whose sake you are
pitching into me. Now, do you see why I laugh?
BOLZ. Ah, is that the way things stand? You yourself are Mr.
Piepenbrink? Then I am really glad to make your acquaintance. No
offense, honored Sir!
PIEPENBRINK. No, no offense. Everything is all right.
BOLZ. Since you were so kind as to tell us your name, the next thing
in order is for you to learn ours. I'm Bolz, Doctor of Philosophy,
and my friend here is Mr. Kämpe.
PIEPENBRINK. Pleased to meet you.
BOLZ. We are comparative strangers in this company and had withdrawn
to this side room as one feels slightly embarrassed among so many
new faces. But we should be very sorry if by our presence we in any
way disturbed the enjoyment of the ladies and the conversation of
so estimable a company. Tell us frankly if we are in the way, and
we will find another place.
PIEPENBRINK. You seem to me a jolly fellow and are not in the least
in my way, Doctor Bolz--that was the name, was it not?
MRS. PIEPENBRINK.The boy, who sat next him, had asked some
questions about the proboscis of the elephant, and Mr. Hervey mentioned
Ives's account of the elephants in India, who have been set to watch young
children, and who draw them back gently with their trunks, when they go
out of bounds. He talked next of the unicorn; and addressing himself to
Dr. X---- and Mr. Percival, he declared that in his opinion Herodotus did
not deserve to be called the father of lies; he cited the mammoth to prove
that the apocryphal chapter in the history of beasts should not be
contemned--that it would in all probability be soon established as true
history. The dessert was on the table before Clarence had done with the
mammoth.

As the butler put a fine dish of cherries upon the table, he said,

"My lady, these cherries are a present from the old gardener to Miss
Delacour."

"Set them before Miss Delacour then," said Lady Anne. "Helena, my dear,
distribute your own cherries."

At the name of Delacour, Clarence Hervey, though his head was still half
full of the mammoth, looked round in astonishment; and when he saw the
cherries placed before the young lady, whose resemblance to Lady Delacour
he had before observed, he could not help exclaiming,

"That young lady then is not a daughter of your ladyship's?"

"No; but I love her as well as if she were," replied Lady Anne.--"What
were you saying about the mammoth?"

"That the mammoth is supposed to be------------" but interrupting himself,
Clarence said in an inquiring tone--"A _niece_ of Lady Delacour's?"

"Her ladyship's _daughter_, sir," said the severe old lady, in a voice
more terrific than her looks.

"Shall I give you some strawberries, Mr. Hervey," said lady Anne, "or will
you let Helena help you to some cherries?"

"Her ladyship's _daughter!_" exclaimed Clarence Hervey in a tone of
surprise.

"Some cherries, sir?" said Helena; but her voice faltered so much, that
she could hardly utter the words.

Clarence perceived that he had been the cause of her agitation, though he
knew not precisely by what means; and he now applied himself in silence to
the picking of his strawberries with great diligence.

The ladies soon afterwards withdrew, and as Mr. Percival did not touch
upon the subject again, Clarence forbore to ask any further questions,
though he was considerably surprised by this sudden discovery. When he
went into the drawing-room to tea, he found his friend, the stern old
lady, speaking in a high declamatory tone. The words which he heard as he
came into the room were--

"If there were no Clarence Herveys, there would be no Lady
Delacours."--Clarence bowed as if he had received a high compliment--the
old lady walked away to an antechamber, fanning herself with great energy.

"Mrs. Margaret Delacour," said Lady Anne, in a low voice to Hervey, "is an
aunt of Lord Delacour's. A woman whose heart is warmer than her temper."

"And that is never cool," said a young lady, who sat next to Lady Anne. "I
call Mrs. Margaret Delacour the volcano; I'm sure I am never in her
company without dreading an eruption. Every now and then out comes with a
tremendous noise, fire, smoke, and rubbish."

"And precious minerals," said Lady Anne, "amongst the rubbish."

"But the best of it is," continued the young lady, "that she is seldom in
a passion without making a hundred mistakes, for which she is usually
obliged afterwards to ask a thousand pardons."

"By that account," said Lady Anne, "which I believe to be just, her
contrition is always ten times as great as her offence."

"Now you talk of contrition, Lady Anne," said Mr. Hervey, "I should think
of my own offences: I am very sorry that my indiscreet questions gave Miss
Delacour any pain--my head was so full of the mammoth, that I blundered on
without seeing what I was about till it was too late."

"Pray, sir," said Mrs. Margaret Delacour, who now returned, and took her
seat upon a sofa, with the solemnity of a person who was going to sit in
judgment upon a criminal, "pray, sir, may I ask how long you have been
acquainted with my Lady Delacour?"

Clarence Hervey took up a book, and with great gravity kissed it, as if he
had been upon his oath in a court of justice, and answered,

"To the best of my recollection, madam, it is now four years since I had
first the pleasure and honour of seeing Lady Delacour."

"And in that time, intimately as you have had the pleasure of being
acquainted with her ladyship, you have never discovered that she had a
daughter?"

"Never," said Mr. Hervey.

"There, Lady Anne!--There!" cried Mrs. Delacour, "will you tell me after
this, that Lady Delacour is not a monster?"

"Every body says that she's a prodigy," said Lady Anne; "and prodigies and
monsters are sometimes thought synonymous terms."

"Such a mother was never heard of," continued Mrs. Delacour, "since the
days of Savage and Lady Macclesfield. I am convinced that she _hates_ her
daughter. Why she never speaks of her--she never sees her--she never
thinks of her!"

"Some mothers speak more than they think of their children, and others
think more than they speak of them," said Lady Anne.

"I always thought," said Mr. Hervey, "that Lady Delacour was a woman of
great sensibility."

"Sensibility!" exclaimed the indignant old lady, "she has no sensibility,
sir--none--none. She who lives in a constant round of dissipation, who
performs no one duty, who exists only for herself; how does she show her
sensibility?--Has she sensibility for her husband--for her daughter--for
any one useful purpose upon earth?--Oh, how I hate the cambric
handkerchief sensibility that is brought out only to weep at a
tragedy!--Yes; Lady Delacour has sensibility enough, I grant ye, when
sensibility is the fashion. I remember well her performing the part of a
nurse with vast applause; and I remember, too, the sensibility she showed,
when the child that she nursed fell a sacrifice to her dissipation. The
second of her children, that she killed--"

"Killed!--Oh! surely, my dear Mrs. Delacour, that is too strong a word,"
said Lady Anne: "you would not make a Medea of Lady Delacour!"

"It would have been better if I had," cried Mrs. Delacour, "I can
understand that there may be such a thing in nature as a jealous wife, but
an unfeeling mother I cannot comprehend--that passes my powers of
imagination."

"And mine, so much," said Lady Anne, "that I cannot believe such a being
to exist in the world--notwithstanding all the descriptions I have heard
of it: as you say, my dear Mrs. Delacour, it passes my powers of
imagination. Let us leave it in Mr. Hervey's apocryphal chapter of
animals, and he will excuse us if I never admit it into true history, at
least without some better evidence than I have yet heard."

"Why, my dear, dear Lady Anne," cried Mrs. Delacour--I've made this coffee
so sweet, there's no drinking it--what evidence would you have?"

"None," said Lady Anne, smiling, "I would have none." "That is to say, you
will take none," said Mrs. Delacour: "but can any thing be stronger
evidence than her ladyship's conduct to _my_ poor Helen--to _your_ Helen,
I should say--for you have educated, you have protected her, you have been
a mother to her. I am an infirm, weak, ignorant, passionate old woman--I
could not have been what you have been to that child--God bless you!--God
will bless you!"

She rose as she spoke, to set down her coffee-cup on the table. Clarence
Hervey took it from her with a look which said much, and which she was
perfectly capable of understanding.

"Young man," said she, "it is very unfashionable to treat age and
infirmity with politeness. I wish that your friend, Lady Delacour, may at
my time of life meet with as much respect, as she has met with admiration
and gallantry in her youth. Poor woman, her head has absolutely been
turned with admiration--and if fame say true, Mr. Hervey has had his share
in turning that head by his flattery."

"I am sure her ladyship has turned mine by her charms," said Clarence;
"and I certainly am not to be blamed for admiring what all the world
admires."

"I wish," said the old lady, "for her own sake, for the sake of her
family, and for the sake of her reputation, that my Lady Delacour had
fewer admirers, and more friends."

"Women who have met with so many admirers, seldom meet with many friends,"
said Lady Anne.

"No," said Mrs. Delacour, "for they seldom are wise enough to know their
value."

"We learn the value of all things, but especially of friends, by
experience," said Lady Anne; "and it is no wonder, therefore, that those
who have little experience of the pleasures of friendship should not be
wise enough to know their value."

"This is very good-natured sophistry; but Lady Delacour is too vain ever
to have a friend," said Mrs. Delacour. "My dear Lady Anne, you don't know
her as well as I do--she has more vanity than ever woman had."

"That is certainly saying a great deal," said Lady Anne; "but then we must
consider, that Lady Delacour, as an heiress, a beauty, and a wit, has a
right to a triple share at least."

"Both her fortune and her beauty are gone; and if she had any wit left, it
is time it should teach her how to conduct herself, I think," said Mrs.
Delacour: "but I give her up--I give her up."

"Oh, no," said Lady Anne, "you must not give her up yet, I have been
informed, and upon _the best authority_, that Lady Delacour was not always
the unfeeling, dissipated fine lady that she now appears to be. This is
only one of the transformations of fashion--the period of her enchantment
will soon be at an end, and she will return to her natural character. I
should not be at all surprised, if Lady Delacour were to appear at once
_la femme comme il y en a pen_."

"Or _la bonne mère_?" said Mrs. Delacour, sarcastically, "after thus
leaving her daughter----"

"_Pour bonne bouche_," interrupted Lady Anne, "when she is tired of the
insipid taste of other pleasures, she will have a higher relish for those
of domestic life, which will be new and fresh to her."

"And so you really think, my dear Lady Anne, that my Lady Delacour will
end by being a domestic woman. Well," said Mrs. Margaret, after taking two
pinches of snuff, "some people believe in the millennium; but I confess I
am not one of them--are you, Mr. Hervey?"

"If it were foretold to me by a good angel," said Clarence, smiling, as
his eye glanced at Lady Anne; "if it were foretold to me by a good angel,
how could I doubt it?"

Here the conversation was interrupted by the entrance of one of Lady
Anne's little boys, who came running eagerly up to his mother, to ask
whether he might have "the sulphurs to show to Helena Delacour. I want to
show her Vertumnus and Pomona, mamma," said he. "Were not the cherries
that the old gardener sent very good?"

"What is this about the cherries and the old gardener, Charles?" said the
young lady who sat beside Lady Anne: "come here and tell me the whole
story."

"I will, but I should tell it you a great deal better another time," said
the boy, "because now Helena's waiting for Vertumnus and Pomona."

"Go then to Helena," said Lady Anne, "and I will tell the story for you."

Then turning to the young lady she began--"Once upon a time there lived an
old gardener at Kensington; and this old gardener had an aloe, which was
older than himself; for it was very near a hundred years of age, and it
was just going to blossom, and the old gardener calculated how much he
might make by showing his aloe, when it should be in full blow, to the
generous public--and he calculated that he might make a 100l.; and with
this 100l. he determined to do more than was ever done with a 100l.
before: but, unluckily, as he was thus reckoning his blossoms before they
were blown, he chanced to meet with a fair damsel, who ruined all his
calculations."

"Ay, Mrs. Stanhope's maid, was not it?" interrupted Mrs. Margaret
Delacour. "A pretty damsel she was, and almost as good a politician as her
mistress. Think of that jilt's tricking this poor old fellow out of his
aloe, and--oh, the meanness of Lady Delacour, to accept of that aloe for
one of her extravagant entertainments!"

"But I always understood that she paid fifty guineas for it," said Lady
Anne.

"Whether she did or not," said Mrs. Delacour, "her ladyship and Mrs.
Stanhope between them were the ruin of this poor old man. He was taken in
to marry that jade of a waiting-maid; she turned out just as you might
expect from a pupil of Mrs. Stanhope's--the match-making Mrs.
Stanhope--you know, sir." (Clarence Hervey changed colour.) "She turned
out," continued Mrs. Delacour, "every thing that was bad--ruined her
husband--ran away from him--and left him a beggar."

"Poor man!" said Clarence Hervey.

"But now," said Lady Anne, "let's come to the best part of the story--mark
how good comes out of evil. If this poor man had not lost his aloe and his
wife, I probably should never have been acquainted with Mrs. Delacour, or
with my little Helena. About the time that the old gardener was left a
beggar, as I happened to be walking one fine evening in Sloane-street, I
met a procession of school-girls--an old man begged from them in a most
moving voice; and as they passed, several of the young ladies threw
halfpence to him. One little girl, who observed that the old man could not
stoop without great difficulty, stayed behind the rest of her companions,
and collected the halfpence which they had thrown to him, and put them
into his hat. He began to tell his story over again to her, and she stayed
so long listening to it, that her companions had turned the corner of the
street, and were out of sight. She looked about in great distress; and I
never shall forget the pathetic voice with which she said, 'Oh! what will
become of me? every body will be angry with me.' I assured her that nobody
should be angry with her, and she gave me her little hand with the utmost
innocent confidence. I took her home to her schoolmistress, and I was so
pleased with the beginning of this acquaintance, that I was determined to
cultivate it. One good acquaintance I have heard always leads to another.
Helena introduced me to her aunt Delacour as her best friend. Mrs.
Margaret Delacour has had the goodness to let her little niece spend the
holidays and all her leisure time with me, so that our acquaintance has
grown into friendship. Helena has become quite one of my family."

"And I am sure she has become quite a different creature since she has
been so much with you," cried Mrs. Delacour; "her spirits were quite
broken by her mother's neglect of her: young as she is, she has a great
deal of real sensibility; but as to her mother's sensibility--"

At the recollection of Lady Delacour's neglect of her child, Mrs. Delacour
was going again to launch forth into indignant invective, but Lady Anne
stopped her, by whispering--

"Take care what you say of the mother, for here is the daughter coming,
and she has, indeed, a great deal of real sensibility."

Helena and her young companions now came into the room, bringing with them
the sulphurs at which they had been looking.

"Mamma," said little Charles Percival, "we have brought the sulphurs to
you, because there are some of them that I don't know."

"Wonderful!" said Lady Anne; "and what is not quite so wonderful, there
are some of them that I don't know."

The children spread the sulphurs upon a little table, and all the company
gathered round it.

"Here are all the nine muses for you," said the least of the boys, who had
taken his seat by Clarence Hervey at dinner; "here are all the muses for
you, Mr. Hervey: which do you like best?--Oh, that's the tragic muse that
you have chosen!--You don't like the tragic better than the comic muse, do
you?"

Clarence Hervey made no answer, for he was at that instant recollecting
how Belinda looked in the character of the tragic muse.

"Has your ladyship ever happened to meet with the young lady who has spent
this winter with Lady Delacour?" said Clarence to Lady Anne.

"I sat near her one night at the opera," said Lady Anne: "she has a
charming countenance."

"Who?--Belinda Portman, do you mean?" said Mrs. Delacour. "I am sure if I
were a young man, I would not trust to the charming countenance of a young
lady who is a pupil of Mrs. Stanhope's, and a friend of--Helena, my dear,
shut the door--the most dissipated woman in London."

"Indeed," said Lady Anne, "Miss Portman is in a dangerous situation; but
some young people learn prudence by being placed in dangerous situations,
as some young horses, I have heard Mr. Percival say, learn to be
sure-footed, by being left to pick their own way on bad roads."

Here Mr. Percival, Dr. X----, and some other gentlemen, came up stairs to
tea, and the conversation took another turn. Clarence Hervey endeavoured
to take his share in it with his usual vivacity, but he was thinking of
Belinda Portman, dangerous situations, stumbling horses, &c; and he made
several blunders, which showed his absence of mind.

"What have you there, Mr. Hervey?" said Dr. X----, looking over his
shoulder--"the tragic muse? This tragic muse seems to rival Lady Delacour
in your admiration."

"Oh," said Clarence, smiling, "you know I was always a votary of the
muses."

"And a favoured votary," said Dr. X----. "I wish for the interests of
literature, that poets may always be lovers, though I cannot say that I
desire lovers should always be poets. But, Mr. Hervey, you must never
marry, remember," continued Dr. X----, "never--for your true poet must
always be miserable. You know Petrarch tells us, he would not have been
happy if he could; he would not have married his mistress if it had been
in his power; because then there would have been an end of his beautiful
sonnets."

"Every one to his taste," said Clarence; "for my part I have even less
ambition to imitate the heroism than hope of being inspired with the
poetic genius of Petrarch. I have no wish to pass whole nights composing
sonnets. I would (am I not right, Mr. Percival?) infinitely rather be a
slave of the ring than a slave of the lamp."

Here the conversation ended; Clarence took his leave, and Mrs. Margaret
Delacour said, the moment he had left the room, "Quite a different sort of
young man from what I had expected to see!"


CHAPTER IX.

ADVICE.


The next morning Mr. Hervey called on Dr. X------, and begged that he
would accompany him to Lady Delacour's.

"To be introduced to your tragic muse?" said the doctor.

"Yes," said Mr. Hervey: "I must have your opinion of her before I devote
myself."

"My opinion! but of whom?--Of Lady Delacour?"

"No; but of a young lady whom you will see with her."

"Is she handsome?"

"Beautiful!"

"And young?"

"And young."

"And graceful?"

"The most graceful person you ever beheld."

"Young, beautiful, graceful; then the deuce take me," said Dr. X------,
"if I give you my opinion of her: for the odds are, that she has a
thousand faults, at least, to balance these perfections."

"A thousand faults! a charitable allowance," said Clarence, smiling.

"There now," said Dr. X------

    'Touch him, and no minister's so sore.'

To punish you for wincing at my first setting out, I promise you, that
if the lady have a million of faults, each of them high as huge Olympus, I
will see them as with the eye of a flatterer-not of a friend."

"I defy you to be so good or so bad as your word, doctor," said Hervey.
"You have too much wit to make a good flatterer."

"And perhaps you think too much to make a good friend," said Dr. X----.

"Not so," said Clarence: "I would at any time rather be cut by a sharp
knife than by a blunt one. But, my dear doctor, I hope you will not be
prejudiced against Belinda, merely because she is with Lady Delacour; for
to my certain knowledge, she in not under her ladyship's influence. She
judges and acts for herself, of which I have had an instance."

"Very possibly!" interrupted Dr. X----. "But before we go any farther,
will you please to tell me of what Belinda you are talking?"

"Belinda Portman. I forgot that I had not told you."

"Miss Portman, a niece of Mrs. Stanhope's?"

"Yes, but do not be prejudiced against her on that account," said
Clarence, eagerly, "though I was at first myself."

"Then you will excuse my following your example instead of your precepts."

"No," said Clarence, "for my precepts are far better than my example."

Lady Delacour received Dr. X---- most courteously, and thanked Mr. Hervey
for introducing to her a gentleman with whom she had long desired to
converse. Dr. X---- had a great literary reputation, and she saw that he
was a perfectly well-bred man; consequently she was ambitious of winning
his admiration. She perceived also that he had considerable influence with
Clarence Hervey, and this was a sufficient reason to make her wish for his
good opinion. Belinda was particularly pleased with his manners and
conversation; she saw that he paid her much attention, and she was
desirous that he should think favourably of her; but she had the good
sense and good taste to avoid a display of her abilities and
accomplishments. A sensible man, who has any knowledge of the world and
talents for conversation, can easily draw out the knowledge of those with
whom he converses. Dr. X------possessed this power in a superior degree?

"Well," cried Clarence, when their visit was over, "what is your opinion
of Lady Delacour?"

"I am 'blasted with excess of light,'" said the doctor.

"Her ladyship is certainly very brilliant," said Clarence, "but I hope
that Miss Portman did not overpower you."

"No--I turned my eyes from Lady Delacour upon Miss Portman, as a painter
turns his eyes upon mild green, to rest them, when they have been dazzled
by glaring colours.

   'She yields her charms of mind with sweet delay.'"

"I was afraid," said Hervey, "that you might think her manners too
reserved and cold: they are certainly become more so than they used to be.
But so much the better; by and by we shall find beautiful flowers spring
up from beneath the snow.'"

"A very poetical hope," said Dr. X------; "but in judging of the human
character, we must not entirely trust to analogies and allusions taken
from the vegetable creation."

"What!" cried Clarence Hervey, looking eagerly in the doctor's eyes, "what
do you mean? I am afraid you do not approve of Belinda."

"Your fears are almost as precipitate as your hopes, my good sir: but to
put you out of pain, I will tell you, that I approve of all I have seen of
this young lady, but that it is absolutely out of my power to form a
decisive judgment of a woman's temper and character in the course of a
single morning visit. Women, you know, as well as men, often speak with
one species of enthusiasm, and act with another. I must see your Belinda
act, I must study her, before I can give you my final judgment. Lady
Delacour has honoured me with her commands to go to her as often as
possible. For your sake, my dear Hervey, I shall obey her ladyship most
punctually, that I may have frequent opportunities of seeing your Miss
Portman."

Clarence expressed his gratitude with much energy, for this instance of
the doctor's friendship. Belinda, who had been entertained by Dr.
X------'s conversation during this first visit, was more and more
delighted with his company as she became more acquainted with his
understanding and character. She felt that he unfolded her powers, and
that with the greatest politeness and address he raised her confidence in
herself, without ever descending to flattery. By degrees she learned to
look upon him as a friend; she imparted to him with great ingenuousness
her opinions on various subjects, and she was both amused and instructed
by his observations on the characters and manners of the company who
frequented Lady Delacour's assemblies. She did not judge of the doctor's
sincerity merely by the kindness he showed her, but by his conduct towards
others.

One night, at a select party at Lady Delacour's, a Spanish gentleman was
amusing the company with some anecdotes, to prove the extraordinary
passion which some of his countrymen formerly showed for the game of
chess. He mentioned families, in which unfinished games, bequeathed by
will, had descended from father to son, and where victory was doubtful for
upwards of a century.

Mr. Hervey observed, that gaining a battle was, at that time, so common to
the court of Spain, that a victory at chess seemed to confer more _éclat_;
for that an abbé, by losing adroitly a game at chess to the Spanish
minister, obtained a cardinal's hat.

The foreigner was flattered by the manner in which Hervey introduced this
slight circumstance, and he directed to him his conversation, speaking in
French and Italian successively; he was sufficiently skilled in both
languages, but Clarence spoke them better. Till he appeared, the foreigner
was the principal object of attention, but he was soon eclipsed by Mr.
Hervey. Nothing amusing or instructive that could be said upon the game of
chess escaped him, and the literary ground, which the slow Don would have
taken some hours to go regularly over, our hero traversed in a few
minutes. From Twiss to Vida, from Irwin to Sir William Jones, from Spain
to India, he passed with admirable celerity, and seized all that could
adorn his course from Indian Antiquities or Asiatic Researches.

By this display of knowledge he surprised even his friend Dr. X----. The
ladies admired his taste as a poet, the gentlemen his accuracy as a
critic; Lady Delacour loudly applauded, and Belinda silently approved.
Clarence was elated. The Spanish gentleman, to whom he had just quoted a
case in point from Vida's Scacchia, asked him if he were as perfect in the
practice as in the theory of the game. Clarence was too proud of excelling
in every thing to decline the Spaniard's challenge. They sat down to
chess. Lady Delacour, as they ranged the pieces on the board, cried,
"Whoever wins shall be my knight; and a silver chess-man shall be his
prize. Was it not Queen Elizabeth who gave a silver chess-man to one of
her courtiers as a mark of her royal favour? I am ashamed to imitate such
a pedantic coquet--but since I have said it, how can I retract?"

"Impossible! impossible!" cried Clarence Hervey: "a silver chess-man be
our prize; and if I win it, like the gallant Raleigh, I will wear it in my
cap; and what proud Essex shall dare to challenge it?"

The combat now began--the spectators were silent. Clarence made an error
in his first move, for his attention was distracted by seeing Belinda
behind his adversary's chair. The Spaniard was deceived by this mistake
into a contemptuous opinion of his opponent--Belinda changed her
place--Clarence recovered his presence of mind, and convinced him that he
was not a man to be despised. The combat was long doubtful, but at length
to the surprise of all present, Clarence Hervey was victorious.

Exulting in his success, he looked round for Lady Delacour, from whom he
expected the honours of his triumph. She had left the room, but soon she
returned, dressed in the character of Queen Elizabeth, in which she had
once appeared at a masquerade, with a large ruff, and all the costume of
the times.

Clarence Hervey, throwing himself at her feet, addressed her in that
high-flown style which her majesty was wont to hear from the gallant
Raleigh, or the accomplished Essex.

Soon the coquetry of the queen entirely conquered her prudery; and the
favoured courtier, evidently elated by his situation, was as enthusiastic
as her majesty's most insatiable vanity could desire. The characters were
well supported; both the actor and actress were highly animated, and
seemed so fully possessed by their parts as to be insensible to the
comments that were made upon the scene. Clarence Hervey was first recalled
to himself by the deep blush which he saw on Belinda's cheek, when Queen
Elizabeth addressed her as one of her maids of honour, of whom she
affected to be jealous. He was conscious that he had been hurried by the
enthusiasm of the moment farther than he either wished or intended. It was
difficult to recede, when her majesty seemed disposed to advance; but Sir
Walter Raleigh, with much presence of mind, turned to the foreigner, whom
he accosted as the Spanish ambassador.

"Your excellency sees," said he, "how this great queen turns the heads of
her faithful subjects, and afterwards has the art of paying them with
nothing but words. Has the new world afforded you any coin half so
valuable?"

The Spanish gentleman's grave replies to this playful question gave a new
turn to the conversation, and relieved Clarence Hervey from his
embarrassment. Lady Delacour, though still in high spirits, was easily
diverted to other objects. She took the Spaniard with her to the next
room, to show him a picture of Mary, Queen of Scots. The company followed
her--Clarence Hervey remained with Dr. X---- and Belinda, who had just
asked the doctor, to teach her the moves at chess.

"Lady Delacour has charming spirits," said Clarence Hervey; "they inspire
every body with gaiety."

"Every body! they incline me more to melancholy than mirth," said Dr.
X----. "These high spirits do not seem quite natural. The vivacity of
youth and of health, Miss Portman, always charms me; but this gaiety of
Lady Delacour's does not appear to me that of a sound mind in a sound
body."

The doctor's penetration went so near the truth, that Belinda, afraid of
betraying her friend's secrets, never raised her eyes from the chess-board
whilst he spoke, but went on setting up the fallen castles, and bishops,
and kings, with expeditious diligence.

"You are putting the bishop into the place of the knight," said Clarence.

"Lady Delacour," continued the doctor, "seems to be in a perpetual fever,
either of mind or body--I cannot tell which--and as a professional man, I
really have some curiosity to determine the question. If I could feel her
pulse, I could instantly decide; but I have heard her say that she has a
horror against having her pulse felt, and a lady's horror is invincible,
by reason--"

"But not by address," said Clarence. "I can tell you a method of counting
her pulse, without her knowing it, without her seeing you, without your
seeing her."

"Indeed!" said Dr. X----, smiling; "that may be a useful secret in my
profession; pray impart it to me--you who excel in every thing."

"Are you in earnest, Mr. Hervey?" said Belinda.

"Perfectly in earnest--my secret is quite simple. Look through the door at
the shadow of Queen Elizabeth's ruff--observe how it vibrates; the motion
as well as the figure is magnified in the shadow. Cannot you count every
pulsation distinctly?"

"I can," said Dr. X----, "and I give you credit for making an ingenious
use of a trifling observation." The doctor paused and looked round. "Those
people cannot hear what we are saying, I believe?"

"Oh, no," said Belinda, "they are intent upon themselves." Doctor X----
fixed his eyes mildly upon Clarence Hervey, and exclaimed in an earnest
friendly tone--"What a pity, Mr. Hervey, that a young man of your talents
and acquirements, a man who might be any thing, should--pardon the
expression--choose to be--nothing; should waste upon petty objects powers
suited to the greatest; should lend his soul to every contest for
frivolous superiority, when the same energy concentrated might ensure
honourable pre-eminence among the first men in his country. Shall he who
might not only distinguish himself in any science or situation, who might
not only acquire personal fame, but, oh, far more noble motive! who might
be permanently useful to his fellow-creatures, content himself with being
the evanescent amusement of a drawing-room?--Shall one, who might be great
in public, or happy in private life, waste in this deplorable manner the
best years of his existence--time that can never be recalled?--This is
declamation!--No: it is truth put into the strongest language that I have
power to use, in the hope of making some impression: I speak from my
heart, for I have a sincere regard for you, Mr. Hervey, and if I have been
impertinent, you must forgive me."

"Forgive you!" cried Clarence Hervey, taking Dr. X---- by the hand, "I
think you a real friend; you shall have the best thanks not in words, but
in actions: you have roused my ambition, and I will pursue noble ends by
noble means. A few years have been sacrificed; but the lessons that they
have taught me remain. I cannot, presumptuous as lam, flatter myself that
my exertions can be of any material utility to my fellow-creatures, but
what I can do I will, my excellent friend! If I be hereafter either
successful in public, or happy in private life, it is to you I shall owe
it."

Belinda was touched by the candour and good sense with which Clarence
Hervey spoke. His character appeared in a new light: she was proud of her
own judgment, in having discerned his merit, and for a moment she
permitted herself to feel "unreproved pleasure in his company."

The next morning, Sir Philip Baddely and Mr. Rochfort called at Lady
Delacour's--Mr. Hervey was present--her ladyship was summoned to Mrs.
Franks, and Belinda was left with these gentlemen."

"Why, damme, Clary! you have been a lost man," cried Sir Philip, "ever
since you were drowned. Damme, why did not you come to dine with us that
day, now I recollect it? We were all famously merry; but for your comfort,
Clarence, we missed you cursedly, and were damned sorry you ever took that
unlucky jump into the Serpentine river--damned sorry, were not we,
Rochfort?"

"Oh," said Clarence, in an ironical tone, "you need no vouchers to
convince me of the reality of your sorrow. You know I can never forget
your jumping so courageously into the river, to save the life of your
friend."

"Oh, pooh! damn it," said Sir Philip, "what signifies who pulled you out,
now you are safe and sound? By-the-bye, Clary, did you ever quiz that
doctor, as I desired you? No, that I'm sure you didn't; but I think he has
made a quiz of you: for, damme, I believe you have taken such a fancy to
the old quizzical fellow, that you can't live without him. Miss Portman,
don't you admire Hervey's taste?"

"In this instance I certainly do admire Mr. Hervey's taste," said Belinda,
"for the best of all possible reasons, because it entirely agrees with my
own."

"Very extraordinary, faith," said Sir Philip.

"And what the devil can you find to like in him, Clary?" continued Mr.
Rochfort, "for one wouldn't be so rude to put that question to a lady.
Ladies, you know, are never to be questioned about their likings and
dislikings. Some have pet dogs, some have pet cats: then why not a _pet
quiz?_"

"Ha! ha! ha! that's a good one, Rochfort--a pet quiz!--Ha! ha! ha! Dr.
X---- shall be Miss Portman's pet quiz. Put it about, put it about,
Rochfort," continued the witty baronet, and be and his facetious companion
continued to laugh as long as they possibly could at this happy hit.

Belinda, without being in the least discomposed by their insolent folly,
as soon as they had finished laughing, very coolly observed, that she
could have no objection to give her reasons for preferring Dr. X-----'s
company but for fear they might give offence to Sir Philip and his
friends. She then defended the doctor with so much firmness, and yet with
so much propriety, that Clarence Hervey was absolutely enchanted with her,
and with his own penetration in having discovered her real character,
notwithstanding her being Mrs. Stanhope's niece.

"I never argue, for my part," cried Mr. Rochfort: "'pon honour, 'tis a
deal too much trouble. A lady, a handsome lay, I mean, is always in the
right with me."

"But as to you, Hervey," said Sir Philip, "damme, do you know, my boy,
that our club has come to a determination to black-ball you, if you keep
company with this famous doctor?"

"Your club, Sir Philip, will do me honour by such an ostracism."

"Ostracism!" repeated Sir Philip.--"In plain English, does that mean that
you choose to be black-balled by us? Why, damn it, Clary, you'll be
nobody. But follow your own genius--damn me, if I take it upon me to
understand your men of genius--they are in the Serpentine river one day,
and in the clouds the next: so fare ye well, Clary. I expect to see you a
doctor of physic, or a methodist parson, soon, damn me if I don't: so fare
ye well, Clary. Is black-ball your last word? or will you think better
on't, and give up the doctor?"

"I can never give up Dr. X----'s friendship--I would sooner be
black-balled by every club in London. The good lesson you gave me, Sir
Philip, the day I was fool enough to jump into the Serpentine river, has
made me wiser for life. I know, for I have felt, the difference between
real friends and fashionable acquaintance. Give up Dr. X----! Never!
never!"

"Then fare you well, Clary," said Sir Philip, "you're no longer one of
us."

"Then fare ye well, Clary, you're no longer the man for me," said
Rochfort.

"_Tant pis_, and _tant mieux_" said Clarence, and so they parted.

As they left the room, Clarence Hervey involuntarily turned to Belinda,
and he thought that he read in her ingenuous, animated countenance, full
approbation of his conduct.

"Hist! are they gone? quite gone?" said Lady Delacour, entering the room
from an adjoining apartment; "they have stayed an unconscionable time. How
much I am obliged to Mrs. Franks for detaining me! I have escaped their
vapid impertinence; and in truth, this morning I have such a multiplicity
of business, that I have scarcely a moment even for wit and Clarence
Hervey. Belinda, my dear, will you have the charity to look over some of
these letters for me, which, as Marriott tells me, have been lying in my
writing-table this week--expecting, most unreasonably, that I should have
the grace to open them? We are always punished for our indolence, as your
friend Dr. X---- said the other day: if we suffer business to accumulate,
it drifts with every ill wind like snow, till at last an avalanche of it
comes down at once, and quite overwhelms us. Excuse me, Clarence,"
continued her ladyship, as she opened her letters, "this is very rude: but
I know I have secured my pardon from you by remembering your friend's
wit--wisdom, I should say: how seldom are wit and wisdom joined! They
might have been joined in Lady Delacour, perhaps--there's vanity!--if she
had early met with such a friend as Dr. X----; but it's too late now,"
said she, with a deep sigh.

Clarence Hervey heard it, and it made a great impression upon his
benevolent imagination. "Why too late?" said he to himself. "Mrs. Margaret
Delacour is mistaken, if she thinks this woman wants sensibility."

"What have you got there, Miss Portman?" said Lady Delacour, taking from
Belinda's hand one of the letters which she had begged her to look over:
"something wondrous pathetic, I should guess, by your countenance.
'_Helena Delacour_.' Oh! read it to yourself, my dear--a school-girl's
letter is a thing I abominate--I make it a rule never to read Helena's
epistles."

"Let me prevail upon your ladyship to make an exception to the general
rule then," said Belinda; "I can assure you this is not a common
school-girl's letter: Miss Delacour seems to inherit her mother's
'_eloquence de billet_.'"

"Miss Portman seems to possess, by inheritance, by instinct, by magic, or
otherwise, powers of persuasion, which no one can resist. There's
compliment for compliment, my dear. Is there any thing half so well turned
in Helena's letter? Really, 'tis vastly well," continued her ladyship, as
she read the letter: "where did the little gipsy learn to write so
charmingly? I protest I should like of all things to have her at home with
me this summer--the 21st of June--well, after the birthday, I shall have
time to think about it. But then, we shall be going out of town, and at
Harrowgate I should not know what to do with her; she had better, much
better, go to her humdrum Aunt Margaret's, as she always does--she is a
fixture in Grosvenor-square. These stationary good people, these zoophite
friends, are sometimes very convenient; and Mrs. Margaret Delacour is the
most unexceptionable zoophite in the creation. She has, it is true, an
antipathy to me, because I'm of such a different nature from herself; but
then her antipathy does not extend to my offspring: she is kind beyond
measure to Helena, on purpose, I believe, to provoke me. Now I provoke her
in my turn, by never being provoked, and she saves me a vast deal of
trouble, for which she is overpaid by the pleasure of abusing me. This is
the way of the world, Clarence. Don't look so serious--you are not come
yet to daughters and sons, and schools and holidays, and all the evils of
domestic life."

"Evils!" repeated Clarence Hervey, in a tone which surprised her ladyship.
She looked immediately with a significant smile at Belinda. "Why do not
you echo _evils_, Miss Portman?"

"Pray, Lady Delacour," interrupted Clarence Hervey, "when do you go to
Harrowgate?"

"What a sudden transition!" said Lady Delacour. "What association of ideas
could just at that instant take you to Harrowgate?  When do I go to
Harrowgate? Immediately after the birthday, I believe we shall--I advise
you to be of the party."

"Your ladyship does me a great deal of honour," said Hervey: "I shall, if
it be possible, do myself the honour of attending you."

And soon after this arrangement was made, Mr. Hervey took his leave.

"Well, my dear, are you still poring over that letter of Helena's?" said
Lady Delacour to Miss Portman.

"I fancy your ladyship did not quite finish it," said Belinda.

"No; I saw something about the Leverian Museum, and a swallow's nest in a
pair of garden-shears; and I was afraid I was to have a catalogue of
curiosities, for which I have little taste and less time."

"You did not see, then, what Miss Delacour says of the lady who took her
to that Museum?"

"Not I. What lady? her Aunt Margaret?"

"No; Mrs. Margaret Delacour, she says, has been so ill for some time past,
that she goes no where but to Lady Anne Percival's."

"Poor woman," said Lady Delacour, "she will die soon, and then I shall
have Helena upon my hands, unless some other kind friend takes a fancy to
her. Who is this lady that has carried her to the Leverian Museum?"

"Lady Anne Percival; of whom she speaks with so much gratitude and
affection, that I quite long----"

"Lord bless me!" interrupted Lady Delacour, "Lady Anne Percival! Helena
has mentioned this Lady Anne Percival to me before, I recollect, in some
of her letters."

"Then you did read some of her letters?"

"Half!--I never read more than half, upon my word," said Lady Delacour,
laughing.

"Why will you delight in making yourself appear less good than you are, my
dear Lady Delacour?" said Belinda, taking her hand.

"Because I hate to be like other people," said her ladyship, "who delight
in making themselves appear better than they are. But I was going to tell
you, that I do believe I did provoke Percival by marrying Lord Delacour: I
cannot tell you how much this Mea delights me--I am sure that the man has
a lively remembrance of me, or else he would never make his wife take so
much notice of my daughter."

"Surely, your ladyship does not think," said Belinda, "that a wife is a
being whose actions are necessarily governed by a husband."

"Not necessarily--but accidentally. When a lady accidentally sets up for
being a good wife, she must of course love, honour, and obey. Now, you
understand, I am not in the least obliged to Lady Anne for her kindness to
Helena, because it all goes under the head of obedience, in my
imagination; and her ladyship is paid for it by an accession of character:
she has the reward of having it said, 'Oh, Lady Anne Percival is the best
wife in the world!'--'Oh, Lady Anne Percival is quite a pattern woman!' I
hate pattern women. I hope I may never see Lady Anne; for I'm sure I
should detest her beyond all things living--Mrs. Luttridge not excepted."

Belinda was surprised and shocked at the malignant vehemence with which
her ladyship uttered these words; it was in vain, however, that she
remonstrated on the injustice of predetermining to detest Lady Anne,
merely because she had shown kindness to Helena, and because she bore a
high character. Lady Delacour was a woman who never listened to reason, or
who listened to it only that she might parry it by wit. Upon this
occasion, her wit had not its usual effect upon Miss Portman; instead of
entertaining, it disgusted her.

"You have called me your friend, Lady Delacour," said she; "I should but
ill deserve that name, if I had not the courage to speak the truth to
you--if I had not the courage to tell you when I think you are wrong."

"But I have not the courage to hear you, my dear," said Lady Delacour,
stopping her ears. "So your conscience may be at ease; you may suppose
that you have said every thing that is wise, and good, and proper, and
sublime, and that you deserve to be called the best of friends; you shall
enjoy the office of censor to Lady Delacour, and welcome; but remember, it
is a sinecure place, though I will pay you with my love and esteem to any
extent you please. You sigh--for my folly. Alas! my dear, 'tis hardly
worth while--my follies will soon be at an end. Of what use could even the
wisdom of Solomon be to me now? If you have any humanity, you will not
force me to reflect: whilst I yet live, I must _keep it up_ with incessant
dissipation--the teetotum keeps upright only while it spins: so let us
talk of the birthnight, or the new play that we are to see to-night, or
the ridiculous figure Lady H---- made at the concert; or let us talk of
Harrowgate, or what you will."

Pity succeeded to disgust and displeasure in Belinda's mind, and she could
hardly refrain from tears, whilst she saw this unhappy creature, with
forced smiles, endeavour to hide the real anguish of her soul: she could
only say, "But, my dear Lady Delacour, do not you think that your little
Helena, who seems to have a most affectionate disposition, would add to
your happiness at home?"

"Her affectionate disposition can be nothing to me," said Lady Delacour.

Belinda felt a hot tear drop upon her hand, which lay upon Lady Delacour's
lap.

"Can you wonder," continued her ladyship, hastily wiping away the tear
which she had let fall; "can you wonder that I should talk of detesting
Lady Anne Percival? You see she has robbed me of the affections of my
child. Helena asks to come home: yes, but how does she ask it? Coldly,
formally,--as a duty. But look at the end of her letter; I have read it
all--every bitter word of it I have tasted. How differently she
writes--look even at the flowing hand--the moment she begins to speak of
Lady Anne Percival; then her soul breaks out: 'Lady Anne has offered to
take her to Oakly-park--she should be extremely happy to go, if I please.'
Yes, let her go; let her go as far from me as possible; let her never,
never see her wretched mother more!--Write," said Lady Delacour, turning
hastily to Belinda, "write in my name, and tell her to go to Oakly-park,
and to be happy."

"But why should you take it for granted that she cannot be happy with
you?" said Belinda. "Let us see her--let us try the experiment."

"No," said Lady Delacour; "no--it is too late: I will never condescend in
my last moments to beg for that affection to which it may be thought I
have forfeited my natural claim."

Pride, anger, and sorrow, struggled in her countenance as she spoke. She
turned her face from Belinda, and walked out of the room with dignity.

Nothing remains for me to do, thought Belinda, but to sooth this haughty
spirit: all other hope, I see, is vain.

At this moment Clarence Hervey, who had no suspicion that the gay,
brilliant Lady Delacour was sinking into the grave, had formed a design
worthy of his ardent and benevolent character. The manner in which her
ladyship had spoken of his friend Dr. X------, the sigh which she gave at
the reflection that she might have been a very different character if she
had early had a sensible friend, made a great impression upon Mr. Hervey.
Till then, he had merely considered her ladyship as an object of
amusement, and an introduction to high life; but he now felt so much
interested for her, that he determined to exert all his influence to
promote her happiness. He knew _that_ influence to be considerable: not
that he was either coxcomb or dupe enough to imagine that Lady Delacour
was in love with him; he was perfectly sensible that her only wish was to
obtain his admiration, and he resolved to show her that it could no longer
be secured without deserving his esteem. Clarence Hervey was a thoroughly
generous young man: capable of making the greatest sacrifices, when
encouraged by the hope of doing good, he determined to postpone the
declaration of his attachment to Belinda, that he might devote himself
entirely to his new project. His plan was to wean Lady Delacour by degrees
from dissipation, by attaching her to her daughter, and to Lady Anne
Percival. He was sanguine in all his hopes, and rapid, but not unthinking,
in all his decisions. From Lady Delacour he went immediately to Dr.
X------, to whom he communicated his designs.

Ah dear Antonia, shall I appreciate What you do for me? (He kisses her
hands.)
Your father will perhaps return.

I leave you... until to-morrow.

ANTONIA.

Until to-morrow.

(Hoffman goes out.)

ANTONIA (opening one of the doors).

Of my father easily he has become the accomplice, But come, regrets are
superfluous, I promised him. I shall sing no more.

(She falls in a chair.)

MIRACLE (appearing suddenly behind her.)

You will sing no more.

Do you know what a sacrifice?
He imposes on your youth, and have you measured it?
Grace, beauty, talent, sacred gift; All these blessings that heaven
gave for your share, Must they be hid in the shadow of a household?
Have you not heard, in a proud dream, Like unto a forest by the wind moving,
Like a soft shiver of the pressing crowd That murmurs your name and follows
you with its eyes?
There is the ardent joy and the eternal festival, That the flower of your
years is about to abandon, For the middle class pleasures where they
would enchain you, And the squalling children who will give you
less beauty!

ANTONIA (without turning round).

Ah, what is this voice that troubles my spirit?
Is it Hell that speaks or Heaven that warns me?
No! happiness is not there, oh cursed voice, And against my pride my
love has armed me; Glory is not worth the happy shade whence invites
me The house of my beloved.

MIRACLE.

What loves can now be yours, Hoffman sacrifices you to his brutality, He
only loves in you your beauty, And for him as for the others.
Soon will come the time of infidelity.

(He disappears.)

ANTONIA (rising).
No, do not tempt me! go away, Demon! I will no longer listen.
I have sworn to be his, my beloved awaits me, I'm no longer my own
and I can't take myself back; And a few moments since, on his heart
adored What eternal love did he not pledge me; Who will save me
from the demon, from myself?
My mother, my mother, I love her.
(She falls weeping on the clavichord.)
MIRACLE (re-appears behind Antonia)
Your mother? Dare you invoke her?
Your mother? But is it not she?
Who speaks by my voice ingrate, and recalls to you The splendor of
the name that you would abdicate?
(The portrait lights up and becomes animated.) 
Listen!
THE VOICE.

Antonia!

ANTONIA.

Heavens!... my mother, my mother!
THE GHOST.
Dear child whom I call, As I used to do, 'Tis your mother, 'tis
she, Listen to her voice.

ANTONIA.

Mother!

MIRACLE.
Yes, yes, 'tis her voice, do you hear?
Her voice, best counselor, Who leaves you a talent the world has
lost!

THE GHOST.

Antonia!

MIRACLE.
Listen! She seems to live aagin, And the distant public by its
bravos fills her bliss.

ANTONIA.

Mother!

GHOST.

Antonia!

MIRACLE.
Join with her.

ANTONIA.
Yes, her soul calls me As before; 'Tis my mother, 'tis she I hear
her voice.

THE GHOST.
Dear child whom I call As I used to do; 'Tis your mother, 'tis she;
List to her voice.

ANTONIA.

No, enough, I cannot!

MIRACLE.

Again.

ANTONIA.
I will sing no more.

MIRACLE.

Again.

ANTONIA.
What ardor draws and devours me?

MIRACLE.

Again! Why stop?
ANTONIA (out of breath).
I give way to a transport that maddens, What flame is it dazzles
my eyes A single moment to live, And my soul flies to Heaven.Her time
passed so agreeably during Lady Delacour's absence, that she was surprised
when she heard the clock strike twelve.

"Is it possible," thought she, "that I have spent two hours by myself in a
library without being tired of my existence?--How different are my
feelings now from what they would have been in the same circumstances six
months ago!--I should then have thought the loss of a birthnight ball a
mighty trial of temper. It is singular, that my having spent a winter with
one of the most dissipated women in England should have sobered my mind so
completely. If I had never seen the utmost extent of the pleasures of the
world, as they are called, my imagination might have misled me to the end
of my life; but now I can judge from my own experience, and I am convinced
that the life of a fine lady would never make me happy. Dr. X---- told me,
the other day, that he thinks me formed for something better, and he is
incapable of flattery."

The idea of Clarence Hervey was so intimately connected with that of his
friend, that Miss Portman could seldom separate them in her imagination;
and she was just beginning to reflect upon the manner in which Clarence
looked, whilst he declared to Sir Philip Baddely, that he would never give
up Dr. X----, when she was startled by the entrance of Marriott.

"Oh, Miss Portman, what shall we do? what shall we do?-My lady! my poor
lady!" cried she.

"What is the matter?" said Belinda.

"The horses--the young horses!--Oh, I wish my lady had never seen them.
Oh, my lady, my poor lady, what will become of her?"

It was some minutes before Belinda could obtain from Marriott any
intelligible account of what had happened.

"All I know, ma'am, is what James has just told me," said Marriott. "My
lady gave the coachman orders upon no account to let Mrs. Luttridge's
carriage get before hers. Mrs. Luttridge's coachman would not give up the
point either. My lady's horses were young and ill broke, they tell me, and
there was no managing of them no ways. The carriages got somehow across
one another, and my lady was overturned, and all smashed to atoms. Oh,
ma'am," continued Marriott, "if it had not been for Mr. Hervey, they say,
my lady would never have been got out of the crowd alive. He's bringing
her home in his own carriage, God bless him!"

"But is Lady Delacour hurt?" cried Belinda.

"She _must_,--to be sure, she must, ma'am," cried Marriott, putting her
hand upon her bosom. "But let her be ever so much hurt, my lady will keep
it to herself: the footmen swear she did not give a scream, not a single
scream; so it's their opinion she was no ways hurt--but that, I know,
can't be--and, indeed, they are thinking so much about the carriage, that
they can't give one any rational account of any thing; and, as for myself,
I'm sure I'm in such a flutter. Lord knows, I advised my lady not to go
with the young horses, no later than--"

"Hark!" cried Belinda, "here they are." She ran down stairs instantly. The
first object that she saw was Lady Delacour in convulsions--the
street-door was open--the hall was crowded with servants. Belinda made her
way through them, and, in a calm voice, requested that Lady Delacour might
immediately be brought to her own dressing-room, and that she should there
be left to Marriott's care and hers. Mr. Hervey assisted in carrying Lady
Delacour--she came to her senses as they were taking her up stairs. "Set
me down, set me down," she exclaimed: "I am not hurt--I am quite
well,--Where's Marriott? Where's Miss Portman?"

"Here we are--you shall be carried quite safely--trust to me," said
Belinda, in a firm tone, "and do not struggle."

Lady Delacour submitted: she was in agonizing pain, but her fortitude was
so great that she never uttered a groan. It was the constraint which she
had put upon herself, by endeavouring not to scream, which threw her into
convulsions. "She is hurt--I am sure she is hurt, though she will not
acknowledge it," cried Clarence Hervey. "My ankle is sprained, that's
all," said Lady Delacour--"lay me on this sofa, and leave me to Belinda."

"What's all this?" cried Lord Delacour, staggering into the room: he was
much intoxicated, and in this condition had just come home, as they were
carrying Lady Delacour up stairs: he could not be made to understand the
truth, but as soon as he heard Clarence Hervey's voice, he insisted upon
going up to _his wife's_ dressing-room. It was a very unusual thing, but
neither Champfort nor any one else could restrain him, the moment that he
had formed this idea; he forced his way into the room.

"What's all this?--Colonel Lawless!" said he, addressing himself to
Clarence Hervey, whom, in the confusion of his mind, he mistook for the
colonel, the first object of his jealousy. "Colonel Lawless," cried his
lordship, "you are a villain. I always knew it."

"Softly!--she's in great pain, my lord," said Belinda, catching Lord
Delacour's arm, just as he was going to strike Clarence Hervey. She led
him to the sofa where Lady Delacour lay, and uncovering her ankle, which
was much swelled, showed it to him. His lordship, who was a humane man,
was somewhat moved by this appeal to his remaining senses, and he began
roaring as loud as he possibly could for arquebusade.

Lady Delacour rested her head upon the back of the sofa, her hands moved
with convulsive twitches--she was perfectly silent. Marriott was in a
great bustle, running backwards and forwards for she knew not what, and
continually repeating, "I wish nobody would come in here but Miss Portman
and me. My lady says nobody must come in. Lord bless me! my lord here
too!"

"Have you any arquebusade, Marriott? Arquebusade, for your lady,
directly!" cried his lordship, following her to the door of the boudoir,
where she was going for some drops.

"Oh, my lord, you can't come in, I assure you, my lord, there's nothing
here, my lord, nothing of the sort," said Marriott, setting her back
against the door. Her terror and embarrassment instantly recalled all the
jealous suspicions of Lord Delacour. "Woman!" cried he, "I _will_ see whom
you have in this room!--You have some one concealed there, and I _will_ go
in." Then with brutal oaths he dragged Marriott from the door, and
snatched the key from her struggling hand.

Lady Delacour started up, and gave a scream of agony. "My lord!--Lord
Delacour," cried Belinda, springing forward, "hear me."

Lord Delacour stopped short. "Tell me, then," cried Lord Delacour, "is not
a lover of Lady Delacour's concealed there?" "No!--No!--No!" answered
Belinda. "Then a lover of Miss Portman?" said Lord Delacour. "Gad! we have
hit it now, I believe."

"Believe whatever you please, my lord," said Belinda, hastily, "but give
me the key."

Clarence Hervey drew the key from Lord Delacour's hand, gave it to Miss
Portman without looking at her, and immediately withdrew. Lord Delacour
followed him with a sort of drunken laugh; and no one remained in the room
but Marriott, Belinda, and Lady Delacour. Marriott was so much
_fluttered_, as she said, that she could do nothing. Miss Portman locked
the room door, and began to undress Lady Delacour, who lay motionless.
"Are we by ourselves?" said Lady Delacour, opening her eyes.

"Yes--are you much hurt?" said Belinda. "Oh, you are a charming girl!"
said Lady Delacour. "Who would have thought you had so much presence of
mind and courage--have you the key safe?" "Here it is," said Belinda,
producing it; and she repeated her question, "Are you much hurt?" "I am
not in pain now," said Lady Delacour, "but I _have_ suffered terribly. If
I could get rid of all this finery, if you could put me to bed, I could
sleep perhaps."

Whilst Belinda was undressing Lady Delacour, she shrieked several times;
but between every interval of pain she repeated, "I shall be better
to-morrow." As soon as she was in bed, she desired Marriott to give her
double her usual quantity of laudanum; for that all the inclination which
she had felt to sleep was gone, and that she could not endure the shooting
pains that she felt in her breast.

"Leave me alone with your lady, Marriott," said Miss Portman, taking the
bottle of laudanum from her trembling hand, "and go to bed; for I am sure
you are not able to sit up any longer."

As she spoke, she took Marriott into the adjoining dressing-room. "Oh,
dear Miss Portman," said Marriott, who was sincerely attached to her lady,
and who at this instant forgot all her jealousies, and all her love of
power, "I'll do any thing you ask me; but pray let me stay in the room,
though I know I'm quite helpless. It will be too much for you to be here
all night by yourself. The convulsions may take my lady. What shrieks she
gives every now and then!--and nobody knows what's the matter but
ourselves; and every body in the house is asking me why a surgeon is not
sent for, if my lady is so much hurt. Oh, I can't answer for it to my
conscience, to have kept the matter secret so long; for to be sure a
physician, if had in time, might have saved my lady--but now nothing can
save her!" And here Marriott burst into tears.

"Why don t you give me the laudanum?" cried Lady Delacour, in a loud
peremptory voice; "Give it to me instantly."--"No," said Miss Portman,
firmly.--"Hear me, Lady Delacour--you must allow me to judge, for you know
that you are not in a condition to judge for yourself, or rather you must
allow me to send for a physician, who may judge for us both."

"A physician!" cried Lady Delacour, "Never--never. I charge you let no
physician be sent for. Remember your promise: you _cannot_ betray me--you
_will_ not betray me."

"No," said Belinda, "of that I have given sufficient proof--but you will
betray yourself: it is already known by your servants that you have been
hurt by the overturn of your carriage; if you do not let either a surgeon
or physician see you it will excite surprise and suspicion. It is not in
your power, when violent pain seizes you, to refrain from---------"

"It is," interrupted Lady Delacour; "not another scream shall you
hear--only do not, do not, my dear Belinda, send for a physician."

"You will throw yourself again into convulsions," said Belinda. "Marriott,
you see, has lost all command of herself--I shall not have strength to
manage you---perhaps I may lose my presence of mind--I cannot answer for
myself--your husband may desire to see you."

"No danger of that," said Lady Delacour: "tell him my ankle is
sprained--tell him I am bruised all over--tell him any thing you will--he
will not trouble himself any more about me--he will forget all that passed
to-night by the time he is sober. Oh! give me the laudanum, dearest
Belinda, and say no more about physicians."

It was in vain to reason with Lady Delacour. Belinda attempted to persuade
her: "For my sake, dear Lady Delacour," said she, "let me send for Dr.
X------; he is a man of honour, your secret will be perfectly safe with
him."

"He will tell it to Clarence Hervey," said Lady Delacour: "of all men
living, I would not send for Dr. X------; I will not see him if he comes."

"Then," said Belinda, calmly, but with a fixed determination of
countenance, "I must leave you to-morrow morning--I must return to Bath."

"Leave me! remember your promise."

"Circumstances have occurred, about which I have made no promise," said
Belinda; "I must leave you, unless you will now give me your permission to
send for Dr. X------."

Lady Delacour hesitated. "You see," continued Belinda, "that I am in
earnest: when I am gone, you will have no friend left; when I am gone,
your secret will inevitably be discovered; for without me, Marriott will
not have sufficient strength of mind to keep it."

"Do you think we might trust Dr. X------?" said Lady Delacour.

"I am sure you may trust him," said Belinda, with energy; "I will pledge
my life upon his honour."

"Then send for him, since it must be so," said Lady Delacour.

No sooner had the words passed Lady Delacour's lips than Belinda flew to
execute her orders. Marriott recovered her senses when she heard that her
ladyship had consented to send for a physician; but she declared that she
could not conceive how any thing less than the power of magic could have
brought her lady to such a determination.

Belinda had scarcely despatched a servant for Dr. X----, when Lady
Delacour repented of the permission she had given, and all that could be
said to pacify only irritated her temper. She became delirious; Belinda's
presence of mind never forsook her, she remained quietly beside the bed
waiting for the arrival of Dr. X----, and she absolutely refused
admittance to the servants, who, drawn by their lady's outrageous cries,
continually came to her door with offers of assistance.

About four o'clock the doctor arrived, and Miss Portman was relieved from
some of her anxiety. He assured her that there was no immediate danger,
and he promised that the secret which she had entrusted to him should be
faithfully kept. He remained with her some hours, till Lady Delacour
became more quiet and fell asleep, exhausted with delirious exertions.--"I
think I may now leave you," said Dr. X----; but as he was going through
the dressing-room, Belinda stopped him.--"Now that I have time to think of
myself," said she, "let me consult you as my friend: I am not used to act
entirely for myself, and I shall be most grateful if you will assist me
with your advice. I hate all mysteries, but I feel myself bound in honour
to keep the secret with which Lady Delacour has entrusted me. Last night I
was so circumstanced, that I could not extricate her ladyship without
exposing myself to--to suspicion."

Miss Portman then related all that had passed about the mysterious door,
which Lord Delacour, in his fit of drunken jealousy, had insisted upon
breaking open.

"Mr. Hervey," continued Belinda, "was present when all this happened--he
seemed much surprised: I should be sorry that he should remain in an error
which might be fatal to my reputation--you know a woman ought not even to
be suspected; yet how to remove this suspicion I know not, because I
cannot enter into any explanation, without betraying Lady Delacour--she
has, I know, a peculiar dread of Mr. Hervey's discovering the truth."

"And is it possible," cried Dr. X----, "that any woman should be so meanly
selfish, as thus to expose the reputation of her friend merely to preserve
her own vanity from mortification?"

"Hush--don't speak so loud," said Belinda, "you will awaken her; and at
present she is certainly more an object of pity than of indignation.--If
you will have the goodness to come with me, I will take you by a back
staircase up to the _mysterious boudoir_. I am not too proud to give
positive proofs of my speaking truth; the key of that room now lies on
Lady Delacour's bed--it was that which she grasped in her hand during her
delirium--she has now let it fall--it opens both the doors of the
boudoir--you shall see," added Miss Portman, with a smile, "that I am not
afraid to let you unlock either of them."

"As a polite man," said Dr. X----, "I believe that I should absolutely
refuse to take any external evidence of a lady's truth; but demonstration
is unanswerable even by enemies, and I will not sacrifice your interests
to the foppery of my politeness--so I am ready to follow you. The
curiosity of the servants may have been excited by last night's
disturbance, and I see no method so certain as that which you propose of
preventing busy rumour. That goddess (let Ovid say what he pleases) was
born and bred in a kitchen, or a servants' hall.--But," continued Dr.
X----, "my dear Miss Portman, you will put a stop to a number of charming
stories by this prudence of yours--a romance called the Mysterious
Boudoir, of nine volumes at least, might he written on this subject, if
you would only condescend to act like almost all other heroines, that is
to say, without common sense."

The doctor now followed Belinda, and satisfied himself by ocular
demonstration, that this cabinet was the retirement of disease, and not of
pleasure.

It was about eight o'clock in the morning when Dr. X---- got home; he
found Clarence Hervey waiting for him. Clarence seemed to be in great
agitation, though he endeavoured, with all the power which he possessed
over himself, to suppress his emotion.

"You have been to see Lady Delacour," said he, calmly: "is she much
hurt?--It was a terrible accident."

"She has been much hurt," said Dr. X----, "and she has been for some hours
delirious; but ask me no more questions now, for I am asleep, and must go
to bed, unless you have any thing to say that can waken me: you look as if
some great misfortune had befallen you; what is the matter?"

"Oh, my dear friend," said Hervey, taking his hand, "do not jest with me;
I am not able to bear your raillery in my present temper--in one word, I
fear that Belinda is unworthy of my esteem: I can tell you no more, except
that I am more miserable than I thought any woman could make me."

"You are in a prodigious hurry to be miserable," said Dr. X----. "Upon my
word I think you would make a mighty pretty hero in a novel; you take
things very properly for granted, and, stretched out upon that sofa, you
act the distracted lover vastly well--and to complete the matter, you
cannot tell me why you are more miserable than ever man or hero was
before. I must tell you, then, that you have still more cause for jealousy
than you suspect. Ay, start--every jealous man starts at the sound of the
word jealousy--a certain symptom this of the disease."

"You mistake me," cried Clarence Hervey; "no man is less disposed to
jealousy than I am--but----"

"But your mistress--no, not your mistress, for you have never yet declared
to her your attachment--but the lady you admire will not let a drunken man
unlock a door, and you immediately suppose--"

"She has mentioned the circumstance to you!" exclaimed Hervey, in a joyful
tone: "then she _must_ be innocent."

"Admirable reasoning!--I was going to have told you just now, if you would
have suffered me to speak connectedly, that you have more reason for
jealousy than you suspect, for Miss Portman has actually unlocked for
me--for me! look at me--the door, the mysterious door--and whilst I live,
and whilst she lives, we can neither of us ever tell you the cause of the
mystery. All I can tell you is, that no lover is in the case, upon my
honour--and now, if you should ever mistake curiosity in your own mind
for jealousy, expect no pity from me."

"I should deserve none," said Clarence Hervey; "you have made me the
happiest of men."

"The happiest of men!--No, no; keep that superlative exclamation for a
future occasion. But now you behave like a reasonable creature, you
deserve to hear the praises of your Belinda--I am so much charmed with
her, that I wish--"

"When can I see her?" interrupted Hervey; "I'll go to her this instant."

"Gently," said Dr. X----, "you forget what time of the day it is--you
forget that Miss Portman has been up all night--that Lady Delacour is
extremely ill--and that this would be the most unseasonable opportunity
you could possibly choose for your visit."

To this observation Clarence Hervey assented; but he immediately seized a
pen from the doctor's writing table, and began a letter to Belinda. The
doctor threw himself upon the sofa, saying, "Waken me when you want me,"
and in a few minutes he was fast asleep.

"Doctor, upon second thoughts," said Clarence, rising suddenly, and
tearing his letter down the middle, "I cannot write to her yet--I forgot
the reformation of Lady Delacour: how soon do you think she will be well?
Besides, I have another reason for not writing to Belinda at present--you
must know, my dear doctor, that I have, or had, another mistress."

"Another mistress, indeed!" cried Dr. X----, trying to waken himself.

"Good Heavens! I do believe you've been asleep."

"I do believe I have."

"But is it possible that you could fall sound asleep in that time?"

"Very possible," said the doctor: "what is there so extraordinary in a
man's falling asleep? Men are apt to sleep sometime within the
four-and-twenty hours, unless they have half-a-dozen mistresses to keep
them awake, as you seem to have, my good friend."

A servant now came into the room with a letter, that had just arrived
express from the country for Dr. X----.

"This is another affair," cried he, rousing himself.

The letter required the doctor's immediate attendance. He shook hands with
Clarence Hervey: "My dear friend, I am really concerned that I cannot stay
to hear the history of your six mistresses; but you see that this is an
affair of life and death."

"Farewell," said Clarence: "I have not six, I have only three goddesses;
even if you count Lady Delacour for one. But I really wanted your advice
in good earnest."

"If your case be desperate, you can write, cannot you? Direct to me at
Horton-hall, Cambridge. In the mean time, as far as general rules go, I
can give you my advice gratis, in the formula of an old Scotch song----

    "'Tis good to be merry and wise,
    'Tis good to be honest and true,
    'Tis good to be off with the old love
    Before you be on with the new.'"


CHAPTER XI.

DIFFICULTIES.


Before he left town, Dr. X---- called in Berkeley-square, to see Lady
Delacour; he found that she was out of all immediate danger. Miss Portman
was sorry that he was obliged to quit her at this time, but she felt the
necessity for his going; he was sent for to attend Mr. Horton, an intimate
friend of his, a gentleman of great talents, and of the most active
benevolence, who had just been seized with a violent fever, in consequence
of his exertions in saving the poor inhabitants of a village in his
neighbourhood from the effects of a dreadful fire, which broke out in the
middle of the night.

Lady Delacour, who heard Dr. X---- giving this account to Belinda, drew
back her curtain, and said, "Go this instant, doctor--I am out of all
immediate danger, you say; but if I were not--I must die in the course of
a few months, you know-and what is my life, compared with the chance of
saving your excellent friend! He is of some use in the world--I am of
none-go this instant, doctor."

"What a pity," said Dr. X------, as he left the room, "that a woman who is
capable of so much magnanimity should have wasted her life on petty
objects!"

"Her life is not yet at an end--oh, sir, if you _could_ save her!" cried
Belinda.

Doctor X---- shook his head; but returning to Belinda, after going half
way down stairs, he added, "when you read this paper, you will know all
that I can tell you upon the subject."

Belinda, the moment the doctor was gone, shut herself up in her own room
to read the paper which he had given to her. Dr. X---- first stated that
he was by no means certain that Lady Delacour really had the complaint
which she so much dreaded; but it was impossible for him to decide without
farther examination, to which her ladyship could not be prevailed upon to
submit. Then he mentioned all that he thought would be most efficacious in
mitigating the pain that Lady Delacour might feel, and all that could be
done, with the greatest probability of prolonging her life. And he
concluded with the following words: "These are all temporizing expedients:
according to the usual progress of the disease, Lady Delacour may live a
year, or perhaps two.

"It is possible that her life might be saved by a _skilful_ surgeon. By a
few words that dropped from her ladyship last night, I apprehend that she
has some thoughts of submitting to an operation, which will be attended
with much pain and danger, even if she employ the most experienced surgeon
in London; but if she put herself, from a vain hope of secrecy, into
ignorant hands, she will inevitably destroy herself."

After reading this paper, Belinda had some faint hopes that Lady
Delacour's life might be saved; but she determined to wait till Dr. X----
should return to town, before she mentioned his opinion to his patient;
and she earnestly hoped that no idea of putting herself into ignorant
hands would recur to her ladyship.

Lord Delacour, in the morning, when he was sober, retained but a confused
idea of the events of the preceding night; but he made an awkwardly
good-natured apology to Miss Portman for his intrusion, and for the
disturbance he had occasioned, which, he said, must be laid to the blame
of Lord Studley's admirable burgundy. He expressed much concern for Lady
Delacour's terrible accident; but he could not help observing, that if his
advice had been taken, the thing could not have happened--that it was the
consequence of her ladyship's self-willedness about the young horses.

"How she got the horses without paying for them, or how she got money to
pay for them, I know not," said his lordship; "for I said I would have
nothing to do with the business, and I have kept to my resolution."

His lordship finished his morning visit to Miss Portman, by observing that
"the house would now be very dull for her: that the office of a nurse was
ill-suited to so young and beautiful a lady, but that her undertaking it
with so much cheerfulness was a proof of a degree of good-nature that was
not always to be met with in the young and handsome."

The manner in which Lord Delacour spoke convinced Belinda that he was in
reality attached to his wife, however the fear of being, or of appearing
to be, governed by her ladyship might have estranged him from her, and
from home. She now saw in him much more good sense, and symptoms of a more
amiable character, than his lady had described, or than she ever would
allow that he possessed.

The reflections, however, which Miss Portman made upon the miserable life
this ill-matched couple led together, did not incline her in favour of
marriage in general; great talents on one side, and good-nature on the
other, had, in this instance, tended only to make each party unhappy.
Matches of interest, convenience, and vanity, she was convinced,
diminished instead of increasing happiness. Of domestic felicity she had
never, except during her childhood, seen examples--she had, indeed, heard
from Dr. X----- descriptions of the happy family of Lady Anne Percival,
but she feared to indulge the romantic hope of ever being loved by a man
of superior genius and virtue, with a temper and manners suited to her
taste. The only person she had seen, who at all answered this description,
was Mr. Hervey; and it was firmly fixed in her mind, that he was not a
marrying man, and consequently not a man of whom any prudent woman would
suffer herself to think with partiality. She could not doubt that he liked
her society and conversation; his manner had sometimes expressed more than
cold esteem. Lady Delacour had assured her that it expressed love; but
Lady Delacour was an imprudent woman in her own conduct, and not
scrupulous as to that of others. Belinda was not guided by _her_ opinions
of propriety; and now that her ladyship was confined to her bed, and not
in a condition to give her either advice or protection, she felt that it
was peculiarly incumbent on her to guard, not only her conduct from
reproach, but her heart from the hopeless misery of an ill-placed
attachment. She examined herself with firm impartiality; she recollected
the excessive pain that she had endured, when she first heard Clarence
Hervey say, that Belinda Portman was a compound of art and affectation;
but this she thought was only the pain of offended pride--of proper pride.
She recollected the extreme anxiety she had felt, even within the last
four-and-twenty hours, concerning the opinion which he might form of the
transaction about the key of the boudoir--but this anxiety she justified
to herself; it was due, she thought, to her reputation; it would have been
inconsistent with female delicacy to have been indifferent about the
suspicions that necessarily arose from the circumstances in which she was
placed. Before Belinda had completed her self-examination, Clarence Hervey
called to inquire after Lady Delacour. Whilst he spoke of her ladyship,
and of his concern for the dreadful accident of which he believed himself
to be in a great measure the cause, his manner and language were animated
and unaffected; but the moment that this subject was exhausted, he became
embarrassed; though he distinctly expressed perfect confidence and esteem
for her, he seemed to wish, and yet to be unable, to support the character
of a friend, contradistinguished to an admirer. He seemed conscious that
he could not, with propriety, advert to the suspicions and jealousy which
he had felt the preceding night; for a man who has never declared love
would be absurd and impertinent, were he to betray jealousy. Clarence was
destitute neither of address nor presence of mind; but an accident
happened, when he was just taking leave of Miss Portman, which threw him
into utter confusion. It surprised, if it did not confound, Belinda. She
had forgotten to ask Dr. X---- for his direction; and as she thought it
might be necessary to write to him concerning Lady Delacour's health, she
begged of Mr. Hervey to give it to her. He took a letter out of his
pocket, and wrote the direction with a pencil; but as he opened the paper,
to tear off the outside, on which he had been writing, a lock of hair
dropped out of the letter; he hastily stooped for it, and as he took it up
from the ground the lock unfolded. Belinda, though she cast but one
involuntary, hasty glance at it, was struck with the beauty of its colour,
and its uncommon length. The confusion of Clarence Hervey convinced her
that he was extremely interested about the person to whom the hair
belonged, and the species of alarm which she had felt at this discovery
opened her eyes effectually to the state of her own heart. She was
sensible that the sight of a lock of hair, however long, or however
beautiful, in the hands of any man but Clarence Hervey, could not possibly
have excited any emotion in her mind. "Fortunately," thought she, "I have
discovered that he is attached to another, whilst it is yet in my power to
command my affections; and he shall see that I am not so weak as to form
any false expectations from what I must now consider as mere common-place
flattery." Belinda was glad that Lady Delacour was not present at the
discovery of the lock of hair, as she was aware that she would have
rallied her unmercifully upon the occasion; and she rejoiced that she had
not been prevailed upon to give _Madame la Comtesse de Pomenars_ a lock of
her _belle chevelure_. She could not help thinking, from the recollection
of several minute circumstances, that Clarence Hervey had endeavoured to
gain an interest in her affections, and she felt that there would be great
impropriety in receiving his ambiguous visits during Lady Delacour's
confinement to her room. She therefore gave orders that Mr. Hervey should
not in future be admitted, till her ladyship should again see company.
This precaution proved totally superfluous, for Mr. Hervey never called
again, during the whole course of Lady Delacour's confinement, though his
servant regularly came every morning with inquiries after her ladyship's
health. She kept her room for about ten days; a confinement to which she
submitted with extreme impatience: bodily pain she bore with fortitude,
but constraint and ennui she could not endure.

One morning as she was sitting up in bed, looking over a large collection
of notes, and cards of inquiry after her health, she exclaimed--

"These people will soon be tired of[4] bidding their footman put it into
their heads to inquire whether I am alive or dead--I must appear amongst
them again, if it be only for a few minutes, or they will forget me. When
I am fatigued, I will retire, and you, my dear Belinda, shall represent
me; so tell them to open my doors, and unmuffle the knocker: let me hear
the sound of music and dancing, and let the house be filled again, for
Heaven's sake. Dr. Zimmermann should never have been my physician, for he
would have prescribed solitude. Now solitude and silence are worse for me
than poppy and mandragora. It is impossible to tell how much silence
tires the ears of those who have not been used to it. For mercy's sake,
Marriott," continued her ladyship, turning to Marriott, who just then
came softly into the room, "for mercy's sake, don't walk to all eternity
on tiptoes: to see people gliding about like ghosts makes me absolutely
fancy myself amongst the shades below. I would rather be stunned by the
loudest peal that ever thundering footman gave at my door, than hear
Marriott lock that boudoir, as if my life depended on my not hearing the
key turned."

"Dear me! I never knew any lady that was ill, except my lady, complain of
one's not making a noise to disturb her," said Marriott.

"Then to please you, Marriott, I will complain of the only noise that
does, or ever did disturb me--the screaming of your odious macaw."

Now Marriott had a prodigious affection for this macaw, and she defended
it with as much eagerness as if it had been her child.

"Odious! O dear, my lady! to call my poor macaw odious!--I didn't expect
it would ever have come to this--I am sure I don't deserve it--I'm sure I
don't deserve that my lady should have taken such a dislike to me."

And here Marriott actually burst into tears. "But, my dear Marriott," said
Lady Delacour, "I only object to your macaw--may not I dislike your macaw
without disliking you?--I have heard of 'love me, love my dog;' but I
never heard of 'love me, love my bird'--did you, Miss Portman?"

Marriott turned sharply round upon Miss Portman, and darted a fiery look
at her through the midst of her tears. "Then 'tis plain," said she, "who
I'm to thank for this;" and as she left the room her lady could not
complain of her shutting the door after her too gently.

"Give her three minutes' grace and she will come to her senses," said Lady
Delacour, "for she is not a bankrupt in sense. Oh, three minutes won't do;
I must allow her three days' grace, I perceive," said Lady Delacour when
Marriott half an hour afterward reappeared, with a face which might have
sat for the picture of ill-humour. Her ill-humour, however, did not
prevent her from attending her lady as usual; she performed all her
customary offices with the most officious zeal but in profound silence,
except every now and then she would utter a sigh, which seemed to say,
"See how much I'm attached to my lady, and yet my lady hates my macaw!"
So the boy's cradle stood in a cottage in which was still felt the old
thrill of the ghosts of the pine wood and the dark clefts which were
thought to be the entrances to the ore veins of the mountain. Certainly
the imagination of the boy was often busy with dark traditions from heathen
mythology.

He was accustomed to feel the presence of uncanny powers as well in the
phenomena of nature as in the life of man. When he turned monk such
remembrances from childhood grew gloomier and took the shape of the
devil of Scripture, but the busy tempter who everywhere lies in wait for
the life of man always retained for him something of the features
of the mischievous goblin who secretly lurks about the peasant's
hearth and stable.

His father, a curt, sturdy, vigorous man, firm in his resolves, and of
unusual, shrewd common sense, had worked his way, after hard struggles,
to considerable prosperity. He kept strict discipline in his household.
Even in later years Luther thought with sadness of the severe punishments
he had endured as a boy and the sorrow they had caused his tender, childish
heart. But Old Hans Luther, nevertheless, up to his death in 1530, had
some influence on the life of his son.
When at the age of twenty-two Martin secretly entered the monastery the old
man was violently angry; for he had already planned a good match for him.
Friends finally succeeded in bringing the angry father to consent
to a reconciliation; and as his imploring son confessed that a terrible
apparition had driven him to the secret vow to enter the monastery, he
replied with the sorrowful words, "God grant that it was not a
deception and trick of the devil;" and he still further wrenched
the heart of the monk by the angry question, "You thought you were
obeying the command of God when you went into the monastery; have
you not heard also that you shall obey your parents?"

These words made a deep impression on the son, and when, many years
after, he sat in the Wartburg, expelled from the Church and outlawed
by the Emperor, he wrote to his father the touching words: "Do you
still wish to tear me from the monastery?

You are still my father and I your son. The law and the power of God
are on your side--on my side human weakness.

But look that you boast not yourself against God, he has been beforehand
with you,--he has taken me out himself."

From that time on it seemed to the old man as if his son were restored
to him. Old Hans had once counted upon having a grandson for whom he would
work.

He now came back obstinately to this thought, caring nothing for the rest
of the world, and soon urged his son to marry; his encouragement was not
the least of the influences to which Luther yielded, and when his father,
advanced in years, at last a councillor of Mansfeld, lay in his death
throes and the minister bent over him and asked the dying man if he
wished to die in the purified faith in Christ and the Holy Gospel,
old Hans gathered his strength once more and said curtly, "He is a wretch
who does not believe in it." When Luther told this later he added
admiringly, "Yes that was a man of the old time." The son received the
news of the father's death in the fortress of Coburg. When he read
the letter, in which his wife inclosed a picture of his youngest daughter
Magdalena, he uttered to a companion merely the words, "Well, my father
is dead too," rose, took his psalter, went into his room, and prayed and
wept so hard that, as the faithful Veit Dietrich wrote, his head was
confused the next day; but he came out again with his soul at peace.

The same day he wrote with deep emotion to Melanchthon of the great love of
his father and of his intimate relations with him. "I have never despised
death so much as today. We die so often before we finally die. Now I am
the oldest of my family and I have the right to follow him." From such a
father the son inherited what was fundamental to his character--truthfulness,
a sturdy will, straightforward common sense, and tact in dealing
with men and affairs. His childhood was full of rigor. He had many
a bitter experience in the Latin school and as a choir boy, though tempered
by kindness and love, and he kept through it all--what is more easily kept
in the lowlier circles of life--a heart full of faith in the goodness
of human nature and reverence for everything great in the world. When he
was at the University of Erfurt, his father was already in a position to
supply his needs more abundantly. He felt the vigor of youth, and was a
merry companion with song and lute. Of his spiritual life at that time
little is known except that death came near him, and that in a thunder
storm he was "called upon by a terrible apparition from heaven." In terror
he took a vow to go into a monastery, and quickly and secretly carried out
his resolve.

From that time date our reports about the troubles of his soul. At
odds with his father, full of awe at the thought of an incomprehensible
eternity, cowed by the wrath of God, he began with supernatural exertions
a life of renunciation, devotion, and penance. He found no peace. All the
highest questions of life rushed with fearful force upon his defenseless,
wandering soul. Remarkably strong and passionate with him was the
necessity of feeling himself in harmony with God and the universe. What
theology offered him was all unintelligible, bitter, and repulsive. To
his nature the riddles of the moral order of the universe were most important.
That the good should suffer, and the evil succeed; that God should condemn
the human race to the monstrous burden of sin because a simple-minded
woman had bitten into an apple; that this same God should endure our sins
with love, toleration, and patience; that Christ at one time sent away
honorable people with severity, and at another time associated with
harlots, publicans, and sinners--"human understanding with its wisdom turns
to folly at this." Then he would complain to his spiritual adviser,
Staupitz:
"Dear Doctor, our Lord treats people so cruelly. Who can serve Him if he
lays on blows like this?" But when he got the answer, "How else could He
subdue the stubborn heads?" this sensible argument could not console
the young man. With fervid desire to find the incomprehensible God, he
searched all his thoughts and dreams with self-torture. Every earthly
thought, every beat of his youthful blood, became for him a cruel wrong.
He began to despair of himself; he wrestled in unceasing prayer,
fasted and scourged himself.

At one time the priests had to break into his cell in which he had
been lying for days in a condition not far from insanity. With warm sympathy
Staupitz looked upon such heart-rending torment, and sought to give
him peace by blunt counsel. Once when Luther had written to him, "Oh,
my sin! My sin! My sin!"

his spiritual adviser gave him the answer, "You long to be without sin, and
you have no real sin. Christ is the forgiveness of real sins, such
as parricide and the like.

If Christ is to help you, you must have a list of real sins, and not come
to Him with such trash and make-believe sins, seeing a sin in every
trifle." The manner in which Luther gradually raised himself above such
despair was decisive for his whole life.

The God whom he served was at that time a God of terror. His anger was to
be appeased only by the means of grace which the ancient Church
prescribed--in the first place through constant confession, for which
there were innumerable prescriptions and formulæ
which seemed to the heart empty and cold. By strictly prescribed
activities and the practice of so-called good works, the feeling of real
atonement and inward peace had not come to the young man. Finally a
saying of his spiritual adviser pierced his heart like an arrow:
"That alone is true penance which begins with love for God. Love for God
and inward exaltation is not the result of the means of grace which
the Church teaches; it must go before them." This doctrine from Tauler's
school became for the young man the basis of a new spiritual and moral
relation to God; it was for him a sacred discovery. The transformation
of his spiritual life was the principal thing. For that he had to
work. From the depths of every human heart must come repentance, expiation,
and atonement. He and every man could lift himself up to God, alone. Not
until now did he realize what free prayer was. In place of a far-off
divine power which he had formerly sought in vain through a hundred forms
and childish confessions, there came before him at last the image
of an all-loving protector to whom he could speak at any time
joyfully and in tears; to whom he could bring all sorrow, every
doubt; who took unceasing interest in him, cared for him, granted
or denied his heartfelt petitions tenderly, like a good father.

So he learned to pray; and how ardent his prayers became! From this
time he lived in peace with the beloved God whom he had finally found, every
day, every hour. His intercourse with the Most High became more intimate
than with the dearest companions of this earth. When he poured out his
whole self before Him, then calm came over him and a holy peace,
a feeling of unspeakable love.

He felt himself a part of God, and remained in this relation to Him from
that time throughout his whole life. He heeded no longer the roundabout
ways of the ancient Church; he could, with God in his heart, defy
the whole world. Even thus early he ventured to believe that those held
false doctrine who put so much stress on works of penance, that there
was nothing beyond these works but a cold satisfaction and a ceremonious
confession; and when, later, he learned from Melanchthon that the Greek
word for penitence, _metanoia_ meant literally "change of mind," it
seemed to him a wonderful revelation.

On this ground rested the confident assurance with which he opposed the
words of Scripture to the ordinances of the Church. By this means Luther
in the monastery gradually worked his way to spiritual liberty. All his
later doctrines, his battles against indulgences, his imperturbable
steadfastness, his method of interpreting the Scriptures, rested upon
the struggles through which he, while a monk, had found his God;
and it may well be said that the new era of German history began
with Luther's prayers in the monastery.

Life was soon to thrust him under its hammer, to harden the pure metal
of his soul.

In 1508 Luther reluctantly accepted the professorship of dialectics
at the new university of Wittenberg.

He would rather have taught that theology which even then he believed the
true one. When, in 1510, he went to Rome on business for his order, it
is well known what devotion and piety marked his sojourn in the Holy
City, and with what horror the heathen life of the Romans and the moral
corruption and worldliness of the clergy filled him. It was
there where his devotions, while he was officiating at mass, were
disturbed by the reckless jests which the Roman priests of his order
called out to him.
He never forgot the devil-inspired words[2] as long as he lived.

But the hierarchy, however deeply its corruption shocked him, still
contained his whole hope; outside of it there was no God and no salvation.
The noble idea of the Catholic Church, and its conquests of fifteen hundred
years, enraptured the mind even of the strongest. And when this German in
Roman clerical dress, at the risk of his life, inspected the ruins of
ancient Rome and stood in awe before the gigantic columns of the temples
which, according to report, the Goths had once destroyed, the sturdy
man from the mountains of the old Hermunduri little dreamed that it would
be his own fate to destroy the temples of medieval Rome more thoroughly,
more fiercely, more grandly.
Luther came back from Rome still a faithful son of the great Mother Church.
All heresy, such as that of the Bohemians, was hateful to him.
He took a warm interest, after his return, in Reuchlin's contest against
the judges of heresy at Cologne, and, in 1512, stood on the side of the
Humanists; but even then he felt that something separated him from this
movement. When, a few years later, he was in Gotha, he did not call upon
the worthy Mutianus Rufus, although he wrote him a very polite letter
of apology; and soon after he was offended by the inward coldness and secular
tone in which theological sinners were ridiculed in Erasmus' dialogues.
The profane worldliness of the Humanists was never quite in harmony with
the cheerful faith of Luther's soul, and the pride with which he
afterward offended the sensitive Erasmus in a letter which was meant
to be conciliatory, was probably even then in his soul.

Even the forms of literary modesty adopted by Luther at that time give the
impression that they were wrung from an unbending spirit by the power of
Christian humility.

For even at that time he felt himself secure and strong in his faith.
As early as 1516 he wrote to Spalatin, who was the link of intercourse
between him and the Elector, Frederick the Wise, that the Elector was the
most prudent of men in the things of this world, but was afflicted with
sevenfold blindness in matters concerning God and the salvation of the soul.
And Luther had reason for this expression, for the provident spirit
of that moderate prince appeared in his careful efforts, among other
things, to gather in for domestic use the means of grace recommended
by the Church.

For instance, he had a special hobby for sacred relics, and just at this
time Staupitz, the vicar of the Augustinian order for Saxony, was occupied
in the Rhine region and elsewhere in collecting them for the Elector.
For Luther the absence of his superior was important, for he had to
fill his place. He was already a respected man in his order. Although
professor (of theology since 1512), he still lived in his monastery in
Wittenberg and generally wore his monk's habit; and now he visited the
thirty monasteries in his charge, deposed priors, uttered severe censure
of bad discipline, and urged severity against fallen monks. But
something of the simple faith of the brother of the monastery still clung
to him.

It was in this spirit of confidence and German sincerity that he wrote,
October 31, 1517, after he had posted the theses against Tetzel on the
church door, to Archbishop Albert of Mainz, the protector of the seller
of indulgences.

Full of the popular belief in the wisdom and the goodwill of the
highest rulers, Luther thought (he often said so later) that it was
only necessary to present honestly to the princes of the Church the
disadvantage and immorality of such abuses.

But how childish this zeal of the monk appeared to the polished and
worldly prince of the Church!

What so deeply offended the honest man was, from the point of view
of the Archbishop, a matter long settled.

The sale of indulgences was an evil in the Church a hundred times deplored,
but as unavoidable as many institutions seem to the politician; while
not good in themselves, they must be kept for the sake of a greater
interest.

The greatest interest of the Archbishop and the curia was their supremacy,
which was acquired and maintained by such commercial dealings. The great
interest of Luther and the people was truth. This was the parting of the
ways.

And so Luther entered upon the struggle, a poor and faithful son of the
Church, full of German devotion to authority; but yet he had in
his character something which gave him strength against too extreme
exercise of this authority--a close relation to his God.

He was then thirty-four years old, in the fulness of his strength, of
medium stature, his body vigorous and without the corpulency of his later
years, appearing tall beside the small, delicate, boyish form of
Melanchthon.

In the face which showed the effects of vigils and inward struggles, shone
two fiery eyes whose keen brilliancy was hard to meet.

He was a respected man, not only in his order, but at the University;
not a great scholar--he learned Greek from Melanchthon in the first year
of his professorship, and Hebrew soon after. He had no extensive book
learning, and never had the ambition to shine as a writer of Latin verse;
but he was astonishingly well-read in the Scriptures and some of the Fathers
of the Church, and what he had once learned he assimilated with
German thoroughness.

He was the untiring shepherd of his flock, a zealous preacher, a warm friend,
once more full of a decorous cheerfulness; he was of an assured
bearing, polite and skilful in social intercourse, with a confidence
of spirit which often lighted up his face in a smile.

The small events of the day might indeed affect him and annoy him. He
was excitable, and easily moved to tears, but on any great emergency,
after he had overcome his early nervous excitement, such as, for instance,
embarrassed him when he first appeared before the Diet at Worms--then he
showed wonderful calmness and self-command. He knew no fear. Indeed, his
lion's nature found satisfaction in the most dangerous situations. The
danger of death into which he sometimes fell, the malicious ambushes of his
enemies, seemed to him at that time hardly worthy of mention. The reason
for this superhuman heroism, as one may call it, was again his close
personal relation to his God. He had long periods in which he wished,
with a cheerful smile, for martyrdom in the service of truth and of his
God. Terrible struggles were still before him, but those in which men opposed
him did not seem to deserve this name. He had defeated the devil himself
again and again for years. He even overcame the fear and torment
of hell, which did its utmost to cloud his reason. Such a man might perhaps
be killed, but he could hardly be conquered.

The period of the struggle which now follows, from the beginning of
the indulgences controversy until his departure from the Wartburg--the
time of his greatest victories and of his tremendous popularity--is
perhaps best known; but it seems to us that even here his nature
has never yet been correctly judged.

I am sure the man has not invention or taste enough to produce
such a fancy piece."

"Did he mention," said Belinda, in a low voice, "the colour of her hair?"

"Yes, light brown; but the colour of this hair seems to affect you more
than all the rest."

Here, to Belinda's great relief, the conversation was interrupted by the
entrance of Marriott. From all she had heard, but especially from the
agreement between the colour of the hair which dropped from Hervey's
letter with Sir Philip's description of Virginia's, Miss Portman was
convinced that Clarence had some secret attachment; and she could not help
blaming him in her own mind for having, as she thought, endeavoured to
gain her affections, whilst he knew that his heart was engaged to another.
Mr. Hervey, however, gave her no farther reason to suspect him of any
design to win her love; for about this time his manner towards her
changed,--he obviously endeavoured to avoid her; his visits were short,
and his attention was principally directed to Lady Delacour; when she
retired, he took his leave, and Sir Philip Baddely had the field to
himself. The baronet, who thought that he had succeeded in producing a
coldness between Belinda and his rival, was surprised to find that he
could not gain any advantage for himself; for some time he had not the
slightest thoughts of any serious connexion with the lady, but at last he
was piqued by her indifference, and by the raillery of his friend
Rochfort.

"'Pon honour," said Rochfort, "the girl must be in love with Clary, for
she minds you no more than if you were nobody."

"I could make her sing to another tune, if I pleased," said Sir Philip;
"but, damme, it would cost me too much--a wife's too expensive a thing,
now-a-days. Why, a man could have twenty curricles, and a fine stud, and a
pack of hounds, and as many mistresses as he chooses into the bargain, for
what it would cost him to take a wife. Oh, damme, Belinda Portman's a fine
girl, but not worth so much as that comes to; and yet, confound me, if I
should not like to see how blue Clary would look, if I were to propose for
her in good earnest--hey, Rochfort?--I should like to pay him for the way
he served us about that quiz of a doctor, hey?"

"Ay," said Rochfort, "you know he told us there was a _tant pis_ and a
_tant mieux_ in every thing--he's not come to the _tant pis_ yet. 'Pon
honour, Sir Philip, the thing rests with you."

The baronet vibrated for some time between the fear of being taken in by
one of Mrs. Stanhope's nieces, and the hope of triumphing over Clarence
Hervey. At last, what he called love prevailed over prudence, and he was
resolved, cost him what it would, to have Belinda Portman. He had not the
least doubt of being accepted, if he made a proposal of marriage;
consequently, the moment that he came to this determination, he could not
help assuming _d'avance_ the tone of a favoured lover.

"Damme," cried Sir Philip, one night, at Lady Delacour's concert, "I think
that Mr. Hervey has taken out a patent for talking to Miss Portman; but
damme if I give up this place, now I have got it," cried the baronet,
seating himself beside Belinda.

Mr. Hervey did not contest his seat, and Sir Philip kept his post during
the remainder of the concert; but, though he had the field entirely to
himself, he could not think of any thing more interesting, more amusing,
to whisper in Belinda's ear, than, "Don't you think the candles want
snuffing famously?"


CHAPTER XII.

THE MACAW.


The baronet determined the next day upon the grand attack. He waited upon
Miss Portman with the certainty of being favourably received; but he was,
nevertheless, somewhat embarrassed to know how to begin the conversation,
when he found himself alone with the lady.

He twirled and twisted a short stick that he held in his hand, and put it
into and out of his boot twenty times, and at last he began with--"Lady
Delacour's not gone to Harrowgate yet?"

"No: her ladyship has not yet felt herself well enough to undertake the
journey."

"That was a cursed unlucky overturn! She may thank Clarence Hervey for
that: it's like him,--he thinks he's a better judge of horses, and wine,
and every thing else, than any body in the world. Damme, now if I don't
believe he thinks nobody else but himself has eyes enough to see that a
fine woman's a fine woman; but I'd have him to know, that Miss Belinda
Portman has been Sir Philip Baddely's toast these two months."

As this intelligence did not seem to make the expected impression upon
Miss Belinda Portman, Sir Philip had recourse again to his little stick,
with which he went through the sword exercise. After a silence of some
minutes, and after walking to the window, and back again, as if to look
for sense, he exclaimed, "How is Mrs. Stanhope now, pray, Miss Portman?
and your sister, Mrs. Tollemache? she was the finest woman, I thought, the
first winter she came out, that ever I saw, damme. Have you ever been told
that you're like her?"

"Never, sir."

"Oh, damn it then, but you are; only ten times handsomer."

"Ten times handsomer than the finest woman you ever saw, Sir Philip?" said
Belinda, smiling.

"Than the finest woman I had ever seen _then_," said Sir Philip; "for,
damme, I did not know what it was to be in love _then_" (here the baronet
heaved an audible sigh): "I always laughed at love, and all that, _then_,
and marriage particularly. I'll trouble you for Mrs. Stanhope's direction,
Miss Portman; I believe, to do the thing in style, I ought to write to her
before I speak to you."

Belinda looked at him with astonishment; and laying down the pencil with
which she had just begun to write a direction to Mrs. Stanhope, she said,
"Perhaps, Sir Philip, to _do the thing in style_, I ought to pretend at
this instant not to understand you; but such false delicacy might mislead
you: permit me, therefore, to say, that if I have any concern in the
letter which you, are going to write to my aunt Stanhope----"

"Well guessed!" interrupted Sir Philip: "to be sure you have, and you're a
charming girl--damn me if you aren't--for meeting my ideas in this way,
which will save a cursed deal of trouble," added the polite lover, seating
himself on the sofa, beside Belinda.

"To prevent your giving yourself any further trouble then, sir, on my
account," said Miss Portman----

"Nay, damme, don't catch at that unlucky word, trouble, nor look so cursed
angry; though it becomes you, too, uncommonly, and I like pride in a
handsome woman, if it was only for variety's sake, for it's not what one
meets with often, now-a-days. As to trouble, all I meant was, the trouble
of writing to Mrs. Stanhope, which of course I thank you for saving me;
for to be sure, I'd rather (and you can't blame me for that) have my
answer from your own charming lips, if it was only for the pleasure of
seeing you blush in this heavenly sort of style."

"To put an end to this heavenly sort of style, sir," said Belinda,
withdrawing her hand, which the baronet took as if he was confident of its
being his willing prize, "I must explicitly assure you, that it is not in
my power to encourage your addresses. I am fully sensible," added Miss
Portman, "of the honour Sir Philip Baddely has done me, and I hope he will
not he offended by the frankness of my answer."

"You can't be in earnest, Miss Portman!" exclaimed the astonished baronet.

"Perfectly in earnest, Sir Philip."

"Confusion seize me," cried he, starting up, "if this isn't the most
extraordinary thing I ever heard! Will you do me the honour, madam, to let
me know your particular objections to Sir Philip Baddely?"

"My objections," said Belinda, "cannot be obviated, and therefore it would
be useless to state them."

"Nay, pray, ma'am, do me the favour--I only ask for information sake--is
it to Sir Philip Baddely's fortune, 15,000l. a year, you object, or to
his family, or to his person?--Oh, curse it!" said he, changing his tone,
"you're only quizzing me to see how I should look--damn me, you did it
too well, you little coquet!"

Belinda again assured him that she was entirely in earnest, and that she
was incapable of the sort of coquetry which he ascribed to her.

"Oh, damme, ma'am, then I've no more to say--a coquet is a thing I
understand as well as another, and if we had been only talking in the air,
it would have been another thing; but when I come at once to a proposal in
form, and a woman seriously tells me she has objections that cannot be
obviated, damme, what must I, or what must the world conclude, but that
she's very unaccountable, or that she's engaged--which last I presume to
be the case, and it would have been a satisfaction to me to have known it
sooner--at any rate, it is a satisfaction to me to know it now."

"I am sorry to deprive you of so much satisfaction," said Miss Portman,
"by assuring you, that I am not engaged to any one."

Here the conversation was interrupted by the entrance of Lord Delacour,
who came to inquire of Miss Portman how his lady did. The baronet, after
twisting his little black stick into all manner of shapes, finished by
breaking it, and then having no other resource, suddenly wished Miss
Portman a good morning, and decamped with a look of silly ill-humour. He
was determined to write to Mrs. Stanhope, whose influence over her niece
he had no doubt would be decisive in his favour. "Sir Philip seems to be a
little out of sorts this morning," said Lord Delacour: "I am afraid he's
angry with me for interrupting his conversation; but really I did not know
he was here, and I wanted to catch you a moment alone, that I might, in
the first place, thank you for all your goodness to Lady Delacour. She has
had a tedious sprain of it; these nervous fevers and convulsions--I don't
understand them, but I think Dr. X----'s prescriptions seem to have done
her good, for she is certainly better of late, and I am glad to hear music
and people again in the house, because I know all this is what my Lady
Delacour likes, and there is no reasonable indulgence that I would not
willingly allow a wife; but I think there is a medium in all things. I am
not a man to be governed by a wife, and when I have once said a thing, I
like to be steady and always shall. And I am sure Miss Portman has too
much good sense to think me wrong: for now, Miss Portman, in that quarrel
about the coach and horses, which you heard part of one morning at
breakfast--I must tell you the beginning of that quarrel."

"Excuse me, my lord, but I would rather hear of the end than of the
beginning of quarrels."

"That shows your good sense as well as your good nature. I wish you could
make my Lady Delacour of your taste--she does not want sense--but then (I
speak to you freely of all that lies upon my mind, Miss Portman, for I
know--I _know_ you have no delight in making mischief in a house,) between
you and me, her sense is not of the right kind. A woman may have too much
wit--now too much is as bad as too little, and in a woman, worse; and when
two people come to quarrel, then wit on either side, but more especially
on the wife's, you know is very provoking--'tis like concealed weapons,
which are wisely forbidden by law. If a person kill another in a fray,
with a concealed weapon, ma'am, by a sword in a cane, for instance, 'tis
murder by the law. Now even if it were not contrary to law, I would never
have such a thing in my cane to carry about with me; for when a man's in a
passion he forgets every thing, and would as soon lay about him with a
sword as with a cane: so it is better such a thing should not be in his
power. And it is the same with wit, which would be safest and best out of
the power of some people."

"But is it fair, my lord, to make use of wit yourself to abuse wit in
others?" said Belinda with a smile, which put his lordship into perfect
good-humour with both himself and his lady.

"Why, really," said he, "there would be no living with Lady Delacour, if I
did not come out with a little sly bit of wit now and then; but it is what
I am not in the habit of doing, I assure you, except when very hard
pushed. But, Miss Portman, as you like so much to hear the end of
quarrels, here's the end of one which you have a particular right to hear
something of," continued his lordship, taking out his pocket-book and
producing some bank-notes: "you should have received this before, madam,
if I had known of the transaction sooner--of your part of it, I mean."

"Milord, de man call to speak about de burgundy you order, milord," said
Champfort, who came into the room with a sly, inquisitive face.

"Tell him I'll see him immediately--show him into the parlour, and give
him a newspaper to read."

"Yes, milord--milord has it in his pocket since he dress."

"Here it is," said his lordship; and as Champfort came forward to receive
the newspaper, his eye glanced at the bank-notes, and then at Miss
Portman.

"Here," continued Lord Delacour, as Champfort had left the room, "here are
your two hundred guineas, Miss Portman; and as I am going to this man
about my burgundy, and shall be out all the rest of the day, let me
trouble you the next time you see Lady Delacour to give her this
pocket-book from me. I should be sorry that Miss Portman, from any thing
that has passed, should run away with the idea that I am a niggardly
husband, or a tyrant, though I certainly like to be master in my own
house. What are you doing, madam?--that is your note, that does not go
into the pocket-book, you know."

"Permit me to put it in, my lord," said Belinda, returning the pocket-book
to him, "and to beg you will give Lady Delacour the pleasure of seeing
you: she has inquired several times whether your lordship were at home. I
will run up to her dressing-room, and tell her that you are here."

"How lightly she goes on the wings of good-nature!" said Lord Delacour. "I
can do no less than follow her; for though I like to be treated with
respect in my own house, there is a time for every thing. I would not give
Lady Delacour the trouble of coming down here to me with her sprained
ankle, especially as she has inquired for me several times."

His lordship's visit was not of unseasonable length; for he recollected
that the man who came about the burgundy was waiting for him. But,
perhaps, the shortness of the visit rendered it the more pleasing, for
Lady Delacour afterward said to Belinda, "My dear, would you believe it,
my Lord Delacour was absolutely a perfect example of the useful and
agreeable this morning--who knows but he may become the sublime and
beautiful in time? _En attendant_ here are your two hundred guineas, my
dear Belinda: a thousand thanks for the thing, and a million for the
manner--manner is all in all in conferring favours. My lord, who, to do
him justice, has too much honesty to pretend to more delicacy than he
really possesses, told me that he had been taking a lesson from Miss
Portman this morning in the art of obliging; and really, for a grown
gentleman, and for the first lesson, he comes on surprisingly. I do think,
that by the time he is a widower his lordship will be quite another thing,
quite an agreeable man--not a genius, not a Clarence Hervey--that you
cannot expect. Apropos, what is the reason that we have seen so little of
Clarence Hervey lately? He has certainly some secret attraction elsewhere.
It cannot be that girl Sir Philip mentioned; no, she's nothing new. Can it
be at Lady Anne Percival's?--or where can it be? Whenever he sees me, I
think he asks when we go to Harrowgate. Now Oakly-park is within a few
miles of Harrowgate. I will not go there, that's decided. Lady Anne is an
exemplary matron, so she is out of the case; but I hope she has no _sister
excellence_, no niece, no cousin, to entangle our hero."

"Ours!" said Belinda.

"Well, _yours_, then," said Lady Delacour.

"Mine!"

"Yes, yours: I never in my life saw a better struggle between a sigh and a
smile. But what have you done to poor Sir Philip Baddely? My Lord Delacour
told me--you know all people who have nothing else to say, tell news
quicker than others--my Lord Delacour told me, that he saw Sir Philip part
from you this morning in a terrible bad humour. Come, whilst you tell your
story, help me to string these pearls; that will save you from the
necessity of looking at me, and will conceal your blushes: you need not be
afraid of betraying Sir Philip's secrets; for I could have told you long
ago, that he would inevitably propose for you--the fact is nothing new or
surprising to me, but I should really like to hear how ridiculous the man
made himself."

"And that," said Belinda, "is the only thing which I do not wish to tell
your ladyship."

"Lord, my dear, surely it is no secret that Sir Philip Baddely is
ridiculous; but you are so good-natured that I can't be out of humour with
you. If you won't gratify my curiosity, will you gratify my taste, and
sing for me once more that charming song which none but you _can_ sing to
please me?--I must learn it from you, absolutely."

Just as Belinda was beginning to sing, Marriott's macaw began to scream,
so that Lady Delacour could not hear any thing else.

"Oh, that odious macaw!" cried her ladyship, "I can endure it no longer"
(and she rang her bell violently): "it kept me from sleeping all last
night--Marriott must give up this bird. Marriott, I cannot endure that
macaw--you must part with it for my sake, Marriott. It cost you four
guineas: I am sure I would give five with the greatest pleasure to get rid
of it, for it is the torment of my life."

"Dear, my lady! I can assure you it is only because they will not shut the
doors after them below, as I desire. I am certain Mr. Champfort never shut
a door after him in his life, nor never will if he was to live to the days
of Methuselah."

"That is very little satisfaction to me, Marriott," said Lady Delacour.

"And indeed, my lady, it is very little satisfaction to me, to hear my
macaw abused as it is every day of my life, for Mr. Champfort's fault."

"But it cannot be Champfort's fault that I have ears."

"But if the doors were shut, my lady, you wouldn't or couldn't hear--as
I'll prove immediately," said Marriott, and she ran directly and shut,
according to her own account, "eleven doors which were stark staring wide
open."--"Now, my lady, you can't hear a single syllable of the macaw."

"No, but one of the eleven doors will open presently," said Lady Delacour:
"you will observe it is always more than ten to one against me."

A door opened, and the macaw was heard to scream. "The macaw must go,
Marriott, that is certain," said her ladyship, firmly.

"Then _I_ must go, my lady," said Marriott, angrily, "that is certain; for
to part with my macaw is a thing I cannot do to please _any_ body." Her
eyes turned with indignation upon Belinda, from association merely;
because the last time that she had been angry about her macaw, she had
also been angry with Miss Portman, whom she imagined to be the secret
enemy of her favourite.

"To stay another week in the house after my macaw's discarded in disgrace
is a thing nothing shall prevail upon me to do." She flung out of the room
in a fury.

"Good Heavens! am I reduced to this?" said Lady Delacour: "she thinks that
she has me in her power. No; I can die without her: I have but a short
time to live--I will not live a slave. Let the woman betray me, if she
will. Follow her this moment, my dear generous friend; tell her never to
come into this room again: take this pocket-book, pay her whatever is due
to her in the first place, and give her fifty guineas--observe!--not as a
bribe, but as a reward."

It was a delicate and difficult commission. Belinda found Marriott at
first incapable of listening to reason. "I am sure there is nobody in the
world that would treat me and my macaw in this manner, except my lady,"
cried she; "and somebody must have set her against me, for it is not
natural to her: but since she can't bear me about her any longer, 'tis
time I should be gone."

"The only thing of which Lady Delacour complained was the noise of this
macaw," said Belinda; "it was a pretty bird--how long have you had it?"

"Scarcely a month," said Marriott, sobbing.

"And how long have you lived with your lady?"

"Six years!--And to part with her after all!--"

"And for the sake of a macaw! And at a time when your lady is so much in
want of you, Marriott! You know she cannot live long, and she has much to
suffer before she dies, and if you leave her, and if in a fit of passion
you betray the confidence she has placed in you, you will reproach
yourself for it ever afterward. This bird--or all the birds in the
world--will not be able to console you; for you are of an affectionate
disposition, I know, and sincerely attached to your poor lady."

"That I am!--and to betray her!--Oh, Miss Portman, I would sooner cut off
my hand than do it. And I have been tried more than my lady knows of, or
you either, for Mr. Champfort, who is the greatest mischief-maker in the
world, and is the cause, by not shutting the door, of all this dilemma;
for now, ma'am, I'm convinced, by the tenderness of your speaking, that
you are not the enemy to me I supposed, and I beg your pardon; but I was
going to say that Mr. Champfort, who saw the _fracas_ between my lord and
me, about the key and the door, the night of my lady's accident, has
whispered it about at Lady Singleton's and every where--Mrs. Luttridge's
maid, ma'am, who is my cousin, has pestered me with so many questions and
offers, from Mrs. Luttridge and Mrs. Freke, of any money, if I would only
tell who was in the boudoir--and I have always answered, nobody--and I
defy them to get any thing out of me. Betray my lady! I'd sooner cut my
tongue out this minute! Can she have such a base opinion of me, or can
you, ma'am?"

"No, indeed, I am convinced that you are incapable of betraying her,
Marriott; but in all probability after you have left her----"

"If my lady would let me keep my macaw," interrupted Marriott, "I should
never think of leaving her."

"The macaw she will not suffer to remain in the house, nor is it
reasonable that she should: it deprives her of sleep--it kept her awake
three hours this morning."

Marriott was beginning the history of Champfort and the doors again; but
Miss Portman stopped her by saying, "All this is past now. How much is due
to you, Mrs. Marriott? Lady Delacour has commissioned me to pay you every
thing that is due to you."

"Due to me! Lord bless me, ma'am, am I to go?"

"Certainly, it was your own desire--it is consequently your lady's: she is
perfectly sensible of your attachment to her, and of your services, but
she cannot suffer herself to be treated with disrespect. Here are fifty
guineas, which she gives you as a reward for your past fidelity, not as a
bribe to secure your future secresy. You are at liberty, she desires me to
say, to tell her secret to the whole world, if you choose to do so."

"Oh, Miss Portman, take my macaw--do what you will with it--only make my
peace with my lady," cried Marriott, clasping her hands, in an agony of
grief: "here are the fifty guineas, ma'am, don't leave them with me--I
will never be disrespectful again--take my macaw and all! No, I will carry
it myself to my lady."

Lady Delacour was surprised by the sudden entrance of Marriott, and her
macaw. The chain which held the bird Marriott put into her ladyship's hand
without being able to say any thing more than, "Do what you please, my
lady, with it--and with me."

Pacified by this submission, Lady Delacour granted Marriott's pardon, and
she most sincerely rejoiced at this reconciliation.

The next day Belinda asked the dowager Lady Boucher, who was going to a
bird-fancier's, to take her with her, in hopes that she might be able to
meet with some bird more musical than a macaw, to console Marriott for the
loss of her screaming favourite. Lady Delacour commissioned Miss Portman
to go to any price she pleased. "If I were able, I would accompany you
myself, my dear, for poor Marriott's sake, though I would almost as soon
go to the Augean stable."

There was a bird-fancier in High Holborn, who had bought several of the
hundred and eighty beautiful birds, which, as the newspapers of the day
advertised, had been "collected, after great labour and expense, by Mons.
Marten and Co. for the Republican Museum at Paris, and lately landed out
of the French brig Urselle, taken on her voyage from Cayenne to Brest, by
His Majesty's Ship Unicorn."

When Lady Boucher and Belinda arrived at this bird-fancier's, they were
long in doubt to which of the feathered beauties they should give the
preference. Whilst the dowager was descanting upon their various
perfections, a lady and three children came in; she immediately attracted
Belinda's attention, by her likeness to Clarence Hervey's description of
Lady Anne Percival--it was Lady Anne, as Lady Boucher, who was slightly
acquainted with her, informed Belinda in a whisper.

The children were soon eagerly engaged looking at the birds.

"Miss Portman," said Lady Boucher, "as Lady Delacour is so far from well,
and wishes to have a bird that will not make any noise in the house,
suppose you were to buy for Mrs. Marriott this beautiful pair of green
parroquets; or, stay, a goldfinch is not very noisy, and here is one that
can play a thousand pretty tricks. Pray, sir, make it draw up water in its
little bucket for us."

"Oh, mamma!" said one of the little boys, "this is the very thing that is
mentioned in Bewick's History of Birds. Pray look at this goldfinch,
Helena, now it is drawing up its little bucket--but where is Helena?
here's room for you, Helena."

Whilst the little boys were looking at the goldfinch, Belinda felt
somebody touch her gently: it was Helena Delacour.

"Can I speak a few words to you?" said Helena.

Belinda walked to the farthest end of the shop with her.

"Is my mamma better?" said she, in a timid tone. "I have some gold fish,
which you know cannot make the least noise: may I send them to her? I
heard that lady call you Miss Portman: I believe you are the lady who
wrote such a kind postscript to me in mamma's last letter--that is the
reason I speak so freely to you now. Perhaps you would write to tell me if
mamma will see me; and Lady Anne Percival would take me at any time, I am
sure--but she goes to Oakly-park in a few days. I wish I might be with
mamma whilst she is ill; I would not make the least noise. But don't ask
her, if you think it will be troublesome--only let me send the gold fish."

Belinda was touched by the manner in which this affectionate little girl
spoke to her. She assured her that she would say all she wished to her
mother, and she begged Helena to send the gold fish whenever she pleased.

"Then," said Helena, "I will send them as soon as I go _home_ as soon as I
go back to Lady Anne Percival's, I mean." Belinda, when she had finished
speaking to Helena, heard the man who was showing the birds, lament that
he had not a blue macaw, which Lady Anne Percival was commissioned to
procure for Mrs. Margaret Delacour.

"Red macaws, my lady, I have in abundance; but unfortunately, a blue macaw
I really have not at present; nor have I been able to get one, though I
have inquired amongst all the bird-fanciers in town; and I went to the
auction at Haydon-square on purpose, but could not get one."

Belinda requested Lady Boucher would tell her servants to bring in the
cage that contained Marriott's blue macaw; and as soon as it was brought
she gave it to Helena, and begged that she would carry it to her Aunt
Delacour.

"Lord, my dear Miss Portman," said Lady Boucher, drawing her aside, "I am
afraid you will get yourself into a scrape; for Lady Delacour is not upon
speaking terms with this Mrs. Margaret Delacour--she cannot endure her;
you know she is my Lord Delacour's aunt."

Belinda persisted in sending the macaw, for she was in hopes that these
terrible family quarrels might be made up, if either party would
condescend to show any disposition to oblige the other.

Lady Anne Percival understood Miss Portman's civility as it was meant.

"This is a bird of good omen," said she; "it augurs family peace."

"I wish you would do me the favour, Lady Boucher, to introduce me to Miss
Portman," continued Lady Anne.

"The very thing I wished!" cried Helena.

A few minutes' conversation passed afterward upon different subjects, and
Lady Anne Percival and Belinda parted with a mutual desire to see more of
each other.


CHAPTER XIII.

SORTES VIRGILIANAE.


When Belinda got home, Lady Delacour was busy in the library looking over
a collection of French plays with the _ci-devant_ Count de N----; a
gentleman who possessed such singular talents for reading dramatic
compositions, that many people declared that they would rather hear him
read a play than see it performed at the theatre. Even those who were not
judges of his merit, and who had little taste for literature, crowded to
hear him, because it was the fashion. Lady Delacour engaged him for a
reading party at her house, and he was consulting with her what play would
be most amusing to his audience. I have lost everything.

GIULIETTA.

What? you too...
Ah, you do me wrong.

Without pity, without mercy, Go!... Go!...

HOFFMAN.

Your tears betrayed you.
Ah! I love you... even at the price of my life.

GIULIETTA.

Ah, unfortunate, but you do not know That an hour, a moment, may prove
fatal?
That my love will cost your life if you remain?
That Schlemil, this night, may strike you in my arms?
Listen to my prayer; My life is wholly yours.
Everywhere I promise to accompany your steps.

HOFFMAN.

Ye gods with what bliss ye fire my heart?
Like a concert divine your voice does move me; With a fire soft yet
burning my being is devoured; Your glances in mine have spent their
flame, Like radiant stars And I feel, my well beloved, Pass your perfumed
breath On my lips and on my eyes.

GIULIETTA.
Yet, to-day, strengthen my courage By leaving me something of
you!

HOFFMAN.

What do you mean?

GIULIETTA.
Listen and don't laugh at me.
(She takes Hoffman in her arms and finds a mirror.)
What I want is your faithful image, To reproduce your features,
your look, your visage, The reflection that I see above me
bend.

HOFFMAN.
My reflection? What folly!

GIULIETTA.
No! for it can detach itself From the polished glass And come quite
whole in my heart to hide.

HOFFMAN.

In your heart?

GIULIETTA.
In my heart. 'Tis I who beg thee, Hoffman, give me my wish.

HOFFMAN.
My reflection?

GIULIETTA.
Your reflection. Yes, wisdom or folly, I await, I demand.
(Ensemble.) 

HOFFMAN.
Ecstasy, unappeased bliss, Strange and soft terror, My reflection,
my soul, my life To you, always to you!

GIULIETTA.
If your presence I lose, I would keep of you Your reflection, your
soul, your life; Dear one, give them me.
GIULIETTA (suddenly).

Schlemil!
(Schlemil enters followed by Nicklausse, Dapertutto, Pittichinaccio
and others.) 

SCHLEMIL.

I was sure of it! Together!
Come, gentlemen, come, 'Tis for Hoffman, it seems to me That we are
abandoned.

(Ironic laughter.)Many conjectures were formed in Belinda's mind as
she passed on to the drawing-room; but the moment that she opened the
door, she knew the nature of Mr. Hervey's business, for she saw the glass
globe containing Helena Delacour's gold fishes standing on the table
beside him. "I have been commissioned to present these to you for Lady
Delacour," said Mr. Hervey, "and I have seldom received a commission that
has given me so much pleasure. I perceive that Miss Portman is indeed a
real friend to Lady Delacour--how happy she is to have such a friend!"

After a pause Mr. Hervey went on speaking of Lady Delacour, and of his
earnest desire to see her as happy in domestic life as she _appeared_ to
be in public. He frankly confessed, that when he was first acquainted with
her ladyship, he had looked upon her merely as a dissipated woman of
fashion, and he had considered only his own amusement in cultivating her
society: "But," continued he, "of late I have formed a different opinion
of her character; and I think, from what I have observed, that Miss
Portman's ideas on this subject agree with mine. I had laid a plan for
making her ladyship acquainted with Lady Anne Percival, who appears to me
one of the most amiable and one of the happiest of women. Oakly-park is
but a few miles from Harrowgate.--But I am disappointed in this scheme;
Lady Delacour has changed her mind, she says, and will not go there. Lady
Anne, however, has just told me, that, though it is July, and though she
loves the country, she will most willingly stay in town a month longer, as
she thinks that, with your assistance, there is some probability of her
effecting a reconciliation between Lady Delacour and her husband's
relations, with some of whom Lady Anne is intimately acquainted. To begin
with my friend, Mrs. Margaret Delacour: the macaw was most graciously
received, and I flatter myself that I have prepared Mrs. Delacour to think
somewhat more favourably of her niece than she was wont to do. All now
depends upon Lady Delacour's conduct towards her daughter: if she
continues to treat her with neglect, I shall be convinced that I have been
mistaken in her character."

Belinda was much pleased by the openness and the unaffected good-nature
with which Clarence Hervey spoke, and she certainly was not sorry to hear
from his own lips a distinct explanation of his views and sentiments. She
assured him that no effort that she could make with propriety should he
wanting to effect the desirable reconciliation between her ladyship and
her family, as she perfectly agreed with him in thinking that Lady
Delacour's character had been generally misunderstood by the world.

"Yes," said Mr. Hervey, "her connexion with that Mrs. Freke hurt her more
in the eyes of the world than she was aware of. It is tacitly understood
by the public, that every lady goes bail for the character of her female
friends. If Lady Delacour had been so fortunate as to meet with such a
friend as Miss Portman in her early life, what a different woman she would
have been! She once said some such thing to me herself, and she never
appeared to me so amiable as at that moment."

Mr. Hervey pronounced these last words in a manner more than usually
animated; and whilst he spoke, Belinda stooped to gather a sprig from a
myrtle, which stood on the hearth. She perceived that the myrtle, which
was planted in a large china vase, was propped up on one side with the
broken bits of Sir Philip Baddely's little stick: she took them up, and
threw them out of the window. "Lady Delacour stuck those fragments there
this morning," said Clarence smiling, "as trophies. She told me of Miss
Portman's victory over the heart of Sir Philip Baddely; and Miss Portman
should certainly have allowed them to remain there, as indisputable
evidence in favour of the baronet's taste and judgment."

Clarence Hervey appeared under some embarrassment, and seemed to be
restrained by some secret cause from laying open his real feelings: his
manner varied continually. Belinda could not avoid seeing his
perplexity--she had recourse again to the gold fishes and to Helena: upon
these subjects they could both speak very fluently. Lady Delacour made her
appearance by the time that Clarence had finished repeating the Abbé
Nollet's experiments, which he had heard from his friend Doctor X----.

"Now, Miss Portman, the transmission of sound in water," said Clarence----

"Deep in philosophy, I protest!" said Lady Delacour, as she came in. "What
is this about the transmission of sound in water?--Ha! whence come these
pretty gold fishes?"

"These gold fishes," said Belinda, "are come to console Marriott for the
loss of her macaw."

"Thank you, my dear Belinda, for these mute comforters," said her
ladyship; "the very best things you could have chosen."

"I have not the merit of the choice," said Belinda, "but I am heartily
glad that you approve of it."

"Pretty creatures," said Lady Delacour: "no fish were ever so pretty since
the days of the prince of the Black Islands in the Arabian Tales. And am I
obliged to you, Clarence, for these subjects?"

"No; I have only had the honour of bringing them to your ladyship
from----"

"From whom?--Amongst all my numerous acquaintance, have I one in the world
who cares a gold fish about me?--Stay, don't tell me, let me guess----Lady
Newland?--No; you shake your heads. I guessed her ladyship, merely because
I know she wants to bribe me some way or other to go to one of her stupid
entertainments; she wants to pick out of me taste enough to spend a
fortune. But you say it was not Lady Newland?--Mrs. Hunt then perhaps? for
she has two daughters whom she wants me to ask to my concerts. It was not
Mrs. Hunt?--Well, then, it was Mrs. Masterson; for she has a mind to go
with me to Harrowgate, where, by-the-bye, I shall not go; so I won't cheat
her out of her gold fishes; it was Mrs. Masterson, hey?"

"No. But these little gold fishes came from a person who would be very
glad to go with you to Harrowgate!" said Clarence Hervey. "Or who would be
very glad to stay with you in town," said Belinda: "from a person who
wants nothing from you but--your love."

"Male or female?" said Lady Delacour.

"Female."

"Female? I have not a female friend in the world but yourself, my dear
Belinda; nor do I know another female in the world, whose love I should
think about for half an instant. But pray tell me the name of this unknown
friend of mine, who wants nothing from me but love."

"Excuse me," said Belinda; "I cannot tell her name, unless you will
promise to see her."

"You have really made me impatient to see her," said Lady Delacour: "but I
am not able to go out, you know, yet; and with a new acquaintance, one
must go through the ceremony of a morning visit. Now, _en conscience_, is
it worth while?"

"Very well worth while," cried Belinda and Clarence Hervey, eagerly.

"Ah, pardi! as M. le Comte exclaims continually, Ah, pardi! You are both
wonderfully interested in this business. It is some sister, niece, or
cousin of Lady Anne Percival's; or--no, Belinda looks as if I were wrong.
Then, perhaps, it is Lady Anne herself?--Well, take me where you please,
my dear Belinda, and introduce me where you please: I depend on your taste
and judgment in all things; but I really am not yet able to pay morning
visits."

"The ceremony of a morning visit is quite unnecessary here," said Belinda:
"I will introduce the unknown friend to you to-morrow, if you will let me
invite her to your reading-party."

"With pleasure. She is some charming émigrée of Clarence Hervey's
acquaintance. But where did you meet with her this morning? You have both
of you conspired to puzzle me. Take it upon yourselves, then, if this new
acquaintance should not, as Ninon de l'Enclos used to say, _quit cost_. If
she be half as agreeable and _graceful_, Clarence, as Madame la Comtesse
de Pomenars, I should not think her acquaintance too dearly purchased by a
dozen morning visits."

Here the conversation was interrupted by a thundering knock at the door.

"Whose carriage is it?" said Lady Delacour. "Oh! Lady Newland's
ostentatious livery; and here is her ladyship getting out of her carriage
as awkwardly as if she had never been in one before. Overdressed, like a
true city dame! Pray, Clarence, look at her, entangled in her bale of gold
muslin, and conscious of her bulse of diamonds!--'Worth, if I'm worth a
farthing, five hundred thousand pounds bank currency!' she says or seems
to say, whenever she comes into a room. Now let us see her entrée--"

"But, my dear," cried Lady Delacour, starting at the sight of Belinda, who
was still in her morning dress, "absolutely below par!--Make your escape
to Marriott, I conjure you, by all your fears of the contempt of a lady,
who will at the first look estimate you, _au juste_, to a farthing a
yard."

As she left the room, Belinda heard Clarence Hervey repeat to Lady
Delacour--

    "Give me a look, give me a face,
    That makes simplicity a grace;
    Robes loosely flowing, hair as free--"

he paused--but Belinda recollected the remainder of the stanza--

    "Such sweet neglect more taketh me
    Than all th'adulteries of art,
    That strike mine eyes, but not mine heart."

It was observed, that Miss Portman dressed herself this day with the most
perfect simplicity.

Lady Delacour's curiosity was raised by the description which Belinda and
Clarence Hervey had given of the new acquaintance who sent her the gold
fishes, and who wanted nothing from her but her love.

Miss Portman told her that the _unknown_ would probably come half an hour
earlier to the reading-party than any of the rest of the company. Her
ladyship was alone in the library, when Lady Anne Percival brought Helena,
in consequence of a note from Belinda.

Miss Portman ran down stairs to the hall to receive her: the little girl
took her hand in silence. "Your mother was much pleased with the pretty
gold fishes," said Belinda, "and she will be still more pleased, when she
knows that they came from you:--she does not know _that_ yet."

"I hope she is better to-day? I will not make the least noise," whispered
Helena, as she went up stairs on tiptoe.

"You need not be afraid to make a noise--you need not walk on tiptoe, nor
shut the doors softly; for Lady Delacour seems to like all noises except
the screaming of the macaw. This way, my dear."

"Oh, I forgot--it is so long since!--Is mamma up and dressed?"

"Yes. She has had concerts and balls since her illness. You will hear a
play read to-night," said Belinda, "by that French gentleman whom Lady
Anne Percival mentioned to me yesterday."

"But there is a great deal of company, then, with mamma?"

"Nobody is with her now: so come into the library with me," said Belinda.
"Lady Delacour, here is the young lady who sent you the gold fishes."

"Helena!" cried Lady Delacour.

"You must, I am sure, acknowledge that Mr. Hervey was in the right, when
he said that the lady was a striking resemblance of your ladyship."

"Mr. Hervey knows how to flatter. I never had that ingenuous countenance,
even in my best days: but certainly the hair of her head is like mine--and
her hands and arms. But why do you tremble, Helena? Is there any thing so
very terrible in the looks of your mother?"

"No, only------"

"Only what, my dear?"

"Only--I was afraid--you might not like me."

"Who has filled your little foolish head with these vain fears? Come,
simpleton, kiss me, and tell me how comes it that you are not at
Oakly-hall, or--What's the name of the place?--Oakly-park?"

"Lady Anne Percival would not take me out of town, she said, whilst you
were ill; because she thought that you might wish--I mean she thought that
I should like to see you--if you pleased."

"Lady Anne is very good--very obliging--very considerate."

"She is _very_ good-natured," said Helena.

"You love this Lady Anne Percival, I perceive."

"Oh, yes, that I do. She has been so kind to me! I love her as if she
were----"

"As if she _were_--What? finish your sentence."

"My mother," said Helena, in a low voice, and she blushed.

"You love her as well as if she were your mother," repeated Lady Delacour:
"that is intelligible: speak intelligibly whatever you say, and never
leave a sentence unfinished."

"No, ma'am."

"Nothing can be more ill-bred, nor more absurd; for it shows that you have
the wish without the power to conceal your sentiments. Pray, my dear,"
continued Lady Delacour, "go to Oakly-park immediately--all farther
ceremony towards me may be spared."

"Ceremony, mamma!" said the little girl, and the tears came into her eyes.
Belinda sighed; and for some moments there was a dead silence.

"I mean only to say, Miss Portman," resumed Lady Delacour, "that I hate
ceremony: but I know that there are people in the world who love it, who
think all virtue, and all affection, depend on ceremony--who are

    'Content to dwell in _decencies_ for ever.'

I shall not dispute their merits. Verily, they have their reward in the
good opinion and good word of all little minds, that is to say, of above
half the world. I envy them not their hard-earned fame. Let ceremony
curtsy to ceremony with Chinese decorum; but, when ceremony expects to be
paid with affection, I beg to be excused."

"Ceremony sets no value upon affection, and therefore would not desire to
be paid with it," said Belinda.

"Never yet," continued lady Delacour, pursuing the train of her own
thoughts without attending to Belinda, "never yet was any thing like real
affection won by any of these ceremonious people."

"Never," said Miss Portman, looking at Helena; who, having quickness
enough to perceive that her mother aimed this _tirade_ against ceremony at
Lady Anne Percival, sat in the most painful embarrassment, her eyes cast
down, and her face and neck colouring all over. "Never yet," said Miss
Portman, "did mere ceremonious person win any thing like real affection;
especially from children, who are often excellent, because unprejudiced,
judges of character."

"We are all apt to think, that an opinion that differs from our own is a
prejudice," said Lady Delacour: "what is to decide?"

"Facts, I should think," said Belinda.

"But it is so difficult to get at facts, even about the merest trifles,"
said Lady Delacour. "Actions we see, but their causes we seldom see--an
aphorism worthy of Confucius himself: now to apply. Pray, my dear Helena,
how came you by the pretty gold fishes that you were so good as to send to
me yesterday?"

"Lady Anne Percival gave them to me, ma'am."

"And how came her ladyship to give them to you, ma'am?"

"She gave them to me," said Helena, hesitating.

"You need not blush, nor repeat to me that she gave them to you; that I
have heard already--that is the fact: now for the cause--unless it be a
secret. If it be a secret which you have been desired to keep, you are
quite right to keep it. I make no doubt of its being necessary, according
to some systems of education, that children should be taught to keep
secrets; and I am convinced (for Lady Anne Percival is, I have heard, a
perfect judge of propriety) that it is peculiarly proper that a daughter
should know how to keep secrets from her mother: therefore, my dear, you
need not trouble yourself to blush or hesitate any more--I shall ask no
farther questions: I was not aware that there was any secret in the case."

"There is no secret in the world in the case, mamma," said Helena; "I only
hesitated because--"

"You hesitated _only_ because, I suppose you mean. I presume Lady Anne
Percival will have no objection to your speaking good English?"

"I hesitated only because I was afraid it would not be right to praise
myself. Lady Anne Percival one day asked us all--"

"Us all?"

"I mean Charles, and Edward, and me, to give her an account of some
experiments, on the hearing of fishes, which Dr. X---- had told to us: she
promised to give the gold fishes, of which we were all very fond, to
whichever of us should give the best account of them--Lady Anne gave the
fishes to me."

"And is this all the secret? So it was real modesty made her hesitate,
Belinda? I beg your pardon, my dear, and Lady Anne's: you see how candid I
am, Belinda. But one question more, Helena: Who put it into your head to
send me your gold fishes?"

"Nobody, mamma; no one put it into my head. But I was at the
bird-fancier's yesterday, when Miss Portman was trying to get some bird
for Mrs. Marriott, that could not make any noise to disturb you; so I
thought my fishes would be the nicest things for you in the world; because
they cannot make the least noise, and they are as pretty as any birds in
the world--prettier, I think--and I hope Mrs. Marriott thinks so too."

"I don't know what Marriott thinks about the matter, but I can tell you
what I think," said Lady Delacour, "that you are one of the sweetest
little girls in the world, and that you would make me love you if I had a
heart of stone, which I have not, whatever some people may think.--Kiss
me, my child!"

The little girl sprang forwards, and threw her arms round her mother,
exclaiming, "Oh, mamma, are you in earnest?" and she pressed close to her
mother's bosom, clasping her with all her force.

Lady Delacour screamed, and pushed her daughter away.

"She is not angry with you, my love," said Belinda, "she is in sudden and
violent pain--don't be alarmed--she will be better soon. No, don't ring
the bell, but try whether you can open these window-shutters, and throw up
the sash."

Whilst Belinda was supporting Lady Delacour, and whilst Helena was trying
to open the window, a servant came into the room to announce the Count de
N----.

"Show him into the drawing-room," said Belinda. Lady Delacour, though in
great pain, rose and retired to her dressing-room. "I shall not be able to
go down to these people yet," said she; "you must make my excuses to the
count and to every body; and tell poor Helena I was not angry, though I
pushed her away. Keep her below stairs: I will come as soon as I am able.
Send Marriott. Do not forget, my dear, to tell Helena I was not angry."

The reading party went on, and Lady Delacour made her appearance as the
company were drinking orgeat, between the fourth and fifth act. "Helena,
_my dear_," said she, "will you bring me a glass of orgeat?"

Clarence Hervey looked at Belinda with a congratulatory smile: "do not you
think," whispered he, "that we shall succeed? Did you see that look of
Lady Delacour's?"

Nothing tends more to increase the esteem and affection of two people for
each other than their having one and the same benevolent object. Clarence
Hervey and Belinda seemed to know one another's thoughts and feelings this
evening better than they had ever done before during the whole course of
their acquaintance.

After the play was over, most of the company went away; only a select
party of _beaux esprits_ stayed to supper; they were standing at the table
at which the count had been reading: several volumes of French plays and
novels were lying there, and Clarence Hervey, taking up one of them,
cried, "Come, let us try our fate by the Sortes Virgilianae."

Lady Delacour opened the book, which was a volume of Marmontel's Tales.

"La femme comme il y en a peu!" exclaimed Hervey.

"Who will ever more have faith in the Sortes Virgilianae?" said Lady
Delacour, laughing; but whilst she laughed she went closer to a candle, to
read the page which she had opened. Belinda and Clarence Hervey followed
her. "Really, it is somewhat singular, Belinda, that I should have opened
upon this passage," continued she, in a low voice, pointing it out to Miss
Portman.

It was a description of the manner in which la femme comme il y en a peu
managed a husband, who was excessively afraid of being thought to be
governed by his wife. As her ladyship turned over the page, she saw a leaf
of myrtle which Belinda, who had been reading the story the preceding day,
had put into the book for a mark.

"Whose mark is this? Yours, Belinda, I am sure, by its elegance," said
Lady Delacour. "So! this is a concerted plan between you two, I see,"
continued her ladyship, with an air of pique: "you have contrived prettily
de me dire des vérités! One says, 'Let us try our fate by the Sortes
Virgilianae;' the other has dexterously put a mark in the book, to make it
open upon a lesson for the naughty child."

Belinda and Mr. Hervey assured her that they had used no such mean arts,
that nothing had been concerted between them.

"How came this leaf of myrtle here, then?" said Lady Delacour.

"I was reading that story yesterday, and left it as my mark."

"I cannot help believing you, because you never yet deceived me, even in
the merest trifle: you are truth itself, Belinda. Well, you see that _you_
were the cause of my drawing such an extraordinary lot; the book would not
have opened here but for your mark. My fate, I find, is in your hands: if
Lady Delacour is ever to be la femme comme il y en a peu, which is the
most _improbable_ thing in the world, Miss Portman will be the cause of
it."

"Which is the most probable thing in the world," said Clarence Hervey.
"This myrtle has a delightful perfume," added he, rubbing the leaf between
his fingers.

"But, after all," said Lady Delacour, throwing aside the book, "This
heroine of Marmontel's is not la femme comme il y en a peu, but la femme
comme il n'y en a _point_."

"Mrs. Margaret Delacour's carriage, my lady, for Miss Delacour," said a
footman to her ladyship.

"Helena stays with me to-night--my compliments," said Lady Delacour.

"How pleased the little gipsy looks!" added she, turning to Helena, who
heard the message; "and how handsome she looks when she is pleased!--Do
these auburn locks of yours, Helena, curl naturally or artificially?"

"Naturally, mamma."

"Naturally! so much the better: so did mine at your age."

Some of the company now took notice of the astonishing resemblance between
Helena and her mother; and the more Lady Delacour considered her daughter
as a part of herself, the more she was inclined to be pleased with her.
The glass globe containing the gold fishes was put in the middle of the
table at supper; and Clarence Hervey never paid her ladyship such
respectful attention in his life as he did this evening.

The conversation at supper turned upon a magnificent and elegant
entertainment which had lately been given by a fashionable duchess, and
some of the company spoke in high terms of the beauty and accomplishments
of her grace's daughter, who had for the first time appeared in public on
that occasion.

"The daughter will eclipse, totally eclipse, the mother," said Lady
Delacour. "That total eclipse has been foretold by many knowing people,"
said Clarence Hervey; "but how can there be an eclipse between two bodies
which never cross one another and that I understand to be the case between
the duchess and her daughter."

This observation seemed to make a great impression upon Lady Delacour.
Clarence Hervey went on, and with much eloquence expressed his admiration
of the mother who had stopped short in the career of dissipation to employ
her inimitable talents in the education of her children; who had
absolutely brought Virtue into fashion by the irresistible powers of wit
and beauty.

"Really, Clarence," said Lady Delacour, rising from table, "vous parlez
avec beaucoup d'onction. I advise you to write a sentimental comedy, a
comédie larmoyante, or a drama on the German model, and call it The School
for Mothers, and beg her grace of ---- to sit for your heroine."

"Your ladyship, surely, would not be so cruel as to send a faithful
servant a begging for a heroine?" said Clarence Hervey.

Lady Delacour smiled at first at the compliment, but a few minutes
afterwards she sighed bitterly. "It is too late for me to think of being a
heroine," said she.

"Too late?" cried Hervey, following her eagerly as she walked out of the
supper-room; "too late? Her grace of ---- is _some_ years older than your
ladyship."

"Well, I did not mean to say _too late_," said Lady Delacour; "but let us
go on to something else. Why were you not at the fète champêtre the other
day? and where were you all this morning? And pray can you tell me when
your friend doctor X---- returns to town?"

"Mr. Horton is getting better," said Clarence, "and I hope that we shall
have Dr. X---- soon amongst us again. I hear that he is to be in town in
the course of a few days."

"Did he inquire for me?--Did he ask how I did?"

"No. I fancy he took it for granted that your ladyship was quite well; for
I told him you were getting better every day, and that you were in
charming spirits."

"Yes," said Lady Delacour, "but I wear myself out with these charming
spirits. I am very nervous still, I assure you, and sitting up late is not
good for me: so I shall wish you and all the world a good night. You see I
am absolutely a reformed rake."


CHAPTER XIV.

THE EXHIBITION.


Two hours after her ladyship had retired to her room, as Belinda was
passing by the door to go to her own bedchamber, she heard Lady Delacour
call to her.

"Belinda, you need not walk so softly; I am not asleep. Come in, will you,
my dear? I have something of consequence to say to you. Is all the world
gone?"

"Yes; and I thought that you were asleep. I hope you are not in pain."

"Not just at present, thank you; but that was a terrible embrace of poor
little Helena's. You see to what accidents I should be continually
exposed, if I had that child always about me; and yet she seems of such an
affectionate disposition, that I wish it were possible to keep her at
home. Sit down by my bedside, my dear Belinda, and I will tell you what I
have resolved upon."

Belinda sat down, and Lady Delacour was silent for some minutes.

"I am resolved," said she, "to make one desperate effort for my life. New
plans, new hopes of happiness, have opened to my imagination, and, with my
hopes of being happy, my courage rises. I am determined to submit to the
dreadful operation which alone can radically cure me--you understand me;
but it must be kept a profound secret. I know of a person who could be got
to perform this operation with the utmost secrecy."

"But, surely," said Belinda, "safety must be your first object!"

"No, secrecy is my first object. Nay, do not reason with me; it is a
subject on which I cannot, will not, reason. Hear me--I will keep Helena
with me for a few days; she was surprised by what passed in the library
this evening--I must remove all suspicion from her mind."

"There is no suspicion in her mind," said Belinda.

"So much the better: she shall go immediately to school, or to Oakly-park.
I will then stand my trial for life or death; and if I live I will be,
what I have never yet been, a mother to Helena. If I die, you and Clarence
Hervey will take care of her; I know you will. That young man is worthy of
you, Belinda. If I die, I charge you to tell him that I knew his value;
that I had a soul capable of being touched by the eloquence of virtue."
Lady Delacour, after a pause, said, in an altered tone, "Do you think,
Belinda, that I shall survive this operation?"

"The opinion of Dr. X----," said Belinda, "must certainly be more
satisfactory than mine;" and she repeated what the doctor had left with
her in writing upon this subject. "You see," said Belinda, "that Dr. X----
is by no means certain that you have the complaint which you dread."

"I am certain of it," said Lady Delacour, with a deep sigh. Then, after a
pause, she resumed: "So it is the doctor's opinion, that I shall
inevitably destroy myself if, from a vain hope of secrecy, I put myself
into ignorant hands? These are his own words, are they? Very strong; and
he is prudent to leave that opinion in writing. Now, whatever happens, he
cannot be answerable for 'measures which he does not guide:' nor you
either, my dear; you have done all that is prudent and proper. But I must
beg you to recollect, that I am neither a child nor a fool; that I am come
to years of discretion, and that I am not now in the delirium of a fever;
consequently, there can be no pretence for _managing_ me. In this
particular I must insist upon managing myself. I have confidence in the
skill of the person whom I shall employ: Dr. X----, very likely, would
have none, because the man may not have a diploma for killing or curing in
form. That is nothing to the purpose. It is I that am to undergo the
operation: it is _my_ health, _my_ life, that is risked; and if I am
satisfied, that is enough. Secrecy, as I told you before, is my first
object."

"And cannot you," said Belinda, "depend with more security upon the honour
of a surgeon who is at the head of his profession, and who has a high
reputation at stake, than upon a vague promise of secrecy from some
obscure quack, who has no reputation to lose?"

"No," said Lady Delacour: "I tell you, my dear, that I cannot depend upon
any of these 'honourable men.' I have taken means to satisfy myself on
this point: their honour and foolish delicacy would not allow them to
perform such an operation for a wife, without the knowledge, privity,
consent, &c. &c. &c. of her husband. Now Lord Delacour's knowing the thing
is quite out of the question."

"Why, my dear Lady Delacour, why?" said Belinda, with great earnestness.
"Surely a husband has the strongest claim to be consulted upon such an
occasion! Let me entreat you to tell Lord Delacour your intention, and
then all will be right. Say Yes, my dear friend! let me prevail upon you,"
said Belinda, taking her ladyship's hand, and pressing it between both of
hers with the most affectionate eagerness.

Lady Delacour made no answer, but fixed her eyes upon Belinda's.

"Lord Delacour," continued Miss Portman, "deserves this from you, by the
great interest, the increasing interest, that he has shown of late about
your health: his kindness and handsome conduct the other morning certainly
pleased you, and you have now an opportunity of showing that confidence in
him, which his affection and constant attachment to you merit."

"I trouble myself very little about the constancy of Lord Delacour's
attachment to me," said her ladyship coolly, withdrawing her hand from
Belinda; "whether his lordship's affection for me has of late increased or
diminished, is an object of perfect indifference to me. But if I were
inclined to reward him for his late attentions, I should apprehend that we
might hit upon some better reward than you have pitched upon. Unless you
imagine that Lord Delacour has a peculiar taste for surgical operations, I
cannot conceive how his becoming my confidant upon this occasion could
have an immediate tendency to increase his affection for me--about which
affection I don't care a straw, as you, better than any one else, must
know; for I am no hypocrite. Now comes the cloud-burst!

COLONEL.

Professor, your newspaper is making progress. To bad principles is now
added something else--baseness.

IDA (_frightened_).

Father!

OLDENDORF (_coming forward_).

Colonel, how can you justify this insulting expression?

COLONEL (_holding out the paper to him_).

Look here! That stands in your paper! In your paper, Oldendorf!

OLDENDORF.

The tone of the attack is not quite as calm as I could have wished--

COLONEL.

Not quite so calm? Not really?

OLDENDORF.

In substance the attack is justified.

COLONEL.

Sir! You dare say that to me!

IDA.

Father!

OLDENDORF.

Colonel, I do not comprehend this attitude, and I beg you to consider
that we are speaking before witnesses.

COLONEL.

Do not ask for any consideration. It would have been your place to show
consideration for the man whose friendship you are otherwise so ready
to claim.

OLDENDORF.

But, first of all, tell me frankly what is your own connection with the
articles attacked in the _Coriolanus_?

COLONEL.

A very chance connection, too insignificant in your eyes to deserve your
regard. The articles are by me!

IDA.

Heavens!

OLDENDORF (_vehemently_).

By you? Articles in the paper of this gentleman?

IDA (_entreating him_).

Edward!

OLDENDORF (_more calmly_).

The _Union_ has attacked not you but an unknown person, who to us
was merely a partisan of this gentleman. You would have spared us both
this painful scene had you not concealed from me the fact that you are a
correspondent of the _Coriolanus_.

COLONEL.

You will have to stand my continuing not to make you a confidant
of my actions. You have here given me a printed proof of your friendship,
which does not make me long for other proofs.

OLDENDORF (_taking up his hat_).

I can only say that I deeply regret the occurrence, but do not feel myself
in the least to blame. I hope, Colonel, that, when you think the matter
over calmly, you will come to the same conclusion. Good-by, Miss Ida. Good
day to you.

[_Exit as far as centre door._]

IDA (_entreating_).

Father, don't let him leave us that way!

COLONEL.

It is better than to have him stay.

_Enter_ ADELAIDE.

ADELAIDE (_entering in elegant traveling costume, meets_ OLDENDORF _at the
door_).

Not so fast, Professor!

[OLDENDORF _kisses her hand and leaves._]
IDA. }(_together_ Adelaide!

[_Falls into her arms._]).
COLONEL. } Adelaide! And at such a moment!

ADELAIDE (_holding_ IDA _fast and stretching out her hand to the_ COLONEL).

Shake hands with your compatriot. Aunt sends love, and
Rosenau Manor, in its brown autumn dress, presents its humble
compliments.

The fields lie bare, and in the garden the withered leaves dance with the
wind.--Ah, Mr. von Senden!

COLONEL (_introducing_).

Mr. Blumenberg, the editor.

SENDEN.

We are delighted to welcome our zealous agriculturist to the city.

ADELAIDE.

And we should have been pleased occasionally to meet our neighbor
in the country.

COLONEL.

He has a great deal to do here. He is a great politician, and works hard
for the good cause.

ADELAIDE.

Yes, indeed, we read of his doings in the newspaper.

I drove through your fields yesterday. Your potatoes are not all in yet.
Your steward didn't get through with the work.

SENDEN.

You Rosenau people are privileged to get through a week earlier than any
one else.

ADELAIDE.

On the other hand, we have nothing to do but to farm. (_Amicably._) The
neighbors send greetings.

SENDEN.

Thank you. We must relinquish you now to friends who have more claim on
you than we have. But will you not receive me in the course of the day so
that I can ask for the news from home? [ADELAIDE _inclines her head._]
SENDEN.

Good-by, Colonel. (_To_ IDA.) My respectful compliments, Miss Berg.

[_Exit together with_ BLUMENBERG.]

IDA (_embracing_ ADELAIDE).

I have you at last. Now everything will be all right!

ADELAIDE.

What is to be all right? Is anything not all right? Back there some one
passed me more quickly than usual, and here I see glistening eyes and a
furrowed brow. [_Kisses her on the eyes._] They shall not ruin your pretty
eyes. And you, honored friend, turn a more friendly countenance to me.

COLONEL.

You must stay with us all winter; it will be the first you have given us
in a long time; we shall try to deserve such a favor.

ADELAIDE (_seriously_).

It is the first one since my father's death that I have cared to
mingle with the world again. Besides, I have business that calls me here.
You know I came of age this summer, and my legal friend, Judge Schwarz,
requires my presence. Listen, Ida, the servants are unpacking, go and
see that things are properly put away. (_Aside._) And put a damp cloth over
your eyes for people can see that you have been crying.

[_Exit_ IDA _to the right._ ADELAIDE _quickly goes up to the_ COLONEL.]
What is the matter with Ida and the professor?

COLONEL.

That would be a long story. I shall not spoil my pleasure with it now.

We men are at odds; our views are too opposed.

ADELAIDE.

But were not your views opposed before this, too? And yet you were
on such good terms with Oldendorf!

COLONEL.

They were not so extremely opposed as now.

ADELAIDE.

And which of you has changed his views?

COLONEL.

H'm! Why, he, of course. He is led astray in great part by his evil companions.
There are some men, journalists on his paper, and especially there
is a certain Bolz.

ADELAIDE (_aside_).

What's this I hear?

COLONEL.

But probably you know him yourself.

Why, he comes from your neighborhood.

ADELAIDE.

He is a Rosenau boy.

COLONEL.

I remember. Your father, the good old general, could not endure him.

ADELAIDE.

At least he sometimes said so.

COLONEL.

Since then this Bolz has become queer. His mode of life is said to be
irregular, and I fear his morals are pretty loose. He is Oldendorf's
evil genius.

ADELAIDE.

That would be a pity!--No, I do not believe it!

COLONEL. What do you not believe, Adelaide?

ADELAIDE (_smiling_).

I do not believe in evil geniuses. What has gone wrong between you and
Oldendorf can be set right again. Enemies today, friends tomorrow--that
is the way in politics; but Ida's feelings will not change so quickly.
Colonel, I have brought with me a beautiful design for a dress. That
new dress I mean to wear this winter as bridesmaid.

COLONEL.

No chance of it! You can't catch me that way, girl.

I'll carry the war into the enemy's country.

Why do you drive other people to the altar and let your own whole neighborhood
joke you about being the Sleeping Beauty and the virgin farmer?

ADELAIDE (_laughing_).

Well, so they do.

COLONEL.

The richest heiress in the whole district! Courted by a host of adorers,
yet so firmly intrenched against all sentiment; no one can comprehend
it.

ADELAIDE.

My dear Colonel, if our young gentlemen were as lovable as certain older
ones--but, alas! they are not.

COLONEL.

You shan't escape me. We shall hold you fast in town, until we find one
among our young men whom you will deem worthy to be enrolled under
your command.

For whoever be your chosen husband, he will have the same experience I have
had--namely, that, first or last, he will have to do your bidding.

ADELAIDE (_quickly_).

Will you do my bidding with regard to Ida and the professor? Now I
have you!

COLONEL.

Will you do me the favor of choosing your husband this winter while
you are with us?

Yes? Now I have _you_!

ADELAIDE.

It's a bargain! Shake hands! [_Holds out her hand to him._]
COLONEL (_puts his hand in hers, laughing_).

Well, you're outwitted.

[_Exit through centre door._]
ADELAIDE (_alone_).

I don't think I am. What, Mr. Conrad Bolz! Is that your reputation among
people! You live an irregular life? You have loose morals? You are an evil
genius?--
_Enter_ KORB.

KORB (_through the centre door with a package_).

Where shall I put the account-books and the papers, Miss Adelaide?

ADELAIDE.

In my apartment. Tell me, dear Korb, did you find your room here in
order?

KORB.

In the finest order. The servant has given me two wax candles; it
is pure extravagance.

ADELAIDE.

You need not touch a pen for me this whole day. I want you to see the town
and look up your acquaintances. You have acquaintances here, I
suppose?

KORB.

Not very many. It is more than a year since I was last here.

ADELAIDE (_indifferently_).

But are there no people from Rosenau here?

KORB.

Among the soldiers are four from the village. There is John Lutz of
Schimmellutz--
ADELAIDE.

I know.

Have you no other acquaintance here from the village?

KORB.

None at all, except him, of course--
ADELAIDE.

Except him? Whom do you mean?

KORB.

Why, our Mr. Conrad.

ADELAIDE.

Oh, to be sure! Are you not going to visit him? I thought you had always
been good friends.

KORB.

Going to visit him? That is the first place I am going to.

I have been looking forward to it during the whole journey. He is a faithful
soul of whom the village has a right to be proud.

ADELAIDE (_warmly_).

Yes, he has a faithful heart.

KORB (_eagerly_).

Ever merry, ever friendly, and so attached to the village! Poor man,
it is a long time since he was there!

ADELAIDE.

Don't speak of it!

KORB.
He will ask me about everything--about the farming--
ADELAIDE (_eagerly_).
And about the horses. The old sorrel he was so fond of riding is
still alive. KORB. And about the shrubs he planted with
you.

ADELAIDE.
Especially about the lilac-bush where my arbor now stands. Be sure
you tell him about that.

KORB.
And about the pond. Three hundred and sixty carp!

ADELAIDE.
And sixty gold-tench; don't forget that. And the old carp with the
copper ring about his body, that he put there, came out with the
last haul, and we threw him back again.

KORB.
And how he will ask about you, Miss Adelaide!

ADELAIDE.
Tell him I am well.

KORB.
And how you have carried on the farming since the general died; and
that you take his newspaper which I read aloud to the farm-hands
afterward.

ADELAIDE.
Just that you need not tell him. [_Sighing, aside._] On these lines
I shall learn nothing whatever. [_Pause, gravely._] See here, dear
Korb, I have heard all sorts of things about Mr. Bolz that surprise
me. He is said to live an irregular life.

KORB.
Yes, I imagine he does; he always was a wild colt.

ADELAIDE.
He is said to spend more than his income.

KORB.
Yes, that is quite possible. But I am perfectly sure he spends it
merrily.

ADELAIDE (_aside_).
Small consolation I shall get from him! (_Indifferently._) He has
now a good position, I suppose; won't he soon be looking for a
wife?

KORB.
A wife? No, he is not doing that. It is impossible.

ADELAIDE.
Well, I heard something of the kind; at least he is said to be much
interested in a young lady. People are talking of it.

KORB.
Why, that would be--no, I don't believe it. (_Hastily._) But I'll
ask him about it at once.

ADELAIDE.
Well, he would be the last person to tell you. One learns such
things from a man's friends and acquaintances. The village people
ought to know it, I suppose, if a Rosenau man marries.

KORB.
Of course they should. I must get at the truth of that.

ADELAIDE.
You would have to go about it the right way. You know how crafty
he is.

KORB.
Oh, I'll get round him all right. I'll find some way.

ADELAIDE.
Go, dear Korb! [_Exit_ KORB.] Those were sad tidings with which the
Colonel met me. Conrad--immoral, unworthy? It is impossible! A noble
character cannot change to that extent. I do not believe one word
of what they say!

[_EXIT_.] 

SCENE II
_Editorial room of the "Union." Doors in the centre and on both
sides.
On the left, in the foreground, a desk with newspapers and documents.
On the right, a similar, smaller table. Chairs._
_Enter_ BOLZ, _through the side door on the right, then_ MILLER
_through the centre door._ 
BOLZ (_eagerly_).
Miller! Factotum! Where is the mail?
MILLER (_nimbly with a package of letters and newspapers_).
Here is the mail, Mr. Bolz; and here, from the press, is the
proof-sheet of this evening's issue to be corrected.
BOLZ (_at the table on the left quickly opening, looking through,
and marking letters with a pencil_).
I have already corrected the proof, old rascal!

MILLER.
Not quite. Down here is still the "Miscellaneous" which Mr. Bellmaus
gave the type-setters.

BOLZ.

Let us have it!
[_Reads in the newspaper._]
"Washing stolen from the yard"--"Triplets born"--"Concert"--"Concert"--"Meeting
of an Association"--"Theatre"--all in order--"Newly invented
engine"--"The great sea-serpent spied." 
[_Jumping up._]
What the deuce is this? Is he bringing up the old sea-serpent
again?
It ought to be cooked into a jelly for him, and he be made to eat
it cold.

[_Hurries to the door on the right._]
Bellmaus, monster, come out!

_Enter_ BELLMAUS.
BELLMAUS (_from the right, pen in hand_).
What is the matter! Why all this noise?

BOLZ (_solemnly_).
Bellmaus, when we did you the honor of intrusting you with the odds
and ends for this newspaper, we never expected you to bring the
everlasting great sea-serpent writhing through the columns of our
journal!--How could you put in that worn-out old lie?

BELLMAUS.
It just fitted. There were exactly six lines left.

BOLZ.
That is an excuse, but not a good one. Invent your own stories.
What are you a journalist for? Make a little "Communication," an
observation, for instance, on human life in general, or something
about dogs running around loose in the streets; or choose a
bloodcurdling story such as a murder out of politeness, or how a
woodchuck bit seven sleeping children, or something of that kind.
So infinitely much happens, and so infinitely much does not happen,
that an honest newspaper man ought never to be without
news.

BELLMAUS.

Give it here, I will change it.
[_Goes to the table, looks into a printed sheet, cuts a clipping
from it with large shears, and pastes it on the copy of the
newspaper._] 
BOLZ.
That's right, my son, so do, and mend thy ways.
[_Opening the door on the right._]
Kämpe, can you come in a moment? (_To_ MILLER, _who is waiting at
the door._) Take that proof straight to the press!
[MILLER _takes the sheet from_ BELLMAUS _and hurries off._]
_Enter_ KÄMPE.

KÄMPE.
But I can't write anything decent while you are making such a
noise.

BOLZ.
You can't? What have you just written, then? At most, I imagine, a
letter to a ballet-dancer or an order to your tailor.

BELLMAUS.
No, he writes tender letters. He is seriously in love, for he took
me walking in the moonlight yesterday and scorned the idea of a
drink.

KÄMPE (_who has seated himself comfortably_).
Gentlemen, it is unfair to call a man away from his work for the
sake of making such poor jokes.

BOLZ.
Yes, yes, he evidently slanders you when he maintains that you love
anything else but your new boots and to some small degree your own
person. You yourself are a love-spurting nature, little Bellmaus.
You glow like a fusee whenever you see a young lady. Spluttering
and smoky you hover around her, and yet don't dare even to address
her. But we must be lenient with him; his shyness is to blame. He
blushes in woman's presence, and is still capable of lovely emotions,
for he started out to be a lyric poet.

BELLMAUS.
I don't care to be continually reproached with my poems. Did I ever
read them to you?

BOLZ.
No, thank Heaven, that audacity you never had. (_Seriously._) But,
now, gentlemen, to business. Today's number is ready. Oldendorf is
not yet here, but meanwhile, let us hold a confidential session.
Oldendorf _must_ be chosen deputy from this town to the next
Parliament; our party and the _Union must_ put that through. How
does our stock stand today?

KÄMPE.
Remarkably high. Our opponents agree that no other candidate would
be so dangerous for them, and our friends everywhere are most
hopeful.
But you know how little that may signify. Here is the list of the
voters. Our election committee sends word to you that our calculations
were correct. Of the hundred voters from our town, forty surely
ours.
About an equal number are pledged to the other party; the remnant
of some twenty votes are undecided. It is clear that the election
will be determined by a very small majority.

BOLZ.
Of course we shall have that majority--a majority of from eight to
ten votes. Just say that, everywhere, with the greatest assuredness.
Many a one who is still undecided will come over to us on hearing
that we are the stronger. Where is the list of our uncertain voters?
[_Looks it over._] 
KÄMPE.
I have placed a mark wherever our friends think some influence might
be exerted.

BOLZ.
I see two crosses opposite one name; what do they signify?

KÄMPE.
That is Piepenbrink, the wine-dealer Piepenbrink. He has a large
following in his district, is a well-to-do man, and, they say, can
command five or six votes among his adherents.

BOLZ.
Him we must have. What sort of a man is he?

KÄMPE.
He is very blunt, they say, and no politician at all.

BELLMAUS.
But he has a pretty daughter.

KÄMPE.
What's the use of his pretty daughter? I'd rather he had an ugly
wife--one could get at him more easily.

BELLMAUS.
Yes, but he has one--a lady with little curls and fiery red ribbons
in her cap.

BOLZ.
Wife or no wife, the man must be ours. Hush, some one is coming;
that is Oldendorf's step. He needn't know anything of our conference.
Go to your room, gentlemen. To be continued this evening.
KÄMPE (_at the door_).
It is still agreed, I suppose, that in the next number I resume the
attack on the new correspondent of the _Coriolanus_, the one with
the arrow.

BOLZ.
Yes, indeed. Pitch into him, decently but hard. Just now, on the
eve of the election, a little row with our opponents will do us
good; and the articles with the arrow give us a great opening.
[_Exeunt_ KÄMPE _and_ BELLMAUS.]
_Enter_ OLDENDORF _through centre door._ 
OLDENDORF.
Good-day, Conrad.
BOLZ (_at the table on the right, looking over the list of
voters_).
Blessed be thy coming! The mail is over there; there is nothing of
importance.

OLDENDORF.

Do you need me here today?

BOLZ.
No, my darling. This evening's issue is ready. For tomorrow Kämpe
is writing the leading article.

OLDENDORF.

About what?

BOLZ.
A little skirmish with the _Coriolanus_. Another one against the
unknown correspondent with the arrow who attacked our party. But
do not worry; I told Kämpe to make the article dignified, very
dignified.

OLDENDORF.
For Heaven's sake, don't! The article must not be written.

BOLZ.
I fail to comprehend you. What use are political opponents if you
cannot attack them?

OLDENDORF.
Now see here! These articles were written by the Colonel; he told
me so himself today.

BOLZ.

Thunder and lightning!
OLDENDORF (_gloomily_).
You may imagine that along with this admission went other intimations
which place me just now in a very uncomfortable position as regards
the Colonel and his family.

BOLZ (_seriously_).
And what does the Colonel want you to do?

OLDENDORF.
He will be reconciled to me if I resign the editorship of this paper
and withdraw as candidate for election.

BOLZ.
The devil! He is moderate in his demands!

OLDENDORF.
I suffer under this discord; to you, as my friend, I can say so.
BOLZ (_going up to him and pressing his hand_).
Solemn moment of manly emotion!

OLDENDORF.
Don't play the clown just now. You can imagine how unpleasant my
position in the Colonel's house has become. The worthy old gentleman
either frigid or violent; the conversation spiced with bitter
allusions; Ida suffering--I can often see that she has been crying.
If our party wins and I become member for the town, I fear I shall
lose all hope of marrying Ida.

BOLZ (_vehemently_).
And if you withdraw it will be a serious blow to our party. (_Rapidly
and emphatically._) The coming session of Parliament will determine
the fate of the country. The parties are almost equal. Every loss
is a blow of a vote to our cause. In this town we have no other
candidate but you, who is sufficiently popular to make his election
probable. If you withdraw from the contest, no matter what the
reason, our opponents win.

OLDENDORF.
Unfortunately what you say is true.
BOLZ (_with continued vehemence_).
I won't dwell on my confidence in your talents. I am convinced that,
in the House, and, possibly, as one of the ministers, you will be
of service to your country. I merely ask you, now, to remember your
duty to our political friends, who have pinned their faith on you,
and to this paper and ourselves, who for three years have worked
for the credit of the name of Oldendorf which heads our front page.
Your honor is at stake, and every moment of wavering is wrong.
OLDENDORF (_dignified_).
You are exciting yourself without reason. I too deem it wrong to
retire now when I am told that our cause needs me. But in confessing
to you, my friend, that my decision means a great personal sacrifice,
I am not compromising either our cause or ourselves as individuals.
BOLZ (_soothingly_).
Right you are! You are a loyal comrade. And so peace, friendship,
courage! Your old Colonel won't be inexorable.

OLDENDORF.
He has grown intimate with Senden, who flatters him in every way,
and has plans, I fear, which affect me also. I should feel still
more worried but for knowing that I have now a good advocate in the
Colonel's house. Adelaide Runeck has just arrived.

BOLZ.
Adelaide Runeck? She into the bargain! (_Quickly calling through
the door on the right._) Kämpe, the article against the knight of
the arrow is not to be written. Understand?

_Enter_ KÄMPE.
KÄMPE (_at the door, pen in hand_).
But what is to be written, then?

BOLZ.
The devil only knows! See here! Perhaps I can induce Oldendorf to
write the leading article for tomorrow himself. But at all events
you must have something on hand.

KÄMPE.

But what?
BOLZ (_excitedly_).
For all I care write about emigration to Australia; that, at any
rate, will give no offense.

KÄMPE.
Good! Am I to encourage it or advise against it?

BOLZ (_quickly_).
Advise against it, of course; we need every one who is willing to
work here at home. Depict Australia as a contemptible hole. Be
perfectly truthful but make it as black as possible--how the Kangaroo,
balled into a heap, springs with invincible malice at the settler's
head, while the duckbill nips at the back of his legs; how the
gold-seeker has, in winter, to stand up to his neck in salt water
while for three months in summer he has not a drop to drink; how
he may live through all that only to be eaten up at last by thievish
natives. Make it very vivid and end up with the latest market prices
for Australian wool from the _Times_. You'll find what books you
need in the library.
[_Slams the door to._]
OLDENDORF (_at the table_).
Do you know Miss Runeck? She often inquires about you in her letters
to Ida.

BOLZ.
Indeed? Yes, to be sure, I know her. We are from the same village--she
from the manor-house, I from the parsonage. My father taught us
together. Oh, yes, I know her!

OLDENDORF.
How comes it that you have drifted so far apart? You never speak
of her.

BOLZ.
H'm! It is an old story--family quarrels, Montagues and Capulets.
I have not seen her for a long time.

OLDENDORF (_smiling_).
I hope that you too were not estranged by politics.

BOLZ.
Politics did, indeed, have something to do with our separation; you
see it is the common misfortune that party life destroys
friendship.

OLDENDORF.
Sad to relate! In religion any educated man will tolerate the
convictions of another; but in politics we treat each other like
reprobates if there be the slightest shade of difference of opinion
between us.

BOLZ (_aside_).
Matter for our next article! (_Aloud._) "The slightest shade of
difference of opinion between us." Just what I think! We must have
that in our paper! (_Entreating)_. Look! A nice little virtuous
article: "An admonition to our voters--Respect our opponents, for
they are, after all, our brothers!" (_Urging him more and more._)
Oldendorf, that would be something for you--there is virtue and
humanity in the theme; writing will divert you, and you owe the
paper an article because you forbade the feud. Please do me the
favor! Go into the back room there and write. No one shall disturb
you.

OLDENDORF (_smiling_).

You are just a vulgar intriguer!
BOLZ (_forcing him from his chair_).
Please, you'll find ink and paper there. Come, deary, come! [_He
accompanies him to the door on the left. Exit_ OLDENDORF. BOLZ
_calling after him._] Will you have a cigar? An old Henry Clay?
[_Draws a cigar-case from his pocket._] No? Don't make it too short;
it is to be the principal article! [_He shuts the door, calls through
the door on the right._] The professor is writing the article
himself."But this seems to be foreign beauty," continued Lady Delacour, "if one
may judge by her air, her dress, and the scenery about her--cocoa-trees,
plantains: Miss Portman, what think you?"

"I think," said Belinda, (but her voice faltered so much that she could
hardly speak,) "that it is a scene from Paul and Virginia. I think the
figure is St. Pierre's Virginia."

"Virginia St. Pierre! ma'am," cried Mr. Rochfort, winking at Sir Philip.
"No, no, damme! there you are wrong, Rochfort; say Hervey's Virginia, and
then you have it, damme! or, may be, Virginia Hervey--who knows?"

"This is a portrait," whispered the baronet to Lady Delacour, "of
Clarence's mistress." Whilst her ladyship leant her ear to this whisper,
which was sufficiently audible, she fixed a seemingly careless, but most
observing, inquisitive eye upon poor Belinda. Her confusion, for she heard
the whisper, was excessive.

"She loves Clarence Hervey--she has no thoughts of Lord Delacour and his
coronet: I have done her injustice," thought Lady Delacour, and instantly
she despatched Sir Philip out of the room, for a catalogue of the
pictures, begged Mr. Rochfort to get her something else, and, drawing Miss
Portman's arm within hers, she said, in a low voice, "Lean upon me, my
dearest Belinda: depend upon it, Clarence will never be such a fool as to
marry the girl--Virginia Hervey she will never be!"

"And what will become of her? can Mr. Hervey desert her? she looks like
innocence itself--and so young, too! Can he leave her for ever to sorrow,
and vice, and infamy?" thought Belinda, as she kept her eyes fixed, in
silent anguish, upon the picture of Virginia. "No, he cannot do this: if
he could he would be unworthy of me, and I _ought_ to think of him no
more. No; he will marry her; and I _must_ think of him no more."

She turned abruptly away from the picture, and she saw Clarence Hervey
standing beside her.

"What do you think of this picture? is it not beautiful? We are quite
enchanted with it; but you do not seem to be struck with it, as we were at
the first glance," said Lady Delacour.

"Because," answered Clarence, gaily, "it is not the first glance I have
had at that picture--I admired it yesterday, and admire it to-day."

"But you are tired of admiring it, I see. Well, we shall not force you to
be in raptures with it--shall we, Miss Portman? A man may be tired of the
most beautiful face in the world, or the most beautiful picture; but
really there is so much sweetness, so much innocence, such tender
melancholy in this countenance, that, if I were a man, I should inevitably
be in love with it, and in love for ever! Such beauty, if it were in
nature, would certainly fix the most inconstant man upon earth."

Belinda ventured to take her eyes for an instant from the picture, to see
whether Clarence Hervey looked like the most inconstant man upon earth. He
was intently gazing upon her; but as soon as she looked round, he suddenly
exclaimed, as he turned to the picture--"A heavenly countenance,
indeed!--the painter has done justice to the poet."

"Poet!" repeated Lady Delacour: "the man's in the clouds!"

"Pardon me," said Clarence; "does not M. de St. Pierre deserve to be
called a poet? Though he does not write in rhyme, surely he has a poetical
imagination."

"Certainly," said Belinda; and from the composure with which Mr. Hervey
now spoke, she was suddenly inclined to believe, or to hope, that all Sir
Philip's story was false. "M. de St. Pierre undoubtedly has a great deal
of imagination, and deserves to be called a poet."

"Very likely, good people!" said Lady Delacour; "but what has that to do
with the present purpose?"

"Nay," cried Clarence, "your ladyship certainly sees that this is St.
Pierre's Virginia?"

"St. Pierre's Virginia! Oh, I know who it is, Clarence, as well as you do.
I am not quite so blind, or so stupid, as you take me to be." Then
recollecting her promise, not to betray Sir Philip's secret, she added,
pointing to the landscape of the picture, "These cocoa trees, this
fountain, and the words _Fontaine de Virginie_, inscribed on the rock--I
must have been stupidity itself, if I had not found it out. I absolutely
_can_ read, Clarence, and spell, and put together. But here comes Sir
Philip Baddely, who, I believe, cannot read, for I sent him an hour ago
for a catalogue, and he pores over the book as if he had not yet made out
the title."

Sir Philip had purposely delayed, because he was afraid of rejoining Lady
Delacour whilst Clarence Hervey was with her, and whilst they were talking
of the picture of Virginia.

"Here's the catalogue; here's the picture your ladyship wants. St.
Pierre's Virginia: damme! I never heard of that fellow before--he is some
new painter, damme! that is the reason I did not know the hand. Not a word
of what I told you, Lady Delacour--you won't blow us to Clary," added he
_aside_ to her ladyship. "Rochfort keeps aloof; and so will I, damme!"

A gentleman at this instant beckoned to Mr. Hervey with an air of great
eagerness. Clarence went and spoke to him, then returned with an altered
countenance, and apologized to Lady Delacour for not dining with her, as
he had promised. Business, he said, of great importance required that he
should leave town immediately. Helena had just taken Miss Portman into a
little room, where Westall's drawings were hung, to show her a group of
Lady Anne Percival and her children; and Belinda was alone with the little
girl, when Mr. Hervey came to bid her adieu. He was in much agitation.

"Miss Portman, I shall not, I am afraid, see you again for some
time;--perhaps I may never have that--hem!--happiness. I had something of
importance that I wished to say to you before I left town; but I am forced
to go so suddenly, I can hardly hope for any moment but the present to
speak to you, madam. May I ask whether you purpose remaining much longer
with Lady Delacour?"

"Yes," said Belinda, much surprised. "I believe--I am not quite
certain--but I believe I shall stay with her ladyship some time longer."

Mr. Hervey looked painfully embarrassed, and his eyes involuntarily fell
upon little Helena. Helena drew her hand gently away from Belinda, left
the room, and retired to her mother.

"That child, Miss Portman, is very fond of you," said Mr. Hervey. Again he
paused, and looked round to see whether he could be overheard. "Pardon me
for what I am going to say. This is not a proper place. I must be abrupt;
for I am so circumstanced, that I have not a moment's time to spare. May I
speak to you with the sincerity of a friend?"

"Yes. Speak to me with sincerity," said Belinda, "and you will deserve
that I should think you my friend." She trembled excessively, but spoke
and looked with all the firmness that she could command.

"I have heard a report," said Mr. Hervey, "which is most injurious to
you."

"To me!"

"Yes. No one can escape calumny. It is whispered, that if Lady Delacour
should die--."

At the word _die_, Belinda started.

"That if Lady Delacour should die, Miss Portman would become the mother of
Helena!"

"Good Heavens! what an absurd report! Surely _you_ could not for an
instant believe it, Mr. Hervey?"

"Not for an instant. But I resolved, as soon as I heard it, to mention it
to you; for I believe that half the miseries of the world arise from
foolish mysteries--from the want of courage to speak the truth. Now that
you are upon your guard, your own prudence will defend you sufficiently. I
never saw any of your sex who appeared to me to have so much prudence, and
so little art; but--farewell--I have not a moment to lose," added
Clarence, suddenly checking himself; and he hurried away from Belinda, who
stood fixed to the spot where he left her, till she was roused by the
voices of several people who came into the room to see the drawings. She
started as if from a dream, and went immediately in search of Lady
Delacour.

Sir Philip Baddely was in earnest conversation with her ladyship; but he
stopped speaking when Belinda came within hearing, and Lady Delacour
turned to Helena, and said, "My dear, if you are satisfied, for mercy's
sake let us be gone, for I am absolutely overcome with heat--and with
curiosity," added she in a low voice to Belinda: "I long to hear how
Clarence Hervey likes Westall's drawings."

As soon as they got home, Lady Delacour sent her daughter to practise a
new lesson upon the piano forte. "And now sit down, my dear Belinda," said
she, "and satisfy my curiosity. It is the curiosity of a friend, not of an
impertinent busybody. Has Clarence declared himself? He chose an odd time
and place; but that is no matter; I forgive him, and so do you, I dare
say. But why do you tear that unfortunate carnation to pieces? Surely you
cannot be embarrassed in speaking to me! What's the matter? I once did
tell you, that I would not give up my claim to Clarence's adorations
during my life; but I intend to live a few years longer after the
amazonian operation is performed, you know; and I could not have the
conscience to keep you waiting whole years. It is better to do things with
a good grace, lest one should be forced at last to do them with an ill
grace. Therefore I give up all manner of claim to every thing
but--flattery! that of course you will allow me from poor Clarence. So now
do not begin upon another flower; but, without any farther superfluous
modesty, let me hear all the pretty things Clarence said or swore."

Whilst Belinda was pulling the carnation to pieces, she recollected what
Mr. Hervey had said to her about mysteries: his words still sounded in her
ear. "_I believe that half the miseries of the world arise from foolish
mysteries--from the want of courage to speak the truth_." I will have the
courage to speak the truth, thought she, whatever it may cost me.

"The only pretty thing that Mr. Hervey said was, that he never saw any
woman who had so much prudence and so little art," said Belinda.

"A very pretty thing indeed, my dear! But it might have been said in open
court by your grandfather, or your great-grandfather. I am sorry, if that
was all, that Helena did not stay to hear such a charming moral
compliment--_Moralité à la glace_. The last thing I should have expected
in a _tête-à-tête_ with Clarence Hervey. Was it worth while to pull that
poor flower to pieces for such a pretty speech as this? And so that was
all?"

"No, not all: but you overpower me with your wit; and I cannot stand the
'lightning of your eyes.'"

"There!" said her ladyship, letting down her veil over her face, "the fire
of my eyes is not too much for you now."

"Helena was showing me Westall's drawing of Lady Anne Percival and her
children--"

"And Mr. Hervey wished that he was the father of such a charming group of
children, and you the mother--hey? was not that it? It was not put in such
plain terms, but that was the purport, I presume?"

"No, not at all; he said nothing about Lady Anne Percival's children,
but--"

"But--why then did you bring in her ladyship and her children? To gain
time?--Bad policy!--Never, whilst you live, when you have a story to tell,
bring in a parcel of people who have nothing to do with the beginning, the
middle, or the end of it. How could I suspect you of such false taste! I
really imagined these children were essential to the business; but I beg
pardon for giving you these elements of criticism. I assure you I
interrupt you, and talk on so fast, from pure good-nature, to give you
time to recollect yourself; for I know you've the worst of memories,
especially for what Clarence Hervey says. But come, my dear, dash into the
middle of things at once, in the true Epic style."

"Then to dash into the midst of things at once," said Miss Portman,
speaking very quick: "Mr. Hervey observed that Miss Delacour was growing
very fond of me."

"Miss Delacour, did you say?" cried her ladyship: "_Et puis_?"

At this instant Champfort opened the door, looked in, and seeing Lady
Delacour, immediately retired.

"Champfort, whom do you want--or what do you want?" said her ladyship.

"Miladi, c'est que--I did come from milord, to see if miladi and
mademoiselle were visible. I did tink miladi was not at home."

"You see I am at home, though," said her ladyship. "Has Lord Delacour any
business with me?"

"No, miladi: not with miladi," said Champfort; "it was with mademoiselle."

"With me, Monsieur Champfort? then you will be so good as to tell Lord
Delacour I am here."

"And that _I_ am not here, Champfort; for I must be gone to dress."

She rose hastily to leave the room, but Miss Portman caught her hand: "You
won't go, I hope, Lady Delacour," said she, "till I have finished my long
story?" Lady Delacour sat down again, ashamed of her own embarrassment.

Whether this be art, innocence, or assurance, thought she, I cannot tell;
but we shall see.

Lord Delacour now came in, with a half-unfolded newspaper, and a packet of
letters in his hand. He came to apologize to Miss Portman for having, by
mistake, broken the seal of a letter to her, which had been sent under
cover to him. He had simply asked Champfort whether the ladies were at
home, that he might not have the trouble of going up stairs if they were
out. Monsieur Champfort possessed, in an eminent degree, the mischievous
art of appearing mysterious about the simplest things in the world.

"Though I was so thoughtless as to break the seal before I looked at the
direction of the letter," said Lord Delacour, "I assure you I went no
farther than the first three words; for I knew 'my dear niece' could not
possibly mean me." He gave Miss Portman the letter, and left the room.
This explanation was perfectly satisfactory to Belinda; but Lady Delacour,
prejudiced by the hesitation of Champfort, could not help suspecting that
this letter was merely the ostensible cause of his lordship's visit.

"From my aunt Stanhope," said Miss Portman, as she opened her letter. She
folded it up again after glancing over the first page, and put it into her
pocket, colouring deeply.

All Lady Delacour's suspicions about Mrs. Stanhope's epistolary counsels
and secrets instantly recurred, with almost the force of conviction to her
mind.

"Miss Portman," said she, "I hope your politeness to me does not prevent
you from reading your letter? Some ceremonious people think it vastly rude
to read a letter in company; but I am not one of them: I can write whilst
you read, for I have fifty notes and more to answer. So pray read your
letter at your ease."

Belinda had but just unfolded her letter again, when Lord Delacour
returned, followed by Champfort, who brought with him a splendid
hammer-cloth.

"Here, my dear Lady Delacour," said his lordship, "is a little surprise
for you: here is a new hammer-cloth, of my bespeaking and taste, which I
hope you will approve of."

"Very handsome, upon my word!" said Lady Delacour, coldly, and she fixed
her eyes upon the fringe, which was black and orange: "Miss Portman's
taste, I see!"

"Did you not say black and orange fringe, my dear?"

"No. I said blue and white, my lord."

His lordship declared he did not know how the mistake had happened; it was
merely a mistake:--but her ladyship was convinced that it was done on
purpose. And she said to herself, "Miss Portman will order my liveries
next! I have not even the shadow of power left in my own house! I am not
treated with even a decent show of respect! But this shall go on till I
have full conviction of her views."

Dissembling her displeasure, she praised the hammer-cloth, and especially
the fringe. Lord Delacour retired satisfied; and Miss Portman sat down to
read the following letter from her aunt Stanhope.


CHAPTER XV.

JEALOUSY.


"Crescent, Bath, July--Wednesday.

"MY DEAR NIECE,

"I received safely the bank notes for my two hundred guineas, enclosed in
your last. But you should never trust unnecessarily in this manner to the
post--always, when you are obliged to send bank notes by post, cut them in
two, and send half by one post and half by another. This is what is done
by all prudent people. Prudence, whether in trifles or in matters of
consequence, can be learned only by experience (which is often too dearly
bought), or by listening, which costs nothing, to the suggestions of those
who have a thorough knowledge of the world.

"A report has just reached me concerning you and _a certain lord_, which
gives me the most heartfelt concern. I always knew, and told you, that
you were _a great favourite_ with the person in question. I depended on
your prudence, delicacy, and principles, to understand this hint properly,
and I trusted that you would conduct yourself accordingly. It is too
plain, (from the report alluded to,) that there has been some misconduct
or mis-management somewhere. The misconduct I cannot--the mis-management I
must, attribute to you, my dear; for let a man's admiration for any woman
be ever so great, unless she suffer herself to be dazzled by vanity, or
unless she be naturally of an inconsiderate temper, she can surely prevent
his partiality from becoming so glaring as to excite envy: envy is always
to be dreaded by handsome young women, as being, sooner or later,
infallibly followed by scandal. Of this, I fear, you have not been
sufficiently aware, and you see the consequences--consequences which, to a
female of genuine delicacy or of real good sense, must be extremely
alarming. Men of contracted minds and cold tempers, who are absolutely
incapable of feeling generous passion for our sex, are often unaccountably
ambitious to gain the reputation of being _well_ with any woman whose
beauty, accomplishments, or connexions, may have brought her into fashion.
Whatever affection may be pretended, this is frequently the _ultimate_ and
_sole_ object of these selfish creatures. Whether or not the person I have
in my eye deserves to be included in this class, I will not presume
positively to determine; but you, who have personal opportunities of
observation, may decide this point (if you have any curiosity on the
subject) by observing whether he most affects to pay his devoirs to you in
public or in private. If the latter be the case, it is the most dangerous;
because a man even of the most contracted understanding has always sense
or instinct enough to feel that the slightest taint in the reputation of
the woman who is, or who is to be, his wife, would affect his own private
peace, or his honour in the eyes of the world. A husband who has in a
first marriage been, as it is said, in constant fear both of matrimonial
subjugation and disgrace, would, in his choice of a second lady, be
peculiarly nice, and probably _tardy_. Any degree of favour that might
have been shown him, any report that may have been raised, and above all,
any restraint he might feel himself under from implied engagement, or from
the discovery or reputation of superior understanding and talents in the
object beloved, would operate infallibly against her, to the confusion of
all her plans, and the ruin at once of her reputation, her peace of mind,
and her hopes of an establishment. Nay, supposing the best that could
possibly happen--that, after playing with the utmost dexterity this
desperate game, the pool were absolutely your own; yet, if there were any
suspicions of unfair play buzzed about amongst the by-standers, you would
not in the main be a gainer; for my dear, without character, what is even
wealth, or all that wealth can bestow? I do not mean to trouble you with
stale wise sayings, which young people hate; nor musty morality, which is
seldom fit for use in the world, or which smells too much of books to be
brought into good company. This is not my way of giving advice; but I only
beg you to observe what actually passes before your eyes in the circle in
which we live. Ladies of the best families, with rank and fortune, and
beauty and fashion, and every thing in their favour, cannot (as yet in
this country) dispense with the strictest observance of the rules of
virtue and decorum. Some have fancied themselves raised so high above the
vulgar as to be in no danger from the thunder and lightning of public
opinion; but these ladies in the clouds have found themselves
mistaken--they have been blasted, and have fallen nobody knows where! What
is become of Lady ----, and the Countess of ----, and others I could
mention, who were as high as envy could look? I remember seeing the
Countess of ----, who was then the most beautiful creature my eyes ever
beheld, and the most admired that ever was heard of, come into the
Opera-house, and sit the whole night in her box without any woman's
speaking or courtesying to her, or taking any more notice of her than you
would of a post, or a beggar-woman. Even a coronet cannot protect a woman,
you see, from disgrace: if she falls, she and it, and all together, are
trampled under foot. But why should I address all this to my dear niece?
Whither have the terror and confusion I was thrown into by this strange
report about you and Lord ---- led me? And yet one cannot be too
cautious--'Ce n'est que le premier _mot_ qui coute'--Scandal never stops
after the first word, unless she be instantly gagged by a dexterous hand.
Nothing shall be wanting on my part, but you alone are the person who can
do any thing effectual Do not imagine that I would have you quit Lady
----; that is the first idea, I know, that will come into your silly
little head, but put it out directly. If you were upon this attack to quit
the field of battle, you yield the victory to your enemies. To leave Lady
----'s house would be folly and madness. As long as she is your friend, or
_appears_ such, all is safe; but any coolness on her part would, in the
present circumstances, be death to your reputation. And, even if you were
to leave her on the best terms possible, the malicious world would say
that you left her on the worst, and would assign as a reason the report
alluded to. People who have not yet believed it would then conclude that
it must be true; and thus by your cowardice you would furnish an
incontrovertible argument against your innocence. I therefore desire that
you will not, upon any account, think of coming home to me at present;
indeed, I hope your own good sense would prevent you from wishing it,
after the reasons that I have given. Far from quitting Lady ---- from
false delicacy, it is your business, from consideration for her peace, as
well as your own, to redouble your attentions to her in private, and,
above all things, to appear as much as possible with her in public. I am
glad to hear her health is so far reestablished, that she _can_ appear
again in public; her spirits, as you may hint, will be the better for a
little amusement. Luckily, you have it completely in your power to
convince her and all the world of the correctness of your mind. I believe
I certainly should have fainted, my dear, when I first heard this shocking
report, if I had not just afterward received a letter from Sir Philip
Baddely which revived me. His proposal at this crisis for you, my dear, is
a charming thing. You have nothing to do but to encourage his addresses
immediately,--the report dies away of itself, and all is just as your best
friends wish. Such an establishment for you, my dear, is indeed beyond
their most sanguine expectations. Sir Philip hints in his letter, that my
influence might be wanting with you in his favour; but this surely cannot
be. As I have told him, he has merely mistaken becoming female reserve for
a want of sensibility on your part, which would be equally unnatural and
absurd. Do you know, my dear, that Sir Philip Baddely has an estate of
fifteen thousand a-year in Wiltshire? and his uncle Barton's estate in
Norfolk will, in due time, pay his debts. Then, as to family--look in the
lists of baronets in your pocket-book; and surely, my love, an old
baronetage in actual possession is worth something more than the reversion
of a new coronet; supposing that such a thing could properly be thought
of, which Heaven forbid! So I see no possible objection to Sir Philip, my
dear Belinda! and I am sure you have too much candour and good sense to
make any childish or romantic difficulties. Sir Philip is not, I know, a
man of what you call genius. So much the better, my dear--those men of
genius are dangerous husbands; they have so many oddities and
eccentricities, there is no managing them, though they are mighty pleasant
men in company to enliven conversation; for example, your favourite,
Clarence Hervey. As it is well known he is not a marrying man, you never
can have thought of him. You are not a girl to expose yourself to the
ridicule, &c., of all your female acquaintance by romance and nonsense. I
cannot conceive that a niece of mine could degrade herself by a mean
prepossession for a man who has never made any declaration of his
attachment to her, and who, I am sure, feels no such attachment. That you
may not deceive yourself, it is fit I should tell you, what otherwise it
might not be so proper to mention to a young lady, that he keeps and has
kept a mistress for some years; and those who are most intimately in his
confidence have assured me that, if ever he marries any body, he will
marry this girl; which is not impossible, considering that she is, they
say, the most beautiful young creature that ever was seen, and he _a man
of genius_. If you have any sense or spirit, I have said enough. So
adieu!--Let me hear, by return of the post, that every thing is going on
as it should do. I am impatient to write to your sister Tollemache this
good news. I always foretold that my Belinda would marry better than her
sister, or any of her cousins, and take place of them all. Are not you
obliged to me for sending you this winter to town to Lady ----? It was an
admirable hit. Pray tell Lady Delacour, with my best compliments, that our
_aloe_ friend (her ladyship will understand me) cheated a gentleman of my
acquaintance the other day, at casino, out of seventy guineas. He hates
the sight of her odious red wig as much now as we always did. I knew, and
told Lady D----, as she will do me the justice to remember, that Mrs.----
cheated at play. What a contemptible character!--Pray, my dear, do not
forget to tell Lady Delacour, that I have a charming anecdote for her,
about another _friend_ of ours, who has lately gone over to the enemy. Has
her ladyship seen a manuscript that is handed about as a great secret, and
said to be by ----, a parallel between _our friend_ and the Chevalier
d'Eon? It is done with infinite wit and humour, in the manner of Plutarch.
I would send a copy, but am afraid my frank would be too heavy if I began
upon another sheet. So once more adieu, my dear niece! Write to me without
fail, and mention Sir Philip. I have written to him to give my
approbation, &c.

"Yours sincerely,

"SELINA STANHOPE."

"Mrs. Stanhope seems to have written you a volume instead of a letter,
Bliss Portman," cried Lady Delacour, as Belinda turned over the sheets of
her aunt's long epistle. She did not attempt to read it regularly through:
some passages here and there were sufficient to astonish and shock her
extremely. "No bad news, I hope?" said Lady Delacour, again looking up
from her writing at Belinda, who sat motionless, leaning her head upon her
hand, as if deep in thought, Mrs. Stanhope's unfolded letter hanging from
her hand. In the midst of the variety of embarrassing, painful, and
alarming feelings excited by this letter, she had sufficient strength of
mind to adhere to her resolution of speaking the exact truth to Lady
Delacour. When she was roused by her ladyship's question, "No bad news, I
hope, Miss Portman?" she instantly answered, with all the firmness she
could command. "Yes. My aunt has been alarmed by a strange report which I
heard myself for the first time this morning from Mr. Hervey. I am sure I
am much obliged to him for having the courage to speak the truth to me."
Here she repeated what Mr. Hervey had said to her. Lady Delacour never
raised her eyes whilst Belinda spoke, but went on scratching out some
words in what she was writing. Through the mask of paint which she wore no
change of colour could be visible; and as Belinda did not see the
expression of her ladyship's eyes, she could not in the least judge of
what was passing in her mind.

"Mr. Hervey has acted like a man of honour and sense," said Lady Delacour;
"but it is a pity, for your sake, he did not speak sooner--before this
report became so public--before it reached Bath, and your aunt. Though it
could not surprise her much, she has such a perfect knowledge of the
world, and ----"

Lady Delacour uttered these broken sentences in a voice of suppressed
anger; cleared her throat several times, and at last, unable to speak,
stopped short, and then began with much precipitation to put wafers into
several notes that she had been writing. So it has reached Bath, thought
she--the report is public! I never till now heard a hint of any such thing
except from Sir Philip Baddely; but it has doubtless been the common talk
of the town, and I am laughed at as a dupe and an idiot, as I am. And now,
when the thing can he concealed no longer, she comes to me with that face
of simplicity, and knowing my generous temper, throws herself on my mercy,
and trusts that her speaking to me with this audacious plainness will
convince me of her innocence. "You have acted in the most prudent manner
possible, Miss Portman," said her ladyship, as she went on sealing her
notes, "by speaking at once to me of this strange, scandalous, absurd
report. Do you act from your aunt Stanhope's advice, or entirely from your
own judgment and knowledge of my character?"

"From my own judgment and knowledge of your character, in which I hope--I
am not--I cannot be mistaken," said Belinda, looking at her with a mixture
of doubt and astonishment.

"No--you calculated admirably--'twas the best, the only thing you could
do. Only," said her ladyship, falling back in her chair with an hysteric
laugh, "only the blunder of Champfort, and the entrance of my Lord
Delacour, and the hammercloth with the orange and black fringe--forgive
me, my dear; for the soul of me I can't help laughing--it was rather
unlucky; so awkward, such a contretemps! But you," added she, wiping her
eyes, as if recovering from laughter, "you have such admirable presence of
mind, nothing disconcerts you! You are equal to all situations, and stand
in no need of such long letters of advice from your aunt Stanhope,"
pointing to the two folio sheets which lay at Belinda's feet.

The rapid, unconnected manner in which Lady Delacour spoke, the hurry of
her motions, the quick, suspicious, angry glances of her eye, her laugh,
her unintelligible words, all conspired at this moment to give Belinda the
idea that her intellects were suddenly disordered. She was so firmly
persuaded of her ladyship's utter indifference to Lord Delacour, that she
never conceived the possibility of her being actuated by the passion of
jealousy--by the jealousy of power--a species of jealousy which she had
never felt, and could not comprehend. But she had sometimes seen Lady
Delacour in starts of passion that seemed to border on insanity, and the
idea of her losing all command of her reason now struck Belinda with
irresistible force. She felt the necessity of preserving her own
composure; and with all the calmness that she could assume, she took up
her aunt Stanhope's letter, and looked for the passage in which Mrs.
Luttridge and Harriot Freke were mentioned. If I can turn the course of
Lady Delacour's mind, thought she, or catch her attention, perhaps she
will recover herself. "Here is a message to you, my dear Lady Delacour,"
cried she, "from my aunt Stanhope, about--about Mrs. Luttridge."

Miss Portman's hand trembled as she turned over the pages of the letter.
"I am all attention," said Lady Delacour, with a composed voice; "only
take care, don't make a mistake: I'm in no hurry; don't read any thing
Mrs. Stanhope might not wish. It is dangerous to garble letters, almost as
dangerous as to snatch them out of a friend's hand, as I once did, you
know--but you need not now be under the least alarm."

Conscious that this letter was not fit for her ladyship to see, Belinda
neither offered to show it to her, nor attempted any apology for her
reserve and embarrassment, but hastily began to read the message relative
to Mrs. Luttridge; her voice gaining confidence as she went on, as she
observed that she had fixed Lady Delacour's attention, who now sat
listening to her, calm and motionless. But when Miss Portman came to the
words, "Do not forget to tell Lady D ----, that I have a charming anecdote
for her about another _friend_ of hers, who lately went over to the
enemy," her ladyship exclaimed with great vehemence, "_Friend_!--Harriot
Freke!--Yes, like all other friends--Harriot Freke!--What was she
compared to? 'Tis too much for me--too much!" and she put her hand to her
head.

"Compose yourself, my dear _friend_," said Belinda, in a calm, gentle
tone; and she went toward her with an intention of soothing her by
caresses; but, at her approach, Lady Delacour pushed the table on which
she had been writing from her with violence, started up, flung back the
veil which fell over her face as she rose, and darted upon Belinda a look,
which fixed her to the spot where she stood. It said, "Come not a step
nearer, at your peril!" Belinda's blood ran cold--she had no longer any
doubt that this was insanity. She shut the penknife which lay upon the
table, and put it into her pocket.

"Cowardly creature!" cried Lady Delacour, and her countenance changed to
the expression of ineffable contempt; "what is it you fear?"

"That you should injure yourself. Sit down--for Heaven's sake listen to
me, to your friend, to Belinda!"

"My friend! my Belinda!" cried Lady Delacour, and she turned from her, and
walked away some steps in silence; then suddenly clasping her hands, she
raised her eyes to heaven with a fervent but wild expression of devotion,
and exclaimed, "Great God of heaven, my punishment is just! the death of
Lawless is avenged. May the present agony of my soul expiate my folly! Of
guilt--deliberate guilt--of hypocrisy--treachery--I have not--oh, never
may I have--to repent!"

She paused--her eyes involuntarily returned upon Belinda. "Oh, Belinda!
You, whom I have so loved--so trusted!"

The tears rolled fast down her painted cheeks; she wiped them hastily
away, and so roughly, that her face became a strange and ghastly
spectacle. Unconscious of her disordered appearance, she rushed past
Belinda, who vainly attempted to stop her, threw up the sash, and
stretching herself far out of the window, gasped for breath. Miss Portman
drew her back, and closed the window, saying, "The rouge is all off your
face, my dear Lady Delacour; you are not fit to be seen. Sit down upon
this sofa, and I will ring for Marriott, and get some fresh rouge. Look at
your face in this glass--you see--"

"I see," interrupted Lady Delacour, looking full at Belinda, "that she who
I thought had the noblest of souls has the meanest! I see that she is
incapable of feeling. _Rouge! not fit to be seen_!--At such a time as
this, to talk to me in this manner! Oh, niece of Mrs. Stanhope!--dupe!--
dupe that I am!" She flung herself upon the sofa, and struck her forehead
with her hand violently several times. Belinda catching her arm, and
holding it with all her force, cried in a tone of authority, "Command
yourself, Lady Delacour, I conjure you, or you will go out of your senses;
and if you do, your secret will be discovered by the whole world."

"Hold me not--you have no right," cried Lady Delacour, struggling to free
her hand. "All-powerful as you are in this house, you have no longer any
power over me! I am not going out of my senses! You cannot get me into
Bedlam, all-powerful, all-artful as you are. You have done enough to drive
me mad--but I am not mad. No wonder you cannot believe me--no wonder you
are astonished at the strong expression of feelings that are foreign to
your nature--no wonder that you mistake the writhings of the heart, the
agony of a generous soul, for madness! Look not so terrified; I will do
you no injury. Do not you hear that I can lower my voice?--do not you see
that I can be calm? Could Mrs. Stanhope herself--could _you_, Miss
Portman, speak in a softer, milder, more polite, more proper tone than I
do now? Are you pleased, are you satisfied?"

"I am better satisfied--a little better satisfied," said Belinda.

"That's well; but still you tremble. There's not the least occasion for
apprehension--you see I can command myself, and smile upon you."

"Oh, do not smile in that horrid manner!"

"Why not?--'Horrid!--Don't you love deceit?"

"I detest it from my soul."

"Indeed!" said Lady Delacour, still speaking in the same low, soft,
unnatural voice: "then why do you practise it, my love?"

"I never practised it for a moment--I am incapable of deceit. When you are
_really_ calm, when you can _really_ command yourself, you will do me
justice, Lady Delacour; but now it is my business, if I can, to bear with
you."

"You are goodness itself, and gentleness, and prudence personified. You
know perfectly how to _manage_ a friend, whom you fear you have driven
just to the verge of madness. But tell me, good, gentle, prudent Miss
Portman, why need you dread so much that I should go mad? You know, if I
went mad, nobody would mind, nobody would believe whatever I say--I should
be no evidence against you, and I should be out of your way sufficiently,
shouldn't I? And you would have all the power in your own hands, would not
you? And would not this be almost as well as if I were dead and buried?
No; your calculations are better than mine. The poor mad wife would still
be in your way, would yet stand between you and the fond object of your
secret soul--a coronet!"

As she pronounced the word _coronet_, she pointed to a coronet set in
diamonds on her watch-case, which lay on the table. Then suddenly seizing
the watch, she dashed it upon the marble hearth with all her force--"Vile
bauble!" cried she; "must I lose my only friend for such a thing as you?
Oh, Belinda! do you see that a coronet cannot confer happiness?"

"I have seen it long: I pity you from the bottom of my soul," said
Belinda, bursting into tears.

"Pity me not. I cannot endure your pity, treacherous woman!" cried Lady
Delacour, and she stamped with a look of rage--"most perfidious of women!"

"Yes, call me perfidious, treacherous--stamp at me--say, do what you will;
I can and will bear it all--all patiently; for I am innocent, and you are
mistaken and unhappy," said Belinda. "You will love me when you return to
your senses; then how can I be angry with you?"

"Fondle me not," said Lady Delacour, starting back from Belinda's
caresses: "do not degrade yourself to no purpose--I never more can be your
dupe. Your protestations of innocence are wasted on me--I am not so blind
as you imagine--dupe as you think me, I have seen much in silence. The
whole world, you find, suspects you now. To save your reputation, you want
my friendship--you want--"

"I want nothing from you, Lady Delacour," said Belinda. "_You have
suspected me long in silence!_ then I have mistaken your character--I can
love you no longer. Farewell for ever! Find another--a better friend."

She walked away from Lady Delacour with proud indignation; but, before she
reached the door, she recollected her promise to remain with this
unfortunate woman.

Is a dying woman, in the paroxysm of insane passion, a fit object of
indignation? thought Belinda, and she stopped short. "No, Lady Delacour,"
cried she, "I will not yield to my humour--I will not listen to my pride.
A few words said in the heat of passion shall not make me forget myself or
you. You have given me your confidence; I am grateful for it. I cannot,
will not desert you: my promise is sacred."

"Your promise!" said Lady Delacour, contemptuously. "I absolve you from
your promise. Unless you find it _convenient_ to yourself to remember it,
pray let it be forgotten; and if I must die--"

At this instant the door opened suddenly, and little Helena came in
singing--

    "'Merrily, merrily shall we live now,
    Under the blossom that hangs on the bough.'

What comes next, Miss Portman?"

Lady Delacour dragged her veil across her face, and rushed out of the
room.

"What is the matter?--Is mamma ill?"

"Yes, my dear," said Belinda. But at this instant she heard the sound of
Lord Delacour's voice upon the stairs; she broke from the little girl, and
with the greatest precipitation retreated to her own room.

She had not been alone above an hour before Marriott knocked at the door.

"Miss Portman, you don't know how late it is. Lady Singleton and the Miss
Singletons are come. But, merciful heaven!" exclaimed Marriott, as she
entered the room, "what is all this packing up? What is this trunk?"

"I am going to Oakly-park with Lady Anne Percival," said Belinda, calmly.

"I thought there was something wrong; my mind misgave me all the time I
was dressing my lady,--she was in such a flutter, and never spoke to me.
I'd lay my life this is, some way or other, Mr. Champfort's doings. But,
good dear Miss Portman, can you leave my poor lady when she wants you so
much; and I'll take upon me to say, ma'am, loves you so much at the bottom
of her heart? Dear me, how your face is flushed! Pray let me pack up these
things, if it must be. But I do hope, if it be possible, that you should
stay. However, I've no business to speak. I beg pardon for being so
impertinent: I hope you won't take it ill,--it is only from regard to my
poor lady I ventured to speak."

"Your regard to your lady deserves the highest approbation, Marriott,"
said Belinda. "It is impossible that I should stay with her any longer.
When I am gone, good Marriott, and when her health and strength decline,
your fidelity and your services will be absolutely necessary to your
mistress; and from what I have seen of the goodness of your heart, I am
convinced that the more she is in want of you, the more _respectful_ will
be your attention."

Marriott answered only by her tears, and went on packing up in a great
hurry.

Nothing could equal Lady Delacour's astonishment when she learnt from
Marriott that Miss Portman was actually preparing to leave the house.
After a moment's reflection, however, she persuaded herself that this was
only a new artifice to work upon her affections; that Belinda did not mean
to leave her; but that she would venture all lengths, in hopes of being at
the last moment pressed to stay. Under this persuasion, Lady Delacour
resolved to disappoint her expectations: she determined to meet her with
that polite coldness which would best become her own dignity, and which,
without infringing the laws of hospitality, would effectually point out to
the world that Lady Delacour was no dupe, and that Miss Portman was an
unwelcome inmate in her house.

The power of assuming gaiety when her heart was a prey to the most
poignant feelings, she had completely acquired by long practice. With the
promptitude of an actress, she could instantly appear upon the stage, and
support a character totally foreign to her own. The loud knocks at the
door, which announced the arrival of company, were signals that operated
punctually upon her associations; and to this species of conventional
necessity her most violent passions submitted with magical celerity. Fresh
rouged, and beautifully dressed, she was performing her part to a
brilliant audience in her drawing-room when Belinda entered. Belinda
beheld her with much astonishment, but more pity.

"Miss Portman," said her ladyship, turning carelessly towards her, "where
do you buy your rouge?--Lady Singleton, would you rather at this moment be
mistress of the philosopher's stone, or have a patent for rouge that will
come and go like Miss Portman's?--Apropos! have you read St. Leon?" Her
ladyship was running on to a fresh train of ideas, when a footman
announced the arrival of Lady Anne Percival's carriage; and Miss Portman
rose to depart.

"You dine with Lady Anne, Miss Portman, I understand?--My compliments to
her ladyship, and my duty to Mrs. Margaret Delacour, and her macaw. _Au
revoir_! Though you talk of running away from me to Oakly-park, I am sure
you will do no such cruel thing. I am, with all due humility, so confident
of the irresistible attractions of this house, that I defy Oakly-park and
all its charms. So, Miss Portman, instead of adieu, I shall only say, _au
revoir!_"

"Adieu, Lady Delacour!" said Belinda, with a look and tone which struck
her ladyship to the heart. All her suspicions, all her pride, all her
affected gaiety vanished; her presence of mind forsook her, and for some
moments she stood motionless and powerless. Then recollecting herself, she
flew after Miss Portman, abruptly stopped her at the head of the stairs,
and exclaimed, "My dearest Belinda, are you gone?--My best, my only
friend!--Say you are not gone for ever!--Say you will return!"

"Adieu!" repeated Belinda. It was all she could say; she broke from Lady
Delacour, and hurried out of the house with the strongest feeling of
compassion for this unhappy woman, but with an unaltered sense of the
propriety and necessity of her own firmness.


CHAPTER XVI.

DOMESTIC HAPPINESS.


There was an air of benevolence and perfect sincerity in the politeness
with which Lady Anne Percival received Belinda, that was peculiarly
agreeable to her agitated and harassed mind.

"You see, Lady Anne," said Belinda, "that I come to you at last, after
having so often refused your kind invitations."

"So you surrender yourself at discretion, just when I was going to raise
the siege in despair," said Lady Anne: "now I may make my own terms; and
the only terms I shall impose are, that you will stay at Oakly-park with
us, as long as we can make it agreeable to you, and no longer. Whether
those who cease to please, or those who cease to be pleased, are most to
blame,[6] it may sometimes be difficult to determine; so difficult, that
when this becomes a question between two friends, they perhaps had better
part than venture upon the discussion."

Lady Anne Percival could not avoid suspecting that something disagreeable
had passed between Lady Delacour and Belinda; but she was not troubled
with the disease of idle curiosity, and her example prevailed upon Mrs.
Margaret Delacour, who dined with her, to refrain from all questions and
comments.

The prejudice which this lady had conceived against our heroine, as being
a niece of Mrs. Stanhope's, had lately been vanquished by the favourable
representations of her conduct which she had heard from her nephew, and by
the kindness that Belinda had shown to little Helena.

"Madam," said Mrs. Delacour, addressing herself to Miss Portman with some
formality, but much dignity, "permit me, as one of my Lord Delacour's
nearest relations now living, to return you my thanks for having, as my
nephew informs me, exerted your influence over Lady Delacour for the
happiness of his family. My little Helena, I am sure, feels her
obligations towards you, and I rejoice that I have had an opportunity of
expressing, in person, my sense of what our family owes to Miss Portman.
As to the rest, her own heart will reward her. The praise of the world is
but an inferior consideration. However, it deserves to be mentioned, as an
instance of the world's candour, and for the singularity of the case, that
every body agrees in speaking well even of so handsome a young lady as
Miss Portman."

"She must have had extraordinary prudence," said Lady Anne; "and the world
does justly to reward it with extraordinary esteem."

Belinda, with equal pleasure and surprise, observed that all this was said
sincerely, and that the report, which she had feared was public, had never
reached Mrs. Delacour or Lady Anne Percival.

In fact, it was known and believed only by those who had been prejudiced
by the malice or folly of Sir Philip Baddely. Piqued by the manner in
which his addresses had been received by Belinda, he readily listened to
the comfortable words of his valet de chambre, who assured him that he had
it from the best possible authority (Lord Delacour's own gentleman, Mr.
Champfort), that his lordship was deeply _taken_ with Miss Portman--that
the young lady managed every thing in the house--that she had been very
prudent, to be sure, and had refused large presents--but that there was
no doubt of her becoming Lady Delacour, if ever his lordship should be at
liberty. Sir Philip was the person who mentioned this to Clarence Hervey,
and Sir Philip was the person who hinted it to Mrs. Stanhope, in the very
letter which he wrote to implore her influence in favour of his own
proposal. This manoeuvring lady represented this report as being
universally known and believed, in hopes of frightening her niece into an
immediate match with the baronet. In the whole extent of Mrs. Stanhope's
politic imagination, she had never foreseen the possibility of her niece's
speaking the simple truth to Lady Delacour, and she had never guarded
against this danger. She never thought of Belinda's mentioning this report
to her ladyship, because she would never have dealt so openly, had she
been in the place of her niece. Thus her art and falsehood operated
against her own views, and produced consequences diametrically opposite to
her expectations. It was her exaggerations that made Lady Delacour
believe, when Belinda repeated what she had said, that this report was
universally known and credited; her own suspicions were by these means
again awakened, and her jealousy and rage were raised to such a pitch,
that, no longer mistress of herself, she insulted her friend and guest.
Miss Portman was then obliged to do the very thing that Mrs. Stanhope most
dreaded--to leave Lady Delacour's house and all its advantages. As to Sir
Philip Baddely, Belinda never thought of him from the moment she read her
aunt's letter, till after she had left her ladyship; her mind was firmly
decided upon this subject; yet she could not help fearing that her aunt
would not understand her reasons, or approve her conduct. She wrote to
Mrs. There is dancing, and she waltzes him off his feet. A Dr. Coppelius
comes in to say he has been swindled by Spalanzani. He slips into Olympia's
room, from which a noise of breaking is heard. Coppelius, out of revenge,
has smashed Olympia. She was only an automaton. Hoffmann is astonished.

ACT III. GIULIETTA.

At Venice, in the house of Giulietta, beloved of Schlemil, who takes the
arrival of Hoffmann very ungraciously. Hoffmann cares nothing for
Giulietta, but she is bribed by Dapertutto to make Hoffmann love her, and
she succeeds by making him believe, that he is her ideal. But as a proof
of his love she wants Hoffmann to get the key of her room away from Schlemil.
Hoffmann demands the key; Schlemil tells him to come and take it, and
they fight. Schlemil is killed.

Hoffmann takes the key and rushes to Giulietta's room, and finding nobody,
comes back, only to see her riding off in her gondola, laughing at him,
and with her arms around another man's neck. Hoffmann is disgusted.

ACT IV. ANTONIA.

Antonia has been told by her father, Crespel, to sing no more. When Hoffmann,
who has long loved her, comes, he wonders why, but he soon learns by
overhearing a conversation between Crespel and an evil person
called Doctor Miracle that Antonia is afflicted with consumption. He then
begs her also not to sing, and she promises him. When Hoffmann goes,
Miracle comes in and tells her it is all nonsense, to sing as much as she
likes; but she will not break her promise to Hoffmann. Miracle then
causes the ghost of Antonia's mother to appear, and to her prayers
the girl yields.

Miracle urges her on and on, until she is utterly exhausted.

She falls dying, and her father receives her last breath.
Hoffmann is heartbroken.

EPILOGUE.

A return to the scene of the first act. Hoffmann has told his
stories.
His companions leave him. The Muse appears and tells him that she
is the only mistress to follow, the only one who will remain true
to him. His spirit flickers a moment with gratitude. Then his head
sinks on the table, and he sleeps.

The Tales of Hoffmann
ACT I.
(The Tavern of Martin Luther. The interior of a German inn. Tables
and benches.) 

CHORUS of Students.
Drig, drig, drig, master Luther, Spark of hades, Drig, drig, drig,
for us more beer, For us thy wine, Until morning, Fill my glass,
Until morning, Fill our pewter Mugs!

NATHANAEL.
Luther is a brave man, Tire, lan, laire, T'is to-morrow that we
brain him, Tire, lan, la!she is going to
be parted from her husband, and basely throws all the blame upon me. But
'tis the same with all of you. There's your cousin Joddrell refused me a
hundred guineas last week, though the piano-forte and harp I bought for
her before she was married stood me in double that sum, and are now
useless lumber on my hands; and she never could have had Joddrell without
them, as she knows as well as I do. As for Mrs. Levit, she never writes to
me, and takes no manner of notice of me. But this is no matter, for her
notice can be of no consequence now to any body. Levit has run out every
thing he had in the world!--All his fine estates advertised in to-day's
paper--an execution in the House, I'm told. I expect that she will have
the assurance to come to me in her distress: but she shall find my doors
shut, I promise her. Your cousin Valleton's match has, through her own
folly, turned out like all the rest. She, her husband, and all his
relations are at daggers-drawing; and Valleton will die soon, and won't
leave her a farthing in his will, I foresee, and all the fine Valleton
estate goes to God knows whom!

"If she had taken my advice after marriage as before, it would have been
all her own at this instant. But the passions run away with people, and
they forget every thing--common sense, gratitude, and all--as you do,
Belinda. Clarence Hervey will never think of you, and I give you up!--Now
manage for yourself as you please, and as you can! I'll have nothing more
to do with the affairs of young ladies who will take no advice.

"SELINA STANHOPE.

"P. S. If you return directly to Lady Delacour's, and marry Sir Philip
Baddely, I will forgive the past."

The regret which Belinda felt at having grievously offended her aunt was
somewhat alleviated by the reflection that she had acted with integrity
and prudence. Thrown off her guard by anger, Mrs. Stanhope had
inadvertently furnished her niece with the best possible reasons against
following her advice with regard to Sir Philip Baddely, by stating that
her sister and cousins, who had married with mercenary views, had made
themselves miserable, and had shown their aunt neither gratitude nor
respect.

The tranquillity of Belinda's mind was gradually restored by the society
that she enjoyed at Oakly-park. She found herself in the midst of a large
and cheerful family, with whose domestic happiness she could not forbear
to sympathize. There was an affectionate confidence, an unconstrained
gaiety in this house, which forcibly struck her, from its contrast with
what she had seen at Lady Delacour's. She perceived that between Mr.
Percival and Lady Anne there was a union of interests, occupations, taste,
and affection. She was at first astonished by the openness with which they
talked of their affairs in her presence; that there were no family
secrets, nor any of those petty mysteries which arise from a discordance
of temper or struggle for power. In conversation, every person expressed
without constraint their wishes and opinions; and wherever these differed,
reason and the general good were the standards to which they appealed. The
elder and younger part of the family were not separated from each other;
even the youngest child in the house seemed to form part of the society,
to have some share and interest in the general occupations or amusements
The children were treated neither as slaves nor as playthings, but as
reasonable creatures; and the ease with which they were managed, and with
which they managed themselves, surprised Belinda; for she heard none of
that continual lecturing which goes forward in some houses, to the great
fatigue and misery of all the parties concerned, and of all the
spectators. Without force or any factitious excitements, the taste for
knowledge, and the habits of application, were induced by example, and
confirmed by sympathy. Mr. Percival was a man of science and literature,
and his daily pursuits and general conversation were in the happiest
manner instructive and interesting to his family. His knowledge of the
world, and his natural gaiety of disposition, rendered his conversation
not only useful, but in the highest degree amusing. From the merest
trifles he could lead to some scientific fact, some happy literary
allusion, or philosophical investigation.

Lady Anne Percival had, without any pedantry or ostentation, much accurate
knowledge, and a taste for literature, which made her the chosen companion
of her husband's understanding, as well as of his heart. He was not
obliged to reserve his conversation for friends of his own sex, nor was he
forced to seclude himself in the pursuit of any branch of knowledge; the
partner of his warmest affections was also the partner of his most serious
occupations; and her sympathy and approbation, and the daily sense of her
success in the education of their children, inspired him with a degree of
happy social energy, unknown to the selfish solitary votaries of avarice
and ambition.

In this large and happy family there was a variety of pursuits. One of the
boys was fond of chemistry, another of gardening; one of the daughters had
a talent for painting, another for music; and all their acquirements and
accomplishments contributed to increase their mutual happiness, for there
was no envy or jealousy amongst them.

Those who unfortunately have never enjoyed domestic happiness, such as we
have just described, will perhaps suppose the picture to be visionary and
romantic; there are others--it is hoped many others--who will feel that it
is drawn from truth and real life. Tastes that have been vitiated by the
stimulus of dissipation might, perhaps, think these simple pleasures
insipid.

Every body must ultimately judge of what makes them happy, from the
comparison of their own feelings in different situations. Belinda was
convinced by this comparison, that domestic life was that which could
alone make her really and permanently happy. She missed none of the
pleasures, none of the gay company, to which she had been accustomed at
Lady Delacour's. She was conscious, at the end of each day, that it had
been agreeably spent; yet there were no extraordinary exertions made to
entertain her; every thing seemed in its natural course, and so did her
mind. Where there was so much happiness, no want of what is called
_pleasure_ was ever experienced. She had not been at Oakly-park a week
before she forgot that it was within a few miles of Harrowgate, and she
never once recollected her vicinity to this fashionable water-drinking
place for a month afterwards.

"Impossible!" some young ladies will exclaim. We hope others will feel
that it was perfectly natural. But to deal fairly with our readers, we
must not omit to mention a certain Mr. Vincent, who came to Oakly-park
during the first week of Belinda's visit, and who stayed there during the
whole succeeding month of felicity. Mr. Vincent was a creole; he was about
two-and-twenty: his person and manners were striking and engaging; he was
tall, and remarkably handsome; he had large dark eyes, an aquiline nose,
fine hair, and a manly sunburnt complexion; his countenance was open and
friendly, and when he spoke upon any interesting subject, it lighted up,
and became full of fire and animation. He used much gesture in
conversation; he had not the common manners of young men who are, or who
aim at being thought, fashionable, but he was perfectly at ease in
company, and all that was uncommon about him appeared foreign. He had a
frank, ardent temper, incapable of art or dissimulation, and so
unsuspicious of all mankind, that he could scarcely believe falsehood
existed in the world, even after he had himself been its dupe. He was in
extreme astonishment at the detection of any species of baseness in a
_gentleman_; for he considered honour and generosity as belonging
indefeasibly, if not exclusively, to the privileged orders. His notions of
virtue were certainly aristocratic in the extreme, but his ambition was to
entertain such only as would best support and dignify an aristocracy. His
pride was magnanimous, not insolent; and his social prejudices were such
as, in some degree, to supply the place of the power and habit of
reasoning, in which he was totally deficient. Dr. Bolz!

COLONEL.

I am at home to no one any longer!

CARL.

So I told the gentleman; but he insisted on speaking to you, saying that
he came in on an affair of honor.

COLONEL.

What? But Oldendorf won't be so insane--show him in here!

_Enter_ BOLZ.

BOLZ (_with dignity_).

Colonel, I come to make you an announcement which the honor of a third person
necessitates.

COLONEL.

I am prepared for it, and beg you not to prolong it unduly.

BOLZ.

No more than is requisite. The article in this evening's _Union_ which
deals with your personality was written by me and inserted by me in the
paper without Oldendorf's knowledge.

COLONEL.

It can interest me little to know who wrote the article.

BOLZ (_courteously_).

But I consider it important to tell you that it is not by Oldendorf and
that Oldendorf knew nothing about it.

My friend was so taken up these last weeks with his own sad and painful
experiences that he left the management of the paper entirely to me. For
all that has lately appeared in it I alone am responsible.

COLONEL.

And why do you impart this information?

BOLZ.

You have sufficient penetration to realize, Colonel, that, after the scene
which took place today between you and my friend, Oldendorf as a man of
honor could neither write such an article nor allow it to appear in his
paper.

COLONEL.

How so, sir? In the article itself I saw nothing unsuitable.

BOLZ.

The article exposes my friend in your eyes to the suspicion of having tried
to regain your good-will by unworthy flattery. Nothing is further from
his thoughts than such a method. You, Colonel, are too honorable
a man yourself to consider a mean action natural to your friend.

COLONEL.

You are right. (_Aside_.) This defiance is unbearable! (_Aloud_.) Is your
explanation at an end?

BOLZ.
It is. I must add still another: that I myself regret very much
having written this article.

COLONEL.
I imagine I do not wrong you in assuming that you have already
written others that were still more to be regretted.
BOLZ (_continuing_).
I had the article printed before hearing of your last interview
with Oldendorf. (_Very courteously_.) My reason for regretting it
is, that it is not quite true. I was too hasty in describing your
personality to the public. Today, at least, it is no longer a true
portrait; it is flattering.

COLONEL (_bursting out_).
Well, by the devil, that is rude!

BOLZ.
Your pardon--it is only true. I wish to convince you that a journalist
can regret having written falsehoods.

COLONEL.
Sir! (_Aside_.) I must restrain myself, or he will always get the
better of me.--Dr. Bolz, I see that you are a clever man and know
your trade. Since, in addition, you seem inclined today to speak
only the truth, I must beg you to tell me further if you, too,
organized the demonstrations which purport to represent to me public
sentiment.

BOLZ (_bowing_).
I have, as a matter of fact, not been inactive in the matter.
COLONEL (_holding out the letter to him, angrily_).
Did you prompt these, too?

BOLZ.
In part, Colonel. This poem is the heart-outpouring of an honest
youth who reveres in you the paternal friend of Oldendorf and the
ideal of a chivalrous hero. I inspired him with the courage to send
you the poem.
It was well-meant, at any rate. The poet will have to seek another
ideal. The address comes from women and girls who constitute the
Association for the Education of Orphans. The Association includes
among its members Miss Ida Berg. I myself composed this address for
the ladies; it was written down by the daughter of the wine-merchant
Piepenbrink.

COLONEL.
That was just about my opinion concerning these letters. It is
needless to ask if you too are the contriver who sent me the
citizens?

BOLZ.
At all events I did not discourage them. [_From without a male
chorus of many voices_.] 

Hail! Hail! Hail!
Within the precincts of our town, Blessed by each burgher's son,
There dwells a knight of high renown, A noble, faithful one.
Who doth in need for aid apply To this brave knight sends word; For
love is his bright panoply And mercy is his sword.
We laud him now in poem and song Protector of the lowly throng.
The Colonel, the Colonel, The noble Colonel Berg!
COLONEL (_rings after the first measure of the song_. CARL
_enters_).
You are to let no one in if you wish to remain in my service.

CARL.
Colonel, they are already in the garden, a great company of them.
It is the glee club; the leaders are already at the steps.
BOLZ (_who has opened the window_).
Very well sung, Colonel--from _La Juive_--he is the best tenor in
town and the accompaniment is exceedingly original.
COLONEL (_aside_).
It is enough to drive one mad. [_Aloud_.] Show the gentlemen
in!
_Exit_ CARL. _At the end of the verse enter_ FRITZ KLEINMICHEL _and
two other gentlemen_.

FRITZ KLEINMICHEL.
Colonel, the local glee club asks to be allowed to sing you some
songs--kindly listen to the little serenade as a feeble expression
of the general veneration and love.This melancholy lasted during the whole time that he
remained at Harrowgate, but from the first day of his arrival at
Oakly-park he began to mend: after he had been there a week, he was heard
to sing, and whistle, and talk as he used to do, and his master
congratulated him upon his recovery. One evening his master asked him to
go back to Harrowgate for his tambourine, as little Charles Percival
wished to hear him play upon it. This simple request had a wonderful
effect upon poor Juba; he began to tremble from head to foot, his eyes
became fixed, and he stood motionless; after some time, he suddenly
clasped his hands, fell upon his knees, and exclaimed:

"Oh, massa, Juba die! If Juba go back, Juba die!" and he wiped away the
drops that stood upon his forehead. "But me will go, if massa bid--me will
die!"

Mr. Vincent began to imagine that the poor fellow was out of his senses.
He assured him, with the greatest kindness, that he would almost as soon
hazard his own life as that of such a faithful, affectionate servant; but
he pressed him to explain what possible danger he dreaded from returning
to Harrowgate. Juba was silent, as if afraid to speak--"Don't fear to
speak to me," said Mr. Vincent; "I will defend you: if anybody have
injured you, or if you dread that any body will injure you, trust to me; I
will protect you."

"Ah, massa, you no can! Me die, if me go back! Me no can say word more;"
and he put his finger upon his lips, and shook his head. Mr. Vincent knew
that Juba was excessively superstitious; and convinced, that, if his mind
were not already deranged, it would certainly become so, were any secret
terror thus to prey upon his imagination, he assumed a very grave
countenance, and assured him, that he should be extremely displeased if he
persisted in this foolish and obstinate silence. Overcome by this, Juba
burst into tears, and answered:

"Den me will tell all."

This conversation passed before Miss Portman and Charles Percival, who
were walking in the park with Mr. Vincent, at the time he met Juba and
asked him to go for the tambourine. When he came to the words, "Me will
tell all," he made a sign that he wished to tell it to his master alone.
Belinda and the little boy walked on, to leave him at liberty to speak;
and then, though with a sort of reluctant horror, he told that the figure
of an old woman, all in flames, had appeared to him in his bedchamber at
Harrowgate every night, and that he was sure she was one of the
obeah-women of his own country, who had pursued him to Europe to revenge
his having once, when he was a child, trampled upon an egg-shell that
contained some of her poisons. The extreme absurdity of this story made
Mr. Vincent burst out a laughing; but his humanity the next instant made
him serious; for the poor victim of superstitious terror, after having
revealed what, according to the belief of his country, it is death to
mention, fell senseless on the ground. When he came to himself, he calmly
said, that he knew he must now die, for that the obeah-women never forgave
those that talked of them or their secrets; and, with a deep groan, he
added, that he wished he might die before night, that he might not see
_her_ again. It was in vain to attempt to reason him out of the idea that
he had actually seen this apparition: his account of it was, that it first
appeared to him in the coach-house one night, when he went thither in the
dark--that he never afterwards went to the coach-house in the dark--but
that the same figure of an old woman, all in flames, appeared at the foot
of his bed every night whilst he stayed at Harrowgate; and that he was
then persuaded she would never let him escape from her power till she had
killed him. That since he had left Harrowgate, however, she had not
tormented him, for he had never seen her, and he was in hopes that she had
forgiven him; but that now he was sure of her vengeance for having spoken
of her.

Mr. Vincent knew the astonishing power which the belief in this species
of sorcery[7] has over the minds of the Jamaica negroes; they pine and
actually die away from the moment they fancy themselves under the
malignant influence of these witches. He almost gave poor Juba over for
lost. The first person that he happened to meet after his conversation
was Belinda, to whom he eagerly related it, because he had observed,
that she had listened with much attention and sympathy to the beginning
of the poor fellow's story. The moment that she heard of the flaming
apparition, she recollected having seen a head drawn in phosphorus,
which one of the children had exhibited for her amusement, and it
occurred to her that, perhaps, some imprudent or ill-natured person
might have terrified the ignorant negro by similar means. When she
mentioned this to Mr. Vincent, he recollected the threat that had been
thrown out by Mrs. Freke, the day that Juba had taken possession of the
disputed coach-house; and from the character of this lady, Belinda
judged that she would be likely to play such a trick, and to call it, as
usual, fun or frolic. Miss Portman suggested that one of the children
should show him the phosphorus, and should draw some ludicrous figure
with it in his presence. This was done, and it had the effect that she
expected. Juba, familiarized by degrees with the object of his secret
horror, and convinced that no obeah-woman was exercising over him her
sorceries, recovered his health and spirits. His gratitude to Miss
Portman, who was the immediate cause of his cure, was as simple and
touching as it was lively and sincere. This was the circumstance which
first turned Mr. Vincent's attention towards Belinda. Upon examining the
room in which the negro used to sleep at Harrowgate, the strong smell of
phosphorus was perceived, and part of the paper was burnt on the very
spot where he had always seen the figure, so that he was now perfectly
convinced that this trick had been purposely played to frighten him, in
revenge for his having kept possession of the coach-house.

Mrs. Freke, when she found herself detected, gloried in the jest, and told
the story as a good joke wherever she went--triumphing in the notion, that
it was she who had driven both _master and man_ from Harrowgate.

The exploit was, however, by no means agreeable in its consequences to her
friend Mrs. Luttridge, who was now at Harrowgate. For reasons of her own,
she was very anxious to fix Mr. Vincent in her society, and she was much
provoked by Mrs. Freke's conduct. The ladies came to high words upon the
occasion, and an irreparable breach would have ensued had not Mrs. Freke,
in the midst of her rage, recollected Mrs. Luttridge's electioneering
interest: and suddenly changing her tone, she declared that "she was
really sorry to have driven Mr. Vincent from Harrowgate; that her only
intention was to get rid of his black; she would lay any wager, that, with
Mrs. Luttridge's assistance, they could soon get the gentleman back
again;" and she proposed, as a certain method of fixing Mr. Vincent in
Mrs. Luttridge's society, to invite Belinda to Harrowgate.

"You may be sure," said Mrs. Freke, "that she must by this time be
cursedly tired of her visit to those stupid good people at Oakly-park, and
never woman _wanted_ an excuse to do any thing she liked: so trust to her
own ingenuity to make some decent apology to the Percivals for running
away from them. As to Vincent, you may be sure Belinda Portman is his only
inducement for staying with that precious family-party; and if we have her
we have him. Now we can be sure of her, for she has just quarrelled with
our dear Lady Delacour. I had the whole story from my maid, who had it
from Champfort. Lady Delacour and she are at daggers-drawing, and it will
be delicious to her to hear her ladyship handsomely abused. We are the
declared enemies of her enemy, so we must be her friends. Nothing unites
folk so quickly and so solidly, as hatred of some common foe."

This argument could not fail to convince Mrs. Luttridge, and the next day
Mrs. Freke commenced her operations. She drove in her _unicorn_ to
Oakly-park to pay Miss Portman a visit. She had no acquaintance either
with Mr. Percival or Lady Anne, and she had always treated Belinda, when
she met her in town, rather cavalierly, as an humble companion of Lady
Delacour. But it cost Mrs. Freke nothing to change her tone: she was one
of those ladies who can remember or forget people, be perfectly familiar
or strangely rude, just as it suits the convenience, fashion, or humour of
the minute.


CHAPTER XVII.

RIGHTS OF WOMAN.


Belinda was alone, and reading, when Mrs. Freke dashed into the room.

"How do, dear creature?" cried she, stepping up to her, and shaking hands
with her boisterously--"How do?--Glad to see you, faith!--Been long
here?--Tremendously hot to-day!"

She flung herself upon the sofa beside Belinda, threw her hat upon the
table, and then continued speaking.

"And how d'ye go on here, poor child?--Gad! I'm glad you're
alone--expected to find you encompassed by a whole host of the righteous.
Give me credit for my courage in coming to deliver you out of their hands.
Luttridge and I had such compassion upon you, when we heard you were close
prisoner here! I swore to set the distressed damsel free, in spite of all
the dragons in Christendom; so let me carry you off in triumph in my
unicorn, and leave these good people to stare when they come home from
their sober walk, and find you gone. There's nothing I like so much as to
make good people stare--I hope you're of my way o' thinking---you don't
look as if you were, though; but I never mind young ladies' looks--always
give the lie to their thoughts. Now we talk o'looks--never saw you look so
well in my life--as handsome as an angel! And so much the better for me.
Do you know, I've a bet of twenty guineas on your head--on your face, I
mean. There's a young bride at Harrowgate, Lady H----, they're all mad
about her; the men swear she's the handsomest woman in England, and I
swear I know one ten times as handsome. They've dared me to make good my
word, and I've pledged myself to produce my beauty at the next ball, and
to pit her against their belle for any money. Most votes carry it. I'm
willing to double my bet since I've seen you again. Come, had not we best
be off? Now don't refuse me and make speeches--you know that's all
nonsense--I'll take all the blame upon myself."

Belinda, who had not been suffered to utter a word whilst Mrs. Freke ran
on in this strange manner, looked in unfeigned astonishment; but when she
found herself seized and dragged towards the door, she drew back with a
degree of gentle firmness that astonished Mrs. Freke. With a smiling
countenance, but a steady tone, she said, "that she was sorry Mrs. Freke's
knight-errantry should not be exerted in a better cause, for that she was
neither a prisoner, nor a distressed damsel."

"And will you make me lose my bet?" cried Mrs. Freke "Oh, at all events,
you must come to the ball!--I'm down for it. But I'll not press it now,
because you're frightened out of your poor little wits, I see, at the bare
thoughts of doing any thing considered out of rule by these good people.
Well, well! it shall be managed for you--leave that to me: I'm used to
managing for cowards. Pray tell me--you and Lady Delacour are off, I
understand?--Give ye joy!--She and I were once great friends; that is to
say, I had over her 'that power which strong minds have over weak ones,'
but she was too weak for me--one of those people that have neither courage
to be good, nor to be bad."

"The courage to be bad," said Belinda, "I believe, indeed, she does not
possess."

Mrs. Freke stared. "Why, I heard you had quarrelled with her!"

"If I had," said Belinda, "I hope that I should still do justice to her
merits. It is said that people are apt to suffer more by their friends
than their enemies. I hope that will never be the case with Lady Delacour,
as I confess that I have been one of her friends."

"'Gad, I like your spirit--you don't want courage, I see, to fight even
for your enemies. You are just the kind of girl I admire. I see you have
been prejudiced against me by Lady Delacour; but whatever stories she may
have trumped up, the truth of the matter is this, there's no living with
her, she's so jealous--so ridiculously jealous--of that lord of hers, for
whom all the time she has the impudence to pretend not to care more than I
do for the sole of my boot," said Mrs. Freke, striking it, with her whip;
"but she hasn't the courage to give him tit for tat: now this is what I
call weakness. Pray, how do she and Clarence Hervey go on together?--Are
they out o' the hornbook of platonics yet?"

"Mr. Hervey was not in town when I left it," said Belinda.

"Was not he?--Ho! ho!--He's off then!--Ay, so I prophesied; she's not the
thing for him: he has some strength of mind--some soul--above vulgar
prejudices; so must a woman be to hold him. He was caught at first by her
grace and beauty, and that sort of stuff; but I knew it could not
last--knew she'd dilly dally with Clary, till he would turn upon his heel
and leave her there."

"I fancy that you are entirely mistaken both with respect to Mr. Hervey
and Lady Delacour," Belinda very seriously began to say. But Mrs. Freke
interrupted her, and ran on; "No! no! no! I'm not mistaken; Clarence has
found her out. She's a _very_ woman--_that_ he could forgive her, and so
could I; but she's a _mere_ woman--and that he can't forgive--no more can
I."

There was a kind of drollery about Mrs. Freke, which, with some people,
made the odd things she said pass for wit. Humour she really possessed;
and when she chose it, she could be diverting to those who like buffoonery
in women. She had set her heart upon winning Belinda over to her party.
She began by flattery of her beauty; but as she saw that this had no
effect, she next tried what could be done by insinuating that she had a
high opinion of her understanding, by talking to her as an esprit fort.

"For my part," said she, "I own I should like a strong devil better than a
weak angel."

"You forget," said Belinda, "that it is not Milton, but Satan, who says,

    'Fallen spirit, to be weak is to be miserable.'"

"You read, I see!--I did not know you were a reading girl. So was I once;
but I never read now. Books only spoil the originality of genius: very
well for those who can't think for themselves--but when one has made up
one's opinion, there is no use in reading."

"But to make them up," replied Belinda, "may it not be useful?"

"Of no use upon earth to minds of a certain class. You, who can think for
yourself, should never read."

"But I read that I may think for myself."

"Only ruin your understanding, trust me. Books are full of
trash--nonsense, conversation is worth all the books in the world."

"And is there never any nonsense in conversation?"

"What have you here?" continued Mrs. Freke, who did not choose to attend
to this question; exclaiming, as she reviewed each of the books on the
table in their turns, in the summary language of presumptuous ignorance,
"Smith's Theory of Moral Sentiments--milk and water! Moore's
Travels--hasty pudding! La Bruyère--nettle porridge! This is what you were
at when I came in, was it not?" said she, taking up a book[8] in which
she saw Belinda's mark: "Against Inconsistency in our Expectations. Poor
thing! who bored you with this task?"

"Mr. Percival recommended it to me, as one of the best essays in the
English language."

"The devil! they seem to have put you in a course of the bitters--a course
of the woods might do your business better. Do you ever hunt?--Let me take
you out with me some morning--you'd be quite an angel on horseback; or let
me drive you out some day in my unicorn."

Belinda declined this invitation, and Mrs. Freke strode away to the window
to conceal her mortification, threw up the sash, and called out to her
groom, "Walk those horses about, blockhead!"

Mr. Percival and Mr. Vincent at this instant came into the room.

"Hail, fellow! well met!" cried Mrs. Freke, stretching out her hand to Mr.
Vincent.

It has been remarked, that an antipathy subsists between creatures, who,
without being the same, have yet a strong external resemblance. Mr.
Percival saw this instinct rising in Mr. Vincent, and smiled.

"Hail, fellow! well met! I say. Shake hands and be friends, man! Though
I'm not in the habit of making apologies, if it will he any satisfaction
to you, I beg your pardon for frightening your poor devil of a black."

Then turning towards Mr. Percival, she measured him with her eye, as a
person whom she longed to attack. She thought, that if Belinda's opinion
of the understanding of _these Percivals_ could be lowered, she should
rise in her esteem: accordingly, she determined to draw Mr. Percival into
an argument.

"I've been talking treason, I believe, to Miss Portman," cried she; "for
I've been opposing some of your opinions, Mr. Percival."

"If you opposed them all, madam," said Mr. Percival, "I should not think
it treason."

"Vastly polite!--But I think all our politeness hypocrisy: what d'ye say
to that?"

"You know that best, madam!"

"Then I'll go a step farther; for I'm determined you shall contradict me:
I think all virtue is hypocrisy."

"I need not contradict you, madam," said Mr. Percival, "for the terms
which you make use of contradict themselves."

"It is my system," pursued Mrs. Freke, "that shame is always the cause of
the vices of women."

"It is sometimes the effect," said Mr. Percival; "and, as cause and effect
are reciprocal, perhaps you may, in some instances, be right."

"Oh! I hate qualifying arguers--plump assertion or plump denial for me:
you sha'n't get off so. I say shame is the cause of all women's vices."

"False shame, I suppose you mean?" said Mr. Percival.

"Mere play upon words! All shame is false shame--we should be a great deal
better without it. What say you, Miss Portman?--Silent, hey? Silence that
speaks."

"Miss Portman's blushes," said Mr. Vincent, "speak _for her_."

"_Against_ her," said Mrs. Freke: "women blush because they understand."

"And you would have them understand without blushing?" said Mr. Percival.
"I grant you that nothing can be more different than innocence and
ignorance. Female delicacy--"

"This is just the way you men spoil women," cried Mrs. Freke, "by talking
to them of the _delicacy of their sex_, and such stuff. This _delicacy_
enslaves the pretty delicate dears."

"No; it enslaves us," said Mr. Vincent.

"I hate slavery! Vive la liberté!" cried Mrs. Freke. "I'm a champion for
the Rights of Woman."

"I am an advocate for their happiness," said Mr. Percival, "and for their
delicacy, as I think it conduces to their happiness."

"I'm an enemy to their delicacy, as I am sure it conduces to their
misery."

"You speak from experience?" said Mr. Percival.

"No, from observation. Your most delicate women are always the greatest
hypocrites; and, in my opinion, no hypocrite can or ought to be happy."

"But you have not proved the hypocrisy," said Belinda. "Delicacy is not, I
hope, an indisputable proof of it? If you mean _false_ delicacy----"

"To cut the matter short at once," cried Mrs. Freke, "why, when a woman
likes a man, does not she go and tell him so honestly?"

Belinda, surprised by this question from a woman, was too much abashed
instantly to answer.

"Because she's a hypocrite. That is and must be the answer."

"No," said Mr. Percival; "because, if she be a woman of sense, she knows
that by such a step she would disgust the object of her affection."

"Cunning!--cunning!--cunning!--the arms of the weakest."

"Prudence! prudence!--the arms of the strongest. Taking the best means to
secure our own happiness without injuring that of others is the best proof
of sense and strength of mind, whether in man or woman. Fortunately for
society, the same conduct in ladies which best secures their happiness
most increases ours."

Mrs. Freke beat the devil's tattoo for some moments, and then exclaimed,
"You may say what you will, but the present system of society is radically
wrong:--whatever is, is wrong."

"How would you improve the state of society?" asked Mr. Percival, calmly.

"I'm not tinker-general to the world," said she.

"I'm glad of it," said Mr. Percival; "for I have heard that tinkers often
spoil more than they mend."

"But if you want to know," said Mrs. Freke, "what I would do to improve
the world, I'll tell you: I'd have both sexes call things by their right
names."

"This would doubtless be a great improvement," said Mr. Percival; "but you
would not overturn society to attain it, would you? Should we find things
much improved by tearing away what has been called the decent drapery of
life?"

"Drapery, if you ask me my opinion," cried Mrs. Freke, "drapery, whether
wet or dry, is the most confoundedly indecent thing in the world."

"That depends on _public_ opinion, I allow," said Mr. Percival. "The
Lacedaemonian ladies, who were veiled only by public opinion, were better
covered from profane eyes than some English ladies are in wet drapery."

"I know nothing of the Lacedaemonian ladies: I took my leave of them when
I was a schoolboy--girl, I should say. But pray, what o'clock is it by
you? I've sat till I'm cramped all over," cried Mrs. Freke, getting up and
stretching herself so violently that some part of her habiliments gave
way. "Honi soit qui mal y pense!" said she, bursting into a horse laugh.

Without sharing in any degree that confusion which Belinda felt for her,
she strode out of the room, saying, "Miss Portman, you understand these
things better than I do; come and set me to rights."

When she was in Belinda's room, she threw herself into an arm-chair, and
laughed immoderately.

"How I have trimmed Percival this morning!" said she.

"I am glad you think so," said Belinda; "for I really was afraid he had
been too severe upon you."

"I only wish," continued Mrs. Freke, "I only wish his wife had been by.
Why the devil did not she make her appearance? I suppose the prude was
afraid of my demolishing and unrigging her."

"There seems to have been more danger of that for you than for any body
else," said Belinda, as she assisted to set Mrs. Freke's rigging, as she
called it, to rights.

"I do of all things delight in hauling good people's opinions out of their
musty drawers, and seeing how they look when they're all pulled to pieces
before their faces! Pray, are those Lady Anne's drawers or yours?" said
Mrs. Freke, pointing to a chest of drawers.

"Mine."

"I'm sorry for it; for if they were hers, to punish her for _shirking_ me,
by the Lord, I'd have every rag she has in the world out in the middle of
the floor in ten minutes! You don't know me--I'm a terrible person when
provoked--stop at nothing!"

As Mrs. Freke saw no other chance left of gaining her point with Belinda,
she tried what intimidating her would do.

"I stop at nothing," repeated she, fixing her eyes upon Miss Portman, to
fascinate her by terror. "Friend or foe! peace or war! Take your choice.
Come to the ball at Harrowgate, I win my bet, and I'm your sworn friend.
Stay away, I lose my bet, and am your sworn enemy."

"It is not in my power, madam," said Belinda, calmly, "to comply with your
request."

"Then you'll take the consequences," cried Mrs. Freke. She rushed past
her, hurried down stairs, and called out, "Bid my blockhead bring my
unicorn."

She, her unicorn, and her blockhead, were out of sight in a few minutes.

Good may be drawn from evil. Mrs. Freke's conversation, though at the time
it confounded Belinda, roused her, upon reflection, to examine by her
reason the habits and principles which guided her conduct. She had a
general feeling that they were right and necessary; but now, with the
assistance of Lady Anne and Mr. Percival, she established in her own
understanding the exact boundaries between right and wrong upon many
subjects. She felt a species of satisfaction and security, from seeing the
demonstration of those axioms of morality, in which she had previously
acquiesced. Reasoning gradually became as agreeable to her as wit; nor was
her taste for wit diminished, it was only refined by this process. She now
compared and judged of the value of the different species of this
brilliant talent.

Mrs. Freke's wit, thought she, is like a noisy squib, the momentary terror
of passengers; Lady Delacour's like an elegant firework, which we crowd to
see, and cannot forbear to applaud; but Lady Anne Percival's wit is like
the refulgent moon, we

    "Love the mild rays, and bless the useful light."

"Miss Portman," said Mr. Percival, "are not you afraid of making an enemy
of Mrs. Freke, by declining her invitation to Harrowgate?"

"I think her friendship more to be dreaded than her enmity," replied
Belinda.

"Then you are not to be terrified by an obeah-woman?" said Mr. Vincent.

"Not in the least, unless she were to come in the shape of a false
friend," said Belinda.

"Till lately," said Mr. Vincent, "I was deceived in the character of Mrs.
Freke. I thought her a dashing, free-spoken, free-hearted sort of
eccentric person, who would make a staunch friend and a jolly companion.
As a mistress, or a wife, no man of any taste could think of her. Compare
that woman now with one of our Creole ladies."

"But why with a creole?" said Mr. Percival.

"For the sake of contrast, in the first place: our creole women are all
softness, grace, delicacy----"

"And indolence," said Mr. Percival.

"Their indolence is but a slight, and, in my judgment, an amiable defect;
it keeps them out of mischief, and it attaches them to domestic life. The
activity of a Mrs. Freke would never excite their emulation; and so much
the better."

"So much the better, no doubt," said Mr. Percival. "But is there no other
species of activity that might excite their ambition with propriety?
Without diminishing their grace, softness, or delicacy, might not they
cultivate their minds? Do you think ignorance, as well as indolence, an
amiable defect, essential to the female character?"

"Not essential. You do not, I hope, imagine that I am so much prejudiced
in favour of my countrywomen, that I can neither see nor feel the
superiority in _some instances_ of European cultivation? I speak only in
general."

"And in general," said Lady Anne Percival, "does Mr. Vincent wish to
confine our sex to the bliss of ignorance?"

"If it be bliss," said Mr. Vincent, "what reason would they have for
complaint?"

"_If_," said Belinda; "but that is a question which you have not yet
decided."

"And how can we decide it?" said Mr. Vincent, "The taste and feelings of
individuals must be the arbiters of their happiness."

"You leave reason quite out of the question, then," said Mr. Percival,
"and refer the whole to taste and feeling? So that if the most ignorant
person in the world assert that he is happier than you are, you are bound
to believe him."

"Why should not I?" said Mr. Vincent.

"Because," said Mr. Percival, "though he can judge of his own pleasures,
he cannot judge of yours; his are common to both, but yours are unknown to
him. Would you, at this instant, change places with that ploughman yonder,
who is whistling as he goes for want of thought? or, would you choose to
go a step higher in the bliss of ignorance, and turn savage?"

Mr. Vincent laughed, and protested that he should be very unwilling to
give up his title to civilized society; and that, instead of wishing to
have less knowledge, he regretted that he had not more. "I am sensible,"
said he, "that I have many prejudices;--Miss Portman has made me ashamed
of some of them."

There was a degree of candour in Mr. Vincent's manner and conversation,
which interested every body in his favour; Belinda amongst the rest. She
was perfectly at ease in Mr. Vincent's company, because she considered him
as a person who wished for her friendship, without having any design to
engage her affections. From several hints that dropped from him, from Mr.
Percival, and from Lady Anne, she was persuaded that he was attached to
some creole lady; and all that he said in favour of the elegant softness
and delicacy of his countrywomen confirmed this opinion.

Miss Portman was not one of those young ladies who fancy that every
gentleman who converses freely with them will inevitably fall a victim to
the power of their charms, and will see in every man a lover, or nothing.


CHAPTER XVIII.

A DECLARATION.


"I've found it!--I've found it, mamma!" cried little Charles Percival,
running eagerly into the room with a plant in his hand. "Will you send
this in your letter to Helena Delacour, and tell her that is the thing
that gold fishes are so fond of? And tell her that it is called lemna, and
that it may be found in any ditch or pool."

"But how can she find ditches and pools in Grosvenor-square, my dear?"

"Oh, I forgot that. Then will you tell her, mamma, that I will send her a
great quantity?"

"How, my dear?"

"I don't know, mamma, yet--but I will find out some way."

"Would it not be as well, my dear," said his mother, smiling, "to consider
how you can perform your promises before you make them?"

"A gentleman," said Mr. Vincent, "never makes a promise that he cannot
perform."

"I know that very well," said the boy, proudly: "Miss Portman, who is very
good-natured, will, I am sure, be so good, when she goes back to Lady
Delacour, as to carry food for the gold fishes to Helena--you see that I
have found out a way to keep my promise."

"No, I'm afraid not," said Belinda; "for I am not going back to Lady
Delacour's."

"Then I am very glad of it!" said the boy, dropping the weed, and clapping
his hands joyfully; "for then I hope you will always stay here, don't you,
mamma?--don't _you_, Mr. Vincent? Oh, _you_ do, I am sure, for I heard you
say so to papa the other day! But what makes you grow so red?"

His mother took him by the hand, as he was going to repeat the question,
and leading him out of the room, desired him to show her the place where
he found the food for the gold fishes.

Belinda, to Mr. Vincent's great relief, seemed not to take any notice of
the child's question, nor to have any sympathy in his curiosity; she was
intently copying Westall's sketch of Lady Anne Percival and her family,
and she had been roused, by the first mention of Helena Delacour's name,
to many painful and some pleasing recollections. "What a charming woman,
and what a charming family!" said Mr. Vincent, as he looked at the
drawing; "and how much more interesting is this picture of domestic
happiness than all the pictures of shepherds and shepherdesses, and gods
and goddesses, that ever were drawn!"

"Yes," said Belinda, "and how much more interesting this picture is to us,
from our knowing that it is not a fancy-piece; that the happiness is real,
not imaginary: that this is the natural expression of affection in the
countenance of the mother; and that these children, who crowd round her,
are what they seem to be--the pride and pleasure of her life!"

"There cannot," exclaimed Mr. Vincent, with enthusiasm, "be a more
delightful picture! Oh, Miss Portman, is it possible that you should not
feel what you can paint so well?"

"Is it possible, sir," said Belinda, "that you should suspect me of such
wretched hypocrisy, as to affect to admire what I am incapable of
feeling?"

"You misunderstand--you totally misunderstand me. Hypocrisy! No; there is
not a woman upon earth whom I believe to be so far above all hypocrisy,
all affectation. But I imagined--I feared--"

As he spoke these last words he was in some confusion, and hastily turned
over the prints in a portfolio which lay upon the table. Belinda's eye was
caught by an engraving of Lady Delacour in the character of the comic
muse. Mr. Vincent did not know the intimacy that had subsisted between her
ladyship and Miss Portman--she sighed from the recollection of Clarence
Hervey, and of all that had passed at the masquerade.

"What a contrast!" said Mr. Vincent, placing the print of Lady Delacour
beside the picture of Lady Anne Percival. "What a contrast! Compare their
pictures--compare their characters--compare--"

"Excuse me," interrupted Belinda; "Lady Delacour was once my friend, and I
do not like to make a comparison so much to her disadvantage. I have never
seen any woman who would not suffer by a comparison with Lady Anne
Percival."

"I have been more fortunate, I _have_ seen one--one equally worthy of
esteem--admiration--love."

Mr. Vincent's voice faltered in pronouncing the word love; yet Belinda,
prepossessed by the idea that he was attached to some creole lady, simply
answered, without looking up from her drawing, "You are indeed very
fortunate--peculiarly fortunate. Are the West-Indian ladies----"

"West-Indian ladies!" interrupted Mr. Vincent. "Surely, Miss Portman
cannot imagine that I am at this instant thinking of any West-Indian
lady!" Belinda looked up with an air of surprise. "Charming Miss Portman,"
continued he, "I have learnt to admire _European beauty, European
excellence_! I have acquired new ideas of the female character--ideas--
feelings that must henceforward render me exquisitely happy or exquisitely
miserable."

Miss Portman had been too often called "_charming_" to be much startled or
delighted by the sound: the word would have passed by unnoticed, but there
was something so impassioned in Mr. Vincent's manner, that she could no
longer mistake it for common gallantry, and she was in evident confusion.
Now for the first time the idea of Mr. Vincent as a lover came into her
mind: the next instant she accused herself of vanity, and dreaded that he
should read her thoughts. "Exquisitely miserable!" said she, in a tone of
raillery: "I should not suppose, from what I have seen of Mr. Vincent,
that any thing could make him exquisitely miserable."

"Then you do not know my character--you do not know my heart: it is in
_your_ power to make me exquisitely miserable. Mine is not the cold,
hackneyed phrase of gallantry, but the fervid language of passion," cried
he, seizing her hand.

At this instant one of the children came in with some flowers to Belinda;
and, glad of the interruption, she hastily put up her drawings and left
the room, observing that she should scarcely have time to dress before
dinner. However, as soon as she found herself alone, she forgot how late
it was; and though she sat down before the glass to dress, she made no
progress in the business, but continued for some time motionless,
endeavouring to recollect and to understand all that had passed. The
result of her reflections was the conviction that her partiality for
Clarence Hervey was greater than she ever had till this moment suspected.
"I have told my aunt Stanhope," thought she, "that the idea of Mr. Hervey
had no influence in my refusal of Sir Philip Baddely; I have said that my
affections are entirely at my own command: then why do I feel this alarm
at the discovery of Mr. Vincent's views? Why do I compare him with one
whom I thought I had forgotten?--And yet how are we to judge of character?
How can we form any estimate of what is amiable, of what will make us
happy or miserable, but by comparison? Am I to blame for perceiving
superiority? Am I to blame if one person be more agreeable, or seem to be
more agreeable, than another? Am I to blame if I cannot love Mr. Vincent?"

Before Belinda had answered these questions to her satisfaction, the
dinner-bell rang. There happened to dine this day at Mr. Percival's a
gentleman who had just arrived from Lisbon, and the conversation turned
upon the sailors' practice of stilling the waves over the bar of Lisbon by
throwing oil upon the water. Charles Percival's curiosity was excited by
this conversation, and he wished to see the experiment. In the evening his
father indulged his wishes. The children were delighted at the sight, and
little Charles insisted upon Belinda's following him to a particular spot,
where he was well convinced that she could see better than any where else
in the world. "Take care," cried Lady Anne, "or you will lead your friend
into the river, Charles." The boy paused, and soon afterwards asked his
father several questions about swimming and drowning, and bringing people
to life after they had been drowned. "Don't you remember, papa," said he,
"_that_ Mr. Hervey, who was almost drowned in the Serpentine river in
London?"--Belinda coloured at hearing unexpectedly the name of the person
of whom she was at that instant thinking, and the child continued--"I
liked that Mr. Hervey very much--I liked him from the first day I saw him.
What a number of entertaining things he told us at dinner! We used to
call him the good-natured gentleman: I like him very much--I wish he was
here this minute. Did you ever see him, Miss Portman? Oh, yes, you must
have seen him; for it was he who carried Helena's gold fishes to her
mother, and he used often to be at Lady Delacour's--was not he?"

"Yes, my dear, often."

"And did not you like him very much?"--This simple question threw Belinda
into inexpressible confusion: but fortunately the crimson on her face was
seen only by Lady Anne Percival. To Belinda's great satisfaction, Mr.
Vincent forbore this evening any attempt to renew the conversation of the
morning; he endeavoured to mix, with his usual animation and gaiety, in
the family society; and her embarrassment was much lessened when she heard
the next day, at breakfast, that he was gone to Harrowgate. Lady Anne
Percival took notice that she was this morning unusually sprightly.

After breakfast, as they were passing through the hall to take a walk in
the park, one of the little boys stopped to look at a musical instrument
which hung up against the wall.

"What is this, mamma?--It is not a guitar, is it?"

"No, my dear, it is called a banjore; it is an African instrument, of
which the negroes are particularly fond. Mr. Vincent mentioned it the
other day to Miss Portman, and I believe she expressed some curiosity to
see one. Juba went to work immediately to make a banjore, I find. Poor
fellow! I dare say that he was very sorry to go to Harrowgate, and to
leave his African guitar half finished; especially as it was intended for
an offering to Miss Portman. He is the most grateful, affectionate
creature I ever saw."

"But why, mamma," said Charles Percival, "is Mr. Vincent gone away? I am
sorry he is gone; I hope he will soon come back. In the mean time, I must
run and water my carnations."

"His sorrow for his friend Mr. Vincent's departure does not seem to affect
his spirits much," said Lady Anne. "People who expect sentiment from
children of six years old will be disappointed, and will probably teach
them affectation. Surely it is much better to let their natural affections
have time to expand. If we tear the rosebud open we spoil the flower."
Belinda smiled at this parable of the rosebud, which, she said, might be
applied to men and women, as well as to children.

"And yet, upon reflection," said Lady Anne, "the heart has nothing in
common with a rosebud. Nonsensical allusions pass off very prettily in
conversation. I mean, when we converse with partial friends: but we should
reason ill, and conduct ourselves worse, if we were to trust implicitly to
poetical analogies. Our affections," continued Lady Anne, "arise from
circumstances totally independent of our will."

"That is the very thing I meant to say," interrupted Belinda, eagerly.

"They are excited by the agreeable or useful qualities that we discover in
things or in persons."

"Undoubtedly," said Belinda.

"Or by those which our fancies discover," said Lady Anne.

Belinda was silent; but, after a pause, she said, "That it was certainly
very dangerous, especially for women, to trust to fancy in bestowing their
affections." "And yet," said Lady Anne, "it is a danger to which they are
much exposed in society. Men have it in their power to assume the
appearance of every thing that is amiable and estimable, and women have
scarcely any opportunities of detecting the counterfeit."

"Without Ithuriel's spear, how can they distinguish the good from the
evil?" said Belinda. "This is a common-place complaint, I know; the ready
excuse that we silly young women plead, when we make mistakes for which
our friends reproach us, and for which we too often reproach ourselves."

"The complaint is common-place precisely because it is general and just,"
replied Lady Anne. "In the slight and frivolous intercourse, which
fashionable belles usually have with those fashionable beaux who call
themselves their lovers, it is surprising that they can discover any thing
of each other's real character. Indeed they seldom do; and this probably
is the cause why there are so many unsuitable and unhappy marriages. A
woman who has an opportunity of seeing her lover in private society, in
domestic life, has infinite advantages; for if she has any sense, and he
has any sincerity, the real character of both may perhaps be developed."

"True," said Belinda (who now suspected that Lady Anne alluded to Mr.
Vincent); "and in such a situation a woman would readily be able to decide
whether the man who addressed her would suit her taste or not; so she
would be inexcusable if, either from vanity or coquetry, she disguised her
real sentiments."

"And will Miss Portman, who cannot, by any one to whom she is known, be
suspected of vanity or coquetry, permit me to speak to her with the
freedom of a friend?"

Belinda, touched by the kindness of Lady Anne's manner, pressed her hand,
and exclaimed, "Yes, dear Lady Anne, speak to me with freedom--you cannot
do me a greater favour. No thought of my mind, no secret feeling of my
heart, shall be concealed from you."

"Do not imagine that I wish to encroach upon the generous openness of your
temper," said Lady Anne; "tell me when I go too far, and I will be silent.
One who, like Miss Portman, has lived in the world, has seen a variety of
characters, and probably has had a variety of admirers, must have formed
some determinate idea of the sort of companion that would make her happy,
if she were to marry--unless," said Lady Anne, "she has formed a
resolution against marriage."

"I have formed no such resolution," said Belinda. "Indeed, since I have
seen the happiness which you and Mr. Percival enjoy in your own family, I
have been much more disposed to think that a union--that a union such as
yours, would increase my happiness. At the same time, my aversion to the
idea of marrying from interest, or convenience, or from any motives but
esteem and love, is increased almost to horror. O Lady Anne! there is
nothing that I would not do to please the friends to whom I am under
obligations, except sacrificing my peace of mind, or my integrity, the
happiness of my life, by--"

Lady Anne, in a gentle tone, assured her, that she was the last person in
the world who would press her to any union which would make her unhappy.
"You perceive that Mr. Vincent has spoken to me of what passed between you
yesterday. You perceive that I am his friend, but do not forget that I am
also yours. If you fear _undue influence_ from any of your relations in
favour of Mr. Vincent's large fortune, &c. let his proposal remain a
secret between ourselves, till you can decide, from farther acquaintance
with him, whether it will be in your power to return his affection."

"I fear, my dear Lady Anne," cried Belinda, "that it is not in my power to
return his affection."

"And may I ask your objections?"

"Is it not a sufficient objection, that I am persuaded I cannot love him?"

"No; for you may be mistaken in that persuasion. Remember what we said a
little while ago, about _fancy and spontaneous affections_. Does Mr.
Vincent appear to you defective in any of the qualities which you think
essential to happiness? Mr. Percival has known him from the time he was a
man, and can answer for his integrity and his good temper. Are not these
the first points you would consider? They ought to be, I am sure, and I
believe they are. Of his understanding I shall say nothing, because you
have had full opportunities of judging of it from his conversation."

"Mr. Vincent appears to have a good understanding," said Belinda.

"Then to what do you object?--Is there any thing disgusting to you in his
person or manners?"

"He is very handsome, he is well bred, and his manners are unaffected,"
said Belinda; "but--do not accuse me of caprice--altogether he does not
suit my taste; and I cannot think it sufficient not to feel disgust for a
husband--though I believe this is the fashionable doctrine."

"It is not mine, I assure you," said Lady Anne. "I am not one of those who
think it 'safest to begin with a little aversion;' but since you
acknowledge that Mr. Vincent possesses the essential good qualities that
entitle him to your esteem, I am satisfied. We gradually acquire knowledge
of the good qualities of those who endeavour to please us; and if they are
really amiable, their persons become agreeable to us by degrees, when we
become accustomed to them."

"Accustomed!" said Belinda, smiling: "one does grow accustomed even to
disagreeable things certainly; but at this rate, my dear Lady Anne, I do
not doubt but one might grow _accustomed_ to Caliban."

"My belief in the reconciling power of custom does not go quite so far,"
said Lady Anne. "It does not extend to Caliban, or even to the hero of La
Belle et La Bête; but I do believe, that, in a mind so well regulated as
yours, esteem may certainly in time be improved into love. I will tell Mr.
Vincent so, my dear."

"No, my dear Lady Anne! no; you must not--indeed you must not. You have
too good an opinion of me--my mind is not so well regulated--I am much
weaker, much sillier, than you imagine--than you can conceive," said
Belinda.

Lady Anne soothed her with the most affectionate expressions, and
concluded with saying, "Mr. Vincent has promised not to return from
Harrowgate, to torment you with his addresses, if you be absolutely
determined against him. He is of too generous, and perhaps too proud a
temper, to persecute you with vain solicitations; and however Mr. Percival
and I may wish that he could obtain such a wife, we shall have the common,
or uncommon, sense and good-nature to allow our friends to be happy their
own way."

"You are very good--too good. But am I then to be the cause of banishing
Mr. Vincent from all his friends--from Oakly-park?"

"Will he not do what is most prudent, to avoid the charming Miss Portman,"
said Lady Anne, smiling, "if he must not love her? This was at least the
advice I gave him, when he consulted us yesterday evening. But I will not
sign his writ of banishment lightly. Nothing but the assurance that the
heart is engaged can be a sufficient cause for despair; nothing else
could, in my eyes, justify you, my dear Belinda, from the charge of
caprice."

"I can give you no such assurance, I hope--I believe," said Belinda, in
great confusion; "and yet I would not for the world deceive you: you have
a right to my sincerity." She paused; and Lady Anne said with a smile,
"Perhaps I can spare you the trouble of telling me in words what a blush
told me, or at least made me suspect, yesterday evening, when we were
standing by the river side, when little Charles asked you--"

"Yes, I remember--I saw you look at me."

"Undesignedly, believe me."

"Undesignedly, I am sure; but I was afraid you would think--"

"The truth."

"No; but more than the truth. The truth you shall hear; and the rest I
will leave to your judgment and to your kindness."

Belinda gave a full account of her acquaintance with Clarence Hervey; of
the variations in his manner towards her; of his excellent conduct with
respect to Lady Delacour (of this, by-the-by, she spoke at large). But she
was more concise when she touched upon the state of her own heart; and her
voice almost failed when she came to the history of the lock of beautiful
hair, the Windsor incognita, and the picture of Virginia. She concluded by
expressing her conviction of the propriety of forgetting a man, who was in
all probability attached to another, and she declared it to be her
resolution to banish him from her thoughts. Lady Anne said, "that nothing
could be more prudent or praiseworthy than forming such a
resolution--except keeping it." Lady Anne had a high opinion of Mr.
Hervey; but she had no doubt, from Belinda's account, and from her own
observations on Mr. Hervey, and from slight circumstances which had
accidentally come to Mr. Percival's knowledge, that he was, as Belinda
suspected, attached to another person. She wished, therefore, to confirm
Miss Portman in this belief, and to turn her thoughts towards one who,
beside being deserving of her esteem and love, felt for her the most
sincere affection. She did not, however, press the subject farther at this
time, but contented herself with requesting that Belinda would take three
days (the usual time given for deliberation in fairy tales) before she
should decide against Mr. Vincent.

The next day they went to look at a porter's lodge, which Mr. Percival had
just built; it was inhabited by an old man and woman, who had for many
years been industrious tenants, but who, in their old age, had been
reduced to poverty, not by imprudence, but by misfortune. Lady Anne was
pleased to see them comfortably settled in their new habitation; and
whilst she and Belinda were talking to the old couple, their
grand-daughter, a pretty looking girl of about eighteen, came in with a
basket of eggs in her hand. "Well, Lucy," said Lady Anne, "have you
overcome your dislike to James Jackson?" The girl reddened, smiled, and
looked at her grand-mother, who answered for her in an arch tone, "Oh,
yes, my lady! We are not afraid of Jackson _now_; we are grown very great
friends. This pretty cane chair for my good man was his handiwork, and
these baskets he made for me. Indeed, he's a most industrious, ingenious,
good-natured youth; and our Lucy takes no offence at his courting her now,
my lady, I can assure you. That necklace, which is never off her neck now,
he turned for her, my lady; it is a present of his. So I tell him he need
not be discouraged, though so be she did not take to him at the first; for
she's a good girl, and a sensible girl--I say it, though she's my own; and
the eyes are used to a face after a time, and then it's nothing. They say,
fancy's all in all in love: now in my judgment, fancy's little or nothing
with girls that have sense. But I beg pardon for prating at this rate,
more especially when I am so old as to have forgot all the little I ever
knew about such things."

"But you have the best right in the world to speak about such things, and
your grand-daughter has the best reason in the world to listen to you,"
said Lady Anne, "because, in spite of all the crosses of fortune, you have
been an excellent and happy wife, at least ever since I can remember."

"And ever since I can remember, that's more; no offence to your ladyship,"
said the old man, striking his crutch against the ground. "Ever since I
can remember, she has made me the happiest man in the whole world, in the
whole parish, as every body knows, and I best of all!" cried he, with a
degree of enthusiasm that lighted up his aged countenance, and animated
his feeble voice.

"And yet," said the honest dame, "if I had followed my fancy, and taken up
with my first love, it would not ha' been with _he_, Lucy. I had a sort of
a fancy (since my lady's so good as to let me speak), I had a sort of a
fancy for an idle young man; but he, very luckily for me, took it into his
head to fall in love with another young woman, and then I had leisure
enough left me to think of your grandfather, who was not so much to my
taste like at first. But when I found out his goodness and cleverness, and
joined to all, his great tenderness for me, I thought better of it, Lucy
(as who knows but you may do, though there shall not be a word said on my
part to press you, for poor Jackson?); and my thinking better is the cause
why I have been so happy ever since, and am so still in my old age. Ah,
Lucy! dear, what a many years that same old age lasts, after all! But
young folks, for the most part, never think what's to come after thirty or
forty at farthest. But I don't say this for you, Lucy; for you are a good
girl, and a sensible girl, though my own grand-daughter, as I said before,
and therefore won't be run away with by fancy, which is soon past and
gone: but make a prudent choice, that you won't never have cause to repent
of. But I'll not say a word more; I'll leave it all to yourself and James
Jackson."

"You do right," said Lady Anne: "good morning to you! Farewell, Lucy!
That's a pretty necklace, and is very becoming to you--fare ye well!"

She hurried out of the cottage with Belinda, apprehensive that the
talkative old dame might weaken the effect of her good sense and
experience by a farther profusion of words.

"One would think," said Belinda, with an ingenuous smile, "that this
lesson upon the dangers of _fancy_ was intended for me: at any rate, I may
turn it to my own advantage!"

"Happy those who can turn all the experience of others to their own
advantage!" said Lady Anne: "this would be a more valuable privilege than
the power of turning every thing that is touched to gold."

They walked on in silence for a few minutes; and then Miss Portman,
pursuing the train of her own thoughts, and unconscious that she had not
explained them to Lady Anne, abruptly exclaimed, "But if I should be
entangled, so as not to be able to retract!--and if it should not be in my
power to love him at last, he will think me a coquette, a jilt, perhaps:
he will have reason to complain of me, if I waste his time, and trifle
with his affections. Then is it not better that I should avoid, by a
decided refusal, all possibility of injury to Mr. Vincent, and of blame to
myself?"

"There is no danger of Mr. Vincent's misunderstanding or misrepresenting
you. The risk that he runs is by his voluntary choice; and I am sure that
if, after farther acquaintance with him, you find it impossible to return
his affection, he will not consider himself as ill-used by your refusal."

"But after a certain time--after the world suspects that two people are
engaged to each other, it is scarcely possible for the woman to recede:
when they come within a certain distance, they are pressed to unite, by
the irresistible force of external circumstances. A woman is too often
reduced to this dilemma: either she must marry a man she does not love, or
she must be blamed by the world--either she must sacrifice a portion of
her reputation, or the whole of her happiness."

"The world is indeed often too curious, and too rash in these affairs,"
said Lady Anne. "Yes," was the reply. "Then I, as last voter, choose as
member of Parliament"--[_Stops._]
ADELAIDE.

The professor?

SENDEN.

No. "A most clever and cunning politician," so he put it, "Dr. Conrad
Bolz." Then he turned short around and his henchmen followed him.

ADELAIDE (_aside, smiling_).

Aha!

SENDEN.

Oldendorf is member by a majority of two votes.

COLONEL.

Ugh!

SENDEN.

It is a shame! No one is to blame for this result but these journalists
of the _Union_. Such a running about, an intriguing, a shaking of hands
with all the voters, a praising of this Oldendorf, a shrugging of the
shoulders at us--and at you, dear Sir!

COLONEL.

Indeed?

IDA.

That last is not true.

ADELAIDE (_to_ SENDEN).

Show some regard, and spare those here.

COLONEL.

You are trembling, my daughter. You are a woman, and let yourself
be too much affected by such trifles.

I will not have you listen to these tidings any longer. Go, my child!
Why, your friend has won, there is no reason for you to cry! Help her,
Miss Adelaide!

IDA (_is led by_ ADELAIDE _to the side door on the left; entreatingly_.)

Leave me!

Stay with father!

SENDEN.

Upon my honor, the bad faith and arrogance with which this paper
is edited are no longer to be endured.

Colonel, since we are alone--for Miss Adelaide will let me count her
as one of us--we have a chance to take a striking revenge.

Their days are numbered now. Quite a long time ago, already, I had the
owner of the _Union_ sounded.

He is not disinclined to sell the paper, but merely has scruples
about the party now controlling the sheet.

At the club-fête I myself had a talk with him.

ADELAIDE.

What's this I hear?

SENDEN.

This outcome of the election will cause the greatest bitterness
among all our friends, and I have no doubt that, in a few days, by
forming a stock company, we can collect the purchase price.

That would be a deadly blow to our opponents, a triumph for the good
cause. The most widely-read sheet in the province in our hands,
edited by a committee-- 
ADELAIDE.

To which Mr. von Senden would not refuse his aid--
SENDEN.

As a matter of duty I should do my part.

Colonel, if you would be one of the shareholders, your example would
at once make the purchase a sure thing.

COLONEL.

Sir, what you do to further your political ideas is your own affair.

Professor Oldendorf, however, has been a welcome guest in my house.
Never will I work against him behind his back. You would have spared me
this moment had you not previously deceived me by your assurances as
to the sentiments of the majority. However, I bear you no malice.
You acted from the best of motives, I am sure. I beg the company to excuse
me if I withdraw for today.

I hope to see you tomorrow again, dear Senden.

SENDEN.

Meanwhile I will start the fund for the purchase of the newspaper. I bid
you good day. [_Exit_.]
COLONEL.

Pardon me, Adelaide, if I leave you alone.

I have some letters to write, and [_with a forced laugh_] my
newspapers to read.

ADELAIDE (_sympathetically_).

May I not stay with you now, of all times?

COLONEL (_with an effort_).

I shall be better off alone, now.

[_Exit through centre door_.]

ADELAIDE (_alone_).

My poor Colonel! Injured vanity is hard at work in his faithful soul.

And Ida. [_Gently opens the door on the left, remains standing_.] She
is writing. It is not difficult to guess to whom.

[_Closes the door_.] And for all of this mischief that evil spirit Journalism
is to blame.
Everybody complains of it, and every one tries to use it for his
own ends.

My Colonel scorned newspaper men until he became one himself, and Senden
misses no opportunity of railing at my good friends of the pen,
merely because he wishes to put himself in their place.

I see Piepenbrink and myself becoming journalists, too, and combining
to edit a little sheet under the title of _Naughty Bolz_. So the _Union_
is in danger of being secretly sold.

It might be quite a good thing for Conrad: he would then have to think
of something else besides the newspaper. Ah! the rogue would start a
new one at once!

_Enter_ OLDENDORF _and_ CARL.

OLDENDORF (_while still outside of the room_).

And the Colonel will receive no one?

CARL.

No one, Professor. [_Exit_.]

ADELAIDE (_going up to_ OLDENDORF).

Dear Professor, this is not just the right moment for you to come. We are
very much hurt and out of sorts with the world, but most of all with
you.

OLDENDORF.

I am afraid you are, but I must speak to him.

_Enter_ IDA _through the door on the left_.

IDA (_going toward him_).

Edward!

I knew you would come!

OLDENDORF.

My dear Ida! [_Embraces her_.]
IDA (_with her arms around his neck_).

And what will become of us now?

_Enter_ COLONEL _through centre door_.

COLONEL (_with forced calmness_).

You shall remain in no doubt about that, my daughter! I beg you, Professor,
to forget that you were once treated as a friend in this household. I
require you, Ida, to banish all thought of the hours when this gentleman
entertained you with his sentiments. (_More violently_.) Be still!
In my own house at least I submit to no attacks from a journalist. Forget
him, or forget that you are my daughter. Go in there! [_Leads_ IDA, _not
ungently, out to the left, and places himself in front of the door_.]
On this ground, Mr. Editor and Member of Parliament, before the heart of
my child, you shall not beat me.

[_Exit to the left_.]
ADELAIDE (_aside_).

Dear me! That is bad!

OLDENDORF (_as the_ COLONEL _turns to go, with determination_).

Colonel, it is ungenerous of you to refuse me this interview. [_Goes
toward the door_.]
ADELAIDE (_intercepting him quickly_).

Stop! No further! He is in a state of excitement where a single word might
do permanent harm. But do not leave us this way, Professor; give me just a
few moments.

OLDENDORF.

I must, in my present condition of mind, ask your indulgence. I have long
dreaded just such a scene, and yet I hardly feel able to control
myself.

ADELAIDE.

You know our friend; you know that his quick temper drives him into acts
for which later he would gladly atone.

OLDENDORF.

This was more than a fit of temper. It means a breach between us two--a
breach that seems to me beyond healing.

ADELAIDE.

Beyond healing, Professor! If your sentiments toward Ida are what I think
they are, healing is not so difficult. Would it not be fitting for you
even now--especially now--to accede to the father's wishes.
Does not the woman you love deserve that, for once at least, you sacrifice
your ambition!

OLDENDORF.

My ambition, yes; my duty, no.

ADELAIDE.

Your own happiness, Professor, seems to me to be ruined for a long time,
possibly forever, if you part from Ida in this way.

OLDENDORF (_gloomily_).

Not every one can be happy in his private life.

ADELAIDE.

This resignation does not please me at all, least of all in a man.
Pardon me for saying so, plainly. (_Ingratiatingly_.) Is the misfortune
so great if you become member for this town a few years later, or even not
at all?

OLDENDORF.

Miss Runeck, I am not conceited. I do not rate my abilities very high,
and, as far as I know myself, there is no ambitious impulse lurking
at the bottom of my heart.

Possibly, as you do now, so a later age will set a low estimate on our
political wrangling, our party aims, and all that that includes. Possibly
all our labor will be without result; possibly much of the good we hope to
do will, when achieved, turn out to be the opposite--yes, it is highly
probable that my own share in the struggle will often be painful,
unedifying, and not at all what you would call a grateful task; but
all that must not keep me from devoting my life to the strife and
struggle of the age to which I belong.

That struggle, after all, is the best and noblest that the present has
to offer.

Not every age permits its sons to achieve results which remain great
for all time; and, I repeat, not every age can make those who live
in it distinguished and happy.

ADELAIDE.

I think every age can accomplish that if the individuals will only
understand how to be great and happy.

[_Rising_.] You, Professor, will do nothing for your own little
home-happiness. You force your friends to act for you.

[Illustration: Permission F. Bruckmann, A.-G. Munich IN THE BEERGARDEN
Adolph von Menzel]
OLDENDORF.

At all events cherish as little anger against me as possible, and
speak a good word for me to Ida.

ADELAIDE.

I shall set my woman's wits to aiding you, Mr. Statesman.

[_Exit_ OLDENDORF.]
ADELAIDE (_alone_).

So this is one of the noble, scholarly, free spirits of the German
nation!

And he climbs into the fire from a sheer sense of duty!

But to conquer anything--the world, happiness, or even a wife--for that he
never was made!

_Enter_ CARL.

CARL (_announcing_).

Dr. Bolz!

ADELAIDE.

Ah! He at least will be no such paragon of virtue!--Where is the
Colonel?

CARL.

In Miss Ida's room.

ADELAIDE.

Show the gentleman in here.

[_Exit_ CARL.]

I feel somewhat embarrassed at seeing you again, Mr. Bolz; I shall take
pains to conceal it.

_Enter_ BOLZ.

BOLZ.

A poor soul has just left you, vainly seeking consolation in your philosophy.
I too come as an unfortunate, for yesterday I incurred your displeasure;
and but for your presence, which cut short a vexatious scene, Mr. von
Senden, in the interests of social propriety, would doubtless have
pitched into me still harder.

I thank you for the reminder you gave me; I take it as a sign that you
will not withdraw your friendly interest in me.

ADELAIDE (_aside_).

Very pretty, very diplomatic!--It is kind of you to put so good a
construction on my astonishing behavior. But pardon me if I presume to
interfere again; that scene with Mr. von Senden will not,
I trust, give provocation for a second one?

BOLZ (_aside_).

This eternal Senden! (_Aloud_.) Your interest in him furnishes me grounds
for avoiding further consequences. I think I can manage it.

ADELAIDE.

I thank you. And now let me tell you that you are a dangerous diplomatist.
You have inflicted a thorough defeat on this household.
On this unfortunate day but one thing has pleased me--the one vote which
sought to make you member of Parliament.

BOLZ.

It was a crazy idea of the honest wine-merchant.

ADELAIDE.

You took so much trouble to put your friend in, why did you not work for
yourself? The young man I used to know had lofty aims, and nothing
seemed beyond the range of his soaring ambition. Have you changed, or is
the fire still burning?

BOLZ (_smiling_).

I have become a journalist, Miss Adelaide.

ADELAIDE.
Your friend is one, too.

BOLZ.
Only as a side issue. But I belong to the guild. He who has joined
it may have the ambition to write wittily or well. All that goes
beyond that is not for us.

ADELAIDE.

Not for you?

BOLZ.
For that we are too flighty, too restless and scatter-brained.

ADELAIDE.
Are you in earnest about that, Conrad?

BOLZ.
Perfectly in earnest. Why should I wish to seem to you different
from what I am? We journalists feed our minds on the daily news;
we must taste the dishes Satan cooks for men down to the smallest
morsel; so you really should make allowances for us. The daily
vexation over failure and wrong doing, the perpetual little excitements
over all sorts of things--that has an effect upon a man. At first
one clenches one's fist, then one learns to laugh at it. If you
work only for the day you come to live for the day.
ADELAIDE (_perturbed_).

But that is sad, I think.

BOLZ.
On the contrary, it is quite amusing. We buzz like bees, in spirit
we fly through the whole world, suck honey when we find it, and
sting when something displeases us. Such a life is not apt to make
great heroes, but queer dicks like us are also needed.
ADELAIDE (_aside_).
Now he too is at it, and he is even worse than the other one.

BOLZ.
We won't waste sentiment on that account. I scribble away so long
as it goes. When it no longer goes, others take my place and do the
same.
When Conrad Bolz, the grain of wheat, has been crushed in the great
mill, other grains fall on the stones until the flour is ready from
which the future, possibly, will bake good bread for the benefit
of the many.

ADELAIDE.
No, no, that is morbidness; such resignation is wrong.

BOLZ.
Such resignation will eventually be found in every profession. It
is not your lot. To you is due a different kind of happiness, and
you will find it. (_Feelingly_.) Adelaide, as a boy I wrote you
tender verses and lulled myself in foolish dreams. I was very fond
of you, and the wound our separation inflicted still smarts at
times.
[ADELAIDE _makes a deprecatory gesture_.] Don't be alarmed, I am
not going to pain you. I long begrudged my fate, and had moments
when I felt like an outcast. But now when you stand there before
me in full radiancy, so lovely, so desirable, when my feeling for
you is as warm as ever, I must say to you all the same: Your father,
it is true, treated me roughly; but that he separated us, that he
prevented you, the rich heiress, who could claim anything, with
your own exclusive circle of friends, from throwing herself away
on a wild boy who had always shown more presumption than power--that
was really very sensible, and he acted quite rightly in the
matter.

ADELAIDE (_in her agitation seizing his hands_).
Thank you, Conrad, thank you for speaking so of my dead father!
Yes, you are good, you have a heart. It makes me very happy that
you should have shown it to me.

BOLZ.
It is only a tiny little pocket-heart for private use. It was quite
against my will that it happened to make its appearance.

ADELAIDE.
And now enough of us two! Here in this house our help is needed.
You have won, have completely prevailed against us. I submit, and
acknowledge you my master. But now show mercy and let us join
forces.
In this conflict of you men a rude blow has been struck at the heart
of a girl whom I love. I should like to make that good again and I
want you to help me.

BOLZ.

I am at your command.

ADELAIDE.
The Colonel must be reconciled. Think up some way of healing his
injured self-esteem.

BOLZ.
I have thought it over and have taken some steps. Unfortunately,
all I can do is to make him feel that his anger at Oldendorf is
folly. This soft conciliatory impulse you alone can inspire.

ADELAIDE.
Then we women must try our luck.

BOLZ.
Meanwhile I will hurry and do what little I can.

ADELAIDE.
Farewell, Mr. Editor. And think not only of the progress of the
great world, but also occasionally of one friend, who suffers from
the base egotism of wishing to be happy on her own account.

BOLZ.
You have always found your happiness in looking after the happiness
of others. With that kind of egotism there is no difficulty in being
happy. [_Exit_.] 
ADELAIDE (_alone_).
He still loves me! He is a man with feeling and generosity. But he,
too, is resigned. They are all _ill_--these men! They have no
courage!
From pure learning and introspection they have lost all confidence
in themselves. This Conrad! Why doesn't he say to me: "Adelaide, I
want you to be my wife?" He can be brazen enough when he wants to!
God forbid! He philosophizes about my kind of happiness and his
kind of happiness! It was all very fine, but sheer nonsense.--My
young country-squires are quite different. They have no great burden
of wisdom and have more whims and prejudices than they ought to;
but they do their hating and loving thoroughly and boldly, and never
forget their own advantage. They are the better for it! Praised be
the country, the fresh air, and my broad acres! [_Pause; with
decision_.] The _Union_ is to be sold! Conrad must come to the
country to get rid of his crotchets! [_Sits down and writes; rings;
enter_ CARL.] Take this note to Judge Schwarz; I want him kindly
to come to me on urgent business.

[_Exit_ CARL.]
_Enter_ IDA _through the side door on the left_.

IDA.
I am too restless to keep still! Let me cry here to my heart's
content! [_Weeps on_ ADELAIDE'S _neck_.] 
ADELAIDE (_tenderly_).
Poor child! The bad men have been very cruel to you. It's all right
for you to grieve, darling, but don't be so still and resigned!

IDA.
I have but the one thought: he is lost to me--lost forever!

ADELAIDE.
You are a dear good girl. But be reassured! You haven't lost him
at all. On the contrary, we'll see to it that you get him back
better than ever. With blushing cheeks and bright eyes he shall
reappear to you, the noble man, your chosen demigod--and your pardon
the demigod shall ask for having caused you pain!--
IDA (_looking up at her_).

What are you telling me?

ADELAIDE.
Listen! This night I read in the stars that you were to become
Mrs.
Member-of-Parliament. A big star fell from heaven, and on it was
written in legible letters: "Beyond peradventure she shall have
him!" The fulfilment has attached to it but one condition.

IDA.
What condition? Tell me!

ADELAIDE.
I recently told you of a certain lady and an unknown gentleman. You
remember?

IDA.

I have thought of it incessantly.

ADELAIDE.
Good! On the same day on which this lady finds her knight again
shall you also be reconciled with your professor--not sooner, not
later.
Thus it is written.

IDA.
I am so glad to believe you. And when will the day come?

ADELAIDE.
Yes, dear, I do not know that exactly. But I will confide in you,
since we girls are alone, that the said lady is heartily tired of
the long hoping and waiting and will, I fear, do something
desperate.

IDA (_embracing her_).

If only she will hurry up!
ADELAIDE (_holding her_).
Hush! Some man might hear us! [_Enter_ KORB.] What is it, old
friend?

KORB.
Miss Adelaide, out there is Mr. Bellmaus, the friend-- 
ADELAIDE.
Very well, and he wishes to speak to me?

KORB.
Yes. I myself advised him to come to you; he has something to tell
you.

ADELAIDE.

Bring him in here! [_Exit_ KORB.] 
IDA.
Let me go away; my eyes are red with weeping.

ADELAIDE.
Well go, dear. In a few minutes I will rejoin you. (_Exit_ IDA.)
He too! The whole _Union_--one after the other!
_Enter_ BEULMAUS.

BELLMAUS (_shyly, bowing repeatedly_).
You permit me, Miss Runeck!

ADELAIDE (_kindly_).
I am glad to receive your visit, and am curious about the interesting
disclosures you have to make to me.

BELLMAUS.
There is no one to whom I would rather confide what I have heard,
Miss Runeck, than to you. Having learned from Mr. Korb that you are
a subscriber to our newspaper I feel sure-- 
ADELAIDE.
That I deserve, too, to be a friend of the editors. Thank you for
the good opinion.

BELLMAUS.
There is this man Schmock! He is a poor fellow who has been little
in good society and was until now on the staff of the
_Coriolanus_.

ADELAIDE. I remember having seen him.

BELLMAUS.
At Bolz's request I gave him a few glasses of punch. He thereupon
grew jolly and told me of a great plot that Senden and the editor
of the _Coriolanus_ have hatched between them. These two gentlemen,
so he assures me, had planned to discredit Professor Oldendorf in
the Colonel's eyes and so drove the Colonel into writing articles
for the _Coriolanus_.

ADELAIDE.
But is the young man who made you these revelations at all
trustworthy?

BELLMAUS.
He can't stand much punch, and after three glasses he told me all
this of his own accord. In general I don't consider him very
reputable. I should call him a good fellow, but reputable--no, he's
not quite that.

ADELAIDE (_indifferently_.)
Do you suppose this gentleman who drank the three glasses of punch
would be willing to repeat his disclosures before other
persons?

BELLMAUS.
He said he would, and spoke of proofs too.

ADELAIDE (_aside_).
Aha! (_Aloud_.) I fear the proofs won't amount to much. And you
have not spoken of it to the professor or Mr. Bolz?

BELLMAUS.
Our professor is very much occupied these days, and Bolz is the
jolliest man in the world; but his relations with Mr. von Senden
being already strained I thought-- 
ADELAIDE (_quickly_).
And you were quite right, dear Mr. Bellmaus. So in other regards
you are content with Mr. Bolz?

BELLMAUS.
He is a sociable, excellent man, and I am on very good terms with
him.
All of us are on very good terms with him.

ADELAIDE.
I am glad to hear it.

BELLMAUS.
He sometimes goes a little too far, but he has the best heart in
the world.
ADELAIDE (_aside_). "Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings" ye
shall hear the truth!

BELLMAUS.
His nature, you know, is a purely prosaic one; for poetry he has
not the least comprehension. ADELAIDE. Do you think so?

BELLMAUS.
Yes, he often bursts forth on the subject.

ADELAIDE (_rising_).
I thank you for your communication even if I cannot attach weight
to it, and I am glad to have met in you one of the editorial
staff.
Journalists, I find, are dangerous people, and it is just as well
to secure their good will; although I, as an unimportant person,
will try never to furnish matter for a newspaper article. [_As_
BELLMAUS _lingers._] Can I do anything more for you?
BELLMAUS (_with warmth_).In these days, however, so few people marry with even the pretence
to love of any sort, that you will think I might have spared this tirade.
No; there are ingenuous minds which will never be enslaved by fashion or
interest, though they may be exposed to be deceived by romance, or by the
_delicacy_ of their own imaginations."

"I hear," said Belinda, smiling, "I hear and understand the emphasis with
which you pronounce that word _delicacy_. I see you have not forgotten
that I used it improperly half an hour ago, as you have convinced me."

"Happy they," said Mr. Percival, "who can be convinced in half an hour!
There are some people who cannot be convinced in a whole life, and who end
where they began, with saying--'This is my opinion--I always thought so,
and always shall.'"

Mr. Vincent at all times loved Mr. Percival; but he never felt so much
affection for him as he did this evening, and his arguments appeared to
him unanswerable. Though Belinda had never mentioned to Mr. Vincent the
name of Clarence Hervey till this day, and though he did not in the least
suspect from her manner that this gentleman ever possessed any interest in
her heart; yet, with her accustomed sincerity, she had confessed to him
that an impression had been made upon her mind before she came to
Oakly-park.

After this conversation with Mr. Percival, Mr. Vincent perceived that he
gained ground more rapidly in her favour; and his company grew every day
more agreeable to her taste: he was convinced that, as he possessed her
esteem, he should in time secure her affections.

"In time," repeated Lady Anne Percival: "you must allow her time, or you
will spoil all."

It was with some difficulty that Mr. Vincent restrained his impatience,
even though he was persuaded of the prudence of his friend's advice.
Things went on in this happy, but as he thought slow, state of progression
till towards the latter end of September.

One fine morning Lady Anne Percival came into Belinda's room with a bridal
favour in her hand. "Do you know," said she, "that we are to have a
wedding to-day? This favour has just been sent to my maid. Lucy, the
pretty girl whom you may remember to have seen some time ago with that
prettily turned necklace, is the bride, and James Jackson is the
bridegroom. Mr. Vincent has let them a very pretty little farm in the
neighbourhood, and--hark! there's the sound of music."

They looked out of the window, and they saw a troop of villagers, gaily
dressed, going to the wedding. Lady Anne, who was always eager to promote
innocent festivity, sent immediately to have a tent pitched in the park;
and all the rural company were invited to a dance in the evening: it was a
very cheerful spectacle. Belinda heard from all sides praises of Mr.
Vincent's generosity; and she could not be insensible to the simple but
enthusiastic testimony which Juba bore to his master's goodness. Juba had
composed, in his broken dialect, a little song in honour of his master,
which he sang to his banjore with the most touching expression of joyful
gratitude. In some of the stanzas Belinda could distinguish that her own
name was frequently repeated. Lady Anne called him, and desired to have
the words of this song. They were a mixture of English and of his native
language; they described in the strongest manner what had been his
feelings whilst he was under the terror of Mrs. Freke's fiery obeah-woman,
then his joy on being relieved from these horrors, with the delightful
sensations of returning health;--and thence he suddenly passed to his
gratitude to Belinda, the person to whom he owed his recovery. He
concluded with wishing her all sorts of happiness, and, above all, that
she might be fortunate in her love; which Juba thought the highest degree
of felicity. He had no sooner finished his song, which particularly
touched and pleased Miss Portman, than he begged his master to offer to
her the little instrument, which he had made with much pains and
ingenuity. She accepted the banjore with a smile that enchanted Mr.
Vincent; but at this instant they were startled by the sound of a carriage
driving rapidly into the park. Belinda looked up, and between the heads of
the dancers she just caught a glimpse of a well-known livery. "Good
heavens!" she exclaimed, "Lady Delacour's carriage!--Can it be Lady
Delacour?"

The carriage stopped, and Marriott hastily jumped out of it. Belinda
pressed forward to meet her; poor Marriott was in great agitation:--"Oh,
Miss Portman! my poor lady is very ill--very ill, indeed. She has sent me
for you--here's her letter. Dear Miss Portman, I hope you won't refuse to
come; she _has_ been very ill, and is very ill; but she would be better,
if she could see you again. But I'll tell every thing, ma'am, when we are
by ourselves, and when you have read your letter."

Miss Portman immediately accompanied Marriott towards the house; and as
they walked thither, she learned that Lady Delacour had applied to the
quack-doctor in whom she had such implicit faith, and had in vain
endeavoured to engage him to perform for her the operation to which she
had determined to submit. He was afraid to hazard it, and he prevailed
upon her to give up the scheme, and to try some new external remedy from
which he promised wonders. No one knew what his medicines were, but they
affected her head in the most alarming manner.

In her delirium she called frequently upon Miss Portman; sometimes
accusing her of the basest treachery, sometimes addressing her as if she
were present, and pouring forth the warmest expressions of friendship. "In
her lucid intervals, ma'am," continued Marriott, "she for some weeks
scarcely ever mentioned your name, nor could bear to hear me mention it.
One day, when I was saying how much I wished that you were with her again,
she darted at me the most terrible look that ever I beheld.

"'When I am in my grave, Marriott,' cried my lady, 'it will be time enough
for Miss Portman again to visit this house, and you may then express your
attachment to her with more propriety than at present.' These were my
lady's own words--I shall never forget them: they struck and astonished
me, ma'am, so much, I stood like one stupified, and then left the room to
think them over again by myself, and make sense of them, if I could. Well,
ma'am, to be sure, it then struck me like a flash of lightning, that my
lady was jealous--and, begging your pardon, ma'am--of you. This seemed to
me the most unnatural thing in the world, considering how easy my lady had
always seemed to be about my lord; but it was now clear to me, that this
was the cause of your leaving us so suddenly, ma'am. Well, I was confident
that Mr. Champfort was at the bottom of the business from the first; and
now that I knew what scent to go upon, I went to work with fresh spirit to
find him out, which was a thing I was determined upon--and what I'm
determined upon, I generally do, ma'am. So I put together things about
Miss Portman and my lord, that had dropped at odd times from Sir Philip
Baddely's gentleman; and I, partly serious and partly flirting, which in a
good cause is no sin, drew from him (for he pretends to be a little an
admirer of mine, ma'am, though I never gave him the smallest
encouragement) all he knew or suspected, or had heard reported, or
whispered; and out it came, ma'am, that Mr. Champfort was the original of
all; and that he had told a heap of lies about some bank-notes that my
lord had given you, and that you and my lord were to be married as soon as
my lady was dead; and I don't know what, which he maliciously circulated
through Sir Philip's gentleman to Sir Philip himself, and so round again
to my lady. Now, Sir Philip's man behaved like a gentleman upon the
occasion, which I shall ever be free to acknowledge and remember: and when
I represented things properly, and made him sensible of the mischief,
which, he assured me, was done purely with an eye to serve Sir Philip, his
master, he very candidly offered to assist me to unmask that villain
Champfort, which he could easily do with the assistance of a few bottles
of claret, and a few fair words; which, though I can't abide hypocrisy, I
thought quite allowable upon such an occasion. So, ma'am, when Mr.
Champfort was thrown off his guard by the claret, Sir Philip's gentleman
began to talk of my lord and my lady, and Miss Portman; and he observed
that my lord and my lady were coming together more than they used to be
since Miss Portman left the house. To which Champfort replied with an
oath, like an unmannered reprobate as he is, and in his gibberish, French
and English, which I can't speak; but the sense of it was this:--'My lord
and lady shall never come together, if I can help it. It was to hinder
this I got Miss Portman banished; for my lord was quite another man after
she got Miss Helena into the house; and I don't doubt but he might have
been brought to leave off his burgundy, and set up for a sober, regular
man; which would not suit me at all. If my lady once was to get power over
him again, I might go whistle--so (with another reprobate oath) my lord
and my lady shall never come together again whilst I live.'

"Well, ma'am," continued Marriott, "as soon as I was in possession of this
precious speech, I carried it and a letter of Sir Philip Baddely's
gentleman vouching it to my lady. My lady was thunderstruck, and so vexed
to have been, as she said, a dupe, that she sent for my lord directly, and
insisted upon his giving up Mr. Champfort. My lord demurred, because my
lady spoke so high, and said _insist_. He would have done it, I'm
satisfied, of his own accord with the greatest pleasure, if my lady had
not, as it were, commanded it. But he answered at last, 'My Lady Delacour,
I'm not a man to be governed by a wife--I shall keep or part with my own
servants in my own house, according to my own pleasure;' and saying so, he
left the room. I never saw my lady so angry as she was at this refusal of
my lord to part with him. The house was quite in a state of distraction
for some days. I never would sit down to the same table, ma'am, with Mr.
Champfort, nor speak to him, nor look at him, and parties ran high above
and below stairs. And at last my lady, who had been getting better, took
to her bed again with a nervous fever, which brought her almost to death's
door; she having been so much weakened before by the quack medicines and
convulsions, and all her sufferings in secret. She would not see my lord
on no account, and Champfort persuaded him her illness was pretence, to
bring him to her purpose; which was the more readily believed, because
nobody was ever let into my lady's bedchamber but myself. All this time
she never mentioned your name, ma'am; but once, when I was sitting by her
bedside, as she was asleep, she started suddenly, and cried out, 'Oh, my
dearest Belinda! are you come back to me?'--She awakened herself with the
start; and raising herself quite up in her bed, she pulled back the
curtains, and looked all round the room. I'm sure she expected to see you;
and when she found it was a dream, she gave a heavy sigh, and sank down
upon her pillow. I then could not forbear to speak, and this time my lady
was greatly touched when I mentioned your name:--she shed tears, ma'am;
and you know it is not a little thing that can draw tears from my lady.
But when I said something about sending for you, she answered, she was
sure you would not return to her, and that she would never condescend to
ask a favour in vain, even from you. Then I replied that I was sure you
loved her still, and as well as ever: and that the proof of that was, that
Mrs. Luttridge and Mrs. Freke together, by all their wiles, could not draw
you over to their party at Harrowgate, and that you had affronted Mrs.
Freke by defending her ladyship. My lady was all surprise at this, and
eagerly asked how I came to know it. Now, ma'am, I had it all by a post
letter from Mrs. Luttridge's maid, who is my cousin, and knows every thing
that's going on. My lady from this moment forward could scarce rest an
instant without wishing for you, and fretting for you as I knew by her
manner. One day my lord met me on the stairs as I was coming down from my
poor lady's room, and he asked me how she was, and why she did not send
for a physician. 'The best physician, my lord, she could send for,' said
I, 'would be Miss Portman; for she'll never be well till that good young
lady comes back again, in my humble opinion.'

"'And what should prevent that good young lady from coming back again? Not
I, surely,' rejoined my lord, 'for I wish she were here with all my
heart.'

"'It is not easy to suppose, my lord,' said I, 'after all that has passed,
that the young lady would choose to return, or that my lady would ask her,
whilst Mr. Champfort remains paramount in the house.' 'If that's all,'
cried my lord, 'tell your lady I'll part with Champfort upon the spot; for
the rascal has just had the insolence to insist upon it, that a pair of
new boots are not too tight for me, when I said they were. I'll show him I
can be master, and will, in my own house.' Ma'am, my heart leaped for joy
within me at hearing these words, and I ran up to my lady with them. I
easily concluded in my own mind, that my lord was glad of the pretence of
the boots, to give up handsomely after his standing out so long. To be
sure, my lord's mightily jealous of being master, and mighty fond of his
own way; but I forgive him every thing for doing as I would have him at
last, and dismissing that prince of mischief-makers, Mr. Champfort. My
lady called for her writing-desk directly, and sat up in her bed, and with
her trembling hand, as you see by the writing, ma'am, wrote a letter to
you as fast as ever she could, and the postchaise was ordered. I don't
know what fancy seized her--but if you remember, ma'am, the hammercloth to
her new carriage had orange and black fringe at first: she would not use
it, till this had been changed to blue and white. Well, ma'am, she
recollected this on a sudden, as I was getting ready to come for you; and
she set the servants at work directly to take off the blue and white, and
put on the black and orange fringe again, which she said must be done
before your coming. And my lady ordered her own footman to ride along with
me; and I have come post, and have travelled night and day, and will never
rest till I get back. But, ma'am, I won't keep you any longer from reading
your letter, only to say, that I hope to Heaven you will not refuse to
return to my poor lady, if it be only to put her mind at ease before she
dies. She cannot have long to live."

As Marriott finished these words they reached the house, and Belinda went
to her own room to read Lady Delacour's letter. It contained none of her
customary '_éloquence du billet_,' no sprightly wit, no real, no affected
gaiety; her mind seemed to be exhausted by bodily suffering, and her high
spirit subdued. She expressed the most poignant anguish for having
indulged such unjust suspicions and intemperate passions. She lamented
having forfeited the esteem and affection of the only real friend she had
ever possessed--a friend of whose forbearance, tenderness, and fidelity,
she had received such indisputable proofs. She concluded by saying, "I
feel my end fast approaching, and perhaps, Belinda, your humanity will
induce you to grant my last request, and to let me see you once more
before I die."

Belinda immediately decided to return to Lady Delacour--though it was
with real regret that she thought of leaving Lady Anne Percival, and the
amiable and happy family to whom she had become so much attached. The
children crowded round her when they heard that she was going, and Mr.
Vincent stood in silent sorrow--but we spare our readers this parting
scene Miss Portman promised to return to Oakly-park as soon as she
possibly could. Mr. Vincent anxiously requested permission to follow her
to town: but this she positively refused; and he submitted with as good a
grace as a lover can submit to any thing that crosses his passion.


CHAPTER XX.

RECONCILIATION.


Aware that her remaining in town at such an unusual season of the year
would appear unaccountable to her fashionable acquaintance, Lady Delacour
contrived for herself a characteristic excuse; she declared that there was
no possibility of finding pleasure in any thing but novelty, and that the
greatest novelty to her would be to remain a whole summer in town. Most of
her friends, amongst whom she had successfully established a character for
caprice, were satisfied that this was merely some new whim, practised to
signalize herself by singularity. The real reason that detained her was
her dependence upon the empiric, who had repeatedly visited and constantly
prescribed for her. Convinced, however, by the dreadful situation to which
his prescriptions had lately reduced her that he was unworthy of her
confidence, she determined to dismiss him: but she could not do this, as
she had a considerable sum to pay him, till Marriott's return, because she
could not trust any one but Marriott to let him up the private staircase
into the boudoir.

During Marriott's absence, her ladyship suffered no one to attend her but
a maid who was remarkable for her stupidity. She thought that she could
have nothing to fear from this girl's spirit of inquiry, for never was any
human being so destitute of curiosity. It was about noon when Belinda and
Marriott arrived. Lady Delacour, who had passed a restless night, was
asleep. When she awoke, she found Marriott standing beside her bed.

"Then it is all in vain, I see," cried her ladyship: "Miss Portman is not
with you?--Give me my laudanum."

"Miss Portman is come, my lady," said Marriott; "she is in the
dressing-room: she would not come in here with me, lest she should startle
you."

"Belinda is come, do you say? Admirable Belinda!" cried Lady Delacour, and
she clasped her hands with ecstasy.

"Shall I tell her, my lady, that you are awake?"

"Yes--no--stay--Lord Delacour is at home. I will get up immediately. Let
my lord be told that I wish to speak with him--that I beg he will
breakfast with me in my dressing-room half an hour hence. I will dress
immediately."

Marriott in vain represented that she ought not to hurry herself in her
present weak state. Intent upon her own thoughts, she listened to nothing
that was said, but frequently urged Marriott to be expeditious. She put on
an unusual quantity of rouge: then looking at herself in the glass, she
said, with a forced smile, "Marriott, I look so charmingly, that Miss
Portman, perhaps, will be of Lord Delacour's opinion, and think that
nothing is the matter with me. Ah! no; she has been behind the scenes--she
knows the truth too well!--Marriott, pray did she ask you many questions
about me?--Was not she very sorry to leave Oakly-park?--Were not they all
extremely concerned to part with her?--Did she ask after Helena?--Did you
tell her that I insisted upon my lord's parting with Champfort?"

At the word Champfort, Marriott's mouth opened eagerly, and she began to
answer with her usual volubility. Lady Delacour waited not for any reply
to the various questions which, in the hurry of her mind, she had asked;
but, passing swiftly by Marriott, she threw open the door of her
dressing-room. At the sight of Belinda she stopped short; and, totally
overpowered, she would have sunk upon the floor, had not Miss Portman
caught her in her arms, and supported her to a sofa. When she came to
herself, and heard the soothing tone of Belinda's voice, she looked up
timidly in her face for a few moments without being able to speak.

"And are you really here once more, my dear Belinda?" cried she at last;
"and may I still call you my friend?--and do you forgive me?--Yes, I _see_
you do--and from you I can endure the humiliation of being forgiven. Enjoy
the noble sense of your own superiority."

"My dear Lady Delacour," said Belinda, "you see all this in too strong a
light: you have done me no injury--I have nothing to forgive."

"I _cannot_ see it in too strong a light.--Nothing to forgive!--Yes, you
have; that which it is the most difficult to forgive--injustice. Oh, how
you must have despised me for the folly, the meanness of my suspicions! Of
all tempers that which appears to me, and I am sure to you, the most
despicable, the most intolerable, is a suspicious temper. Mine was once
open, generous as your own--you see how the best dispositions may be
depraved--what am I now? Fit only

    'To point a moral, or adorn a tale'--

a mismatched, misplaced, miserable, perverted being."

"And now you have abused yourself till you are breathless, I may have some
chance," said Belinda, "of being heard in your defence. I perfectly agree
with you in thinking that a suspicious temper is despicable and
intolerable; but there is a vast difference between an acute fit of
jealousy, as our friend Dr. X---- would say, and a chronic habit of
suspicion. The noblest natures may be worked up to suspicion by designing
villany; and then a handkerchief, or a hammercloth, 'trifles as light as
air'--"

"Oh, my dear, you are too good. But my folly admits of no excuse, no
palliation," interrupted Lady Delacour; "mine was jealousy without love."

"That indeed would admit of no excuse," said Belinda; "therefore you will
pardon me if I think it incredible--especially as I have detected you in
feeling something like affection for your little daughter, after you had
done your best, I mean your worst, to make me believe that you were a
monster of a mother."

"That was quite another affair, my dear. I did not know Helena was worth
loving. I did not imagine my little daughter could love me. When I found
my mistake, I changed my tone. But there is no hope of mistake with my
poor husband. Your own sense must show you, that Lord Delacour is not a
man to beloved."

"That could not _always_ have been your ladyship's opinion," said Belinda,
with an arch smile.

"Lord! my dear," said Lady Delacour, a little embarrassed, "in the highest
paroxysm of my madness, I never suspected that you could _love_ Lord
Delacour; I surely only hinted that you were in love with his coronet.
That was absurd enough in all conscience--don't make me more absurd than I
am."

"Is it then the height of absurdity to love a husband?"

"Love! Nonsense!--Impossible!--Hush! here he comes, with his odious
creaking shoes. What man can ever expect to be loved who wears creaking
shoes?" pursued her ladyship, as Lord Delacour entered the room, his shoes
creaking at every step; and assuming an air of levity, she welcomed him as
a stranger to her dressing-room. "No speeches, my lord! no speeches, I
beseech you," cried she, as he was beginning to speak to Miss Portman.
"Believe me, that explanations always make bad worse. Miss Portman is
here, thank Heaven! and her; and Champfort is gone, thank you--or your
boots. And now let us sit down to breakfast, and forget as soon as
possible every thing that is disagreeable."

When Lady Delacour had a mind to banish painful recollections, it was
scarcely possible to resist the magical influence of her conversation and
manners; yet her lord's features never relaxed to a smile during this
breakfast. He maintained an obstinate silence, and a profound
solemnity--till at last, rising from table, he turned to Miss Portman, and
said, "Of all the caprices of fine ladies, that which surprises me the
most is the whim of keeping their beds without being sick. Now, Miss
Portman, you would hardly suppose that my Lady Delacour, who has been so
lively this morning, has kept her bed, as I am informed, a fortnight--is
not this astonishing?"

"Prodigiously astonishing, that my Lord Delacour, like all the rest of the
world, should be liable to be deceived by appearances," cried her
ladyship. "Honour me with your attention for a few minutes, my lord, and
perhaps I may increase your astonishment."

His lordship, struck by the sudden change of her voice from gaiety to
gravity, fixed his eyes upon her and returned to his seat. She
paused--then addressing herself to Belinda, "My incomparable friend," said
she, "I will now give you a convincing proof of the unlimited power you
have over my mind. My lord, Miss Portman has persuaded me to the step
which I am now going to take. She has prevailed upon me to make a decisive
trial of your prudence and kindness. She has determined me to throw myself
on your mercy."

"Mercy!" repeated Lord Delacour; and a confused idea, that she was now
about to make a confession of the justice of some of his former
suspicions, took possession of his mind: he looked aghast.

"I am going, my lord, to confide to you a secret of the utmost
importance--a secret which is known to but three people in the world--Miss
Portman, Marriott, and a man whose name I cannot reveal to you."

"Stop, Lady Delacour!" cried his lordship, with a degree of emotion and
energy which he had never shown till now: "stop, I conjure, I command you,
madam! I am not sufficiently master of myself--I once loved you too well
to hear such a stroke. Trust me with no such secret--say no more--you have
said enough--too much. I forgive you, that is all I can do: but we must
part, Lady Delacour!" said he, breaking from her with agony expressed in
his countenance.

"The man has a heart, a soul, I protest! You knew him better than I did,
Miss Portman. Nay, you are not gone yet, my lord! You really love me, I
find."

"No, no, no," cried he, vehemently: "weak as you take me to be, Lady
Delacour, I am incapable of loving a woman who has disgraced me, disgraced
herself, her family, her station, her high endowments, her--" His
utterance failed.

"Oh, Lady Delacour!" cried Belinda, "how can you trifle in this manner?"

"I meant not," said her ladyship, "to trifle: I am satisfied. My lord, it
is time that you should he satisfied. I _can_ give you the most
irrefragable proof, that whatever may have been the apparent levity of my
conduct, you have had no serious cause for jealousy. But the proof will
shock--disgust you. Have you courage to know more?--Then follow me."

He followed her.--Belinda heard the boudoir door unlocked.--In a few
minutes they returned.--Grief, and horror, and pity, were painted in Lord
Delacour's countenance, as he passed hastily through the room.

"My dearest friend, I have taken your advice: would to Heaven I had taken
it sooner!" said Lady Delacour to Miss Portman. "I have revealed to Lord
Delacour my real situation. Poor man! he was shocked beyond expression. He
behaved incomparably well. I am convinced that he would, as he said, let
his hand be cut off to save my life. The moment his foolish jealousy was
extinguished, his love for me revived in full force. Would you believe it?
he has promised me to break with odious Mrs. Luttridge. Upon my charging
him to keep my secret from her, he instantly, in the handsomest manner in
the world, declared he would never see her more, rather than give me a
moment's uneasiness. How I reproach myself for having been for years the
torment of this man's life!"

"You may do better than reproach yourself, my dear Lady Delacour," said
Belinda; "you may yet live for years to be the blessing and pride of his
life. I am persuaded that nothing but your despair of obtaining domestic
happiness has so long enslaved you to dissipation; and now that you find a
friend in your husband, now that you know the affectionate temper of your
little Helena, you will have fresh views and fresh hopes; you will have
the courage to live for yourself, and not for what is called the world."

"The world!" cried Lady Delacour, with a tone of disdain: "how long has
that word enslaved a soul formed for higher purposes!" She paused, and
looked up towards heaven with an expression of fervent devotion, which
Belinda had once, and but once, before seen in her countenance. Then, as
if forgetful even that Belinda was present, she threw herself upon a sofa,
and fell, or seemed to fall, into a profound reverie. She was roused by
the entrance of Marriott, who came into the room to ask whether she would
now take her laudanum. "I thought I had taken it," said she in a feeble
voice; and as she raised her eyes and saw Belinda, she added, with a faint
smile, "Miss Portman, I believe, has been laudanum to me this morning: but
even that will not do long, you see; nothing will do for me now but
_this_," and she stretched out her hand for the laudanum. "Is not it
shocking to think," continued she, after she had swallowed it, "that in
laudanum alone I find the means of supporting existence?"

She put her hand to her head, as if partly conscious of the confusion of
her own ideas: and ashamed that Belinda should witness it, she desired
Marriott to assist her to rise, and to support her to her bedchamber. She
made a sign to Miss Portman not to follow her. "Do not take it unkindly,
but I am quite exhausted, and wish to be alone; for I am grown fond of
being alone some hours in the day, and perhaps I shall sleep."

Marriott came out of her lady's room about a quarter of an hour afterward,
and said that her lady seemed disposed to sleep, but that she desired to
have her hook left by her bedside. Marriott searched among several which
lay upon the table, for one in which a mark was put. Belinda looked over
them along with Marriott, and she was surprised to find that they had
almost all methodistical titles. Lady Delacour's mark was in the middle of
Wesley's Admonitions. Several pages in other books of the same description
Miss Portman found marked in pencil, with reiterated lines, which she knew
to be her ladyship's customary mode of distinguishing passages that she
particularly liked. Some were highly oratorical, but most of them were of
a mystical cast, and appeared to Belinda scarcely intelligible. She had
reason to be astonished at meeting with such books in the dressing-room of
a woman of Lady Delacour's character. During the solitude of her illness,
her ladyship had first begun to think seriously on religious subjects, and
the early impressions that had been made on her mind in her childhood, by
a methodistical mother, recurred. Author of _A History of Germany in the
Middle Ages; A Short History of Germany, etc._

It is difficult to assign to Gustav Freytag his exact niche in the
hall of fame, because of his many-sidedness. He wrote one novel of which
the statement has been made by an eminent French critic that no
book in the German language, with the exception of the Bible, has enjoyed
in its day so wide a circulation; he wrote one comedy which for years
was more frequently played than any other on the German stage; he wrote a
series of historical sketches--_Pictures of the German Past_ he calls
them--which hold a unique place in German literature, being as charming in
style as they are sound in scholarship. Add to these a work on the
principles of dramatic criticism that is referred to with respect
by the very latest writers on the subject, an important biography, a
second very successful novel, and a series of six historical romances that
vary in interest, indeed, but that are a noble monument to his own
nation and that, alone, would have made him famous.

As a novelist Freytag is often compared with Charles Dickens, largely on
account of the humor that so frequently breaks forth from his pages. It is
a different kind of humor, not so obstreperous, not so exaggerated,
but it helps to lighten the whole in much the same way.
One moment it is an incongruous simile, at another a bit of sly satire;
now infinitely small things are spoken of as though they were
great, and again we have the reverse.

It is in his famous comedy, _The Journalists_, which appeared in 1853, that
Freytag displays his humor to its best advantage. Some of the situations
themselves, without being farcical, are exceedingly amusing, as when
the Colonel, five minutes after declaiming against the ambition of
journalists and politicians, and enumerating the different forms
under which it is concealed, lets his own ambition run away with
him and is won by the very same arts he has just been denouncing.

Again, Bolz's capture of the wine-merchant Piepenbrink at the ball given
under the auspices of the rival party is very cleverly described indeed.
There is a difference of opinion as to whether or not Bolz was
inventing the whole dramatic story of his rescue by Oldendorf, but
there can be no difference of opinion as to the comicality of the
scene that follows, where, under the very eyes of his rivals and
with the consent of the husband, Bolz prepares to kiss Mrs.

Piepenbrink. The play abounds with curious little bits of satire, quaint
similes and unexpected exaggerations. "There is so much that happens,"
says Bolz in his editorial capacity, "and so tremendously much that does
not happen, that an honest reporter should never be at a loss for novelties."
Playing dominoes with polar bears, teaching seals the rudiments
of journalism, waking up as an owl with tufts of feathers for ears
and a mouse in one's beak, are essentially Freytagian conceptions;
and no one else could so well have expressed Bolz's indifference
to further surprises--they may tell him if they will that some one
has left a hundred millions for the purpose of painting all negroes
white, or of making Africa four-cornered; but he, Bolz, has reached
a state of mind where he will accept as truth anything and
everything.

Freytag's greatest novel, entitled _Soll und Haben_ (the technical commercial
terms for "debit" and "credit"), appeared in 1856. _Dombey and Son_ by
Dickens had been published a few years before and is worth our attention
for a moment because of a similarity of theme in the two works. In both,
the hero is born of the people, but comes in contact with the
aristocracy not altogether to his own advantage; in both, looming
in the background of the story, is the great mercantile house with
its vast and mysterious transactions.

The writer of this short article does not hesitate to place _Debit
and Credit_ far ahead of _Dombey and Son_.

That does not mean that there are not single episodes, and occasionally
a character, in _Dombey and Son_ that the German author could never have
achieved. But, considered as an artistic whole, the English novel is so
disjointed and uneven that the interest often flags and almost dies,
while many of the characters are as grotesque and wooden as so many
jumping-jacks. In Freytag's work, on the other hand, the different parts
are firmly knitted together; an ethical purpose runs through the whole,
and there is a careful subordination of the individual characters to the
general plan of the whole structure. It is much the same contrast as
that between an old-fashioned Italian opera and a modern German tone-drama.
In the one case the effects are made through senseless repetition and
through _tours de force_ of the voice; in the other there is a steady
progression in dramatic intensity, link joining link without a gap.

But to say that _Debit and Credit_ is a finer book than _Dombey and Son_
is not to claim that Freytag, all in all, is a greater novelist
than Dickens.

The man of a single fine book would have to be superlatively great to
equal one who could show such fertility in creation of characters or
produce such masterpieces of description.

Dickens reaches heights of passion to which Freytag could never aspire; in
fact the latter's temperament strikes one as rather a cool one. Even
Spielhagen, far inferior to him in many regards, could thrill where Freytag
merely interests.

Freytag's _forte_ lay in fidelity of depiction, in the power to ascertain
and utilize essential facts. It would not be fair to say that he had little
imagination, for in the parts of _The Ancestors_ that have to do with
remote times, times of which our whole knowledge is gained from a few
paragraphs in old chronicles and where the scenes and incidents have to be
invented, he is at his best. But one of his great merits lies in his evident
familiarity with the localities mentioned in the pages as well as
with the social environment of his personages. The house of T.D. Schröter
in _Debit and Credit_ had its prototype in the house of Molinari in Breslau,
and at the Molinaris Freytag was a frequent visitor.

Indeed in the company of the head of the firm he even undertook just such
a journey to the Polish provinces in troubled times as he makes
Anton take with Schröter.

Again, the life in the newspaper office, so amusingly depicted in
_The Journalists_, was out of the fulness of his own experience as
editor of a political sheet. A hundred little natural touches thus add to
the realism of the whole and make the figures, as a German critic
says, "stand out like marble statues against a hedge of yew." The
reproach has been made that many of Freytag's characters are too much alike.
He has distinct types which repeat themselves both in the novels and in the
plays. George Saalfeld in _Valentine_, for instance, is strikingly like
Bolz in _The Journalists_ or Fink in _Debit and Credit_.

Freytag's answer to such objections was that an author, like any other
artist, must work from models, which he is not obliged constantly to
change. The feeling for the solidarity of the arts was very strong
with him.

He practically abandoned writing for the stage just after achieving
his most noted success and merely for the reason that in poetic narration,
as he called it, he saw the possibility of being still more dramatic.

He felt hampered by the restrictions which the necessarily limited
length of an evening's performance placed upon him, and wished more
time and space for the explanation of motives and the development
of his plot.

In his novel, then, he clung to exactly the same arrangement of his
theme as in his drama--its initial presentation, the intensification
of the interest, the climax, the revulsion, the catastrophe. Again, in the
matter of contrast he deliberately followed the lead of the painter who
knows which colors are complementary and also which ones will clash.

[Illustration: GUSTAV FREYTAG. STAUFFER-BERN]
What, now, are some of the special qualities that have made Freytag's
literary work so enduring, so dear to the Teuton heart, so successful
in every sense of the word?

For one thing, there are a clearness, conciseness and elegance of
style, joined to a sort of musical rhythm, that hold one captive
from the beginning.

So evident is his meaning in every sentence that his pages suffer less by
translation than is the case with almost any other author.

Freytag's highly polished sentences seem perfectly spontaneous, though
we know that he went through a long period of rigid training before
achieving success. "For five years," he himself writes, "I had pursued
the secret of dramatic style; like the child in the fairy-tale I had
sought it from the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars. At length I had found
it: my soul could create securely and comfortably after the manner which
the stage itself demanded."

He had found it, we are given to understand, in part through the study of
the French dramatists of his own day of whom Scribe was one just
then in vogue.

From them, says a critic, he learned "lightness of touch, brevity, conciseness,
directness, the use of little traits as a means of giving insight into
character, different ways of keeping the interest at the proper point
of tension, and a thousand little devices for clearing the stage
of superfluous figures or making needed ones appear at the crucial
moment."

Among his tricks of style, if we may call them so, are inversion
and elision; by the one he puts the emphasis just where he wishes,
by the other he hastens the action without sacrificing the meaning.

Another of his weapons is contrast--grave and gay, high and low succeed
each other rapidly, while vice and virtue follow suit.

No writer ever trained himself for his work more consciously and
consistently. He experimented with each play, watched its effect on
his audiences, asked himself seriously whether their apparent want
of interest in this or that portion was due to some defect in his
work or to their own obtuseness.

He had failures, but remarkably few, and they did not discourage
him; nor did momentary success in one field prevent him from abandoning
it for another in which he hoped to accomplish greater things.

He is his own severest critic, and in his autobiography speaks of certain
productions as worthless which are only relatively wanting in
merit.

Freytag's orderly treatment of his themes affords constant pleasure to the
reader. He proceeds as steadily toward his climax as the builder does
toward the highest point of his roof. He had learned much about climaxes,
so he tells us himself, from Walter Scott, who was the first to see
the importance of a great final or concluding effect.

We have touched as yet merely on externals. Elegance of style, orderliness
of arrangement, consecutiveness of thought alone would never have given
Freytag his place in German literature. All these had first to be
consecrated to the service of a great idea. That idea as expressed in _Debit
and Credit_ is that the hope of the German nation rests in its steady
commercial or working class. He shows the dignity, yes, the poetry of
labor. The nation had failed to secure the needed political reforms, to
the bitter disappointment of numerous patriots; Freytag's mission was to
teach that there were other things worth while besides these constitutional
liberties of which men had so long dreamed and for which they had so long
struggled.

Incidentally he holds the decadent noble up to scorn, and shows how he
still clings to his old pretensions while their very basis is crumbling
under him. It is a new and active life that Freytag advocates, one
of toil and of routine, but one that in the end will give the highest
satisfaction. Such ideas were products of the revolution of 1848, and
they found the ground prepared for them by that upheaval. Freytag,
as Fichte had done in 1807 and 1808, inaugurated a campaign of education
which was to prove enormously successful. A French critic writes of _Debit
and Credit_ that it was "the breviary in which a whole generation of Germans
learned to read and to think," while an English translator (three
translations of the book appeared in England in the same year) calls it
the _Uncle Tom's Cabin_ of the German workingman. A German critic is
furious that a work of such real literary merit should be compared to one
so flat and insipid as Mrs. Stowe's production; but he altogether misses
the point, which is the effect on the people of a spirited defense of
those who had hitherto had no advocate.

Freytag has been called an opportunist, but the term should not be
considered one of reproach. It certainly was opportune that his great
work appeared at the moment when it was most needed, a moment of discouragement,
of disgust at everything high and low. It brought its smiling message
and remained to cheer and comfort. _The Journalists_, too, was opportune,
for it called attention to a class of men whose work was as important as
it was unappreciated. Up to 1848, the year of the revolution, the press
had been under such strict censorship that any frank discussion
of public matters had been out of the question.
But since then distinguished writers, like Freytag himself, had taken the
helm. Even when not radical, they were dreaded by the reactionaries, and
even Freytag escaped arrest in Prussia only by hastily becoming a
court official of his friend the Duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha--within
whose domains he already owned an estate and was in the habit of residing
for a portion of each year--and thus renouncing his Prussian
citizenship.

Even Freytag's _Pictures from the German Past_ may be said to have been
opportune. Already, for a generation, the new school of scientific
historians--the Rankes, the Wattenbachs, the Waitzs, the Giesebrechts--had
been piling up their discoveries, and collating and publishing manuscripts
describing the results of their labors. They lived on too high a plane
for the ordinary reader. Freytag did not attempt to "popularize" them
by cheap methods. He served as an interpreter between the two extremes.
He chose a type of facts that would have seemed trivial to the great
pathfinders, worked them up with care from the sources, and by
his literary art made them more than acceptable to the world at
large. In these _Pictures from the German Past_, as in the six volumes
of the series of historical romances entitled _The Ancestors_, a
patriotic purpose was not wanting. Freytag wished to show his Germans
that they had a history to be proud of, a history whose continuity was
unbroken; the nation had been through great vicissitudes, but everything
had tended to prove that the German has an inexhaustible fund of reserve
force.

Certain national traits, certain legal institutions, could be followed back
almost to the dawn of history, and it would be found that the Germans of
the first centuries of our era were not nearly so barbarous as had been
supposed.

And so with a wonderful talent for selecting typical and essential facts and
not overburdening his narrative with detail he leads us down the ages. The
hero of his introductory romance in _The Ancestors_ is a Vandal chieftain
who settles among the Thuringians at the time of the great wandering of
the nations--the hero of the last of the series is a journalist of
the nineteenth century. All are descendants of the one family, and
Freytag has a chance to develop some of his theories of heredity. Not
only can bodily aptitudes and mental peculiarities be transmitted,
but also the tendency to act in a given case much as the ancestor
would have done.

It cannot be denied that as Freytag proceeds with _The Ancestors_
the tendency to instruct and inform becomes too marked.

He had begun his career in the world by lecturing on literature at
the University of Breslau, but had severed his connection with that
institution because he was not allowed to branch out into history.

Possibly those who opposed him were right and the two subjects are incapable
of amalgamation.

Freytag in this, his last great work, revels in the fulness of his knowledge
of facts, but shows more of the thoroughness of the scholar than of the
imagination of the poet. The novels become epitomes of the history of
the time. No type of character may be omitted. So popes and emperors, monks
and missionaries, German warriors and Roman warriors, minstrels and
students, knights, crusaders, colonists, landskechts, and mercenaries are
dragged in and made to do their part with all too evident fidelity to
truth.

We owe much of our knowledge of Freytag's life to a charming autobiography
which served as a prefatory volume to his collected works. Freytag lived
to a ripe old age, dying in 1895 at the age of seventy-nine. Both as a
newspaper editor and as a member of parliament (the former from 1848 to
1860, the latter for the four years from 1867 to 1871) he had shown his
patriotism and his interest in public affairs. Many of his numerous
essays, written for the _Grenzboten_, are little masterpieces and are to
be found among his collected works published in 1888. As a member of
parliament, indeed, he showed no marked ability and his name is associated
with no important measure.

Not to conceal his shortcoming it must be said that Freytag, at the
time of the accession to the throne of the present head of the German
Empire, laid himself open to much censure by attacking the memory of the
dead Emperor Frederick who had always been his friend and patron.

In conclusion it may be said that no one claims for Freytag a place in the
front rank of literary geniuses. He is no Goethe, no Schiller, no Dante,
no Milton, no Shakespeare. He is not a pioneer, has not changed the course
of human thought. But yet he is an artist of whom his country may
well be proud, who has added to the happiness of hundreds of thousands of
Germans, and who only needs to be better understood to be thoroughly
enjoyed by foreigners.

England and America have much to learn from him--the value of long, careful,
and unremitting study; the advantage of being thoroughly familiar with
the scenes and types of character depicted; the charm of an almost unequaled
simplicity and directness. He possessed the rare gift of being able
to envelop every topic that he touched with an atmosphere of elegance and
distinction. His productions are not ephemeral, but are of the
kind that will endure

.

* * * * *

_GUSTAV FREYTAG_

* * * * *
#THE JOURNALISTS#

DRAMATIS PERSONÆ

BERG, _retired Colonel_.

IDA, _his daughter_.

ADELAIDE RUNECK.

SENDEN, _landed proprietor_.
_ PROFESSOR OLDENDORF, _editor-in-chief_. |
|
CONRAD BOLZ, _editor_. |
|
BELLMAUS, _on the staff._. |
|
KÄMPE, _on the staff_. } of the newspaper | _The Union_.

KÖRNER, _on the staff_. |
|

PRINTER HENNING, _owner_. |
|
MILLER, _factotum_. _|

_ BLUMENBERG, _editor_. |
} of the newspaper SCHMOCK, _on the staff_.	 _| _Coriolanus_.

PIEPENBRINK, _wine merchant and voter_.

LOTTIE, _his wife_.

BERTHA, _their daughter_.

KLEINMICHEL _citizen and voter_.

FRITZ, _his son_.

JUDGE SCHWARZ.

_A foreign ballet-dancer._
KORB, _secretary for Adelaide's estate_.

CARL, _the Colonel's man-servant._
_A waiter._
_Club-guests._ _Deputations of citizens_.

_Place of action: A provincial capital._

THE JOURNALISTS[1] (1853)
TRANSLATED BY ERNEST F. HENDERSON, PH.D., L.H.D.

ACT I

SCENE I

_A summer parlor in the_ COLONEL'S _house.

Handsome furnishings. In the centre of rear wall an open door, behind it
a verandah and garden; on the sides of rear wall large windows.

Right and left, doors; on the right, well in front, a window.

Tables, chairs, a small sofa_.

IDA _is sitting in front on the right reading a book.

The_ COLONEL _enters through centre door with an open box in his hand in
which are dahlias_.

COLONEL.

Here, Ida, are the new varieties of dahlias our gardener has grown.
You'll have to rack your brains to find names for them. Day after
tomorrow is the Horticultural Society meeting, when I am to exhibit
and christen them.

IDA.

This light-colored one here should be called the "Adelaide."

COLONEL.

Adelaide Buneck, of course. Your own name is out of the running, for as a
little dahlia you have long been known to the flower-trade.

IDA.

One shall be called after your favorite writer, "Boz."
COLONEL.

Splendid! And it must be a really fine one, this yellow one here
with violet points. And the third one--how shall we christen
that?
IDA (_stretching out her hand entreatingly to her father_).
"Edward Oldendorf." 
COLONEL.
What! The professor? The editor? Oh no, that will not do! It was
bad enough for him to take over the paper; but that he now has
allowed himself to be led by his party into running for Parliament--that
I can never forgive him.

IDA.

Here he comes himself.
COLONEL (_aside_).
It used to be a pleasure to me to hear his footstep; now I can
hardly keep from being rude when I see him.
_Enter_ OLDENDORF.

OLDENDORF.

Good morning, Colonel!
IDA (_with a friendly greeting_).
Good morning, Edward. Help me to admire the new dahlias that father
has grown.

COLONEL.
But do not trouble the professor. Such trifles no longer interest
him; he has bigger things in his head.

OLDENDORF.
At all events I have not lost my ability to enjoy what gives you
pleasure.

COLONEL (_grumbling to himself_).
You have not given me much proof of that. I fear you take pleasure
in doing the very things that vex me. You are doubtless quite busy
now with your election, Mr. Future Member of Parliament!

OLDENDORF.
You know, Colonel, that I myself have less than any one else to do
with it.

COLONEL.
Oh, I don't believe that! It is the usual custom in such elections,
I imagine, to pay court to influential persons and shake hands with
the voters, to make speeches, scatter promises, and do all the other
little devil's tricks.

OLDENDORF.
You yourself do not believe, Colonel, that I would do anything
discreditable?

COLONEL.
Not? I am not so sure, Oldendorf. Since you have turned journalist,
edit your _Union_ and daily reproach the State with its faulty
organization, you are no longer what you used to be.
OLDENDORF (_who up to this point has been conversing with_ IDA
_about the flowers, but now turns to the_ COLONEL).
Does what I now say or write conflict with my former views? It would
be hard to convince me of that. And still less can you have noticed
any change in my feelings or in my conduct toward you.
COLONEL (_obdurate_).
Well, I don't see what reason you would have for that. I am not
going to spoil my morning by quarreling. Ida may try to straighten
things out with you. I am going to my flowers. [_Takes the box and
exit toward the garden._] 
OLDENDORF.
What has put your father in such a bad humor? Has something in the
newspaper vexed him again?

IDA.
I do not think so. But it annoys him that now in politics you again
find it necessary to advocate measures he detests and attack
institutions he reveres. (_Shyly._) Edward, is it really impossible
for you to withdraw from the election?

OLDENDORF.
It is impossible.

IDA.
I should then have you here, and father could regain his good humor;
for he would highly appreciate the sacrifice you were making for
him, and we could look forward to a future as peaceful as our past
has been.

OLDENDORF.
I know that, Ida, and I feel anything but pleasure at the prospect
of becoming member for this town; yet I cannot withdraw."And so you ought to beg my pardon," said Lord Delacour, in a faltering
voice, but without moving his posture.

"You will acknowledge you left me, however, my lord? That is clear."

"Left you! Yes, so I did; to ride all over the country in search of a
house that would suit you. For what else did you think I _could_ leave you
at such a time as this?"

Lady Delacour again stooped, and leaned her arm upon his shoulder.

"I wish to Heaven, my dear," said his lordship, shrinking as he put away
her hand, which still held Clarence Hervey's letters, "I wish to Heaven,
my dear, you would not hold those abominable perfumed papers just under my
very nose. You know I cannot stand perfumes."

"Are they perfumed? Ay; so every thing is that I keep in that cabinet of
curiosities. Thank you, my dear Miss Portman," said her ladyship, as
Belinda rose to take the letters from her hand. "Will you have the
goodness to put them back into their cabinet, if you can endure to touch
them, if the perfume has not overcome you as well as my lord? After all,
it is only ottar of roses, to which few people's olfactory nerves have an
antipathy."

"I have the honour to be one of the few," said his lordship, rising from
his seat with so sudden a motion as to displace Lady Delacour's arm which
leaned upon him. "For my part," continued he, taking down one of the
Argand lamps from the chimney-piece, and trimming it, "I would rather a
hundred to one snuff up the oil of this cursed lamp."

Whilst his lordship applied himself to trimming the lamp with great
earnestness, Lady Delacour negligently walked away to the farthest end of
the room, where stood the cabinet, which Belinda was trying to unlock.

"Stay, my love; it has a secret lock, which I alone can manage."

"Oh, my dear Lady Delacour!" whispered Belinda, holding her hand as she
gave her the key, "I never can love or esteem you if you use Lord Delacour
ill now."

"Ill now? ill now? This lock is spoilt, I do believe," said she aloud.

"Nay, you understand me, Lady Delacour! You see what is passing in his
mind."

"To he sure: I am not a fool, though he is. I see he is jealous, though he
has had such _damning proof_ that all's right--the man's a fool, that's
all. Are you sure this is the key I gave you, my dear?"

"And can you think him a fool," pursued Belinda, in a still more earnest
whisper, "for being more jealous of your mind than of your person? Fools
have seldom so much penetration, or so much delicacy."

"But, Lord! what would you have me do? what would you have me say? That
Lord Delacour writes better letters than these?"

"Oh, no! but show him these letters, and you will do justice to him, to
yourself, to Cla----, to every body."

"I am sure I should be happy to do justice to _every body_."

"Then pray do this very instant, my dearest Lady Delacour! and I shall
love you for it all my life."

"Done!--for who can withstand that offer?--Done!" said her ladyship. Then
turning to Lord Delacour, "My lord, will you come here and tell us what
can be the matter with this lock?"

"If the lock be spoiled, Lady Delacour, you had better send for a
locksmith," replied his lordship, who was still employed about the wick of
the Argand: "I am no locksmith--I do not pretend to understand
locks--especially secret locks."

"But you will not desert us at our utmost need, I am sure, my lord," said
Belinda, approaching him with a conciliatory smile.

"You want the light, I believe, more than I do," said his lordship,
advancing with the lamp to meet her. "Well! what is the matter with this
confounded lock of yours, Lady Delacour? I know I should be at Studley's
by this time--but how in the devil's name can you expect me to open a
secret lock when I do not know the secret, Lady Delacour?"

"Then I will tell you the secret, Lord Delacour--that there is no secret
at all in the lock, or in the letters. Here, if you can stand the odious
smell of ottar of roses, take these letters and read them, foolish man;
and keep them till the shocking perfume is gone off."

Lord Delacour could scarcely believe his senses; he looked in Lady
Delacour's eyes to see whether he had understood her rightly.

"But I am afraid," said she, smiling, "that you will find the perfume too
overcoming."

"Not half so overcoming," cried he, seizing her hand, and kissing it often
with eager tenderness, "not half so overcoming as this confidence, this
kindness, this condescension from you."

"Miss Portman will think us both a couple of old fools," said her
ladyship, making a slight effort to withdraw her hand. "But she is almost
as great a simpleton herself, I think," continued she, observing that the
tears stood in Belinda's eyes.

"My lord," said a footman who came in at this instant, "do you dress? The
carriage is at the door, as you ordered, to go to Lord Studley's."

"I'd see Lord Studley at the devil, sir, and his burgundy along with him,
before I'd go to him to-day; and you may tell him so, if you please,"
cried Lord Delacour.

"Very well, my lord," said the footman.

"My lord dines at home--they may put up the carriage--that's all," said
Lady Delacour: "only let us have dinner directly," added she, as the
servant shut the door. "Miss Portman will be famished amongst us: there is
no living upon sentiment."

"And there is no living with such belles without being something more of a
beau," said Lord Delacour, looking at his splashed boots. "I will be ready
for dinner before dinner is ready for me." With activity very unusual to
him, he hurried out of the room to change his dress.

"O day of wonders!" exclaimed Lady Delacour. "And, O night of wonders! if
we can get him through the evening without the help of Lord Studley's
wine. You must give us some music, my good Belinda, and make him accompany
you with his flute. I can tell you he has really a very pretty taste for
music, and knows fifty times more of the matter than half the dilettanti,
who squeeze the human face divine into all manner of ridiculous shapes, by
way of persuading you that they are in ecstasy! And, my dear, do not
forget to show us the charming little portfolio of drawings that you have
brought from Oakly-park. Lord Delacour was with me at Harrowgate in the
days of his courtship: he knows the charming views that you have been
taking about Knaresborough and Fountain's Abbey, and all those places. I
will answer for it, he remembers them a hundred times better than I do.
And, my love, I assure you he is a better judge of drawing than many whom
we saw ogling Venus rising from the sea, in the Orleans gallery. Lord
Delacour has let his talents go to sleep in a shameless manner; but really
he has talents, if they could be wakened. By-the-by, pray make him tell
you the story of Lord Studley's original Titian: he tells that story with
real humour. Perhaps you have not found it out, but Lord Delacour has a
vast deal of drollery in his own way, and----"

"Dinner's ready, my lady!"

"That is a pity!" whispered Lady Delacour; "for if they had let me go on
in my present humour, I should have found out that my lord has every
accomplishment under the sun, and every requisite under the moon, to make
the marriage state happy."

With the assistance of Belinda's portfolio and her harp, and the
good-humour and sprightliness of Lady Delacour's wit, his lordship got
through the evening much to his own satisfaction. He played on the flute,
he told the story of Studley's original Titian, and he detected a fault
that had escaped Mr. Percival in the perspective of Miss Portman's sketch
of Fountain's Abbey. The perception that his talents were _called out_,
and that he appeared to unusual advantage, made him _excellent company_:
he found that the spirits can be raised by self-complacency even more
agreeably than by burgundy.


CHAPTER XXI.

HELENA


Whilst they were at breakfast the next morning in Lady Delacour's
dressing-room, Marriott knocked at the door, and immediately opening it,
exclaimed in a joyful tone, "Miss Portman, they're eating it! Ma'am,
they're eating it as fast as ever they can!"

"Bring them in; your lady will give you leave, Marriott, I fancy," said
Miss Portman. Marriott brought in her gold fishes; some green leaves were
floating on the top of the water in the glass globe.

"See, my lady," said she, "what Miss Portman has been so good as to bring
from Oakly-park for my poor gold fishes, who, I am sure, ought to be much
obliged to her, as well as myself." Marriott set the globe beside her
lady, and retired.

"From Oakly-park! And by what name impossible to pronounce must I call
these green leaves, to please botanic ears?" said Lady Delacour.

"This," replied Belinda, "is what

    'Th'unlearned, duckweed--learned, lemna, call;

and it is to be found in any ditch or standing pool."

"And what possessed you, my dear, for the sake of Marriott and her gold
fishes, to trouble yourself to bring such stuff a hundred and seventy
miles?"

"To oblige little Charles Percival," said Miss Portman. "He was anxious to
keep his promise of sending it to your Helena. She found out in some book
that she was reading with him last summer, that gold fishes are fond of
this plant; and I wish," added Belinda, in a timid voice, "that she were
here at this instant to see them eat it."

Lady Delacour was silent for some minutes, and kept her eye steadily upon
the gold fishes. At length she said, "I never shall forget how well the
poor little creature behaved about those gold fishes. I grew amazingly
fond of her whilst she was with me. But you know, circumstanced as I was,
after you left me, I could not have her at home."

"But now I am here," said Belinda, "will she he any trouble to you? And
will she not make your home more agreeable to you, and to Lord Delacour,
who was evidently very fond of her?"

"Ah, my dear!" said Lady Delacour, "you forget, and so do I at times, what
I have to go through. It is in vain to talk, to think of making home, or
any place, or any thing, or any person, agreeable to me now. What am I?
The outside rind is left--the sap is gone. The tree lasts from day to day
by miracle--it cannot last long. You would not wonder to hear me talk in
this way, if you knew the terrible time I had last night after we parted.
But I have these nights constantly now. Let us talk of something else.
What have you there--a manuscript?"

"Yes, a little journal of Edward Percival's, which he sent for the
entertainment of Helena."

Lady Delacour stretched out her hand for it. "The boy will write as like
his father as possible," said she, turning over the leaves. "I wish to
have this poor girl with me--but I have no spirits. And you know, whenever
Lord Delacour can find a house that will suit us, we shall leave town, and
I could not take Helena with me. But this may he the last opportunity I
may ever have of seeing her; and I _can_ refuse you nothing, my dear. So
will you go for her? She can stay with us a few days. Lady Boucher, that
most convenient dowager, who likes going about, no matter where, all the
morning, will go with you to Mrs. Dumont's academy in Sloane-street. I
would as soon go to a bird-fancier's as to a boarding-school for young
ladies: indeed, I am not well enough to go any where. So I will throw
myself upon a sofa, and read this child's journal. I wonder how that or
any thing else can interest me now."

Belinda, who had been used to the variations of Lady Delacour's spirits,
was not much alarmed by the despondent strain in which she now spoke,
especially when she considered that the thoughts of the dreadful trial
this unfortunate woman was soon to go through must naturally depress her
courage. Rejoiced at the permission that she had obtained to go for
Helena, Miss Portman sent immediately to Lady Boucher, who took her to
Sloane-street.

"Now, my dear, considerate Miss Portman," said Lady Boucher, "I must beg,
and request that you will hurry Miss Delacour into the carriage as fast as
possible. I have not a moment to spare; for I am to be at a china auction
at two, that I would not miss for the whole world. Well, what's the matter
with the people? Why does not James knock at the door? Can't the man read?
Can't the man see?" cried the purblind dowager. "Is not that Mrs. Dumont's
name on the door before his eyes?"

"No, ma'am, I believe this name is Ellicot," said Belinda.

"Ellicot, is it? Ay, true. But what's the man stopping for, then? Mrs.
Dumont's is the next door, tell the blind dunce. Mercy on us! To waste
one's time in this way! I shall, as sure as fate, be too late for the
china auction. What upon earth stops us?"

"Nothing but a little covered cart, which stands at Mrs. Dumont's door.
There, now it is going; an old man is drawing it out of the way as fast as
he can."

"Open the coach-door, James!" cried Lady Boucher the moment that they had
drawn up. "Now, my dear, considerate Miss Portman, remember the auction,
and don't let Miss Delacour stay to change her dress or any thing."

Belinda promised not to detain her ladyship a minute. The door at Mrs.
Dumont's was open, and a servant was assisting an old man to carry in some
geraniums and balsams out of the covered cart which had stopped the way.
In the hall a crowd of children were gathered round a high stand, on which
they were eagerly arranging their flower-pots; and the busy hum of voices
was so loud, that when Miss Portman first went in, she could neither hear
the servant, nor make him hear her name. Nothing was to be heard but "Oh,
how beautiful! Oh, how sweet! That's mine! That's yours! The great rose
geranium for Miss Jefferson! The white Provence rose for Miss Adderly! No,
indeed, Miss Pococke, that's for Miss Delacour; the old man said so."

"_Silence, silence, mesdemoiselles!_" cried the voice of a French woman,
and all was silence. The little crowd looked towards the hall door; and
from the midst of her companions, Helena Delacour, who now caught a
glimpse of Belinda, sprang forward, throwing down her white Provence rose
as she passed.

"Lady Boucher's compliments, ma'am," said the servant to Mrs. Dumont;
"she's in indispensable haste, and she begs you won't let Miss Delacour
think of changing her dress."

It was the last thing of which Miss Delacour was likely to think at this
instant. She was so much overjoyed, when she heard that Belinda was come
by her mamma's desire to take her home, that she would scarcely stay
whilst Mrs. Dumont was tying on her straw hat, and exhorting her to let
Lady Delacour know how it happened that she was "so far from fit to be
seen."

"Yes, ma'am; yes, ma'am, I'll remember; I'll be sure to remember," said
Helena, tripping down the steps. But just as she was getting into the
carriage she stopped at the sight of the old man, and exclaimed, "Oh, good
old man! I must not forget you."

"Yes, indeed, you must, though, my dear Miss Delacour," said Lady Boucher,
pulling her into the carriage: "'tis no time to think of good old men
now."

"But I must. Dear Miss Portman, will you speak for me? I must pay--I must
settle--and I have a great deal to say."

Miss Portman desired the old man to call in Berkley-square at Lady
Delacour's; and this satisfying all parties, they drove away.

When they arrived in Berkley-square, Marriott told them that her lady was
just gone to lie down. Edward Percival's little journal, which she had
been reading, was left on the sofa, and Belinda gave it to Helena, who
eagerly began to look over it.

"Thirteen pages! Oh, how good he has been to write so much for me!" said
she; and she had almost finished reading it before her mother came into
the room.

Lady Delacour shrunk back as her daughter ran towards her; for she
recollected too well the agony she had once suffered from an embrace of
Helena's. The little girl appeared more grieved than surprised at this;
and after kissing her mother's hand, without speaking, she again looked
down at the manuscript.

"Does that engross your attention so entirely, my dear," said Lady
Delacour, "that you can neither spare one word nor one look for your
mother?"

"Oh, mamma! I only tried to read, because I thought you were angry with
me."

"An odd reason for trying to read, my dear!" said Lady Delacour with a
smile: "have you any better reason for thinking I was angry with you?"

"Ah, I know you are not angry now, for you smile," said Helena; "but I
thought at first that you were, mamma, because you gave me only your hand
to kiss."

"Only my hand! The next time, simpleton, I'll give you only my foot to
kiss," said her ladyship, sitting down, and holding out her foot
playfully.

Her daughter threw aside the book, and kneeling down kissed her foot,
saying, in a low voice, "Dear mamma, I never was so happy in my life; for
you never looked so very, _very_ kindly at me before."

"Do not judge always of the kindness people feel for you, child, by their
looks; and remember that it is _possible_ a person might have felt more
than you could guess by their looks. Pray now, Helena, you are such a good
judge of physiognomy, should you guess that I was dying, by my looks?"

The little girl laughed, and repeated "Dying? Oh, no, mamma."

"Oh, no! because I have such a fine colour in my cheeks, hey?"

"Not for that reason, mamma," said Helena, withdrawing her eyes from her
mother's face.

"What, then you know rouge already when you see it?--You perceive some
difference, for instance, between Miss Portman's colour and mine? Upon my
word, you are a nice observer. Such nice observers are sometimes dangerous
to have near one."

"I hope, mother," said Helena, "that you do not think I would try to find
out any thing that you wish, or that I imagined you wished, I should not
know."

"I do not understand you, child," cried Lady Delacour, raising herself
suddenly upon the sofa, and looking full in her daughter's face.

Helena's colour rose to her temples; but, with a firmness that surprised
even Belinda, she repeated what she had said nearly in the same words.

"Do you understand her, Miss Portman?" said Lady Delacour.

"She expresses, I think," said Belinda, "a very honourable sentiment, and
one that is easily understood."

"Ay, in general, certainly," said Lady Delacour, checking herself; "but I
thought that she meant to allude to something in particular--_that_ was
what I did not understand. Undoubtedly, my dear, you have just expressed a
very honourable sentiment, and one that I should scarcely have expected
from a child of your age.

"Helena, my dear," said her mother, after a silence of some minutes, "did
you ever read the Arabian Tales?--'Yes, mamma,' I know must be the answer.
But do you remember the story of Zobeide, who carried the porter home with
her on condition that, let him hear or see what he might, he would ask no
questions?"

"Yes, mamma."

"On the same conditions should you like to stay with me for a few days?"

"Yes. On any conditions, mamma, I should like to stay with you."

"Agreed, then, my dear!" said Lady Delacour. "Now let us go to the gold
fishes, and see them eat lemna, or whatever you please to call it."

While they were looking at the gold fishes, the old man, who had been
desired by Miss Portman to call, arrived. "Who is this fine, gray-haired
old man?" said Lady Delacour. Helena, who did not know the share which
Belinda's aunt and her own mother had in the transaction, began with great
eagerness to tell the history of the poor gardener, who had been cheated
by some fine ladies out of his aloe, &c. She then related how kind Lady
Anne Percival and her Aunt Margaret had been to him; that they had gotten
him a place as a gardener at Twickenham; and that he had pleased the
family to whom he was recommended so much by his good behaviour, that, as
they were leaving their house, and obliged to part with him, they had
given him all the geraniums and balsams out of the green-house of which he
had the care, and these he had been this day selling to the young ladies
at Mrs. Dumont's. "I received the money for him, and I was just going to
pay him," said Helena, "when Miss Portman came; and that put every thing
else out of my head. May I go and give him his money now, mamma?"

"He can wait a few minutes," said Lady Delacour, who had listened to this
story with much embarrassment and impatience. "Before you go, Helena,
favour us with the names of _the fine ladies who cheated_ this old
gardener out of his aloe."

"Indeed, mamma, I don't know their names."

"No!--Did you never ask Lady Anne Percival, or your aunt Margaret?--Look
in my face, child! Did they never inform you?"

"No, ma'am, never. I once asked Lady Anne, and she said that she did not
choose to tell me; that it would be of no use to me to know."

"I give Lady Anne Percival more credit and more thanks for this," cried
Lady Delacour, "than for all the rest. I see she has not attempted to
lower me in my child's opinion. I am the fine lady, Helena--I was the
cause of his being cheated--I was intent upon _the noble end_ of
outshining a certain Mrs. Luttridge--the _noble means_ I left to others,
and the means have proved worthy of the end. I deserve to be brought to
shame for my folly; yet my being ashamed will do nobody any good but
myself. Restitution is in these cases the best proof of repentance. Go,
Helena, my love! settle your little affairs with this old man, and bid him
call here again to-morrow. I will see what we can do for him."

Lord Delacour had this very morning sent home to her ladyship a handsome
diamond ring, which had been intended as a present for Mrs. Luttridge, and
which he imagined would therefore be peculiarly acceptable to his lady. In
the evening, when his lordship asked her how she liked the ring, which he
desired the jeweller to leave for her to look at it, she answered, that it
was a handsome ring, but that she hoped he had not purchased it for her.

"It is not actually bought, my dear," said his lordship; "but if it suits
your fancy, I hope you will do me the honour to wear it for my sake."

"I will wear it for your sake, my lord," said Lady Delacour, "if you
desire it; and as a mark of your regard it is agreeable: but as to the
rest--

    'My taste for diamonds now is o'er,
    The sparkling baubles please no more.'

If you wish to do me a kindness, I will tell you what I
should like much better than diamonds, though I know it is rather
ungracious to dictate the form and fashion of a favour. But as my
dictatorship in all human probability cannot last much longer--"

"Oh, my dear Lady Delacour! I must not hear you talk in this manner: your
dictatorship, as you call it, will I hope last many, many happy years. But
to the point--what should you like better, my dear, than this foolish
ring?"

Her ladyship then expressed her wish that a small annuity might be settled
upon a poor old man, whom she said she had unwittingly injured. She told
the story of the rival galas and the aloe, and concluded by observing,
that her lord was in some measure called upon to remedy part of the
unnumbered ills which had sprung from her hatred of Mrs. Luttridge, as he
had originally been the cause of her unextinguishable ire. Lord Delacour
was flattered by this hint, and the annuity was immediately promised to
the old gardener.

In talking to this old man afterward, Lady Delacour found, that the family
in whose service he lately lived had a house at Twickenham that would just
answer her purpose. Lord Delacour's inquiries had hitherto been
unsuccessful; he was rejoiced to find what he wanted just as he was giving
up the search. The house was taken, and the old man hired as gardener--a
circumstance which seemed to give him almost as much pleasure as the
annuity; for there was a morello cherry-tree in the garden which had
succeeded the aloe in his affection: "it would have grieved him sorely,"
he said, "to leave his favourite tree to strangers, after all the pains he
had been at _in netting_ it to keep off the birds."

As the period approached when her fate was to be decided, Lady Delacour's
courage seemed to rise; and at the same time her anxiety, that her secret
should not be discovered, appeared to increase.

"If I survive _this business_," said she, "it is my firm intention to
appear in a new character, or rather to assert my real character. I will
break through the spell of dissipation--I will at once cast off all the
acquaintance that are unworthy of me--I will, in one word, go with you, my
dear Belinda, to Mr. Percival's. I can bear to be mortified for my good;
and I am willing, since I find that Lady Anne Percival has behaved
generously to me, with regard to Helena's affections, I am willing that
the recovery of my moral health should be attributed to the salubrious air
of Oakly-park. But it would be inexpressible, intolerable mortification to
me, to have it said or suspected in the world of fashion, that I retreated
from the ranks disabled instead of disgusted. A voluntary retirement is
graceful and dignified; a forced retreat is awkward and humiliating. You
must be sensible that I could not endure to have it whispered--'Lady
Delacour now sets up for being a prude, because she can no longer be a
coquette.' Lady Delacour would become the subject of witticisms, epigrams,
caricatures without end. It would just be the very thing for Mrs.
Luttridge; then she would revenge herself without mercy for _the ass and
her panniers_. We should have 'Lord and Lady D----, or the Domestic
Tête-à-tête,' or 'The Reformed Amazon,' stuck up in a print-shop window!
Oh, my dear, think of seeing such a thing! I should die with vexation; and
of all deaths, that is the death I should like the least."

Though Belinda could not entirely enter into those feelings, which thus
made Lady Delacour invent wit against herself, and anticipate caricatures;
yet she did every thing in her power to calm her ladyship's apprehension
of a discovery.

"My dear," said Lady Delacour, "I have perfect confidence in Lord
Delacour's promise, and in his good-nature, of which he has within these
few days given me proofs that are not lost upon my heart; but he is not
the most discreet man in the world. Whenever he is anxious about any
thing, you may read it a mile off in his eyes, nose, mouth, and chin. And
to tell you all my fears in one word, Marriott informed me this morning,
that _the Luttridge_, who came from Harrowgate to Rantipole, to meet Lord
Delacour, finding that there was no drawing him to her, has actually
brought herself to town.

"To town!--At this strange time of year! How will my lord resist this
unequivocal, unprecedented proof of passion? If she catch hold of him
again, I am undone. Or, even suppose him firm as a rock, her surprise, her
jealousy, her curiosity, will set all engines at work, to find out by what
witchcraft I have taken my husband from her. Every precaution that
prudence could devise against her malicious curiosity I have taken.
Marriott, you know, is above all temptation. That vile wretch (naming the
person whose quack medicines had nearly destroyed her), that vile wretch
will be silent from fear, for his own sake. He is yet to be paid and
dismissed. That should have been done long ago, but I had not money both
for him and Mrs. Franks the milliner. She is now paid: and Lord
Delacour--I am glad to tell his friend how well he deserves her good
opinion--Lord Delacour in the handsomest manner supplied me with the
means of satisfying this man. He is to be here at three o'clock to-day;
and this is the last interview he will ever have with Lady Delacour in
_the mysterious boudoir_."

The fears which her ladyship expressed of Mrs. Luttridge's malicious
curiosity were not totally without foundation. Champfort was at work for
her and for himself. The memorable night of Lady Delacour's overturn, and
the bustle that Marriott made about the key of the boudoir, were still
fresh in his memory; and he was in hopes that, if he could discover the
mystery, he should at once regain his power over Lord Delacour, reinstate
himself in his lucrative place, and obtain a handsome reward, or, more
properly speaking, bribe, from Mrs. Luttridge. The means of obtaining
information of all that passed in Lady Delacour's family were, he thought,
still in his power, though he was no longer an inmate of the house. The
_stupid maid_ was not so stupid as to be impenetrable to the voice of
flattery, or, as Mr. Champfort called it, the voice of love. He found it
his interest to court, and she her pleasure to be courted. On these
"coquettes of the _second_ table," on these underplots in the drama, much
of the comedy, and some of the tragedy, of life depend. Under the
unsuspected mask of stupidity this worthy mistress of our intriguing
valet-de-chambre concealed the quick ears of a listener, and the demure
eyes of a spy. Long, however, did she listen, and long did she spy in
vain, till at last Mr. Champfort gave her notice in writing that his love
would not last another week, unless she could within that time contrive to
satisfy his curiosity; and that, in short, she _must_ find out the reason
why the boudoir was always locked, and why Mrs. Marriott alone was to be
trusted with the key. Now it happened that this billet-doux was received
on the very day appointed for Lady Delacour's last interview with the
quack surgeon in the mysterious boudoir. Marriott, as it was her custom
upon such occasions, let the surgeon in, and showed him up the back stairs
into the boudoir, locked the door, and bade him wait there till her lady
came. The man had not been punctual to the hour appointed; and Lady
Delacour, giving up all expectation of his coming till the next day, had
retired to her bedchamber, where she of late usually at this hour secluded
herself to read methodistical books, or to sleep. Marriott, when she went
up to let her lady know that _the person_, as she always called him, was
come, found her so fast asleep that she thought it a pity to waken her, as
she had not slept at all the preceding night. She shut the door very
softly, and left her lady to repose. At the bottom of the stairs she was
met by _the stupid maid_, whom she immediately despatched with orders to
wash some lace: "Your lady's asleep," said she, "and pray let me have no
running up and down stairs." The room into which the stupid maid went was
directly underneath the boudoir; and whilst she was there she thought that
she heard the steps of a man's foot walking over head. She listened more
attentively--she heard them again. She armed herself with a glass of jelly
in her hand, _for my lady_, and hurried up stairs instantly to _my lady's_
room. She was much surprised to see my lady fast asleep. Her astonishment
at finding that Mrs. Marriott had told her the truth was such, as for a
moment to bereave her of all presence of mind, and she stood with the door
ajar in her hand. As thus she stood she was roused by the sound of some
one clearing his throat very softly in the boudoir--_his_ throat; for she
recollected the footsteps she had heard before, and she was convinced it
could be no other than a masculine throat. She listened again, and stooped
down to try whether any feet could be seen under the door. As she was in
this attitude, her lady suddenly turned on her bed, and the book which she
had been reading fell from the pillow to the floor with a noise, that made
the listener start up instantaneously in great terror. The noise, however,
did not waken Lady Delacour, who was in that dead sleep which is sometimes
the effect of opium. The noise was louder than what could have been made
by the fall of a book alone, and the girl descried a key that had fallen
along with the book. It occurred to her that this might possibly be the
key of the boudoir. From one of those irresistible impulses which some
people make an excuse for doing whatever they please, she seized it,
resolved at all hazards to open the mysterious door. She was cautiously
putting the key into the key-hole, so as not to make the least noise, when
she was suddenly startled by a voice behind her, which said, "Who gave you
leave to open that door?"

She turned, and saw Helena standing at the half open bedchamber door.

"Mercy, Miss Delacour! who thought of seeing you? For God's sake, don't
make a noise to waken my lady!"

"Did my mother desire you to go into that room?" repeated Helena.

"Dear me! no, miss," said the maid, putting on her stupid face; "but I
only thought to open the door, to let in a little air to freshen the room,
which my lady always likes, and bids me to do--and I thought--"

Helena took the key gently from her hand without listening to any more of
her thoughts, and the woman left the room muttering something about
_jelly_ and _my lady_, Helena went to the side of her mother's bed,
determined to wait there till she awakened, then to give her the key, and
tell her the circumstance. Notwithstanding the real simplicity of this
little girl's character, she was, as her mother had discovered, _a nice
observer_, and she had remarked that her mother permitted no one but
Marriott to go into the boudoir. This remark did not excite her to dive
into the mystery: on the contrary, she carefully repressed all curiosity,
remembering the promise she had given to her mother when she talked of
Zobeide and the porter. She had not been without temptation to break this
promise; for the maid who usually attended her toilette had employed every
art in her power to stimulate her curiosity. As she was dressing Helena
this morning, she had said to her, "The reason I was so late calling you,
miss, this morning, was because I was so late myself last night; for I
went to the play, miss, last night, which was Bluebeard. Lord bless us!
I'm sure, if I had been Bluebeard's wife, I should have opened the door,
if I'd died for it; for to have the notion of living all day long, and all
night too, in a house in which there was a room that one was never to go
into, is a thing I could not put up with." Then after a pause, and after
waiting in vain for some reply from Helena, she added, "Pray, Miss
Delacour, did you ever go into that little room within my lady's
bedchamber, that Mrs. Marriott keeps the key of always?"

"No," said Helena.

"I've often wondered what's in it: but then that's only because I'm a
simpleton. I thought to be sure, _you_ knew."

Observing that Helena looked much displeased, she broke off her speech,
hoping that what she had said would operate in due time, and that she
should thus excite the young lady to get the secret from Marriott, which
she had no doubt afterward of _worming_ from Miss Delacour.

In all this she calculated ill; for what she had said only made Helena
distrust and dislike her. It was the recollection of this conversation
that made her follow the maid to her mother's bedchamber, to see what
detained her there so long. Helena had heard Marriott say, that "she ought
not to run up and down stairs, because her lady was asleep," and it
appeared extraordinary that but a few minutes after this information she
should have gone into the room with a glass of jelly in her hand.

"Ah, mamma!" thought Helena, as she stood beside her mother's bed, "you
did not understand, and perhaps you did not believe me, when I said that I
would not try to find out any thing that you wished me not to know. Now I
hope you will _understand_ me better."

Lady Delacour opened her eyes: "Helena," cried she, starting up, "how came
you by that key?"

"Oh, mother! don't look as if you suspected me." She then told her mother
how the key came into her hands.

"My dear child, you have done me an essential service," said Lady
Delacour: "you know not its importance, at least in my estimation. But
what gives me infinitely more satisfaction, you have proved yourself
worthy of my esteem--my love."

Marriott came into the room, and whispered a few words to her lady.

"You may speak out, Marriott, before my Helena," said Lady Delacour,
rising from the bed as she spoke: "child as she is, Helena has deserved my
confidence; and she shall be convinced that, where her mother has once
reason to confide, she is incapable of suspicion. Wait here for a few
minutes, my dear."

She went to her boudoir, paid and dismissed the surgeon expeditiously,
then returned, and taking her daughter by the hand, she said, "You look
all simplicity, my dear! I see you have no vulgar, school-girl curiosity.
You will have all your mother's strength of mind; may you never have any
of her faults, or any of her misfortunes! I speak to you not as to a
child, Helena, for you have reason far above your years; and you will
remember what I now say to you as long as you live. You will possess
talents, beauty, fortune; you will be admired, followed, and flattered, as
I have been: but do not throw away your life as I have thrown away
mine--to win the praise of fools. Had I used but half the talents I
possess, as I hope you will use yours, I might have been an ornament to my
sex--I might have been a Lady Anne Percival."

Here Lady Delacour's voice failed; but commanding her emotion, she in a
few moments went on speaking.

"Choose your friends well, my dear daughter! It was my misfortune, my
folly, early in life to connect myself with a woman, who under the name of
frolic led me into every species of mischief. You are too young, too
innocent, to hear the particulars of my history now; but you will hear
them all at a proper time from my best friend, Miss Portman. I shall leave
you to her care, my dear, when I die."

"When you die!--Oh, mother!" said Helena, "but why do you talk of dying?"
and she threw her arms round her mother.

"Gently, my love!" said Lady Delacour, shrinking back; and she seized this
moment to explain to her daughter why she shrunk in this manner from her
caresses, and why she talked of dying.

Helena was excessively shocked.

"I wished, my dear," resumed her mother, calmly, "I wished to have spared
you the pain of knowing all this. I have given you but little pleasure in
my life; it is unjust to give you so much pain. We shall go to Twickenham
to-morrow, and I will leave you with your Aunt Margaret, my dear, till all
is over. If I die, Belinda will take you with her immediately to
Oakly-park--you shall have as little sorrow as possible. If you had shown
me less of your affectionate temper, you would have spared yourself the
anguish that you now feel, and you would have spared me--"

"My dear, kind mother," interrupted Helena, throwing herself on her knees
at her mother's feet, "do not send me away from you--I don't wish to go to
my Aunt Margaret--I don't wish to go to Oakly-park--I wish to stay with
you. Do not send me away from you; for I shall suffer ten times more if I
am not with you, though I know I can be of no use."

Overcome by her daughter's entreaties, Lady Delacour at last consented
that she should remain with her, and that she should accompany her to
Twickenham.

The remainder of this day was taken up in preparations for their
departure. The _stupid maid_ was immediately dismissed. No questions were
asked, and no reasons for her dismissal assigned, except that Lady
Delacour had no farther occasion for her services. Marriott alone was to
attend her lady to Twickenham. Lord Delacour, it was settled, should stay
in town, lest the unusual circumstance of his attending his lady should
excite public curiosity. His lordship, who was naturally a good-natured
man, and who had been touched by the kindness his wife had lately shown
him, was in extreme agitation during the whole of this day, which he
thought might possibly be the last of her existence. She, on the contrary,
was calm and collected; her courage seemed to rise with the necessity for
its exertion.

In the morning, when the carriage came to the door, as she parted with
Lord Delacour, she put into his hand a paper that contained some
directions and requests with which, she said, she hoped that he would
comply, if they should prove to be her _last_. The paper contained only
some legacies to her servants, a provision for Marriott, and a bequest to
her excellent and beloved friend, Belinda Portman, of the cabinet in which
she kept Clarence Hervey's letters.

Interlined in this place, Lady Delacour had written these words: "My
daughter is nobly provided for; and lest any doubt or difficulty should
arise from the omission, I think it necessary to mention that the said
cabinet contains the valuable jewels left to me by my late uncle, and that
it is my intention that the said jewels should be part of my bequest to
the said Belinda Portman.--If she marry a man of good fortune, she will
wear them for my sake: if she do not marry an opulent husband, I hope she
will sell the jewels without scruple, as they are intended for her
convenience, and not as an ostentatious bequest. It is fit that she should
be as independent in her circumstances as she is in her mind."

Lord Delacour with much emotion looked over this paper, and assured her
ladyship that she should be obeyed, if--He could say no more.

"Farewell, then, my lord!" said she: "keep up your spirits, for I intend
to live many years yet to try them."


CHAPTER XXII.

A SPECTRE.


The surgeon who was to attend Lady Delacour was prevented from going to
her on the day appointed; he was one of the surgeons of the queen's
household, and his attendance was required at the palace. This delay was
extremely irksome to Lady Delacour, who had worked up her courage to the
highest point, but who had not prepared herself to endure suspense. She
spent nearly a week at Twickenham in this anxious state, and Belinda
observed that she every day became more and more thoughtful and reserved.
She seemed as if she had some secret subject of meditation, from which she
could not bear to be distracted. When Helena was present, she exerted
herself to converse in her usual sprightly strain; but as soon as she
could escape, as she thought, unobserved, she would shut herself up in her
own apartment, and remain there for hours.

"I wish to Heaven, Miss Portman," said Marriott, coming one morning into
her room with a portentous face, "I wish to Heaven, ma'am, that you could
any way persuade my lady not to spend so many hours of the day and night
as she does in reading those methodistical books that she keeps to
herself!--I'm sure that they do her no good, but a great deal of harm,
especially now when her spirits should be kept up as much as possible. I
am sensible, ma'am, that 'tis those books that have made my lady
melancholy of a sudden. Ma'am, my lady has let drop very odd hints within
these two or three days, and she speaks in a strange _disconnected_ sort
of style, and at times I do not think she is quite right in her head."

When Belinda questioned Marriott more particularly about the strange hints
which her lady had let fall, she with looks of embarrassment and horror
declined repeating the words that had been said to her; yet persisted in
asserting that Lady Delacour had been very _strange_ for these two or
three days. "And I'm sure, ma'am, you'd be shocked if you were to see my
lady in a morning, when she wakens, or rather when I first go into the
room--for, as to wakening, that's out of the question. I am certain she
does not sleep during the whole night. You'll find, ma'am, it is as I tell
you, those books will quite turn her poor head, and I wish they were
burnt. I know the mischief that the same sort of things did to a poor
cousin of my own, who was driven melancholy mad by a methodist preacher,
and came to an untimely end. Oh, ma'am! if you knew as much as I do, you'd
be as much alarmed for my lady as I am."

It was impossible to prevail upon Marriott to explain herself more
distinctly. The only circumstances that could be drawn from her seemed to
Belinda so trifling as to be scarcely worth mentioning. For instance, that
Lady Delacour, contrary to Marriott's advice, had insisted on sleeping in
a bedchamber upon the ground floor, and had refused to let a curtain be
put up before a glass door that was at the foot of her bed. "When I
offered to put up the curtain, ma'am," said Marriott, "my lady said she
liked the moonlight, and that she would not have it put up till the fine
nights were over. Now, Miss Portman, to hear my lady talk of the moon, and
moonlights, and liking the moon, is rather extraordinary and
unaccountable; for I never heard her say any thing of the sort in her life
before; I question whether she ever knew there was a moon or not from one
year's end to another. But they say the moon has a great deal to do with
mad people; and, from my own experience, I'm perfectly sensible, ma'am, it
had in my own cousin's case; for, before he came to the worst, he took a
prodigious fancy to the moon, and was always for walking by moonlight, and
talking to one of the beauty of the moon, and such melancholy nonsense,
ma'am."

Belinda could not forbear smiling at this melancholy nonsense; though she
was inclined to be of Marriott's opinion about the methodistical books,
and she determined to talk to Lady Delacour on the subject. The moment
that she made the attempt, her ladyship, commanding her countenance, with
her usual ability, replied only by cautious, cold monosyllables, and
changed the conversation as soon as she could.

At night, when they were retiring to rest, Marriott, as she lighted them
to their rooms, observed that she was afraid her lady would suffer from
sleeping in so cold a bedchamber, and Belinda pressed her friend to change
her apartment.

"No, my dear," replied Lady Delacour, calmly. "I have chosen this for my
bedchamber, because it is at a distance from the servants' rooms; and when
_the operation_, which I have to go through, shall be performed, my cries,
if I should utter any, will not be overheard. The surgeon will be here in
a few days, and it is not worth while to make any change."

The next day, towards evening, the surgeon and Dr. X---- arrived.
Belinda's blood ran cold at the sight of them.

"Will you be so kind, Miss Portman," said Marriott, "as to let my lady
know that they are come? for I am not well able to go, and you can speak
more composed to her than I can."

Miss Portman went to Lady Delacour's bedchamber. The door was bolted. As
Lady Delacour opened it, she fixed her eyes upon Belinda, and said to her
with a mild voice, "You are come to tell me that the surgeon is arrived. I
knew that by the manner in which you knocked at the door. I will see him
this moment," continued she, in a firm tone; and she deliberately put a
mark in the book which she had been reading, walked leisurely to the other
end of the room, and locked it up in her book-case. There was an air of
determined dignity in all her motions. "Shall we go? I am ready," said
she, holding out her hand to Belinda, who had sunk upon a chair.

"One would think that you were the person that was going to suffer. But
drink this water, my dear, and do not tremble for me; you see that I do
not tremble for myself. Listen to me, dearest Belinda! I owe it to your
friendship not to torment you with unnecessary apprehensions. Your
humanity shall be spared this dreadful scene."

"No," said Belinda, "Marriott is incapable of attending you. I must--I
will--I am ready now. Forgive me one moment's weakness. I admire, and will
imitate, your courage. I will keep my promise."

"Your promise was to be with me in my dying moments, and to let me breathe
my last in your arms."

"I hope that I shall never be called upon to perform that promise."

Lady Delacour made no answer, but walked on before her with steady steps
into the room where Dr. X---- and the surgeon were waiting. Without
adverting in the least to the object of their visit, she paid her
compliments to them, as if they came on a visit of mere civility. Without
seeming to notice the serious countenances of her companions, she talked
of indifferent subjects with the most perfect ease, occupying herself all
the time with cleaning a seal, which she unhooked from her watch-chain.
"This seal," said she, turning to Dr. X----, "is a fine onyx--it is a head
of Esculapius. I have a great value for it. It was given to me by your
friend, Clarence Hervey; and I have left it in my will, doctor," continued
she, smiling, "to you, as no slight token of my regard. He is an excellent
young man; and I request," said she, drawing Dr. X---- to a window, and
lowering her voice, "I request, when you see him again, and when I am out
of the way, that you will tell him such were my sentiments to the hour of
my death. Here is a letter which you will have the goodness to put into
his hands, sealed with my favourite seal. You need have no scruple to take
charge of it; it relates not to myself. It expresses only my opinion
concerning a lady who stands almost as high in your esteem, I believe, as
she does in mine. My affection and my gratitude have not biassed my
judgment in the advice which I have ventured to give to Mr. Hervey."

"But he will soon be here," interrupted Dr. X----, "and then--"

"And then I shall he gone," said Lady Delacour, coolly,

    "'To that undiscover'd country,
    From whose bourn no traveller returns.'"

Dr. X---- was going to interrupt her, but she continued rapidly, "And now,
my dear doctor, tell me candidly, have you seen any symptoms of cowardice
in my manner this evening?"

"None," replied he. "On the contrary, I have admired your calm
self-possession."

"Then do not suspect me of want of fortitude, when I request that this
operation may not he performed to-day. I have changed my mind within these
few hours. I have determined, for a reason which I am sure that you would
feel to be sufficient, to postpone this affair till to-morrow. Believe me,
I do not act from caprice."

She saw that Dr. X---- did not yield assent to her last assertion, and
that he looked displeased.

"I will tell you my reason," said she; "and then you will have no right to
be displeased if I persist, as I shall inflexibly, in my determination. It
is my belief that I shall die this night. To submit to a painful operation
to-day would be only to sacrifice the last moments of my existence to no
purpose. If I survive this night, manage me as you please! But I am the
best judge of my own feelings--I shall die to-night."

Dr. X---- looked at her with a mixture of astonishment and Compassion. Her
pulse was high, she was extremely feverish, and he thought that the best
thing which he could do was to stay with her till the next day, and to
endeavour to divert her mind from this fancy, which he considered as an
insane idea. He prevailed upon the surgeon to stay with her till the next
morning; and he communicated his intentions to Belinda, who joined with
him in doing all that was possible to entertain and interest her by
conversation during the remainder of the day. She had sufficient
penetration to perceive that they gave not the least faith to her
prognostic, and she never said one word more upon the subject; but
appeared willing to be amused by their attempts to divert her, and
resolute to support her courage to the last moment. She did not affect
trifling gaiety: on the contrary, there was in all she said more strength
and less point than usual.

The evening passed away, and Lady Delacour seemed totally to have
forgotten her own prophecy respecting the event of the ensuing night; so
much so, that she spoke of several things that she intended to do the next
day. Helena knew nothing of what had passed, and Belinda imagined that her
friend put this constraint upon herself to avoid alarming her daughter.
Yet, after Helena retired, her mother's manner continued to be so much the
same, that Dr. X---- began to believe that her ladyship was actuated
merely by caprice. In this opinion she confirmed him by bursting out a
laughing when he proposed that some one should sit up with her during the
night.

"My sage sir," said she, "have you lived to this time without ever having
been duped by a woman before? I wanted a day's reprieve, and I have gained
it--gained a day, spent in most agreeable conversation, for which I thank
you. To-morrow," said she, turning to the surgeon, "I must invent some new
excuse for my cowardice; and though I give you notice of it beforehand, as
Harrington did when he picked the man's pocket, yet, nevertheless, I shall
succeed. Good night!"

She hurried to her own apartment, leaving them all in astonishment and
perplexity. Belinda was persuaded that she only affected this gaiety to
prevent Dr. X---- from insisting upon sitting up in her room, as he had
proposed. Doctor X----, judging, as he said, from her ladyship's general
character, attributed the whole to caprice; and the surgeon, judging, as
he said, from human nature in general, was decided in his belief that she
had been influenced, as she herself declared, by cowardice. After having
all expressed their opinions, without making any impression upon one
another, they retired to rest.

Belinda's bedchamber was next to Helena's; and after she had been in bed
about an hour, she fancied that she heard some one walking softly in the
next room. She rose, and found Lady Delacour standing beside her
daughter's bed. She started at the sight of Belinda, but only said in a
low voice, as she pointed to her child, "Don't waken her." She then looked
at her for some moments in silence. The moon shone full upon her face. She
stooped over Helena, parted the ringlets of hair upon her forehead, and
kissed her gently.

"You will be good to this poor girl when I am gone, Belinda!" said she,
turning away from her as she spoke: "I only came to look at her for the
last time."

"Are you then serious, my dear Lady Delacour?"

"Hush! Don't waken her," said Lady Delacour, putting her finger on her
lips; and walking slowly out of the room, she forbade Belinda to follow.

"If my fears be vain," said she, "why should I disturb you with them? If
they be just, you will hear my bell ring, and then come to me."

For some time afterward all was perfectly silent in the house. Belinda did
not go to bed, but sat waiting and listening anxiously. The clock struck
two; and as she heard no other sound, she began to hope that she had
suffered herself to be falsely alarmed by a foolish imagination, and she
lay down upon her bed, resolving to compose herself to rest. She was just
sinking to sleep, when she thought she heard the faint sound of a bell.
She was not sure whether she was dreaming or awake. She started up and
listened. All was silent. But in a few-minutes Lady Delacour's bell rang
violently. Belinda flew to her room. The surgeon was already there; he had
been sitting up in the next room to write letters, and he had heard the
first sound of the bell. Lady Delacour was senseless, supported in the
surgeon's arms. Belinda, by his directions, ran immediately for Doctor
X----, who was at the other end of the house. Before she returned, Lady
Delacour had recovered her senses. She begged that the surgeon would leave
the room, and that neither Dr. X---- nor Marriott might be yet admitted,
as she had something of importance to communicate to Miss Portman. The
surgeon withdrew, and she beckoned to Belinda, who sat down upon the side
of her bed. Lady Delacour held out her hand to her; it was covered with a
cold dew.

"My dear friend," said she, "my prophecy is accomplishing--I know I must
die."

"The surgeon said that you were not in the least danger, my dear Lady
Delacour; that it was merely a fainting fit. Do not suffer a vain
imagination thus to overpower your reason."

"It is no vain imagination--I must die," said Lady Delacour.

    'I hear a voice you cannot hear,
        Which says I must not stay;
    I see a hand you cannot see,
        Which beckons me away.'

"You perceive that I am in my perfect senses, my dear, or I could not quote
poetry. I am not insane--I am not delirious."

She paused--"I am ashamed to tell you what I know will expose me to your
ridicule."

"Ridicule!" cried Belinda: "can you think me so cruel as to consider your
sufferings a subject for ridicule?"

Lady Delacour was overcome by the tenderness with which Belinda spoke.

"I will then speak to you," said she, "without reserve. Inconsistent as it
is with the strength of mind which you might expect from me, I cannot
resist the impression which has been made on my mind by--a vision."

"A vision!"

"Three times," continued Lady Delacour, "it has appeared to me about this
hour. The first night after we came here I saw it; last night it returned;
and to-night I have beheld it for the third time. I consider it as a
warning to prepare for death. You are surprised--you are incredulous. I
know that this must appear to you extravagant; but depend upon it that
what I tell you is true. It is scarcely a quarter of an hour since I
beheld the figure of ----, that man for whose untimely death I am
answerable. Whenever I close my eyes the same form appears before me."

"These visions," said Belinda, "are certainly the effects of opium."

"The forms that flit before my eyes when I am between sleeping and
waking," said Lady Delacour, "I am willing to believe, are the effects of
opium; but, Belinda, it is impossible I should be convinced that my senses
have deceived me with respect to what I have beheld when I have been as
broad awake, and in as perfect possession of my understanding as I am at
this instant. The habits of my life, and the natural gaiety, not to say
levity, of my temper, have always inclined me rather to incredulity than
to superstition. But there are things which no strength of mind, no
temerity can resist. I repeat it--this is a warning to me to prepare for
death. No human means, no human power can save me!"

Here they were interrupted by Marriott, who could no longer be restrained
from bursting into the room. Dr. X---- followed, and going calmly to the
side of Lady Delacour's bed, took her hand to feel her pulse.

"Mrs. Marriott, you need not alarm yourself in this manner," said he:
"your lady is at this instant in as little danger as I am."

"_You_ think she'll live! Oh, my lady! why did you terrify us in this
manner?"

Lady Delacour smiled, and calmly said, as Doctor X---- still continued to
count her pulse, "The pulse may deceive you, doctor, but I do not.
Marriott, you may--"

Belinda heard no more; for at this instant, as she was standing alone,
near the glass-door that was opposite to the bed, she saw at a distance in
the garden the figure which Lady Delacour had described. Lady Delacour was
now so intent upon speaking to Dr. X----, that she saw nothing but him.
Belinda had the presence of mind to be perfectly silent. The figure stood
still for some moments. My compliments to the ladies!

[_Exit_.]
COLONEL.

Ida!

[IDA _hastens to him_.] 
Are you my good daughter?

IDA.
My dear father!

COLONEL.
I know what is troubling you, child. You are worse off than any
one.
Console yourself, Ida; if, as seems likely, the professor has to
make way for the old soldier, then we'll talk further on the
matter.
Oldendorf has not deserved it of me; there are many things about
him that I do not like. But you are my only child.X----
would go with some of the men-servants and search the garden, to discover
whether any one was there concealed, or whether any footsteps could be
traced. The doctor did not search long before he perceived footsteps in
the borders opposite to the glass-door of Lady Delacour's bedchamber; he
was carefully following their track, when he heard a loud cry, which
seemed to come from the other side of the garden wall. There was a breach
in the wall over which he scrambled with some difficulty. The screams
continued with redoubled violence. As he was making his way to the spot
from which they proceeded, he was met by the old gardener, who was
crossing one of the walks with a lantern in his hand.

"Ho! ho!" cried the gardener, "I take it that we have the thief at last. I
fancy that the fellow whose footsteps I traced, and who has been at my
morello cherry-tree every night, has been caught in the trap. I hope his
leg is not broke, though!-This way, sir--this way!"

The gardener led the doctor to the place, and there they found a man,
whose leg had actually been caught in the spring-trap which had been set
for the defence of the cherry-tree. The man had by this time fallen into a
swoon; they extricated him as fast as possible, and Doctor X---- had him
brought to Lady Delacour's, in order that the surgeon, who was there,
might see his leg.

As they were carrying him across the hall, Belinda met them. She poured
out a glass of water for the man, who was just recovering from his swoon;
but as she went nearer to give it him, she was struck with his wonderful
resemblance to Harriot Freke.

"It must he Mrs. Freke herself!" whispered she to Marriott, whose wide
opening eyes, at this instant, fixed themselves upon her.

"It must be Mrs. Freke herself, ma'am!" repeated Marriott.

And so in fact it was.

There is a certain class of people, who are incapable of generous
confidence in their equals, but who are disposed to yield implicit credit
to the underhand information of mean emissaries. Through the medium of
Champfort and the _stupid maid_, Mrs. Freke had learned a confused story
of a man's footsteps having been heard in Lady Delacour's boudoir, of his
being let in by Marriott secretly, of his having remained locked up there
for several hours, and of the maid's having been turned away, merely
because she innocently went to open the door whilst the gentleman was in
concealment. Mrs. Freke was farther informed by the same unquestionable
authority, that Lady Delacour had taken a house at Twickenham, for the
express purpose of meeting her lover: that Miss Portman and Marriott were
the only persons who were to be of this party of pleasure.

Upon the faith of this intelligence, Mrs. Freke, who had accompanied Mrs.
Luttridge to town, immediately repaired to Twickenham, to pay a visit to a
third cousin, that she might have an opportunity of detecting the
intrigues, and afterwards of publishing the disgrace, of her former
friend. The desire of revenging herself upon Miss Portman, for having
declined her civilities at Harrowgate, had also a powerful influence in
stimulating her malicious activity. She knew that if it were proved that
Belinda was the confidante of Lady Delacour's intrigues, her reputation
must be materially injured, and that the Percivals would then be as
desirous to break off as they now were anxious to promote the match with
Mr. Vincent. Charmed with this hope of a double triumph, the vindictive
lady commenced her operations, nor was she ashamed to descend to the
character of a spy. The general and convenient name of _frolic_, she
thought, would cover every species of meanness. She swore that "it was
charming fun to equip herself at night in men's clothes, and to sally
forth to reconnoitre the motions of the enemy."

By an unfrequented path she used to gain the window that looked into Lady
Delacour's bedchamber. This was the figure which appeared at night at a
certain hour, and which, to her ladyship's disturbed imagination, seemed
to be the form of Colonel Lawless. There was, indeed, a resemblance in
their size and persons, which favoured the delusion. For several nights
Mrs. Freke paid these visits without obtaining any satisfaction; but this
night she thought herself overpaid for her exertions, by the charming
discovery which she fancied she had made. She mistook the surgeon for a
lover of Lady Delacour's; and she was hurrying home with the joyful
intelligence, when she was caught in the gardener's trap. The agony that
she suffered was at first intense, but in a few hours the pain somewhat
subsided; and in this interval of rest she turned to Belinda, and with a
malicious smile said,--"Miss Portman, 'tis fair I should pay for my
peeping; but I shall not pay quite so dear for it as some of my friends."

Miss Portman did not in the least comprehend her, till she added, "I'm
sure you'll allow that 'tis better for a lady to lose her leg than her
reputation--and for my part I'd rather be caught in a man trap, than have
a man caught in my bedchamber. My service to your friend, Lady Delacour,
and tell her so."

"And do you know who that gentleman was, that you saw in her ladyship's
room?"

"Not I, not yet; but I'll make it my business to find out. I give you fair
notice; I'm a very devil when provoked. Why didn't you make me your friend
when you could?--You'll not baffle me. I have seen all I wanted, and I am
capable of painting all I saw. As to who the man might be, that's no
matter; one Lothario is as good as another for my purpose."

Longer had Mrs. Freke spoken with malignant triumph, had she not been
interrupted by a burst of laughter from the surgeon. Her vexation was
indescribable when he informed her, that he was the man whom she had seen
in Lady Delacour's bedchamber, and whom she had mistaken for a favoured
lover.

Mrs. Freke's leg was much cut and bruised; and now that she was no longer
supported by the hopes of revenge, she began to lament loudly and
incessantly the injury that she had sustained. She impatiently inquired
how long it was probable that she should be confined by this accident; and
she grew quite outrageous when it was hinted, that the beauty of her legs
would be spoiled, and that she would never more be able to appear to
advantage in man's apparel. The dread of being seen by Lady Delacour in
the deplorable yet ludicrous situation to which she had reduced herself
operated next upon her mind, and every time the door of the apartment
opened, she looked with terror towards it, expecting to see her ladyship
appear. But though Lady Delacour heard from Marriott immediately the news
of Mrs. Freke's disaster, she never disturbed her by her presence. She was
too generous to insult a fallen foe.

Early in the morning Mrs. Freke was by her own desire conveyed to her
cousin's house, where without regret we shall leave her to suffer the
consequences of her frolic.

"A false prophetess! Nowithstanding all my visions, I have outlived the
night, you see," said Lady Delacour, to Miss Portman when they met in the
morning. "I have heard, my dear Belinda, and I believe, that the passion
of love, which can endure caprice, vice, wrinkles, deformity, poverty,
nay, disease itself, is notwithstanding so squeamish as to be
instantaneously disgusted by the perception of folly in the object
beloved. I hope friendship, though akin to love, is of a more robust
constitution, else what would become of me? My folly, and my visions, and
my spectre--oh, that I had not exposed myself to you in this manner!
Harriot Freke herself is scarcely more contemptible. Spies and cowards are
upon an equal footing. Her malice and her _frolic_ are consistent with her
character, but my fears and my superstition are totally inconsistent with
mine. Forget the nonsense I talked to you last night, my dear, or fancy
that I was then under the dominion of laudanum. This morning you shall see
Lady Delacour _herself again_. Is Dr. X----, is the surgeon ready? Where
are they? I am prepared. My fortitude shall redeem me in your opinion,
Belinda, and in my own."

Doctor X---- and the surgeon immediately obeyed her summons.

Helena heard them go into Lady Delacour's room, and she saw by Marriott's
countenance, who followed, that her mother was going to submit to the
operation. She sat down trembling on the steps which led to her mother's
room, and waited there a long time, as she thought, in the most painful
suspense. At last she heard some one call Helena. She looked up, and saw
her father close to her.

"Helena," said he, "how is your mother?"

"I don't know. Oh, papa, you cannot go in there _now_," said Helena,
stopping him as he was pressing forwards.

"Why did not you or Miss Portman write to me yesterday, as you promised?"
said Lord Delacour, in a voice that showed he was scarcely able to ask the
question.

"Because, papa, we had nothing to tell you: nothing was done yesterday.
But the surgeon is now there," said Helena, pointing towards her mother's
room.

Lord Delacour stood motionless for an instant; then suddenly seizing his
daughter's hand, "Let us go," said he: "if we stay here, we shall hear her
screams;" and he was hurrying her away, when the door of Lady Delacour's
apartment opened, and Belinda appeared, her countenance radiant with joy.

"Good news, dear Helena! Oh, my lord! you are come in a happy moment--I
give you joy."

"Joy! joy! joy!" cried Marriott, following.

"Is it all over?" said Lord Delacour.

"And without a single shriek!" said Helena. "What courage!"

"There's no need of shrieks, or courage either, thank God," said Marriott.
"Dr. X---- says so, and he is the best man in the world, and the
cleverest. And I was right from the first; I said it was impossible my
lady should have such a shocking complaint as she thought she had. There's
no such thing at all in the case, my lord! I said so always, till I was
persuaded out of my senses by that villainous quack, who contradicted me
for this own 'molument. And Doctor X---- says, if my lady will leave off
the terrible quantities of laudanum she takes, he'll engage for her
recovery."

The surgeon and Dr. X---- now explained to Lord Delacour that the
unprincipled wretch to whom her ladyship had applied for assistance had
persuaded her that she had a cancer, though in fact her complaint arose
merely from the bruise which she had received. He knew too well how to
make a wound hideous and painful, and so continue her delusion for his own
advantage. Dr. X---- observed, that if Lady Delacour would have permitted
either the surgeon or him to have _examined_ sooner into the real state of
the case, it would have saved herself infinite pain, and them all anxiety.
Belinda at this moment felt too much to speak.

"I'm morally certain," cried Marriott, "Mr. Champfort would die with
vexation, if he could see the joy that's painted in my lord's face this
minute. And we may thank Miss Portman for this, for 'twas she made every
thing go right, and I never expected to live to see so happy a day."

Whilst Marriott ran on in this manner with all the volubility of joy, Lord
Delacour passed her with some difficulty, and Helena was in her mother's
arms in an instant.

Lady Delacour, struck to the heart by their affectionate looks and words,
burst into tears. "How little have I deserved this kindness from you, my
lord! or from you, my child! But my feelings," added she, wiping away her
tears, "shall not waste themselves in tears, nor in vain thanks. My
actions, the whole course of my future life, shall show that I am not
quite a brute. Even brutes are won by kindness. Observe, my lord,"
continued she, smiling, "I said _won_, not _tamed!_--A tame Lady Delacour
would be a sorry animal, not worth looking at. Were she even to become
domesticated, she would fare the worse."

"How so?--How so, my dear?" said Lord Delacour and Belinda almost in the
same breath.

"How so?--Why, if Lady Delacour were to wash off her rouge, and lay aside
her air, and be as gentle, good, and kind as Belinda Portman, for
instance, her lord would certainly say to her,

    'So alter'd are your face and mind,
    'Twere perjury to love you now.'"


CHAPTER XXIII.

THE CHAPLAIN.


In some minds, emotions of joy are always connected with feelings of
benevolence and generosity. Lady Delacour's heart expanded with the
sensations of friendship and gratitude, now that she was relieved from
those fears by which she had so long been oppressed.

"My dear daughter," said she to Helena, "have you at this instant any wish
that I can gratify?--Ask any thing you please, the fairy Goodwill shall
contrive to get it for you in a trice. You have thought of a wish at this
moment, I know, by your eyes, by your blush. Nay, do not hesitate. Do you
doubt me because I do not appear before you in the shape of a little ugly
woman, like Cinderella's godmother? or do you despise me because you do
not see a wand waving in my hand?--'Ah, little skilled of fairy lore!'
know that I am in possession of a talisman that can command more than ever
fairy granted. Behold my talisman," continued she, drawing out her purse,
and showing the gold through the net-work. "Speak boldly, then," cried she
to Helena, "and be obeyed."

"Ah, mamma," said Helena, "I was not thinking of what fairies or gold can
give; but you can grant my wish, and if you will let me, I will whisper it
to you."

Lady Delacour stooped to hear her daughter's whisper.

"Your wish is granted, my own grateful, charming girl," said her mother.

Helena's wish was, that her mother could be reconciled to her good aunt,
Margaret Delacour.

Her ladyship sat down instantly, and wrote to Mrs. Delacour. Helena was
the bearer of this letter, and Lady Delacour promised to wait upon this
excellent old lady as soon as she should return to town.

In the meantime her ladyship's health rapidly improved under the skilful
care of Dr. X----: it had been terribly injured by the ignorance and
villany of the wretch to whom she had so long and so rashly trusted. The
nostrums which he persuaded her to take, and the immoderate use of opium
to which she accustomed herself, would have ruined her constitution, had
it not been uncommonly strong. Dr. X---- recommended it to her ladyship to
abstain gradually from opium, and this advice she had the resolution to
follow with uninterrupted perseverance.

The change in Lady Delacour's manner of life, in the hours and the
company that she kept, contributed much to her recovery.[9] She was no
longer in continual anxiety to conceal the state of her health from the
world. She had no secret to keep--no part to act; her reconciliation
with her husband and with his friends restored her mind to ease and
self-complacency. Her little Helena was a source of daily pleasure; and
no longer conscious of neglecting her daughter, she no longer feared
that the affections of her child should be alienated. Dr. X----, well
aware that the passions have a powerful influence over the body, thought
it full as necessary, in some cases, to attend to the mind as to the
pulse. By conversing with Lady Delacour, and by combining hints and
circumstances, he soon discovered what had lately been the course of her
reading, and what impression it had made on her imagination. Mrs.
Marriott, indeed, assisted him with her opinion concerning _the
methodistical books_; and when he recollected the forebodings of death
which her ladyship had felt, and the terror with which she had been
seized on the night of Mrs. Freke's adventure, he was convinced that
superstitious horrors hung upon his patient's spirits, and affected her
health. To argue on religious subjects was not his province, much less
his inclination; but he was acquainted with a person qualified by his
profession and his character 'to minister to a mind diseased,' and he
resolved on the first favourable opportunity to introduce this gentleman
to her ladyship.

One morning Lady Delacour was complaining to Belinda, that the books in
the library were in dreadful confusion. "My lord has really a very fine
library," said she; "but I wish he had half as many books twice as well
arranged: I never can find any thing I want. Dr. X----, I wish to heaven
you could recommend a librarian to my lord--not a chaplain, observe."

"Why not a chaplain, may I ask your ladyship?" said the doctor.

"Oh, because we had once a chaplain, who gave me a surfeit of the whole
tribe. The meanest sycophant, yet the most impertinent busy-body--always
cringing, yet always intriguing--wanting to govern the whole family, and
at the same time every creature's humble servant--fawning to my lord the
bishop, insolent to the poor curate--anathematizing all who differed from
him in opinion, yet without dignity to enforce the respect due to his
faith or his profession--greedy for preferment, yet without a thought of
the duties of his office. It was the common practice of this man to leap
from his horse at the church door on a holiday, after following a pack of
hounds, huddle on his surplice, and gabble over the service with the most
indecent mockery of religion. Do I speak with acrimony? I have reason. It
was this chaplain who first led my lord to Newmarket; it was he who first
taught my lord to drink. Then he was _a wit_--an insufferable wit. His
conversation after he had drank was such as no woman but Harriot Freke
could understand, and such as few _gentlemen_ could hear. I have never,
alas! been thought a prude, but in the heyday of my youth and gaiety, this
man always disgusted me. In one word, he was a buck parson. I hope you
have as great a horror for this species of animal as I have?"

"Full as great," replied Dr. X----; "but I consider them as monsters,
which belonging to no species, can disgrace none."

"They ought to be hunted by common consent out of civilized society," said
Lady Delacour.

"They are by public opinion banished from all rational society; and your
ladyship's just indignation proves, that they have no chance of being
tolerated by fashion. But would it not allow such beings too much
consequence, would it not extend their power to do mischief, if we
perceived that one such person could disgust Lady Delacour with the whole
race of chaplains?"

"It is uncommon," replied her ladyship, "to hear a physician _earnest_ in
the defence of the clergy--and a literary philosophic physician too! Shall
we have an eulogium upon bishops as well as chaplains?"

"We have had that already," replied Dr. X----. "All ranks, persuasions,
and descriptions of people, including, I hope, those stigmatized by the
name of philosophers, have joined in admiration of the bishop of St. Pol
de Leon. The conduct of the real martyrs to their faith amongst the French
clergy, not even the most witty or brutal sceptic could ridicule."

"You surprise me, doctor!" said Lady Delacour; "for I assure you that you
have the character of being very liberal in your opinions."

"I hope I am liberal in my opinions," replied the doctor, "and that I give
your ladyship a proof of it."

"You would not then persecute a man or woman with ridicule for believing
more than you do?" said Lady Delacour.

"Those who persecute, to overturn religion, can scarcely pretend to more
philosophy, or more liberality, than those who persecute to support it,"
said Dr. X----.

"Perhaps, doctor, you are only speaking popularly?"

"I believe what I now say to be true," said Dr. X----, "and I always
endeavour to make truth popular."

"But possibly these are only truths for ladies. Doctor X---- may be such
an ungallant philosopher, as to think that some truths are not fit for
ladies. He may hold a different language with gentlemen."

"I should not only be an ungallant but a weak philosopher," said Dr.
X----, "if I thought that truth was not the same for all the world who can
understand it. And who can doubt Lady Delacour's being of that number?"

Lady Delacour, who, at the beginning of this conversation, had spoken
guardedly, from the fear of lowering the doctor's opinion of her
understanding, was put at her ease by the manner in which he now spoke;
and, half laying aside the tone of raillery, she said to him, "Well,
doctor! seriously, I am not so _illiberal_ as to condemn _all_ chaplains
for one, odious as he was. But where to find his contrast in these
degenerate days? Can you, who are a defender of the faith, and so forth,
assist me? Will you recommend a chaplain to my lord?"

"Willingly," said Dr. X----; "and that is what I would not say for a world
of fees, unless I were sure of my man."

"What sort of a man is he?"

"Not a buck parson."

"And I hope not a pedant, not a dogmatist, for that would be almost as
bad. Before we domesticate another chaplain, I wish to know all his
qualities, and to have a full and true description of him."

"Shall I then give you a full and true description of him in the words of
Chaucer?"

"In any words you please. But Chaucer's chaplain must be a little
old-fashioned by this time, I should think."

"Pardon me. Some people, as well as some things, never grow old-fashioned.
I should not be ashamed to produce Chaucer's parish priest at this day to
the best company in England--I am not ashamed to produce him to your
ladyship; and if I can remember twenty lines in his favour, I hope you
will give me credit for being a sincere friend to the worthy part of the
clergy. Observe, you must take them as I can patch them together; I will
not promise that I can recollect twenty lines _de suite_, and without
missing a word; that is what I would not swear to do for His Grace the
Archbishop of Canterbury."

"His Grace will probably excuse you from swearing; at least I will," said
Lady Delacour, "on the present occasion: so now for your twenty lines in
whatever order you please."

Doctor X----, with sundry intervals of recollection, which may be spared
the reader, repeated the following lines:

    "Yet has his aspect nothing of severe,
    But such a face as promised him sincere.
    Nothing reserved or sullen was to see,
    But sweet regards, and pleasing sanctity,
    Mild was his accent, and his action free.
    With eloquence innate his tongue was arm'd,
    Though harsh the precept, yet the preacher charm'd;
    For, letting down the golden chain from high,
    He drew his audience upwards to the sky.
    He taught the Gospel rather than the law,
    And forced himself to drive, but loved to draw.
    The tithes his parish freely paid, he took;
    But never sued, or curs'd with bell and book.
    Wide was his parish, not contracted close
    In streets--but here and there a straggling house.
    Yet still he was at hand, without request,
    To serve the sick, and succour the distressed.
    The proud he tamed, the penitent he cheer'd,
    Nor to rebuke the rich offender fear'd.
    His preaching much, but more his practice wrought,
    A living sermon of the truths he taught."

Lady Delacour wished that she could find a chaplain, who in any degree
resembled this charming parish priest, and Dr. X----promised that he would
the next day introduce to her his friend Mr. Moreton.

"Mr. Moreton!" said Belinda, "the gentleman of whom Mr. Percival spoke,
Mrs. Freke's Mr. Moreton?"

"Yes," said Dr. X----, "the clergyman whom Mrs. Freke hanged in effigy,
and to whom Clarence Hervey has given a small living."

These circumstances, even if he had not precisely resembled Chaucer's
character of a benevolent clergyman, would have strongly interested Lady
Delacour in his favour. She found him, upon farther acquaintance, a
perfect contrast to her former chaplain; and he gradually acquired such
salutary influence over her mind, that he relieved her from the terrors of
methodism, and in their place substituted the consolations of mild and
rational piety.

Her conscience was now at peace; her spirits were real and equable, and
never was her conversation so agreeable. Animated with the new feelings of
returning health, and the new hopes of domestic happiness, she seemed
desirous to impart her felicity to all around her, but chiefly to Belinda,
who had the strongest claims upon her gratitude, and the warmest place in
her affections. Belinda never made her friend feel the weight of any
obligation, and consequently Lady Delacour's gratitude was a voluntary
pleasure--not an expected duty. Nothing could be more delightful to Miss
Portman than thus to feel herself the object at once of esteem, affection,
and respect; to see that she had not only been the means of saving her
friend's life, but that the influence she had obtained over her mind was
likely to be so permanently beneficial both to her and to her family.

Belinda did not take all the merit of this reformation to herself: she was
most willing to share it, in her own imagination, not only with Dr. X----
and Mr. Moreton, but with poor Clarence Hervey. She was pleased to observe
that Lady Delacour never omitted any occasion of doing justice to his
merit, and she loved her for that generosity, which sometimes passed the
bounds of justice in her eulogiums. But Belinda was careful to preserve
her consistency, and to guard her heart from the dangerous effect of these
enthusiastic praises; and as Lady Delacour was now sufficiently
re-established in her health, she announced her intention of returning
immediately to Oakly-park, according to her promise to Lady Anne Percival
and to Mr. Vincent.

"But, my dear," said Lady Delacour, "one week more is all I ask from
you--may not friendship ask such a sacrifice from love?"

"You expect, I know," said Miss Portman, ingenuously, "that before the end
of that time Mr. Hervey will be here."

"True. And have you no friendship for him?" said Lady Delacour with an
arch smile, "or is friendship for every man in the creation, one Augustus
Vincent always excepted, prohibited by the statutes of Oakly-park?"

"By the statutes of Oakly-park nothing is forbidden," said Belinda, "but
what reason--"

"Reason! Oh, I have done if you go to reason! You are invulnerable to the
light shafts of wit, I know, when you are cased in this heavy armour of
reason; Cupid himself may strain his bow, and exhaust his quiver upon you
in vain. But have a care--you cannot live in armour all your life--lay it
aside but for a moment, and the little bold urchin will make it his prize.
Remember, in one of Raphael's pictures, Cupid creeping into the armour of
the conqueror of the world."

"I am sufficiently aware," said Belinda, smiling, "of the power of Cupid,
and of his wiles. I would not brave his malice, but I will fly from it."

"It is so cowardly to fly!"

"Surely prudence, not courage, is the virtue of our sex; and seriously, my
dear Lady Delacour, I entreat you not to use your influence over my mind,
lest you should lessen my happiness, though you cannot alter my
determination."

Moved by the earnest manner in which Belinda uttered these words, Lady
Delacour rallied her no more, nor did she longer oppose her resolution of
returning immediately to Oakly-park.

"May I remind you," said Miss Portman, "though it is seldom either politic
or polite, to remind people of their promises,--but may I remind you of
something like a promise you made, to accompany me to Mr. Percival's?"

"And would you have me behave so brutally to poor Lord Delacour, as to run
away from him in this manner the moment I have strength to run?"

"Lord Delacour is included in this invitation," said Miss Portman, putting
the last letter that she had received from Lady Anne Percival into her
hands.

"When I recollect," said Lady Delacour, as she looked over the letter,
"how well this Lady Anne of yours has behaved to me about Helena, when I
recollect, that, though you have been with her so long, she has not
supplanted me in your affections, and that she did not attempt to detain
you when I sent Marriott to Oakly-park, and when I consider how much for
my own advantage it will be to accept this invitation, I really cannot
bring myself, from pride, or folly, or any other motive, to refuse it. So,
my dear Belinda, prevail upon Lord Delacour to spend his Christmas at
Oakly-park, instead of at Studley-manor (Rantipole, thank Heaven! is out
of the question), and prevail upon yourself to stay a few days for me, and
you shall take us all with you in triumph."

Belinda was convinced that, when Lady Delacour had once tasted the
pleasures of domestic life, she would not easily return to that
dissipation which she had followed from habit, and into which she had
first been driven by a mixture of vanity and despair. All the connexions
which she had imprudently formed with numbers of fashionable but
extravagant and thoughtless women would insensibly be broken off by this
measure; for Lady Delacour, who was already weary of their company, would
be so much struck with the difference between their insipid conversation
and the animated and interesting society in Lady Anne Percival's family,
that she would afterwards think them not only burdensome but intolerable.
Lord Delacour's intimacy with Lord Studley was one of his chief
inducements to that intemperance, which injured almost equally his
constitution and his understanding: for some weeks past he had abstained
from all excess, and Belinda was well aware, that, when the immediate
motive of humanity to Lady Delacour ceased to act upon him, he would
probably return to his former habits, if he continued to visit his former
associates. It was therefore of importance to break at once his connexion
with Lord Studley, and to place him in a situation where he might form new
habits, and where his dormant talents might be roused to exertion. She was
convinced that his understanding was not so much _below par_ as she had
once been taught to think it: she perceived, also, that since their
reconciliation, Lady Delacour was anxious to make him appear to advantage:
whenever he said any thing that was worth hearing, she looked at Belinda
with triumph; and whenever he happened to make _a mistake_ in
conversation, she either showed involuntary signs of uneasiness, or passed
it off with that easy wit, by which she generally knew how "to make the
worse appear the better reason." Miss Portman knew that Mr. Percival
possessed the happy talent of drawing out all the abilities of those with
whom he conversed, and that he did not value men merely for their
erudition, science, or literature; he was capable of estimating _the
potential_ as well as _the actual range_ of the mind. Of his generosity
she could not doubt, and she was persuaded that he would take every
possible means which good nature, joined to good sense, could suggest, to
raise Lord Delacour in his lady's esteem, and to make that union happy
which was indissoluble. All these reflections passed with the utmost
rapidity in Belinda's mind, and the result of them was, that she consented
to wait Lady Delacour's leisure for her journey.


CHAPTER XXIV.

PEU À PEU.


Things were in this situation, when one day Marriott made her appearance
at her lady's toilette with a face which at once proclaimed that something
had discomposed her, and that she was impatient to be asked what it was.

"What is the matter, Marriott?" said Lady Delacour; "for I know you want
me to ask."

"Want you to ask! Oh, dear, my lady, no!--for I'm sure, it's a thing that
goes quite against me to tell; for I thought, indeed, my lady,
_superiorly_ of the person in question; so much so, indeed, that I wished
what I declare I should now be ashamed to mention, especially in the
presence of Miss Portman, who deserves the best that this world can afford
of every denomination. Well, ma'am, in one word," continued she,
addressing herself to Belinda, "I am extremely rejoiced that things are as
they are, though I confess that was not always my wish or opinion, for
which I beg Mr. Vincent's pardon and yours; but I hope to be forgiven,
since I'm now come entirely round to my Lady Anne Percival's way of
thinking, which I learnt from good authority at Oakly-park; and I am now
convinced and confident, Miss Portman, that every thing is for the best."

"Marriott will inform us, in due course of time, what has thus suddenly
and happily converted her," said Lady Delacour to Belinda, who was thrown
into some surprise and confusion by Marriott's address; but Marriott went
on with much warmth--

Dear me! I'm sure I thought we had got rid of all double-dealers, when the
house was cleared of Mr. Champfort; but, oh, mercy! there's not traps
enough in the world for them all; I only wish they were all caught as
finely as some people were. "Tis what all double-dealers, and Champfort at
the head of the whole regiment, deserve--that's certain."

"We must take patience, my dear Belinda," said Lady Delacour, calmly,
"till Marriott has exhausted all the expletives in and out of the English
language; and presently, when she has fought all her battles with
Champfort over again, we may hope to get at the fact."

"Dear! my lady, it has nothing to do with Mr. Champfort, nor any such
style of personage, I can assure you; for, I'm positive, I'd rather think
contemptibly of a hundred million Mr. Champforts than of one such
gentleman as Mr. Clarence Hervey."

"Clarence Hervey!" exclaimed Lady Delacour: taking it for granted that
Belinda blushed, her ladyship, with superfluous address, instantly turned,
so as to hide her friend's face from Mrs. Marriott. "Well, Marriott, what
of Mr. Hervey?"

"Oh, my lady, something you'll be surprised to hear, and Miss Portman,
too. It is not, by any means, that I am more of a prude than is becoming,
my lady: nor that I take upon me to be so innocent as not to know that
young gentlemen of fortune will, if it be only for fashion's sake, have
such things as kept mistresses (begging pardon for mentioning such trash);
but no one that has lived in the world thinks any thing of that, except,"
added she, catching a glimpse of Belinda's countenance, "except, to be
sure, ma'am, morally speaking, it's very wicked and shocking, and makes
one blush before company, till one's used to it, and ought certainly to be
put down by act of parliament, ma'am; but, my lady, you know, in point of
surprising any body, or being discreditable in a young gentleman of Mr.
Hervey's fortune and pretensions, it would be mere envy and scandal to
deem it any thing--worth mentioning."

"Then, for mercy's sake, or mine," said Lady Delacour, "go on to something
that is worth mentioning."

"Well, my lady, you must know, then, that yesterday I wanted some hempseed
for my bullfinch--Miss Helena's bullfinch, I mean; for it was she found it
by accident, you know, Miss Portman, the day after we came here. Poor
thing! it got itself so entangled in the net over the morello cherry tree,
in the garden, that it could neither get itself in nor out; but very
luckily Miss Helena saw it, and saved, and brought it in: it was almost
dead, my lady."

"Was it?--I mean I am very sorry for it: that is what you expect me to
say. Now, go on--get us once past the bullfinch, or tell us what it has to
do with Clarence Hervey."

"That is what I am aiming at, as fast as possible, my lady. So I sent for
some hempseed for the bullfinch, and along with the hempseed they brought
me wrapped round it, as it were, a printed handbill, as it might be, or
advertisement, which I threw off, disregardingly, taking for granted it
might have been some of those advertisements for lozenges or razor-strops,
that meet one wherever one goes; but Miss Delacour picked it up, and found
it was a kind of hue and cry after a stolen or strayed bullfinch. Ma'am, I
was so provoked, I could have cried, when I learnt it was the exact
description of our little Bobby to a feather--gray upon the back, and red
on----"

"Oh! spare me the description to a feather. Well, you took the bird,
bullfinch, or Bobby, as you call it, home to its rightful owner, I
presume? Let me get you so far on your way."

"No, I beg your pardon, my lady, that is not the thing."

"Then you did not take the bird home to its owner--and you are a
bird-stealer? With all my heart: be a dog-stealer, if you will--only go
on."

"But, my lady, you hurry me so, it puts every thing topsy-turvy in my
head; I could tell it as fast as possible my own way."

"Do so, then."

"I was ready to cry, when I found our little Bobby was claimed from us, to
be sure; but Miss Delacour observed, that those with whom it had lived
till it was grey must be sorrier still to part with it: so I resolved to
do the honest and genteel thing by the lady who advertised for it, and to
take it back myself, and to refuse the five guineas reward offered. The
lady's name, according to the advertisement, was Ormond."

"Ormond!" repeated Lady Delacour, looking eagerly at Belinda: "was not
that the name Sir Philip Baddely mentioned to us--you remember?"

"Yes, Ormond was the name, as well as I recollect," said Belinda, with a
degree of steady composure that provoked her ladyship. "Go on, Marriott."

"And the words were, to leave the bird at a perfumer's in Twickenham,
opposite to ----; but that's no matter. Well, my lady, to the perfumer's I
went with the bird, this morning. Now, I had my reasons for wishing to see
this Mrs. Ormond myself, because, my lady, there was one thing rather
remarkable about this bullfinch, that it sings a very particular tune,
which I never heard any bullfinch, or any human creature, sing anything
like before: so I determined, in my own cogitations, to ask this Mrs.
Ormond to name the tunes her bullfinch could sing, before I produced it;
and if she made no mention of its knowing any one out of the common way, I
resolved to keep my bird to myself, as I might very conscientiously and
genteelly too. So, my lady, when I got to the perfumer's, I inquired where
Mrs. Ormond was to be found? I was told that she received no visits from
any, at least from the female sex; and that I must leave the bird there
till called for. I was considering what to do, and the strangeness of the
information made about the female sex, when in there came, into the shop,
a gentleman, who saved me all the indelicacy of asking particulars. The
bullfinch was at this time piping away at a fine rate, and, as luck would
have it, that very remarkable strange tune that I mentioned to you. Says
the gentleman, as he came into the shop, fixing his eyes on the bullfinch
as if they would have come fairly out of his head, 'How did that bird come
here?'--'I brought it here, sir,' said I. Then he began to offer me
mountains of gold in a very strange way, if I could tell him any tidings
of the lady to whom it belonged. The shopman from behind the counter now
bent forward, and whispered the gentleman that he could give him some
information, if he would make it worth his while; and they both went
together to a little parlour behind the shop, and I saw no more of them.
But, my lady, very opportunely for me, that was dying with curiosity, out
of the parlour they turned a young woman in, to attend the shop, who
proved to be an acquaintance of mine, whom I had done some little favours
to when in service in London. And this young woman, when I told her my
distress about the advertisement and the bullfinch, let me into the whole
of the affair. 'Ma'am,' said she, 'all that is known about Mrs. Ormond, in
this house, or any where else, is from me; so there was no occasion for
turning me out of the parlour. I lived with Mrs. Ormond, ma'am," says she,
"'for half a year, in the very house she now occupies, and consequently
nobody can be better informed than I am:'--to which I agreed. Then she
told me that the reason that Mrs. Ormond never saw any company of any sort
was, because she is not fit to see company--proper company--for she's not
a proper woman. She has a most beautiful young creature there, shut up,
who has been seduced, and is now deserted in a most cruel manner by a Mr.
Hervey. Oh, my lady! how the name struck upon my ear! I hoped, however, it
was not our Mr. Hervey; but it was the identical Mr. Clarence Hervey. I
made the young woman describe him, for she had often and often seen him,
when he visited the unfortunate creature; and the description could suit
none but our Mr. Hervey, and besides it put it beyond a doubt, she told me
his linen was all marked C. H. So our Mr. Hervey, ma'am," added Marriott,
turning to Belinda, "it certainly proved to be, to my utter dismay and
confusion."

"Oh, Marriott! my poor head!" exclaimed Lady Delacour, starting from under
her hands: "that cruel comb went at least half an inch into my head--heads
have feeling as well as hearts, believe me." And, as she spoke, she
snatched out the comb with which Marriott had just fastened up her hair,
and flung it on a sofa at some yards' distance. While Marriott went to
fetch it, Lady Delacour thought that Belinda would have time to recover
from that utter dismay and confusion into which she hoped that she must
now be thrown. "Come, Marriott, make haste. I have done _you_ at least a
great favour, for you have all this hair to perform upon again, and you
will have leisure to finish this story of yours--which, at all events, if
it is not in any other respect wonderful, we must allow is wonderfully
long."

"Well, my lady, to be short, then--I was more curious than ever, when I
heard all this, to hear more; and asked my friend how she could ever think
of staying in a house with ladies of such a description! Upon which she
justified herself by assuring me, upon her honour, that at first she
believed the young lady was married privately to Mr. Hervey, for that a
clergyman came in secret, and read prayers, and she verily believes that
the unfortunate young creature was deceived barbarously, and made to fancy
herself married to all intents and purposes, till all at once Mr. Had he,
then, done such an unheard-of thing? What he had expressed was, he knew,
the belief of all the best men of the Church. When the Bishop of Brandenburg
had sent the Abbot of Lehnin to him, with the request that Luther would
suppress the printed edition of his German sermon on indulgences and
grace, however near the truth he might be, the brother of the poor Augustinian
monastery was deeply moved that such great men should speak to him in
so friendly and cordial a manner, and he was ready to give up the printing
rather than make himself a monster that disturbed the Church. Eagerly
he sought to refute the report that the Elector had instigated his quarrel
with Tetzel--"they wish to involve the innocent prince in the enmity
that falls on me." He was ready to do anything to keep the peace
before Cajetan and with Miltitz.

One thing he would not do--recant what he had said against the
unchristian extension of the system of indulgences; but recantation
was the only thing the hierarchy wanted of him.

For a long time he still wished for peace, reconciliation, and return
to the peaceful activity of his cell; and again and again a false
assertion of his opponents set his blood on fire, and every
opposition was followed by a new and sharper blow from his weapon.

Even in the first letter to Leo X, May 30, 1518, Luther's heroic
assurance is remarkable.

He is still entirely the faithful son of the Church. He still concludes
by falling at the Pope's feet, offers him his whole life and being, and
promises to honor his voice as the voice of Christ, whose representative
the head of the Church is; but even from this devotion befitting the
monk, the vigorous words flash out:
"If I have merited death, I refuse not to die." In the body of the letter,
how strong are the expressions in which he sets forth the coarseness
of the sellers of indulgences! Here, too, his surprise is honest that his
theses are making so much stir with their unintelligible sentences, involved,
according to the old custom, to the point of riddles. And good humor sounds
in the manly words: "What shall I do? I cannot recant. In our century
full of intellect and beauty, which might put Cicero into a corner, I am
only an unlearned, limited, poorly educated man! But the goose must needs
cackle among the swans."
The following year almost all who honored Luther united in the endeavor to
bring about a reconciliation. Staupitz and Palatin, and the Elector
through them, scolded, besought, and urged; the papal chamberlain, Miltitz
himself, praised Luther's attitude, and whispered to him that he was
entirely right, implored him, drank with him, and kissed him. Luther,
to be sure, thought he knew that the courtier had a secret mission to make
him a captive, if possible, and bring him to Rome. But the peacemakers
successfully hit upon the point in which the stubborn man heartily agreed
with them--that respect for the Church must be maintained, and its unity
must not be destroyed. Luther promised to keep quiet and to submit the
decision of the contested points to three worthy bishops. While in this
position he was urged to write a letter of apology to the Pope. But even
this letter of March 3, 1519, though approved by the mediators and written
under compulsion, is characteristic as showing the advance Luther had
made.
Humility, such as our theologians see in it, is hardly present, but a
cautious diplomatic attitude throughout. Luther regrets that what he has
done to defend the honor of the Roman Church should have been interpreted
as lack of respect in him. He promises henceforth to say nothing more about
indulgences--if, that is, his opponents will do the same; he offers to
address a manifesto to the people in which he will advise them to give
proper obedience to the Church and not to be estranged from her because
his adversaries have been insolent and he himself harsh. But all these
submissive words do not conceal the rift which already separates his mind
from the essential basis of the Church of Rome. It sounds like cold irony
when he writes: "What shall I do, Most Holy Father? I am at a complete
loss. I cannot endure the weight of your anger, and yet I do not know
how to escape it. They demand a recantation from me. If it could accomplish
what they propose by it, I would recant without hesitation, but the
opposition of my adversaries has spread my writings farther than I had
ever hoped; they have taken hold too deeply on the souls of men. In
Germany today talent, learning, freedom of judgment are flourishing.

If I should recant, I should cover the Church, in the judgment of my
Germans, with still greater disgrace. It is they--my adversaries--who
have brought the Church of Rome into disrepute with us in Germany." He
finally closes politely: "If I should be able to do more, I shall without
doubt be very ready. May Christ preserve your Holiness! Martin Luther."

Much is to be read between the lines of this studied reserve. Even if the
vain Eck had not immediately set all Wittenberg University by the
ears, this letter could hardly have been considered at Rome as a
token of repentant submission.

The thunderbolt of excommunication had been hurled; Rome had spoken.

Now Luther, again completely his old self, wrote once more to the Pope that
great and famous letter which, at the request of the untiring
Miltitz, he dated back to September 6, 1520, that he might be able
to ignore the bull of excommunication.

It is a beautiful reflection of a resolute mind which from a lofty standpoint
calmly surveys its opponent, and at the same time is magnificent
in its sincerity, and of the noblest spirit.

With sincere sympathy he speaks of the personality and of the difficult
position of the Pope; but it is the sympathy of a stranger. He still laments
with melancholy the condition of the Church, but it is plain that he himself
has already outgrown it. It is a farewell letter. With the keenest
severity there is still a firm attitude and silent sorrow. Such is the way
a man parts from what he has once loved and found unworthy. This letter
was to be the last bridge for the peacemakers.

For Luther it was the liberation of his soul.

In these years Luther had become a different man.

In the first place he had acquired prudence and self-reliance in
his intercourse with the most exalted personages, and at heavy cost
had won insight into the policies and the private character of the
rulers.

Nothing was at heart more painful to the peaceable nature of his
sovereign than this bitter theological controversy, which sometimes
furthered his political ends but always disturbed his peace of mind.
Constant efforts were made by his court to keep the Wittenberg people
within bounds, and Luther always saw to it that they were made too late.
Whenever the faithful Spalatin dissuaded him from the publication
of a new polemic, he received the answer that there was no help for
it, that the sheets were printed and already in the hands of many
and could not be suppressed.

And in his dealings with his adversaries Luther had acquired the assurance
of a seasoned warrior. He was bitterly hurt when Hieronymus Emser, in the
spring of 1518, craftily took him to a banquet in Dresden where he
was forced to argue with angry enemies, especially when he learned that
a Dominican friar had listened at the door and the next day had spread it
in the town that Luther had been completely silenced, and that the
listener had had difficulty to restrain himself from rushing into the room
and spitting in Luther's face. At that first meeting with Cajetan
Luther still prostrated himself humbly at the feet of the prince of
the Church; after the second he allowed himself to express the view that
the cardinal was as fit for his office as an ass to play the harp. He
treated the polite Miltitz with fitting politeness. The Roman had hoped to
tame the German bear, but soon the courtier came of his own accord into
the position which was appropriate for him--he was used by Luther. And in
the Leipzig disputation against Eck the favorable impression which
the self-possessed, honest, and sturdy nature of Luther produced
was the best counterpoise to the self-satisfied assurance of his
clever opponent.

But Luther's inward life calls for greater sympathy. It was after all a
terrible period for him. Close to exaltation and victory lay for him
deathly anxiety, torturing doubt, and horrible apparitions.

He, almost alone, was in arms against all Christendom, and was becoming
more and more irreconcilably hostile to the mightiest power, which
still included everything that had been sacred to him since his
youth.

What if, after all, he were wrong in this or that! He was responsible for
every soul that he led away with him--and whither? What was there outside
the Church but destruction and perdition for time and for eternity?

If his adversaries and anxious friends cut him to the heart with reproaches
and warnings, the pain, the secret remorse, the uncertainty which he must
not acknowledge to any one, were greater beyond comparison. He found
peace, to be sure, in prayer. Whenever his fervid soul, seeking its God,
rose in mighty flights, he was filled with strength, peace, and cheerfulness.
But in hours of less tense exaltation, when his sensitive spirit
quivered under unpleasant impressions, then he felt himself embarrassed,
divided, under the spell of another power which was hostile to his God.
He knew from childhood how actively evil spirits ensnare mankind;
he had learned from the Scripture that the Devil works against the
purest to ruin them.

On his path the busy devils were lurking to weaken him, to mislead him, to
make innumerable others wretched through him. He saw their work in the angry
bearing of the cardinal, in the scornful face of Eck, even in the
thoughts of his own soul. He knew how powerful they had been in Rome.
Even in his youth apparitions had tormented him; now they reappeared.

From the dark shadows of his study the spectre of the tempter lifted its
claw-like hand against his reason.

Even while he was praying the Devil approached him in the form of the
Redeemer, radiant as King of Heaven with the five wounds, as the ancient
Church represented Him.

But Luther knew that Christ appears to poor humanity only in His words, or
in humble form, as He hung upon the cross; and he roused himself
vigorously and cried to the apparition: "Avaunt, foul fiend!"

--and the vision disappeared.

Thus the strong heart of the man worked for years in savage indignation--always
renewed. It was a sad struggle between reason and insanity, but Luther
always came out victorious; the native strength of his sound nature
prevailed. In long prayer, often lasting for hours, the stormy waves
of his emotion became calm, and his massive intelligence and his
conscience brought him every time out of doubt to certainty. He considered
this process of liberation as a gracious inspiration of his God, and
after such moments he who had once been in such anxious doubt was as
firm as steel, indifferent to the opinion of men, not to be moved,
inexorable. Quite a different picture is that of his personality
in contest with earthly foes. Here he retains almost everywhere the
superiority of conviction, particularly in his literary
feuds.

The literary activity which he developed at this time was gigantic. Up to
1517 he had printed little. From that time on he was not only the most
productive but the greatest popular writer of Germany. The energy
of his style, the vigor of his argumentation, the ardor and passion
of his conviction, carried away his readers. No one had ever spoken thus
to the people. His language lent itself to every mood, to all keys; now
brief, forcible, sharp as steel, now in majestic breadth, the words poured
in among the people like a mighty stream.

A figurative expression, a striking simile, made the most difficult
thoughts intelligible. His was a wonderfully creative power. He used
language with sovereign ease. As soon as he touched a pen his mind worked
with the greatest freedom; his sentences show the cheerful warmth
which filled him, the perfect charm of sympathetic creation is
poured out upon them.

And such power is by no means least apparent in the attacks which he makes
upon individual opponents, and it is closely connected with a fault which
caused misgivings even to his admiring contemporaries. He liked to play
with his opponents. His imagination clothed the form of an enemy
with a grotesque mask, and he teased, scorned, and stabbed this picture
of his imagination with turns of speech which had not always the grace of
moderation, or even of decency; but in the midst of vituperation, his
good humor generally had a conciliatory effect--although, to be sure, not
upon his victims.
Petty spite was rarely visible; not seldom the most imperturbable
good-nature. Sometimes he fell into a true artistic zeal, forgot the
dignity of the reformer, and pinched like a German peasant boy,
even like a malicious goblin. What blows he gave to all his opponents,
now with a club, wielded by an angry giant, now with a jester's
bauble!

He liked to twist their names into ridiculous forms, and thus they
lived in Wittenberg circles as beasts, or as fools.

Eck became Dr. Geck; Murner was adorned with the head and claws of a cat;
Emser, who had printed at the head of most of his pamphlets his coat-of-arms
the head of a horned goat, was abused as a goat. The Latin name of the
renegade humanist Cochläus, was retranslated, and Luther greeted him
as a snail with impenetrable armor, and--sad to say--sometimes also as a
dirty boy whose nose needed wiping.

Still worse, terrible even to his contemporaries, was the reckless violence
with which he declaimed against hostile princes. It is true that he
sometimes bestowed upon his sovereign's cousin, Duke George of Saxony, a
consideration hardly to be avoided. Each considered the other the prey of
the devil, but in secret each esteemed in the other a manly worth. Again
and again they fell into dissension, even in writing, but again and again
Luther prayed warmly for his neighbor's soul. The reckless wilfulness
of Henry VIII. of England, on the other hand, offended the German
reformer to the depths of his soul; he reviled him horribly and without
cessation; and even in his last years he treated the hot-headed Henry
of Brunswick like a naughty school-boy. "Clown" was the mildest of many
dramatic characters in which he represented him.
When, later, such outpourings of excessive zeal stared at him from the
printed page, and his friends complained, he would be vexed at
his rudeness, upbraid himself, and honestly repent. But repentance availed
little, for on the next occasion he would commit the same fault; and
Spalatin had some reason to look distrustfully upon a projected publication
even when Luther proposed to write very gently and tamely.
His opponents could not equal him in his field. They called names with
equal vigor, but they lacked his inward freedom. Unfortunately it cannot
be denied that this little appendage to the moral dignity of his nature
was sometimes the spice which made his writings so irresistible to the
honest Germans of the sixteenth century.

In the autumn of 1517 he had got into a quarrel with a reprobate Dominican
friar; in the winter of 1520 he burned the Pope's bull. In the spring of
1518 he had prostrated himself at the feet of the Vicar of Christ; in the
spring of 1521 he declared at the Diet of Worms, before the emperor
and the princes and the papal legates, that he believed neither the
Pope nor the Councils alone, only the testimony of the Holy Scripture
and the interpretation of reason.

Now he was free, but excommunication and outlawry hovered over his
head. He was inwardly free, but he was free as the beast of the forest
is free, and behind him bayed the blood-thirsty pack.

He had reached the culminating point of his life, and the powers against
which he had revolted, even the thoughts which he himself had aroused
among the people, were working from now on against his life and
doctrine.

Even at Worms, so it appears, it had been made clear to Luther that
he must disappear for a while.

The customs of the Franconian Knights, among whom he had faithful followers,
suggested the idea of having him spirited away by armed men. Elector
Frederick, with his faithful friends, discussed the abduction, and it
was quite after the manner of this prince that he himself did not
wish to know the place of retreat, in order to be able, in case of
need, to swear to his ignorance.

Nor was it easy to win Luther over to the plan, for his bold
heart had long ago overcome earthly fear; and with an enthusiastic
joy, in which there was much fanaticism and some humor, he watched
the attempts of the Romanists to put out of the way a man of whom
Another must dispose, He who spoke through his lips.

Unwillingly he submitted. The secret was not easy to keep, however
skilfully the abduction had been planned. At first none of the Wittenbergers
but Melanchthon knew where he was. But Luther was the last man to submit
to even the best-intentioned intrigue.

Very soon an active communication arose between the Wartburg and
Wittenberg.

No matter how much caution was used in delivering the letters, it was
difficult to avoid suspicion. In his fortified retreat, Luther found out
earlier than the Wittenbergers what was going on in the world outside. He
was informed of everything that happened at his university, and
tried to keep up the courage of his friends and direct their policy.
It is touching to see how he tried to strengthen Melanchthon, whose
unpractical nature made him feel painfully the absence of his sturdy
friend. "Things will get on without me," he writes to him; "only
have courage. I am no longer necessary to you. If I get out, and I
cannot return to Wittenberg, I shall go into the wide world. You are
men enough to hold the fortress of the Lord against the Devil, without
me." He dated his letters from the air, from Patmos, from the desert,
from "among the birds that sing merrily on the branches and praise God with
all their might from morning to night." Once he tried to be crafty. He
inclosed in a letter to Spalatin a letter intended to deceive: "It
was believed without reason that he was at the Wartburg.

He was living among faithful brethren. It was surprising that no one had
thought of Bohemia;" and then came a thrust--not ill-tempered--at Duke
George of Saxony, his most active enemy.

This letter Spalatin was to lose with well-planned carelessness so that it
should come into the hands of the enemy. But in this kind of diplomacy he
was certainly not logical, for as soon as his leonine nature was aroused
by some piece of news, he would determine impulsively to start for Erfurt
or Wittenberg. It was hard for him to bear the inactivity of his life.
He was treated with the greatest attention by the governor of the castle,
and this attention expressed itself, as was the custom at that
time, primarily in the shape of the best care in the matter of food
and drink. The rich living, the lack of activity, and the fresh mountain
air into which the theologian was transported, had their effect
upon soul and body.

He had already brought from Worms a physical infirmity, now there were added
hours of gloomy melancholy which made him unfit for work.

On two successive days he joined hunting parties, but his heart was with the
few hares and partridges which were driven into the net by the troop
of men and dogs. "Innocent creatures! The papists persecute in the
same way!" To save the life of a little hare he had wrapped him in the
sleeve of his coat. The dogs came and crushed the animal's bones
within the protecting coat. "Thus Satan rages against the souls that I
seek to save." Luther had reason for protecting himself and his
friends from Satan.

He had rejected all the authority of the Church; now he stood terribly
alone; nothing was left to him but his last resort--the Scriptures. The
ancient Church had represented Christianity in continual development.
The faith had been kept in a fluid state by a living tradition which ran
parallel with the Scriptures, by the Councils, by the Papal decrees;
and they had adapted themselves, like a facile stream, to the sharp
corners of national character, to the urgent needs of each age.

It is true that this noble idea of a perpetually living organism had not
been preserved in its original purity.

The best part of its life had vanished; empty cocoons were being preserved.
The old democratic church had been transformed into the irresponsible
sovereignty of a few, had been stained with all the vices of an
unconscientious aristocracy, and was already in striking opposition to
reason and popular feeling. What Luther, however, could put in its
place--the word of the Scriptures--although it gave freedom from a
hopeless mass of soulless excrescences, threatened on the other
hand new dangers.

What was the Bible?

Between the earliest and latest writings of the sacred book lay perhaps
two thousand years. Even the New Testament was not written by Christ
himself, not even entirely by those who had received the sacred doctrine
from his lips. It was compiled after his death. Portions of it
might have been transmitted inexactly.
Everything was written in a foreign tongue, which it was difficult
for the Germans to understand.

Even the keenest penetration was in danger of interpreting falsely unless
the grace of God enlightened the interpreter as it had the apostles.

The ancient Church had settled the matter summarily; in it the
sacrament of holy orders gave such enlightenment. Indeed, the Holy Father
even laid claim to divine authority to decide arbitrarily what
should be right, even when his will was contrary to the Scriptures.

The reformer had nothing but his feeble human knowledge, and prayer.

The first unavoidable step was that he must use his reason, for a
certain critical treatment even of the Holy Bible was necessary. Nor did
Luther fail to see that the books of the New Testament were of varying
worth.

It is well known that he did not highly esteem the Apocalypse, and that
the Epistle of James was regarded by him as "an epistle of straw." But
his objection to particular portions never shook his faith in the whole.
His belief was inflexible that the Holy Scriptures, excepting a
few books, contained a divine revelation in every word and letter.

It was for him the dearest thing on earth, the foundation of all his
learning. He had put himself so in sympathy with it that he lived among its
figures as in the present. The more urgent his feeling of responsibility,
the warmer the passion with which he clung to Scripture; and a
strong instinct for the sensible and the fitting really helped him
over many dangers.

His discrimination had none of the hair-splitting sophistry of the
ancient teachers.

He despised useless subtleties, and, with admirable tact, let go what seemed
to him unessential; but, if he was not to lose his faith or his
reason, he could do nothing, after all, but found the new doctrine
on words and conditions of life fifteen hundred years old, and in
some cases he became the victim of what his adversary Eck called
"the black letter."

Under the urgency of these conditions his method took form. If he had
a question to settle, he collected all the passages of Holy Scripture which
seemed to offer him an answer.

Vincent; I am grateful to him
for the proofs he has given me of steady attachment, and of confidence in
my integrity. I like his manners and the frankness of his temper; but I do
not yet love him, and till I do, no earthly consideration could prevail
upon me to marry him."

"Perfectly satisfactory, my dear Belinda; and yet I cannot be quite at
ease whilst Mr. Vincent is present, and my poor Clarence absent: proximity
is such a dangerous advantage even with the wisest of us. The absent lose
favour so quickly in Cupid's court, as in all other courts; and they are
such victims to false reports and vile slanderers!"

Belinda sighed.

"Thank you for that sigh, my dear," said Lady Delacour. "May I ask, would
you, if you discovered that Mr. Vincent had a Virginia, discard him for
ever from your thoughts?"

"If I discovered that he had deceived and behaved dishonourably to any
woman, I certainly should banish him for ever from my regard."

"With as much ease as you banished Clarence Hervey?"

"With more, perhaps."

"Then you acknowledge--that's all I want--that you liked Clarence better
than you do Vincent?"

"I acknowledge it," said Belinda, colouring up to her temples; "but that
time is entirely past, and I never look back to it."

"But if you were forced to look back to it, my dear,--if Clarence Hervey
proposed for you,--would not you cast a lingering look behind?"

"Let me beg of you, my dear Lady Delacour, as my friend," cried Belinda,
speaking and looking with great earnestness; "let me beg of you to
forbear. Do not use your powerful influence over my heart to make me think
of what I ought not to think, or do what I ought not to do. I have
permitted Mr. Vincent to address me. You cannot imagine that I am so base
as to treat him with duplicity, or that I consider him only as a
_pis-aller_; no--I have treated, I will treat him honourably. He knows
exactly the state of my mind. He shall have a fair trial whether he can
win my love; the moment I am convinced that he cannot succeed, I will tell
him so decidedly: but if ever I should feel for him that affection which
is necessary for my happiness and his, I hope I shall without fear, even
of Lady Delacour's ridicule or displeasure, avow my sentiments, and abide
by my choice."

"My dear, I admire you," said Lady Delacour; "but I am incorrigible; I am
not fit to hear myself convinced. After all, I am impelled by the genius
of imprudence to tell you, that, in spite of Mr. Percival's cure for
_first loves_, I consider love as a distemper that can be had but once."

"As you acknowledge that you are not fit to hear yourself convinced," said
Belinda, "I will not argue this point with you."

"But you will allow," said Lady Delacour, "as it is said or sung in
Cupid's calendar, that--

    'Un peu d'amour, un peu de soin,
    Menent souvent un coeur bien loin;'"

and she broke off the conversation by singing that beautiful French air.


CHAPTER XXV.

LOVE ME, LOVE MY DOG.


The only interest that honest people can take in the fate of rogues is in
their detection and punishment; the reader, then, will be so far
interested in the fate of Mr. Champfort, as to feel some satisfaction at
his being safely lodged in Newgate. The circumstance which led to this
desirable catastrophe was the anonymous letter to Mr. Vincent. From the
first moment that Marriott saw or heard of the letter, she was convinced,
she said, that "Mr. Champfort _was at the bottom of it_." Lady Delacour
was equally convinced that Harriot Freke was the author of the epistle;
and she supported her opinion by observing, that Champfort could neither
write nor spell English. Marriott and her lady were both right. It was a
joint, or rather a triplicate performance. Champfort, in conjunction with
the stupid maid, furnished the intelligence, which Mrs. Freke
manufactured; and when she had put the whole into proper style and form,
Mr. Champfort got her rough draught fairly copied at his leisure, and
transmitted his copy to Mr. Vincent. Now all this was discovered by a very
slight circumstance. The letter was copied by Mr. Champfort upon a sheet
of mourning paper, off which he thought that he had carefully cut the
edges; but one bit of the black edge remained, which did not escape
Marriott's scrutinizing eye. "Lord bless my stars! my lady," she
exclaimed, "this must be the paper--I mean may be the paper--that Mr.
Champfort was cutting a quire of, the very day before Miss Portman left
town. It's a great while ago, but I remember it as well as if it was
yesterday. I saw a parcel of black jags of paper littering the place, and
asked what had been going on? and was told, that it was only Mr. Champfort
who had been cutting some paper; which, to be sure, I concluded my lord
had given to him, having no further occasion for,--as my lord and you, my
lady, were just going out of mourning at that time, as you may remember."

Lord Delacour, when the paper was shown to him, recognized it immediately
by a private mark which he had put on the outside sheet of a division of
letter paper, which, indeed, he had never given to Champfort, but which he
had missed about the time Marriott mentioned. Between the leaves of this
paper his lordship had put, as it was often his practice, some bank notes:
they were notes but of small value, and when he missed them he was easily
persuaded by Champfort that, as he had been much intoxicated the preceding
night, he had thrown them away with some useless papers. He rummaged
through his writing-desk in vain, and then gave up the search. It was true
that on this very occasion he gave Champfort the remainder of some
mourning paper, which he made no scruple, therefore, of producing openly.
Certain that he could swear to his own private mark, and that he could
identify his notes by their numbers, &c., of which he had luckily a
memorandum, Lord Delacour, enraged to find himself both robbed and duped
by a favourite servant, in whom he had placed implicit confidence, was
effectually roused from his natural indolence: he took such active and
successful measures, that Mr. Champfort was committed to gaol, to take his
trial for the robbery. To make peace for himself, he confessed that he had
been instigated by Mrs. Freke to get the anonymous letter written. This
lady was now suffering just punishment for her _frolics_, and Lady
Delacour thought her fallen so much below indignation, that she advised
Belinda to take no manner of notice of her conduct, except by simply
returning the letter to her, with "Miss Portman's, Mr. Vincent's, and Lord
and Lady Delacour's, compliments and thanks to _a sincere friend_, who had
been the means of bringing villany to justice."

So much for Mrs. Freke and Mr. Champfort, who, both together, scarcely
deserve an episode of ten lines.

Now to return to Mr. Vincent. Animated by fresh hope, he pressed his suit
with Belinda with all the ardour of his sanguine temper. Though little
disposed to fear any future evil, especially in the midst of present
felicity, yet he was aware of the danger that might ensue to him from
Clarence Hervey's arrival; he was therefore impatient for the intermediate
day to pass, and it was with heartfelt joy that he saw the carriages at
last at the door, which were actually to convey them to Oakly-park. Mr.
Vincent, who had all the West Indian love for magnificence, had upon this
occasion an extremely handsome equipage. Lady Delacour, though she was
disappointed by Clarence Hervey's not appearing, did not attempt to delay
their departure. She contented herself with leaving a note, to be
delivered to him on his arrival, which, she still flattered herself, would
induce him immediately to go to Harrowgate. The trunks were fastened upon
the carriages, the imperial was carrying out, Marriott was full of a world
of business, Lord Delacour was looking at his horses as usual, Helena was
patting Mr. Vincent's great dog, and Belinda was rallying her lover upon
his taste for "the pomp, pride, and circumstance" of glorious
travelling--when an express arrived from Oakly-park. It was to delay their
journey for a few weeks. Mr. Percival and Lady Anne wrote word, that they
were unexpectedly called from home by--. Lady Delacour did not stay to
read by what, or by whom, she was so much delighted by this reprieve. Mr.
Vincent bore the disappointment as well as could be expected; particularly
when Belinda observed, to comfort him, that "the mind is its own place;"
and that hers, she believed, would be the same at Twickenham as at
Oakly-park. Nor did _she_ give him any reason to regret that she was not
immediately under the influence of his own friends. The dread of being
unduly biassed by Lady Delacour, and the strong desire Belinda felt to act
honourably by Mr. Vincent, to show him that she was not trifling with his
happiness, and that she was incapable of the meanness of retaining a lover
as a _pis-aller_, were motives which acted more powerfully in his favour
than all that even Lady Anne Percival could have looked or said. The
contrast between the openness and decision of his conduct towards her, and
Clarence Hervey's vacillation and mystery; the belief that Mr. Hervey was
or ought to be attached to another woman; the conviction that Mr. Vincent
was strongly attached to her, and that he possessed many of the good
qualities essential to her happiness, operated every day more and more
strongly upon Belinda's mind.

Where was Clarence Hervey all this time? Lady Delacour, alas! could not
divine. She every morning was certain that he would appear that day, and
every night she was forced to acknowledge her mistake. No inquiries--and
she had made all that could be made, by address and perseverance--no
inquiries could clear up the mystery of Virginia and Mrs. Ormond; and her
impatience to see her friend Clarence every hour increased. She was
divided between her confidence in him and her affection for Belinda;
unwilling to give him up, yet afraid to injure her happiness, or to offend
her, by injudicious advice, and improper interference. One thing kept Lady
Delacour for some time in spirits--Miss Portman's assurance that she would
not bind herself by any promise or engagement to Mr. Vincent, even when
decided in his favour; and that she should hold both him and herself
perfectly free till they were actually married. This was according to Lady
Anne and Mr. Percival's principles; and Lady Delacour was never tired of
expressing directly or indirectly her admiration of the prudence and
propriety of their doctrine.

Lady Delacour recollected her own promise, to give her _sincere
congratulations to the victorious knight_; and she endeavoured to treat
Mr. Vincent with impartiality. She was, however, now still less inclined
to like him, from a discovery, which she accidentally made, of his being
still upon good terms with _odious Mrs. Luttridge_. Helena, one morning,
was playing with Mr. Vincent's large dog, of which he was excessively
fond. It was called Juba, after his faithful servant.

"Helena, my dear," said Lady Delacour, "take care! don't trust your hand
in that creature's monstrous mouth."

"I can assure your ladyship," cried Mr. Vincent, "that he is the very
quietest and best creature in the world."

"No doubt," said Belinda, smiling, "since he belongs to you; for you know,
as Mr. Percival tells you, every thing animate or inanimate that is under
your protection, you think must be the best of its kind in the universe."

"But, really, Juba is the best creature in the world," repeated Mr.
Vincent, with great eagerness. "Juba is, without exception, the best
creature in the universe."

"Juba, the dog, or Juba, the man?" said Belinda: "you know, they cannot be
both the best creatures in the universe."

"Well! Juba, the man, is the best man--and Juba, the dog, is the best dog,
in the universe," said Mr. Vincent, laughing, with his usual candour, at
his own foible, when it was pointed out to him. "But, seriously, Lady
Delacour, you need not be in the least afraid to trust Miss Delacour with
this poor fellow; for, do you know, during a whole month that I lent him
to Mrs. Luttridge, at Harrowgate, she used constantly to let him sleep in
the room with her; and now, whenever he sees her, he licks her hand as
gently as if he were a lapdog; and it was but yesterday, when I had him
there, she declared he was more gentle than any lapdog in London."

At the name of Luttridge, Lady Delacour changed countenance, and she
continued silent for some time. Mr. Vincent, attributing her sudden
seriousness to dislike or fear of his dog, took him out of the room.

"My dear Lady Delacour," said Belinda, observing that she still retained
an air of displeasure, "I hope your antipathy to _odious Mrs. Luttridge_
does not extend to every body who visits her."

"Tout au contraire," cried Lady Delacour, starting from her reverie, and
assuming a playful manner: "I have made a general gaol-delivery of all my
old hatreds; and even odious Mrs. Luttridge, though a hardened offender,
must be included in this act of grace: so you need not fear that Mr.
Vincent should fall under my royal displeasure for consorting with this
state criminal. Though I can't sympathize with him, I forgive him, both
for liking that great dog, and that little woman; especially, as I
shrewdly suspect, that he likes the lady's E O table better than the
lady."

"E O table! Good Heavens! you do not imagine Mr. Vincent----"

"Nay, my dear, don't look so terribly alarmed! I assure you, I did not
mean to hint that there was any serious, _improper_ attachment to the E O
table; only a little flirtation, perhaps, to which his passion for you
has, doubtless, put a stop."

"I'll ask him the moment I see him," cried Belinda, "if he is fond of
play: I know he used to play at billiards at Oakly-park, but merely as an
amusement. Games of address are not to be put upon a footing with games of
hazard.'

"A man may, however, contrive to lose a good deal of money at billiards,
as poor Lord Delacour can tell you. But I beseech you, my dear, do not
betray me to Mr. Vincent; ten to one I am mistaken, for his great dog put
me out of humour----"

"But with such a doubt upon my mind, unsatisfied----"

"It shall be satisfied; Lord Delacour shall make inquiries for me. Lord
Delacour _shall_ make inquiries, did I say?--_will_, I should have said.
If Champfort had heard me, to what excellent account he might have turned
that unlucky _shall_. What a nice grammarian a woman had need to be, who
would live well with a husband inferior to her in understanding! With a
superior or an equal, she might use _shall_ and _will_ as inaccurately as
she pleases. Glorious privilege! How I shall envy it you, my dear Belinda!
But how can you ever hope to enjoy it? Where is your superior? Where is
your equal?"

Mr. Vincent, who had by this time seen his dog fed, which was one of his
daily pleasures, returned, and politely assured Lady Delacour that Juba
should not again intrude. To make her peace with Mr. Vincent, and to drive
the E O table from Belinda's thoughts, her ladyship now turned the
conversation from Juba the dog, to Juba the man. She talked of Harriot
Freke's phosphoric Obeah woman, of whom, she said, she had heard an
account from Miss Portman. From thence she went on to the African slave
trade, by way of contrast, and she finished precisely where she intended,
and where Mr. Vincent could have wished, by praising a poem called 'The
dying Negro,' which he had the preceding evening brought to read to
Belinda. This praise was peculiarly agreeable, because he was not
perfectly sure of his own critical judgment, and his knowledge of English
literature was not as extensive as Clarence Hervey's; a circumstance which
Lady Delacour had discovered one morning, when they went to see Pope's
famous villa at Twickenham. Flattered by her present confirmation of his
taste, Mr. Vincent readily complied with a request to read the poem to
Belinda. They were all deeply engaged by the charms of poetry, when they
were suddenly interrupted by the entrance of--Clarence Hervey!

The book dropped from Vincent's hand the instant that he heard his name.
Lady Delacour's eyes sparkled with joy. Belinda's colour rose, but her
countenance maintained an expression of calm dignity. Mr. Hervey, upon his
first entrance, appeared prepared to support an air of philosophic
composure, which forsook him before he had walked across the room. He
seemed overpowered by the kindness with which Lady Delacour received his
congratulations on her recovery--struck by the reserve of Belinda's
manner--but not surprised, or displeased, at the sight of Mr. Vincent. On
the contrary, he desired immediately to be introduced to him, with the air
of a man resolute to cultivate his friendship. Provoked and perplexed,
Lady Delacour, in a tone of mingled reproach and astonishment, exclaimed,
"Though you have not done me the honour, Mr. Hervey, to take any other
notice of my last letter, I am to understand, I presume, by the manner in
which you desire me to introduce you to our friend Mr. Vincent, that it
has been received."

"Received! Good Heavens! have not you had my answer?" cried Clarence
Hervey, with a voice and look of extreme surprise and emotion: "Has not
your ladyship received a packet?"

"I have had no packet--I have had no letter. Mr. Vincent, do me the favour
to ring the bell," cried Lady Delacour, eagerly: "I'll know, this instant,
what's become of it."

"Your ladyship must have thought me--," and, as he spoke, his eye
involuntarily glanced towards Belinda.

"No matter what I thought you," cried Lady Delacour, who forgave him every
thing for this single glance; "if I did you a little injustice, Clarence,
when I was angry, you must forgive me; for, I assure you, I do you a great
deal of justice at other times."

"Did any letter, any packet, come here for me? Inquire, inquire," said
she, impatiently, to the servant who came in. No letter or packet was to
be heard of. It had been directed, Mr. Hervey now remembered, to her
ladyship's house in town. She gave orders to have it immediately sent for;
but scarcely had she given them, when, turning to Mr. Hervey, she laughed
and said, "A very foolish compliment to you and your letter, for you
certainly can speak as well as you can write; nay, better, I think--though
you don't write ill, neither--but you can tell me, in two words, what in
writing would take half a volume. Leave this gentleman and lady to 'the
dying Negro,' and let me hear your two words in Lord Delacour's
dressing-room, if you please," said she, opening the door of an adjoining
apartment. "Lord Delacour will not be jealous if he find you tête-à-tête
with me, I promise you. But you shall not be compelled. You look--"

"I look," said Mr. Hervey, affecting to laugh, "as if I felt the
impossibility of putting half a volume into two words. It is a long story,
and--"

"And I must wait for the packet, whether I will or no--well, be it so,"
said Lady Delacour. Struck with the extreme perturbation into which he was
thrown, she pressed him with no farther raillery, but instantly attempted
to change the conversation to general subjects.

Again she had recourse to 'the dying Negro.' Mr. Vincent, to whom she now
addressed herself, said, "For my part, I neither have, nor pretend to
have, much critical taste; but I admire in this poem the manly, energetic
spirit of virtue which it breathes." From the poem, an easy transition was
made to the author; and Clarence Hervey, exerting himself to join in the
conversation, observed, "that this writer (Mr. Day) was an instance that
genuine eloquence must spring from the heart. Cicero was certainly right,"
continued he, addressing himself to Mr. Vincent, "in his definition of a
great orator, to make it one of the first requisites, that he should be a
good man."

Mr. Vincent coldly replied, "This definition would exclude too many men of
superior talents, to be easily admitted."

"Perhaps the appearance of virtue," said Belinda, "might, on many
occasions, succeed as well as the reality."

"Yes, if the man be as good an actor as Mr. Hervey," said, Lady Delacour,
"and if he suit 'the action to the word'--'the word to the action.'"

Belinda never raised her eyes whilst her ladyship uttered these words; Mr.
Vincent was, or seemed to be, so deeply engaged in looking for something
in the book, which he held in his hand, that he could take no farther part
in the conversation; and a dead silence ensued.

Lady Delacour, who was naturally impatient in the extreme, especially in
the vindication of her friends, could not bear to see, as she did by
Belinda's countenance, that she had not forgotten Marriott's story of
Virginia St. Pierre; and though her ladyship was convinced that the
_packet_ would clear up all mysteries, yet she could not endure that even
in the interim 'poor Clarence' should he unjustly suspected; nor could she
refrain from trying an expedient, which just occurred to her, to satisfy
herself and every body present. She was the first to break silence.

"To do ye justice, my friends, you are all good company this morning. Mr.
Vincent is excusable, because he is in love; and Belinda is excusable,
because--because--Mr. Hervey, pray help me to an excuse for Miss Portman's
stupidity, for I am dreadfully afraid of blundering out the truth. But why
do I ask _you_ to help me? In your present condition, you seem totally
unable to help yourself.--Not a word!--Run over the common-places of
conversation--weather--fashion--scandal--dress--deaths--marriages.--Will
none of these do? Suppose, then, you were to entertain me with other
people's thoughts, since you have none of your own unpacked--Forfeit to
arbitrary power," continued her ladyship, playfully seizing Mr. Vincent's
book. "I have always observed that none submit with so good a grace to
arbitrary power from our sex as your true men of spirit, who would shed
the last drop of their blood to resist it from one of their own.
Inconsistent creatures, the best of you! So read this charming little poem
to us, Mr. Hervey, will you?"

He was going to begin immediately, but Lady Delacour put her hand upon the
book, and stopped him.

"Stay; though I am tyrannical, I will not be treacherous. I warn you,
then, that I have imposed upon you a difficult, a dangerous task. If you
have any 'sins unwhipt of justice,' there are lines which I defy you to
read without faltering--listen to the preface."

Her ladyship began as follows:

"Mr. Day, indeed, retained during all the period of his life, as might be
expected from his character, a strong detestation of female seduction----
Happening to see some verses, written by a young lady, on a recent event
of this nature, which was succeeded by a fatal catastrophe--the unhappy
young woman, who had been a victim to the perfidy of a lover, overpowered
by her sensibility of shame, having died of a broken heart--he expresses
his sympathy with the fair poetess in the following manner."

Lady Delacour paused, and fixed her eyes upon Clarence Hervey. He, with
all the appearance of conscious innocence, received the book, without
hesitation, from her hands, and read aloud the lines, to which she
pointed.

    "Swear by the dread avengers of the tomb,
    By all thy hopes, by death's tremendous gloom,
    That ne'er by thee deceived, the tender maid
    Shall mourn her easy confidence betray'd,
    Nor weep in secret the triumphant art,
    With bitter anguish rankling in her heart;
    So may each blessing, which impartial fate
    Throws on the good, but snatches from the great,
    Adorn thy favour'd course with rays divine,
    And Heaven's best gift, a virtuous love, be thine!"

Mr. Hervey read these lines with so much unaffected, unembarrassed energy,
that Lady Delacour could not help casting a triumphant look at Belinda,
which said or seemed to say--you see I was right in my opinion of
Clarence!

Had Mr. Vincent been left to his own observations, he would have seen the
simple truth; but he was alarmed and deceived by Lady Delacour's imprudent
expressions of joy, and by the significant looks that she gave her friend
Miss Portman, which seemed to be _looks of mutual intelligence_. He
scarcely dared to turn his eyes toward his mistress, or upon him whom he
thought his rival: but he kept them anxiously fixed upon her ladyship, in
whose face, as in a glass, he seemed to study every thing that was
passing.

"Pray, have you ever played at chess, since we saw you last?" said Lady
Delacour to Clarence. "I hope you do not forget that you are _my knight_.
I do not forget it, I assure you--I own you as my knight to all the world,
in public and private--do not I, Belinda?"

A dark cloud overspread Mr. Vincent's brow--he listened not to Belinda's
answer. Seized with a transport of jealousy, he darted at Mr. Hervey a
glance of mingled scorn and rage; and, after saying a few unintelligible
words to Miss Portman and Lady Delacour, he left the room.

Clarence Hervey, who seemed afraid to trust himself longer with Belinda,
withdrew a few minutes afterward.

"My dear Belinda," exclaimed Lady Delacour, the moment that he was out of
the room, "how glad I am he is gone, that I may say all the good I think
of him! In the first place, Clarence Hervey loves you. Never was I so
fully convinced of it as this day. Why had we not that letter of his
sooner? that will explain all to us: but I ask for no explanation, I ask
for no letter, to confirm my opinion, my conviction--that he _loves_ you:
on this point I _cannot_ be mistaken--he fondly loves you."

"He fondly loves her!--Yes, to be sure, I could have told you that news
long ago," cried the dowager Lady Boucher, who was in the room before they
were aware of her entrance; they had both been so eager, the one
listening, and the other speaking.

"Fondly loves her!" repeated the dowager: "yes; and no secret, I promise
you, Lady Delacour:" and then, turning to Belinda, she began a
congratulatory speech, upon the report of her approaching marriage with
Mr. Vincent. Belinda absolutely denied the truth of this report: but the
dowager continued, "I distress you, I see, and it's quite out of rule, I
am sensible, to speak in this sort of way, Miss Portman; but as I'm an old
acquaintance, and an old friend, and an old woman, you'll excuse me. I
can't help saying, I feel quite rejoiced at your meeting with such a
match." Belinda again attempted to declare that she was not going to be
married; but the invincible dowager went on: "Every way eligible, and
every way agreeable. A charming young man, I hear, Lady Delacour: I see I
must only speak to you, or I shall make Miss Portman sink to the centre of
the earth, which I would not wish to do, especially at such a critical
moment as this. A charming young man, I hear, with a noble West Indian
fortune, and a noble spirit, and well connected, and passionately in
love--no wonder. But I have done now, I promise you; I'll ask no
questions: so don't run away, Miss Portman; I'll ask no questions, I
promise you."

To ensure the performance of the promise, Lady Delacour asked what news
there was in the world? This question, she knew, would keep the dowager in
delightful employment. "I live quite out of the world here; but since Lady
Boucher has the charity to come to see me, we shall hear all the 'secrets
worth knowing,' from the best authority."

"Then, the first piece of news I have for you is, that my Lord and my Lady
Delacour are absolutely reconciled; and that they are the happiest couple
that ever lived."

"All very true," replied Lady Delacour.

"True!" repeated Lady Boucher: "why, my dear Lady Delacour, you amaze
me!--Are you in earnest?--Was there ever any thing so provoking?--There
have I been contradicting the report, wherever I went; for I was convinced
that the whole story was a mistake, and a fabrication."

"The history of the reformation might not be exact, but the reformation
itself your ladyship may depend upon, since you hear it from my own lips."

"Well, how amazing! how incredible!--Lord bless me! But your ladyship
certainly is not in earnest? for you look just the same, and speak just in
the same sort of way: I see no alteration, I confess."

"And what alteration, my good Lady Boucher, did you expect to see? Did you
think that, by way of being exemplarily virtuous, I should, like Lady
Q----, let my sentences come out of my mouth only at the rate of a word a
minute?

    'Like--minute--drops--from--off--the--eaves.'

Or did you expect that, in hopes of being a pattern for the rising
generation, I should hold my features in penance, immoveably, thus--like
some of the poor ladies of Antigua, who, after they have blistered their
faces all over, to get a fine complexion, are forced, whilst the new skin
is coming, to sit without speaking, smiling, or moving muscle or feature,
lest an indelible wrinkle should be the consequence?"

Lady Boucher was impatient to have this speech finished, for she had a
piece of news to tell. "Well!" cried she, "there's no knowing what to
believe or disbelieve, one hears so many strange reports; but I have a
piece of news for you, that you may all depend upon. I have one secret
worth knowing, I can tell your ladyship--and one, your ladyship and Miss
Portman, I'm sure, will be rejoiced to hear. Your friend, Clarence Hervey,
is going to be married."

"Married! married!" cried Lady Delacour.

"Ay, ay, your ladyship may look as much astonished as you please, you
cannot be more so than I was when I heard it. Clarence Hervey, Miss
Portman, that was looked upon so completely, you know, as not a marrying
man; and now the last man upon earth that your ladyship would suspect of
marrying in this sort of way!"

"In what sort of way?--My dear Belinda, how can you stand this fire?" said
Lady Delacour, placing a skreen, dexterously, to hide her face from the
dowager's observation.

"Now only guess whom he is going to marry," continued Lady Boucher: "whom
do _you_ guess, Miss Portman?"

"An amiable woman, I should guess, from Mr. Hervey's general character,"
cried Lady Delacour.

"Oh, an amiable woman, I take for granted; every woman is amiable of
course, as the newspapers tell us, when she is going to be married," said
the dowager: "an amiable woman, to be sure; but that means nothing. I have
not had a guess from Miss Portman."

"From general character," Belinda began, in a constrained voice.

"Do not guess from general character, my dear Belinda," interrupted Lady
Delacour; "for there is no judging, in these cases, from general
character, of what people will like or dislike."

"Then I will leave it to your ladyship to guess this time, if you please,"
said Belinda.

"You will neither of you guess till doomsday!" cried the dowager; "I must
tell you. Mr. Hervey's going to marry--in the strangest sort of way!--a
girl that nobody knows--a daughter of a Mr. Hartley. The father can give
her a good fortune, it is true; but one should not have supposed that
fortune was an object with Mr. Hervey, who has such a noble one of his
own. It's really difficult to believe it."

"So difficult, that I find it quite impossible," said Lady Delacour, with
an incredulous smile.

"Depend upon it, my dear Lady Delacour," said the dowager, laying the
convincing weight of her arm upon her ladyship's, "depend upon it, my dear
Lady Delacour, that my information is correct. Guess whom I had it from."

"Willingly. But first let me tell you, that I have seen Mr. Hervey within
this half hour, and I never saw a man look less like a bridegroom."

"Indeed! well, I've heard, too, that he didn't like the match: but what a
pity, when you saw him yourself this morning, that you didn't get all the
particulars out of him. But let him look like what he will, you'll find
that my information is perfectly correct. Guess whom I had it from--from
Mrs. Margaret Delacour: it was at her house that Clarence Hervey first met
Mr. Hartley, who, as I mentioned, is the father of the young lady. There
was a charming scene, and some romantic story, about his finding the girl
in a cottage, and calling her Virginia something or other, but I didn't
clearly understand about that. However, this much is certain, that the
girl, as her father told Mrs. Delacour, is desperately in love with Mr.
Hervey, and they are to be married immediately. Depend upon it, you'll
find my information correct. Good morning to you. Lord bless me! now I
recollect, I once heard that Mr. Hervey was a great admirer of Miss
Portman," said the dowager.

The inquisitive dowager, whose curiosity was put upon a new scent,
immediately fastened her eyes upon Belinda's face; but from that she could
make out nothing. Was it because she had not the best eyes, or because
there was nothing to be seen? To determine this question, she looked
through her glass, to take a clearer view; but Lady Delacour drew off her
attention, by suddenly exclaiming--"My dear Lady Boucher, when you go back
to town, do send me a bottle of concentrated anima of quassia."

"Ah! ah! have I made a convert of you at last?" said the dowager; and,
satisfied with the glory of this conversion, she departed.

"Admire my knowledge of human nature, my dear Belinda," said Lady
Delacour. "Now she will talk, at the next place she goes to, of nothing
but of my faith in anima of quassia; and she will forget to make a
gossiping story out of that most imprudent hint I gave her, about Clarence
Hervey's having been an admirer of yours."

"Do not leave the room, Belinda; I have a thousand things to say to you,
my dear."

"Excuse me, at present, my dear Lady Delacour; I am impatient to write a
few lines to Mr. Vincent. He went away--"

"In a fit of jealousy, and I am glad of it."

"And I am sorry for it," said Belinda; "sorry that he should have so
little confidence in me as to feel jealousy without cause--without
sufficient cause, I should say; for certainly your ladyship gave pain, by
the manner in which you received Mr. Hervey."

"Lord, my dear, you would spoil any man upon earth. You could not act more
foolishly if the man were your husband. Are you privately married to
him?--If you be not--for my sake--for your own--for Mr. Vincent's--do not
write till we see the contents of Clarence Hervey's packet."

"It _can_ make no alteration in what I write," said Belinda.

"Well, my dear, write what you please; but I only hope you will not send
your letter till the packet arrives."

"Pardon me, I shall send it as soon as I possibly can: the 'dear delight
of giving pain' does not suit my taste."

Lady Delacour, as soon as she was left alone, began to reconsider the
dowager's story; notwithstanding her unbelieving smile, it alarmed her,
for she could not refuse to give it some degree of credit, when she learnt
that Mrs. Margaret Delacour was the authority from whom it came. Mrs.
Delacour was a woman of scrupulous veracity, and rigid in her dislike to
gossiping; so that it was scarcely probable a report originating with her,
however it might be altered by the way, should prove to be totally void of
foundation. The name of Virginia coincided with Sir Philip Baddely's
hints, and with Marriott's discoveries: these circumstances considered,
Lady Delacour knew not what opinion to form; and her eagerness to receive
Mr. Hervey's packet every moment increased. She walked up and down the
room--looked at her watch--fancied that it had stopped--held it to her
ear--ran the bell every quarter of an hour, to inquire whether the
messenger was not _yet_ come back. At last, the long-expected packet
arrived. [_Waiter comes to him_.]

Two bottles of this!

PIEPENBRINK. Hold on! You won't find that wine here. I brought my own
kind. You're to drink with me.

BOLZ. But Mr. Piepenbrink----
PIEPENBRINK. No remonstrances!

You drink with me. And when I ask any one to drink with me, Sir, I don't
mean to sip, as women do, but to drink out and fill up. You must make
up your mind to that.

BOLZ. Well, I am content. We as gratefully accept your hospitality as it
is heartily offered. But you must then let me have my revenge. Next
Sunday you are all to be my guests, will you? Say yes, my kind
host!
Punctually at seven, informal supper. I am single, so it will be in a
quiet, respectable hotel.

Give your consent, my dear Madam. Shake hands on it, Mr. Piepenbrink.--You,
too, Mr.

Kleinmichel and Mr.
Fritz!

[_Holds out his hand to each of them_.]
PIEPENBRINK. If my wife is satisfied it will suit me all right.

BOLZ. Done! Agreed! And now the first toast. To the good spirit who brought
us together today, long may he live!

--[_Questioning those about him_.] What's the spirit's name?

FRITZ KLEINMICHEL. Chance.

BOLZ. No, he has a yellow cap.

PIEPENBRINK. Yellow-seal is his name.

BOLZ. Correct! Here's his health! We hope the gentleman may last a long
time, as the cat said to the bird when she bit its head off.

KLEINMICHEL. We wish him long life just as we are putting an end to him.

BOLZ. Well said! Long life!

PIEPENBRINK. Long life!

[_They touch glasses_. PIEPENBRINK _to his wife_.]
It is going to turn out well today, after all.

MRS. PIEPENBRINK. They are very modest nice men.

BOLZ. You can't imagine how glad I am that our good fortune brought us into
such pleasant company. For although in there everything is very prettily
arranged--

PIEPENBRINK. It really is all very creditable.

BOLZ. Very creditable! But yet this political society is not to my
taste.

PIEPENBRINK. Ah, indeed! You don't belong to the party, I suppose, and on
that account do not like it.

BOLZ. It's not that! But when I reflect that all these people have been
invited, not really to heartily enjoy themselves, but in order that they
shall presently give their votes to this or that gentleman, it cools my
ardor.

PIEPENBRINK. Oh, it can hardly be meant just that way. Something could
be said on the other side--don't you think so, comrade?

KLEINMICHEL. I trust no one will be asked to sign any agreement here.

BOLZ. Perhaps not. I have no vote to cast and I am proud to be in a
company where nothing else is thought of but enjoying oneself with
one's neighbor and paying attention to the queens of society--to charming
women! Touch glasses, gentlemen, to the health of the ladies, of
the two who adorn our circle.

[_All touch glasses_.]

PIEPENBRINK. Come here, Lottie, your health is being drunk.

BOLZ. Young lady, allow a stranger to drink to your future prosperity.

PIEPENBRINK. What else do you suppose they are going to do in there?

FRITZ KLEINMICHEL. I hear that at supper there are to be speeches, and
the candidate for election, Colonel Berg, is to be introduced.

PIEPENBRINK. A very estimable gentleman.

KLEINMICHEL.

Yes, it is a good choice the gentlemen on the committee have made.

ADELAIDE, _who has been visible in the rear, now saunters in_.

ADELAIDE. He sitting here? What sort of a company is that?

KÄMPE. People say that Professor Oldendorf has a good chance of
election.

Many are said to be going to vote for him.

PIEPENBRINK. I have nothing to say against him, only to my mind he is
too young.

SENDEN _is seen in the rear, later_ BLUMENBERG _and guests_.

SENDEN. You here, Miss Runeck?

ADELAIDE. I'm amusing myself with watching those queer people. They act
as though the rest of the company were non-existent.

SENDEN.

What do I see?

There sits the _Union_ itself and next to one of the most important
personages of the fête!

[_The music ceases_.]
BOLZ (_who has meanwhile been conversing with_ MRS.

PIEPENBRINK _but has listened attentively--to_ MR. PIEPENBRINK).
There, you see the gentlemen cannot desist from talking politics
after all. (_To_ PIEPENBRINK.) Did you not mention Professor Oldendorf?

PIEPENBRINK. Yes, my jolly Doctor, just casually.

BOLZ. When you talk of him I heartily pray you to say good things about him;
for he is the best, the noblest man I know.

PIEPENBRINK. Indeed? You know him?

KLEINMICHEL. Are you possibly a friend of his!

BOLZ. More than that. Were the professor to say to me today: "Bolz, it will
help me to have you jump into the water," I should have to jump in,
unpleasant as it would be to me just at this moment to drown in
water.

PIEPENBRINK. Oho! That is strong!

BOLZ. In this company I have no right to speak of candidates for election.
But if I did have a member to elect he should be the one--he, first of
all.

PIEPENBRINK. But you are very much prejudiced in the man's favor.

BOLZ. His political views do not concern me here at all. But what do
I demand of a member? That he be a man; that he have a warm heart and a
sure judgment, and that he know unwaveringly and unquestionably
what is good and right; furthermore, that he have the strength to
do what he knows to be right without delay, without hesitation.

PIEPENBRINK. Bravo!

KLEINMICHEL. But the Colonel, too, is said to be that kind of a
man.

BOLZ. Possibly he is, I do not know; but of Oldendorf I know it. I looked
straight into his heart on the occasion of an unpleasant experience I went
through. I was once on the point of burning to powder when he was
kind enough to prevent it. Him I have to thank for sitting here. He saved
my life.

SENDEN. He lies abominably!

[_Starts forward_.]
ADELAIDE (_holding him back_). Be still! I believe there is some truth to
the story.

PIEPENBRINK. Well now, it was very fine of him to save your life; but
that kind of thing often happens.

MRS. PIEPENBRINK. Do tell us about it, Doctor!

BOLZ. The little affair is like a hundred others and would not interest
me at all, had I not been through it myself. Picture to yourself an old
house. I am a student living on the third floor. In the house opposite me
lives a young scholar; we do not know each other. At dead of night I am
awakened by a great noise and a strange crackling under me. If it
were mice, they must have been having a torchlight procession for the room
was brilliantly illuminated. I rush to the window, the bright flame from
the story under me leaps up to where I stand. My window-panes burst about
my head, and a vile cloud of smoke rushes in on me. There being no great
pleasure under the circumstances in leaning out of the window, I rush to
the door and throw it open. The stairs, too, cannot resist the mean impulse
peculiar to old wood, they are all ablaze.

Up three flights of stairs and no exit! I gave myself up for lost. Half
unconscious I hurried back to the window. I heard the cries from
the street, "A man! a man!
This way with the ladder!" A ladder was set up. In an instant it began to
smoke and to burn like tinder. It was dragged away. Then streams of water
from all the engines hissed in the flames beneath me. Distinctly I could
hear each separate stream striking the glowing wall.

A fresh ladder was put up; below there was deathly silence and you can
imagine that I, too, had no desire to make much of a commotion in
my fiery furnace.

"It can't be done," cried the people below. Then a full, rich voice rang
out: "Raise the ladder higher!" Do you know, I felt instantly that this was
the voice of my rescuer. "Hurry!" cried those below. Then a fresh
cloud of vapor penetrated the room. I had had my share of the thick smoke,
and lay prostrate on the ground by the window.

MRS.

PIEPENBRINK. Poor Doctor Bolz!

PIEPENBRINK (_eagerly_). Go on!

[SENDEN _starts forward_.]
ADELAIDE (_holding him back_). Please, let him finish, the story is
true!

BOLZ. Then a man's hand seizes my neck. A rope is wound round me under
the arms, and a strong wrist raises me from the ground. A moment
later I was on the ladder, half dragged, half carried; with shirt aflame,
and unconscious, I reached the pavement.--I awoke in the room of the young
scholar. Save for a few slight burns, I had brought nothing with me
over into the new apartment; all my belongings were burned. The stranger
nursed me and cared for me like a brother. Not until I was able to go out
again did I learn that this scholar was the same man who had paid his
visit to me that night on the ladder.

You see the man has his heart in the right spot, and that's why I wish
him now to become member of Parliament, and why I could do for him
what I would not do for myself; for him I could electioneer, intrigue,
or make fools of honest people.

That man is Professor Oldendorf.

PIEPENBRINK. Well, he's a tremendously fine man! [_Rising_.] Here's
to the health of Professor Oldendorf! [_All rise and touch
glasses_.]
BOLZ (_bowing pleasantly to all--to_ MRS. PIEPENBRINK). I see warm sympathy
shining in your eyes, dear madam, and I thank you for it. Mr.

Piepenbrink, I ask permission to shake your hand; you are a fine fellow.
[_Slaps him on the back and embraces him_.]

Give me your hand, Mr. Kleinmichel! [_Embraces him_.] And you, too, Mr.
Fritz Kleinmichel! May no child of yours ever sit in the fire, but if he
does may there ever be a gallant man at hand to pull him out. Come nearer,
I must embrace you, too.

MRS. PIEPENBRINK (_much moved_). Piepenbrink, we have veal-cutlets
tomorrow. What do you think? [_Converses with him in a low tone_.]
ADELAIDE. His spirits are running away with him!
SENDEN. He is unbearable! I see that you are as indignant as I am.
He snatches away our people; it can no longer be endured.
BOLZ (_who had gone the rounds of table, returning and standing in
front of_ MRS. PIEPENBRINK). It really isn't right to let it stop
here. Mr. Piepenbrink, head of the house, I appeal to you, I ask
your permission--hand or mouth?
ADELAIDE (_horrified, on the right toward the front_). He is actually
kissing her!

PIEPENBRINK. Sail in, old man, courage!
MRS. PIEPENBRINK. Piepenbrink, I no longer know you!
ADELAIDE (_at the moment when_ BOLZ _is about to kiss_ MRS.
PIEPENBRINK _crosses the stage, passing them casually, as it were,
and holds her bouquet between_ BOLZ _and_ MRS. PIEPENBRINK. _In a
low tone, quickly to_ BOLZ). You're going too far! You are being
watched!

[_Passes to the rear on the left, and exit_.]
BOLZ. A fairy interferes!
SENDEN _(who has already been haranguing some of the other guests,
including_ BLUMENBERG, _noisily pushes forward at this moment--to
those at the table_). He is presumptuous; he has thrust himself
in!
PIEPENBRINK (_bringing down his hand on the table and rising_).
Oho! I like that! If I kiss my wife or let her be kissed, that is
nobody's concern whatever! Nobody's! No man and no woman and no
fairy has a right to put a hand before her mouth.
BOLZ. Very true! Splendid! Hear! Hear!
SENDEN. Revered Mr. Piepenbrink, no offense against you! The company
is charmed to see you here. Only to Mr. Bolz we will remark that
his presence is causing scandal. So completely opposed are his
political principles that we must regard his appearing at this fête
as an unwarrantable intrusion!
BOLZ. My political principles opposed? In society I know no other
political principle than this--to drink with nice people and not
to drink with those whom I do not consider nice. With you, Sir, I
have not drunk.
PIEPENBRINK _(striking the table_). That was a good one!
SENDEN _(hotly)_. You thrust yourself in here!
BOLZ _(indignantly)_. Thrust myself in?
PIEPENBRINK. Thrust himself in? Old man, you have an entrance ticket,
I suppose?
BOLZ _(frankly)_. Here is my ticket! It is not you I am showing it
to, but this honorable man from whom you are trying to estrange me
by your attack. Kämpe, give your ticket to Mr. Piepenbrink. He is
the man to judge of all the tickets in the world!
PIEPENBRINK. Here are two tickets just exactly as valid as my
own.
Why, you scattered them right and left like sour grape juice. Oho!
I see quite well how things stand! I'm not one of your crowd, either,
but you want to get me. That's why you came to my house again and
again--because you expected to capture me. Because I am a voter,
that's why you're after me. But because this honorable man is not
a voter he does not count for you at all. We know those smooth
tricks!

SENDEN. But, Mr. Piepenbrink!
PIEPENBRINK _(interrupting him, more angrily)_. Is that any reason
for insulting a peaceful guest? Is it a reason for closing my wife's
mouth? It is an injustice to this man, and he shall stay here as
long as I do. And he shall stay here by my side. And whoever attempts
to attack him will have to deal with me!
BOLZ. Your fist, good sir! You're a faithful comrade! And so
hand-in-hand with you Philip, I defy the Capulet and his entire
clan!
PIEPENBRINK. Philip! Right you are, Conrad, my boy! Come here! They
shall swell with anger till they burst! Here's to Philip and
Conrad!
_[They drink brotherhood.]_
BOLZ. Long live Piepenbrink!
PIEPENBRINK. So, old chum! Shall I tell you what! Since we are
having so good a time I think we'll leave all these people to their
own devices, and all of you come home with me. I'll brew a punch
and we'll sit together as merrily as jackdaws. I'll escort you,
Conrad, and the rest of you go ahead.
SENDEN _(and guests)_. But do listen, _revered_ Mr. Piepenbrink!
PIEPENBRINK. I'll listen to nothing. I'm done with you!
_Enter_ BELLMAUS _and other guests_.
BELLMAUS _(hurrying through the crowd_). Here I am!
BOLZ. My nephew! Gracious Madam, I put him under your protection!
Nephew, you escort Madam Piepenbrink. (MRS. PIEPENBRINK _takes a
firm grip on_ BELLMAUS'S _arm and holds him securely. Polka behind
the scene.)_ Farewell, gentlemen, it's beyond your power to spoil
our good humor. There, the music is striking up! We march off in a
jolly procession, and again I cry in conclusion, Long live
Piepenbrink!
THE DEPARTING ONES. Long live Piepenbrink! _[They march off in
triumph_. FRITZ KLEINMICHEL _and his fiancée,_ KÄMPE _with_
KLEINMICHEL, MRS. PIEPENBRINK _with_ BELLMAUS, _finally_ BOLZ _with_
PIEPENBRINK.] 
_Enter_ COLONEL.

COLONEL. What's going on here?
SENDEN. An outrageous scandal! The _Union_ has kidnapped our two
most important voters!

ACT III 

SCENE I
_The_ COLONEL'S _Summer Parlor_.
_The_ COLONEL _in front, walking rapidly up and down. In the rear_,
ADELAIDE _and_ IDA _arm-in-arm, the latter in great agitation. A
short pause. Then enter_ SENDEN.
SENDEN (_hastily calling through centre door_).
All goes well! 37 votes against 29.

COLONEL.
Who has 37 votes?

SENDEN.

Why you, Colonel, of course!

COLONEL.
Of course! (_Exit_ SENDEN.) The election day is unendurable! In no
fight in my life did I have this feeling of fear. It is a mean
cannon-fever of which any ensign might be ashamed. And it is a long
time since I was an ensign!

[_Stamping his foot_.]
Confound it!

[_Goes to rear of stage_.]
IDA (_coming forward with_ ADELAIDE).Clarence left the house instantly,
mounted his horse, and galloped to the next town for medical assistance.
The poor woman was so far recovered by a skilful apothecary, that she
could, in a few days, articulate so as to be understood. She knew that her
end was approaching fast, and seemed piously resigned to her fate. Mr.
Hervey went constantly to see her; but, though grateful to him for his
humanity, and for the assistance he had procured for her, yet she appeared
agitated when he was in the room, and frequently looked at him and at her
grand-daughter with uncommon anxiety. At last, she whispered something to
the girl, who immediately left the room; and she then beckoned to him to
come closer to the arm-chair, in which she was seated.

"May be, sir," said she, "you thought me out of my right mind the day when
I was lying on that bed, and said to you in such a peremptory tone,
'Begone!'--It was all I could say then; and, in truth, I cannot speak
quite plain yet; nor ever shall again. But God's will be done. I had only
one thing to say to you, sir, about that poor girl of mine--"

Clarence listened to her with eagerness. She paused, and then laying her
cold hand upon his, she looked up earnestly in his face, and continued,
"You are a fine young gentleman, and you look like a good gentleman; but
so did the man who broke the heart of her poor mother. Her mother was
carried off from a boarding-school, when she was scarcely sixteen, by a
wretch, who, after privately marrying her, would not own his marriage,
stayed with her but two years, then went abroad, left his wife and his
infant, and has never been heard of since. My daughter died of a broken
heart. Rachel was then between three and four years old; a beautiful
child. God forgive her father!--God's will be done!"--She paused to subdue
her emotion, and then, with some difficulty, proceeded.

"My only comfort is, I have bred Rachel up in innocence; I never sent her
to a boarding-school. No, no; from the moment of her birth till now, I
have kept her under my own eye. In this cottage she has lived with me,
away from all the world. You are the first man she ever spoke to; the
first man who ever was within these doors. She is innocence itself!--Oh,
sir, as you hope for mercy when you are as I am now, spare the innocence
of that poor child!--Never, never come here after her, when I am dead and
gone! Consider, she is but a child, sir. God never made a better creature.
Oh, promise me you will not be the ruin of my sweet innocent girl, and I
shall die in peace!"

Clarence Hervey was touched. He instantly made the promise required of
him; and, as nothing less would satisfy the poor dying woman, confirmed it
by a solemn oath.

"Now I am easy," said she, "quite easy; and may God bless you for it! In
the village here, there is a Mrs. Smith, a good farmer's wife, who knows
us well; she will see to have me decently buried, and then has promised to
sell all the little I have for my girl, and to take care of her. And
you'll never come near her more?"

"I did not promise that," said Hervey.

The old woman again looked much disturbed.

"Ah, good young gentleman!" said she, "take my advice; it will be best for
you both. If you see her again, you will love her, sir--you can't help it;
and if she sees you--poor thing, how innocently she smiled when she gave
you the rose!--oh, sir, never come near her when I am gone! It is too late
for me now to get her out of your way. This night, I'm sure, will be my
last in this world--oh, promise me you will never come here again!"

"After the oath I have taken," replied Clarence, "that promise would be
unnecessary. Trust to my honour."

"Honour! Oh, that was the word the gentleman said that betrayed her poor
mother, and left her afterwards to die.'--Oh, sir, sir----"

The violent emotion that she felt was too much for her--she fell back
exhausted--never spoke more--and an hour afterwards she expired in the
arms of her grand-daughter. The poor girl could not believe that she had
breathed her last. She made a sign to the surgeon, and to Clarence Hervey,
who stood beside her, to be silent; and listened, fancying that the corpse
would breathe again. Then she kissed her cold lips, and the shrivelled
cheeks, and the eyelids that were closed for ever. She warmed the dead
fingers with her breath--she raised the heavy arm, and when it fell she
perceived there was no hope: she threw herself upon her knees:--"She is
dead!" she exclaimed; "and she has died without giving me her blessing!
She can never bless me again."

They took her into the air, and Clarence Hervey sprinkled water upon her
face. It was a fine night, and the fresh air soon brought her to her
senses. He then said that he would leave her to the care of the surgeon,
and ride to the village in search of that Mrs. Smith who had promised to
be her friend.

"And so _you_ are going away from me, too?" said she; and she burst into
tears. At the sight of these tears Clarence turned away, and hurried from
her. He sent the woman from the village, but returned no more that night.

Her simplicity, sensibility, and, perhaps more than he was aware, her
beauty, had pleased and touched him extremely. The idea of attaching a
perfectly pure, disinterested, unpractised heart, was delightful to his
imagination: the cultivation of her understanding, he thought, would be an
easy and a pleasing task: all difficulties vanished before his sanguine
hopes.

"Sensibility," said he to himself, "is the parent of great talents and
great virtues; and evidently she possesses natural feeling in an uncommon
degree: it shall be developed with skill, patience, and delicacy; and I
will deserve before I claim my reward."

The next day he returned to the cottage, accompanied by an elderly lady, a
Mrs. Ormond; the same lady who afterward, to Marriott's prejudiced eyes,
had appeared _more like a dragon than any thing else_, but who, to this
simple, unsuspicious girl, seemed like what she really was, a truly
good-natured, benevolent woman. She consented, most readily, to put
herself under the protection of Mrs. Ormond, "provided Mrs. Smith would
give her leave." There was no difficulty in persuading Mrs. Smith that it
was for her advantage. Mrs. Smith, who was a plain farmer's wife, told all
that she knew of Rachel's history; but all that she knew was little. She
had heard only hints at odd times from the old woman: these agreed
perfectly with what Mr. Hervey had already heard.

"The _old gentlewoman_," said Mrs. Smith, "as I believe I should call her
by rights, has lived in the forest there, where you found her, these many
a year--she earned her subsistence by tending bees and making
rose-water--she was a good soul, but very particular, especially about her
grand-daughter, which, considering all things, one cannot blame her for.
She often told me she would never put Rachel to a boarding-school, which I
approved, seeing she had no fortune; and it is the ruin of girls, to my
mind, to be bred above their means--as it was of her mother, sir. Then she
would never teach Rachel to write, for fear she should take to scrawling
nonsense of love-letters, as her mother did before her. Now, sir, this I
approved too, for I don't much mind about book-learning myself; and I even
thought it would have been as well if the girl had not learnt to read; but
that she did learn, and was always fond of, and I'm sure it was more
plague than use too to her grandmother, for she was as particular about
the books that the girl was to read as about all the rest. She went
farther than all that, sir, for she never would let the girl speak to a
man--not a man ever entered the doors of the house."

"So she told me."

"And she told you true enough. But there, I thought, she was quite wrong;
for seeing the girl must, some time or other, speak to men, where was the
use of her not learning to do it properly?--Lord, ma'am," continued Mrs.
Smith, addressing herself to Mrs. Ormond, "Lord, ma'am, though it is a sin
to be remembering so much of the particularities of the dead, I must say
there never was an old lady who had more scrupulosities than the deceased.
I verily thought, one day, she would have gone into fits about a picture
of a man, that Rachel lit upon by accident, as if a picture had any sense
to hurt a body! Now if it had been one of your naked pictures, there might
have been some delicacy in her dislike to it; but it was no such thing,
but a very proper picture.

"A picture, ma'am, of a young sea-officer, in his full uniform--quite
proper, ma'am. It was his mother that left it with me, and I had it always
in my own room, and the girl saw it, and was mightily taken with it, being
the first thing of the kind she had ever lit upon, and the old lady comes
in, _and took on_, till I verily thought she was crazed. Lord! I really
could not but laugh; but I checked myself, when the poor old soul's eyes
filled with tears, which made me know she was thinking of her daughter
that was dead. When I thought on the cause of her particularity about
Rachel, I could not laugh any more at her strangeness.

"I promised the good lady that day, in case of her death, to take care of
her grand-daughter; and I thought in my own mind that, in time to come, if
one of my boys should take a fancy to her, I should make no objections,
because she was always a good, modest-behaved girl; and, I'm sure, would
make a good wife, though too delicate for hard country work; but, as it
pleases God to send you, madam, and the good gentleman, to take the charge
of her off my hands, I am content it should be so, and I will sell every
thing here for her honestly, and bring it to you, madam, for poor Rachel."

There was nothing that Rachel was anxious to carry away with her but a
little bullfinch, of which she was very fond. One, and but one,
circumstance about Rachel stopped the current of Clarence Hervey's
imagination, and this, consequently, was excessively disagreeable to
him--her name: the name of Rachel he could hot endure, and he thought it
so unsuited to her, that he could scarcely believe it belonged to her. He
consequently resolved to change it as soon as possible. The first time
that he beheld her, he was struck with the idea that she resembled the
description of Virginia in M. de St. Pierre's celebrated romance; and by
this name he always called her, from the hour that she quitted her
cottage.

Mrs. Ormond, the lady whom he had engaged to take care of his Virginia,
was a widow, the mother of a gentleman who had been his tutor at college.
Her son died, and left her in such narrow circumstances, that she was
obliged to apply to her friends for pecuniary assistance.

Mr. Hervey had been liberal in his contributions; from his childhood he
had known her worth, and her attachment to him was blended with the most
profound respect. She was not a woman of superior abilities, or of much
information; but her excellent temper and gentle disposition won
affection, though she had not any talents to excite admiration. Mr. Hervey
had perfect confidence in her integrity; he believed that she would
exactly comply with his directions, and he thought that her want of
literature and ingenuity could easily be supplied by his own care and
instructions. He took a house for her and his fair pupil at Windsor, and
he exacted a solemn promise that she would neither receive nor pay any
visits. Virginia was thus secluded from all intercourse with the world:
she saw no one but Mrs. Ormond, Clarence Hervey, and Mr. Moreton, an
elderly clergyman, whom Mr. Hervey engaged to attend every Sunday to read
prayers for them at home. Virginia never expressed the slightest curiosity
to see any other persons, or any thing beyond the walls of the garden that
belonged to the house in which she lived; her present retirement was not
greater than that to which she had long been accustomed, and consequently
she did not feel her seclusion from the world as any restraint: with the
circumstances that were altered in her situation she seemed neither to be
dazzled nor charmed; the objects of convenience or luxury that were new to
her she looked upon with indifference; but with any thing that reminded
her of her former way of life, and of her grandmother's cottage, she was
delighted.

One day Mr. Hervey asked her, whether she should like better to return to
that cottage, or to remain where she was? He trembled for her answer. She
innocently replied, "I should like best to go back to the cottage, if you
would go with me--but I would rather stay here with you than live there
without you."

Clarence was touched and flattered by this artless answer, and for some
time he discovered every day fresh indications, as he thought, of virtue
and abilities in his charming pupil. Her indifference to objects of show
and ornament appeared to him an indisputable proof of her magnanimity, and
of the superiority of her unprejudiced mind. What a difference, thought
he, between this child of nature and the frivolous, sophisticated slaves
of art!

To try and prove the simplicity of her taste, and the purity of her mind,
he once presented to her a pair of diamond earrings and a moss rosebud,
and asked her to take whichever she liked best. She eagerly snatched the
rose, crying, "Oh! it puts me in mind of the cottage:--how sweet it
smells!"

She placed it in her bosom, and then, looking at the diamonds, said, "They
are pretty, sparkling things--what are they? of what use are they?" and
she looked with more curiosity and admiration at the manner in which the
earring shut and opened than at the diamonds. Clarence was charmed with
her. When Mrs. Ormond told her that these things were to hang in her ears,
she laughed and said, "How! how can I make them hang?"

"Have you never observed that I wear earrings?" said Mrs. Ormond.

"Ay! but yours are not like these, and--let me look--I never saw how you
fastened them--let me look--oh! you have holes in your ears; but I have
none in mine."

Mrs. Ormond told her that holes could easily be made in her ears, by
running a steel pin through them. She shrunk back, defending her ear with
one hand, and pushing the diamonds from her with the other, exclaiming,
"Oh, no, no!--unless," added she, changing her tone, and turning to
Clarence, "unless you wish it:--if you bid me, I will."

Clarence was scarcely master of himself at this instant; and it was with
the utmost difficulty that he could reply to her with that dispassionate
calmness which became his situation and hers. And yet there was more of
ignorance and timidity, perhaps, than of sound sense or philosophy in
Virginia's indifference to diamonds; she did not consider them as
ornaments that would confer distinction upon their possessor, because she
was ignorant of the value affixed to them by society. Isolated in the
world, she had no excitements to the love of finery, no competition, no
means of comparison, or opportunities of display; diamonds were
consequently as useless to her as guineas were to Robinson Crusoe on his
desert island. It could not justly be said that he was free from avarice,
because he set no value on the gold; or that she was free from vanity,
because she rejected the diamonds. These reflections could not possibly
have escaped a man of Clarence Hervey's abilities, had he not been engaged
in defence of a favourite system of education, or if his pupil had not
been quite so handsome. Virginia's absolute ignorance of the world
frequently gave an air of originality to her most trivial observations,
which made her appear at once interesting and entertaining. All her ideas
of happiness were confined to the life she had led during her childhood;
and as she had accidentally lived in a beautiful situation in the New
Forest, she appeared to have an instinctive taste for the beauties of
nature, and for what we call the picturesque. This taste Mr. Hervey
perceived, whenever he showed her prints and drawings, and it was a fresh
source of delight and self-complacency to him. All that was amiable or
estimable in Virginia had a double charm, from the secret sense of his
penetration, in having discovered and appreciated the treasure. The
affections of this innocent girl had no object but himself and Mrs.
Ormond, and they were strong, perhaps, in proportion as they were
concentrated. The artless familiarity of her manner, and her unsuspicious
confidence, amounting almost to credulity, had irresistible power over Mr.
Hervey's mind; he felt them as appeals at once to his tenderness and his
generosity. He treated her with the utmost delicacy, and his oath was
never absent from his mind: but he felt proudly convinced, that if he had
not been bound by any such solemn engagement, no temptation could have
made him deceive and betray confiding innocence.

Conscious that his views were honourable, anticipating the generous
pleasure he should have in showing his superiority to all mercenary
considerations and worldly prejudices, in the choice of a wife, he
indulged, with a species of pride, his increasing attachment to Virginia;
but he was not sensible of the rapid progress of the passion, till he was
suddenly awakened by a few simple observations of Mrs. Ormond.

"This is Virginia's birthday--she tells me she is seventeen to-day."

"Seventeen!--is she only seventeen?" cried Clarence, with a mixture of
surprise and disappointment in his countenance--"Only seventeen! Why she
is but a child still."

"Quite a child," said Mrs. Ormond; "and so much the better."

"So much the worse, I think," said Clarence. "But are you sure she's only
seventeen?--she must be mistaken--she must be eighteen, at least."

"God forbid!"

"God forbid!--Why, Mrs. Ormond?"

"Because, you know, we have a year more before us."

"That may be a very satisfactory prospect to you," said Mr. Hervey,
smiling.

"And to you, surely," said Mrs. Ormond; "for, I suppose, you would be glad
that your wife should, at least, know the common things that every body
knows."

"As to that," said Clarence, "I should be glad that my wife were ignorant
of what _every body knows_. Nothing is so tiresome to a man of any taste
or abilities as _what every body knows_. I am rather desirous to have a
wife who has an uncommon than a common understanding."

"But you would choose, would not you," said Mrs. Ormond, hesitating with
an air of great deference, "that your wife should know how to write?"

"To be sure," replied Clarence, colouring. "Does not Virginia know how to
write?"

"How should she?" said Mrs. Ormond: "it is no fault of hers, poor
girl--she was never taught. You know it was her grandmother's notion that
she should not learn to write, lest she should write love-letters."

"But _you_ promised that she should be taught to write, and I trusted to
you, Mrs. Ormond."

"She has been here only two months, and all that time, I am sure, I have
done every thing in my power; but when a person comes to be sixteen or
seventeen, it is up-hill work."

"I will teach her myself," cried Clarence: "I am sure she may be taught
any thing."

"By you," said Mrs. Ormond, smiling; "but not by me."

"You have no doubts of her capacity, surely?"

"I am no judge of capacity, especially of the capacity of those I love;
and I am grown very fond of Virginia; she is a charming, open-hearted,
simple, affectionate creature. I rather think it is from indolence that
she does not learn, and not from want of abilities."

"All indolence arises from want of excitement," said Clarence: "if she had
proper motives, she would conquer her indolence."

"Why, I dare say, if I were to tell her that she would never have a letter
from Mr. Hervey till she is able to write an answer, she would learn to
write very expeditiously; but I thought that would not be a proper motive,
because you forbade me to tell her your future views. And indeed it would
be highly imprudent, on your account, as well as hers, to give her any
hint of that kind: because you might change your mind, before she's old
enough for you to think of her seriously, and then you would not know what
to do with her; and after entertaining hopes of becoming your wife, she
would be miserable, I am sure, with that affectionate tender heart of
hers, if you were to leave her. Now that she knows nothing of the matter,
we are all safe, and as we should be."

Though Clarence Hervey did not at this time foresee any great probability
of his changing his mind, yet he felt the good sense and justice of Mrs.
Ormond's suggestions; and he was alarmed to perceive that his mind had
been so intoxicated as to suffer such obvious reflections to escape his
attention. Mrs. Ormond, a woman whom he had been accustomed to consider as
far his inferior in capacity, he now felt was superior to him in prudence,
merely because she was undisturbed by passion. He resolved to master his
own mind: to consider that it was not a mistress, but a wife he wanted in
Virginia; that a wife without capacity or without literature could never
be a companion suited to him, let her beauty or sensibility be ever so
exquisite and captivating. The happiness of his life and of hers were at
stake, and every motive of prudence and delicacy called upon him to
command his affections. He was, however, still sanguine in his
expectations from Virginia's understanding, and from his own power of
developing her capacity. He made several attempts, with the greatest skill
and patience; and his fair pupil, though she did not by any means equal
his hopes, astonished Mrs. Ormond by her comparatively rapid progress.

"I always believed that you could make her any thing you pleased," said
she. "You are a tutor who can work miracles with Virginia."

"I see no miracles," replied Clarence; "I am conscious of no such power. I
should be sorry to possess any such influence, until I am sure that it
would be for our mutual happiness."

Mr. Hervey then conjured Mrs. Ormond, by all her attachment to him and to
her pupil, never to give Virginia the most distant idea that he had any
intentions of making her his wife. She promised to do all that was in her
power to keep this secret, but she could not help observing that it had
already been betrayed, as plainly as looks could speak, by Mr. Hervey
himself. Clarence in vain endeavoured to exculpate himself from this
charge: Mrs. Ormond brought to his recollection so many instances of his
indiscretion, that it was substantiated even in his own judgment, and he
was amazed to find that all the time he had put so much constraint upon
his inclinations, he had, nevertheless, so obviously betrayed them. His
surprise, however, was at this time unmixed with any painful regret; he
did not foresee the probability that he should change his mind; and
notwithstanding Mrs. Ormond assured him that Virginia's sensibility had
increased, he was persuaded that she was mistaken, and that his pupil's
heart and imagination were yet untouched. The innocent openness with which
she expressed her affection for him confirmed him, he said, in his
opinion. To do him justice, Clarence had none of the presumption which too
often characterizes men who have been successful, as it is called, with
the fair sex. His acquaintance with women had increased his persuasion
that it is difficult to excite genuine love in the heart; and with respect
to himself, he was upon this subject astonishingly incredulous. It was
scarcely possible to convince him that he was beloved.

Mrs. Ormond, piqued upon this subject, determined to ascertain more
decisively her pupil's sentiments.

"My dear," said she, one day to Virginia, who was feeding her bullfinch,
"I do believe you are fonder of that bird than of any thing in the
world--fonder of it, I am sure, than of me."

"Oh! you cannot think so," said Virginia, with an affectionate smile.

"Well! fonder than you are of Mr. Hervey, you will allow, at least?"

"No, indeed!" cried she, eagerly: "how can you think me so foolish, so
childish, so ungrateful, as to prefer a little worthless bird to him--"
(the bullfinch began to sing so loud at this instant, that her
enthusiastic speech was stopped). "My pretty bird," said she, as it
perched upon her hand, "I love you very much, but if Mr. Hervey were to
ask it, to wish it, I would open that window, and let you fly; yes, and
bid you fly away far from me for ever. Perhaps he does wish it?--Does
he?--Did he tell you so?" cried she, looking earnestly in Mrs. Ormond's
face, as she moved towards the window.

Mrs. Ormond put her hand upon the sash, as Virginia was going to throw it
up--

"Gently, gently, my love--whither is your imagination carrying you?"

"I thought _something_ by your look," said Virginia, blushing.

"And I thought _something_, my dear Virginia," said Mrs. Ormond, smiling.

"What did you think?--What _could_ you think?"

"I cannot--I mean, I would rather not at present tell you. But do not look
so grave; I will tell you some time or other, if you cannot guess."

Virginia was silent, and stood abashed.

"I am sure, my sweet girl," said Mrs. Ormond, "I do not mean, by any thing
I said, to confuse or blame you. It is very natural that you should be
grateful to Mr. Hervey, and that you should admire, and, _to a certain
degree, love_ him."

Virginia looked up delighted, yet with some hesitation in her manner.

"He is, indeed," said Mrs. Ormond, "one of the first of human beings: such
even _I_ have always thought him; and I am sure I like you the better, my
dear, for your sensibility," said she, kissing Virginia as she spoke;
"only we must take care of it, or this tenderness might go too far."

"How so?" said Virginia, returning her caresses with fondness: "can I love
you and Mr. Hervey too much?"

"Not me."

"Nor him, I'm sure--he is so good, so very good! I am afraid that I do not
love him _enough_," said she, sighing. "I love him enough when he is
absent, but not when he is present. When he is near I feel a sort of fear
mixed with my love. I wish to please him very much, but I should not quite
like that he should show his love for me as you do--as you did just now."

"My dear, it would not be proper that he should; you are quite right not
to wish it."

"Am I? I was afraid that it was a sign of my not liking him as much as I
ought."

"Ah, my poor child! you love him full as much as you ought."

"Do you think so? I am glad of it," said Virginia, with a look of such
confiding simplicity, that her friend was touched to the heart.

"I do think so, my love," said Mrs. Ormond; "and I hope I shall never be
sorry for it, nor you either. But it is not proper that we should say any
more upon this subject now. Where are your drawings? Where is your
writing? My dear, we must get forward with these things as fast as we can.
That is the way to please Mr. Hervey, I can tell you."

Confirmed by this conversation in her own opinion, Mrs. Ormond was
satisfied. From delicacy to her pupil, she did not repeat all that had
passed to Mr. Hervey, resolving to wait till the _proper_ moment. "She is
too young and too childish for him to think of marrying her yet, for a
year or two," thought she; "and it is better to repress her sensibility
till her education is more finished; by that time Mr. Hervey will find out
his mistake."

In the mean time she could not help thinking that he was blind, for he
continued steady in his belief of Virginia's indifference.

To dissipate his own mind, and to give time for the development of hers,
he now, according to his resolution, left his pupil to the care of Mrs.
Ormond, and mixed as much as possible in gay and fashionable company. It
was at this period that he renewed his acquaintance with Lady Delacour,
whom he had seen and admired before he went abroad. He found that his
gallantry, on the famous day of the battle between the turkeys and pigs,
was still remembered with gratitude by her ladyship; she received him with
marked courtesy, and he soon became a constant visitor at her house. Her
wit entertained, her eloquence charmed him, and he followed, admired, and
_gallanted_ her, without scruple, for he considered her merely as a
coquette, who preferred the glory of conquest to the security of
reputation. With such a woman he thought he could amuse himself without
danger, and he every where appeared the foremost in the public train of
her ladyship's admirers. He soon discovered, however, that her talents
were far superior to what are necessary for playing the part of a fine
lady; his visits became more and more agreeable to him, and he was glad to
feel, that, by dividing his attention, his passion for Virginia insensibly
diminished, or, as he said to himself, became more reasonable. In
conversing with Lady Delacour, his faculties were always called into full
play; in talking to Virginia, his understanding was passive: he perceived
that a large proportion of his intellectual powers, and of his knowledge,
was absolutely useless to him in her company; and this did not raise her
either in his love or esteem. Her simplicity and naïvete, however,
sometimes relieved him, after he had been fatigued by the extravagant
gaiety and _glare_ of her ladyship's manners; and he reflected that the
coquetry which amused him in an acquaintance would be odious in a wife:
the perfect innocence of Virginia promised security to his domestic
happiness, and he did not change his views, though he was less eager for
the period of their accomplishment. "I cannot expect every thing that is
desirable," said he to himself: "a more brilliant character than
Virginia's would excite my admiration, but could not command my
confidence."

It was whilst his mind was in this situation that he became acquainted
with Belinda. At first, the idea of her having been I educated by the
match-making Mrs. Stanhope prejudiced him against her; but as he had
opportunities of observing her conduct, this prepossession was conquered,
and when she had secured his esteem, he could no longer resist her power
over his heart. In comparison with Belinda, Virginia appeared to him but
an insipid, though innocent child: the one he found was his equal, the
other his inferior; the one he saw could be a companion, a friend to him
for life, the other would merely be his pupil, or his plaything. Belinda
had cultivated taste, an active understanding, a knowledge of literature,
the power and the habit of conducting herself; Virginia was ignorant and
indolent, she had few ideas, and no wish to extend her knowledge; she was
so entirely unacquainted with the world, that it was absolutely impossible
she could conduct herself with that discretion, which must be the combined
result of reasoning and experience. Mr. Hervey had felt gratuitous
confidence in Virginia's innocence; but on Belinda's prudence, which he
had opportunities of seeing tried, he gradually learned to feel a
different and a higher species of reliance, which it is neither in our
power to bestow nor to refuse. The virtues of Virginia sprang from
sentiment; those of Belinda from reason.

Clarence, whilst he made all these comparisons, became every day more
wisely and more fondly attached to Belinda; and at length he became
desirous to change the nature of his connexion with Virginia, and to
appear to her only in the light of a friend or a benefactor. He thought of
giving her a suitable fortune and of leaving her under the care of Mrs.
Ormond, till some method of establishing her in the world should occur.
Unfortunately, just at the time when Mr. Hervey formed this plan, and
before it was communicated to Mrs. Ormond, difficulties arose which
prevented him from putting it into execution.

Whilst he had been engaged in the gay world at Lady Delacour's, his pupil
had necessarily been left much to the management of Mrs. Ormond. This
lady, with the best possible intentions, had not that reach of mind and
variety of resource necessary to direct the exquisite sensibility and
ardent imagination of Virginia: the solitude in which she lived added to
the difficulty of the task. Without companions to interest her social
affections, without real objects to occupy her senses and understanding,
Virginia's mind was either perfectly indolent, or _exalted_ by romantic
views, and visionary ideas of happiness. As she had never seen any thing
of society, all her notions were drawn from books; the severe restrictions
which her grandmother had early laid upon the choice of these seemed to
have awakened her curiosity, and to have increased her appetite for
books--it was insatiable. Reading, indeed, was now almost her only
pleasure; for Mrs. Ormond's conversation was seldom entertaining, and
Virginia had no longer those occupations which filled a portion of her day
at the cottage.

Mr. Hervey had cautioned Mrs. Ormond against putting _common_ novels into
her hands, but he made no objection to romances: these, he thought,
breathed a spirit favourable to female virtue, exalted the respect for
chastity, and inspired enthusiastic admiration of honour, generosity,
truth, and all the noble qualities which dignify human nature. Virginia
devoured these romances with the greatest eagerness; and Mrs. Ormond, who
found her a prey to ennui when her fancy was not amused, indulged her
taste; yet she strongly suspected that they contributed to increase her
passion for the only man who could, in her imagination, represent a hero.

One night Virginia found, in Mrs. Ormond's room, a volume of St. Pierre's
Paul and Virginia. She knew that her own name had been taken from this
romance; Mr. Hervey had her picture painted in this character; and these
circumstances strongly excited her curiosity to read the book. Mrs. Ormond
could not refuse to let her have it; for, though it was not an ancient
romance, it did not exactly come under the description of a common novel,
and Mr. Hervey was not at hand to give his advice. Virginia sat down
instantly to her volume, and never stirred from the spot till she had
nearly finished it.

"What is it that strikes your fancy so much? What are you considering so
deeply, my love?" said Mrs. Ormond, observing, that she seemed lost in
thought. "Let us see, my dear," continued she, offering to take the hook,
which hung from her hand. Virginia started from her reverie, but held the
volume fast.--"Will not you let me read along with you?" said Mrs. Ormond.
"Won't you let me share your pleasure?"

"It was not pleasure that I felt, I believe," said Virginia. "I would
rather you should not see just that particular part that I was reading;
and yet, if you desire it," added she, resigning the book reluctantly.

"What can make you so much afraid of me, my sweet girl?"

"I am not afraid of you--but--of myself," said Virginia, sighing.

Mrs. Ormond read the following passage:

 "She thought of Paul's friendship, more pure than the waters
 of the fountain, stronger than the united palms, and sweeter than
 the perfume of flowers; and these images, in night and in
 solitude, gave double force to the passion which she nourished
 in her heart. She suddenly left the dangerous shades, and
 went to her mother, to seek protection against herself. She
 wished to reveal her distress to her; she pressed her hands, and
 the name of Paul was on her lips; but the oppression of her
 heart took away all utterance, and, laying her head upon her
 mother's bosom, she only wept."

"And am I not a mother to you, my beloved Virginia?" said Mrs. Ormond.
"Though I cannot express my affection in such charming language as this,
yet, believe me, no mother was ever fonder of a child."

Virginia threw her arms round Mrs. Ormond, and laid her head upon her
friend's bosom, as if she wished to realize the illusion, and to be the
Virginia of whom she had been reading.

"I know all you think, and all you feel: I know," whispered Mrs. Ormond,
"the name that is on _your_ lips."

"No, indeed, you do not; you cannot," cried Virginia, suddenly raising her
head, and looking up in Mrs. Ormond's face, with surprise and timidity:
"how could you possibly know _all_ my thoughts and feelings? I never told
them to you; for, indeed, I have only confused ideas floating in my
imagination from the books I have been reading. I do not distinctly know
my own feelings."

"This is all very natural, and a proof of your perfect innocence and
simplicity, my child. But why did the passage you were reading just now
strike you so much?"

"I was only considering," said Virginia, "whether it was the description
of--love."

"And your heart told you that it was?"

"I don't know," said she, sighing. "But of this I am certain, that I had
not the name, which you were thinking of, upon my lips."

Ah! thought Mrs. Ormond, she has not forgotten how I checked her
sensibility some time ago. Poor girl! she is become afraid of me, and I
have taught her to dissemble; but she betrays herself every moment.

"My dear," said Mrs. Ormond, "you need not fear me--I cannot blame you: in
your situation, it is impossible that you could help loving Mr. Hervey."

"Is it?"

"Yes; quite impossible. So do not blame yourself for it."

"No, I do not blame myself for that. I only blame myself for not loving
him _enough_, as I told you once before."

"Yes, my dear; and the oftener you tell me so, the more I am convinced of
your affection. It is one of the strongest symptoms of love, that we are
unconscious of its extent. We fancy that we can never do too much for the
beloved object."

"That is exactly what I feel about Mr. Hervey."

"That we can never love him enough."

"Ah! that is precisely what I feel for Mr. Hervey."

"And what you ought--I mean, what it is natural you should feel; and what
he will himself, I hope, indeed I dare say, some time or other wish, and
be glad that you should feel."

"Some time or other! Does not he wish it now?"

"I--he--my dear, what a question is that? And how shall I answer it? We
must judge of what he feels by what he expresses: when he expresses love
for you, it will then be the time to show yours for him."

"He has always expressed love for me, I think," said Virginia--"always,
till lately," continued she; "but lately he has been away so much, and
when he comes home, he does not look so well pleased; so that I was
afraid he was angry with me, and that he thought me ungrateful."

"Oh, my love, do not torment yourself with these vain fears! And yet I
know that you cannot help it."

"Since you are so kind, so very kind to me," said Virginia, "I will tell
you all my fears and doubts. But it is late--there! the clock struck one.
I will not keep you up."

"I am not at all sleepy," said the indulgent Mrs. Ormond.

"Nor I," said Virginia,

"Now, then," said Mrs. Ormond, "for these doubts and fears."

"I was afraid that, perhaps, Mr. Hervey would be angry if he knew that I
thought of any thing in the world but him."

"Of what else do you think?--Of nothing else from morning till night, that
I can see."

"Ah, then you do not see into my mind. In the daytime often think of those
heroes, those charming heroes, that I read of in the books you have given
me."

"To be sure you do."

"And is not that wrong? Would not Mr. Hervey be displeased if he knew it?"

"Why should he?"

"Because they are not quite like him. I love some of them better than I do
him, and he might think that _ungrateful_."

How naturally love inspires the idea of jealousy, thought Mrs. Ormond. "My
dear," said she, "you carry your ideas of delicacy and gratitude to an
extreme; but it is very natural you should: however, you need not be
afraid; Mr. Hervey cannot be jealous of those charming heroes, that never
existed, though they are not quite like him."

"I am very glad that he would not think me ungrateful--but if he knew that
I dream of them sometimes?"

"He would think you dreamed, as all people do, of what they think of in
the daytime."

"And he would not be angry? I am very glad of it. But I once saw a
picture--"

"I know you did--well," said Mrs. Ormond, "and your grandmother was
frightened because it was the picture of a man--hey? If she was not your
grandmother, I should say that she was a simpleton. I assure you, Mr.
Hervey is not like her, if that is what you mean to ask. He would not be
angry at your having seen fifty pictures."

"I am glad of it--but I see it very often in my dreams."

"Well, if you had seen more pictures, you would not see this so often. It
was the first you ever saw, and very naturally you remember it, Mr. Hervey
would not be angry at that," said Mrs. Ormond, laughing.

"But sometimes, in my dreams, it speaks to me."

"And what does it say?"

"The same sort of things that those heroes I read of say to their
mistresses."

"And do you never, in your dreams, hear Mr. Hervey say this sort of
things?"

"No."

"And do you never see Mr. Hervey in these dreams?"

"Sometimes; but he does not speak to me; he does not look at me with the
same sort of tenderness, and he does not throw himself at my feet."

"No; because he has never done all this in reality."

"No; and I wonder how I come to dream of such things."

"So do I; but you have read and thought of them, it is plain. Now go to
sleep, there's my good girl; that is the best thing you can do at
present--go to sleep."

It was not long after this conversation that Sir Philip Baddely and Mr.
Rochfort scaled the garden wall, to obtain a sight of Clarence Hervey's
mistress. Virginia was astonished, terrified, and disgusted, by their
appearance; they seemed to her a species of animals for which she had no
name, and of which she had no prototype in her imagination. That they were
men she saw; but they were clearly not _Clarence Herveys_: they bore still
less resemblance to the courteous knights of chivalry. Their language was
so different from any of the books she had read, and any of the
conversations she had heard, that they were scarcely intelligible. After
they had forced themselves into her presence, they did not scruple to
address her in the most unceremonious manner. Amongst other rude things,
they said, "Damme, my pretty dear, you cannot love the man that keeps you
prisoner in this manner, hey? Damme, you'd better come and live with one
of us. You can't love this tyrant of a fellow."

"He is not a tyrant--I _do_ love him as much as I detest you," cried
Virginia, shrinking from him with looks of horror.

"Damme! good actress! Put her on the stage when he is tired of her. So you
won't come with us?--Good bye, till we see you again. You're right, my
girl, to be upon your good behaviour; may be you may get him to marry you,
child!"

Virginia, upon hearing this speech, turned from the man who insulted her
with a degree of haughty indignation, of which her gentle nature had never
before appeared capable.

Mrs. Ormond hoped, that after the alarm was over, the circumstance would
pass away from her pupil's mind; but on the contrary, it left the most
forcible impression. Virginia became silent and melancholy, and whole
hours were spent in reverie. Mrs. Ormond imagined, that notwithstanding
Virginia's entire ignorance of the world, she had acquired from books
sufficient knowledge to be alarmed at the idea of being taken for Clarence
Hervey's mistress. She touched upon this subject with much delicacy, and
the answers that she received confirmed her opinion. Virginia had been
inspired by romances with the most exalted notions of female delicacy and
honour! but from her perfect ignorance, these were rather vague ideas than
principles of conduct.

"We shall see Mr. Hervey to-morrow; he has written me word that he will
come from town, and spend the day with us."

"I shall be ashamed to see him after what has passed," said Virginia.

"You have no cause for shame, my dear; Mr. Hervey will try to discover the
persons who insulted you, and he will punish them. They will never return
here; you need not fear that. He is willing and able to protect you."

"Yes of that I am sure. But what did that strange man mean, when he
said--"

"What, my dear?"

"That, perhaps, Mr. Hervey would marry me."

Virginia pronounced these words with difficulty. Mrs. Ormond was silent,
for she was much embarrassed. Virginia having conquered her first
difficulty, seemed resolute to obtain an answer.

"You do not speak to me! Will you not tell me, dear Mrs. Ormond," said
she, hanging upon her fondly, "what did he mean?"

"What he said, I suppose."

"But he said, that if I behaved well, I might get Mr. Hervey to marry me.
What did he mean by that?" said Virginia, in an accent of offended pride.

"He spoke very rudely and improperly; but it is not worth while to think
of what he said, or what he meant."

"But, dear Mrs. Ormond, do not go away from me now: I never so much wished
to speak to you in my whole life, and you turn away from me."

"Well, my love, well, what would you say?"

"Tell me one thing, only one thing, and you will set my heart at ease.
Does Mr. Hervey _wish_ me to be his wife?"

"I cannot tell you that, my dearest Virginia. Time will show us. Perhaps
his heart has not yet decided."

"I wish it would decide," said Virginia, sighing deeply; "and I wish that
strange man had not told me any thing about the matter; it has made me
very unhappy."

She covered her eyes with her hand, but the tears trickled between her
fingers, and rolled fast down her arm. Mrs. Ormond, quite overcome by the
sight of her distress, was no longer able to keep the secret with which
she had been entrusted by Clarence Hervey. And after all, thought she,
Virginia will hear it from himself soon. I shall only spare her some
unnecessary pain; it is cruel to see her thus, and to keep her in
suspense. Besides, her weakness might be her ruin, in his opinion, if it
were to extinguish all her energy, and deprive her of the very power of
pleasing. How wan she looks, and how heavy are those sleepless eyes! She
is not, indeed, in a condition to meet him, when he comes to us to-morrow:
if she had some hopes, she would revive and appear with her natural ease
and grace.

"My sweet child," said Mrs. Ormond, "I cannot bear to see you so
melancholy; consider, Mr. Hervey will be with us to-morrow, and it will
give him a great deal of pain to see you so."

"Will it? Then I will try to be very gay."

Mrs. Ormond was so delighted to see Virginia smile, that she could not
forbear adding, "The strange man was not wrong in every thing he said; you
_will_, one of these days, be Mr. Hervey's wife."

"That, I am sure," said Virginia, bursting again into tears, "that, I am
sure, I do not wish, unless _he_ does."

"He does, he does, my dear--do not let this delicacy of yours, which has
been wound up too high, make you miserable. He thought of you, he loved
you long and long ago."

"He is very good, too good," said Virginia, sobbing.

"Nay, what is more--for I can keep nothing from you--he has been educating
you all this time on purpose for his wife, and he only waits till your
education is finished, and till he is sure that you feel no repugnance for
him."

"I should be very ungrateful if I felt any repugnance for him," said
Virginia; "I feel none."

"Oh, that you need not assure me," said Mrs. Ormond.

"But I do not wish to marry him--I do not wish to marry."

"You are a modest girl to say so; and this modesty will make you ten times
more amiable, especially in Mr. Hervey's eyes. Heaven forbid that I should
lessen it!"

The next morning Virginia, who always slept in the same room with Mrs.
Ormond, wakened her, by crying out in her sleep, with a voice of terror,
"Oh, save him!--save Mr. Hervey!--Mr. Hervey!--forgive me! forgive me!"

Mrs. Ormond drew back the curtain, and saw Virginia lying fast asleep; her
beautiful face convulsed with agony.

"He's dead!--Mr. Hervey!" cried she, in a voice of exquisite distress:
then starting up, and stretching out her arms, she uttered a piercing cry,
and awoke.

"My love, you have been dreaming frightfully," said Mrs. Ormond.

"Is it all a dream?" cried Virginia, looking round fearfully.

"All a dream, my dear!" said Mrs. Ormond, taking her hand.

"I am very, very glad of it!--Let me breathe. It was, indeed, a frightful
dream!"

"Your hand still trembles," said Mrs. Ormond; "let me put back this hair
from your poor face, and you will grow cool, and forget this foolish
dream."

"No; I must tell it you. I ought to tell it you. But it was all so
confused, I can recollect only some parts of it. First, I remember that I
thought I was not myself, but the Virginia that we were reading of the
other night; and I was somewhere in the Isle of France. I thought the
place was something like the forest where my grandmother's cottage used to
be, only there were high mountains and rocks, and cocoa-trees and
plantains."

"Such as you saw in the prints of that book?"

"Yes; only beautiful, beautiful beyond description! And it was moonlight,
brighter and clearer than any moonlight I ever before had seen; and the
air was fresh yet perfumed; and I was seated under the shade of a
plane-tree, beside Virginia's fountain."

"Just as you are in your picture?"

"Yes: but Paul was seated beside me."

"Paul!" said Mrs. Ormond, smiling: "that is Mr. Hervey."

"No; not Mr. Hervey's face, though it spoke with his voice--this is what I
thought that I must tell you. It was another figure: it seemed a real
living person: it knelt at my feet, and spoke to me so kindly, so
tenderly; and just as it was going to kiss my hand, Mr. Hervey appeared,
and I started terribly, for I was afraid he would be displeased, and that
he would think me _ungrateful_; and he was displeased, and he called me
ungrateful Virginia, and frowned, and then I gave him my hand, and then
every thing changed, I do not know how suddenly, and I was in a place like
the great print of the cathedral, which Mr. Hervey showed me; and there
were crowds of people--I was almost stifled. _You_ pulled me on, as I
remember; and Mr. Moreton was there, standing upon some steps by what you
called the altar; and then we knelt down before him, and Mr. Hervey was
putting a ring on my finger; but there came suddenly from the crowd that
strange man, who was here the other day, and he dragged me along with him,
I don't know how or where, swiftly down precipices, whilst I struggled,
and at last fell. Then all changed again, and I was in a magnificent
field, covered with cloth of gold, and there were beautiful ladies seated
under canopies; and I thought it was a tournament, such as I have read of,
only more splendid; and two knights, clad in complete armour, and mounted
on fiery steeds, were engaged in single combat; and they fought furiously,
and I thought they were fighting for me. One of the knights wore black
plumes in his helmet, and the other white; and, as he was passing by me,
the vizor of the knight of the white plumes was raised, and I saw it
was--"

"Clarence Hervey?" said Mrs. Ormond.

"No; still the same figure that knelt to me; and I wished him to be
victorious. And he was victorious. And he unhorsed his adversary, and
stood over him with his drawn sword; and then I saw that the knight in the
black plumes was Mr. Hervey, and I ran to save him, but I could not. I saw
him weltering in his blood, and I heard him say, 'Perfidious, _ungrateful_
Virginia! you are the cause of my death!'--and I screamed, I believe, and
that awakened me."

"Well, it is only a dream, my love," said Mrs. Ormond; "Mr. Hervey is
safe: get up and dress yourself, and you will soon see him."

"But was it not wrong and _ungrateful_ to wish that the knight in the
white plumes should be victorious?"

"Your poor little head is full of nothing but these romances, and love for
Mr. Hervey. It is your love for him that makes you fear that he will be
jealous. But he is not so simple as you are. He will forgive you for
wishing that the knight in the white plumes should be victorious,
especially as you did not know that the other knight was Mr. Hervey. Come,
my love, dress yourself, and think no more of these foolish dreams, and
all will go well."


CHAPTER XXVII

A DISCOVERY.


Instead of the open, childish, affectionate familiarity with which
Virginia used to meet Clarence Hervey, she now received him with reserved,
timid embarrassment. Struck by this change in her manner, and alarmed by
the dejection of her spirits, which she vainly strove to conceal, he
eagerly inquired, from Mrs. Ormond, into the cause of this alteration.

Mrs. Ormond's answers, and her account of all that had passed during his
absence, increased his anxiety. His indignation was roused by the insult
which Virginia had been offered by the strangers who had scaled the
garden-wall. All his endeavours to discover who they were proved
ineffectual; but, lest they should venture to repeat their visit, he
removed her from Windsor, and took her directly to Twickenham. Here he
stayed with her and Mrs. Ormond some days, to determine, by his own
observation, how far the representations that had been made to him were
just. Till this period he had been persuaded that Virginia's regard for
him was rather that of gratitude than of love; and with this opinion, he
thought that he had no reason seriously to reproach himself for the
imprudence with which he had betrayed the partiality that he felt for her
in the beginning of their acquaintance. He flattered himself that even
should she have discerned his intentions, her heart would not repine at
any alteration in his sentiments; and if her happiness were uninjured, his
reason told him that he was not in honour bound to constancy. The case was
now altered. Unwilling as he was to believe, he could no longer doubt.
Virginia could neither meet his eyes nor speak to him without a degree of
embarrassment which she had not sufficient art to conceal: she trembled
whenever he came near her, and if he looked grave, or forbore to take
notice of her, she would burst into tears. At other times, contrary to the
natural indolence of her character, she would exert herself to please him
with surprising energy: she learned every thing that he wished; her
capacity seemed suddenly to unfold. For an instant, Clarence flattered
himself that both her fits of melancholy and of exertion might arise from
a secret desire to see something of that world from which she had been
secluded. One day he touched upon this subject, to see what effect it
would produce; but, contrary to his expectations, she seemed to have no
desire to quit her retirement: she did not wish, she said, for amusements
such as he described; she did not wish to go into the world.

It was during the time of his passion for her that Clarence had her
picture painted in the character of St. Pierre's Virginia. It happened to
be in the room in which they were now conversing, and when she spoke of
loving a life of retirement, Clarence accidentally cast his eyes upon the
picture, and then upon Virginia. She turned away--sighed deeply; and when,
in a tone of kindness, he asked her if she were unhappy, she hid her face
in her hands, and made no answer.

Mr. Hervey could not be insensible to her distress or to her delicacy. He
saw her bloom fading daily, her spirits depressed, her existence a burden
to her, and he feared that his own imprudence had been the cause of all
this misery.

"I have taken her out of a situation in which she might have spent her
life usefully and happily; I have excited false hopes in her mind, and now
she is a wretched and useless being. I have won her affections; her
happiness depends totally upon me; and can I forsake her? Mrs. Ormond
says, that she is convinced Virginia would not survive the day of my
marriage with another. I am not disposed to believe that girls often die
or destroy themselves for love; nor am I a coxcomb enough to suppose that
love for me must be extraordinarily desperate. But here's a girl, who is
of a melancholy temperament, who has a great deal of natural sensibility,
whose affections have all been concentrated, who has lived in solitude,
whose imagination has dwelt, for a length of time, upon a certain set of
ideas, who has but one object of hope; in such a mind, and in such
circumstances, passion may rise to a paroxysm of despair."

Pity, generosity, and honour, made him resolve not to abandon this
unfortunate girl; though he felt that every time he saw Virginia, his love
for Belinda increased. It was this struggle in his mind betwixt love and
honour which produced all the apparent inconsistency and irresolution that
puzzled Lady Delacour and perplexed Belinda. The lock of beautiful hair,
which so unluckily fell at Belinda's feet, was Virginia's; he was going to
take it to the painter, who had made the hair in her picture considerably
too dark. How this picture got into the exhibition must now be explained.

Whilst Mr. Hervey's mind was in that painful state of doubt which has just
been described, a circumstance happened that promised him some relief from
his embarrassment. Mr. Moreton, the clergyman who used to read prayers
every Sunday for Mrs. Ormond and Virginia, did not come one Sunday at the
usual time: the next morning he called on Mr. Hervey, with a face that
showed he had something of importance to communicate.

"I have hopes, my dear Clarence," said he, "that I have found out your
Virginia's father. Yesterday, a musical friend of mine persuaded me to go
with him to hear the singing at the Asylum for children in St. George's
Fields. There is a girl there who has indeed a charming voice--but that's
not to the present purpose. After church was over, I happened to be one of
the last that stayed; for I am too old to love bustling through a crowd.
Perhaps, as you are impatient, you think that's nothing to the purpose;
and yet it is, as you shall hear. When the congregation had almost left
the church, I observed that the children of the Asylum remained in their
places, by order of one of the governors; and a middle-aged gentleman went
round amongst the elder girls, examined their countenances with care, and
inquired with much anxiety their ages, and every particular relative to
their parents. The stranger held a miniature picture in his hand, with
which he compared each face. I was not near enough to him," continued Mr.
Moreton, "to see the miniature distinctly: but from the glimpse I caught
of it, I thought that it was like your Virginia, though it seemed to be
the portrait of a child but four or five years old. I understand that this
gentleman will be at the Asylum again next Sunday; I heard him express a
wish to see some of the girls who happened last Sunday to be absent."

"Do you know this gentleman's name, or where he lives?" said Clarence.

"I know nothing of him," replied Mr. Moreton, "except that he seems fond
of painting; for he told one of the directors, who was looking at his
miniature, that it was remarkably well painted, and that, in his happier
days, he had been something of a judge of the art."

Impatient to see the stranger, who, he did not doubt, was Virginia's
father, Clarence Hervey went the next Sunday to the Asylum; but no such
gentleman appeared, and all that he could learn respecting him was, that
he had applied to one of the directors of the institution for leave to see
and question the girls, in hopes of finding amongst them his lost
daughter; that in the course of the week, he had seen all those who were
not at the church the last Sunday. None of the directors knew any thing
more concerning him; but the porter remarked, that he came in a very
handsome coach, and one of the girls of the Asylum said that he gave her
half a guinea, because she was a little like _his poor Rachel, who was
dead_; but that he had added, with a sigh, "This cannot be my daughter,
for she is only thirteen, and my girl, if she be now living, must be
nearly eighteen."

The age, the name, every circumstance confirmed Mr. Hervey in the belief
that this stranger was the father of Virginia, and he was disappointed and
provoked by having missed the opportunity of seeing or speaking to him. It
occurred to Clarence that the gentleman might probably visit the Foundling
Hospital, and thither he immediately went, to make inquiries. He was told
that a person, such as he described, had been there about a month before,
and had compared the face of the oldest girls with a little picture of a
child: that he gave money to several of the girls, but that they did not
know his name, or any thing more about him.

Mr. Hervey now inserted proper advertisements in all the papers, but
without producing any effect. At last, recollecting what Mr. Moreton told
him of the stranger's love of pictures, he determined to put his portrait
of Virginia into the exhibition, in hopes that the gentleman might go
there and ask some questions about it, which might lead to a discovery.
The young artist, who had painted this picture, was under particular
obligations to Clarence, and he promised that he would faithfully comply
with his request, to be at Somerset-house regularly every morning, as soon
as the exhibition opened; that he would stay there till it closed, and
watch whether any of the spectators were particularly struck with the
portrait of Virginia. If any person should ask questions respecting the
picture, he was to let Mr. Hervey know immediately, and to give the
inquirer his address.

Now it happened that the very day when Lady Delacour and Belinda were at
the exhibition, the painter called Clarence aside, and informed him that a
gentleman had just inquired from him very eagerly, whether the picture of
Virginia was a portrait. This gentleman proved to be not the stranger who
had been at the Asylum, but an eminent jeweller, who told Mr. Hervey that
his curiosity about the picture arose merely from its striking likeness to
a miniature, which had been lately left at his house to be new set. It
belonged to a Mr. Hartley, a gentleman who had made a considerable fortune
in the West Indies, but who was prevented from enjoying his affluence by
the loss of an only daughter, of whom the miniature was a portrait, taken
when she was not more than four or five years old. When Clarence heard all
this, he was extremely impatient to know where Mr. Hartley was to be
found; but the jeweller could only tell him that the miniature had been
called for the preceding day by Mr. Hartley's servant, who said his master
was leaving town in a great hurry to go to Portsmouth, to join the West
India fleet, which was to sail with the first favourable wind.

Clarence determined immediately to follow him to Portsmouth: he had not a
moment to spare, for the wind was actually favourable, and his only chance
of seeing Mr. Hartley was by reaching Portsmouth as soon as possible. This
was the cause of his taking leave of Belinda in such an abrupt manner:
painful indeed were his feelings at that moment, and great the difficulty
he felt in parting with her, without giving any explanation of his
conduct, which must have appeared to her capricious and mysterious. He was
aware that he had explicitly avowed to Lady Delacour his admiration of
Miss Portman, and that in a thousand instances he had betrayed his
passion. Yet of her love he dared not trust himself to think, whilst his
affairs were in this doubtful state. He had, it is true, some faint hopes
that a change in Virginia's situation might produce an alteration in her
sentiments, and he resolved to decide his own conduct by the manner in
which she should behave, if her father should be found, and she should
become heiress to a considerable fortune. New views might then open to her
imagination: the world, the fashionable world, in all its glory, would be
before her; her beauty and fortune would attract a variety of admirers,
and Clarence thought that perhaps her partiality for him might become less
exclusive, when she had more opportunities of choice. If her love arose
merely from circumstances, with circumstances it would change; if it were
only a disease of the imagination, induced by her seclusion from society,
it might be cured by mixing with the world; and then he should be at
liberty to follow the dictates of his own heart, and declare his
attachment to Belinda. But if he should find that change of situation made
no alteration in Virginia's sentiments, if her happiness should absolutely
depend upon the realization of those hopes which he had imprudently
excited, he felt that he should be bound to her by all the laws of justice
and honour; laws which no passion could tempt him to break. Full of these
ideas, he hurried to Portsmouth in pursuit of Virginia's father. The first
question he asked, upon his arrival there, may easily be guessed.

"Has the West India fleet sailed?"

"No: it sails to-morrow morning," was the answer.

He hastened instantly to make inquiries for Mr. Hartley. No such person
could be found, no such gentleman was to be heard of any where. _Hartley_,
he was sure, was the name which the jeweller mentioned to him, but it was
in vain that he repeated it; no Mr. Hartley was to be heard of at
Portsmouth, except a pawnbroker. At last, a steward of one of the West
Indiamen recollected that a gentleman of that name came over with him in
the Effingham, and that he talked of returning in the same vessel to the
West Indies, if he should ever leave England again.

"But we have heard nothing of him since, sir," said the steward. "No
passage is taken for him with us."

"And my life to a china orange," cried a sailor who was standing by, "he's
gone to kingdom come, or more likely to Bedlam, afore this; for he was
plaguy crazy in his timbers, and his head wanted righting, I take it, if
it was he, Jack, who used to walk the deck, you know, with a bit of a
picture in his hand, to which he seemed to be mumbling his prayers from
morning to night. There's no use in sounding for him, master; he's down in
Davy's locker long ago, or stowed into the tight waistcoat before this
time o'day."

Notwithstanding this knowing sailor's opinion, Clarence would not desist
from his sounding; because having so lately heard of him at different
places, he could not believe that he was gone either into Davy's locker or
to Bedlam. He imagined that, by some accident, Mr. Hartley had been
detained upon the road to Portsmouth; and in the expectation that he would
certainly arrive before the fleet should sail, Clarence waited with
tolerable patience. He waited, however, in vain; he saw the Effingham and
the whole fleet sail--no Mr. Hartley arrived. As he hailed one of the
boats of the Effingham, which was rowing out with some passengers, who had
been too late to get on board, his friend the sailor answered, "We've no
crazy man here: I told you, master, he'd never go out no more in the
Effingham. He's where I said, master, you'll find, or nowhere."

Mr. Hervey remained some days at Portsmouth, after the fleet had sailed,
in hopes that he might yet obtain some information; but none could be had;
neither could any farther tidings be obtained from the jeweller, who had
first mentioned Mr. Hartley. Despairing of success in the object of his
journey, he, however, determined to delay his return to town for some
time, in hopes that absence might efface the impression which had been
made on the heart of Virginia. He made a tour along the picturesque coasts
of Dorset and Devonshire, and it was during this excursion that he wrote
the letters to Lady Delacour which have so often been mentioned. He
endeavoured to dissipate his thoughts by new scenes and employments, but
all his ideas involuntarily centred in Belinda. If he saw new characters,
he compared them with hers, or considered how far she would approve or
condemn them. The books that he read were perused with a constant
reference to what she would think or feel; and during his whole journey he
never beheld any beautiful prospect, without wishing that it could at the
same instant be seen by Belinda. If her name were mentioned but once in
his letters, it was because he dared not trust himself to speak of her;
she was for ever present to his mind: but while he was writing to Lady
Delacour, her idea pressed more strongly upon his heart; he recollected
that it was she who first gave him a just insight into her ladyship's real
character; he recollected that she had joined with him in the benevolent
design of reconciling her to Lord Delacour, and of creating in her mind a
taste for domestic happiness. This remembrance operated powerfully to
excite him to fresh exertions, and the eloquence which touched Lady
Delacour so much in these "_edifying_" letters, as she called them, was in
fact inspired by Belinda.

Whenever he thought distinctly upon his future plans, Virginia's
attachment, and the hopes which he had imprudently inspired, appeared
insuperable obstacles to his union with Miss Portman; but, in more
sanguine moments, he flattered himself with a confused notion that these
difficulties would vanish. Great were his surprise and alarm when he
received that letter of Lady Delacour's, in which she announced the
probability of Belinda's marriage with Mr. Vincent. In consequence of his
moving from place to place in the course of his tour, he did not receive
this letter till nearly a fortnight after it should have come to his
hands. The instant he received it he set out on his way home; he travelled
with all that expedition which money can command in England: his first
thought and first wish when he arrived in town were to go to Lady
Delacour's; but he checked his impatience, and proceeded immediately to
Twickenham, to have his fate decided by Virginia. It was with the most
painful sensations that he saw her again. The accounts which he received
from Mrs. Ormond convinced him that absence had produced none of the
effects which he expected on the mind of her pupil. Mrs. Ormond was
naturally both of an affectionate disposition and a timid temper; she had
become excessively fond of Virginia, and her anxiety was more than in
proportion to her love; it sometimes balanced and even overbalanced her
regard and respect for Clarence Hervey himself. When he spoke of his
attachment to Belinda, and of his doubts respecting Virginia, she could no
longer restrain her emotion.

"Oh, indeed, Mr. Hervey," said she, "this is no time for reasoning and
doubting. No man in his senses, no man who is not wilfully blind, could
doubt her being distractedly fond of you."

"I am sorry for it," said Clarence.

"And why--oh, why, Mr. Hervey? Don't you recollect the time when you were
all impatience to call her yours,--when you thought her the most charming
creature in the whole world?"

"I had not seen Belinda Portman then."

"And I wish to Heaven you never had seen her! But oh, surely, Mr. Hervey,
you will not desert my Virginia!--Must her health, her happiness, her
reputation, all be the sacrifice?"

"Reputation! Mrs. Ormond."

"Reputation, Mr. Hervey: you do not know in what a light she is considered
here; nor did I till lately. But I tell you her reputation is
injured--fatally injured. It is whispered, and more than whispered
everywhere, that she is your mistress. A woman came here the other day
with the bullfinch, and she looked at me, and spoke in such an
extraordinary way, that I was shocked more than I can express. I need not
tell you all the particulars; it is enough that I have made inquiries, and
am sure, too sure, of what I say, that nothing but your marriage with
Virginia can save her reputation; or--"

Mrs. Ormond stopped short, for at this instant Virginia entered the room,
walking in her slow manner, as if she were in a deep reverie.

"Since my return," said Clarence, in an embarrassed voice, "I have
scarcely heard a syllable from Miss St. Pierre's lips."

"_Miss St. Pierre!_--He used to call me Virginia," said she, turning to
Mrs. Ormond: "he is angry with me--he used to call me Virginia."

"But you were a child then, you know, my love," said Mrs. Ormond.

"And I wish I was still a child," said Virginia, Then, after a long pause,
she approached Mr. Hervey with extreme timidity, and, opening a portfolio
which lay on the table, she said to him, "If you are at leisure--if I do
not interrupt you--would you look at these drawings; though they are not
worth your seeing, except as proofs that I can conquer my natural
indolence?"

The drawings were views which she had painted from memory, of scenes in
the New Forest, near her grandmother's cottage. That cottage was drawn
with an exactness that proved how fresh it was in her remembrance. Many
recollections rushed forcibly into Clarence Hervey's mind at the sight of
this cottage. The charming image of Virginia, as it first struck his
fancy,--the smile, the innocent smile, with which she offered him the
finest rose in her basket,--the stern voice in which her grandmother spoke
to her,--the prophetic fears of her protectress,--the figure of the dying
woman,--the solemn promise he made to her,--all recurred, in rapid
succession, to his memory.

"You don't seem to like that," said Virginia; and then putting another
drawing into his hands, "perhaps this may please you better."

"They are beautiful; they are surprisingly well done!" exclaimed he.

"I knew he would like them! I told you so!" cried Mrs. Ormond, in a
triumphant tone.

"You see," said Virginia, "that though you have heard scarcely a syllable
from Miss St. Pierre's lips since your return, yet she has not been
unmindful of your wishes in your absence. You told her, some time ago,
that you wished she would try to improve in drawing. She has done her
best. But do not trouble yourself to look at them any longer," said
Virginia, taking one of her drawings from his hand; "I merely wanted to
show you that, though I have no genius, I have some--"

Her voice faltered so that she could not pronounce the word _gratitude_.

Mrs. Ormond pronounced it for her; and added, "I can answer for it, that
Virginia is not ungrateful."

"Ungrateful!" repeated Clarence; "who ever thought her so? Why did you put
these ideas into her mind?"

Virginia, resting her head on Mrs. Ormond's shoulder, wept bitterly.

"You have worked upon her sensibility till you have made her miserable,"
cried Clarence, angrily. "Virginia, listen to me: look at me," said he,
affectionately taking her hand; but she pressed closer to Mrs. Ormond, and
would not raise her head. "Do not consider me as your master--your tyrant;
do not imagine that I think you ungrateful!"

"Oh, I am--I am--I am ungrateful to you," cried she, sobbing; "but Mrs.
Ormond never told me so; do not blame her: she has never worked upon my
sensibility. Do you think," said she, looking up, while a transient
expression of indignation passed over her countenance, "do you think I
cannot _feel_ without having been taught?"

Clarence uttered a deep sigh.

"But if you feel too much, my dearest Virginia,--if you give way to your
feelings in this manner," said Mrs. Ormond, "you will make both yourself
and Mr. Hervey unhappy."

"Heaven forbid! The first wish of my soul is--" She paused. "I should be
the most ungrateful wretch in the world, if I were to make him unhappy."

"But if he sees you miserable, Virginia?"

"Then he shall not see it," said she, wiping the tears from her face.

"To imagine that you were unhappy, and that you concealed it from us,
would be still worse," said Clarence.

"But why should you imagine it?" replied Virginia; "you are too good, too
kind; but do not fancy that I am not happy: I am sure I ought to be
happy."

"Do you regret your cottage?" said Clarence: "these drawings show how well
you remember it."

Virginia coloured; and, with some hesitation, answered, "Is it my fault if
I cannot forget?"

"You were happier then, Virginia, than you are now, you will confess,"
said Mrs. Ormond, who was not a woman of refined delicacy, and who thought
that the best chance she had of working upon Mr. Hervey's sense of honour
was by making it plain to him how much her pupil's affections were
engaged.

Virginia made no answer to this question, and her silence touched Clarence
more than any thing she could have said. When Mrs. Ormond repeated her
question, he relieved the trembling girl by saying, "My dear Mrs. Ormond,
confidence must be won, not demanded."

"I have no right to insist upon confessions, I know," said Mrs. Ormond;
"but--"

"Confessions! I do not wish to conceal any thing, but I think sincerity is
not _always_ in our sex consistent with--I mean--I don't know what I mean,
what I say, or what I ought to say," cried Virginia; and she sunk down on
a sofa, in extreme confusion.

"Why will you agitate her, Mrs. Ormond, in this manner?" said Mr. Hervey,
with an expression of sudden anger. It was succeeded by a look of such
tender compassion for Virginia, that Mrs. Ormond rejoiced to have excited
his anger; at any price she wished to serve her beloved pupil.

"Do not be in the least apprehensive, my dear Virginia, that we should
take ungenerous advantage of the openness and simplicity of your
character," said Mr. Hervey.

"Oh, no, no; I cannot, do not apprehend any thing ungenerous from you; you
are, you ever have been, my best, my most generous friend! But I fear that
I have not the simplicity of character, the openness that you imagine; and
yet, I am sure, I wish, from the bottom of my heart--I wish to do right,
if I knew how. But there is not one--no, not one--person in the whole
world," continued she, her eyes moving from Mrs. Ormond to Mr. Hervey, and
from him to Mrs. Ormond again, "not one person in the whole world I
dare--I ought--to lay my heart open to. I have, perhaps, said more than is
proper already. But this I know," added she, in a firm tone, rising, and
addressing herself to Clarence, "_you_ shall never be made unhappy by me.
And do not think about my happiness so much," said she, forcing a smile;
"I am, I will be, perfectly happy. Only let me always know your wishes,
your sentiments, your feelings, and by them I will, as I ought, regulate
mine."

"Amiable, charming, generous girl!" cried Clarence.

"Take care," said Mrs. Ormond; "take care, Virginia, lest you promise more
than you can perform. Wishes, and feelings, and sentiments, are not to be
so easily regulated."

"I did not, I believe, say it was easy; but I hope it is possible,"
replied Virginia. "I promise nothing but what I am able to perform."

"I doubt it," said Mrs. Ormond, shaking her head. "You _are_--you _will_
be perfectly happy. Oh, Virginia, my love, do not deceive yourself; do not
deceive us so terribly. I am sorry to put you to the blush; but--"

"Not a word more, my dear madam, I beg--I insist," said Mr. Hervey in a
commanding tone; but, for the first time in her life, regardless of him,
she persisted.

"I only ask you to call to mind, my dearest Virginia," said she, taking
her hand, "the morning that you screamed in your sleep, the morning when
you told me the frightful dream--were you perfectly happy then?"

"It is easy to force my thoughts from me," said Virginia, withdrawing her
hand from Mrs. Ormond; "but it is cruel to do so." And with an air of
offended dignity she passed them, and quitted the room.

"I wish to Heaven!" exclaimed Mrs. Ormond, "that Miss Portman was married,
and out of the way--I shall never forgive myself! We have used this poor
girl cruelly amongst us: she loves you to distraction, and I have
encouraged her passion, and I have betrayed her--oh, fool that I was! I
told her that she would certainly be your wife."

"You have told her so!--Did I not charge you, Mrs. Ormond----"

"Yes; but I could not help it, when I saw the sweet girl fading away--and,
besides, I am sure she thought it, from your manner, long and long before
I told it to her. Do you forget how fond of her you were scarce one short
year ago? And do you forget how plainly you let her see your passion? Oh,
how can you blame her, if she loves you, and if she is unhappy?"

"I blame no one but myself," cried Clarence; "I must abide by the
consequences of my own folly. Unhappy!--she shall not be unhappy; she does
not deserve to be so."

He walked backward and forward, with hasty steps, for some minutes; then
sat down and wrote a letter to Virginia.

When he had finished it, he put it into Mrs. Ormond's hands.

"Read it--seal it--give it to her--and let her answer be sent to town to
me, at Dr. X.'s, in Clifford-street."

Mrs. Ormond clasped her hands, in an ecstasy of joy, as she glanced her
eye over the letter, for it contained an offer of his hand.

"This is like yourself; like what I always knew you to be, dear Mr.
Hervey!" she exclaimed.

But her exclamation was lost upon him. When she looked up, to repeat her
praises, she perceived he was gone. After the effort which he had made, he
wished for time to tranquillize his mind, before he should again see
Virginia. What her answer to this letter would be he could not doubt: his
fate was now decided, and he determined immediately to write to Lady
Delacour to explain his situation; he felt that he had not sufficient
fortitude at this moment to make such an explanation in person. With all
the strength of his mind, he endeavoured to exclude Belinda from his
thoughts, but _curiosity_--(for he would suffer himself to call it by no
other name)--curiosity to know whether she were actually engaged to Mr.
Vincent obtruded itself with such force, that it could not be resisted.

From Dr. X---- he thought he could obtain full information, and he
hastened immediately to town. When he got to Clifford-street, he found
that the doctor was not at home; his servant said, he might probably be
met with at Mrs. Margaret Delacour's, as he usually finished his morning
rounds at her house. Thither Mr. Hervey immediately went.

The first sound that he heard, as he went up her stairs, was the screaming
of a macaw; and the first person he saw, through the open door of the
drawing-room, was Helena Delacour. She was standing with her back to him,
leaning over the macaw's cage, and he heard her say in a joyful tone,
"Yes, though you do scream so frightfully, my pretty macaw, I love you as
well as Marriott ever did. When my dear, good Miss Portman, sent this
macaw--My dear aunt! here's Mr. Hervey!--you were just wishing to see
him."

"Mr. Hervey," said the old lady, with a benevolent smile, "your little
friend Helena tells you truth; we were just wishing for you. I am sure it
will give you pleasure to hear that I am at last a convert to your opinion
of Lady Delacour. She has given up all those that I used to call her
rantipole acquaintance. She has reconciled herself to her husband, and to
his friends; and Helena is to go home to live with her. Here is a charming
note I have just received from her! Dine with me on Thursday next, and you
will meet her ladyship, and see a happy family party. You have had some
share in the _reformation_, I know, and that was the reason I wished that
you should be with us on Thursday. You see I am not an obstinate old
woman, though I was cross the first day I saw you at Lady Anne Percival's.
I found I was mistaken in your character, and I am glad of it. But this
note of Lady Delacour's seems to have struck you dumb."

There were, indeed, a few words in this note, which deprived him, for some
moments, of all power of utterance.

"The report you have heard (unlike most other reports) is perfectly well
founded: Mr. Vincent, Belinda's admirer, is here. I will bring him with us
on Thursday."

Mr. Hervey was relieved from the necessity of accounting to Mrs. Delacour
for his sudden embarrassment, by the entrance of Dr. X---- and another
gentleman, of whom, in the confusion of his mind, Clarence did not at
first take any notice. Dr. X----, with his usual mixture of benevolence
and raillery, addressed himself to Clarence, whilst the stranger took out
of his pocket some papers, and in a low voice entered earnestly into
conversation with Mrs. Delacour.

"Now, tell me, if you can, Clarence," said Dr. X----, "which of your three
mistresses you like best? I think I left you some months ago in great
doubt upon this subject: are you still in that philosophic state?"

"No," said Clarence; "all doubts are over--I am going to be married."

"Bravo!--But you look as if you were going to be hanged. May I, as it will
so soon be in the newspaper, may I ask the name of the fair lady?"

"Virginia St. Pierre. You shall know her history and mine when we are
alone," said Mr. Hervey, lowering his voice.

"You need not lower your voice," said Dr. X----, "for Mrs. Delacour is, as
you see, so much taken up with her own affairs, that she has no curiosity
for those of her neighbours; and Mr. Hartley is as busy as--"

"Mr. who? Mr. Hartley did you say?" interrupted Clarence, eagerly turning
his eyes upon the stranger, who was a middle-aged gentleman, exactly
answering the description of the person who had been at the Asylum in
search of his daughter.

"Mr. Hartley! yes. What astonishes you so much?" said X----, calmly. "He
is a West Indian. I met him in Cambridgeshire last summer, at his friend
Mr. Horton's; he has been very generous to the poor people who suffered by
the fire, and he is now consulting with Mrs. Delacour, who has an estate
adjoining to Mr. Horton's, about her tenants, whose houses in the village
were burnt. Now I have, in as few words and parentheses as possible, told
you all I know of Mr. Hartley's history; but your curiosity still looks
voracious."

"I want to know whether he has a miniature?" said Clarence, hastily.
"Introduce me to him, for Heaven's sake, directly!"

"Mr. Hartley," cried the doctor, raising his voice, "give me leave to
introduce my friend Mr. Hervey to you, and to your miniature picture, if
you have one."

Mr. Hartley sighed profoundly as he drew from his bosom a small portrait,
which he put into Mr. Hervey's hands, saying, "Alas! sir, you cannot, I
fear, give me any tidings of the original; it is the picture of a
daughter, whom I have never seen since she was an infant--whom I never
shall see again."

Clarence instantly knew it to be Virginia; but as he was upon the point of
making some joyful exclamation, he felt Dr. X---- touch his shoulder, and
looking up at Mr. Hartley, he saw in his countenance such strong workings
of passion, that he prudently suppressed his own emotion, and calmly said,
"It would be cruel, sir, to give you false hopes."

"It would kill me--it would kill me, sir!--or worse!--worse! a thousand
times worse!" cried Mr. Hartley, putting his hand to his forehead. "What,"
continued he impatiently, "what was the meaning of the look you gave, when
you first saw that picture? Speak, if you have any humanity! Did you ever
see any one that resembles that picture?"

"I have seen, I think, a picture," said Clarence Hervey, "that has some
resemblance to it."

"When? where?--"

"My good sir," said Dr. X----, "let me recommend it to you to consider
that there is scarcely any possibility of judging, from the features of
children, of what their faces may be when they grow up. Nothing can be
more fallacious than these accidental resemblances between the pictures of
children and of grown-up people."

Mr. Hartley's countenance fell.

"But," added Clarence Hervey, "you will perhaps, sir, think it worth your
while to see the picture of which I speak: you can see it at Mr. F----'s,
the painter, in Newman-street; and I will accompany you thither whenever
you please."

"This moment, if you would have the goodness: my carriage is at the door;
and Mrs. Delacour will be so kind to excuse ----"

"Oh, make no apologies to me at such a time as this," said Mrs. Delacour.
"Away with you, gentlemen, as soon as you please; upon condition, that if
you have any good news to tell, some of you will remember, in the midst of
your joy, that such an old woman as Mrs. Margaret Delacour exists, who
loves to hear _good_ news of those who deserve it."

"It was so late in the day when they got to Newman-street, that they were
obliged to light candles. Trembling with eagerness, Mr. Hartley drew near,
while Clarence held the light to the picture.

"It is so like," said he, looking at his miniature, "that I dare not
believe my senses. Dr. X----, pray do you look. My head is so dizzy, and
my eyes so----What do you think, sir? What do you say, doctor?"

"That the likeness is certainly striking--but this seems to be a fancy
piece."

"A fancy piece," repeated Mr. Hartley, with terror: "why then did you
bring me here?--A fancy piece!"

"No, sir; it is a portrait," said Clarence; "and if you will be calm, I
will tell you more."

"I will be calm--only is she alive?"

"The lady, of whom this is the portrait, is alive," replied Clarence
Hervey, who was obliged to exert his utmost command over himself, to
maintain that composure which he saw was necessary; "the lady, of whom
this is the portrait, is alive, and you shall see her to-morrow."

"Oh, why not now? Cannot I see her now? I must see her to-night--this
instant, sir!"

"It is impossible," said Mr. Hervey, "that you should see her this
instant, for she is some miles off, at Twickenham."

"It is too late to go thither now; you cannot think of it, Mr. Hartley,"
continued Dr. X----, in a tone of command, to which he yielded more
readily than to reason.

Clarence had the presence of mind to recollect that it would be necessary
to prepare poor Virginia for this meeting, and he sent a messenger
immediately to request that Mrs. Ormond would communicate the intelligence
with all the caution in her power.

The next morning, Mr. Hartley and Mr. Hervey set off together for
Twickenham. In their way thither Clarence gradually confirmed Mr. Hartley
in the belief that Virginia was his daughter, by relating all the
circumstances that he had learned from her grandmother, and from Mrs.
Smith, the farmer's wife, with whom she had formerly been acquainted: the
name, the age, every particular, as it was disclosed, heightened his
security and his joy.

For some time Mr. Hartley's mind was so intent that he could not listen to
any thing, but at last Clarence engaged his attention and suspended his
anxiety, by giving him a history of his own connexion with Virginia, from
the day of his first discovering her in the New Forest, to the letter
which he had just written, to offer her his hand. The partiality which it
was suspected Virginia felt for him was the only circumstance which he
suppressed, because, notwithstanding all Mrs. Ormond had said, and all he
had himself heard and seen, his obstinate incredulity required
confirmation under her own hand, or positively from her own lips. He still
fancied it was possible that change of situation might alter her views and
sentiments; and he earnestly entreated that she might be left entirely to
her own decision. It was necessary to make this stipulation with her
father; for in the excess of his gratitude for the kindness which Clarence
had shown to her, he protested that he should look upon her as a monster
if she did not love him: he added, that if Mr. Hervey had not a farthing,
he should prefer him to every man upon earth; he, however, promised that
he would conceal his wishes, and that his daughter should act entirely
from the dictates of her own mind. In the fulness of his heart, he told
Clarence all those circumstances of his conduct towards Virginia's mother
which had filled his soul with remorse. She was scarcely sixteen when he
ran away with her from a boarding-school; he was at that time a gay
officer, she a sentimental girl, who had been spoiled by early
novel-reading. Her father had a small place at court, lived beyond his
fortune, educated his daughter, to whom he could give no portion, as if
she were to be heiress to a large estate; then died, and left his widow
absolutely in penury. This widow was the old lady who lived in the cottage
in the New Forest. It was just at the time of her husband's death, and of
her own distress, that she heard of the elopement of her daughter from
school. Mr. "He does not know you, and even if he did know you, you are a
poor orphan and a servant, and nothing could ever come of it. He does
not know you, and will not ask about you."
In the evening, when the two men came back, Barefoot had already been able
to remove the handkerchief from her forehead; but the one she had tied
over her temples and under her chin, she was obliged to keep on still,
drawn tightly around her face. John himself seemed to have neither tongue
nor eyes for her. But his dog was with her in the kitchen all the time,
and she fed the creature and stroked it and talked to it.

"Yes, if you could only tell him everything, you would be sure to tell him
the whole truth." The dog laid its head on Barefoot's lap, and looked up
at her with intelligent eyes; then he seemed to shake his head, as if
to say: "It is too bad, but unfortunately I cannot speak."
Barefoot now went into the bed-room and began singing to the children again,
although they had long been asleep; she sang various songs, but most
of all the waltz to which she had danced with John. John listened to her
as if bewildered, and seemed to be absent-minded when he spoke.
Rose went into the room, and told Barefoot to be quiet.

Late at night, when Barefoot had just drawn some water for Black Marianne
and was returning to her parents' house with the full pail on her head,
John met her as he was going to the tavern. With a suppressed voice she
bade him a "Good evening."
"Oh, it is you!" said John. "Where are you going with that water at this
time?"
"To Black Marianne."
"Who is that?"
"A poor woman, who is sick in bed."
"Why, Rose told me that there were no poor people here."
"Good heavens! there are more than enough. But Rose no doubt said that,
because she thought it would be a disgrace to the village. She's good-hearted,
you may believe me--and she's fond of giving things away."
"You are a loyal friend. But you mustn't stand there with that heavy
pail.

May I go with you?"
"Why not?"
"You are right; you are doing a kind deed, and nothing can harm you. And
you need not be afraid of me."
"I am not afraid of anybody, and of you least of all. I saw today that
you are kind."
"When did you see that?"
"When you advised me how to cure my swollen face.

Your advice was good--you see, I have my shoes on now."
"That's a good thing that you are obedient," said John with an
approving glance; and the dog, too, seemed to notice his approval of
Barefoot, for he jumped up at her and licked her free hand.

"Come here, Lux!"

cried John.

"No, let him alone," said Barefoot. "We are already good friends--he
has been in the kitchen with me all day long. All dogs are fond of me and
of my brother."
"So you have a brother?"
"Yes, and I wanted to appeal to you very earnestly to take him as
a servant on your farm.

You would be doing a very charitable deed, and he would be sure to
serve you faithfully all his life."

"Where is your brother?"
"Down yonder in the woods; just now he is a charcoal-burner."
"Why, we have few trees and no kiln at all.

I could more easily find work for a field-laborer."
"He'd be able to do that work, too.

But here is the house."
"I'll wait until you come out," said John.

Barefoot went in to put down the water, and arrange the fire, and make
Marianne comfortable in bed.

When she came out John was still standing there and the dog jumped
up at her.

For a long time they stood under the parental tree, which rustled quietly
and bowed its branches. They talked of all kinds of things; John praised
her cleverness and her quick mind, and at last said:
"If you should ever want to change your place, you would be the
very person for my mother."

"That is the greatest praise that anybody in the world could give me!"
Barefoot declared. "I still have a keepsake from your mother."

And then she related the incident of their meeting his mother, and both
laughed when Barefoot told how Damie could not forget that Dame Landfried
owed him a pair of leather-breeches.

"And he shall have them," John declared.

They then walked back together as far as the village, and John gave
her his hand when he bade her "Good night."

Barefoot wanted to tell him that he had shaken hands with her once before,
but, as if frightened by the thought, she fled away from him and ran
into the house; she did not even return his "Good night." John,
puzzled and thoughtful, returned to his room at the "Heathcock."

The next morning Barefoot found that the swelling in her face had vanished
as if by magic. And never had she caroled more gaily through the house and
yard, through the stable and barn, than she did today.

And yet today was the day when it was to be decided, the day that
John was to declare himself.

Farmer Rodel did not want to have his sister talked about by any one,
in case it should all come to nothing after all.

Nearly the whole day John sat in the room with Rose, who was making
a man's shirt.

Toward evening Mistress Rodel's parents came, along with other
relatives.

It must be decided one way or the other today.

The roast was sputtering in the kitchen, the pine wood cracking and
snapping, and Barefoot's cheeks were glowing, heated by the fire on the
hearth and the fire that was burning within her.

Crappy Zachy walked back and forth and up and down with an air of great
importance, and made himself very much at home--he even smoked Farmer
Rodel's pipe.

"Then it is settled after all," said Barefoot to herself, mournfully.

Night had come.

Many lights were burning in the house, and Rose, in festive attire, was
hurrying back and forth between the room and the kitchen, though
she did not know how to give any help.

Everything was ready.

And now the young farmer's wife said to Barefoot:
"Go upstairs and put on your Sunday dress."

"Why?"

"You must wait on the table today, and you'll get a better present."
"I would rather stay in the kitchen."
"No, do as I tell you--and make haste."

Amrei went up to her room and sat down for a moment on her box in order to
get her breath. She was dead tired. If she could only go to sleep
now and never wake up again! But duty called.

Hardly had she taken the first piece of her Sunday dress in her
hand, when a feeling of joy came over her; and the evening sun,
sending a red beam into the little attic, shone upon a pair of
glowing cheeks.

"Put on your Sunday dress!" She had but one Sunday dress, and that was the
one she had worn that day at the wedding in Endringen. Every flutter,
every rustle of the dress reminded her of the happiness she had
experienced, and of the waltz she had danced on that eventful day.

But as darkness followed the setting of the sun, so did sorrow follow
gladness; and she said to herself that she was thus adorning herself
only to do honor to John, and to show how much she valued whatever
came from his family, she at last put on the necklace.

Thus, adorned as she had been on the day of the wedding at Endringen,
Amrei came down from her room.

"What is this? What did you dress yourself up like that for?" cried Rose
angrily.

She was already anxious and impatient because the visitor was so long
in making his appearance. "Why do you put all your possessions on? Is
that a fit necklace for a servant, with a coin hanging to it?

You take that off directly!"
"No, I shall not do that; for his mother gave it to me when I was
a little child, and I had it on when we danced together at Endringen."

Something was heard to fall on the staircase; but nobody heeded it, for Rose
screamed out:

"What! You good-for-nothing, horrible witch! You would have perished in
rags if we had not taken you up!

And now you want to take my betrothed from me!"
"Don't call him that until he is your betrothed," replied Amrei, with a
strange mixture of feelings in her voice.

"Wait! I'll show you what you've got to do!" shrieked Rose. "Take that!"
and she dragged Barefoot down to the ground and struck her in the face.

"I'll take my things off! Let me go!" screamed Barefoot.

But Rose let go before she had finished saying it; for, as if he had
risen out of the ground, John was standing before her!

He was as pale as death, and his lips were quivering. He could not speak,
but merely raised his hand to protect Barefoot, who was still kneeling
on the floor.

Barefoot was the first to speak; she cried out:

"Believe me, John, I have never seen her like that before, never in my whole
life!

And it was my fault."

"Yes, it was your fault. And, now, come; you shall go with me and
be mine.

Will you? I have found you, and I did not seek you. But now you shall
live with me and be my wife. It is God's will."

If any one could have seen Barefoot's eyes then! But no mortal eye has
ever fully seen a flash of lightning in the heavens, for no matter how
firmly we look, our eyes are sure to be dazzled. And there are also
flashes in the human eye which are never fully seen, just as there
are workings in the human heart which are never fully understood.

A momentary flash of joy, such as may brighten the face when the heavens are
opened, darted from Amrei's eyes.

She covered her face with both hands, and the tears ran forth from
between her fingers.

John stood with his hand upon her. All the relatives had gathered around,
and were gazing with astonishment at the strange scene.

"What's all this with Barefoot? What's all this?" blustered Farmer Rodel.

"So, your name is Barefoot?" cried John. He laughed loud and heartily, and
added: "Come, now, will you have me?

Say so now, for here we have witnesses to confirm it. Say 'Yes,' and
nothing but death shall part us!"
"Yes!

--and nothing but death shall part us!" cried Barefoot, throwing herself
on his neck.

"Very well--then take her out of this house at once!" roared Farmer Rodel,
foaming with rage.

"Yes, you need not tell me to do that. I thank you for your good reception,
cousin.

When you come to us some day, we'll make it quits," replied John. He
put both hands up to his head, and cried: "Good heavens! Mother,
mother, how glad you will be!"

"Go up, Barefoot, and take your box away at once; for nothing
belonging to you shall remain in my house!"

commanded Farmer Rodel.

"Very well," replied John; "but that can be done with less noise. Come,
Barefoot, I'll go with you. But tell me what your real name is."
"Amrei."
"I was once to have married an Amrei--she is the 'Butter Countess!'--you
are my Salt Countess! Hurrah! Now come; I should like to see your room,
where you have lived so long. Now you shall have a large house!"
The dog, with the hairs on his back standing up like bristles, kept walking
around Farmer Rodel; he saw that the latter would have been glad
to choke John.

Only when John and Barefoot were at the top of the stairs did the dog come
running after them.

John let the box stand, because he could not take it on his horse. But
they packed Barefoot's possessions into the sack which she had
inherited from her father.

As they were descending the stairs together on their way out,
Barefoot felt somebody quietly press her hand in the dark--it was
her mistress who was thus taking leave of her.

At the threshold, with her hand upon the door-post against which she had
so often leaned, she said sadly:
"May God reward this house for all good, and forgive it for all
evil!"

They had gone but a few paces when Barefoot called out: "Good heavens! I
have forgotten all my shoes! They are upstairs on the shelf!"

Scarcely had she spoken the words, when the shoes, as if they were running
after their owner, came flying out of the window and down into the
street.

"Run to the devil in them!" cried a voice from the garret window. The
voice sounded masculine, and yet it belonged to Rose.

Barefoot collected the shoes and took them to the tavern with John, who
carried the sack on his back.

The moon was shining brightly, and the whole village was already
asleep.

Barefoot would not stay at the tavern.

"Then I should like to go home this very night," said John.

"Before I do anything else," replied Barefoot, "I must go to Black Marianne.
She has filled a mother's place for me, and I have not seen her today,
and have not been able to do anything for her. And besides that, she's
ill. Alas! It is too bad that I shall have to leave her; but what am I to
do?

Come, go with me to her."
They went together to the house. When Barefoot opened the inside door a
moonbeam fell upon the angel on the stove, just as a sunbeam had fallen on
that day of long ago.

And it seemed to smile and dance more merrily.

Barefoot cried with a loud voice:

"Marianne! Marianne! Wake up, Marianne! Happiness and blessing are
here!
Wake up!"
The old woman sat up in bed; the moonlight fell upon her face and
neck.

She opened her eyes wide and said:

"What is it? What is it?

Who calls?"

"Rejoice! Here I bring you my John!"

"My John!" screamed the old woman, "Good God, my John! How long--how
long--I have thee--I have thee! Oh God, I thank thee a thousand and a
thousand times! Oh, my child, my boy! I see thee with a thousand eyes,
and a thousandfold--No, there--there--thy hand! Come here--there--there
in the chest is thy dowry! Take the cloth! My son! my boy! Yes, yes,
she is thine! John, my son, my son! my--"
The old woman laughed convulsively, and fell back in her bed. Amrei and
John had knelt down beside her, and when they stood up and bent over
her, she had ceased to breathe.

"Oh, heavens! She is dead! Joy killed her!" exclaimed Barefoot. "She took
you for her son. She died happy. Oh, why is it thus in the world, why
is it thus?" She sank down by the bed again, and sobbed bitterly.

At last John raised her up, and Barefoot closed the dead woman's eyes.
For a long time they stood together beside the bed; then Barefoot said:

"Come, I will wake up people who will watch by her body. God has been very
gracious; she would have no one to care for her when I was gone.
And God has given her the greatest joy in the last moment of her life.
How long, oh, how long, she waited for that joy!"
"Yes, but you cannot stay here now," said John. "You must go with me this
very night."
Barefoot woke up the gravedigger's wife, and sent her to Black Marianne.
Her mind was so wonderfully composed that she remembered to tell
the woman that the flowers, which stood on her window-ledge at the
farm, were to be planted on Black Marianne's grave; and especially
that she was not to forget to put Black Marianne's hymn-book under
her head, as she had always wished.

When at last she had arranged everything, she stood up erect and, stretching
out her arms, said:

"Now everything is done.

You must forgive me, good man, that I was obliged to bring you to
a house of sorrow; and forgive me, too, if I am not now as I should
wish to be.

I see now that all is well, and that God has ordered it for the best. But
still I shake with fear in every limb--it is a hard thing to die. You
cannot imagine how I have almost puzzled my brains out about it. But
now all is well, and I will be cheerful--for I am the happiest girl in
the world!"
"Yes, you are right.--But come, let us go.

Will you ride with me on my horse?" asked John.

"Yes. Is it the white horse that you had at the wedding at Endringen?"
"To be sure!"
"And, oh, that Farmer Rodel! If he didn't send to Lauterbach the night
before you came and have a white horse brought from there, so as
to get you to come to his house.

Holloa! white horse, go home again!" she concluded, almost merrily.

And thus their thoughts and feelings returned to ordinary life, and from
it they learned to appreciate their happiness anew.

CHAPTER XVI
SILVERSTEP

[The two lovers mount the white horse, which Amrei suggests they call
"Silverstep," and start out through the moonlight for John's home.

As they ride along they talk and sing and tell stories and enjoy themselves
as only lovers can. At Amrei's request, they stop on the way to see Damie,
who is with Coaly Mathew in the forest; Amrei tells him all that
has happened, and John promises to make him an independent herdsman,
and gives him a silver-mounted pipe.

Damie, inwardly rejoiced, but, as usual, not over-appreciative, reminds him
of the "pair of leather breeches," a debt which John also promises to pay.
Damie then displays unexpected cleverness by performing a
mock-ceremony, in which he compels John to ask him, as his sister's
only living relative, for Amrei's hand.

Damie surprises his sister by doing this with considerable histrionic
success, so that the two lovers start out again more merry than ever.]

CHAPTER XVII

OVER HILL AND VALE

The day had dawned when the two lovers reached the town; and already
long before, when they encountered the first early-riser, they had
alighted.

They felt that they must have a strange appearance, and regarded this
first person they met as a herald who had come to remind them of the fact
that they must adapt themselves to the order of human conventionalities.

So they dismounted, and John led the horse with one hand and held
Amrei with the other.

Thus they went on in silence, and as often as they looked at each other,
their faces shone like those of children newly waked from sleep; but as
often as they looked down, they became thoughtful and anxious about
the immediate future.

Amrei, as if she had already been discussing the subject with John,
and in complete confidence that his mind must have been dwelling on the
same thoughts, now said:

"To be sure, it would have been more sensible if we had done the thing in a
more normal way. You should have gone home first, and meanwhile
I should have stayed somewhere--at Coaly Mathew's in the forest, if we
could have done no better. Then you could have come with your mother to
fetch me, or could have written to me, and I could have come to you
with my Damie. But do you know what I think?"
"Not everything you think."

"I think that regret is the most stupid feeling one can possibly cherish.
Do what you will, you cannot make yesterday into today. What we did,
in the midst of our rejoicing, that was right, and must remain
right.

Now that our minds have been become more sober again, we can't waste any
time reproving ourselves. What we have to think of now is, how shall
we do everything right in the future?

But you are such a right-minded man that you will know what is right.
And you can tell me everything you think, only tell me honestly; if you
say what you mean, you won't hurt me, but if you keep anything back from
me, you will hurt me. But you don't regret it, do you?"
"Can you answer a riddle?" asked John.

"Yes, as a child I used to be able to do that well."

"Then tell me what this is--it is a simple, plain word: Take away the first
letter, and you're ready to tear your hair out; put it back again, and all
is firm and sure?"
"That's easy," said Barefoot, "easy as anything; it's Truth and Ruth."

At the first inn by the gate they stopped off; and Amrei, when she and
John were alone in the room, and the latter had ordered some good coffee,
said:

"How splendidly the world is arranged! These people have provided a house,
and tables, and benches, and chairs, and a kitchen, in which the fire
is burning, and they have coffee, and milk and sugar, and fine dishes,
and it is all ready for us as if we had ordered it.

And when we go farther on we find more people and more houses, with all we
want in them. It's like it is in the fairy-tale, 'Table, be covered!'"
"But you have to have the 'Loaf, come out of the bag!' too," said John,
and he reached into his pocket and drew forth a handful of money.
"Without that you'll get nothing."
"Yes, to be sure," said Amrei; "whoever has those wheels can roll through
the world. But tell me, John--did coffee ever taste to you in your
whole life like this? And the fresh white bread! Only you have ordered
too much; we cannot manage all this. The bread I shall take with
me, but it's a pity about the good coffee. How many poor people
could be refreshed by it, and we must let it go to waste. And yet
you have to pay for it just the same."
"That's no matter; one cannot figure so accurately in the world."

"Yes, yes, you are right. You see, I have been accustomed to do
with little. You must not take it amiss if I say things of that
kind--I do it without thinking."
Presently Amrei got up. Her face was glowing, and when she stood
before the glass, she exclaimed:
"Gracious heavens! How can it be? All this seems almost impossible!"

"Well, there are still some hard planks to pierce; but I am not
worrying about that. Now lie down and rest for a short time while
I look for a Bernese chaise-wagon--you can't ride on horseback with
me in the daytime--and we want one anyway."
"I cannot sleep--I have a letter to write to Haldenbrunn. I am away
from there now, and yet I enjoyed a great many good times there.
And I have other matters to settle, besides."
"Very well, do that until I come back."
John went out, and Amrei wrote a long letter to the Magistrate in
Haldenbrunn, thanking the entire community for benefits received,
and promising to adopt a child from the place some day, if it were
possible; and she once more begged to have Black Marianne's hymn-book
placed under the good old woman's head. When she had finished, she
sealed the letter and pressed her lips tight together with the
remark:
"So! Now I have done my duty to the people of Haldenbrunn."
But she quickly tore the letter open again, for she considered it
her duty to show John what she had written. But a long time passed
and he did not return. And Amrei blushed when the chatty hostess
said:
"I suppose your husband has some business at the Town-hall?"
It seemed to strike her with a strange shock to have John called
her "husband" for the first time.
She could not answer, and the hostess looked at her in wonder. She
knew no other way of escaping from her strange glances than by going
out in front of the house, where she sat on some piled-up boards
for a long time, waiting for John. It was, indeed, a long time
before he did come back; and when at last she caught sight of him,
she said:
"When something calls you away like that again, you'll take me with
you, won't you?"
"Oh," he answered, "so you were afraid, were you? Did you think I
had gone off and left you? What would you think if I were to leave
you here and simply ride away?"
Amrei started, and then she said, severely:
"I can't say that you are very witty; in fact to joke about such a
thing as that is miserably stupid. I am sorry that you said that;
for you did something that is bad for you if you realize it, and
bad for you if you don't realize it. You talk about riding away,
and think that I am to cry to amuse you. Do you imagine, perhaps,
that because you have a horse and money, you can do as you please
with me? No, your horse carried us away together, and I came with
you. What would you think if I were to say jokingly: 'How would it
be if I left you alone?' I am sorry that you made such a jest!"
"Yes, yes, I'll say that you are right."God forbid!" said Clarence Hervey.

"The man," resumed Lord Delacour, "must, in my opinion, be very superior
indeed who is deserving of Belinda Portman. Oh, Mr. Hervey, you do
not--you cannot know her merit, as I do. It is one thing, sir, to see a
fine girl in a ball-room, and another--quite another--to live in the house
with her for months, and to see her, as I have seen Belinda Portman, in
every-day life, as one may call it. _Then_ it is one can judge of the real
temper, manners, and character; and never woman had so sweet a temper,
such charming manners, such a fair, open, generous, decided yet gentle
character, as this Miss Portman."

"Your lordship speaks _con amore_," said Clarence.

"I speak, Mr. Hervey, from the bottom of my soul," cried Lord Delacour,
pulling in his horse, and stopping short. "I should be an unfeeling,
ungrateful brute, if I were not sensible of the obligations--yes, the
obligations--which my Lady Delacour and I have received from Belinda
Portman. Why, sir, she has been the peacemaker between us--but we will not
talk of that now. Let us think of her affairs. If Mr. Vincent once gets
into Mrs. Luttridge's cursed set, there's no knowing where it will end. I
speak from my own experience, for I really never was fond of high play;
and yet, when I got into that set, I could not withstand it. I lost by
hundreds and thousands; and so will he, before he is aware of it, no
doubt. Mrs. Luttridge will look upon him as her dupe, and make him such. I
always--but this is between ourselves--suspected that I did not lose my
last thousand to her fairly. Now, Hervey, you know the whole, do try and
save Mr. Vincent, for Belinda Portman's sake."

Clarence Hervey shook hands with Lord Delacour, with a sentiment of real
gratitude and affection; and assured him that his confidence was not
misplaced. His lordship little suspected that he had been soliciting him
to save his rival. Clarence's love was not of that selfish sort which the
moment that it is deprived of hope sinks into indifference, or is
converted into hatred. Belinda could not be his; but, in the midst of the
bitterest regret, he was supported by the consciousness of his own honour
and generosity: he felt a noble species of delight in the prospect of
promoting the happiness of the woman upon whom his fondest affections had
been fixed; and he rejoiced to feel that he had sufficient magnanimity to
save a rival from ruin. He was even determined to make that rival his
friend, notwithstanding the prepossession which, he clearly perceived, Mr.
Vincent felt against him.

"His jealousy will be extinguished the moment he knows my real situation,"
said Clarence to himself. "He will be convinced that I have a soul
incapable of envy; and, if he suspect my love for Belinda, he will respect
the strength of mind with which I can command my passions. I take it for
granted that Mr. Vincent must possess a heart and understanding such as I
should desire in a friend, or he could never be--what he is to Belinda."

Full of these generous sentiments, Clarence waited with impatience for the
hour when he might present himself at Mrs. Luttridge's. He went there so
early in the evening, that he found the drawing-room quite empty; the
company, who had been invited to dine, had not yet left the dining-room,
and the servants had but just set the card-tables and lighted the candles.
Mr. Hervey desired that nobody should be disturbed by his coming so early;
and, fortunately, Mrs. Luttridge was detained some minutes by Lady
Newland's lingering glass of Madeira. In the mean time, Clarence executed
his design. From his former observations, and from the hints that Lord
Delacour had let fall, he suspected that there was sometimes in this house
not only high play, but foul play: he recollected that once, when he
played there at billiards, he had perceived that the table was not
perfectly horizontal; and it occurred to him, that perhaps the E O table
might be so contrived as to put the fortunes of all who played at it in
the power of the proprietor. Clarence had sufficient ingenuity to invent
the method by which this might be done; and he had the infallible means in
his possession of detecting the fraud. The E O table was in an apartment
adjoining to the drawing-room: he found his way to it; and he discovered,
beyond a possibility of doubt, that it was constructed for the purposes of
fraud. His first impulse was to tell this immediately to Mr. Vincent, to
put him on his guard; but, upon reflection, he determined to keep his
discovery to himself, till he was satisfied whether that gentleman had or
had not any passion for play.

"If he have," thought Clarence, "it is of the utmost consequence to Miss
Portman that he should early in life receive a shock that may leave an
indelible impression upon his mind. To save him a few hours of remorse, I
will not give up the power of doing him the most essential service. I will
let him go on--if he be so inclined--to the very verge of ruin and
despair: I will let him feel all the horrors of a gamester's fate, before
I tell him that I have the means to save him. Mrs. Luttridge must, when I
call upon her, refund whatever he may lose: she will not brave public
shame--she cannot stand a public prosecution."

Scarcely had Clarence arranged his scheme, when he heard the voices of the
ladies, who were coming up stairs.

Mrs. Luttridge made her appearance, accompanied by a very pretty, modish,
affected young lady, Miss Annabella Luttridge, her niece. Her little
coquettish airs were lost upon Clarence Hervey, whose eye was intently
fixed upon the door, watching for the entrance of Mr. Vincent. He was one
of the dinner party, and he came up soon after the ladies. He seemed
prepared for the sight of Mr. Hervey, to whom he bowed with a cold,
haughty air; and then addressed himself to Miss Annabella Luttridge, who
showed the most obvious desire to attract his attention.

From all that passed this evening, Mr. Hervey was led to suspect,
notwithstanding the reasons which made it apparently improbable, that the
fair Annabella was the secret cause of Mr. Vincent's frequent visits at
her aunt's. It was natural that Clarence should be disposed to this
opinion, from the circumstances of his own situation. During three hours
that he stayed at Mrs. Luttridge's, Mr. Vincent never joined any of the
parties at play; but, just as he was going away, he heard some one
say--"How comes it, Vincent, that you've been idle all night?" This
question revived Mr. Hervey's suspicions; and, uncertain what report he
should make to Lord Delacour, he resolved to defer making any, till he had
farther opportunities of judging.

When Mr. Hervey asked himself how it was possible that the pupil of Mr.
Percival could become a gamester, he forgot that Mr. Vincent had not been
educated by his guardian; that he had lived in the West Indies till he was
eighteen; and that he had only been under the care of Mr. Percival for a
few years, after his habits and character were in a great measure formed.
The taste for gambling he had acquired whilst he was a child; but, as it
was then confined to trifles, it had been passed over, as a thing of no
consequence, a boyish folly, that would never grow up with him: his father
used to see him, day after day, playing with eagerness at games of chance,
with his negroes, or with the sons of neighbouring planters; yet he was
never alarmed: he was too intent upon making a fortune for his family to
consider how they would spend it; and he did not foresee that this boyish
fault might be the means of his son's losing, in a few hours, the wealth
which he had been many years amassing. When young Vincent came over to
England, Mr. Percival had not immediate opportunities of discovering this
particular foible in his ward; but he perceived that in his mind there was
that presumptuous belief in his special good fortune which naturally leads
to the love of gambling. Instead of lecturing him, his guardian appealed
to his understanding, and took opportunities of showing him the ruinous
effects of high play in real life. Young Vincent was touched, and, as he
thought, convinced; but his emotion was stronger than his conviction--his
feelings were always more powerful than his reason. His detestation of the
selfish character of a gamester was felt and expressed with enthusiasm and
eloquence; and his indignation rose afterwards at the slightest hint that
_he_ might ever in future be tempted to become what he abhorred.
Unfortunately he disdained prudence, as the factitious virtue of inferior
minds: he thought that the _feelings_ of a man of honour were to be his
guide in the first and last appeal; and for his conduct through life, as a
man and as a gentleman, he proudly professed to trust to the sublime
instinct of a good heart. His guardian's doubts of the infallibility and
even of the existence of this moral instinct wounded Mr. Vincent's pride
instead of alarming his understanding; and he was rather eager than averse
to expose himself to the danger, that he might prove his superiority to
the temptation. How different are the feelings in different situations!
Yet often as this has been repeated, how difficult it is to impress the
truth upon inexperienced, sanguine minds!--Whilst young Vincent was
immediately under his guardian's eye at Oakly-park, his safety from vice
appeared to him inglorious; he was impatient to sally forth into the
world, confident rather of his innate than acquired virtue.

When he first became acquainted with Mrs. Luttridge at Harrowgate, he knew
that she was a professed gambler, and he despised the character; yet
without reflecting on the danger, or perhaps for the pleasure of
convincing Mr. Percival that he was superior to it, he continued his
visits. For some time he was a passive spectator. Billiards, however, was
a game of address, not chance; there was a billiard-table at Oakly-park,
as well as at Mr. Luttridge's, and he had played with his guardian. Why,
then, should he not play with Mr. Luttridge? He did play: his skill was
admired; he betted, and his bets were successful: but he did not call this
gaming, for the bets were not to any great amount, and it was only playing
at billiards. Mr. Percival was delayed in town some weeks longer than
usual, and he knew nothing of the manner in which his young friend spent
his time. As soon as Mr. Vincent heard of his arrival at Oakly-park, he
left half finished his game at billiards; and, fortunately for him, the
charms of Belinda made him forget for some months that such a thing as a
billiard-table existed. All that had happened at Mr. Luttridge's passed
from his mind as a dream; and whilst his heart was agitated by his new
passion, he could scarcely believe that he had ever been interested by any
other feelings. He was surprised when he accidentally recollected the
eagerness with which he used to _amuse_ himself in Mr. Luttridge's
company; but he was certain that all this was passed for ever; and
precisely because he was under the dominion of one strong passion, he
thought he could never be under the dominion of another. Thus persisting
in his disdain of reason as a moral guide, Mr. Vincent thought, acted, and
suffered as a man of feeling. Scarcely had Belinda left Oakly-park for one
week when the ennui consequent to violent passion became insupportable;
and to console himself for her absence he flew to the billiard-table.
Emotion of some kind or other was become necessary to him; he said that
not to feel was not to live; and soon the suspense, the anxiety, the
hopes, the fears, the perpetual vicissitudes of a gamester's life, seemed
to him almost as delightful as those of a lover's. Deceived by these
appearances, Mrs. Luttridge thought that his affection for Belinda either
was or might be conquered, and her hopes of obtaining his fortune for her
niece Annabella revived. As Mr. Vincent could not endure Mrs. Freke, she
abstained, at her friend's particular desire, from appearing at her house
whilst he was there, and Mrs. Luttridge interested him much in her own
favour, by representing her indignation at _Harriot's_ conduct to be such
that it had occasioned a total breach in their friendship. Mrs. Freke's
sudden departure from Harrowgate confirmed the probability of this
quarrel; yet these two ladies were secretly leagued together in a design
of breaking off Mr. Vincent's match with Belinda, against whom Mrs. Freke
had vowed revenge. The anonymous letter, which she hoped would work her
purpose, produced, however, an effect totally unexpected upon his generous
mind: he did not guess the writer; but his indignation against such base
accusations burst forth with a violence that astounded Mrs. Luttridge. His
love for Belinda appeared ten times more enthusiastic than before--the
moment she was accused, he felt himself her defender, as well as her
lover. He was dispossessed of the evil spirit of gambling as if by a
miracle; and the billiard-table, and Mrs. Luttridge, and Miss Annabella,
vanished from his view. He breathed nothing but love; he would ask no
permission, he would wait for none from Belinda: he declared that instant
he would set out in search of her, and he would tear that infamous letter
to atoms in her presence; he would show her how impossible suspicion was
to his nature. The first violence of the hurricane Mrs. Luttridge could
not stand, and thought not of opposing; but whilst his horses and curricle
were getting ready, she took such an affectionate leave of his dog Juba,
and she protested so much that she and Annabella should not know how to
live without poor Juba, that Mr. Vincent, who was excessively fond of his
dog, could not help sympathizing in their sorrow: reasoning just as well
as they wished, he extended his belief in their affection for this animal
to friendship, if not love, for his master. He could not grant Mrs.
Luttridge's earnest supplication to leave the dog behind him under her
protection; but he promised--and laid his hand upon his heart when he
promised--that Juba should wait upon Mrs. Luttridge as soon as she went to
town. This appointment being made, Miss Annabella permitted herself to be
somewhat consoled. It would be injustice to omit that she did all that
could be done by a cambric handkerchief to evince delicate sensibility in
this parting scene. Mrs. Luttridge also deserves her share of praise for
the manner in which she reproved her niece for giving way to her feelings,
and for the address with which she wished to Heaven that poor Annabella
had the calm philosophic temper of which Miss Portman was, she understood,
a most uncommon example.

As Mr. Vincent drove toward London he reflected upon these last words; and
he could not help thinking that if Belinda had more faults she would be
more amiable.

These thoughts were, however, driven from his mind, and scarcely left a
trace behind them, when he once more saw and conversed with her. The
dignity, sincerity, and kindness which she showed the evening that he put
the anonymous letter into her hands charmed and touched him, and his real
feelings and his enthusiasm conspired to make him believe that his whole
happiness depended on her smiles. The confession which she made to him of
her former attachment to Clarence Hervey, as it raised in Vincent's mind
strong emotions of jealousy, increased his passion as much as it piqued
his pride; and she appeared in a new and highly interesting light when he
discovered that the coldness of manner which he had attributed to want of
sensibility arose probably from its excess--that her heart should have
been preoccupied was more tolerable to him than the belief of her settled
indifference. He was so intent upon these delightful varieties in his love
for Belinda that it was not till he had received a reproachful note from
Mrs. Luttridge, to remind him of his promised visit with Juba, that he
could prevail upon himself to leave Twickenham, even for a few hours. Lady
Delacour's hatred or fear of Juba, which he accidentally mentioned to Miss
Annabella, appeared to her and to her aunt "the most extraordinary thing
upon earth;" and when it was contrasted with their excessive fondness, it
seemed to him indeed unaccountable. From pure consideration for her
ladyship's nerves, Mrs. Luttridge petitioned Vincent to leave the dog with
her, that Helena might not be in such imminent danger from "the animal's
monstrous jaws." The petition was granted; and as the petitioners foresaw,
Juba became to them a most useful auxiliary. Juba's master called daily to
see him, and sometimes when he came in the morning Mrs. Luttridge was not
at home, so that his visits were repeated in the evening; and the evening
in London is what in other places is called the night. Mrs. Luttridge's
nights could not be passed without deep play. The sight of the E O table
at first shocked Mr. Vincent: he thought of Mr. Percival, and he turned
away from it; but to his active social disposition it was extremely
irksome to stand idle and uninterested where all were busy and eager in
one common pursuit; to his generous temper it seemed ungentlemanlike to
stand by the silent censor of the rest of the company; and when he
considered of how little importance a few hundreds or even thousands could
be to a man of his large fortune, he _could not help feeling_ that it was
sordid, selfish, avaricious, to dread their possible loss; and thus social
spirit, courage, generosity, all conspired to carry our man of feeling to
the gaming-table. Once there, his ruin was inevitable. Mrs. Luttridge,
whilst she held his doom in her power, hesitated only whether it would be
more her interest to marry him to her niece, or to content herself with
his fortune. His passion for Belinda, which she saw had been by some means
or other increased, in spite of the anonymous letter, gave her little
hopes of Annabella's succeeding, even with the assistance of Juba and
delicate sensibility. So the aunt, careless of her niece's disappointment,
determined that Mr. Vincent should be _her_ victim; and sensible that she
must not give him time for reflection, she hurried him on, till, in the
course of a few evenings spent at the E O table, he lost not only
thousands, but tens of thousands. One lucky night, she assured him, would
set all to rights; the run could not always be against him, and fortune
must change in his favour, if he tried her with sufficient perseverance.

The horror, the agony of mind, which he endured at this sudden ruin which
seemed impending over him--the recollection of Belinda, of Mr. Percival,
almost drove him to distraction. He retreated from the E O table one
night, swearing that he never would hazard another guinea. But his ruin
was not yet complete--he had thousands yet to lose, and Mrs. Luttridge
would not thus relinquish her prey. She persuaded him to try his fortune
_once_ more. She now suffered him to regain courage, by winning back some
of his own money. His mind was relieved from the sense of immediate
danger; he rejoiced to be saved from the humiliation of confessing his
losses to Mr. Percival and Belinda. The next day he saw her with unusual
pleasure, and this was the very morning Clarence Hervey paid his visit.
The imprudence of Lady Delacour, joined perhaps to his own consciousness
that he had a secret fault, which ought to lower him in the esteem of his
mistress, made him misinterpret every thing that passed--his jealousy was
excited in the most sudden and violent manner. He flew from Lady
Delacour's to Mrs. Luttridge's--he was soothed and flattered by the
apparent kindness with which he was received by Annabella and her aunt;
but after dinner, when one of the servants whispered to Mrs. Luttridge,
who sat next to him, that Mr. Clarence Hervey was above stairs, he gave
such a start, that the fair Annabella's lap did not escape a part of the
bumper of wine which he was going to drink to her health. In the confusion
and apologies which this accident occasioned, Mrs. Luttridge had time to
consider what might be the cause of the start, and she combined her
suspicions so quickly and judiciously that she guessed the truth--that he
feared to be seen at the E O table by a person who might find it for his
interest to tell the truth to Belinda Portman. "Mr. Vincent," said she, in
a low voice, "I have such a terrible headache, that I am fit for
nothing--I am not _up_ to E O to-night, so you must wait for your revenge
till to-morrow."

Mr. Vincent was heartily glad to be relieved from his engagement, and he
endeavoured to escape Clarence's suspicions, by devoting his whole time
this evening to Annabella, not in the least apprehensive that Mr. Hervey
would return the next night. Mr. Vincent was at the E O table at the usual
hour, for he was excessively anxious to regain what he had lost, not so
much for the sake of the money, which he could afford to lose, but lest
the defalcation in his fortune should lead Mr. Percival to the knowledge
of the means which had occasioned it. He could not endure, after his high
vaunts, to see himself humbled by his rash confidence in himself, and he
secretly vowed, that if he could but reinstate himself, by one night's
good luck, he would for ever quit the society of gamblers. A few months
before this time, he would have scorned the idea of concealing any part of
his conduct, any one of his actions, from his best friend, Mr. Percival;
but his pride now reconciled him to the meanness of concealment; and here,
the acuteness of his feelings was to his own mind an excuse for
dissimulation: so fallacious is moral instinct, unenlightened or
uncontrolled by reason and religion.

Mr. Vincent was disappointed in his hopes of regaining what he had lost.
This was not the fortunate night, which Mrs. Luttridge's prognostics had
vainly taught him to expect: he played on, however, with all the
impetuosity of his natural temper; his judgment forsook him; he scarcely
knew what he said or did; and, in the course of a few hours, he was worked
up to such a pitch of insanity, that in one desperate moment he betted
nearly all that he was worth in the world--and lost! He stood like one
stupified: the hum of voices scarcely reached his ear--he saw figures
moving before him; but he did not distinguish who or what they were.

Supper was announced, and the room emptied fast, whilst he remained
motionless leaning on the E O table. He was roused by Mrs. Luttridge
saying, as she passed, "Don't you sup to-night, Mr. Hervey?"--Vincent
looked up, and saw Clarence Hervey opposite to him. His countenance
instantly changed, and the lightning of anger flashed through the gloom of
despair: he uttered not a syllable; but his looks said, "How is this, sir?
Here again to-night to watch me?--to enjoy my ruin?--to be ready to carry
the first news of it to Belinda?"

At this last thought, Vincent struck his closed hand with violence against
his forehead; and rushing by Mr. Hervey, who in vain attempted to speak to
him, he pressed into the midst of the crowd on the stairs, and let himself
be carried along with them into the supper-room. At supper he took his
usual seat between Mrs. Luttridge and the fair Annabella; and, as if
determined to brave the observing eyes of Clarence Hervey, who was at the
same table, he affected extravagant gaiety; he ate, drank, talked, and
laughed, more than any of the company. Toward the end of the supper, his
dog, who was an inmate at Mrs. Luttridge's, licked his hand to put him in
mind that he had given him nothing to eat.

"Drink, Juba!--drink, and never have done, boy!" cried Vincent, holding a
bumper of wine to the dog's mouth; "he's the only dog I ever saw taste
wine." Then snatching up some of the flowers, which ornamented the table,
he swore that Juba should henceforward be called Anacreon, and that he
deserved to be crowned with roses by the hand of beauty. The fair
Annabella instantly took a hothouse rose from her bosom, and assisted in
making the garland, with which she crowned the new Anacreon. Insensible to
his honours, the dog, who was extremely hungry, turned suddenly to Mrs.
Luttridge, by whom he had, till this night, regularly been fed with the
choicest morsels, and lifting up his huge paw, laid it, as he had been
wont to do, upon her arm. She shook it off: he, knowing nothing of the
change in his master's affairs, laid the paw again upon her arm; and with
that familiarity to which he had long been encouraged, raised his head
almost close to the lady's cheek.

"Down, Juba!--down, sir, down!" cried Mrs. Luttridge, in a sharp voice.

"Down, Juba!--down, sir!" repeated Mr. Vincent, in a tone of bitter
feeling, all his assumed gaiety forsaking him at this instant: "Down,
Juba!--down, sir, down!" as low as your master, thought he; and pushing
back his chair, he rose from table, and precipitately left the room.

Little notice was taken of his retreat; the chairs closed in; and the gap
which his vacant place left was visible but for a moment: the company were
as gay as before; the fair Annabella smiled with a grace as attractive;
and Mrs. Luttridge exulted in the success of her schemes--whilst her
victim was in the agonies of despair.

Clarence Hervey, who had watched every change of Vincent's countenance,
saw the agony of soul with which he rose from the table, and quitted the
room: he suspected his purpose, and followed him immediately; but Mr.
Vincent had got out of the house before he could overtake him; which way
he was gone no one could tell, for no one had seen him; the only
information he could gain was, that he might possibly be heard of at
Nerot's Hotel, or at Governor Montford's, in Portland-place. The hotel was
but a few yards from Mrs. Luttridge's. Clarence went there directly. He
asked for Mr. Vincent. One of the waiters said, that he was not yet come
in; but another called out, "Mr. Vincent, sir, did you say? I have just
shown him up to his room."

"Which is the room?--I must see him instantly," cried Hervey.

"Not to-night--you can't see him now, sir. Mr. Vincent won't let you in, I
can assure you, sir. I went up myself three minutes ago, with some
letters, that came whilst he was away, but he would not let me in. I heard
him double-lock the door, and he swore terribly. I can't go up again at
this time o'night--for my life I dare not, sir."

"Where is his own man?--Has Mr. Vincent any servant here?--Mr. Vincent's
man!" cried Clarence; "let me see him!"

"You can't, sir. Mr. Vincent has just sent his black, the only servant he
has here, out on some message. Indeed, sir, there's no use in going up,"
continued the waiter, as Clarence sprang up two or three stairs at once:
"Mr. Vincent has desired nobody may disturb him. I give you my word, sir,
he'll be very angry; and, besides, 'twould be to no purpose, for he'll not
unlock the door."

"Is there but one door to the room?" said Mr. Hervey; and, as he asked the
question, he pulled a guinea out of his pocket, and touched the waiter's
hand with it.

"Oh, now I recollect--yes, sir, there's a private door through a closet:
may be that mayn't be fastened."

Clarence put the guinea into the waiter's hand, who instantly showed him
the way up the back staircase to the door that opened into Mr. Vincent's
bed-chamber.

"Leave me now," whispered he, "and make no noise."

The man withdrew; and as Mr. Hervey went close to the concealed door, to
try if it was fastened, he distinctly heard a pistol cocked. The door was
not fastened: he pushed it softly open, and saw the unfortunate man upon
his knees, the pistol in his hand, his eyes looking up to heaven. Clarence
was in one moment behind him; and, seizing hold of the pistol, he snatched
it from Vincent's grasp with so much calm presence of mind and dexterity,
that, although the pistol was cocked, it did not go off.

"Mr. Hervey!" exclaimed Vincent, starting up. Astonishment overpowered all
other sensations. But the next instant recovering the power of speech, "Is
this the conduct of a gentleman, Mr. Hervey--of a man of honour," cried
he, "thus to intrude upon my privacy; to be a spy upon my actions; to
triumph in my ruin; to witness my despair; to rob me of the only--"

He looked wildly at the pistol which Clarence held in his hand; then
snatching up another, which lay upon the table, he continued, "You are my
enemy--I know it; you are my rival; I know it; Belinda loves you! Nay,
affect not to start--this is no time for dissimulation--Belinda loves
you--you know it: for her sake, for your own, put me out of the world--put
me out of torture. It shall not be called murder: it shall be called a
duel. You have been a spy upon my actions--I demand satisfaction. If you
have one spark of honour or of courage within you, Mr. Hervey, show it
now--fight me, sir, openly as man to man, rival to rival, enemy to
enemy--fire."

"If you fire upon me, you will repent it," replied Clarence calmly; "for I
am not your enemy--I am not your rival."

"You _are_," interrupted Vincent, raising his voice to the highest pitch
of indignation: "you are my rival, though you dare not avow it! The denial
is base, false, unmanly. Oh, Belinda, is this the being you prefer to
_me_? Gamester--wretch, as I am, my soul never stooped to falsehood!
Treachery I abhor; courage, honour, and a heart worthy of Belinda, I
possess. I beseech you, sir," continued he, addressing himself, in a
tremulous tone of contempt, to Mr. Hervey, "I beseech you, sir, to leave
me to my own feelings--and to myself."

"You are not yourself at this moment, and I cannot leave you to such
mistaken feelings," replied Hervey: "command yourself for a moment, and
hear me; use your reason, and you will soon be convinced that I am your
friend."

"My friend!"

"Your friend. For what purpose did I come here? to snatch this pistol from
your hand? If it were my interest, my wish, that you were out of the
world, why did I prevent you from destroying yourself? Do you think _that_
the action of an enemy? Use your reason."

"I cannot," said Vincent, striking his forehead; "I know not what to
think--I am not master of myself. I conjure you, sir, for your own sake,
to leave me."

"For my _own_ sake!" repeated Hervey, disdainfully: "I am not thinking of
myself; nor can any thing you have said provoke me from my purpose. My
purpose is to save you from ruin, for the sake of a woman, whom, though I
am no longer your rival, I have loved longer, if not better, than you
have."

There was something so open in Hervey's countenance, such a strong
expression of truth in his manner, that it could not be resisted, and
Vincent, in an altered voice, exclaimed, "You acknowledge that you have
loved Belinda--and could you cease to love her? Impossible!--And, loving
her, must you not detest me?"

"No," said Clarence, holding out his hand to him; "I wish to be your
friend. I have not the baseness to wish to deprive others of happiness
because I cannot enjoy it myself. In one word, to put you at ease with me
for ever, I have no pretensions, I can have none, to Miss Portman. I am
engaged to another woman--in a few days you will hear of my marriage."

Mr. Vincent threw the pistol from him, and gave his hand to Hervey.

"Pardon what I said to you just now," cried he; "I knew not what I said--I
spoke in the agony of despair: your purpose is most generous--but it is in
vain--you come too late--I am ruined, past all hope."

He folded his arms, and his eyes reverted involuntarily to his pistols.

"The misery that you have this night experienced," said Mr. Hervey, "was
necessary to the security of your future happiness."

"Happiness!" repeated Vincent; "happiness--there is no happiness left for
me. My doom is fixed--fixed by my own folly--my own rash, headstrong
folly. Madman that I was, what could tempt me to the gaming-table? Oh! if
I could recall but a few days, a few hours of my existence! But remorse is
vain--prudence comes too late. Do you know," said he, fixing his eyes upon
Hervey, "do you know that I am a beggar? that I have not a farthing left
upon earth? Go to Belinda; tell her so: tell her, that if she had ever the
slightest regard for me, I deserve it no longer. Tell her to forget,
despise, detest me. Give her joy that she has escaped having a gamester
for a husband."

"I will," said Clarence, "I will, if you please, tell her what I believe
to be true, that the agony you have felt this night, the dear-bought
experience you have had, will be for ever a warning."

"A warning!" interrupted Vincent: "Oh, that it could yet be useful to
me!--But I tell you it comes too late--nothing can save me."

"_I_ can," said Mr. Hervey. "Swear to me, for Belinda's sake--solemnly
swear to me, that you will never more trust your happiness and hers to the
hazard of a die--swear that you will never more, directly or indirectly,
play at any game of chance, and I will restore to you the fortune that you
have lost."

Mr. Vincent stood as if suspended between ecstasy and despair: he dared
not trust his senses: with a fervent and solemn adjuration he made the vow
that was required of him; and Clarence then revealed to him the secret of
the E O table.

"When Mrs. Luttridge knows that I have it in my power to expose her to
public shame, she will instantly refund all that she has iniquitously won
from you. Even among gamblers she would be blasted for ever by this
discovery: she knows it, and if she dared to brave public opinion, we have
then a sure resource in the law--prosecute her. The laws of honour, as
well as the laws of the land, will support the prosecution. But she will
never let the affair go into a court of justice. I will see her early, as
early as I can to-morrow, and put you out of suspense."

"Most generous of human beings!" exclaimed Vincent; "I cannot express to
you what I feel; but your own heart, your own approbation--"

"Farewell, good night," interrupted Clarence; "I see that I have made a
friend--I was determined that Belinda's husband should be my friend--I
have succeeded beyond my hopes. And now I will _intrude_ no longer," said
he, as he closed the door after him. His sensations at this instant were
more delightful even than those of the man he had relieved from the depth
of despair. How wisely has Providence made the benevolent and generous
passions the most pleasurable!


CHAPTER XXIX.

A JEW.


In the silence of the night, when the hurry of action was over, and the
enthusiasm of generosity began to subside, the words, which had escaped
from Mr. Vincent in the paroxysm of despair and rage--the words, "_Belinda
loves you_"--recurred to Clarence Hervey; and it required all his power
over himself to banish the sound from his ear, and the idea from his mind.
He endeavoured to persuade himself that these words were dictated merely
by sudden jealousy, and that there could be no real foundation for the
assertion: perhaps this belief was a necessary support to his integrity.
He reflected, that, at all events, his engagement with Virginia could not
be violated; his proffered services to Mr. Vincent could not be withdrawn:
he was firm and consistent. Before two o'clock the next day, Vincent
received from Clarence this short note:

"Enclosed is Mrs. Luttridge's acknowledgment, that she has no claims upon
you, in consequence of what passed last night. I said nothing about the
money she had previously won, as I understand you have paid it.

"The lady fell into fits, but it would not do. The husband attempted to
bully me; I told him I should be at his service, after he had made the
whole affair public, by calling you out.

"I would have seen you myself this morning, but that I am engaged with
lawyers and marriage settlements.

"Yours sincerely,

"CLARENCE HERVEY."

Overjoyed at the sight of Mrs. Luttridge's acknowledgment, Vincent
repeated his vow never more to hazard himself in her dangerous society. He
was impatient to see Belinda; and, full of generous and grateful
sentiments, in his first moment of joy, he determined to conceal nothing
from her; to make at once the confession of his own imprudence and the
eulogium of Clarence Hervey's generosity. He was just setting out for
Twickenham, when he was sent for by his uncle, Governor Montford, who had
business to settle with him, relative to his West India estates. He spent
the remainder of the morning with his uncle; and there he received a
charming letter from Belinda--that letter which she had written and sent
whilst Lady Delacour was reading Clarence Hervey's packet. It would have
cured Vincent of jealousy, even if he had not, in the interim, seen Mr.
Hervey, and learnt from him the news of his approaching marriage. Miss
Portman, at the conclusion of her letter, informed him that Lady Delacour
purposed being in Berkeley-square the next day; that they were to spend a
week in town, on account of Mrs. Margaret Delacour, who had promised her
ladyship a visit; and to go to Twickenham would be a formidable journey to
an infirm old lady, who seldom stirred out of her house.

Whatever displeasure Lady Delacour felt towards her friend Belinda, on
account of her coldness to Mr. Hervey, and her steadiness to Mr. Vincent,
had by this time subsided. Angry people, who express their passion, as it
has been justly said, always speak worse than they think. This was usually
the case with her ladyship.

The morning after they arrived in town, she came into Belinda's room, with
an air of more than usual sprightliness and satisfaction. "Great
news!--Great news!--Extraordinary news!--But it is very imprudent to
excite your expectations, my dear Belinda. Pray, did you hear a wonderful
noise in the square a little while ago?"

"Yes, I thought I heard a great bustle; but Marriott appeased my
curiosity, by saying that it was only a battle between two dogs."

"It is well if this battle between two dogs do not end in a duel between
two men," said Lady Delacour.

"This prospect of mischief seems to have put your ladyship in wonderfully
good spirits," said Belinda, smiling.

"But what do you think I have heard of Mr. Vincent?" continued Lady
Delacour: "that Miss Annabella Luttridge is dying for love of him--or of
his fortune. Knowing, as I do, the vanity of mankind, I suppose that your
Mr. Vincent, all perfect as he is, was flattered by the little coquette;
and perhaps he condescends to repay her in the same coin. I take it for
granted--for I always fill up the gaps in a story my own way--I take it
for granted that Mr. Vincent got into some entanglement with her, and that
this has been the cause of the quarrel with the aunt. That there has been
a quarrel is certain, for your friend Juba told Marriott so. His massa
swore that he would never go to Mrs. Luttridge's again; and this morning
he took the decisive measure of sending to request that his dog might be
returned. Juba went for his namesake. Miss Annabella Luttridge was the
person who delivered up the dog; and she desired the black to tell his
master, with her compliments, that Juba's collar was rather too tight; and
she begged that he would not fail to take it off as soon as he could.
Perhaps, my dear, you are as simple as the poor negro, and suspect no
_finesse_ in this message. Miss Luttridge, aware that the faithful fellow
was too much in your interests to be either persuaded or bribed to carry a
billet-doux from any other lady to his master, did not dare to trust him
upon this occasion; but she had the art to make him carry her letter
without his knowing it. _Colin maillard_, vulgarly called _blind man's
buff_, was, some time ago, a favourite play amongst the Parisian ladies:
now _hide and seek_ will be brought into fashion, I suppose, by the fair
Annabella. Judge of her talents for the game by this instance:--she hid
her billet-doux within the lining of Juba's collar. The dog, unconscious
of his dignity as an ambassador, or rather as a chargé d'affaires, set out
on his way home. As he was crossing Berkeley-square he was met by Sir
Philip Baddely and his dog. The baronet's insolent favourite bit the
black's heels. Juba, the dog, resented the injury immediately, and a
furious combat ensued. In the height of the battle Juba's collar fell off.
Sir Philip Baddely espied the paper that was sewed to the lining, and
seized upon it immediately: the negro caught hold of it at the same
instant: the baronet swore; the black struggled: the baronet knocked him
down. The great dog left his canine antagonist that moment, flew at your
baronet, and would have eaten him up at three mouthfuls, if Sir Philip had
not made good his retreat to Dangerfield's circulating library. The
negro's head was terribly cut by the sharp point of a stone, and his ankle
was sprained; but, as he has just told me, he did not feel this till
afterward. He started up, and pursued his master's enemy. Sir Philip was
actually reading Miss Luttridge's billet-doux aloud when the black entered
the library. He reclaimed his master's property with great intrepidity;
and a gentleman who was present took his part immediately.

"In the mean time, Lord Delacour, who had been looking at the battle from
our breakfast-room window, determined to go over to Dangerfield's, to see
what was the matter, and how all this would end. He entered the library
just as the gentleman who had volunteered in favour of poor Juba was
disputing with Sir Philip. The bleeding negro told my lord, in as plain
words as he could, the cause of the dispute; and Lord Delacour, who, to do
him justice, is a man of honour, joined instantly in his defence. The
baronet thought proper at length to submit; and he left the field of
battle, without having any thing to say for himself but--'Damme!--very
extraordinary, damme!'--_or words to that effect_.

"Now, Lord Delacour, besides being a man of honour, is also a man of
humanity. I know that I cannot oblige you more, my dear Belinda, than by
seasoning my discourse with a little conjugal flattery. My lord was
concerned to see the poor black writhing in pain; and with the assistance
of the gentleman who had joined in his defence, he brought Juba across the
square to our house. Guess for what:--to try upon the strained ankle an
infallible quack balsam recommended to him by the Dowager Lady Boucher. I
was in the hall when they brought the poor fellow in: Marriott was called.
'Mrs. Marriott,' cried my lord, 'pray let us have Lady Boucher's
infallible balsam--this instant!' Had you but seen the eagerness of face,
or heard the emphasis, with which he said '_infallible_ balsam'--you must
let me laugh at the recollection. One human smile must pass, and be
forgiven."

"The smile may be the more readily forgiven," said Belinda, "since I am
sure you are conscious that it reflected almost as much upon yourself as
upon Lord Delacour."

"Why, yes; belief in a quack doctor is full as bad as belief in a quack
balsam, I allow. Your observation is so malicious, because so just, that
to punish you for it, I will not tell you the remainder of my story for a
week to come; and I assure you that the best part of it I have left
untold. To return to our friend Mr. Vincent:--could you but know what
reasons I have, at this instant, for wishing him in Jamaica, you would
acknowledge that I am truly candid in confessing that I believe my
suspicions about E O were unfounded; and I am truly generous in admitting
that you are right to treat him with justice."

This last enigmatical sentence Belinda could not prevail upon Lady
Delacour to explain.

In the evening Mr. Vincent made his appearance. Lady Delacour immediately
attacked him with raillery, on the subject of the fair Annabella. He was
rejoiced to perceive that her suspicions took this turn, and that nothing
relative to the transaction in which Clarence Hervey had been engaged had
transpired. Vincent wavered in his resolution to confess the truth to
Belinda. Though he had determined upon this in the first moment of joyful
enthusiasm, yet the delay of four-and-twenty hours had made a material
change in his feelings; his most virtuous resolves were always rather the
effect of sudden impulse than of steady principle. But when the tide of
passion had swept away the landmarks, he had no method of ascertaining the
boundaries of right and wrong. Upon the present occasion his love for
Belinda confounded all his moral calculations: one moment, his feelings as
a man of honour forbade him to condescend to the meanness of
dissimulation; but the next instant his feelings as a lover prevailed; and
he satisfied his conscience by the idea that, as his vow must preclude all
danger of his return to the gaming-table in future, it would only be
creating an unnecessary alarm in Belinda's mind to speak to her of his
past imprudence. His generosity at first revolted from the thought of
suppressing those praises of Clarence Hervey, which had been so well
deserved; but his jealousy returned, to combat his first virtuous impulse.
He considered that his own inferiority must by comparison appear more
striking to his mistress; and he sophistically persuaded himself that it
would be for her happiness to conceal the merits of a rival, to whom she
could never be united. In this vacillating state of mind he continued
during the greatest part of the evening. About half an hour before he took
his leave, Lady Delacour was called out of the room by Mrs. Marriott. Left
alone with Belinda, his embarrassment increased, and the unsuspecting
kindness of her manner was to him the most bitter reproach. He stood in
silent agony whilst in a playful tone she smiled and said,

"Where are your thoughts, Mr. Vincent? If I were of a jealous temper, I
should say with the fair Annabella--"

"You would say wrong, then," replied Mr. Vincent, in a constrained voice.
He was upon the point of telling the truth; but to gain a reprieve of a
few minutes, he entered into a defence of his conduct towards Miss
Luttridge.

The sudden return of Lady Delacour relieved him from his embarrassment,
and they conversed only on general subjects during the remainder of the
evening; and he at last departed, secretly rejoicing that he was, as he
fancied, under the necessity of postponing his explanation; he even
thought of suppressing the history of his transaction with Mrs. Luttridge.
He knew that his secret was safe with Clarence Hervey: Mrs. Luttridge
would be silent for her own sake; and neither Lady Delacour nor Belinda
had any connexion with her society.

A few days afterward, Mr. Vincent went to Gray, the jeweller, for some
trinkets which he had bespoken. Lord Delacour was there, speaking about
the diamond ring, which Gray had promised to dispose of for him. Whilst
his lordship and Mr. Vincent were busy about their own affairs, Sir Philip
Baddely and Mr. Rochfort came into the shop. Sir Philip and Mr. Vincent
had never before met. Lord Delacour, to prevent him from getting into a
quarrel about a lady who was so little worth fighting for as Miss
Annabella Luttridge, had positively refused to tell Mr. Vincent what he
knew of the affair, or to let him know the name of the gentleman who was
concerned in it.

The shopman addressed Mr. Vincent by his name, and immediately Sir Philip
whispered to Rochfort, that Mr. Vincent was "_the master of the black_."
Vincent, who unluckily overheard him, instantly asked Lord Delacour if
that was the gentleman who had behaved so ill to his servant? Lord
Delacour told him that it was now of no consequence to inquire. "If," said
his lordship, "either of these gentlemen choose to accost you, I shall
think you do rightly to retort; but for Heaven's sake do not begin the
attack!"

Vincent's impetuosity was not to be restrained; he demanded from Sir
Philip, whether he was the person who had beaten his servant? Sir Philip
readily obliged him with an answer in the affirmative; and the consequence
was the loss of a finger to the baronet, and a wound in the side to Mr.
Vincent, which, though it did not endanger his life, yet confined him to
his room for several days. The impatience of his mind increased his fever,
and retarded his recovery.

When Belinda's first alarm for Mr. Vincent's safety was over, she
anxiously questioned Lord Delacour as to the particulars of all that had
passed between Mr. Vincent and Sir Philip, that she might judge of the
manner in which her lover had conducted himself. Lord Delacour, who was a
man of strict truth, was compelled to confess that Mr. Vincent had shown
more spirit than temper, and more courage than prudence. Lady Delacour
rejoiced to perceive that this account made Belinda uncommonly serious.

Mr. Vincent now thought himself sufficiently recovered to leave his room;
his physicians, indeed, would have kept him prisoner a few days longer,
but he was too impatient of restraint to listen to their counsels.

"Juba, tell the doctor, when he comes, that you could not keep me at home;
and that is all that is necessary to be said."

He had now summoned courage to acknowledge to Belinda all that had
happened, and was proceeding, with difficulty, down stairs, when he was
suddenly struck by the sound of a voice which he little expected at this
moment; a voice he had formerly been accustomed to hear with pleasure, but
now it smote him to the heart:--it was the voice of Mr. Percival. For the
first time in his life, he wished to deny himself to his friend. The
recollection of the E O table, of Mrs. Luttridge, of Mr. Percival as his
guardian, and of all the advice he had heard from him as his friend,
rushed upon his mind at this instant; conscious and ashamed, he shrunk
back, precipitately returned to his own room, and threw himself into a
chair, breathless with agitation. He listened, expecting to hear Mr.
Percival coming up stairs, and endeavoured to compose himself, that he
might not betray, by his own agitation, all that he wished most anxiously
to conceal. After waiting for some time, he rang the bell, to make
inquiries. The waiter told him that a Mr. Percival had asked for him; but,
having been told by his black that he was just gone out, the gentleman
being, as he said, much hurried, had left a note; for an answer to which
he would call at eight o'clock in the evening. Vincent was glad of this
short reprieve. "Alas!" thought he, "how changed am I, when I fear to meet
my best friend! To what has this one fatal propensity reduced me!"

He was little aware of the new difficulties that awaited him.

Mr. Percival's note was as follows:--


"My dear _friend_!

"Am not I a happy man, to find a friend in my ci-devant ward? But I have
no time for sentiment; nor does it become the character, in which I am now
writing to you--that of a DUN. You are so rich, and so prudent, that the
word in capital letters cannot frighten you. Lady Anne's cousin, poor Mr.
Carysfort, is dead. I am guardian to his boys; they are but ill provided
for. I have fortunately obtained a partnership in a good house for the
second son. Ten thousand pounds are wanting to establish him--we cannot
raise the money amongst us, without dunning poor Mr. Vincent. Enclosed is
your bond for the purchase-money of the little estate you bought from me
last summer. I know that you have double the sum we want in ready
money--so I make no ceremony. Let me have the ten thousand this evening,
if you can, as I wish to leave town as soon as possible.

"Yours most sincerely,

"HENRY PERCIVAL."

Now Mr. Vincent had lost, and had actually paid to Mrs. Luttridge, the
ready money which had been destined to discharge his debt to Mr. Percival:
he expected fresh remittances from the West Indies in the course of a few
weeks; but, in the mean time, he must raise this money immediately: this
he could only do by having recourse to Jews--a desperate expedient. The
Jew, to whom he applied, no sooner discovered that Mr. Vincent was under a
necessity of having this sum before eight o'clock in the evening than he
became exorbitant in his demands; and the more impatient this unfortunate
young man became, the more difficulties he raised. At last, a bargain was
concluded between them, in which Vincent knew that he was grossly imposed
upon; but to this he submitted, for he had no alternative. The Jew
promised to bring him ten thousand pounds at five o'clock in the evening,
but it was half after seven before he made his appearance; and then he was
so dilatory and circumspect, in reading over and signing the bonds, and in
completing the formalities of the transaction, that before the money was
actually in Vincent's possession, one of the waiters of the hotel knocked
at the door to let him know that Mr. Percival was coming up stairs.
Vincent hurried the Jew into an adjoining apartment, and bid him wait
there, till he should come to finish the business. Though totally
unsuspicious, Mr. Percival could not help being struck with the
perturbation in which he found his young friend. Vincent immediately began
to talk of the duel, and his friend was led to conclude that his anxiety
arose from this affair. He endeavoured to put him at ease by changing the
conversation. He spoke of the business which brought him to town, and of
the young man whom he was going to place with a banker. "I hope," said he,
observing that Vincent grew more embarrassed, "that my _dunning_ you for
this money is not really inconvenient."

"Not in the least--not in the least. I have the money ready--in a few
moments--if you'll be so good as to wait here--I have the money ready in
the next room."

At this instant a loud noise was heard--the raised voices of two people
quarrelling. It was Juba, the black, and Solomon, the Jew. Mr. Vincent had
sent Juba out of the way, on some errand, whilst he had been transacting
his affairs with the Jew; but the black, having executed the commission on
which he had been sent, returned, and went into his master's bedchamber,
to read at his leisure a letter which he had just received from his wife.
He did not at first see the Jew, and he was spelling out the words of his
wife's letter.

"My dear Juba,

"I take this op-por-tu--"

--_nity_ he would have said; but the Jew, who had held his breath in to
avoid discovery, till he could hold it no longer, now drew it so loud,
that Juba started, looked round, and saw the feet of a man, which appeared
beneath the bottom of the window curtain. Where fears of supernatural
appearances were out of the question, our negro was a man of courage; he
had no doubt that the man who was concealed behind the curtain was a
robber, but the idea of a robber did not unnerve him like that of an Obeah
woman. With presence of mind worthy of a greater danger, Juba took down
his master's pistol, which hung over the chimney-piece, and marching
deliberately up to the enemy, he seized the Jew by the throat,
exclaiming--

"You rob my massa?--You dead man, if you rob my massa."

Terrified at the sight of the pistol, the Jew instantly explained who he
was, and producing his large purse, assured Juba that he was come to lend
money, and not to take it from his master; but this appeared highly
improbable to Juba, who believed his master to be the richest man in the
world; besides, the Jew's language was scarcely intelligible to him, and
he saw secret terror in Solomon's countenance. Solomon had an antipathy to
the sight of a black, and he shrunk from the negro with strong signs of
aversion. Juba would not relinquish his hold; each went on talking in his
own angry gibberish as loud as he could, till at last the negro fairly
dragged the Jew into the presence of his master and Mr. Percival.

It is impossible to describe Mr. Vincent's confusion, or Mr. Percival's
astonishment. The Jew's explanation was perfectly intelligible to him; he
saw at once all the truth. Vincent, overwhelmed with shame, stood the
picture of despair, incapable of uttering a single syllable.

"There is no necessity to borrow this money on my account," said Mr.
Percival, calmly; "and if there were, we could probably have it on more
reasonable terms than this gentleman proposes."

"I care not on what terms I have it--I care not what becomes of me--I am
undone!" cried Vincent.

Mr. Percival coolly dismissed the Jew, made a sign to Juba to leave the
room, and then, addressing himself to Vincent, said, "I can borrow the
money that I want elsewhere. Fear no reproaches from me--I foresaw all
this--you have lost this sum at play: it is well that it was not your
whole fortune. I have only one question to ask you, on which depends my
esteem--have you informed Miss Portman of this affair?"

"I have not yet told her, but I was actually half down stairs in my way to
tell her."

"Then, Mr. Vincent, you are still my friend. I know the difficulty of such
an avowal--but it is necessary."

"Cannot you, dear Mr. Percival, save me the intolerable shame of
confessing my own folly? Spare me this mortification! Be yourself the
bearer of this intelligence, and the mediator in my favour."

"I will with pleasure," said Mr. Percival; "I will go this instant: but I
cannot say that I have any hope of persuading Belinda to believe in your
being irrevocably reclaimed from the charms of play."

"Indeed, my excellent friend, she may rely upon me: I feel such horror at
the past, such heartfelt resolution against all future temptation, that
you may pledge yourself for my total reformation."

Mr. Percival promised that he would exert all his influence, except by
pledging his own honour; to this he could not consent. "If I have any good
news for you, I will return as soon as possible; but I will not be the
bearer of any painful intelligence," said he; and he departed, leaving Mr.
Vincent in a state of anxiety, which, to his temper, was a punishment
sufficient for almost any imprudence he could have committed.

Mr. Percival returned no more that night. The next morning Mr. Vincent
received the following letter from Belinda. He guessed his fate: he had
scarcely power to read the words.

"I promised you that, whenever my own mind should be decided, I would not
hold yours in suspense; yet at this moment I find it difficult to keep my
word.

"Instead of lamenting, as you have often done, that my esteem for your
many excellent qualities never rose beyond the bounds of friendship, we
have now reason to rejoice at this, since it will save us much useless
pain. It spares me the difficulty of conquering a passion that might be
fatal to my happiness; and it will diminish the regret which you may feel
at our separation. I am now obliged to say, that circumstances have made
me certain we could not add to our mutual felicity by any nearer
connexion.

"The hope of enjoying domestic happiness with a person whose manners,
temper, and tastes suited my own, inclined me to listen to your addresses.
But this happiness I could never enjoy with one who has any propensity to
the love of play.

"For my own sake, as well as for yours, I rejoice that your fortune has
not been materially injured; as this relieves me from the fear that my
present conduct should be imputed to interested motives. Indeed, such is
the generosity of your own temper, that in any situation I should scarcely
have reason to apprehend from you such a suspicion.

"The absolute impossibility of my forming at present a connexion with
another, will prevent you from imagining that I am secretly influenced by
sentiments different from those which I avow; nor can any weak doubts on
this subject expose me to my own reproaches.

"You perceive, sir, that I am not willing utterly to lose your esteem,
even when I renounce, in the most unequivocal manner, all claim upon your
affections. If any thing should appear to you harsh in this letter, I beg
you to impute it to the real cause--my desire to spare you all painful
suspense, by convincing you at once that my determination is irrevocable.
With sincere wishes for your happiness, I bid you farewell.

"BELINDA PORTMAN."


A few hours after Mr. Vincent had read this letter he threw himself into a
post-chaise, and set out for Germany. He saw that all hopes of being
united to Belinda were over, and he hurried as far from her as possible.
Her letter rather soothed than irritated his temper; her praises of his
generosity were highly gratifying, and they had so powerful an effect upon
his mind, that he was determined to prove that they were deserved. His
conscience reproached him with not having made sufficiently honourable
mention of Clarence Hervey's conduct, on the night when he was on the
point of destroying himself. Before he left London he wrote a full account
of this whole transaction, to be given to Miss Portman after his
departure.

Belinda was deeply touched by this proof of his generosity. His
letter--his farewell letter--she could not read without great emotion. It
was written with true feeling, but in a manly style, without one word of
vain lamentation.

"What a pity," thought Belinda, "that with so many good and great
qualities, I should be forced to bid him adieu for ever!"

The perfection to which mosaic-work has arrived may possibly hold out a
strong temptation to the thoughtless to substitute the shadow for the
reality. Do not deceive yourself; an experienced eye will instantly
detect the imposition, though your ornaments may be
[Illustration: FRESH EVERY DAY;]

for, we will defy any true gentleman to preserve an equanimity of
expression under the hint--either visual or verbal--that (to use the
language of the poet) you are "a man of brass."
We have a faint recollection of a class of gentlemen who used to attach
an heterogeneal collection of massive seals and keys to one end
of a chain, and a small church-clock to the other.

The chain then formed a pendulum in front of their small-clothes,
and the dignified oscillation of the appendages was considered to
distinguish the gentleman.

They were also used as auxiliaries in argument; for whenever an
hiatus occurred in the discussion, the speaker, by having resort
to his watch-chain, could frequently confound his adversary by
commencing a series of rapid gyrations.

But the fashion has descended to merchants, lawyers, doctors, _et sui
generis_, who never drive bargains, ruin debtors, kill patients, _et cetera_,
without having recourse to this imposing decoration.

_Rings_ are the next indicators of superfluous cash. As they are _merely
ornamental_, they should resemble vipers, tapeworms, snakes, toads,
monkey's, death's heads, and similar engaging and pleasing subjects.
The more liberally the fingers are enriched, the greater the
assurance that the hand is never employed in any useful labour, and
is consequently only devoted to the minisitration of indulgences,
and the exhibition of those elegant productions which distinguish
the highly-civilised gentleman from the _highly-tattooed_ savage.

Mourning-rings have an air of extreme respectability; for they are
always suggestive of a legacy, and of the fact that you have been
connected with somebody who was not buried at the expense of the
parish.

_Studs_ should be selected with the greatest possible care, and in our
opinion the small gold ones can only be worn by a perfect gentleman;
for whilst they perform their required office, they do not distract
the attention from the quality and whiteness of your linen.

Some that we have seen were evidently intended for cabinet pictures, rifle
targets and breast-plates.

_Pins._--These necessary adjuncts to the cravat of a gentleman have undergone
a singular revolution during late years; but we confess we are
admirers of the present fashion, for if it is desirable to indulge
in an ornament, it is equally desirable that everybody should be
gratified by the exhibition thereof.

We presume that it is with this commendable feeling that pins'-heads (whose
smallness in former days became a proverb) should now resemble the
apex of a beadle's staff; and, as though to make "assurance doubly
sure," a plurality is absolutely required for the decoration of a
gentleman.

In these times, when political partisanship is so exceedingly
violent, why not make the pins indicative of the opinions of the
wearer, as the waistcoat was in the days of Fox. We could suggest some
very appropriate designs; for instance, the heads of Peel and Wakley,
connected by a _very_ slight link--Sibthorp and Peter Borthwick by a
series of long-car rings--Muntz and D'Israeli cut out of very hard wood,
and united by a hair-chain; and many others too numerous to mention.

* * * * *

HAMLET'S SOLILOQUY.

PARODIED BY A XX TEETOTALLER.

To drink, or not to drink? That is the question.
Whether 'tis nobler inwardly to suffer The pangs and twitchings of uneasy
stomach, Or to take brandy-toddy 'gainst the colic, And by imbibing end
it? To drink,--to sleep,-- To snore;--and, by a snooze, to say we end The
head-ache, and the morning's parching thirst That drinking's heir to;--'tis
a consummation Devoutly to be wish'd. To drink,--to pay,-- To pay the
waiter's bill?--Ay--there's the rub; For in that snipe-like bill, a
stop may come, When we would shuffle off our mortal score, Must give us
pause. There's the respect That makes sobriety of so long date; For who
could bear to hear the glasses ring In concert clear--the chairman's
ready toast-- The pops of out-drawn corks--the "hip hurrah!"

The eloquence of claret--and the songs, Which often through the noisy
revel break, When a man--might his quietus make With a full bottle?

Who would sober be, Or sip weak coffee through the live-long night; But
that the dread of being laid upon That stretcher by policemen borne,
on which The reveller reclines,--puzzles me much, And makes me
rather tipple ginger beer, Than fly to brandy, or to-- [Illustration:
--HODGE'S SIN?]

Thus poverty doth make us Temp'rance men

.

* * * * *

"TRY OUR BEST SYMPATHY."

It is a fact, when the deputation of the distressed manufacturers waited
upon Sir Robert Peel to represent to him their destitute condition,
that the Right Honourable Baronet declared he felt the deepest
sympathy for them.

This is all very fine--but we fear greatly, if Sir Robert should be inclined
to make a commercial speculation of his _sympathy_, that he would go
into the market with 
[Illustration: A VERY SMALL STOCK-IN(G) TRADE

.]
* * * * *

THE MAN OF HABIT.

I meet with men of this character very frequently, and though I
believe that the stiff formality of the past age was more congenial
than the present to the formation and growth of these peculiar
beings, there are still a sufficient number of the species in
existence for the philosophical cosmopolite to study and comment
upon.

A true specimen of a _man of habit_ should be an old bachelor,--for
matrimony deranges the whole clock-work system upon which he piques
himself.

He could never endure to have his breakfast delayed for one second
to indulge "his soul's far dearer part" with a prolonged morning
dream; and he dislikes children, because the noisy urchins make a
point of tormenting him wherever he goes.

The Man of Habit has a certain hour for all the occupations of his
life; he allows himself twenty minutes for shaving and dressing;
fifteen for breakfasting, in which time he eats two slices of toast,
drinks two cups of coffee, and swallows two eggs boiled for two and
a half minutes by an infallible chronometer.

After breakfast he reads the newspaper, but lays it down in the very heart
and pith of a clever article on his own side of the question, the moment
his time is up.

He has even been known to leave the theatre at the very moment of the
_dénouement_ of a deeply-interesting play rather than exceed his
limited hour by five minutes.

He will be out of temper all day, if he does not find his hat on its proper
nail and his cane in its allotted corner. He chooses a particular walk,
where he may take his prescribed number of turns without interruption, for
he would prefer suffering a serious inconvenience rather than be
obliged to quicken or slacken his pace to suit the speed of a friend
who might join him.

My uncle Simon was a character of this cast.

I could take it on my conscience to assert that, every night for
the forty years preceding his death, he had one foot in the bed on
the first stroke of 11 o'clock, and just as the last chime had
tolled, that he was enveloped in the blankets to his chin.

I have known him discharge a servant because his slippers were placed by
his bed-side for contrary feet; and I have won a wager by betting that he
would turn the corner of a certain street at precisely three minutes
before ten in the morning.

My uncle used to frequent a club in the City, of which he had become the
oracle. Precisely at eight o'clock he entered the room--took his seat in a
leather-backed easy chair in a particular corner--read a certain
favourite journal--drank two glasses of rum toddy--smoked four
pipes--and was always in the act of putting his right arm into the
sleeve of his great-coat, to return home, as the clock struck ten.

The cause of my uncle's death was as singular as his life was
whimsical. He went one night to the club, and was surprised to find his
seat occupied by a tall dark-browed man, who smoked a _meerschaum_
of prodigious size in solemn silence.

Numerous hints were thrown out to the stranger that the seat had by
prescriptive right and ancient custom become the property of my
uncle; he either did not or would not understand them, and continued
to keep his possession of the leather-backed chair with the most
imperturbable _sang-froid_.

My uncle in despair took another seat, and endeavoured to appear as if
nothing had occurred to disturb him,--but he could not dissimulate. He was
pierced to the heart,--and
[Illustration: "I SAW THE IRON ENTER HIS SOLE."]
My uncle left the club half-an-hour before his time; he returned
home--went to bed without winding his watch--and the next morning
he was found lifeless in his bed

.

* * * * *

PUNCH'S POLITICAL ECONOMY.

The subject of political economy is becoming so general a portion of
education, that it will doubtless soon be introduced at the infant
schools among the other eccentric evolutions or playful whirls of
_Mr.

Wilder-spin_. At it is the fashion to comprehend nothing, but to have a
smattering of everything, we beg leave to smatter our readers with a
very thin layer of political economy. In the first place, "political"
means "political," and "economy" signifies "economy," at least when taken
separately; but put them together, and they express all kinds of
extravagance. Political economy contemplates the possibility of labouring
without work, eating without food, and living without the means of
subsistence. Social, or individual economy, teaches to live _within_ our
means; political economy calls upon us to live _without_ them. In the
debates, when more than usual time has been wasted in talking the
most _extravagant_ stuff, ten to one that there has been a good
deal of _political economy_.

If you bother a poor devil who is dying of want, and speak to him about
_consumption_, it is probably "political economy" that you will have
addressed to him. If you talk to a man sinking with hunger about
_floating_ capital, you will no doubt have given him the benefit
of a few hints in "political economy:" while, if to a wretch in tattered
rags you broach the theory of _rent_, he must be an ungrateful
beast indeed if he does not appreciate the blessings of "political
economy."

That "labour is wealth" forms one of the most refreshing axioms of this
delicious science; and if brought to the notice of a man breaking stones
on the road, he would perhaps wonder where his wealth might be while
thinking of his labour, but he could not question your proficiency
in "political economy."

In fact, it is the most political and most economical science in the world,
if it can only be made to achieve its object, which is to persuade the
hard-working classes that they are the richest people in the universe, for
their labour gives value, and value gives wealth; but who gets the value
and the wealth is a consideration that does not fall within the
province of "political economy."

There is another branch of the subject at which we shall merely
glance; but one hint will open up a wide field of observation to
the student.

The branch to which we allude is the tremendous extent to which
political economy is carried by those who interfere so much in
politics with so very little political knowledge, and who consequently
display a most surprising share of "political economy,"
As a very little goes a great way, and particularly as the most
diminutive portion of knowledge communicated by ourselves is, like
the "one small pill constituting a dose," much more efficacious
than the 40 Number Ones and 50 Number Twos of the mere quacks, we
close for the present our observations on _Political Economy_

.

* * * * *

ON THE KEY-VIVE.

There can be no doubt as to the _primâ facie_ evidence of the hostile
intentions of the destroyed American steamer, with respect to the
disaffected on Navy Island, as, from the acknowledged inquisitiveness
of the gentler sex, there can be no doubt that _Caroline_ would
have a natural predilection for 
[Illustration: PRIVATE (H)EERING

.]

* * * * *

LAST NEW SAYINGS.

_Come, none of your raillery_; as the stage-coach indignantly said to the
steam-engine.

_That "strain" again_; as the Poor-law Commissioner generously said
to the water-gruel sieve.

_I paid very dear for my whistle_; as the steam-engine emphatically
said to the railroad.

_Peel for ever!_ as the church bells joyously said to Conservative
hearts.

* * * * *

There is at present a man in New York whose temper is so exceedingly hot
that he invariably reduces all his shirts to tinder.

* * * * *

PUNCH'S THEATRE.

THE MAID OF HONOUR.

The Adelphi "Correspondent from Paris" has favoured that Theatre
with an adaptation of Scribe's "_Verre d'Eau_," which he has called
"The Maid of Honour."

Everybody must remember that, last year, the trifling affair of the
British Government was settled by the far more momentous consideration
of who should be Ladies of the Bed-chamber.

The Parisians, seeing the dramatic capabilities of this incident, put
it into a farce, resting the whole affair upon the shoulders of a
former Queen whose Court was similarly circumstanced.

This is the piece which Mr. Yates has had the daring to get done
into English, and transplanted into Spain, and interspersed with
embroidery, confectionary, and a Spanish sentence; the last judiciously
entrusted to that accomplished linguist, Mr.

John Saunders.

Soon after the rising of the curtain, we behold the figure of Mr. Yates
displayed to great advantage in the dress usually assigned to _Noodle_
and _Doodle_ in the tragedy of "Tom Thumb."

He represents the _Count Ollivarez_, and the head of a political party--the
opposition. The Court faction having for its chief the _Duchess of
Albafurez_, who being Mistress of the Queen's robes is of course her
favourite; for the millinery department of the country which can
boast of a Queen Regnant is of far higher importance than foreign
or financial affairs, justice, police, or war--consequently, the
chief of the wardrobe is far more exalted and better beloved than
a mere Premier or Secretary of State.

The Count is planning an intrigue, the agents of which are to be _Henrico_,
a Court page, and _Felicia_, a court milliner. Not being able to make
much of the page, he turns over a new leaf, and addresses himself to
the dress-maker; so, after a few preliminary hems, he draws out the thread
of his purpose to her, and cuts out an excellent pattern for her guidance,
which if she implicitly follow will assuredly make her a Maid of
Honour.

A comedy without mystery is Punch without a joke; Yates without a speech
to the audience on a first night; or Bartley's pathos without a
pocket-handkerchief.

The Court page soon opens the book of _imbroglio_. He is made a Captain
of the Queen's Guard by some unknown hand; he has always been protected
by the same unseen benefactor, who, as if to guard him from every ill
that flesh is heir to, showers on him his or her favours upon
condition that he never marries!

"Happy man," exclaims the Count. "Not at all," answers the other, "I am
in love with _Felicia_!"

Nobody is surprised at this, for it is a rule amongst dramatists never
to forbid the banns until the banned, poor devil, is on the steps of the
altar.

_Henrico_, now a Captain, goes off to flesh his sword; meets with
an insult, and by the greatest good luck kills his antagonist in
the precincts of the palace; so that if he be not hanged for murder,
his fortune is made.

The victim is the Count's cousin, to whom he is next of kin. "Good Heavens!"
ejaculates _Ollivarez_, "You have made yourself a criminal, and
me--a Duke! Horrible!"
By the way, this same _Henrico_, as performed by that excellent swimmer
(in the water-piece), Mr.

Spencer Forde, forms a very entertaining character. His imperturbable
calmness while uttering the heart-stirring words, assigned by the
author to his own description of the late affair-of-honourable
assassination, was highly edifying to the philosophic mind.

The pleasing and amiable tones in which he stated how irretrievably he
was ruined, the dulcet sweetness of the farewell to his heart's adored, the
mathematical exactitude of his position while embracing her, the
cool deliberation which marked his exit--offered a picture of calm
stoicism just on the point of tumbling over the precipice of
destruction not to be equalled--not, at least, since those halcyon
dramatic days when Osbaldiston leased Covent Garden, and played
_Pierre_.

Somehow or other--for one must not be too particular about the wherefores
of stage political intrigues--_Felicia_ is promoted from the office of
making dresses for the Queen to that of putting them on.

Behold her a maid of honour and of all-work; for the Queen takes
her into her confidence, and in that case people at Court have an
immense variety of duties to perform.

The Duchess's place is fast becoming a sinecure, and she trembles for her
influence--perhaps, in case of dismissal, for her next quarter's
salary to boot--so she shakes in her shoes.

It is at this stage of the plot that we perceive why the part of
_Henrico_ was entrusted to the gentleman who plays it,--the mystery
we have alluded to being by this arrangement very considerably increased;
for we now learn that no fewer than three ladies in the piece are
in love with him, namely, _Felicia_, the Queen, and the Duchess.

Now the most penetrating auditor would never, until actually informed
of the fact, for a moment suspect a Queen, or even a Duchess, of such bad
taste; for, as far as our experience goes, we have generally found that
women do not cast their affections to men who are sheepish, insensible,
cold, ungainly, with small voices, and not more than five feet
high. Surprise artfully excited and cleverly satisfied is the grand aim
of the dramatist. How completely is it here fulfilled! for when we
discover that the personator of Henrico is meant for an Adonis, we _are_
astonished.

The truth is then, that the secret benefactor of this supposed-to-be
irresistible youth has always been the _Duchess Albafurez_, who, learning
from _Ollivarez_ that her pet has new claims upon her heart for having
killed her friend the Duke, determines to assist him to escape, which
however is not at all necessary, for Ollivarez is entrusted with the
warrant for apprehending the person or persons unknown who did the
murder.
But could he injure the man who has made him a Duke by a lucky _coup-d'épée_?
No, no. Let him cross the frontier; and, when he is out of reach,
what thundering denunciations will not the possessor of the dukedom
fulminate against the killer of his cousin! It is shocking to perceive
how intimately acquainted old Scribe must be with manners, customs, and
feelings, as they exist at Court.

The necessary passports are placed before the Queen for her signature
(perhaps her Spanish Majesty can't afford clerks); but when she
perceives whom they threaten to banish from behind her chair, she
declines honouring them with her autograph.

The Duchess thus learns her secret.
But forgive me for pressing this point; I am anxious to have
your suffrage in her favour: Miss Belinda Portman's character for prudence
and propriety stands so high, and is fixed so firmly, that she may venture
to let us cling to it; and I am as well convinced of the poor girl's
innocence as I am of yours; and when you see her, you will be of my
opinion."

"I assure you, Mrs. Delacour," said Belinda, "that you have wasted a great
deal of eloquence upon this occasion, for--"

"I am sorry for it," interrupted Mrs. Delacour, rising from her seat, with
a look of some displeasure. "I meant not to distress or offend you, Miss
Portman, by _my eloquence_: I am only concerned that I should have so far
mistaken your character as to expose myself to this refusal."

"I have given no refusal," said Belinda, mildly: "you did not let me
finish my sentence."

"I beg pardon; that is a foolish old trick of mine."

"Mrs. Delacour, I was going to say, has wasted a great deal of eloquence:
for I am entirely of her opinion, and I shall, with the greatest
readiness, comply with her request."

"You are a charming, generous girl, and I am a passionate old fool--thank
you a thousand times."

"You are not at all obliged to me," said Belinda. "When I first heard this
story, I believed it, as Lady Boucher now does--but I have had reason to
alter my opinion, and perhaps the same means of information would have
changed hers; once convinced, it is impossible to relapse into suspicion."

"Impossible to _you_: the most truly virtuous women are always the least
suspicious and uncharitable in their opinion of their own sex. Lady Anne
Percival inspired me with this belief, and Miss Portman confirms it. I
admire your courage in daring to come forward in the defence of innocence.
I am very rude, alas! for praising you so much."

"I have not a right to your admiration," said Belinda; "for I must
honestly confess to you that I should not have this courage if there were
any danger in the case. I do not think that in doubtful cases it is the
business of a young woman to hazard her own reputation by an attempt to
preserve another's: I do not imagine, at least, that I am of sufficient
consequence in the world for this purpose; therefore I should never
attempt it. It is the duty of such women as Mrs. Delacour, whose
reputation is beyond the power of scandal, to come forward in the defence
of injured innocence; but this would not be courage in Belinda Portman, it
would be presumption and temerity."

"Well, if you will not let me admire your courage, or your generosity, or
your prudence," said Mrs. Delacour laughing, "you must positively let me
admire _you_ altogether, and love you too, for I cannot help it.
Farewell."

After the company was gone, Lady Delacour was much surprised by the
earnestness with which Belinda pressed the request that they might the
next morning pay a visit to Virginia.

"My dear," said Lady Delacour, "to tell you the truth, I am full of
curiosity, and excessively anxious to go. I hesitated merely on your
account: I fancied that you would not like the visit, and that if I went
without you, it might be taken notice of; but I am delighted to find that
you will come with me: I can only say that you have more generosity than I
should have in the same situation."

The next morning they went together to Mrs. Delacour's. In their way
thither, Belinda, to divert her own thoughts, and to rouse Lady Delacour
from the profound and unnatural silence into which she had fallen,
petitioned her to finish the history of Sir Philip Baddely, the dog, Miss
Annabella Luttridge, and her billet-doux.

"For some of my high crimes and misdemeanours, you vowed that you would
not tell me the remainder of the story till the whole week had elapsed;
now will you satisfy my curiosity? You recollect that you left off just
where you said that you were come to the best part of the story."

"Was I? did I?--Very true, we shall have time enough to finish it
by-and-by, my dear," said Lady Delacour; "at present my poor head is
running upon something else, and I have left off being an accomplished
actress, or I could talk of one subject and think of another as well as
the best of you.--Stop the carriage, my dear; I am afraid they have forgot
my orders."

"Did you carry what I desired this morning to Mrs. Delacour?" said her
ladyship to one of the footmen.

"I did, my lady."

"And did you say from me, that it was not to be opened till I came?'

"Yes, my lady."

"Where did you leave it?"

"In Mrs. Delacour's dressing-room, my lady:--she desired me to take it up
there, and she locked the door, and said no one should go in till you
came."

"Very well--go on. Belinda, my dear, I hope that I have worked up your
curiosity to the highest pitch."


CHAPTER XXXI.

THE DENOUEMENT.


Curiosity was not, at this instant, the strongest passion in Belinda's
mind. When the carriage stopped at Mrs. Delacour's door, her heart almost
ceased to beat; but she summoned resolution to go through, with firmness
and dignity, the task she had undertaken.

Clarence Hervey was not in the room when they entered, nor was Virginia:
Mrs. Ormond said that she had been extremely feverish during the night,
and that she had advised her not to get up till late in the day. But Mrs.
Delacour immediately went for her, and in a few minutes she made her
appearance.

Belinda and Lady Delacour exchanged a glance of surprise and admiration.
There was a grace and simplicity in her manner, joined to an air of
naïveté, that made an irresistible impression in her favour. Lady
Delacour, however, after the first surprise was over, seemed to relapse
into her former opinion; and the piercing looks which her ladyship from
time to time cast upon Virginia as she spoke, produced their effect. She
was abashed and silent. Belinda endeavoured to engage her in conversation,
and to her she talked with ease and even with freedom. Virginia examined
Miss Portman's countenance with a species of artless curiosity and
interest, that was not restrained by factitious politeness. This
examination was not peculiarly agreeable to Belinda, yet it was made with
so much apparent simplicity, that she could not be displeased.

On the first pause in the conversation, Mrs. Delacour said, "Pray, my dear
Lady Delacour, what is this wonderful present that you sent to me this
morning, which you desired that no one should see till you came?"

"I cannot satisfy your curiosity yet," replied Lady Delacour. "I must wait
till Clarence Hervey comes, for the present is intended for him."

An air of solemn mystery in her ladyship's manner, as she pronounced these
words, excited general attention. There was a dead silence, which lasted
several minutes: some feeble attempts were then made by each of the
company to start a fresh subject of conversation; but it would not do--all
relapsed into the silence of expectation. At last Clarence Hervey arrived.
Belinda rejoiced that the universal curiosity which Lady Delacour had
inspired prevented any one's observing the sudden change in Mr. Hervey's
countenance when he beheld her.

"A pretty set of curious children you are!" cried Lady Delacour, laughing.
"Do you know, Clarence, that they are all dying with impatience to see _un
gage d'amitié_ that I have brought for you; and the reason that they are
so curious is simply because I had the address to say, in a solemn voice,
'I cannot satisfy your curiosity till Clarence Hervey arrives.' Now follow
me, my friends; and if you be disappointed, lay the blame, not on me, but
on your own imaginations."

She led the way to Mrs. Delacour's dressing-room, and all the company
followed.

"Now, what do you expect to see?" said she, putting the key into the door.

After waiting some moments for a reply, but in vain, she threw open the
door, and they saw, hung before the wall opposite to them, a green
curtain.

"I thought, my dear Clarence," resumed Lady Delacour, "that no present
could be more agreeable to you than a companion for your Virginia. Does
this figure," continued she, drawing back the curtain, "does this figure
give you the idea of Paul?"

"Paul!" said Clarence; "it is a naval officer in full uniform: what can
your ladyship mean?"

"Virginia perhaps will know what I mean, if you will only stand out of her
way, and let her see the picture."

At these words Clarence made way for Virginia: she turned her eyes upon
the picture, uttered a piercing shriek, and fell senseless upon the floor.

"Take it coolly," said Lady Delacour, "and she will come to her senses
presently. Young ladies must shriek and faint upon certain occasions; but
men (looking at Clarence Hervey) need not always be dupes. This is only a
_scene_; consider it as such, and admire the actress as I do."

"Actress! Oh, she is no actress!" cried Mrs. Ormond.

Clarence Hervey raised her from the ground, and Belinda sprinkled water
over her face.

"She's dead!--she's dead! Oh, my sweet child! she's dead!" exclaimed Mrs.
Ormond, trembling so violently, that she could not sustain Virginia.

"She is no actress, indeed," said Clarence Hervey: "her pulse is gone!"

Lady Delacour looked at Virginia's pale lips, touched her cold hands, and
with a look of horror cried out, "Good Heavens! what have I done? What
shall we do with her?"

"Give her air--give her air, air, air!" cried Belinda.

"You keep the air from her, Mrs. Ormond," said Mrs. Delacour. "Let us
leave her to Miss Portman; she has more presence of mind than any of us."
And as she spoke she forced Mrs. Ormond away with her out of the room.

"If Mr. Hartley should come, keep him with you, Mrs. Delacour," said
Clarence Hervey. "Is her pulse quite gone?"

"No; it beats stronger and stronger," said Belinda.

"Her colour is returning," said Lady Delacour. "There! raise her a little,
dear Belinda; she is coming to herself."

"Had not you better draw the curtain again before that picture," said Miss
Portman, "lest she should see it the moment she opens her eyes?"

Virginia came slowly to her recollection, saw Lady Delacour drawing the
curtain before the picture, then fixed her eyes upon Clarence Hervey,
without uttering a word.

"Are you better now?" said he, in a gentle tone.

"Oh, do not speak--do not look so kindly!" cried Virginia. "I am
well--quite well--better than I deserve to be;" and she pressed Belinda's
hand, as if to thank her for assisting and supporting her.

"We may safely leave her now," whispered Belinda to Lady Delacour; "we are
strangers, and our presence only distresses her."

They withdrew. But the moment Virginia found herself alone with Mr.
Hervey, she was seized with a universal tremor; she tried to speak, but
could not articulate. At last she burst into a flood of tears; and when
this had in some measure relieved her, she threw herself upon her knees,
and clasping her hands, exclaimed, as she looked up to heaven--

"Oh, if I knew what I ought to do!--if I knew what I ought to say!"

"Shall I tell you, Virginia? And will you believe me?"

"Yes, yes, yes!"

"You ought to say--the truth, whatever it may be."

"But you will think me the most ungrateful of human beings?"

"How often must I assure you, Virginia, that I make no claim upon your
gratitude? Speak to me--I conjure you, as you value your happiness and
mine--speak to me without disguise! What is all this mystery? Why should
you fear to let me know what passes in your heart? Why did you shriek at
the sight of that picture?"

"Oh, forgive me! forgive me!" cried Virginia: she would have sunk at his
feet, if he had not prevented her.

"I will--I can forgive any thing but deceit. Do not look at me with so
much terror, Virginia--I have not deserved it: my wish is to make you
happy. I would sacrifice even my own happiness to secure yours; but do not
mislead me, or you ruin us both. Cannot you give me a distinct answer to
this simple question--Why did you shriek at the sight of that picture?"

"Because--but you will call me '_perfidious, ungrateful
Virginia_!'--because I have seen that figure--he has knelt to me--he has
kissed my hand--and I------"

Clarence Hervey withdrew his arms, which had supported her, and placing
her upon a sofa, left her, whilst he walked up and down the room for some
minutes in silence.

"And why, Virginia," said he, stopping short, "was it necessary to conceal
all this from me? Why was it necessary to persuade me that I was beloved?
Why was it necessary that my happiness should be the sacrifice?"

"It shall not!--it shall not! Your happiness shall not be the sacrifice.
Heaven is my witness, that there is no sacrifice I would not make for you.
Forgive me that shriek! I could not help fainting, indeed! But I will be
yours--I _ought_ to be yours; and I am not perfidious--I am not
ungrateful: do not look upon me as you did in my dream!"

"Do not talk to me of dreams, my dear Virginia; this is no time for
trifling; I ask no sacrifice from you--I ask nothing but truth."

"Truth! Mrs. Ormond knows all the truth: I have concealed nothing from
her."

"But she has concealed every thing from me," cried Clarence; and, with a
sudden impulse of indignation, he was going to summon her, but when his
hand was upon the lock of the door he paused, returned to Virginia, and
said, "Let me hear the truth from _your_ lips: it is all I shall ever ask
from you. How--when--where did you see this man?"

"What man?" said Virginia, looking up, with the simple expression of
innocence in her countenance.

Clarence pointed to the picture.

"At the village in the New Forest, at Mrs. Smith's house," said Virginia,
"one evening when I walked with her from my grandmother's cottage."

"And your grandmother knew of this?"

"Yes," said Virginia, blushing, "and she was very much displeased."

"And Mrs. Ormond knew of this?" pursued Clarence.

"Yes; but she told me that you would not be displeased at it."

Mr. Hervey made another hasty step toward the door, but restraining his
impetuous temper, he again stopped, and leaning ever the back of a chair,
opposite to Virginia, waited in silence for her to proceed. He waited in
vain.

"I do not mean to distress you, Miss Hartley," said he.

She burst into tears. "I knew, I knew," cried she, "that you _would_ be
displeased; I told Mrs. Ormond so. I knew you would never forgive me."

"In that you were mistaken," said Clarence, mildly; "I forgive you without
difficulty, as I hope you may forgive yourself: nor can it be my wish to
extort from you any mortifying confessions. But, perhaps, it may yet be in
my power to serve you, if you will trust to me. I will myself speak to
your father. I will do every thing to secure to you the object of your
affections, if you will, in this last moment of our connexion, treat me
with sincerity, and suffer me to be your friend."

Virginia sobbed so violently for some time, that she could not speak: at
last she said, "You are--you are the most generous of men! You have always
been my _best_ friend! I am the most ungrateful of human beings! But I am
sure I never wished, I never intended, to deceive you. Mrs. Ormond told
me--"

"Do not speak of her at present, or perhaps I may lose my temper,"
interrupted Clarence in an altered voice: "only tell me--I conjure you,
tell me--in one word, who is this man I and where is he to be found?"

"I do not know. I do not understand you," said Virginia.

"You do not know! You will not trust me. Then I must leave you to--to Mr.
Hartley."

"Do not leave me--oh, do not leave me in anger!" cried Virginia, clinging
to him. "Not trust you!--I!--not trust you! Oh, what _can_ you mean? I
have no confessions to make! Mrs. Ormond knows every thought of my mind,
and so shall you, if you will only hear me. I do not know who this man is,
I assure you; nor where he is to be found."

"And yet you love him? Can you love a man whom you do not know, Virginia?"

"I only love his figure, I believe," said Virginia.

"His figure!"

"Indeed I am quite bewildered," said Virginia, looking round wildly; "I
know not what I feel."

"If you permitted this man to kneel to you, to kiss your hand, surely you
must know that you love him, Virginia?"

It was a happy thought on the part of The Jehu to suggest a picnic
at the Waters Meet to-day, before our forward move on to Los Moyes,
and after breakfast we started out.

First we went to inspect the site where the new house is to be
built, then on to the pretty little monte near by, where some
picturesque photographs were taken of the cavalcade of riders.

We paused in this tiny monte, for it is an intensely interesting
spot from a botanical point of view, and with care and attention
should be so for some years to come.

In an extraordinary small compass this wood contains more varied
specimens of trees than one would ordinarily see in a day's journey.

So on to Waters Meet. Here one is afforded an opportunity for studying the
watershed of this portion of Argentina. Three rivers meet here, the Concha,
the Calchaqui, and the Northern Salado. The latter is the only perennial
river in that region; it rises in the snowy peaks of the Andes, in the
province of Salta, miles away, and it is not to be wondered at, that,
though it is a slow-moving river and meanders through the Gran Chaco, in
the times of floods its swollen waters overflow their banks and flood immense
tracts of land. Thomas Page, an American Admiral, in the year 1855,
navigated this river from its junction with the Parana to the spot where
we were to-day, but when he went up it there was so little water in the
river that he had to give up the idea of continuing his pioneer task of
exploration. It had been his intention to open up the river for trade, and
there is no reason why this should not be done at some future date.
The Calchaqui goes under different names at various places. It rises on the
great swamps on the North-East of the Santa Fé Land Company's
territory, and flows through a chain of lakes and cañadas until it
runs into the huge laguna "Del Palmar," and thence along what used
to be the Eastern boundary of the Santa Fé Land Company's lands,
until it joins the Salado.

The Calchaqui must drain at least 150,000 acres of land, and the Rio
Concha has a watershed of about 60 or 70 thousand acres. It is
not known what the area of the watershed of the Salado is, but it must
be immense; therefore it can be understood that the meeting-place of
the waters of these three rivers is an interesting spot geographically,
and we were all glad to have seen it.

On our arrival at the Water Meet we had our first introduction to the native
"asado," and we all hoped it would not be the last. The peons collected
(apparently from nowhere), in less time than it takes to write
about, sticks and odds and ends for a fire, over the ashes of which
they broiled the meat, holding it over the heat on long skewers of
wood.

She looked irresolute: and at last, in a low voice, said, "If I could see,
if I could speak to Mrs. Ormond------"

"She cannot tell what are the secret feelings of your heart, Virginia.
Consult no Mrs. Ormond. Consult no human creature but yourself."

"But Mrs. Ormond told me that you loved me, and that you had educated me
to be your wife."

Mr. Hervey made an involuntary exclamation against Mrs. Ormond's folly.

"How, then, can you be happy," continued Virginia, "if I am so ungrateful
as to say I do not love you? That I do not _love_ you!--Oh! _that_ I
cannot say; for I do love you better than any one living except my father,
and with the same sort of affection that I feel for him. You ask me to
tell you the secret feelings of my heart: the only secret feeling of which
I am conscious is--a wish not to marry, unless I could see in reality such
a person as----But that I knew was only a picture, a dream; and I thought
that I ought at least to sacrifice my foolish imaginations to you, who
have done so much for me. I knew that it would be the height of
ingratitude to refuse you; and besides, my father told me that you would
not accept of my fortune without my hand, so I consented to marry you:
forgive me, if these were wrong motives--I thought them right. Only tell
me what I can do to make you happy, as I am sure I wish to do; to that
wish I would sacrifice every other feeling."

"Sacrifice nothing, dear Virginia. We may both be happy without making any
sacrifice of our feelings," cried Clarence. And, transported at regaining
his own freedom, Virginia's simplicity never appeared to him so charming
as at this moment. "Dearest Virginia, forgive me for suspecting you for
one instant of any thing unhandsome. Mrs. Ormond, with the very best
intentions possible, has led us both to the brink of misery. But I find
you such as I always thought you, ingenuous, affectionate, innocent."

"And you are not angry with me?" interrupted Virginia, with joyful
eagerness; "and you will not think me ungrateful? And you will not be
unhappy? And Mrs. Ormond was mistaken? And you do not wish that I should
_love_ you, that I should be your wife, I mean? Oh, don't deceive me, for
I cannot help believing whatever you say."

Clarence Hervey, to give her a convincing proof that Mrs. Ormond had
misled her as to his sentiments, immediately avowed his passion for
Belinda.

"You have relieved me from all doubt, all fear, all anxiety," said
Virginia, with the sweetest expression of innocent affection in her
countenance. "May you be as happy as you deserve to be! May Belinda--is
not that her name?--May Belinda--"

At this moment Lady Delacour half opened the door, exclaiming--"Human
patience can wait no longer!"

"Will you trust me to explain for you, dear Virginia?" said Clarence.

"Most willingly," said Virginia, retiring as Lady Delacour advanced. "Pray
leave me here alone, whilst you, who are used to talk before strangers,
speak for me."

"Dare you venture, Clarence," said her ladyship, as she closed the door,
"to leave her alone with that picture? You are no lover, if you be not
jealous."

"I am not jealous," said Clarence, "yet I am a lover--a passionate lover."

"A passionate lover!" cried Lady Delacour, stopping short as they were
crossing the antechamber:--"then I have done nothing but mischief. In love
with Virginia? I will not--cannot believe it."

"In love with Belinda!--Cannot you, will not you believe it?"

"My dear Clarence, I never doubted it for an instant. But are you at
liberty to own it to any body but me?"

"I am at liberty to declare it to all the world."

"You transport me with joy! I will not keep you from her a second. But
stay--I am sorry to tell you, that, as she informed me this morning, _her
heart is not at present inclined to love_. And here is Mrs. Margaret
Delacour, poor wretch, in this room, dying with curiosity. Curiosity is as
ardent as love, and has as good a claim to compassion."

As he entered the room, where there were only Mrs. Margaret Delacour and
Belinda, Clarence Hervey's first glance, rapid as it was, explained his
heart.

Belinda put her arm within Lady Delacour's, trembling so that she could
scarcely stand. Lady Delacour pressed her hand, and was perfectly silent.

"And what is Miss Portman to believe," cried Mrs. Margaret Delacour, "when
she has seen you on the very eve of marriage with another lady?"

"The strongest merit I can plead with such a woman as Miss Portman is,
that I was ready to sacrifice my own happiness to a sense of duty. Now
that I am at liberty----"

"Now that you are at liberty," interrupted Lady Delacour, "you are in a
vast hurry to offer your whole soul to a lady, who has for months seen all
your merits with perfect insensibility, and who has been, notwithstanding
all my operations, stone blind to your love."

"The struggles of my passion cannot totally have escaped Belinda's
penetration," said Clarence; "but I like her a thousand times the better
for not having trusted merely to appearances. That love is most to be
valued which cannot be easily won. In my opinion there is a prodigious
difference between a warm imagination and a warm heart."

"Well," said Lady Delacour, "we have all of us seen _Pamela maritata_--let
us now see _Belinda in love_, if that be possible. _If!_ forgive me this
last stroke, my dear--in spite of all my raillery, I do believe that the
prudent Belinda is more capable of feeling real permanent passion than any
of the dear sentimental young ladies, whose motto is

   'All for love, or the world well lost.'"

"That is just my opinion," said Mrs. Margaret Delacour.

"But pray, what is become of Mr. Hartley?" looking round: "I do not see
him."

"No: for I have hid him," said Lady Delacour: "he shall be forthcoming
presently."

"Dear Mr. Clarence Hervey, what have you done with my Virginia?" said Mrs.
Ormond, coming into the room.

"Dear Mrs. Ormond, what have _you_ done with her?" replied Clarence. "By
your mistaken kindness, by insisting upon doing us both good against our
wills, you were very near making us both miserable for life. But I blame
nobody; I have no right to blame any one so much as myself. All this has
arisen from my own presumption and imprudence. Nothing could be more
absurd than my scheme of educating a woman in solitude to make her fit for
society. I might have foreseen what must happen, that Virginia would
consider me as her tutor, her father, not as her lover, or her husband;
that with the most affectionate of hearts, she could for me feel nothing
but _gratitude_."

"Nothing but gratitude!" repeated Mrs. Ormond, with a degree of amazement
in her countenance, which made every body present smile: "I am sure I
thought she was dying for love of you."

"My dear Belinda," whispered Lady Delacour, "if I might judge of the
colour of this cheek, which has been for some moments permanent crimson, I
should guess that you were beginning to find out _of what use the sun is
to the dial_."

"You will not let me hear what Mr. Hervey is saying," replied Belinda; "I
am very curious."

"Curiosity is a stronger passion than love, as I told him just now," said
Lady Delacour.

In spite of all his explanations, Mrs. Ormond could not be made to
comprehend Virginia's feelings. She continually repeated, "But it is
impossible for Virginia, or for any body, to be in love with a picture."

"It is not said that she is in love with a picture," replied Mrs.
Delacour, "though even for that I could find you a precedent."

"My Lady Delacour," said Mrs. Ormond, "will you explain to us how that
picture came into your possession, and how it came here, and, in short,
all that is to be known about it?"

"Ay, explain! explain! my dear Lady Delacour," cried Mrs. Delacour: "I am
afraid I am grown almost as curious as my Lady Boucher. Explain! explain!"

"Most willingly," said Lady Delacour. "To Marriott's ruling passion for
birds you are all of you indebted for this discovery. Some time ago,
whilst we were at Twickenham, as Marriott was waiting at a stationer's, to
bid her last adieus to a bullfinch, a gentleman came into the shop where
she and Bobby (as she calls this bird) were coquetting, and the gentleman
was struck even more than Marriott with the bullfinch. He went almost
distracted on hearing a particular tune, which this bird sang. I
suspected, from the symptoms, that the gentleman must be, or must have
been, in love with the bullfinch's mistress. Now the bullfinch was traced
home to the ci-devant Virginia St. Pierre, the present Miss Hartley. I had
my reasons for being curious about her loves and lovers, and as soon as I
learned the story from Marriott, I determined, if possible, to find out
who this stranger, with the strange passion for bullfinches, might be. I
questioned and cross-questioned all those people at the stationer's who
were present when he fell into ecstasies; and, from the shopman, who had
been bribed to secrecy, I learned that our gentleman returned to the
stationer's the day after he met Marriott, and watched till he obtained a
sight of Virginia, as she came to her window. Now it was believed by the
girl of this shop, who had lived for some time with Mrs. Ormond--Forgive
me, Mr. Hervey, for what I am going to say--forgive me, Mrs.
Ormond--scandal, like death, is common to all--It was believed that
Virginia was Mr. Hervey's mistress. My stranger no sooner learned this
than he swore that he would think of her no more; and after bestowing a
variety of seamen's' execrations upon the villain who had seduced this
heavenly creature, he departed from Twickenham, and was no more seen
or heard of. My inquiries after him were indefatigable, but for some time
unsuccessful: and so they might have continued, and we might have been
all making one another unhappy at this moment, if it had not been for Mr.
Vincent's great dog Juba--Miss Annabella Luttridge's billet-doux--Sir
Philip Baddely's insolence--my Lord Delacour's belief in a quack
balsam--and Captain Sunderland's humanity."

"Captain Sunderland! who is Captain Sunderland? we never heard of him
before," cried Mrs. Ormond.

"You shall hear of him just as I did, if you please," said Lady Delacour,
"and if Belinda will submit to hear me tell the same story twice."

Here her ladyship repeated the history of the battle of the dogs; and of
Sir Philip Baddely's knocking down Juba, the man, for struggling in
defence of Juba, the dog.

"Now the gentleman who assisted my Lord Delacour in bringing the disabled
negro across the square to our house, was Captain Sunderland. My lord
summoned Marriott to produce Lady Boucher's infallible balsam, that it
might be tried upon Juba's sprained ankle. Whilst my lord was intent upon
the balsam, Marriott was intent upon Captain Sunderland. She recollected
that she had met him somewhere before, and the moment he spoke, she knew
him to be the gentleman who had fallen into ecstasies in the shop at
Twickenham, about the bullfinch. Marriott hastened to me with the news; I
hastened to my lord, made him introduce Captain Sunderland to me, and I
never rested till he had told me all that I wanted to know. Some years
ago, just before he went to sea, he paid a visit to his mother, who then
lodged with a widow Smith, in the New Forest. Whilst he was there, he
heard of the young beauty who lived in the Forest, with a grandmother, who
was _not a little particular_; and who would not permit any body to see
her.

"My captain's curiosity was excited; one day, unseen by the duenna, he
obtained a distinct view of Virginia, watering her roses and tending her
bees. Struck with her uncommon beauty, he approached carefully to the
thicket in which the cottage was enclosed, and found a _lair_, where he
concealed himself, day after day, and contemplated at leisure the budding
charms of the fair wood-nymph. In short, he became so enamoured, that he
was determined to gain admittance at the cottage, and declare his passion:
but to his honour be it told, that when the history of the poor girl's
mother, and the situation and fears of the old lady, who was her only
friend, were known to him, in consideration of the extreme youth of the
ward, and the extreme age of her guardian, he determined to defer his
addresses till his return from the West Indies, whither he was shortly to
sail, and where he had hopes of making a fortune, that might put him in a
situation to render the object of his affections independent. He left a
bullfinch with Mrs. Smith, who gave it to Virginia, without telling to
whom it had belonged, lest her grandmother might be displeased.

"I really thought that all this showed too nice a moral sense for a young
dashing lieutenant in the navy, and I was persuaded that my gentleman was
only keeping his mistress's secret like a man of honour. With this belief,
I regretted that Clarence Hervey should throw himself away upon a girl who
was unworthy of him."

"I hope," interrupted Clarence, "you are perfectly convinced of your
mistake."

"Perfectly! perfectly!--I am convinced that Virginia is only half mad. But
let me go on with my story. I was determined to discover whether she had
any remains of affection for this captain. B--aus? I don't know it, it
must be a pseudonym! [_Reads_.] It seems to be exceedingly good poetry!--And
what have we here?
[_Opens the second letter_.] "To the benefactor of the poor, the father
of orphans." An address!--[_Reads_.] "Veneration and kindliness."--Signature:
"Many women and girls." The seal a P.P.--Good God, what does it all mean?
Have I gone mad? If these are really voices from the town, and if that
is the way people look on this day, then I must confess men think better
of me than I do of myself!

_Enter_ CARL.

CARL.

A number of gentlemen wish to speak to you, Colonel.

COLONEL.

What sort of gentlemen!

CARL.

They say: A deputation from the voters.

COLONEL.

Show them in. This confounded newspaper was right, after all.

_Enter_ PIEPENBRINK, KLEINMICHEL _and three other gentlemen. They bow, the_
COLONEL _likewise_.

PIEPENBRINK (_solemnly_).

My Colonel: A number of voters have sent us as a deputation to you to
inform you on this special day that the whole town considers you
a most respectable and worthy man.

COLONEL (_stiffly_).

I am obliged for the good opinion.

PIEPENBRINK.

You have no reason to feel obliged. It is the truth. You are a man of honor
through and through, and it gives us pleasure to tell you so; you cannot
object to hearing this from your fellow-citizens.

COLONEL.
I always did consider myself a man of honor, gentlemen.

PIEPENBRINK.
There you were quite right. And you have proved your good principles,
too. On every occasion. In cases of poverty, of famine, of caring
for orphans, also at our shooting-club meeting--always when we
citizens enjoyed or needed a benevolent good man, you were among
the first.
Always simple and loyal without arrogance or supercilious manners.
That's the reason why we universally love and honor you. (_Colonel
wipes his eyes_.) Today many of us gave their votes to the
professor.
Some on account of politics, some because they know that he is your
close friend and possibly even your future son-in-law. COLONEL (_not
harshly_).

Sir-- 
PIEPENBRINK.

Nor did I myself vote for you.
COLONEL (_somewhat more excitedly_).

Sir-- 
PIEPENBRINK.
But for that very reason I come to you with the rest, and that is
why we tell you what the citizens think of you. And we hope that
for long years to come you will preserve to us your manly principles
and friendly heart as an honored, most respected gentleman and
fellow-citizen.

COLONEL (_without harshness_).
Why do you not say that to the professor, to the man that you have
chosen?

PIEPENBRINK.
He shall first deserve it in Parliament before the town thanks
him.
But you _have_ deserved it of us, and therefore we come to you.
COLONEL (_heartily_).
I thank you, sir, for your kind words. They are very comforting to
me just now. May I ask your name?

PIEPENBRINK.
My name is Piepenbrink.
COLONEL (_morely coldly, but not impolitely_).
Ah, indeed, that is your name!"My dear Miss Hartley," continued Lady Delacour, "in plain prose, to
prevent all difficulties and embarrassments, I must inform you, that
Captain Sunderland will not insist upon prompt payment of your father's
debt of gratitude: he has but one quarter of an hour to spend with us--he
is actually under sailing orders; so that you will have time to compose
your mind before his return. Clarence, I advise you to accompany Captain
Sunderland on this cruise; don't you, Belinda?

"And now, my good friends," continued Lady Delacour, "shall I finish the
novel for you?"

"If your ladyship pleases; nobody can do it better," said Clarence Hervey.

"But I hope you will remember, dear Lady Delacour," said Belinda, "that
there is nothing in which novelists are so apt to err as in hurrying
things toward the conclusion: in not allowing _time_ enough for that
change of feeling, which change of situation cannot instantly produce."

"That's right, my dear Belinda; true to your principles to the last gasp.
Fear nothing--you shall have _time_ enough to become accustomed to
Clarence. Would you choose that I should draw out the story to five
volumes more? With your advice and assistance, I can with the greatest
ease, my dear. A declaration of love, you know, is only the beginning of
things; there may be blushes, and sighs, and doubts, and fears, and
misunderstandings, and jealousies without end or common sense, to fill up
the necessary space, and to gain the necessary _time_; but if I might
conclude the business in two lines, I should say,

    'Ye gods, annihilate both space and time,
    And make four lovers happy.'"

"Oh, that would be cutting matters too short," said Mrs. Margaret
Delacour. "I am of the old school; and though I could dispense with the
description of Miss Harriot Byron's worked chairs and fine china, yet I
own I like to hear something of the preparation for a marriage, as well as
of the mere wedding. I like to hear _how_ people become happy in a
rational manner, better than to be told in the huddled style of an old
fairy tale--_and so they were all married, and they lived very happily all
the rest of their days_."

"We are not in much danger of hearing such an account of modern
marriages," said Lady Delacour. "But how shall I please you all?--Some
people cry, 'Tell me every thing;' others say, that,

    'Le secret d'ennuyer est celui de tout dire.'"

"Something must be left to the imagination. Positively I will not describe
wedding-dresses, or a procession to church. I have no objection to saying
that the happy couples were united by the worthy Mr. Moreton; that Mr.
Percival gave Belinda away; and that immediately after the ceremony, he
took the whole party down with him to Oakly-park. Will this do?--Or, we
may conclude, if you like it better, with a characteristic letter of
congratulation from Mrs. Stanhope to her _dearest_ niece, Belinda,
acknowledging that she was wrong to quarrel with her for refusing Sir
Philip Baddely, and giving her infinite credit for that admirable
_management_ of Clarence Hervey, which she hopes will continue through
life."

"Well, I have no objection to ending with a letter," said Mrs. Delacour;
"for last speeches are always tiresome."

"Yes," said her ladyship; "it is so difficult, as the Critic says, to get
lovers off upon their knees. Ah! how wondrous was the fountain flowing
from His piercèd side, Whence the blood and water mingled in a strange
and sacred tide,-- Water, sign of mystic cleansing; blood, the martyr's
crown of pride.

In that hour the ancient Serpent saw the holy Victim slain, Saw, and shed
his hate envenomed, all his malice spent in vain; See! the hissing
neck is broken as he writhes in sullen pain.

Aye, what boots it, cursèd Serpent, that the man God made from clay,
Victim of thy baleful cunning, by thy lies was led astray?
God hath ta'en a mortal body and hath washed the guilt away.
Christ, our Captain, for a season deigned to dwell in Death's domain,
That the dead, long time imprisoned, might return to life again,
Breaking by His great example ancient sins' enthralling chain.a
good start of surprise, my love--stand still, pray; you cannot be better
than you are: Helena, my love, do not let go your father's hand. There!
quite pretty and natural! Now, Lady Delacour, to show that she is
reformed, comes forward to address the audience with a moral--a moral!
Yes,

    "Our _tale_ contains a _moral_; and, no doubt,
    You all have wit enough to find it out.'"

(_Written in_ 1800. _Published in_ 1801.)

THE END.




FOOTNOTES:


[1] This declaration was taken from the lips of a celebrated character.

[2] The manners, if not the morals, of gentlemen, have improved since the
first publication of this work. Swearing has gone out of fashion. But Sir
Philip Baddely's oaths are retained, as marks in a portrait of the times
held up to the public, touched by ridicule, the best reprobation.

[3] The bloody hand is the heraldic designation of the baronet.

[4] "Would Chloe know if you're alive or dead,
    She bids her footman put it in her head."

[5] See Adventures of a Guinea, vol. i. chap. xvi.

[6] Marmontel.

[7] See Edwards's History of the West Indies, vol. ii.

[8] Miscellaneous Pieces by Mrs. Barbauld and Dr. Aikin.

[9] we spare the reader the medical journal of Lady Delacour's health
for some months. Her recover was gradual and complete.

[10] A fact.