Produced by Steven desJardins and Distributed Proofreaders


THE RED THUMB MARK


BY R. AUSTIN FREEMAN


PREFACE

In writing the following story, the author has had in view no purpose
other than that of affording entertainment to such readers as are
interested in problems of crime and their solutions; and the story
itself differs in no respect from others of its class, excepting in that
an effort has been made to keep within the probabilities of ordinary
life, both in the characters and in the incidents.

Nevertheless it may happen that the book may serve a useful purpose in
drawing attention to certain popular misapprehensions on the subject of
finger-prints and their evidential value; misapprehensions the extent of
which may be judged when we learn from the newspapers that several
Continental commercial houses have actually substituted finger-prints
for signed initials.

The facts and figures contained in Mr. Singleton's evidence, including
the very liberal estimate of the population of the globe, are, of
course, taken from Mr. Galton's great and important work on
finger-prints; to which the reader who is interested in the subject is
referred for much curious and valuable information.

In conclusion, the author desires to express his thanks to his friend
Mr. Bernard E. Bishop for the assistance rendered to him in certain
photographic experiments, and to those officers of the Central Criminal
Court who very kindly furnished him with details of the procedure in
criminal trials.


CONTENTS

CHAPTER I
MY LEARNED BROTHER

CHAPTER II
THE SUSPECT

CHAPTER III
A LADY IN THE CASE

CHAPTER IV
CONFIDENCES

CHAPTER V
THE "THUMBOGRAPH"

CHAPTER VI
COMMITTED FOR TRIAL

CHAPTER VII
SHOALS AND QUICKSANDS

CHAPTER VIII
A SUSPICIOUS ACCIDENT

CHAPTER IX
THE PRISONER

CHAPTER X
POLTON IS MYSTIFIED

CHAPTER XI
THE AMBUSH

CHAPTER XII
IT MIGHT HAVE BEEN

CHAPTER XIII
MURDER BY POST

CHAPTER XIV
A STARTLING DISCOVERY

CHAPTER XV
THE FINGER-PRINT EXPERTS

CHAPTER XVI
THORNDYKE PLAYS HIS CARD

CHAPTER XVII
AT LAST


CHAPTER I

MY LEARNED BROTHER


"Conflagratam An° 1677. Fabricatam An° 1698. Richardo Powell Armiger
Thesaurar." The words, set in four panels, which formed a frieze beneath
the pediment of a fine brick portico, summarised the history of one of
the tall houses at the upper end of King's Bench Walk and as I, somewhat
absently, read over the inscription, my attention was divided between
admiration of the exquisitely finished carved brickwork and the quiet
dignity of the building, and an effort to reconstitute the dead and gone
Richard Powell, and the stirring times in which he played his part.

I was about to turn away when the empty frame of the portico became
occupied by a figure, and one so appropriate, in its wig and obsolete
habiliments, to the old-world surroundings that it seemed to complete
the picture, and I lingered idly to look at it. The barrister had halted
in the doorway to turn over a sheaf of papers that he held in his hand,
and, as he replaced the red tape which bound them together, he looked up
and our eyes met. Did I guess aright when I judged that it was a
fatty substance that preserved the Epeira from the snares of her sticky
Catherine-wheel? The action of the carbon-disulphide seems to say yes.
Besides, there is no reason why a substance of this kind, which plays
so frequent a part in animal economy, should not coat the Spider
very slightly by the mere act of perspiration.

We used to rub our fingers with a little oil before handling the twigs
in which the Goldfinch was to be caught; even so the Epeira varnishes
herself with a special sweat, to operate on any part of her web without
fear of the lime-threads.

However, an unduly protracted stay on the sticky threads would have
its drawbacks. In the long run, continual contact with those threads
might produce a certain adhesion and inconvenience to the Spider, who
must preserve all her agility in order to rush upon the prey before
it can release itself. For this reason, gummy threads are never used
in building the post of interminable waiting.

It is only on her resting-floor that the Epeira sits, motionless
and with her eight legs outspread, ready to mark the least quiver
in the net.

It is here, again, that she takes her meals, often long-drawn out, when
the joint is a substantial one; it is hither that, after trussing and
nibbling it, she drags her prey at the end of a thread, to consume it
at her ease on a non-viscous mat. As a hunting-post and
refectory, the Epeira has contrived a central space, free from glue.

"Then come round to my chambers at seven," said Thorndyke, "and we will
have a chop and a pint of claret together and exchange autobiographies.
I am due in court in a few minutes."

"Do you reside within that noble old portico?" I asked.

"No," replied Thorndyke. "I often wish I did. It would add several
inches to one's stature to feel that the mouth of one's burrow was
graced with a Latin inscription for admiring strangers to ponder over.
No; my chambers are some doors further down--number 6A"--and he turned
to point out the house as we crossed towards Crown Office Row.

At the top of Middle Temple Lane we parted, Thorndyke taking his way
with fluttering gown towards the Law Courts, while I directed my steps
westward towards Adam Street, the chosen haunt of the medical agent.

The soft-voiced bell of the Temple clock was telling out the hour of
seven in muffled accents (as though it apologised for breaking the
studious silence) as I emerged from the archway of Mitre Court and
turned into King's Bench Walk.

The paved footway was empty save for a single figure, pacing slowly
before the doorway of number 6A, in which, though the wig had now given
place to a felt hat and the gown to a jacket, I had no difficulty in
recognising my friend.

"Punctual to the moment, as of old," said he, meeting me half-way. "What
a blessed virtue is punctuality, even in small things. I have just been
taking the air in Fountain Court, and will now introduce you to my
chambers. Here is my humble retreat."

We passed in through the common entrance and ascended the stone stairs
to the first floor, where we were confronted by a massive door, above
which my friend's name was written in white letters.  "Rather a
forbidding exterior," remarked Thorndyke, as he inserted the latchkey,
"but it is homely enough inside."

The heavy door swung outwards and disclosed a baize-covered inner door,
which Thorndyke pushed open and held for me to pass in.

"You will find my chambers an odd mixture," said Thorndyke, "for they
combine the attractions of an office, a museum, a laboratory and a
workshop."

"And a restaurant," added a small, elderly man, who was decanting a
bottle of claret by means of a glass syphon: "you forgot that, sir."

"Yes, I forgot that, Polton," said Thorndyke, "but I see you have not."
He glanced towards a small table that had been placed near the fire and
set out with the requisites for our meal.

"Tell me," said Thorndyke, as we made the initial onslaught on the
products of Polton's culinary experiments, "what has been happening to
you since you left the hospital six years ago?"

"My story is soon told," I answered, somewhat bitterly. "It is not an
uncommon one. My funds ran out, as you know, rather unexpectedly. When I
had paid my examination and registration fees the coffer was absolutely
empty, and though, no doubt, a medical diploma contains--to use
Johnson's phrase--the potentiality of wealth beyond the dreams of
avarice, there is a vast difference in practice between the potential
and the actual. I have, in fact, been earning a subsistence, sometimes
as an assistant, sometimes as a _locum tenens_. Just now I've got no
work to do, and so have entered my name on Turcival's list of
eligibles."

Thorndyke pursed up his lips and frowned.

"It's a wicked shame, Jervis," said he presently, "that a man of your
abilities and scientific acquirements should be frittering away his
time on odd jobs like some half-qualified wastrel."

"It is," I agreed. "My merits are grossly undervalued by a stiff-necked
and obtuse generation. But what would you have, my learned brother? If
poverty steps behind you and claps the occulting bushel over your thirty
thousand candle-power luminary, your brilliancy is apt to be obscured."

"Yes, I suppose that is so," grunted Thorndyke, and he remained for a
time in deep thought.

"And now," said I, "let us have your promised explanation. I am
positively frizzling with curiosity to know what chain of circumstances
has converted John Evelyn Thorndyke from a medical practitioner into a
luminary of the law."

Thorndyke smiled indulgently.

"The fact is," said he, "that no such transformation has occurred. John
Evelyn Thorndyke is still a medical practitioner."

"What, in a wig and gown!" I exclaimed.

"Yes, a mere sheep in wolf's clothing," he replied. "I will tell you how
it has come about. After you left the hospital, six years ago, I stayed
on, taking up any small appointments that were going--assistant
demonstrator--or curatorships and such like--hung about the chemical and
physical laboratories, the museum and post mortem room, and meanwhile
took my M.D. and D.Sc. Then I got called to the bar in the hope of
getting a coronership, but soon after this, old Stedman retired
unexpectedly--you remember Stedman, the lecturer on medical
jurisprudence--and I put in for the vacant post. Rather to my surprise,
I was appointed lecturer, whereupon I dismissed the coronership from my
mind, took my present chambers and sat down to wait for anything that
might come."  "And what has come?" I asked.

"Why, a very curious assortment of miscellaneous practice," he replied.
"At first I only got an occasional analysis in a doubtful poisoning
case, but, by degrees, my sphere of influence has extended until it now
includes all cases in which a special knowledge of medicine or physical
science can be brought to bear upon law."

"But you plead in court, I observe," said I.

"Very seldom," he replied. "More usually I appear in the character of
that _bête noir_ of judges and counsel--the scientific witness. But in
most instances I do not appear at all; I merely direct investigations,
arrange and analyse the results, and prime the counsel with facts and
suggestions for cross-examination."

"A good deal more interesting than acting as understudy for an absent
g.p.," said I, a little enviously. "But you deserve to succeed, for you
were always a deuce of a worker, to say nothing of your capabilities."

"Yes, I worked hard," replied Thorndyke, "and I work hard still; but I
have my hours of labour and my hours of leisure, unlike you poor devils
of general practitioners, who are liable to be dragged away from the
dinner table or roused out of your first sleep by--confound it all! who
can that be?"

For at this moment, as a sort of commentary on his self-congratulation,
there came a smart rapping at the outer door.

"Must see who it is, I suppose," he continued, "though one expects
people to accept the hint of a closed oak."

He strode across the room and flung open the door with an air of by no
means gracious inquiry.

"It's rather late for a business call," said an apologetic voice
outside, "but my client was anxious to see you without delay."

"Come in, Mr. Lawley," said Thorndyke, rather stiffly, and, as he held
the door open, the two visitors entered. They were both men--one
middle-aged, rather foxy in appearance and of a typically legal aspect,
and the other a fine, handsome young fellow of very prepossessing
exterior, though at present rather pale and wild-looking, and evidently
in a state of profound agitation.

"I am afraid," said the latter, with a glance at me and the dinner
table, "that our visit--for which I am alone responsible--is a most
unseasonable one. If we are really inconveniencing you, Dr. Thorndyke,
pray tell us, and my business must wait."

Thorndyke had cast a keen and curious glance at the young man, and he
now replied in a much more genial tone--

"I take it that your business is of a kind that will not wait, and as to
inconveniencing us, why, my friend and I are both doctors, and, as you
are aware, no doctor expects to call any part of the twenty-four hours
his own unreservedly."

I had risen on the entrance of the two strangers, and now proposed to
take a walk on the Embankment and return later, but the young man
interrupted me.

"Pray don't go away on my account," he said. "The facts that I am about
to lay before Dr. Thorndyke will be known to all the world by this time
to-morrow, so there is no occasion for any show of secrecy."

"In that case," said Thorndyke, "let us draw our chairs up to the fire
and fall to business forthwith. We had just finished our dinner and were
waiting for the coffee, which I hear my man bringing down at this
moment."

We accordingly drew up our chairs, and when Polton had set the coffee on
the table and retired, the lawyer plunged into the matter without
preamble.


CHAPTER II

THE SUSPECT


"I had better," said he, "give you a general outline of the case as it
presents itself to the legal mind, and then my client, Mr. Reuben
Hornby, can fill in the details if necessary, and answer any questions
that you may wish to put to him.

"Mr. Reuben occupies a position of trust in the business of his uncle,
John Hornby, who is a gold and silver refiner and dealer in precious
metals generally. There is a certain amount of outside assay work
carried on in the establishment, but the main business consists in the
testing and refining of samples of gold sent from certain mines in South
Africa.

"About five years ago Mr. Reuben and his cousin Walter--another nephew
of John Hornby--left school, and both were articled to their uncle, with
the view to their ultimately becoming partners in the house; and they
have remained with him ever since, occupying, as I have said, positions
of considerable responsibility.

"And now for a few words as to how business is conducted in Mr. Hornby's
establishment. The samples of gold are handed over at the docks to some
accredited representative of the firm--generally either Mr. Reuben or
Mr. Walter--who has been despatched to meet the ship, and conveyed
either to the bank or to the works according to circumstances. Of course
every effort is made to have as little gold as possible on the premises,
and the bars are always removed to the bank at the earliest opportunity;
but it happens unavoidably that samples of considerable value have often
to remain on the premises all night, and so the works are furnished with
a large and powerful safe or strong room for their reception. This safe
is situated in the private office under the eye of the principal, and,
as an additional precaution, the caretaker, who acts as night-watchman,
occupies a room directly over the office, and patrols the building
periodically through the night.

"Now a very strange thing has occurred with regard to this safe. It
happens that one of Mr. Hornby's customers in South Africa is interested
in a diamond mine, and, although transactions in precious stones form no
part of the business of the house, he has, from time to time, sent
parcels of rough diamonds addressed to Mr. Hornby, to be either
deposited in the bank or handed on to the diamond brokers.

"A fortnight ago Mr. Hornby was advised that a parcel of stones had been
despatched by the _Elmina Castle_, and it appeared that the parcel was
an unusually large one and contained stones of exceptional size and
value. Under these circumstances Mr. Reuben was sent down to the docks
at an early hour in the hope the ship might arrive in time for the
stones to be lodged in the bank at once. Unfortunately, however, this
was not the case, and the diamonds had to be taken to the works and
locked up in the safe."

"Who placed them in the safe?" asked Thorndyke.

"Mr. Hornby himself, to whom Mr. Reuben delivered up the package on his
return from the docks."  "Yes," said Thorndyke, "and what happened
next?"

"Well, on the following morning, when the safe was opened, the diamonds
had disappeared."

"Had the place been broken into?" asked Thorndyke.

"No. The place was all locked up as usual, and the caretaker, who had
made his accustomed rounds, had heard nothing, and the safe was,
outwardly, quite undisturbed. It had evidently been opened with keys and
locked again after the stones were removed."

"And in whose custody were the keys of the safe?" inquired Thorndyke.

"Mr. Hornby usually kept the keys himself, but, on occasions, when he
was absent from the office, he handed them over to one of his
nephews--whichever happened to be in charge at the time. But on this
occasion the keys did not go out of his custody from the time when he
locked up the safe, after depositing the diamonds in it, to the time
when it was opened by him on the following morning."

"And was there anything that tended to throw suspicion upon anyone?"
asked Thorndyke.

"Why, yes," said Mr. Lawley, with an uncomfortable glance at his client,
"unfortunately there was. It seemed that the person who abstracted the
diamonds must have cut or scratched his thumb or finger in some way, for
there were two drops of blood on the bottom of the safe and one or two
bloody smears on a piece of paper, and, in addition, a remarkably clear
imprint of a thumb."  "Also in blood?" asked Thorndyke.

"Yes. The thumb had apparently been put down on one of the drops and
then, while still wet with blood, had been pressed on the paper in
taking hold of it or otherwise."

"Well, and what next?"

"Well," said the lawyer, fidgeting in his chair, "to make a long story
short, the thumb-print has been identified as that of Mr. Reuben
Hornby."

"Ha!" exclaimed Thorndyke. "The plot thickens with a vengeance. I had
better jot down a few notes before you proceed any further."

He took from a drawer a small paper-covered notebook, on the cover of
which he wrote "Reuben Hornby," and then, laying the book open on a
blotting-pad, which he rested on his knee, he made a few brief notes.

"Now," he said, when he had finished, "with reference to this
thumb-print. There is no doubt, I suppose, as to the identification?"

"None whatever," replied Mr. Lawley. "The Scotland Yard people, of
course, took possession of the paper, which was handed to the director
of the finger-print department for examination and comparison with those
in their collection. The report of the experts is that the thumb-print
does not agree with any of the thumb-prints of criminals in their
possession; that it is a very peculiar one, inasmuch as the
ridge-pattern on the bulb of the thumb--which is a remarkably distinct
and characteristic one--is crossed by the scar of a deep cut, rendering
identification easy and infallible; that it agrees in every respect with
the thumb-print of Mr. Reuben Hornby, and is, in fact, his thumb-print
beyond any possible doubt."

"Is there any possibility," asked Thorndyke, "that the paper bearing the
thumb-print could have been introduced by any person?"

"No," answered the lawyer. "It is quite impossible. The paper on which
the mark was found was a leaf from Mr. Hornby's memorandum block. He had
pencilled on it some particulars relating to the diamonds, and laid it
on the parcel before he closed up the safe."

"Was anyone present when Mr. Hornby opened the safe in the morning?"
asked Thorndyke.

"No, he was alone," answered the lawyer. "He saw at a glance that the
diamonds were missing, and then he observed the paper with the
thumb-mark on it, on which he closed and locked the safe and sent for
the police."

"Is it not rather odd that the thief did not notice the thumb-mark,
since it was so distinct and conspicuous?"

"No, I think not," answered Mr. Lawley. "The paper was lying face
downwards on the bottom of the safe, and it was only when he picked it
up and turned it over that Mr. Hornby discovered the thumb-print.
Apparently the thief had taken hold of the parcel, with the paper on it,
and the paper had afterwards dropped off and fallen with the marked
surface downwards--probably when the parcel was transferred to the other
hand."

"You mentioned," said Thorndyke, "that the experts at Scotland Yard have
identified this thumb-mark as that of Mr. Reuben Hornby. May I ask how
they came to have the opportunity of making the comparison?"

"Ah!" said Mr. Lawley. "Thereby hangs a very curious tale of
coincidences. The police, of course, when they found that there was so
simple a means of identification as a thumb-mark, wished to take
thumb-prints of all the employees in the works; but this Mr. Hornby
refused to sanction--rather quixotically, as it seems to me--saying that
he would not allow his nephews to be subjected to such an indignity. Now
it was, naturally, these nephews in whom the police were chiefly
interested, seeing that they alone had had the handling of the keys, and
considerable pressure was brought to bear upon Mr. Hornby to have the
thumb-prints taken.

"However, he was obdurate, scouting the idea of any suspicion attaching
to either of the gentlemen in whom he had reposed such complete
confidence and whom he had known all their lives, and so the matter
would probably have remained a mystery but for a very odd circumstance.

"You may have seen on the bookstalls and in shop windows an appliance
called a 'Thumbograph,' or some such name, consisting of a small book of
blank paper for collecting the thumb-prints of one's friends, together
with an inking pad."

"I have seen those devices of the Evil One," said Thorndyke, "in fact, I
have one, which I bought at Charing Cross Station."

"Well, it seems that some months ago Mrs. Hornby, the wife of John
Hornby, purchased one of these toys--"  "As a matter of fact,"
interrupted Reuben, "it was my cousin Walter who bought the thing and
gave it to her."

"Well, that is not material," said Mr. Lawley (though I observed that
Thorndyke made a note of the fact in his book); "at any rate, Mrs.
Hornby became possessed of one of these appliances and proceeded to fill
it with the thumb-prints of her friends, including her two nephews. Now
it happened that the detective in charge of this case called yesterday
at Mr. Hornby's house when the latter was absent from home, and took the
opportunity of urging her to induce her husband to consent to have the
thumb-prints of her nephews taken for the inspection of the experts at
Scotland Yard. He pointed out that the procedure was really necessary,
not only in the interests of justice but in the interests of the young
men themselves, who were regarded with considerable suspicion by the
police, which suspicion would be completely removed if it could be shown
by actual comparison that the thumb-print could not have been made by
either of them. Moreover, it seemed that both the young men had
expressed their willingness to have the test applied, but had been
forbidden by their uncle. Then Mrs. Hornby had a brilliant idea. She
suddenly remembered the 'Thumbograph,' and thinking to set the question
at rest once for all, fetched the little book and showed it to the
detective. It contained the prints of both thumbs of Mr. Reuben (among
others), and, as the detective had with him a photograph of the
incriminating mark, the comparison was made then and there; and you may
imagine Mrs. Hornby's horror and amazement when it was made clear that
the print of her nephew Reuben's left thumb corresponded in every
particular with the thumb-print that was found in the safe.

"At this juncture Mr. Hornby arrived on the scene and was, of course,
overwhelmed with consternation at the turn events had taken. He would
have liked to let the matter drop and make good the loss of the diamonds
out of his own funds, but, as that would have amounted practically to
compounding a felony, he had no choice but to prosecute. As a result, a
warrant was issued for the arrest of Mr. Reuben, and was executed this
morning, and my client was taken forthwith to Bow Street and charged
with the robbery."

"Was any evidence taken?" asked Thorndyke.

"No. Only evidence of arrest. The prisoner is remanded for a week, bail
having been accepted in two sureties of five hundred pounds each."

Thorndyke was silent for a space after the conclusion of the narrative.
Like me, he was evidently not agreeably impressed by the lawyer's
manner, which seemed to take his client's guilt for granted, a position
indeed not entirely without excuse having regard to the circumstances of
the case.

"What have you advised your client to do?" Thorndyke asked presently.

"I have recommended him to plead guilty and throw himself on the
clemency of the court as a first offender. You must see for yourself
that there is no defence possible."

The young man flushed crimson, but made no remark.

"But let us be clear how we stand," said Thorndyke. "Are we defending an
innocent man or are we endeavouring to obtain a light sentence for a man
who admits that he is guilty?"

Mr. Lawley shrugged his shoulders.

"That question can be best answered by our client himself," said he.

Thorndyke directed an inquiring glance at Reuben Hornby, remarking--

"You are not called upon to incriminate yourself in any way, Mr. Hornby,
but I must know what position you intend to adopt."  Here I again
proposed to withdraw, but Reuben interrupted me.

"There is no need for you to go away, Dr. Jervis," he said. "My position
is that I did not commit this robbery and that I know nothing whatever
about it or about the thumb-print that was found in the safe. I do not,
of course, expect you to believe me in the face of the overwhelming
evidence against me, but I do, nevertheless, declare in the most solemn
manner before God, that I am absolutely innocent of this crime and have
no knowledge of it whatever."

"Then I take it that you did not plead 'guilty'?" said Thorndyke.

"Certainly not; and I never will," replied Reuben hotly.

"You would not be the first innocent man, by very many, who has entered
that plea," remarked Mr. Lawley. "It is often the best policy, when the
defence is hopelessly weak."

"It is a policy that will not be adopted by me," rejoined Reuben. "I may
be, and probably shall be, convicted and sentenced, but I shall continue
to maintain my innocence, whatever happens. Do you think," he added,
turning to Thorndyke, "that you can undertake my defence on that
assumption?"

"It is the only assumption on which I should agree to undertake the
case," replied Thorndyke.

"And--if I may ask the question--" pursued Reuben anxiously, "do you
find it possible to conceive that I may really be innocent?"

"Certainly I do," Thorndyke replied, on which I observed Mr. Lawley's
eyebrows rise perceptibly. "I am a man of facts, not an advocate, and
if I found it impossible to entertain the hypothesis of your innocence,
I should not be willing to expend time and energy in searching for
evidence to prove it. Nevertheless," he continued, seeing the light of
hope break out on the face of the unfortunate young man, "I must impress
upon you that the case presents enormous difficulties and that we must
be prepared to find them insuperable in spite of all our efforts."

"I expect nothing but a conviction," replied Reuben in a calm and
resolute voice, "and can face it like a man if only you do not take my
guilt for granted, but give me a chance, no matter how small, of making
a defence."

"Everything shall be done that I am capable of doing," said Thorndyke;
"that I can promise you. The long odds against us are themselves a spur
to endeavour, as far as I am concerned. And now, let me ask you, have
you any cuts or scratches on your fingers?"

Reuben Hornby held out both his hands for my colleague's inspection, and
I noticed that they were powerful and shapely, like the hands of a
skilled craftsman, though faultlessly kept. Thorndyke set on the table a
large condenser such as is used for microscopic work, and taking his
client's hand, brought the bright spot of light to bear on each finger
in succession, examining their tips and the parts around the nails with
the aid of a pocket lens.

"A fine, capable hand, this," said he, regarding the member approvingly,
as he finished his examination, "but I don't perceive any trace of a
scar on either the right or left. Will you go over them, Jervis? The
robbery took place a fortnight ago, so there has been time for a small
cut or scratch to heal and disappear entirely. Still, the matter is
worth noting."

He handed me the lens and I scrutinised every part of each hand without
being able to detect the faintest trace of any recent wound.

"There is one other matter that must be attended to before you go," said
Thorndyke, pressing the electric bell-push by his chair. "I will take
one or two prints of the left thumb for my own information."

In response to the summons, Polton made his appearance from some lair
unknown to me, but presumably the laboratory, and, having received his
instructions, retired, and presently returned carrying a box, which he
laid on the table. From this receptacle Thorndyke drew forth a bright
copper plate mounted on a slab of hard wood, a small printer's roller, a
tube of finger-print ink, and a number of cards with very white and
rather glazed surfaces.

"Now, Mr. Hornby," said he, "your hands, I see, are beyond criticism as
to cleanliness, but we will, nevertheless, give the thumb a final
polish."

Accordingly he proceeded to brush the bulb of the thumb with a
well-soaked badger-hair nail-brush, and, having rinsed it in water,
dried it with a silk handkerchief, and gave it a final rub on a piece of
chamois leather. The thumb having been thus prepared, he squeezed out a
drop of the thick ink on to the copper plate and spread it out with the
roller, testing the condition of the film from time to time by touching
the plate with the tip of his finger and taking an impression on one of
the cards.

When the ink had been rolled out to the requisite thinness, he took
Reuben's hand and pressed the thumb lightly but firmly on to the inked
plate; then, transferring the thumb to one of the cards, which he
directed me to hold steady on the table, he repeated the pressure, when
there was left on the card a beautifully sharp and clear impression of
the bulb of the thumb, the tiny papillary ridges being shown with
microscopic distinctness, and even the mouths of the sweat glands, which
appeared as rows of little white dots on the black lines of the ridges.
This manoeuvre was repeated a dozen times on two of the cards, each of
which thus received six impressions. Thorndyke then took one or two
rolled prints, _i.e._ prints produced by rolling the thumb first on the
inked slab and then on the card, by which means a much larger portion of
the surface of the thumb was displayed in a single print.

"And now," said Thorndyke, "that we may be furnished with all the
necessary means of comparison, we will take an impression in blood."

The thumb was accordingly cleansed and dried afresh, when Thorndyke,
having pricked his own thumb with a needle, squeezed out a good-sized
drop of blood on to a card.

"There," said he, with a smile, as he spread the drop out with the
needle into a little shallow pool, "it is not every lawyer who is
willing to shed his blood in the interests of his client."

He proceeded to make a dozen prints as before on two cards, writing a
number with his pencil opposite each print as he made it.

But the sentence was hardly pronounced when the lost horse and
spaniel were found. So the judges were under the painful necessity of
reconsidering their decision: but they fined Zadig four hundred ounces
of gold for saying he had seen that which he had not seen.

"The first thing was to pay the fine; afterwards Zadig was permitted
to open his defence to the court, which he did in the following
terms:

"'Stars of justice, abysses of knowledge, mirrors of truth, whose gravity
is as that of lead, whose inflexibility is as that of iron, who rival
the diamond in clearness, and possess no little affinity with gold;
since I am permitted to address your august assembly, I swear by
Ormuzd that I have never seen the respectable lady dog of the Queen,
nor beheld the sacrosanct horse of the King of Kings.

"'This is what happened. I was taking a walk towards the little wood
near which I subsequently had the honour to meet the venerable chief
eunuch and the most illustrious grand huntsman.

I noticed the track of an animal in the sand, and it was easy to
see that it was that of a small dog. Long faint streaks upon the little
elevations of sand between the footmarks convinced me that it was a
she dog with pendent dugs, showing that she must have had puppies
not many days since.

Other scrapings of the sand, which always lay close to the marks of the
forepaws, indicated that she had very long ears; and, as the imprint
of one foot was always fainter than those of the other three, I
judged that the lady dog of our august Queen was, if I may venture
to say so, a little lame.

"'With respect to the horse of the King of Kings, permit me to observe
that, wandering through the paths which traverse the wood, I noticed the
marks of horse-shoes.

They were all equidistant. "Ah!"

said I, "this is a famous galloper." In a narrow alley, only seven feet
wide, the dust upon the trunks of the trees was a little disturbed at
three feet and a half from the middle of the path. "This horse," said I
to myself, "had a tail three feet and a half long, and, lashing
it from one side to the other, he has swept away the dust."

Branches of the trees met overhead at the height of five feet, and under
them I saw newly fallen leaves; so I knew that the horse had brushed
some of the branches, and was therefore five feet high. As to his bit,
it must have been made of twenty-three carat gold, for he had rubbed
it against a stone, which turned out to be a touchstone, with the
properties of which I am familiar by experiment. Lastly, by the marks
which his shoes left upon pebbles of another kind, I was led to think
that his shoes were of fine silver.'
"All the judges admired Zadig's profound and subtle discernment;
and the fame of it reached even the King and the Queen.

From the ante-rooms to the presence-chamber, Zadig's name was in everybody's
mouth; and, although many of the magi were of opinion that he ought
to be burnt as a sorcerer, the King commanded that the four hundred
ounces of gold which he had been fined should be restored to him.

So the officers of the court went in state with the four hundred ounces;
only they retained three hundred and ninety-eight for legal expenses,
and their servants expected fees."

Those who are interested in learning more of the fateful history of
Zadig must turn to the original; we are dealing with him only
as a philosopher, and this brief excerpt suffices for the
exemplification of the nature of his conclusions and of the methods
by which he arrived at them.

These conclusions may be said to be of the nature of retrospective
prophecies; though it is perhaps a little hazardous to employ
phraseology which perilously suggests a contradiction in terms--the
word "prophecy" being so constantly, in ordinary use, restricted
to "foretelling."

Strictly, however, the term prophecy applies as much to outspeaking as
to foretelling; and, even in the restricted sense of "divination,"
it is obvious that the essence of the prophetic operation does not
lie in its backward or forward relation to the course of time, but
in the fact that it is the apprehension of that which lies out of
the sphere of immediate knowledge; the seeing of that which, to the
natural sense of the seer, is invisible.

The foreteller asserts that, at some future time, a properly situated
observer will witness certain events; the clairvoyant declares that,
at this present time, certain things are to be witnessed a thousand
miles away; the retrospective prophet (would that there were such
a word as "backteller!")

affirms that, so many hours or years ago, such and such things were to
be seen. In all these cases, it is only the relation to time which
alters--the process of divination beyond the limits of possible direct
knowledge remains the same.

No doubt it was their instinctive recognition of the analogy between
Zadig's results and those obtained by authorised inspiration which
inspired the Babylonian magi with the desire to burn the philosopher.

Zadig admitted that he had never either seen or heard of the horse of the
king or of the spaniel of the queen; and yet he ventured to assert
in the most positive manner that animals answering to their description
did actually exist and ran about the plains of Babylon. If his method
was good for the divination of the course of events ten hours old,
why should it not be good for those of ten years or ten centuries
past; nay, might it not extend ten thousand years and justify the impious
in meddling with the traditions of Oannes and the fish, and all
the sacred foundations of Babylonian cosmogony?

But this was not the worst. There was another consideration which
obviously dictated to the more thoughtful of the magi the propriety of
burning Zadig out of hand.

His defence was worse than his offence. It showed that his mode of
divination was fraught with danger to magianism in general.

Swollen with the pride of human reason, he had ignored the established
canons of magian lore; and, trusting to what after all was mere carnal
common sense, he professed to lead men to a deeper insight into
nature than magian wisdom, with all its lofty antagonism to
everything common, had ever reached.

What, in fact, lay at the foundation of all Zadig's argument but
the coarse commonplace assumption, upon which every act of our daily
lives is based, that we may conclude from an effect to the pre-existence
of a cause competent to produce that effect?

The tracks were exactly like those which dogs and horses leave;
therefore they were the effects of such animals as causes. The marks at
the sides of the fore-prints of the dog track were exactly such as
would be produced by long trailing ears; therefore the dog's long ears
were the causes of these marks--and so on. Nothing can be more
hopelessly vulgar, more unlike the majestic development of a system
of grandly unintelligible conclusions from sublimely inconceivable
premisses such as delights the magian heart.

In fact, Zadig's method was nothing but the method of all mankind.

Retrospective prophecies, far more astonishing for their minute accuracy
than those of Zadig, are familiar to those who have watched the daily
life of nomadic people.

From freshly broken twigs, crushed leaves, disturbed pebbles, and
imprints hardly discernible by the untrained eye, such graduates
in the University of Nature will divine, not only the fact that a
party has passed that way, but its strength, its composition, the
course it took, and the number of hours or days which have elapsed
since it passed.

But they are able to do this because, like Zadig, they perceive
endless minute differences where untrained eyes discern nothing;
and because the unconscious logic of common sense compels them to
account for these effects by the causes which they know to be
competent to produce them.

And such mere methodised savagery was to discover the hidden things
of nature better than _a priori_ deductions from the nature of Ormuzd--perhaps
to give a history of the past, in which Oannes would be altogether
ignored!

Decidedly it were better to burn this man at once.

If instinct, or an unwonted use of reason, led Moabdar's magi to this
conclusion two or three thousand years ago, all that can be said
is that subsequent history has fully justified them.

For the rigorous application of Zadig's logic to the results of accurate
and long-continued observation has founded all those sciences which have
been termed historical or palaetiological, because they are retrospectively
prophetic and strive towards the reconstruction in human imagination
of events which have vanished and ceased to be.

History, in the ordinary acceptation of the word, is based upon the
interpretation of documentary evidence; and documents would have no
evidential value unless historians were justified in their assumption
that they have come into existence by the operation of causes similar
to those of which documents are, in our present experience, the
effects.

If a written history can be produced otherwise than by human agency, or
if the man who wrote a given document was actuated by other than
ordinary human motives, such documents are of no more evidential
value than so many arabesques.

Archaeology, which takes up the thread of history beyond the point
at which documentary evidence fails us, could have no existence,
except for our well grounded confidence that monuments and works
of art or artifice, have never been produced by causes different
in kind from those to which they now owe their origin.

And geology, which traces back the course of history beyond the
limits of archaeology, could tell us nothing except for the assumption
that, millions of years ago, water, heat, gravitation, friction,
animal and vegetable life, caused effects of the same kind as they
now cause.

Nay, even physical astronomy, in so far as it takes us back to the
uttermost point of time which palaetiological science can reach,
is founded upon the same assumption.

If the law of gravitation ever failed to be true, even to a small
extent, for that period, the calculations of the astronomer have
no application.

The power of prediction, of prospective prophecy, is that which is commonly
regarded as the great prerogative of physical science.

And truly it is a wonderful fact that one can go into a shop and buy for
a small price a book, the "Nautical Almanac," which will foretell
the exact position to be occupied by one of Jupiter's moons six
months hence; nay, more, that, if it were worth while, the
Astronomer-Royal could furnish us with as infallible a prediction
applicable to 1980 or 2980.

But astronomy is not less remarkable for its power of retrospective
prophecy.

Thales, oldest of Greek philosophers, the dates of whose birth and
death are uncertain, but who flourished about 600 B.C., is said to
have foretold an eclipse of the sun which took place in his time
during a battle between the Medes and the Lydians.

Sir George Airy has written a very learned and interesting memoir
[2] in which he proves that such an eclipse was visible in Lydia
on the afternoon of the 28th of May in the year 585 B.C.

No one doubts that, on the day and at the hour mentioned by the
Astronomer-Royal, the people of Lydia saw the face of the sun totally
obscured.

But, though we implicitly believe this retrospective prophecy, it
is incapable of verification.

In the total absence of historical records, it is impossible even to
conceive any means of ascertaining directly whether the eclipse of
Thales happened or not. All that can be said is, that the prospective
prophecies of the astronomer are always verified; and that, inasmuch as
his retrospective prophecies are the result of following backwards,
the very same method as that which invariably leads to verified results,
when it is worked forwards, there is as much reason for placing full
confidence in the one as in the other. Retrospective prophecy is therefore
a legitimate function of astronomical science; and if it is legitimate
for one science it is legitimate for all; the fundamental axiom
on which it rests, the constancy of the order of nature, being the
common foundation of all scientific thought.

Indeed, if there can be grades in legitimacy, certain branches of science
have the advantage over astronomy, in so far as their retrospective
prophecies are not only susceptible of verification, but are sometimes
strikingly verified.

Such a science exists in that application of the principles of biology
to the interpretation of the animal and vegetable remains imbedded in
the rocks which compose the surface of the globe, which is called
Palaeontology.

At no very distant time, the question whether these so-called "fossils,"
were really the remains of animals and plants was hotly disputed. Very
learned persons maintained that they were nothing of the kind, but a sort
of concretion, or crystallisation, which had taken place within
the stone in which they are found; and which simulated the forms of animal
and vegetable life, just as frost on a window-pane imitates vegetation.

At the present day, it would probably be impossible to find any
sane advocate of this opinion; and the fact is rather surprising, that
among the people from whom the circle-squarers, perpetual-motioners,
flat-earthed men and the like, are recruited, to say nothing of
table-turners and spirit-rappers, somebody has not perceived the
easy avenue to nonsensical notoriety open to any one who will take
up the good old doctrine, that fossils are all _lusus naturae._

The position would be impregnable, inasmuch as it is quite impossible
to prove the contrary.

If a man choose to maintain that a fossil oyster shell, in spite of its
correspondence, down to every minutest particular, with that of
an oyster fresh taken out of the sea, was never tenanted by a living
oyster, but is a mineral concretion, there is no demonstrating his
error.

All that can be done is to show him that, by a parity of reasoning, he
is bound to admit that a heap of oyster shells outside a fishmonger's
door may also be "sports of nature," and that a mutton bone in a
dust-bin may have had the like origin.

And when you cannot prove that people are wrong, but only that
they are absurd, the best course is to let them alone.

The whole fabric of palaeontology, in fact, falls to the ground unless
we admit the validity of Zadig's great principle, that like effects
imply like causes, and that the process of reasoning from a shell,
or a tooth, or a bone, to the nature of the animal to which it
belonged, rests absolutely on the assumption that the likeness of
this shell, or tooth, or bone, to that of some animal with which
we are already acquainted, is such that we are justified in inferring
a corresponding degree of likeness in the rest of the two organisms.

It is on this very simple principle, and not upon imaginary laws of
physiological correlation, about which, in most cases, we know
nothing whatever, that the so-called restorations of the palaeontologist
are based.

Abundant illustrations of this truth will occur to every one who
is familiar with palaeontology; none is more suitable than the case
of the so-called _Belemnites._ In the early days of the study of
fossils, this name was given to certain elongated stony bodies,
ending at one extremity in a conical point, and truncated at the
other, which were commonly reputed to be thunderbolts, and as such
to have descended from the sky.

They are common enough in some parts of England; and, in the condition in
which they are ordinarily found, it might be difficult to give
satisfactory reasons for denying them to be merely mineral bodies.

They appear, in fact, to consist of nothing but concentric layers of
carbonate of lime, disposed in subcrystalline fibres, or prisms,
perpendicular to the layers.

Among a great number of specimens of these Belemnites, however, it was
soon observed that some showed a conical cavity at the blunt end; and,
in still better preserved specimens, this cavity appeared to be divided
into chambers by delicate saucer-shaped partitions, situated at
regular intervals one above the other.

Now there is no mineral body which presents any structure comparable
to this, and the conclusion suggested itself that the Belemnites
must be the effects of causes other than those which are at work
in inorganic nature.

On close examination, the saucer-shaped partitions were proved to be all
perforated at one point, and the perforations being situated exactly
in the same line, the chambers were seen to be traversed by a canal,
or _siphuncle,_ which thus connected the smallest or aphical chamber
with the largest.
My feelings towards him are quite friendly, but not of such a
nature as to allow me to contemplate marrying him."

"And now, to return for a moment to Mr. Reuben. You have known him for
some years?"

"I have known him intimately for six years," replied Miss Gibson.

"And what sort of character do you give him?"

"Speaking from my own observation of him," she replied, "I can say that
I have never known him to tell an untruth or do a dishonourable deed. As
to theft, it is merely ridiculous. His habits have always been
inexpensive and frugal, he is unambitious to a fault, and in respect to
the 'main chance' his indifference is as conspicuous as Walter's
keenness. He is a generous man, too, although careful and industrious."

"Thank you, Miss Gibson," said Thorndyke. "We shall apply to you for
further information as the case progresses. I am sure that you will help
us if you can, and that you can help us if you will, with your clear
head and your admirable frankness. If you will leave us your card, Dr.
Jervis and I will keep you informed of our prospects and ask for your
assistance whenever we need it."

After our fair visitor had departed, Thorndyke stood for a minute or
more gazing dreamily into the fire. Then, with a quick glance at his
watch, he resumed his hat and, catching up the microscope, handed the
camera case to me and made for the door.  "How the time goes!" he
exclaimed, as we descended the stairs; "but it hasn't been wasted,
Jervis, hey?"

"No, I suppose not," I answered tentatively.

"You suppose not!" he replied. "Why here is as pretty a little problem
as you could desire--what would be called in the jargon of the novels, a
psychological problem--and it is your business to work it out, too."

"You mean as to Miss Gibson's relations with these two young men?"

Thorndyke nodded.

"Is it any concern of ours?" I asked.

"Certainly it is," he replied. "Everything is a concern of ours at this
preliminary stage. We are groping about for a clue and must let nothing
pass unscrutinised."

"Well, then, to begin with, she is not wildly infatuated with Walter
Hornby, I should say."

"No," agreed Thorndyke, laughing softly; "we may take it that the canny
Walter has not inspired a grand passion."

"Then," I resumed, "if I were a suitor for Miss Gibson's hand, I think I
would sooner stand in Reuben's shoes than in Walter's."

"There again I am with you," said Thorndyke. "Go on."

"Well," I continued, "our fair visitor conveyed to me the impression
that her evident admiration of Reuben's character was tempered by
something that she had heard from a third party. That expression of
hers, 'speaking from my own observation,' seemed to imply that her
observations of him were not in entire agreement with somebody else's."

"Good man!" exclaimed Thorndyke, slapping me on the back, to the
undissembled surprise of a policeman whom we were passing; "that is what
I had hoped for in you--the capacity to perceive the essential
underneath the obvious. Yes; somebody has been saying something about
our client, and the thing that we have to find out is, what is it that
has been said and who has been saying it. We shall have to make a
pretext for another interview with Miss Gibson."

"By the way, why didn't you ask her what she meant?" I asked foolishly.

Thorndyke grinned in my face. "Why didn't you?" he retorted.

"No," I rejoined, "I suppose it is not politic to appear too discerning.
Let me carry the microscope for a time; it is making your arm ache, I
see."

"Thanks," said he, handing the case to me and rubbing his fingers; "it
is rather ponderous."

"I can't make out what you want with this great instrument," I said. "A
common pocket lens would do all that you require. Besides, a six-inch
objective will not magnify more than two or three diameters."

"Two, with the draw-tube closed," replied Thorndyke, "and the low-power
eye-piece brings it up to four. Polton made them both for me for
examining cheques, bank-notes and other large objects. But you will
understand when you see me use the instrument, and remember, you are to
make no comments."

We had by this time arrived at the entrance to Scotland Yard, and were
passing up the narrow thoroughfare, when we encountered a uniformed
official who halted and saluted my colleague.

"Ah, I thought we should see you here before long, doctor," said he
genially. "I heard this morning that you have this thumb-print case in
hand."

"Yes," replied Thorndyke; "I am going to see what can be done for the
defence."

"Well," said the officer as he ushered us into the building, "you've
given us a good many surprises, but you'll give us a bigger one if you
can make anything of this. It's a foregone conclusion, I should say."

"My dear fellow," said Thorndyke, "there is no such thing. You mean that
there is a _prima facie_ case against the accused."

"Put it that way if you like," replied the officer, with a sly smile,
"but I think you will find this about the hardest nut you ever tried
your teeth on--and they're pretty strong teeth too, I'll say that. You
had better come into Mr. Singleton's office," and he conducted us along
a corridor and into a large, barely-furnished room, where we found a
sedate-looking gentleman seated at a large writing table.

"How-d'ye-do, doctor?" said the latter, rising and holding out his hand.
"I can guess what you've come for. Want to see that thumb-print, eh?"

"Quite right," answered Thorndyke, and then, having introduced me, he
continued: "We were partners in the last game, but we are on opposite
sides of the board this time."

"Yes," agreed Mr. Singleton; "and we are going to give you check-mate."

He unlocked a drawer and drew forth a small portfolio, from which he
extracted a piece of paper which he laid on the table. It appeared to be
a sheet torn from a perforated memorandum block, and bore the pencilled
inscription: "Handed in by Reuben at 7.3 p.m., 9.3.01. J. H." At one end
was a dark, glossy blood-stain, made by the falling of a good-sized
drop, and this was smeared slightly, apparently by a finger or thumb
having been pressed on it. Near to it were two or three smaller smears
and a remarkably distinct and clean print of a thumb.

Thorndyke gazed intently at the paper for a minute or two, scrutinising
the thumb-print and the smears in turn, but making no remark, while Mr.
Singleton watched his impassive face with expectant curiosity.

"Not much difficulty in identifying that mark," the official at length
observed.

"No," agreed Thorndyke; "it is an excellent impression and a very
distinctive pattern, even without the scar."

"Yes," rejoined Mr. Singleton; "the scar makes it absolutely conclusive.
You have a print with you, I suppose?"

"Yes," replied Thorndyke, and he drew from a wide flap-pocket the
enlarged photograph, at the sight of which Mr. Singleton's face
broadened into a smile.

"You don't want to put on spectacles to look at that," he remarked; "not
that you gain anything by so much enlargement; three diameters is ample
for studying the ridge-patterns. I see you have divided it up into
numbered squares--not a bad plan; but ours--or rather Galton's, for we
borrowed the method from him--is better for this purpose."

He drew from the portfolio a half-plate photograph of the thumb-print
which appeared magnified to about four inches in length. The print was
marked by a number of figures written minutely with a fine-pointed pen,
each figure being placed on an "island," a loop, a bifurcation or some
other striking and characteristic portion of the ridge-pattern.

"This system of marking with reference numbers," said Mr. Singleton, "is
better than your method of squares, because the numbers are only placed
at points which are important for comparison, whereas your squares or
the intersections of the lines fall arbitrarily on important or
unimportant points according to chance. Besides, we can't let you mark
our original, you know, though, of course, we can give you a photograph,
which will do as well."

"I was going to ask you to let me take a photograph presently," said
Thorndyke.

"Certainly," replied Mr. Singleton, "if you would rather have one of
your own taking. I know you don't care to take anything on trust. And
now I must get on with my work, if you will excuse me. Inspector Johnson
will give you any assistance you may require."

"And see that I don't pocket the original," added Thorndyke, with a
smile at the inspector who had shown us in.

"Oh, I'll see to that," said the latter, grinning; and, as Mr. Singleton
returned to his table, Thorndyke unlocked the microscope case and drew
forth the instrument.

"What, are you going to put it under the microscope?" exclaimed Mr.
Singleton, looking round with a broad smile.

"Must do something for my fee, you know," replied Thorndyke, as he set
up the microscope and screwed on two extra objectives to the triple
nose-piece.  "You observe that there is no deception," he added to the
inspector, as he took the paper from Mr. Singleton's table and placed it
between two slips of glass.

"I'm watching you, sir," replied the officer, with a chuckle; and he did
watch, with close attention and great interest, while Thorndyke laid the
glass slips on the microscope stage and proceeded to focus.

I also watched, and was a good deal exercised in my mind by my
colleague's proceedings. After a preliminary glance with the six-inch
glass, he swung round the nose-piece to the half-inch objective and
slipped in a more powerful eye-piece, and with this power he examined
the blood-stains carefully, and then moved the thumb-print into the
field of vision. After looking at this for some time with deep
attention, he drew from the case a tiny spirit lamp which was evidently
filled with an alcoholic solution of some sodium salt, for when he lit
it I recognised the characteristic yellow sodium flame. Then he replaced
one of the objectives by a spectroscopic attachment, and having placed
the little lamp close to the microscope mirror, adjusted the
spectroscope. Evidently my friend was fixing the position of the "D"
line (or sodium line) in the spectrum.

Having completed the adjustments, he now examined afresh the
blood-smears and the thumb-print, both by transmitted and reflected
light, and I observed him hurriedly draw one or two diagrams in his
notebook. Then he replaced the spectroscope and lamp in the case and
brought forth the micrometer--a slip of rather thin glass about three
inches by one and a half--which he laid over the thumb-print in the
place of the upper plate of glass.

Having secured it in position by the clips, he moved it about, comparing
its appearance with that of the lines on the large photograph, which he
held in his hand. After a considerable amount of adjustment and
readjustment, he appeared to be satisfied, for he remarked to me--

"I think I have got the lines in the same position as they are on our
print, so, with Inspector Johnson's assistance, we will take a
photograph which we can examine at our leisure."

He extracted the camera--a quarter-plate instrument--from its case and
opened it. Then, having swung the microscope on its stand into a
horizontal position, he produced from the camera case a slab of mahogany
with three brass feet, on which he placed the camera, and which brought
the latter to a level with the eye-piece of the microscope.

The front of the camera was fitted with a short sleeve of thin black
leather, and into this the eye-piece end of the microscope was now
passed, the sleeve being secured round the barrel of the microscope by a
stout indiarubber band, thus producing a completely light-tight
connection.

Everything was now ready for taking the photograph. The light from the
window having been concentrated on the thumb-print by means of a
condenser, Thorndyke proceeded to focus the image on the ground-glass
screen with extreme care and then, slipping a small leather cap over the
objective, introduced the dark slide and drew out the shutter.

"I will ask you to sit down and remain quite still while I make the
exposure," he said to me and the inspector. "A very little vibration is
enough to destroy the sharpness of the image."

We seated ourselves accordingly, and Thorndyke then removed the cap,
standing motionless, watch in hand, while he exposed the first plate.

"We may as well take a second, in case this should not turn out quite
perfect," he said, as he replaced the cap and closed the shutter.

He reversed the dark slide and made another exposure in the same way,
and then, having removed the micrometer and replaced it by a slip of
plain glass, he made two more exposures.

"There are two plates left," he remarked, as he drew out the second dark
slide. "I think I will take a record of the blood-stain on them."

He accordingly made two more exposures--one of the larger blood-stain
and one of the smaller smears.

"There," said he, with an air of satisfaction, as he proceeded to pack
up what the inspector described as his "box of tricks." "I think we have
all the data that we can squeeze out of Scotland Yard, and I am very
much obliged to you, Mr. Singleton, for giving so many facilities to
your natural enemy, the counsel for the defence."

"Not our natural enemies, doctor," protested Mr. Singleton. "We work for
a conviction, of course, but we don't throw obstacles in the way of the
defence. You know that perfectly well."

"Of course I do, my dear sir," replied Thorndyke, shaking the official
by the hand. "Haven't I benefited by your help a score of times? But I
am greatly obliged all the same. Good-bye."

"Good-bye, doctor. I wish you luck, though I fear you will find it 'no
go' this time."

"We shall see," replied Thorndyke, and with a friendly wave of the hand
to the inspector he caught up the two cases and led the way out of the
building.


CHAPTER IV

CONFIDENCES


During our walk home my friend was unusually thoughtful and silent, and
his face bore a look of concentration under which I thought I could
detect, in spite of his habitually impassive expression, a certain
suppressed excitement of a not entirely unpleasurable kind. I forbore,
however, from making any remarks or asking questions, not only because I
saw that he was preoccupied, but also because, from my knowledge of the
man, I judged that he would consider it his duty to keep his own counsel
and to make no unnecessary confidences even to me.

On our arrival at his chambers he immediately handed over the camera to
Polton with a few curt directions as to the development of the plates,
and, lunch being already prepared, we sat down at the table without
delay.

We had proceeded with our meal in silence for some time when Thorndyke
suddenly laid down his knife and fork and looked into my face with a
smile of quiet amusement.

"It has just been borne in upon me, Jervis," said he, "that you are the
most companionable fellow in the world. You have the heaven-sent gift of
silence."

"If silence is the test of companionability," I answered, with a grin,
"I think I can pay you a similar compliment in even more emphatic
terms."

He laughed cheerfully and rejoined--

"You are pleased to be sarcastic, I observe; but I maintain my position.
The capacity to preserve an opportune silence is the rarest and most
precious of social accomplishments. Now, most men would have plied me
with questions and babbled comments on my proceedings at Scotland Yard,
whereas you have allowed me to sort out, without interruption, a mass of
evidence while it is still fresh and impressive, to docket each item and
stow it away in the pigeonholes of my brain. By the way, I have made a
ridiculous oversight."

"What is that?" I asked.

"The 'Thumbograph.' I never ascertained whether the police have it or
whether it is still in the possession of Mrs. Hornby."

"Does it matter?" I inquired.

"Not much; only I must see it. And perhaps it will furnish an excellent
pretext for you to call on Miss Gibson. As I am busy at the hospital
this afternoon and Polton has his hands full, it would be a good plan
for you to drop in at Endsley Gardens--that is the address, I think--and
if you can see Miss Gibson, try to get a confidential chat with her, and
extend your knowledge of the manners and customs of the three Messieurs
Hornby. Put on your best bedside manner and keep your weather eye
lifting. Find out everything you can as to the characters and habits of
those three gentlemen, regardless of all scruples of delicacy.
Everything is of importance to us, even to the names of their tailors."

"And with regard to the 'Thumbograph'?"

"Find out who has it, and, if it is still in Mrs. Hornby's possession,
get her to lend it to us or--what might, perhaps, be better--get her
permission to take a photograph of it."

"It shall be done according to your word," said I. "I will furbish up my
exterior, and this very afternoon make my first appearance in the
character of Paul Pry."

About an hour later I found myself upon the doorstep of Mr. Hornby's
house in Endsley Gardens listening to the jangling of the bell that I
had just set in motion.

"Miss Gibson, sir?" repeated the parlourmaid in response to my question.
"She _was_ going out, but I am not sure whether she has gone yet. If you
will step in, I will go and see."

I followed her into the drawing-room, and, threading my way amongst the
litter of small tables and miscellaneous furniture by which ladies
nowadays convert their special domain into the semblance of a broker's
shop, let go my anchor in the vicinity of the fireplace to await the
parlourmaid's report.

I had not long to wait, for in less than a minute Miss Gibson herself
entered the room. She wore her hat and gloves, and I congratulated
myself on my timely arrival.

"I didn't expect to see you again so soon, Dr. Jervis," she said,
holding out her hand with a frank and friendly manner, "but you are very
welcome all the same. You have come to tell me something?"

"On the contrary," I replied, "I have come to ask you something."

"Well, that is better than nothing," she said, with a shade of
disappointment. "Won't you sit down?"

I seated myself with caution on a dwarf chair of scrofulous aspect, and
opened my business without preamble.

"Do you remember a thing called a 'Thumbograph'?"

"Indeed I do," she replied with energy. "It was the cause of all this
trouble."

"Do you know if the police took possession of it?"

"The detective took it to Scotland Yard that the finger-print experts
might examine it and compare the two thumb-prints; and they wanted to
keep it, but Mrs. Hornby was so distressed at the idea of its being
used in evidence that they let her have it back. You see, they really
had no further need of it, as they could take a print for themselves
when they had Reuben in custody; in fact, he volunteered to have a print
taken at once, as soon as he was arrested, and that was done."

"So the 'Thumbograph' is now in Mrs. Hornby's possession?"

"Yes, unless she has destroyed it. She spoke of doing so."

"I hope she has not," said I, in some alarm, "for Dr. Thorndyke is
extremely anxious, for some reason, to examine it."

"Well, she will be down in a few minutes, and then we shall know. I told
her you were here. Have you any idea what Dr. Thorndyke's reason is for
wanting to see it?"

"None whatever," I replied. "Dr. Thorndyke is as close as an oyster. He
treats me as he treats every one else--he listens attentively, observes
closely, and says nothing."

"It doesn't sound very agreeable," mused Miss Gibson; "and yet he seemed
very nice and sympathetic."

"He _is_ very nice and sympathetic," I retorted with some emphasis, "but
he doesn't make himself agreeable by divulging his clients' secrets."

"I suppose not; and I regard myself as very effectively snubbed," said
she, smiling, but evidently somewhat piqued by my not very tactful
observation.

I was hastening to repair my error with apologies and self-accusations,
when the door opened and an elderly lady entered the room. She was
somewhat stout, amiable and placid of mien, and impressed me (to be
entirely truthful) as looking rather foolish.

"Here is Mrs. Hornby," said Miss Gibson, presenting me to her hostess;
and she continued, "Dr. Jervis has come to ask about the 'Thumbograph.'
You haven't destroyed it, I hope?"

"No, my dear," replied Mrs. Hornby. "I have it in my little bureau. What
did Dr. Jervis wish to know about it?"

Seeing that she was terrified lest some new and dreadful surprise should
be sprung upon her, I hastened to reassure her.

"My colleague, Dr. Thorndyke, is anxious to examine it. He is directing
your nephew's defence, you know."

"Yes, yes," said Mrs. Hornby. "Juliet told me about him. She says he is
a dear. Do you agree with her?"

Here I caught Miss Gibson's eye, in which was a mischievous twinkle, and
noted a little deeper pink in her cheeks.

"Well," I answered dubiously, "I have never considered my colleague in
the capacity of a dear, but I have a very high opinion of him in every
respect."

"That, no doubt, is the masculine equivalent," said Miss Gibson,
recovering from the momentary embarrassment that Mrs. Hornby's artless
repetition of her phrase had produced. "I think the feminine expression
is more epigrammatic and comprehensive. But to return to the object of
Dr. Jervis's visit. Would you let him have the 'Thumbograph,' aunt, to
show to Dr. Thorndyke?"  "Oh, my dear Juliet," replied Mrs. Hornby, "I
would do anything--anything--to help our poor boy. I will never believe
that he could be guilty of theft--common, vulgar theft. There has been
some dreadful mistake--I am convinced there has--I told the detectives
so. I assured them that Reuben could not have committed the robbery, and
that they were totally mistaken in supposing him to be capable of such
an action. But they would not listen to me, although I have known him
since he was a little child, and ought to be able to judge, if anyone
is. Diamonds, too! Now, I ask you, what could Reuben want with diamonds?
and they were not even cut."

Here Mrs. Hornby drew forth a lace-edged handkerchief and mopped her
eyes.

"I am sure Dr. Thorndyke will be very much interested to see this little
book of yours," said I, with a view to stemming the tide of her
reflections.

"Oh, the 'Thumbograph,'" she replied. "Yes, I will let him have it with
the greatest pleasure. I am so glad he wishes to see it; it makes one
feel hopeful to know that he is taking so much interest in the case.
Would you believe it, Dr. Jervis, those detective people actually wanted
to keep it to bring up in evidence against the poor boy. My
'Thumbograph,' mind you. But I put my foot down there and they had to
return it. I was resolved that they should not receive any assistance
from me in their efforts to involve my nephew in this horrible affair."

"Then, perhaps," said Miss Gibson, "you might give Dr. Jervis the
'Thumbograph' and he can hand it to Dr. Thorndyke."

"Of course I will," said Mrs. Hornby; "instantly; and you need not
return it, Dr. Jervis. When you have finished with it, fling it into the
fire. I wish never to see it again."

But I had been considering the matter, and had come to the conclusion
that it would be highly indiscreet to take the book out of Mrs. Hornby's
custody, and this I now proceeded to explain.

"I have no idea," I said, "for what purpose Dr. Thorndyke wishes to
examine the 'Thumbograph,' but it occurs to me that he may desire to put
it in evidence, in which case it would be better that it should not go
out of your possession for the present. He merely commissioned me to ask
for your permission to take a photograph of it."

"Oh, if he wants a photograph," said Mrs. Hornby, "I could get one done
for him without any difficulty. My nephew Walter would take one for us,
I am sure, if I asked him. He is so clever, you know--is he not, Juliet,
dear?"

"Yes, aunt," replied Miss Gibson quickly, "but I expect Dr. Thorndyke
would rather take the photograph himself."

"I am sure he would," I agreed. "In fact, a photograph taken by another
person would not be of much use to him."

"Ah," said Mrs. Hornby in a slightly injured tone, "you think Walter is
just an ordinary amateur; but if I were to show you some of the
photographs he has taken you would really be surprised. He is remarkably
clever, I assure you."

"Would you like us to bring the book to Dr. Thorndyke's chambers?" asked
Miss Gibson. "That would save time and trouble."

"It is excessively good of you--" I began.

"Not at all. When shall we bring it? Would you like to have it this
evening?"

"We should very much," I replied. "My colleague could then examine it
and decide what is to be done with it. But it is giving you so much
trouble."

"It is nothing of the kind," said Miss Gibson. "You would not mind
coming with me this evening, would you, aunt?"

"Certainly not, my dear," replied Mrs. Hornby, and she was about to
enlarge on the subject when Miss Gibson rose and, looking at her watch,
declared that she must start on her errand at once. I also rose to make
my adieux, and she then remarked--

"If you are walking in the same direction as I am, Dr. Jervis, we might
arrange the time of our proposed visit as we go along."

I was not slow to avail myself of this invitation, and a few seconds
later we left the house together, leaving Mrs. Hornby smiling fatuously
after us from the open door.

"Will eight o'clock suit you, do you think?" Miss Gibson asked, as we
walked up the street.

"It will do excellently, I should say," I answered. "If anything should
render the meeting impossible I will send you a telegram. I could wish
that you were coming alone, as ours is to be a business conference."

Miss Gibson laughed softly--and a very pleasant and musical laugh it
was.

"Yes," she agreed. "Dear Mrs. Hornby is a little diffuse and difficult
to keep to one subject; but you must be indulgent to her little
failings; you would be if you had experienced such kindness and
generosity from her as I have."

"I am sure I should," I rejoined; "in fact, I am. After all, a little
diffuseness of speech and haziness of ideas are no great faults in a
generous and amiable woman of her age."

Miss Gibson rewarded me for these highly correct sentiments with a
little smile of approval, and we walked on for some time in silence.
Presently she turned to me with some suddenness and a very earnest
expression, and said--

"I want to ask you a question, Dr. Jervis, and please forgive me if I
beg you to put aside your professional reserve just a little in my
favour. I want you to tell me if you think Dr. Thorndyke has any kind of
hope or expectation of being able to save poor Reuben from the dreadful
peril that threatens him."

This was a rather pointed question, and I took some time to consider it
before replying.

"I should like," I replied at length, "to tell you as much as my duty to
my colleague will allow me to; but that is so little that it is hardly
worth telling. However, I may say this without breaking any confidence:
Dr. Thorndyke has undertaken the case and is working hard at it, and he
would, most assuredly, have done neither the one nor the other if he had
considered it a hopeless one."

"That is a very encouraging view of the matter," said she, "which, had,
however, already occurred to me. May I ask if anything came of your
visit to Scotland Yard? Oh, please don't think me encroaching; I am so
terribly anxious and troubled."

"I can tell you very little about the results of our expedition, for I
know very little; but I have an idea that Dr. Thorndyke is not
dissatisfied with his morning's work. He certainly picked up some facts,
though I have no idea of their nature, and as soon as we reached home he
developed a sudden desire to examine the 'Thumbograph.'"

"Thank you, Dr. Jervis," she said gratefully. "You have cheered me more
than I can tell you, and I won't ask you any more questions. Are you
sure I am not bringing you out of the way?"

"Not at all," I answered hastily. "The fact is, I had hoped to have a
little chat with you when we had disposed of the 'Thumbograph,' so I can
regard myself as combining a little business with a great deal of
pleasure if I am allowed to accompany you."

She gave me a little ironical bow as she inquired--

"And, in short, I may take it that I am to be pumped?"

"Come, now," I retorted. "You have been plying the pump handle pretty
vigorously yourself. But that is not my meaning at all. You see, we are
absolute strangers to all the parties concerned in this case, which, of
course, makes for an impartial estimate of their characters. But, after
all, knowledge is more useful to us than impartiality. There is our
client, for instance. He impressed us both very favourably, I think; but
he might have been a plausible rascal with the blackest of records. Then
you come and tell us that he is a gentleman of stainless character and
we are at once on firmer ground."

"I see," said Miss Gibson thoughtfully; "and suppose that I or some one
else had told you things that seemed to reflect on his character. Would
they have influenced you in your attitude towards him?"

"Only in this," I replied; "that we should have made it our business to
inquire into the truth of those reports and ascertain their origin."

"That is what one should always do, I suppose," said she, still with an
air of deep thoughtfulness which encouraged me to inquire--

"May I ask if anyone to your knowledge has ever said anything to Mr.
Reuben's disadvantage?"

She pondered for some time before replying, and kept her eyes bent
pensively on the ground. At length she said, not without some hesitation
of manner--

"It is a small thing and quite without any bearing on this affair. But
it has been a great trouble to me since it has to some extent put a
barrier between Reuben and me; and we used to be such close friends. And
I have blamed myself for letting it influence me--perhaps unjustly--in
my opinion of him. I will tell you about it, though I expect you will
think me very foolish.

"You must know, then, that Reuben and I used, until about six months
ago, to be very much together, though we were only friends, you
understand. But we were on the footing of relatives, so there was
nothing out of the way in it. Reuben is a keen student of ancient and
mediaeval art, in which I also am much interested, so we used to visit
the museums and galleries together and get a great deal of pleasure from
comparing our views and impressions of what we saw.

"About six months ago, Walter took me aside one day and, with a very
serious face, asked me if there was any kind of understanding between
Reuben and me. I thought it rather impertinent of him, but nevertheless,
I told him the truth, that Reuben and I were just friends and nothing
more.

"'If that is the case,' said he, looking mighty grave, 'I would advise
you not to be seen about with him quite so much.'

"'And why not?' I asked very naturally.

"'Why, the fact is,' said Walter, 'that Reuben is a confounded fool. He
has been chattering to the men at the club and seems to have given them
the impression that a young lady of means and position has been setting
her cap at him very hard, but that he, being a high-souled philosopher
above the temptations that beset ordinary mortals, is superior both to
her blandishments and her pecuniary attractions. I give you the hint for
your own guidance,' he continued, 'and I expect this to go no farther.
You mustn't be annoyed with Reuben. The best of young men will often
behave like prigs and donkeys, and I have no doubt the fellows have
grossly exaggerated what he said; but I thought it right to put you on
your guard.'

"Now this report, as you may suppose, made me excessively angry, and I
wanted to have it out with Reuben then and there. But Walter refused to
sanction this--'there was no use in making a scene' he said--and he
insisted that the caution was given to me in strict confidence; so what
was I to do? I tried to ignore it and treat Reuben as I always had done,
but this I found impossible; my womanly pride was much too deeply hurt.
And yet I felt it the lowest depth of meanness to harbour such thoughts
of him without giving him the opportunity to defend himself. And
although it was most unlike Reuben in some respects, it was very like
him in others; for he has always expressed the utmost contempt for men
who marry for a livelihood. So I have remained on the horns of a dilemma
and am there still. What do you think I ought to have done?"

I rubbed my chin in some embarrassment at this question. Needless to
say, I was most disagreeably impressed by Walter Hornby's conduct, and
not a little disposed to blame my fair companion for giving an ear to
his secret disparagement of his cousin; but I was obviously not in a
position to pronounce, offhand, upon the merits of the case.

"The position appears to be this," I said, after a pause, "either Reuben
has spoken most unworthily and untruthfully of you, or Walter has lied
deliberately about him."

"Yes," she agreed, "that is the position; but which of the two
alternatives appears to you the more probable?"

"That is very difficult to say," I answered. "There is a certain kind of
cad who is much given to boastful rhodomontade concerning his conquests.
We all know him and can generally spot him at first sight, but I must
say that Reuben Hornby did not strike me as that kind of man at all.
Then it is clear that the proper course for Walter to have adopted, if
he had really heard such rumours, was to have had the matter out with
Reuben, instead of coming secretly to you with whispered reports. That
is my feeling, Miss Gibson, but, of course, I may be quite wrong. I
gather that our two young friends are not inseparable companions?"

"Oh, they are very good friends, but you see, their interests and views
of life are quite different. Reuben, although an excellent worker in
business hours, is a student, or perhaps rather what one would call a
scholar, whereas Walter is more a practical man of affairs--decidedly
long-headed and shrewd. He is undoubtedly very clever, as Mrs. Hornby
said."

"He takes photographs, for instance," I suggested.

"Yes. But not ordinary amateur photographs; his work is more technical
and quite excellent of its kind. For example, he did a most beautiful
series of micro-photographs of sections of metalliferous rocks which he
reproduced for publication by the collotype process, and even printed
off the plates himself."

"I see. He must be a very capable fellow."

"He is, very," she assented, "and very keen on making a position; but I
am afraid he is rather too fond of money for its own sake, which is not
a pleasant feature in a young man's character, is it?"

I agreed that it was not.

"Excessive keenness in money affairs," proceeded Miss Gibson oracularly,
"is apt to lead a young man into bad ways--oh, you need not smile, Dr.
Jervis, at my wise saws; it is perfectly true, and you know it. The fact
is, I sometimes have an uneasy feeling that Walter's desire to be rich
inclines him to try what looks like a quick and easy method of making
money. He had a friend--a Mr. Horton--who is a dealer on the Stock
Exchange and who 'operates' rather largely--'operate' I believe is the
expression used, although it seems to be nothing more than common
gambling--and I have more than once suspected Walter of being concerned
in what Mr. Horton calls 'a little flutter.'"

"That doesn't strike me as a very long-headed proceeding," I remarked,
with the impartial wisdom of the impecunious, and therefore untempted.

"No," she agreed, "it isn't. But your gambler always thinks he is going
to win--though you mustn't let me give you the impression that Walter is
a gambler. But here is my destination. Thank you for escorting me so
far, and I hope you are beginning to feel less like a stranger to the
Hornby family. We shall make our appearance to-night at eight
punctually."

She gave me her hand with a frank smile and tripped up the steps leading
to the street door; and when I glanced back, after crossing the road,
she gave me a little friendly nod as she turned to enter the house.


CHAPTER V

THE 'THUMBOGRAPH'


"So your net has been sweeping the quiet and pleasant waters of feminine
conversation," remarked Thorndyke when we met at the dinner table and I
gave him an outline of my afternoon's adventures.

"Yes," I answered, "and here is the catch cleaned and ready for the
consumer."

I laid on the table two of my notebooks in which I had entered such
facts as I had been able to extract from my talk with Miss Gibson.

"You made your entries as soon as possible after your return, I
suppose?" said Thorndyke--"while the matter was still fresh?"

"I wrote down my notes as I sat on a seat in Kensington Gardens within
five minutes after leaving Miss Gibson."

"Good!" said Thorndyke. "And now let us see what you have collected."

He glanced quickly through the entries in the two books, referring back
once or twice, and stood for a few moments silent and abstracted. Then
he laid the little books down on the table with a satisfied nod.

"Our information, then," he said, "amounts to this: Reuben is an
industrious worker at his business and, in his leisure, a student of
ancient and medieval art; possibly a babbling fool and a cad or, on the
other hand, a maligned and much-abused man.  "Walter Hornby is
obviously a sneak and possibly a liar; a keen man of business, perhaps a
flutterer round the financial candle that burns in Throgmorton Street;
an expert photographer and a competent worker of the collotype process.
You have done a very excellent day's work, Jervis. I wonder if you see
the bearing of the facts that you have collected."

"I think I see the bearing of some of them," I answered; "at least, I
have formed certain opinions."

"Then keep them to yourself, _mon ami_, so that I need not feel as if I
ought to unbosom myself of my own views."

"I should be very much surprised if you did, Thorndyke," I replied, "and
should have none the better opinion of you. I realise fully that your
opinions and theories are the property of your client and not to be used
for the entertainment of your friends."

Thorndyke patted me on the back playfully, but he looked uncommonly
pleased, and said, with evident sincerity, "I am really grateful to you
for saying that, for I have felt a little awkward in being so reticent
with you who know so much of this case. But you are quite right, and I
am delighted to find you so discerning and sympathetic. The least I can
do under the circumstances is to uncork a bottle of Pommard, and drink
the health of so loyal and helpful a colleague. Ah! Praise the gods!
here is Polton, like a sacrificial priest accompanied by a sweet savour
of roasted flesh. Rump steak I ween," he added, sniffing, "food meet for
the mighty Shamash (that pun was fortuitous, I need not say) or a
ravenous medical jurist. Can you explain to me, Polton, how it is that
your rump steak is better than any other steak? Is it that you have
command of a special brand of ox?"

The little man's dry countenance wrinkled with pleasure until it was as
full of lines as a ground-plan of Clapham Junction.

"Perhaps it is the special treatment it gets, sir," he replied. "I
usually bruise it in the mortar before cooking, without breaking up the
fibre too much, and then I heat up the little cupel furnace to about 600
C, and put the steak in on a tripod."

Thorndyke laughed outright. "The cupel furnace, too," he exclaimed.
"Well, well, 'to what base uses'--but I don't know that it is a base use
after all. Anyhow, Polton, open a bottle of Pommard and put a couple of
ten by eight 'process' plates in your dark slides. I am expecting two
ladies here this evening with a document."

"Shall you bring them upstairs, sir?" inquired Polton, with an alarmed
expression.

"I expect I shall have to," answered Thorndyke.

"Then I shall just smarten the laboratory up a bit," said Polton, who
evidently appreciated the difference between the masculine and feminine
view as to the proper appearance of working premises.

"And so Miss Gibson wanted to know our private views on the case?" said
Thorndyke, when his voracity had become somewhat appeased.

"Yes," I answered; and then I repeated our conversation as nearly as I
could remember it.

"Your answer was very discreet and diplomatic," Thorndyke remarked, "and
it was very necessary that it should be, for it is essential that we
show the backs of our cards to Scotland Yard; and if to Scotland Yard,
then to the whole world. We know what their trump card is and can
arrange our play accordingly, so long as we do not show our hand."

"You speak of the police as your antagonists; I noticed that at the
'Yard' this morning, and was surprised to find that they accepted the
position. But surely their business is to discover the actual offender,
not to fix the crime on some particular person."

"That would seem to be so," replied Thorndyke, "but in practice it is
otherwise. When the police have made an arrest they work for a
conviction. If the man is innocent, that is his business, not theirs; it
is for him to prove it. The system is a pernicious one--especially since
the efficiency of a police officer is, in consequence, apt to be
estimated by the number of convictions he has secured, and an inducement
is thus held out to him to obtain a conviction, if possible; but it is
of a piece with legislative procedure in general. Lawyers are not
engaged in academic discussions or in the pursuit of truth, but each is
trying, by hook or by crook, to make out a particular case without
regard to its actual truth or even to the lawyer's own belief on the
subject. That is what produces so much friction between lawyers and
scientific witnesses; neither can understand the point of view of the
other. But we must not sit over the table chattering like this; it has
gone half-past seven, and Polton will be wanting to make this room
presentable."

"I notice you don't use your office much," I remarked.

"Hardly at all, excepting as a repository for documents and stationery.
It is very cheerless to talk in an office, and nearly all my business is
transacted with solicitors and counsel who are known to me, so there is
no need for such formalities. All right, Polton; we shall be ready for
you in five minutes."

The Temple bell was striking eight as, at Thorndyke's request, I threw
open the iron-bound "oak"; and even as I did so the sound of footsteps
came up from the stairs below. I waited on the landing for our two
visitors, and led them into the room.

"I am so glad to make your acquaintance," said Mrs. Hornby, when I had
done the honours of introduction; "I have heard so much about you from
Juliet--"

"Really, my dear aunt," protested Miss Gibson, as she caught my eye with
a look of comical alarm, "you will give Dr. Thorndyke a most erroneous
impression. I merely mentioned that I had intruded on him without notice
and had been received with undeserved indulgence and consideration."

"You didn't put it quite in that way, my dear," said Mrs. Hornby, "but I
suppose it doesn't matter."

"We are highly gratified by Miss Gibson's favourable report of us,
whatever may have been the actual form of expression," said Thorndyke,
with a momentary glance at the younger lady which covered her with
smiling confusion, "and we are deeply indebted to you for taking so much
trouble to help us."

"It is no trouble at all, but a great pleasure," replied Mrs. Hornby;
and she proceeded to enlarge on the matter until her remarks threatened,
like the rippling circles produced by a falling stone, to spread out
into infinity. In the midst of this discourse Thorndyke placed chairs
for the two ladies, and, leaning against the mantelpiece, fixed a stony
gaze upon the small handbag that hung from Mrs. Hornby's wrist.

"Is the 'Thumbograph' in your bag?" interrupted Miss Gibson, in response
to this mute appeal.

"Of course it is, my dear Juliet," replied the elder lady. "You saw me
put it in yourself. What an odd girl you are. Did you think I should
have taken it out and put it somewhere else? Not that these handbags are
really very secure, you know, although I daresay they are safer than
pockets, especially now that it is the fashion to have the pocket at the
back. Still, I have often thought how easy it would be for a thief or a
pickpocket or some other dreadful creature of that kind, don't you know,
to make a snatch and--in fact, the thing has actually happened. Why, I
knew a lady--Mrs. Moggridge, you know, Juliet--no, it wasn't Mrs.
Moggridge, that was another affair, it was Mrs.--Mrs.--dear me, how
silly of me!--now, what was her name? Can't you help me, Juliet? You
must surely remember the woman. She used to visit a good deal at the
Hawley-Johnsons'--I think it was the Hawley-Johnsons', or else it was
those people, you know--"

"Hadn't you better give Dr. Thorndyke the 'Thumbograph'?" interrupted
Miss Gibson.

"Why, of course, Juliet, dear. What else did we come here for?" With a
slightly injured expression, Mrs. Hornby opened the little bag and
commenced, with the utmost deliberation, to turn out its contents on to
the table. These included a laced handkerchief, a purse, a card-case, a
visiting list, a packet of _papier poudré_, and when she had laid the
last-mentioned article on the table, she paused abruptly and gazed into
Miss Gibson's face with the air of one who has made a startling
discovery.

"I remember the woman's name," she said in an impressive voice. "It was
Gudge--Mrs. Gudge, the sister-in-law of--"

Here Miss Gibson made an unceremonious dive into the open bag and fished
out a tiny parcel wrapped in notepaper and secured with a silk thread.

"Thank you," said Thorndyke, taking it from her hand just as Mrs. Hornby
was reaching out to intercept it. He cut the thread and drew from its
wrappings a little book bound in red cloth, with the word "Thumbograph"
stamped upon the cover, and was beginning to inspect it when Mrs. Hornby
rose and stood beside him.

"That," said she, as she opened the book at the first page, "is the
thumb-mark of a Miss Colley. She is no connection of ours. You see it is
a little smeared--she said Reuben jogged her elbow, but I don't think he
did; at any rate he assured me he did not, and, you know--"

"Ah! Here is one we are looking for," interrupted Thorndyke, who had
been turning the leaves of the book regardless of Mrs. Hornby's rambling
comments; "a very good impression, too, considering the rather rough
method of producing it."

He reached out for the reading lens that hung from its nail above the
mantelpiece, and I could tell by the eagerness with which he peered
through it at the thumb-print that he was looking for something. A
moment later I felt sure that he had found that something which he had
sought, for, though he replaced the lens upon its nail with a quiet and
composed air and made no remark, there was a sparkle of the eye and a
scarcely perceptible flush of suppressed excitement and triumph which I
had begun to recognise beneath the impassive mask that he presented to
the world.

"I shall ask you to leave this little book with me, Mrs. Hornby," he
said, breaking in upon that lady's inconsequent babblings, "and, as I
may possibly put it in evidence, it would be a wise precaution for you
and Miss Gibson to sign your names--as small as possible--on the page
which bears Mr. Reuben's thumb-mark. That will anticipate any suggestion
that the book has been tampered with after leaving your hands."

"It would be a great impertinence for anyone to make any such
suggestion," Mrs. Hornby began; but on Thorndyke's placing his fountain
pen in her hand, she wrote her signature in the place indicated and
handed the pen to Miss Gibson, who signed underneath.

"And now," said Thorndyke, "we will take an enlarged photograph of this
page with the thumb-mark; not that it is necessary that it should be
done now, as you are leaving the book in my possession; but the
photograph will be wanted, and as my man is expecting us and has the
apparatus ready, we may as well despatch the business at once."

To this both the ladies readily agreed (being, in fact, devoured by
curiosity with regard to my colleague's premises), and we accordingly
proceeded to invade the set of rooms on the floor above, over which the
ingenious Polton was accustomed to reign in solitary grandeur.

It was my first visit to these mysterious regions, and I looked about me
with as much curiosity as did the two ladies. The first room that we
entered was apparently the workshop, for it contained a small
woodworker's bench, a lathe, a bench for metal work and a number of
mechanical appliances which I was not then able to examine; but I
noticed that the entire place presented to the eye a most unworkmanlike
neatness, a circumstance that did not escape Thorndyke's observation,
for his face relaxed into a grim smile as his eye travelled over the
bare benches and the clean-swept floor.

From this room we entered the laboratory, a large apartment, one side of
which was given up to chemical research, as was shown by the shelves of
reagents that covered the wall, and the flasks, retorts and other
apparatus that were arranged on the bench, like ornaments on a
drawing-room mantelpiece. On the opposite side of the room was a large,
massively-constructed copying camera, the front of which, carrying the
lens, was fixed, and an easel or copyholder travelled on parallel guides
towards, or away, from it, on a long stand.

This apparatus Thorndyke proceeded to explain to our visitors while
Polton was fixing the "Thumbograph" in a holder attached to the easel.

"You see," he said, in answer to a question from Miss Gibson, "I have a
good deal to do with signatures, cheques and disputed documents of
various kinds. Now a skilled eye, aided by a pocket-lens, can make out
very minute details on a cheque or bank-note; but it is not possible to
lend one's skilled eye to a judge or juryman, so that it is often very
convenient to be able to hand them a photograph in which the
magnification is already done, which they can compare with the original.
Small things, when magnified, develop quite unexpected characters; for
instance, you have handled a good many postage stamps, I suppose, but
have you ever noticed the little white spots in the upper corner of a
penny stamp, or even the difference in the foliage on the two sides of
the wreath?"

Miss Gibson admitted that she had not.

"Very few people have, I suppose, excepting stamp-collectors," continued
Thorndyke; "but now just glance at this and you will find these
unnoticed details forced upon your attention." As he spoke, he handed
her a photograph, which he had taken from a drawer, showing a penny
stamp enlarged to a length of eight inches.

While the ladies were marvelling over this production, Polton proceeded
with his work. The "Thumbograph" having been fixed in position, the
light from a powerful incandescent gas lamp, fitted with a parabolic
reflector, was concentrated on it, and the camera racked out to its
proper distance.

"What are those figures intended to show?" inquired Miss Gibson,
indicating the graduation on the side of one of the guides.

"They show the amount of magnification or reduction," Thorndyke
explained. "When the pointer is opposite 0, the photograph is the same
size as the object photographed; when it points to, say, x 4, the
photograph will be four times the width and length of the object, while
if it should point to, say, ÷ 4, the photograph will be one-fourth the
length of the object. It is now, you see, pointing to x 8, so the
photograph will be eight times the diameter of the original thumb-mark."

By this time Polton had brought the camera to an accurate focus and,
when we had all been gratified by a glimpse of the enlarged image on the
focussing screen, we withdrew to a smaller room which was devoted to
bacteriology and microscopical research, while the exposure was made and
the plate developed. Here, after an interval, we were joined by Polton,
who bore with infinite tenderness the dripping negative on which could
be seen the grotesque transparency of a colossal thumb-mark.

This Thorndyke scrutinised eagerly, and having pronounced it
satisfactory, informed Mrs. Hornby that the object of her visit was
attained, and thanked her for the trouble she had taken.

"I am very glad we came," said Miss Gibson to me, as a little later we
walked slowly up Mitre Court in the wake of Mrs. Hornby and Thorndyke;
"and I am glad to have seen these wonderful instruments, too. It has
made me realise that something is being done and that Dr. Thorndyke
really has some object in view. It has really encouraged me immensely."

"And very properly so," I replied. "I, too, although I really know
nothing of what my colleague is doing, feel very strongly that he would
not take all this trouble and give up so much valuable time if he had
not some very definite purpose and some substantial reasons for taking
a hopeful view."

"Thank you for saying that," she rejoined warmly; "and you will let me
have a crumb of comfort when you can, won't you?" She looked in my face
so wistfully as she made this appeal that I was quite moved; and,
indeed, I am not sure that my state of mind at that moment did not fully
justify my colleague's reticence towards me.

However, I, fortunately, had nothing to tell, and so, when we emerged
into Fleet Street to find Mrs. Hornby already ensconced in a hansom, I
could only promise, as I grasped the hand that she offered to me, to see
her again at the earliest opportunity--a promise which my inner
consciousness assured me would be strictly fulfilled.

"You seem to be on quite confidential terms with our fair friend,"
Thorndyke remarked, as we strolled back towards his chambers. "You are
an insinuating dog, Jervis."

"She is very frank and easy to get on with," I replied.

"Yes. A good girl and a clever girl, and comely to look upon withal. I
suppose it would be superfluous for me to suggest that you mind your
eye?"

"I shouldn't, in any case, try to cut out a man who is under a cloud," I
replied sulkily.

"Of course you wouldn't; hence the need of attention to the ophthalmic
member. Have you ascertained what Miss Gibson's actual relation is to
Reuben Hornby?"

"No," I answered.

"It might be worth while to find out," said Thorndyke; and then he
relapsed into silence.


CHAPTER VI

COMMITTED FOR TRIAL


Thorndyke's hint as to the possible danger foreshadowed by my growing
intimacy with Juliet Gibson had come upon me as a complete surprise, and
had, indeed, been resented by me as somewhat of an impertinence.
Nevertheless, it gave me considerable food for meditation, and I
presently began to suspect that the watchful eyes of my observant friend
might have detected something in my manner towards Miss Gibson
suggestive of sentiments that had been unsuspected by myself.

Of course it would be absurd to suppose that any real feeling could have
been engendered by so ridiculously brief an acquaintance. I had only met
the girl three times, and even now, excepting for business relations,
was hardly entitled to more than a bow of recognition. But yet, when I
considered the matter impartially and examined my own consciousness, I
could not but recognise that she had aroused in me an interest which
bore no relation to the part that she had played in the drama that was
so slowly unfolding. She was undeniably a very handsome girl, and her
beauty was of a type that specially appealed to me--full of dignity and
character that gave promise of a splendid middle age. And her
personality was in other ways not less attractive, for she was frank and
open, sprightly and intelligent, and though evidently quite
self-reliant, was in nowise lacking in that womanly softness that so
strongly engages a man's sympathy.

In short, I realised that, had there been no such person as Reuben
Hornby, I should have viewed Miss Gibson with uncommon interest.

But, unfortunately, Reuben Hornby was a most palpable reality, and,
moreover, the extraordinary difficulties of his position entitled him to
very special consideration by any man of honour. It was true that Miss
Gibson had repudiated any feelings towards Reuben other than those of
old-time friendship; but young ladies are not always impartial judges of
their own feelings, and, as a man of the world, I could not but have my
own opinion on the matter--which opinion I believed to be shared by
Thorndyke. The conclusions to which my cogitations at length brought me
were: first, that I was an egotistical donkey, and, second, that my
relations with Miss Gibson were of an exclusively business character and
must in future be conducted on that basis, with the added consideration
that I was the confidential agent, for the time being, of Reuben Hornby,
and in honour bound to regard his interests as paramount.

"I am hoping," said Thorndyke, as he held out his hand for my teacup,
"that these profound reflections of yours are connected with the Hornby
affair; in which case I should expect to hear that the riddle is solved
and the mystery made plain."

"Why should you expect that?" I demanded, reddening somewhat, I suspect,
as I met his twinkling eye. There was something rather disturbing in
the dry, quizzical smile that I encountered and the reflection that I
had been under observation, and I felt as much embarrassed as I should
suppose a self-conscious water-flea might feel on finding itself on the
illuminated stage of a binocular microscope.

"My dear fellow," said Thorndyke, "you have not spoken a word for the
last quarter of an hour; you have devoured your food with the relentless
regularity of a sausage-machine, and you have, from time to time, made
the most damnable faces at the coffee-pot--though there I'll wager the
coffee-pot was even with you, if I may judge by the presentment that it
offers of my own countenance."

I roused myself from my reverie with a laugh at Thorndyke's quaint
conceit and a glance at the grotesquely distorted reflection of my face
in the polished silver.

"I am afraid I _have_ been a rather dull companion this morning," I
admitted apologetically.

"By no means," replied Thorndyke, with a grin. "On the contrary, I have
found you both amusing and instructive, and I only spoke when I had
exhausted your potentialities as a silent entertainer."

"You are pleased to be facetious at my expense," said I.

"Well, the expense was not a very heavy one," he retorted. "I have been
merely consuming a by-product of your mental activity--Hallo! that's
Anstey already."

A peculiar knock, apparently delivered with the handle of a
walking-stick on the outer door, was the occasion of this exclamation,
and as Thorndyke sprang up and flung the door open, a clear, musical
voice was borne in, the measured cadences of which proclaimed at once
the trained orator.

"Hail, learned brother!" it exclaimed. "Do I disturb you untimely at
your studies?" Here our visitor entered the room and looked round
critically. "'Tis even so," he declared. "Physiological chemistry and
its practical applications appears to be the subject. A physico-chemical
inquiry into the properties of streaky bacon and fried eggs. Do I see
another learned brother?"

He peered keenly at me through his pince-nez, and I gazed at him in some
embarrassment.

"This is my friend Jervis, of whom you have heard me speak," said
Thorndyke. "He is with us in this case, you know."

"The echoes of your fame have reached me, sir," said Anstey, holding out
his hand. "I am proud to know you. I should have recognised you
instantly from the portrait of your lamented uncle in Greenwich
Hospital."

"Anstey is a wag, you understand," explained Thorndyke, "but he has
lucid intervals. He'll have one presently if we are patient."

"Patient!" snorted our eccentric visitor, "it is I who need to be
patient when I am dragged into police courts and other sinks of iniquity
to plead for common thieves and robbers like a Kennington Lane
advocate."

"You've been talking to Lawley, I see," said Thorndyke.

"Yes, and he tells me that we haven't a leg to stand upon."

"No, we've got to stand on our heads, as men of intellect should. But
Lawley knows nothing about the case."

"He thinks he knows it all," said Anstey.

"Most fools do," retorted Thorndyke. "They arrive at their knowledge by
intuition--a deuced easy road and cheap travelling too. We reserve our
defence--I suppose you agree to that?"

"I suppose so. The magistrate is sure to commit unless you have an
unquestionable _alibi_."

"We shall put in an _alibi_, but we are not depending on it."

"Then we had better reserve our defence," said Anstey; "and it is time
that we wended on our pilgrimage, for we are due at Lawley's at
half-past ten. Is Jervis coming with us?"

"Yes, you'd better come," said Thorndyke. "It's the adjourned hearing of
poor Hornby's case, you know. There won't be anything done on our side,
but we may be able to glean some hint from the prosecution."

"I should like to hear what takes place, at any rate," I said, and we
accordingly sallied forth together in the direction of Lincoln's Inn, on
the north side of which Mr. Lawley's office was situated.

"Ah!" said the solicitor, as we entered, "I am glad you've come; I was
getting anxious--it doesn't do to be late on these occasions, you know.
Let me see, do you know Mr. Walter Hornby? I don't think you do." He
presented Thorndyke and me to our client's cousin, and as we shook
hands, we viewed one another with a good deal of mutual interest.

"I have heard about you from my aunt," said he, addressing himself more
particularly to me. "She appears to regard you as a kind of legal
Maskelyne and Cooke. I hope, for my cousin's sake, that you will be able
to work the wonders that she anticipates. Poor old fellow! He looks
pretty bad, doesn't he?"

I glanced at Reuben, who was at the moment talking to Thorndyke, and as
he caught my eye he held out his hand with a warmth that I found very
pathetic. He seemed to have aged since I had last seen him, and was
pale and rather thinner, but he was composed in his manner and seemed to
me to be taking his trouble very well on the whole.

"Cab's at the door, sir," a clerk announced.

"Cab," repeated Mr. Lawley, looking dubiously at me; "we want an
omnibus."

"Dr. Jervis and I can walk," Walter Hornby suggested. "We shall probably
get there as soon as you, and it doesn't matter if we don't."

"Yes, that will do," said Mr. Lawley; "you two walk down together. Now
let us go."

We trooped out on to the pavement, beside which a four-wheeler was drawn
up, and as the others were entering the cab, Thorndyke stood close
beside me for a moment.

"Don't let him pump you," he said in a low voice, without looking at me;
then he sprang into the cab and slammed the door.

"What an extraordinary affair this is," Walter Hornby remarked, after we
had been walking in silence for a minute or two; "a most ghastly
business. I must confess that I can make neither head nor tail of it."

"How is that?" I asked.

"Why, do you see, there are apparently only two possible theories of the
crime, and each of them seems to be unthinkable. On the one hand there
is Reuben, a man of the most scrupulous honour, as far as my experience
of him goes, committing a mean and sordid theft for which no motive can
be discovered--for he is not poor, nor pecuniarily embarrassed nor in
the smallest degree avaricious. On the other hand, there is this
thumb-print, which, in the opinion of the experts, is tantamount to the
evidence of an eye-witness that he did commit the theft. It is
positively bewildering. Don't you think so?"

"As you put it," I answered, "the case is extraordinarily puzzling."

"But how else would you put it?" he demanded, with ill-concealed
eagerness.

"I mean that, if Reuben is the man you believe him to be, the thing is
incomprehensible."

"Quite so," he agreed, though he was evidently disappointed at my
colourless answer.

He walked on silently for a few minutes and then said: "I suppose it
would not be fair to ask if you see any way out of the difficulty? We
are all, naturaly anxious about the upshot of the affair, seeing what
poor old Reuben's position is."

"Naturally. But the fact is that I know no more than you do, and as to
Thorndyke, you might as well cross-examine a Whitstable native as put
questions to him."

"Yes, so I gathered from Juliet. But I thought you might have gleaned
some notion of the line of defence from your work in the laboratory--the
microscopical and photographic work I mean."

"I was never in the laboratory until last night, when Thorndyke took me
there with your aunt and Miss Gibson; the work there is done by the
laboratory assistant, and his knowledge of the case, I should say, is
about as great as a type-founder's knowledge of the books that he is
helping to produce. No; Thorndyke is a man who plays a single-handed
game and no one knows what cards he holds until he lays them on the
table."

My companion considered this statement in silence while I congratulated
myself on having parried, with great adroitness, a rather inconvenient
question. But the time was not far distant when I should have occasion
to reproach myself bitterly for having been so explicit and emphatic.

"My uncle's condition," Walter resumed after a pause, "is a pretty
miserable one at present, with this horrible affair added to his own
personal worries."

"Has he any special trouble besides this, then?" I asked.

"Why, haven't you heard? I thought you knew about it, or I shouldn't
have spoken--not that it is in any way a secret, seeing that it is
public property in the city. The fact is that his financial affairs are
a little entangled just now."

"Indeed!" I exclaimed, considerably startled by this new development.

"Yes, things have taken a rather awkward turn, though I think he will
pull through all right. It is the usual thing, you know--investments, or
perhaps one should say speculations. He appears to have sunk a lot of
capital in mines--thought he was 'in the know,' not unnaturally; but it
seems he wasn't after all, and the things have gone wrong, leaving him
with a deal more money than he can afford locked up and the possibility
of a dead loss if they don't revive. Then there are these infernal
diamonds. He is not morally responsible, we know; but it is a question
if he is not legally responsible, though the lawyers think he is not.
Anyhow, there is going to be a meeting of the creditors to-morrow."

"And what do you think they will do?"

"Oh, they will, most probably, let him go on for the present; but, of
course, if he is made accountable for the diamonds there will be nothing
for it but to 'go through the hoop,' as the sporting financier
expresses it."

"The diamonds were of considerable value, then?"

"From twenty-five to thirty thousand pounds' worth vanished with that
parcel."

I whistled. This was a much bigger affair than I had imagined, and I was
wondering if Thorndyke had realised the magnitude of the robbery, when
we arrived at the police court.

"I suppose our friends have gone inside," said Walter. "They must have
got here before us."

This supposition was confirmed by a constable of whom we made inquiry,
and who directed us to the entrance to the court. Passing down a passage
and elbowing our way through the throng of idlers, we made for the
solicitor's box, where we had barely taken our seats when the case was
called.

Unspeakably dreary and depressing were the brief proceedings that
followed, and dreadfully suggestive of the helplessness of even an
innocent man on whom the law has laid its hand and in whose behalf its
inexorable machinery has been set in motion.

The presiding magistrate, emotionless and dry, dipped his pen while
Reuben, who had surrendered to his bail, was placed in the dock and the
charge read over to him. The counsel representing the police gave an
abstract of the case with the matter-of-fact air of a house-agent
describing an eligible property. Then, when the plea of "not guilty" had
been entered, the witnesses were called. There were only two, and when
the name of the first, John Hornby, was called, I glanced towards the
witness-box with no little curiosity.

I had not hitherto met Mr. Hornby, and as he now entered the box, I saw
an elderly man, tall, florid, and well-preserved, but strained and wild
in expression and displaying his uncontrollable agitation by continual
nervous movements which contrasted curiously with the composed demeanour
of the accused man. Nevertheless, he gave his evidence in a perfectly
connected manner, recounting the events connected with the discovery of
the crime in much the same words as I had heard Mr. Lawley use, though,
indeed, he was a good deal more emphatic than that gentleman had been in
regard to the excellent character borne by the prisoner.

After him came Mr. Singleton, of the finger-print department at Scotland
Yard, to whose evidence I listened with close attention. He produced the
paper which bore the thumb-print in blood (which had previously been
identified by Mr. Hornby) and a paper bearing the print, taken by
himself, of the prisoner's left thumb. These two thumb-prints, he
stated, were identical in every respect.

"And you are of opinion that the mark on the paper that was found in Mr.
Hornby's safe, was made by the prisoner's left thumb?" the magistrate
asked in dry and business-like tones.

"I am certain of it."

"You are of opinion that no mistake is possible?"

"No mistake is possible, your worship. It is a certainty."

The magistrate looked at Anstey inquiringly, whereupon the barrister
rose.  "We reserve our defence, your worship."

The magistrate then, in the same placid, business-like manner, committed
the prisoner for trial at the Central Criminal Court, refusing to accept
bail for his appearance, and, as Reuben was led forth from the dock, the
next case was called.

By special favour of the authorities, Reuben was to be allowed to make
his journey to Holloway in a cab, thus escaping the horrors of the
filthy and verminous prison van, and while this was being procured, his
friends were permitted to wish him farewell.

"This is a hard experience, Hornby," said Thorndyke, when we three were,
for a few moments, left apart from the others; and as he spoke the
warmth of a really sympathetic nature broke through his habitual
impassivity. "But be of good cheer; I have convinced myself of your
innocence and have good hopes of convincing the world--though this is
for your private ear, you understand, to be mentioned to no one."

Reuben wrung the hand of this "friend in need," but was unable, for the
moment, to speak; and, as his self-control was evidently strained to the
breaking point, Thorndyke, with a man's natural instinct, wished him a
hasty good-bye, and passing his hand through my arm, turned away.

"I wish it had been possible to save the poor fellow from this delay,
and especially from the degradation of being locked up in a jail," he
exclaimed regretfully as we walked down the street.

"There is surely no degradation in being merely accused of a crime," I
answered, without much conviction, however. "It may happen to the best
of us; and he is still an innocent man in the eyes of the law."

"That, my dear Jervis, you know, as well as I do, to be mere casuistry,"
he rejoined. "The law professes to regard the unconvicted man as
innocent; but how does it treat him? You heard how the magistrate
addressed our friend; outside the court he would have called him _Mr_.
Hornby. You know what will happen to Reuben at Holloway. He will be
ordered about by warders, will have a number label fastened on to his
coat, he will be locked in a cell with a spy-hole in the door, through
which any passing stranger may watch him; his food will be handed to him
in a tin pan with a tin knife and spoon; and he will be periodically
called out of his cell and driven round the exercise yard with a mob
composed, for the most part, of the sweepings of the London slums. If he
is acquitted, he will be turned loose without a suggestion of
compensation or apology for these indignities or the losses he may have
sustained through his detention."

"Still I suppose these evils are unavoidable," I said.

"That may or may not be," he retorted. "My point is that the presumption
of innocence is a pure fiction; that the treatment of an accused man,
from the moment of his arrest, is that of a criminal. However," he
concluded, hailing a passing hansom, "this discussion must be adjourned
or I shall be late at the hospital. What are you going to do?"

"I shall get some lunch and then call on Miss Gibson to let her know the
real position."

"Yes, that will be kind, I think; baldly stated, the news may seem
rather alarming. I was tempted to thrash the case out in the police
court, but it would not have been safe. He would almost certainly have
been committed for trial after all, and then we should have shown our
hand to the prosecution."

He sprang into the hansom and was speedily swallowed up in the traffic,
while I turned back towards the police court to make certain inquiries
concerning the regulations as to visitors at Holloway prison. At the
door I met the friendly inspector from Scotland Yard, who gave me the
necessary information, whereupon with a certain homely little French
restaurant in my mind I bent my steps in the direction of Soho.


CHAPTER VII

SHOALS AND QUICKSANDS


When I arrived at Endsley Gardens, Miss Gibson was at home, and to my
unspeakable relief, Mrs. Hornby was not. My veneration for that lady's
moral qualities was excessive, but her conversation drove me to the
verge of insanity--an insanity not entirely free from homicidal
tendencies.

"It is good of you to come--though I thought you would," Miss Gibson
said impulsively, as we shook hands. "You have been so sympathetic and
human--both you and Dr. Thorndyke--so free from professional stiffness.
My aunt went off to see Mr. Lawley directly we got Walter's telegram."

"I am sorry for her," I said (and was on the point of adding "and him,"
but fortunately a glimmer of sense restrained me); "she will find him
dry enough."

"Yes; I dislike him extremely. Do you know that he had the impudence to
advise Reuben to plead 'guilty'?"

"He told us he had done so, and got a well-deserved snubbing from
Thorndyke for his pains."

"I am so glad," exclaimed Miss Gibson viciously. "But tell me what has
happened. Walter simply said 'Transferred to higher court,' which we
agreed was to mean, 'Committed for trial.' Has the defence failed? And
where is Reuben?"

"The defence is reserved. Dr. Thorndyke considered it almost certain
that the case would be sent for trial, and that being so, decided that
it was essential to keep the prosecution in the dark as to the line of
defence. You see, if the police knew what the defence was to be they
could revise their own plans accordingly."

"I see that," said she dejectedly, "but I am dreadfully disappointed. I
had hoped that Dr. Thorndyke would get the case dismissed. What has
happened to Reuben?"

This was the question that I had dreaded, and now that I had to answer
it I cleared my throat and bent my gaze nervously on the floor.

"The magistrate refused bail," I said after an uncomfortable pause.

"Well?"

"Consequently Reuben has been--er--detained in custody."

"You don't mean to say that they have sent him to prison?" she exclaimed
breathlessly.

"Not as a convicted prisoner, you know. He is merely detained pending
his trial."

"But in prison?"

"Yes," I was forced to admit; "in Holloway prison."

She looked me stonily in the face for some seconds, pale and wide-eyed,
but silent; then, with a sudden catch in her breath, she turned away,
and, grasping the edge of the mantel-shelf, laid her head upon her arm
and burst into a passion of sobbing.

Now I am not, in general, an emotional man, nor even especially
impulsive; but neither am I a stock or a stone or an effigy of wood;
which I most surely must have been if I could have looked without being
deeply moved on the grief, so natural and unselfish, of this strong,
brave, loyal-hearted woman. In effect, I moved to her side and, gently
taking in mine the hand that hung down, murmured some incoherent words
of consolation in a particularly husky voice.

Presently she recovered herself somewhat and softly withdrew her hand,
as she turned towards me drying her eyes.

"You must forgive me for distressing you, as I fear I have," she said;
"for you are so kind, and I feel that you are really my friend and
Reuben's."

"I am indeed, dear Miss Gibson," I replied, "and so, I assure you, is my
colleague."

"I am sure of it," she rejoined. "But I was so unprepared for this--I
cannot say why, excepting that I trusted so entirely in Dr.
Thorndyke--and it is so horrible and, above all, so dreadfully
suggestive of what may happen. Up to now the whole thing has seemed like
a nightmare--terrifying, but yet unreal. But now that he is actually in
prison, it has suddenly become a dreadful reality and I am overwhelmed
with terror. Oh! poor boy! What will become of him? For pity's sake, Dr.
Jervis, tell me what is going to happen."

What could I do? I had heard Thorndyke's words of encouragement to
Reuben and knew my colleague well enough to feel sure that he meant all
he had said. Doubtless my proper course would have been to keep my own
counsel and put Miss Gibson off with cautious ambiguities. But I could
not; she was worthy of more confidence than that.

"You must not be unduly alarmed about the future," I said. "I have it
from Dr. Thorndyke that he is convinced of Reuben's innocence, and is
hopeful of being able to make it clear to the world. But I did not have
this to repeat," I added, with a slight qualm of conscience.

"I know," she said softly, "and I thank you from my heart."

"And as to this present misfortune," I continued, "you must not let it
distress you too much. Try to think of it as of a surgical operation,
which is a dreadful thing in itself, but is accepted in lieu of
something which is immeasurably more dreadful."

"I will try to do as you tell me," she answered meekly; "but it is so
shocking to think of a cultivated gentleman like Reuben, herded with
common thieves and murderers, and locked in a cage like some wild
animal. Think of the ignominy and degradation!"

"There is no ignominy in being wrongfully accused," I said--a little
guiltily, I must own, for Thorndyke's words came back to me with all
their force. But regardless of this I went on: "An acquittal will
restore him to his position with an unstained character, and nothing but
the recollection of a passing inconvenience to look back upon."

She gave her eyes a final wipe, and resolutely put away her
handkerchief.

"You have given me back my courage," she said, "and chased away my
terror. I cannot tell you how I feel your goodness, nor have I any
thank-offering to make, except the promise to be brave and patient
henceforth, and trust in you entirely."

She said this with such a grateful smile, and looked withal so sweet and
womanly that I was seized with an overpowering impulse to take her in my
arms. Instead of this I said with conscious feebleness: "I am more than
thankful to have been able to give you any encouragement--which you must
remember comes from me second-hand, after all. It is to Dr. Thorndyke
that we all look for ultimate deliverance."

"I know. But it is you who came to comfort me in my trouble, so, you
see, the honours are divided--and not divided quite equally, I fear, for
women are unreasoning creatures, as, no doubt, your experience has
informed you. I think I hear my aunt's voice, so you had better escape
before your retreat is cut off. But before you go, you must tell me how
and when I can see Reuben. I want to see him at the earliest possible
moment. Poor fellow! He must not be allowed to feel that his friends
have forgotten him even for a single instant."

"You can see him to-morrow, if you like," I said; and, casting my good
resolutions to the winds, I added: "I shall be going to see him myself,
and perhaps Dr. Thorndyke will go."

"Would you let me call at the Temple and go with you? Should I be much
in the way? It is rather an alarming thing to go to a prison alone."

"It is not to be thought of," I answered. "If you will call at the
Temple--it is on the way--we can drive to Holloway together. I suppose
you are resolved to go? It will be rather unpleasant, as you are
probably aware."

"I am quite resolved. What time shall I come to the Temple?"

"About two o'clock, if that will suit you."

"Very well. I will be punctual; and now you must go or you will be
caught."

* * * * *
 

NOTES OF A READER.

ADVICE, BY A MAN OF THE WORLD.

[We quoted _Contarini Fleming_ in our last volume, but were silent on
its character. It is purely metaphysical, and metaphysics, at this
season, may be "like pork in the dog-days;" but there are certain portions
which strike out ideas so forcibly, and illustrate the _communia_ of
life with such vigour, as to tempt any lounging reader.

Contarini is stated to be Mr.
D'Israeli, the younger--Vivian Grey and the Young Duke,--with much
more of the crust and wing of age and experience than was found in either
of the fashionable novels. The real charm of Contarini is in its
abstractedness, and consists in being pleased and puzzled at the
same moment.

The embellishment which the playful genius of the writer has gracefully,
not tawdrily, thrown over his pages will attract, but the main purpose
and merit of the work lies in its undercurrents, or, rather it would
consist in this feature if the judgment of the writer were still more
matured.
Perhaps Mr. D'Israeli, who began the world of letters as a writer of
fashionable novels, may leave us a work on metaphysics.

In the opening chapter of Contarini Fleming, Mr. D'Israeli explains
his object as follows:--]
I am desirous of writing a book which shall be all truth, a work
of which the passion, the thought, the action, and even the style,
should spring from my own experience of feeling, from the meditations
of my own intellect, from my own observation of incident, from my
own study of the genius of expression.

[We can only admit a passage which appears to us to contain much world-knowledge
and wholesome experience--what half the coroneted heads in Europe
lack most lamentably. It is the advice tendered to Contarini by his
father, previous to the youth of promise repairing to the University:]

I wish you to mix as much as is convenient with society. I apprehend that
you have, perhaps, hitherto indulged a little too much in lonely
habits.

Young men are apt to get a little abstracted, and occasionally to
think that there is something singular in their nature, when the fact is,
if they were better acquainted with their fellow creatures, they would
find they were mistaken. This is a common error, indeed the commonest.
I am not at all surprised that you have fallen into it. All have. The
most practical business-like men that exist have many of them,
when children, conceived themselves totally disqualified to struggle
in the world.

You may rest assured of this. I could mention many remarkable instances.
All persons, when young, are fond of solitude, and, when they are
beginning to think, are sometimes surprised at their own thoughts.
There is nothing to be deplored, scarcely to be feared, in this. It
almost always wears off; but sometimes it happens, that they have
not judicious friends by them to explain, that the habits which
they think peculiar are universal, and, if unreasonably indulged,
can ultimately only turn them into indolent, insignificant members
of society, and occasion them lasting unhappiness.

But to enter society with pleasure, you must be qualified for it. I
think it quite time for you to make yourself master of some
accomplishments.
Decidedly you should make yourself a good dancer. Without dancing, you can
never attain a perfectly graceful carriage, which is of the highest
importance in life, and should be every man's ambition. You are yet too
young fully to comprehend, how much in life depends upon manner. Whenever
you see a man, who is successful in society, try to discover what
makes him pleasing, and, if possible, adopt his system. You should learn
to fence. For languages, at present, French will be sufficient. You
speak it fairly: try to speak it elegantly. Read French authors.

Read Rouchefoucault. The French writers are the finest in the world, for
they clear our heads of ridiculous ideas. Study precision.

Do not talk too much at present, do not _try_ to talk. But whenever you
speak, speak with self-possession. Speak in a subdued tone, and
always look at the person whom you are addressing. Before one can engage
in general conversation with any effect, there is a certain
acquaintance with trifling, but amusing subjects, which must be first
attained. You will soon pick up sufficient by listening and observing.
Never argue. In society, nothing must be discussed: give only
results.

If any person differ with you--bow and turn the conversation. In society,
never think--always be on the watch, or you will miss many
opportunities, and say many disagreeable things.

Talk to women, talk to women as much as you can. This is the best
school.

This is the way to gain fluency--because you need not care what you say,
and had better not be sensible. They too will rally you on many points,
and, as they are women, you will not be offended. Nothing is of so much
importance, and of so much use, to a young man entering life, as
to be well criticised by women.

It is impossible to get rid of those thousand bad habits, which we
pick up in boyhood, without this supervision.

Unfortunately, you have no sisters. But never be offended if a woman rally
you. Encourage her. Otherwise, you will never be free from your awkwardness,
or any little oddities, and certainly never learn to dress.

You ride pretty well, but you had better go through the manège. Every
gentleman should be a perfect cavalier.

As you are to be at home for so short a time, and for other reasons, I
think it better that you should not have a tutor in the house. Parcel
out your morning, then, for your separate masters.

Rise early and regularly, and read for three hours. Read the Memoirs of
the Cardinal de Retz--the Life of Richelieu--everything about
Napoleon,--read works of that kind.

Read no history: nothing but biography, for that is life without
theory.

Then fence. Talk an hour with your French master, but do not throw the
burden of the conversation upon him.

Give him an account of something.
Describe to him the events of yesterday, or give him a detailed account
of the constitution. You will have then sufficiently rested yourself for
your dancing.

And after that ride and amuse yourself as much as you can.
Amusement to an observing mind is study.

I pursued the system which my father had pointed out, with exactness,
and soon with pleasure. I sacredly observed my hours of reading, and
devoted myself to the study of the lives of what my father considered
really great men--that is to say, men of great energies, and
violent volition, who look upon their fellow creatures as mere
tools, with which they can build up a pedestal for their solitary
statue, and who sacrifice every feeling which should sway humanity,
and every high work which genius should really achieve, to the
short-sighted gratification of an irrational and outrageous selfism.

As for my manners, I flattered myself that they advanced in measure
with my mind, although I already emulated Napoleon.

I soon overcame the fear which attended my first experiments in
society, and by scrupulously observing the paternal maxims, I soon
became very self-satisfied.

I listened to men with a delightful mixture of defference and
self-confidence: were they old, and did I differ with them, I contented
myself by positively stating my opinion in a most subdued voice,
and then either turning the subject, or turning upon my heel. But
as for women, it is astonishing how well I got on. The nervous
rapidity of my first rattle soon subsided into a continuous flow of
easy nonsense.
Impertinent and flippant, I was universally hailed an original and a
wit.
But the most remarkable incident was, that the baroness and myself became
the greatest friends.

I was her constant attendant, and rehearsed to her flattered ear all
my evening performance. She was the person with whom I practised, and
as she had a taste in dress, I encouraged her opinions.
Unconscious that she was at once my lay figure and my mirror, she
loaded me with presents, and announced to all her coterie, that I
was the most delightful young man of her acquaintance.

From all this it may easily be suspected, that at the age of fifteen I
had unexpectedly become one of the most affected, conceited, and intolerable
atoms that ever peopled the sunbeam of society.

* * * * *

[This gem is from a volume of Songs and other small Poems, by Barry
Cornwall.

It is one of the prettiest poetical _bijoux_ of the season, and shall
receive more attention in our next.]
PETITION TO TIME.

Touch us gently, Time!
Let us glide adown thy stream Gently,--as we sometimes glide Through
a quiet dream!

Humble voyagers are We, Husband, wife, and children three-- (One is
lost,--an angel, fled To the azure overhead!)

Touch us gently, Time!
We've not proud nor soaring wings:
_Our_ ambition, _our_ content Lies in simple things.

Humble voyagers are We, O'er Life's dim unsounded sea, Seeking only some
calm clime:-- Touch us _gently_, gentle Time!

* * * * *

THE SPIRIT OF SONG-WRITING.

Song-writing is the most difficult species of poetry; failure is not to
be recovered--one slip ruins the whole attempt. A good song is a little
piece of perfection, and perfection does not grow in every field. There
must be felicity of idea, lightness of tone, exquisiteness or extreme
naturalness and propriety of expression; and this within the
compass of a few verses.
And this is not all; the writer must betray a sustained tone of
enthusiasm:
the song should have neither beginning nor end,--it must seem a snatch
from out of a continuous strain of melody--something that swells
upon the ear, as if the previous parts had been unheard, and which
dies away as if the air had carried its notes afar, and the sounds
were wafted along to other lands.

Men of genius are now and then born song-writers; such were Horace
and Burns, such is Béranger.

England has not had hers yet, and perhaps never may have. Englishmen are
not nationally calculated to make song-writers; but individual genius
makes light of running counter to a whole nation of habits, and there
is no saying that we may not have our true lyricist yet.

Song-writing is most likely to spring up among people greatly
susceptible of the charms of music, and inventive of airs which,
by some peculiar charm they possess, spread over all the country,
sink deep in the memory, and come spontaneously on the thoughts in
moments of sadness or joy, and, in short, become what are called
national.

National songs go with national airs, and spring up with circumstances.
The English have few native airs, and as few native songs of any
excellence. When an Englishman is in love, does he sing? In camp, what
wretched braying goes by that name!

at table, what have we of the generous, jovial sort?

Generally speaking, our table songs--always excepting our glees--are
pieces of bald sentiment, when they are English; but more generally,
they are borrowed from the Scotch, the Irish, and other national
song-writers.

Gaiety, and that gaiety showing itself musically, is not _English_:
when we are poetically given, it is in the sad piping strain of the
forlorn, deserted, or hopeless lover.

Gaiety is not English: we can be sentimental, tender, witty, pretty,
pompous, and glorious in our songs; but we ever want the essential
quality of gaiety--gaiety of heart--the dancing life of the spirit,
that makes the voice hum, the fingers crack merrily, and the feet
fidget restlessly on the ground.

--_Spectator Newspaper_.

* * * * *

LORD BYRON'S EARLY POEMS.

[The following specimens are from the Seventh Volume of the elegant
Edition of Lord Byron's Life and Works, now in the course of publication,
under the editorship of Mr.

Moore:]

THE ADIEU.

_Written under the impression that the Author would soon die._

Adieu, thou hill![4] where early joy Spread roses o'er my brow; Where
science seeks each loitering boy With knowledge to endow.

Adieu, my youthful friends or foes, Partners of former bliss or woes;
No more through Ida's path we stray; Soon must I share the gloomy
cell, Whose ever-slumbering inmates dwell Unconscious of the day.

Adieu, ye hoary Regal Fanes, Ye spires of Granta's vale, Where learning
robed in sable reigns, And melancholy pale.

Ye comrades of the jovial hour, Ye tenants of the classic bower, On
Cama's verdant margin placed, Adieu! while memory still is mine, For
offerings on oblivion's shrine, These scenes must be effaced.

Adieu, ye mountains of the clime, Where grew my youthful years; Where
Loch na Garr in snows sublime His giant summit rears.

Why did my childhood wander forth From you, ye regions of the
North, With sons of pride to roam?
Why did I quit my Highland cave, Marr's dusky heath, and Dee's clear
wave, To seek a Sotheron home?

Hall of my sires! a long farewell; Yet why to thee adieu?
Thy vaults will echo back my knell, Thy towers my tomb will view;
The faltering tongue which sung thy fall, And former glories of thy
hall Forgets its wonted simple note; But yet the lyre retains the
strings, And sometimes on Aeolian wings, In dying strains may float.

Fields, which surround yon rustic cot, While yet I linger here, Adieu!
you are not now forgot, To retrospection dear.
Streamlet[5] along whose rippling surge, My youthful limbs were
wont to urge At noontide heat their pliant course; Plunging with
ardour from the shore, Thy springs will lave these limbs no more,
Deprived of active force.

And shall I here forget the scene, Still nearest to my breast?
Rocks rise, and rivers roll between The spot which passion blest;
Yet, Mary,[6] all thy beauties seem Fresh as in Love's bewitching
dream, To me in smiles display'd:
Till slow disease resigns his prey To Death, the parent of decay,
Thine image cannot fade.

And thou, my friend![7] whose gentle love Yet thrills my bosom's chords,
How much thy friendship was above Description's power of words!
Still near my breast thy gift I wear, Which sparkled once with
feeling's tear.

Of Love, the pure, the sacred gem; Our souls were equal, and our
lot In that dear moment quite forgot; Let Pride alone condemn!

All, all is dark and cheerless now!
No smile of Love's deceit Can warm my veins with wonted glow, Can
bid Life's pulses beat:
Not e'en the hope of future fame Can wake my faint, exhausted frame.

Or crown with fancied wreaths my head.
Mine is a short inglorious race, To humble in the dust my face, And
mingle with the dead.

Oh Fame! thou goddess of my heart:
On him who gains thy praise, Pointless must fall the Spectre's dart,
Consumed in glory's blaze; But me she beckons from the earth,
My name obscure, unmark'd my birth, My life a short and vulgar dream:

Lost in the dull, ignoble crowd, My hopes recline within a
shroud, My fate is Lethe's stream.

When I repose beneath the sod, Unheeded in the clay, Where
once my playful footsteps trod, Where now my head must lay; The meed of
pity will be shed In dew-drops o'er my narrow bed, By nightly skies and
storms alone; No mortal eye will deign to steep With tears the dark
sepulchral deep Which hides a name unknown.

Forget this world, my restless sprite, Turn, turn thy thoughts to
Heaven; There must thou soon direct thy flight, If errors are
forgiven, To bigots and to sects unknown, Bow down beneath the
Almighty's Throne; To Him address thy trembling prayer:
He who is merciful and just, Will not reject a child of dust,
Although his meanest care.

Father of Light! to Thee I call, My soul is dark within; Thou, who
canst mark the sparrow's fall, Avert the death of sin.

Thou, who canst guide the wandering star, Who calms't the elemental
war, Whose mantle is yon boundless sky, My thoughts, my words, my
crimes forgive; And, since I soon must cease to live, Instruct me
how to die.

1807.

[Now first published.]

[4] Harrow.

[5] The river Grete at Southwell.

[6] Mary Duff.

[7] Eddlestone, the Cambridge chorister.

FAREWELL TO THE MUSE.

Thou power! who hast ruled me through infancy's days, Young
offspring of Fancy, 'tis time we should part, Then rise on the gale
this the last of my lays, The coldest effusion which springs from my
heart.

This bosom, responsive to rapture no more, Shall hush thy wild notes, nor
implore thee to sing; The feelings of childhood, which taught thee to
soar, Are wafted far distant on Apathy's wing.

Though simple the themes of my rude flowing lyre, Yet even these
themes are departed for ever; No more beam the eyes which my dream could
inspire, My visions are flown, to return--alas, never!

When drain'd is the nectar which gladdens the bowl, How vain is the
effort delight to prolong!
When cold is the beauty which dwelt in my soul, What magic of Fancy can
lengthen my song?

Can the lips sing of Love in the desert alone, Of kisses and smiles
which they now must resign?
Or dwell with delight on the hours that are flown?
Ah, no! for those hours can no longer be mine.

Can they speak of the friends that I lived but to love?
Ah, surely affection ennobles the strain!

But how can my numbers in sympathy move, When I scarcely can hope to
behold them again?

Can I sing of the deeds which my Fathers have done, And raise my
loud harp to the fame of my sires?

For glories like theirs, oh, how faint is my tone!
For Heroes' exploits how unequal my fires!

Untouch'd, then, my lyre shall reply to the blast; 'Tis hush'd; and
my feeble endeavours are o'er; And those who have heard it will
pardon the past, When they know that its murmurs shall vibrate no
more.

And soon shall its wild erring notes be forgot, Since early affection
and love is o'ercast:
Oh! blest had my fate been, and happy my lot, Had the first strain of
love been the dearest, the last.

Farewell, my young Muse! since we now can ne'er meet; If our
songs have been languid, they surely are few:

Let us hope that the present at least will be sweet; The present--which
seals our eternal Adieu.

1807.

[Now first published.]
* * * * *

RETROSPECTIVE GLEANINGS
FUNERAL OF WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR.

The death of William, almost every reader knows, was occasioned by a hurt
in the belly from the pummel of his saddle, while reducing the town of
Mantes to ashes, at Rouen on Sep. 9, 1086, in the 63rd year of
his age and 21st of his reign.

The king's decease was the signal for general consternation throughout
the metropolis of Normandy. The citizens, panic struck, ran to and fro
as if intoxicated, or as if the town were upon the point of being
taken by assault.

Each asked counsel of his neighbour, and each anxiously turned his
thoughts to the concealing of his property.

When the alarm had in some measure subsided, the monks and clergy
made a solemn procession to the abbey of St.

George, where they offered their prayers for the repose of the soul of the
departed duke: and Archbishop William commanded that the body
should be carried to Caen, to be interred in the church of St.
Stephen, which William had founded.

But the lifeless king was now deserted by all who had participated
in his bounty. Every one of his brethren and relations had left him; nor
was there even a servant to be found to perform the last offices to his
departed lord. The care of the obsequies was finally undertaken by
Herluin, a knight of that district, who, moved by the love of God and
the honour of his nation, provided at his own expense, embalmers
and bearers, and a hearse, and conveyed the corpse to the Seine,
whence it was carried by land and water to the place of its
destination.

Upon the arrival of the funeral train at Caen, it was met by Gislebert,
bishop of Evreux, then abbot of St. Stephen's, at the head of
his monks, attended by a numerous throng of clergy and laity; but
scarcely had the bier been brought within the gates, when the report was
spread that a dreadful fire had broken out in another part of the
town, and the duke's remains were a second time deserted. The monks
alone remained; and, fearful and resolute, they bore their founder "with
candle, with book, and with knell," to his last home. Ordericus Vitalis
enumerates the principal prelates and barons assembled upon this
occasion; but he makes no mention of the Conqueror's son Henry,
who, according to William of Jumieges, was the only one worthy of
succeeding such a father.

Mass had now been performed, and the body was about to be committed to
the ground, "ashes to ashes, dust to dust," when, previously to this
closing part of the ceremony, Gislebert mounted the pulpit, and
delivered an ovation in honour of the deceased.

He praised his valour, which had so widely extended the limits of the
Norman dominion; his ability, which had elevated the nation to the
highest pitch of glory; his equity in the administration of justice; his
firmness in correcting abuses; and his liberality towards the monks and
clergy; then finally addressing the people, he besought them to intercede
with the Almighty for the soul of their prince.

At this moment, one Asselin, an obscure individual, starting from the
crowd, exclaimed with a loud voice, "the ground upon which you are
standing was the site of my father's dwelling.

This man, for whom you ask our prayers, took it by force from my
parent; by violence he seized, by violence he retained it; and,
contrary to all law and justice, he built upon it this church,
wherein we are assembled.

Publicly, therefore, in the sight of God and man, do I claim my inheritance,
and protest against the body of the plunderer being covered with my
turf."

The appeal was attended with instant effect:
bishops and nobles united in their entreaties with Asselin; they
admitted the justice of his claim; they pacified him; they paid him
sixty shillings on the spot by way of recompense for the place of
sepulture; and, finally, they satisfied him for the rest of the
land.

But the remarkable incidents doomed to attend upon this burial were not
yet at an end; for at the time when they were laying the corpse
in the sarcophagus, and were bending it with some force, which they
were compelled to do, in consequence of the coffin having been made
too short, the body, which was extremely corpulent, burst, and so
intolerable a stench issued from the grave, that all the perfumes
which arose from all the censers of the priests and acolytes were
of no avail; and the rites were concluded in haste, and the assembly,
struck with horror, returned to their homes.

The latter part of this story accords but ill with what De Bourgueville
relates. We learn from this author, that four hundred and thirty years
subsequent to the death of the Conqueror, a Roman cardinal, attended by
an archbishop and bishop, visited the town of Caen, and that his
eminence having expressed a wish to see the body of the duke,
the monks yielded to his curiosity, the tomb was opened, and the corpse
discovered in so perfect a state that the cardinal caused a portrait
to be taken from the lifeless features.

It is not worth while now to inquire into the truth of this story, or
the fidelity of the resemblance.

The painting has disappeared in the course of time: it hung for
awhile against the walls of the church, opposite to the monument,
but it was stolen during the tumults caused by the Huguenots, and
was broken into two pieces, in which state De Bourgueville saw it
a few years afterwards, in the hands of a Calvinist, one Peter Hode,
the gaoler at Caen, who used it in the double capacity of a table
and a door.

The worthy magistrate states, that he kept the picture, "because the
abbey-church was demolished."
He was himself present at the second violation of the royal tomb,
in 1572; and he gives a piteous account of the transaction.

The monument raised to the memory of the Conqueror, by his son.

William Rufus, under the superintendance of Lanfrane, was a production of
much costly and elaborate workmanship; the shrine, which was placed
upon the mausoleum, glittered with gold and silver and precious
stones.
"'What is that noise?' I asked the warder who was with me.

"'Prisoners seeing their friends,' he answered. 'Like to have a look at
them, sir?'

"He unlocked a small door and, as he threw it open, the distant, muffled
sound swelled into a deafening roar. I passed through the door and found
myself in a narrow alley at one end of which a warder was sitting. The
sides of the alley were formed by two immense cages with stout wire
bars, one for the prisoners and the other for the visitors; and each
cage was lined with faces and hands, all in incessant movement, the
faces mouthing and grimacing, and the hands clawing restlessly at the
bars. The uproar was so terrific that no single voice could be
distinguished, though every one present was shouting his loudest to make
himself heard above the universal din. The result was a very strange and
horrid illusion, for it seemed as if no one was speaking at all, but
that the noise came from outside, and that each one of the faces--low,
vicious faces, mostly--was silently grimacing and gibbering, snapping
its jaws and glaring furiously at the occupants of the opposite cage. It
was a frightful spectacle. I could think of nothing but the
monkey-house at the Zoo. It seemed as if one ought to walk up the alley
and offer nuts and pieces of paper to be torn to pieces."

"Horrible!" exclaimed Miss Gibson. "And do you mean to say that we shall
be turned loose into one of these cages with a herd of other visitors?"

"No. You are not turned loose anywhere in a prison. The arrangement is
this: each cage is divided by partitions into a number of small boxes or
apartments, which are numbered. The prisoner is locked in one box and
his visitor in the corresponding box opposite. They are thus confronted,
with the width of the alley between them; they can see one another and
talk but cannot pass any forbidden articles across--a very necessary
precaution, I need hardly say."

"Yes, I suppose it is necessary, but it is horrible for decent people.
Surely they ought to be able to discriminate."

"Why not give it up and let me take a message to Reuben? He would
understand and be thankful to me for dissuading you."

"No, no," she said quickly; "the more repulsive it is the greater the
necessity for me to go. He must not be allowed to think that a trifling
inconvenience or indignity is enough to scare his friends away. What
building is that ahead?"

We had just swung round from Caledonian Road into a quiet and
prosperous-looking suburban street, at the end of which rose the tower
of a castellated building.

"That is the prison," I replied. "We are looking at it from the most
advantageous point of view; seen from the back, and especially from the
inside, it is a good deal less attractive."  Nothing more was said
until the cab drove into the courtyard and set us down outside the great
front gates. Having directed the cabman to wait for us, I rang the bell
and we were speedily admitted through a wicket (which was immediately
closed and locked) into a covered court closed in by a second gate,
through the bars of which we could see across an inner courtyard to the
actual entrance to the prison. Here, while the necessary formalities
were gone through, we found ourselves part of a numerous and very motley
company, for a considerable assemblage of the prisoners' friends was
awaiting the moment of admission. I noticed that my companion was
observing our fellow-visitors with a kind of horrified curiosity, which
she strove, however, and not unsuccessfully, to conceal; and certainly
the appearance of the majority furnished eloquent testimony to the
failure of crime as a means of worldly advancement. Their present
position was productive of very varied emotions; some were silent and
evidently stricken with grief; a larger number were voluble and excited,
while a considerable proportion were quite cheerful and even inclined to
be facetious.

At length the great iron gate was unlocked and our party taken in charge
by a warder, who conducted us to that part of the building known as "the
wing"; and, in the course of our progress, I could not help observing
the profound impression made upon my companion by the circumstance that
every door had to be unlocked to admit us and was locked again as soon
as we had passed through.

"It seems to me," I said, as we neared our destination, "that you had
better let me see Reuben first; I have not much to say to him and shall
not keep you waiting long."

"Why do you think so?" she asked, with a shade of suspicion.

"Well," I answered, "I think you may be a little upset by the interview,
and I should like to see you into your cab as soon as possible
afterwards."

"Yes," she said; "perhaps you are right, and it is kind of you to be so
thoughtful on my account."

A minute later, accordingly, I found myself shut into a narrow box, like
one of those which considerate pawnbrokers provide for their more
diffident clients, and in a similar, but more intense, degree, pervaded
by a subtle odour of uncleanness. The woodwork was polished to an
unctuous smoothness by the friction of numberless dirty hands and soiled
garments, and the general appearance--taken in at a glance as I
entered--was such as to cause me to thrust my hands into my pockets and
studiously avoid contact with any part of the structure but the floor.
The end of the box opposite the door was closed in by a strong grating
of wire--excepting the lower three feet, which was of wood--and looking
through this, I perceived, behind a second grating, Reuben Hornby,
standing in a similar attitude to my own. He was dressed in his usual
clothes and with his customary neatness, but his face was unshaven and
he wore, suspended from a button-hole, a circular label bearing the
characters "B.31"; and these two changes in his exterior carried with
them a suggestiveness as subtle as it was unpleasant, making me more
than ever regretful that Miss Gibson had insisted on coming.

"It is exceedingly good of you, Dr. Jervis, to come and see me," he said
heartily, making himself heard quite easily, to my surprise, above the
hubbub of the adjoining boxes; "but I didn't expect you here. I was told
I could see my legal advisers in the solicitor's box."

"So you could," I answered. "But I came here by choice because I have
brought Miss Gibson with me."  "I am sorry for that," he rejoined, with
evident disapproval; "she oughtn't to have come among these riff-raff."

"I told her so, and that you wouldn't like it, but she insisted."

"I know," said Reuben. "That's the worst of women--they will make a
beastly fuss and sacrifice themselves when nobody wants them to. But I
mustn't be ungrateful; she means it kindly, and she's a deuced good
sort, is Juliet."

"She is indeed," I exclaimed, not a little disgusted at his cool,
unappreciative tone; "a most noble-hearted girl, and her devotion to you
is positively heroic."

The faintest suspicion of a smile appeared on the face seen through the
double grating; on which I felt that I could have pulled his nose with
pleasure--only that a pair of tongs of special construction would have
been required for the purpose.

"Yes," he answered calmly, "we have always been very good friends."

A rejoinder of the most extreme acidity was on my lips. Damn the fellow!
What did he mean by speaking in that supercilious tone of the loveliest
and sweetest woman in the world? But, after all, one cannot trample on a
poor devil locked up in a jail on a false charge, no matter how great
may be the provocation. I drew a deep breath, and, having recovered
myself, outwardly at least, said--

"I hope you don't find the conditions here too intolerable?"  "Oh, no,"
he answered. "It's beastly unpleasant, of course, but it might easily be
worse. I don't mind if it's only for a week or two; and I am really
encouraged by what Dr. Thorndyke said. I hope he wasn't being merely
soothing."

"You may take it that he was not. What he said, I am sure he meant. Of
course, you know I am not in his confidence--nobody is--but I gather
that he is satisfied with the defence he is preparing."

"If he is satisfied, I am," said Reuben, "and, in any case, I shall owe
him an immense debt of gratitude for having stood by me and believed in
me when all the world--except my aunt and Juliet--had condemned me."

He then went on to give me a few particulars of his prison life, and
when he had chatted for a quarter of an hour or so, I took my leave to
make way for Miss Gibson.

Her interview with him was not as long as I had expected, though, to be
sure, the conditions were not very favourable either for the exchange of
confidences or for utterances of a sentimental character. The
consciousness that one's conversation could be overheard by the
occupants of adjacent boxes destroyed all sense of privacy, to say
nothing of the disturbing influence of the warder in the alley-way.

When she rejoined me, her manner was abstracted and very depressed, a
circumstance that gave me considerable food for reflection as we made
our way in silence towards the main entrance. Had she found Reuben as
cool and matter-of-fact as I had? He was assuredly a very calm and
self-possessed lover, and it was conceivable that his reception of the
girl, strung up, as she was, to an acute pitch of emotion, might have
been somewhat in the nature of an anticlimax. And then, was it possible
that the feeling was on her side only? Could it be that the priceless
pearl of her love was cast before--I was tempted to use the colloquial
singular and call him an "unappreciative swine!" The thing was almost
unthinkable to me, and yet I was tempted to dwell upon it; for when a
man is in love--and I could no longer disguise my condition from
myself--he is inclined to be humble and to gather up thankfully the
treasure that is rejected of another.

I was brought up short in these reflections by the clank of the lock in
the great iron gate. We entered together the gloomy vestibule, and a
moment later were let out through the wicket into the courtyard; and as
the lock clicked behind us, we gave a simultaneous sigh of relief to
find ourselves outside the precincts of the prison, beyond the domain of
bolts and bars.

I had settled Miss Gibson in the cab and given her address to the
driver, when I noticed her looking at me, as I thought, somewhat
wistfully.

"Can't I put you down somewhere?" she said, in response to a
half-questioning glance from me.

I seized the opportunity with thankfulness and replied--

"You might set me down at King's Cross if it is not delaying you;" and
giving the word to the cabman, I took my place by her side as the cab
started and a black-painted prison van turned into the courtyard with
its freight of squalid misery.

"I don't think Reuben was very pleased to see me," Miss Gibson remarked
presently, "but I shall come again all the same. It is a duty I owe both
to him and to myself."

I felt that I ought to endeavour to dissuade her, but the reflection
that her visits must almost of necessity involve my companionship,
enfeebled my will. I was fast approaching a state of infatuation.

"I was so thankful," she continued, "that you prepared me. It was a
horrible experience to see the poor fellow caged like a wild beast, with
that dreadful label hanging from his coat; but it would have been
overwhelming if I had not known what to expect."

As we proceeded, her spirits revived somewhat, a circumstance that she
graciously ascribed to the enlivening influence of my society; and I
then told her of the mishap that had befallen my colleague.

"What a terrible thing!" she exclaimed, with evidently unaffected
concern. "It is the merest chance that he was not killed on the spot. Is
he much hurt? And would he mind, do you think, if I called to inquire
after him?"

I said that I was sure he would be delighted (being, as a matter of
fact, entirely indifferent as to his sentiments on the subject in my
delight at the proposal), and when I stepped down from the cab at King's
Cross to pursue my way homewards, there already opened out before me the
prospect of the renewal of this bitter-sweet and all too dangerous
companionship on the morrow.


CHAPTER X

POLTON IS MYSTIFIED


A couple of days sufficed to prove that Thorndyke's mishap was not to be
productive of any permanent ill consequences; his wounds progressed
favourably and he was able to resume his ordinary avocations.

Miss Gibson's visit--but why should I speak of her in these formal
terms? To me, when I thought of her, which I did only too often, she was
Juliet, with perhaps an adjective thrown in; and as Juliet I shall
henceforth speak of her (but without the adjective) in this narrative,
wherein nothing has been kept back from the reader--Juliet's visit,
then, had been a great success, for my colleague was really pleased by
the attention, and displayed a quiet geniality that filled our visitor
with delight.

He talked a good deal of Reuben, and I could see that he was
endeavouring to settle in his own mind the vexed question of her
relations with and sentiments towards our unfortunate client; but what
conclusions he arrived at I was unable to discover, for he was by no
means communicative after she had left. Nor was there any repetition of
the visit--greatly to my regret--since, as I have said, he was able, in
a day or two, to resume his ordinary mode of life.

The first evidence I had of his renewed activity appeared when I
returned to the chambers at about eleven o'clock in the morning, to find
Polton hovering dejectedly about the sitting-room, apparently
perpetrating as near an approach to a "spring clean" as could be
permitted in a bachelor establishment.

"Hallo, Polton!" I exclaimed, "have you contrived to tear yourself away
from the laboratory for an hour or two?"

"No, sir," he answered gloomily. "The laboratory has torn itself away
from me."

"What do you mean?" I asked.

"The Doctor has shut himself in and locked the door, and he says I am
not to disturb him. It will be a cold lunch to-day."

"What is he doing in there?" I inquired.

"Ah!" said Polton, "that's just what I should like to know. I'm fair
eaten up with curiosity. He is making some experiments in connection
with some of his cases, and when the Doctor locks himself in to make
experiments, something interesting generally follows. I should like to
know what it is this time."

"I suppose there is a keyhole in the laboratory door?" I suggested, with
a grin.

"Sir!" he exclaimed indignantly. "Dr. Jervis, I am surprised at you."
Then, perceiving my facetious intent, he smiled also and added: "But
there _is_ a keyhole if you'd like to try it, though I'll wager the
Doctor would see more of you than you would of him."

"You are mighty secret about your doings, you and the Doctor," I said.

"Yes," he answered. "You see, it's a queer trade this of the Doctor's,
and there are some queer secrets in it. Now, for instance, what do you
make of this?"

He produced from his pocket a leather case, whence he took a piece of
paper which he handed to me. On it was a neatly executed drawing of what
looked like one of a set of chessmen, with the dimensions written on the
margin.

"It looks like a pawn--one of the Staunton pattern," I said.

"Just what I thought; but it isn't. I've got to make twenty-four of
them, and what the Doctor is going to do with them fairly beats me."

"Perhaps he has invented some new game," I suggested facetiously.  "He
is always inventing new games and playing them mostly in courts of law,
and then the other players generally lose. But this is a puzzler, and no
mistake. Twenty-four of these to be turned up in the best-seasoned
boxwood! What can they be for? Something to do with the experiments he
is carrying on upstairs at this very moment, I expect." He shook his
head, and, having carefully returned the drawing to his pocket-book,
said, in a solemn tone--"Sir, there are times when the Doctor makes me
fairly dance with curiosity. And this is one of them."

Although not afflicted with a curiosity so acute as that of Polton, I
found myself speculating at intervals on the nature of my colleague's
experiments and the purpose of the singular little objects which he had
ordered to be made; but I was unacquainted with any of the cases on
which he was engaged, excepting that of Reuben Hornby, and with the
latter I was quite unable to connect a set of twenty-four boxwood
chessmen. Moreover, on this day, I was to accompany Juliet on her second
visit to Holloway, and that circumstance gave me abundant mental
occupation of another kind.

At lunch, Thorndyke was animated and talkative but not communicative. He
"had some work in the laboratory that he must do himself," he said, but
gave no hint as to its nature; and as soon as our meal was finished, he
returned to his labours, leaving me to pace up and down the walk,
listening with ridiculous eagerness for the sound of the hansom that was
to transport me to the regions of the blest, and--incidentally--to
Holloway Prison.

When I returned to the Temple, the sitting-room was empty and hideously
neat, as the result of Polton's spring-cleaning efforts. My colleague
was evidently still at work in the laboratory, and, from the
circumstance that the tea-things were set out on the table and a kettle
of water placed in readiness on the gas-ring by the fireplace, I
gathered that Polton also was full of business and anxious not to be
disturbed.

Accordingly, I lit the gas and made my tea, enlivening my solitude by
turning over in my mind the events of the afternoon.

Juliet had been charming--as she always was--frank, friendly and
unaffectedly pleased to have my companionship. She evidently liked me
and did not disguise the fact--why should she indeed?--but treated me
with a freedom, almost affectionate, as though I had been a favourite
brother; which was very delightful, and would have been more so if I
could have accepted the relationship. As to her feelings towards me, I
had not the slightest misgiving, and so my conscience was clear; for
Juliet was as innocent as a child, with the innocence that belongs to
the direct, straightforward nature that neither does evil itself nor
looks for evil motives in others. For myself, I was past praying for.
The thing was done and I must pay the price hereafter, content to
reflect that I had trespassed against no one but myself. It was a
miserable affair, and many a heartache did it promise me in the lonely
days that were to come, when I should have said "good-bye" to the Temple
and gone back to my old nomadic life; and yet I would not have had it
changed if I could; would not have bartered the bitter-sweet memories
for dull forgetfulness.

But other matters had transpired in the course of our drive than those
that loomed so large to me in the egotism of my love. We had spoken of
Mr. Hornby and his affairs, and from our talk there had emerged certain
facts of no little moment to the inquiry on which I was engaged.

"Misfortunes are proverbially sociable," Juliet had remarked, in
reference to her adopted uncle. "As if this trouble about Reuben were
not enough, there are worries in the city. Perhaps you have heard of
them."

I replied that Walter had mentioned the matter to me.

"Yes," said Juliet rather viciously; "I am not quite clear as to what
part that good gentleman has played in the matter. It has come out,
quite accidentally, that he had a large holding in the mines himself,
but he seems to have 'cut his loss,' as the phrase goes, and got out of
them; though how he managed to pay such large differences is more than
we can understand. We think he must have raised money somehow to do it."

"Do you know when the mines began to depreciate?" I asked.

"Yes, it was quite a sudden affair--what Walter calls 'a slump'--and it
occurred only a few days before the robbery. Mr. Hornby was telling me
about it only yesterday, and he recalled it to me by a ridiculous
accident that happened on that day."

"What was that?" I inquired.

"Why, I cut my finger and nearly fainted," she answered, with a
shamefaced little laugh. "It was rather a bad cut, you know, but I
didn't notice it until I found my hand covered with blood. Then I turned
suddenly faint, and had to lie down on the hearthrug--it was in Mr.
Hornby's study, which I was tidying up at the time. Here I was found by
Reuben, and a dreadful fright it gave him at first; and then he tore up
his handkerchief to tie up the wounded finger, and you never saw such an
awful mess as he got his hands in. He might have been arrested as a
murderer, poor boy, from the condition he was in. It will make your
professional gorge rise to learn that he fastened up the extemporised
bandage with red tape, which he got from the writing table after rooting
about among the sacred papers in the most ruthless fashion.

"When he had gone I tried to put the things on the table straight again,
and really you might have thought some horrible crime had been
committed; the envelopes and papers were all smeared with blood and
marked with the print of gory fingers. I remembered it afterwards, when
Reuben's thumb-mark was identified, and thought that perhaps one of the
papers might have got into the safe by accident; but Mr. Hornby told me
that was impossible; he tore the leaf off his memorandum block at the
time when he put away the diamonds."

Such was the gist of our conversation as the cab rattled through the
streets on the way to the prison; and certainly it contained matter
sufficiently important to draw away my thoughts from other subjects,
more agreeable, but less relevant to the case. With a sudden remembrance
of my duty, I drew forth my notebook, and was in the act of committing
the statements to writing, when Thorndyke entered the room.

"Don't let me interrupt you, Jervis," said he. "I will make myself a cup
of tea while you finish your writing, and then you shall exhibit the
day's catch and hang your nets out to dry."

I was not long in finishing my notes, for I was in a fever of impatience
to hear Thorndyke's comments on my latest addition to our store of
information. By the time the kettle was boiling my entries were
completed, and I proceeded forthwith to retail to my colleague those
extracts from my conversation with Juliet that I have just recorded.

He listened, as usual, with deep and critical attention.

"This is very interesting and important," he said, when I had finished;
"really, Jervis, you are a most invaluable coadjutor. It seems that
information, which would be strictly withheld from the forbidding
Jorkins, trickles freely and unasked into the ear of the genial Spenlow.
Now, I suppose you regard your hypothesis as having received very
substantial confirmation?"

"Certainly, I do."

"And very justifiably. You see now how completely you were in the right
when you allowed yourself to entertain this theory of the crime in spite
of its apparent improbability. By the light of these new facts it has
become quite a probable explanation of the whole affair, and if it could
only be shown that Mr. Hornby's memorandum block was among the papers on
the table, it would rise to a high degree of probability. The obvious
moral is, never disregard the improbable. By the way, it is odd that
Reuben failed to recall this occurrence when I questioned him. Of
course, the bloody finger-marks were not discovered until he had gone,
but one would have expected him to recall the circumstance when I asked
him, pointedly, if he had never left bloody finger-prints on any
papers."

"I must try to find out if Mr. Hornby's memorandum block was on the
table and among the marked papers," I said.

"Yes, that would be wise," he answered, "though I don't suppose the
information will be forthcoming."

My colleague's manner rather disappointed me. He had heard my report
with the greatest attention, he had discussed it with animation, but yet
he seemed to attach to the new and--as they appeared to me--highly
important facts an interest that was academic rather than practical. Of
course, his calmness might be assumed; but this did not seem likely, for
John Thorndyke was far too sincere and dignified a character to
cultivate in private life the artifices of the actor. To strangers,
indeed, he presented habitually a calm and impassive exterior; but this
was natural to him, and was but the outward sign of his even and
judicial habit of mind.

No; there was no doubt that my startling news had left him unmoved, and
this must be for one of two reasons: either he already knew all that I
had told him (which was perfectly possible), or he had some other and
better means of explaining the crime. I was turning over these two
alternatives, not unobserved by my watchful colleague, when Polton
entered the room; a broad grin was on his face, and a drawing-board,
that he carried like a tray, bore twenty-four neatly turned boxwood
pieces.

Thorndyke at once entered into the unspoken jest that beamed from the
countenance of his subordinate.

"Here is Polton with a problem for you, Jervis," he said. "He assumes
that I have invented a new parlour game, and has been trying to work out
the moves. Have you succeeded yet, Polton?"

"No, sir, I haven't; but I suspect that one of the players will be a man
in a wig and gown."

"Perhaps you are right," said Thorndyke; "but that doesn't take you very
far. Let us hear what Dr. Jervis has to say."

"I can make nothing of them," I answered. "Polton showed me the drawing
this morning, and then was terrified lest he had committed a breach of
confidence, and I have been trying ever since, without a glimmer of
success, to guess what they can be for."

"H'm," grunted Thorndyke, as he sauntered up and down the room, teacup
in hand, "to guess, eh? I like not that word 'guess' in the mouth of a
man of science. What do you mean by a 'guess'?"

His manner was wholly facetious, but I professed to take his question
seriously, and replied--

"By a guess, I mean a conclusion arrived at without data."

"Impossible!" he exclaimed, with mock sternness. "Nobody but an utter
fool arrives at a conclusion without data."

"Then I must revise my definition instantly," I rejoined. "Let us say
that a guess is a conclusion drawn from insufficient facts."

"That is better," said he; "but perhaps it would be better still to say
that a guess is a particular and definite conclusion deduced from facts
which properly yield only a general and indefinite one. Let us take an
instance," he continued. "Looking out of the window, I see a man walking
round Paper Buildings. Now suppose I say, after the fashion of the
inspired detective of the romances, 'That man is a stationmaster or
inspector,' that would be a guess. The observed facts do not yield the
conclusion, though they do warrant a conclusion less definite and more
general."

"You'd have been right though, sir!" exclaimed Polton, who had stepped
forward with me to examine the unconscious subject of the demonstration.
"That gent used to be the stationmaster at Camberwell. I remember him
well."  The little man was evidently greatly impressed.

"I happen to be right, you see," said Thorndyke; "but I might as easily
have been wrong."

"You weren't though, sir," said Polton. "You spotted him at a glance."

In his admiration of the result he cared not a fig for the correctness
of the means by which it had been attained.

"Now why do I suggest that he is a stationmaster?" pursued Thorndyke,
disregarding his assistant's comment.

"I suppose you were looking at his feet," I answered. "I seem to have
noticed that peculiar, splay-footed gait in stationmasters, now that you
mention it."

"Quite so. The arch of the foot has given way; the plantar ligaments
have become stretched and the deep calf muscles weakened. Then, since
bending of the weakened arch causes discomfort, the feet have become
turned outwards, by which the bending of the foot is reduced to a
minimum; and as the left foot is the more flattened, so it is turned out
more than the right. Then the turning out of the toes causes the legs to
splay outward from the knees downwards--a very conspicuous condition in
a tall man like this one--and you notice that the left leg splays out
more than the other.

"But we know that depression of the arch of the foot is brought about by
standing for long periods. Continuous pressure on a living structure
weakens it, while intermittent pressure strengthens it; so the man who
stands on his feet continuously develops a flat instep and a weak calf,
while the professional dancer or runner acquires a high instep and a
strong calf. Now there are many occupations which involve prolonged
standing and so induce the condition of flat foot: waiters,
hall-porters, hawkers, policemen, shop-walkers, salesmen, and station
officials are examples. But the waiter's gait is characteristic--a
quick, shuffling walk which enables him to carry liquids without
spilling them. This man walks with a long, swinging stride; he is
obviously not a waiter. His dress and appearance in general exclude the
idea of a hawker or even a hall-porter; he is a man of poor physique and
so cannot be a policeman. The shop-walker or salesman is accustomed to
move in relatively confined spaces, and so acquires a short, brisk step,
and his dress tends to rather exuberant smartness; the station official
patrols long platforms, often at a rapid pace, and so tends to take long
strides, while his dress is dignified and neat rather than florid. The
last-mentioned characteristics, you see, appear in the subject of our
analysis; he agrees with the general description of a stationmaster. But
if we therefore conclude that he _is_ a stationmaster, we fall into the
time-honoured fallacy of the undistributed middle term--the fallacy that
haunts all brilliant guessers, including the detective, not only of
romance, but too often also of real life. All that the observed facts
justify us in inferring is that this man is engaged in some mode of life
that necessitates a good deal of standing; the rest is mere guess-work."

"It's wonderful," said Polton, gazing at the now distant figure;
"perfectly wonderful. I should never have known he was a stationmaster."
With this and a glance of deep admiration at his employer, he took his
departure.

"You will also observe," said Thorndyke, with a smile, "that a fortunate
guess often brings more credit than a piece of sound reasoning with a
less striking result."

"Yes, that is unfortunately the case, and it is certainly true in the
present instance. Your reputation, as far as Polton is concerned, is now
firmly established even if it was not before. In his eyes you are a
wizard from whom nothing is hidden. But to return to these little
pieces, as I must call them, for the lack of a better name. I can form
no hypothesis as to their use. I seem to have no 'departure,' as the
nautical phrase goes, from which to start an inquiry. I haven't even the
material for guess-work. Ought I to be able to arrive at any opinion on
the subject?"

Thorndyke picked up one of the pieces, fingering it delicately and
inspecting with a critical eye the flat base on which it stood, and
reflected for a few moments.

"It is easy to trace a connection when one knows all the facts," he said
at length, "but it seems to me that you have the materials from which to
form a conjecture. Perhaps I am wrong, but I think, when you have had
more experience, you will find yourself able to work out a problem of
this kind. What is required is constructive imagination and a rigorous
exactness in reasoning. Now, you are a good reasoner, and you have
recently shown me that you have the necessary imagination; you merely
lack experience in the use of your faculties. When you learn my purpose
in having these things made--as you will before long--you will probably
be surprised that their use did not occur to you. And now let us go
forth and take a brisk walk to refresh ourselves (or perhaps I should
say myself) after the day's labour.


CHAPTER XI

THE AMBUSH


"I am going to ask for your collaboration in another case," said
Thorndyke, a day or two later. "It appears to be one of suicide, but the
solicitors to the 'Griffin' office have asked me to go down to the
place, which is in the neighbourhood of Barnet, and be present at the
_post-mortem_ and the inquest. They have managed to arrange that the
inquest shall take place directly after the _post-mortem_, so that we
shall be able to do the whole business in a single visit."

"Is the case one of any intricacy?" I asked.

"I don't think so," he answered. "It looks like a common suicide; but
you can never tell. The importance of the case at present arises
entirely from the heavy insurance; a verdict of suicide will mean a gain
of ten thousand pounds to the 'Griffin,' so, naturally, the directors
are anxious to get the case settled and not inclined to boggle over a
little expense."

"Naturally. And when will the expedition take place?" I asked.

"The inquest is fixed for to-morrow--what is the matter? Does that fall
foul of any arrangement of yours?"

"Oh, nothing of any importance," I replied hastily, deeply ashamed of
the momentary change of countenance that my friend had been so quick to
observe.

"Well, what is it?" persisted Thorndyke. "You have got something on."

"It is nothing, I tell you, but what can be quite easily arranged to
suit your plans."

"_Cherchez la_--h'm?" queried Thorndyke, with an exasperating grin.

"Yes," I answered, turning as red as a pickled cabbage; "since you are
so beastly inquisitive. Miss Gibson wrote, on behalf of Mrs. Hornby,
asking me to dine with them _en famille_ to-morrow evening, and I sent
off an acceptance an hour ago."

"And you call that 'nothing of any importance'!" exclaimed Thorndyke.
"Alas! and likewise alackaday (which is an approximately synonymous
expression)! The age of chivalry is past, indeed. Of course you must
keep your appointment; I can manage quite well alone."

"We shouldn't be back early enough for me to go to Kensington from the
station, I suppose?"

"No; certainly not. I find that the trains are very awkward; we should
not reach King's Cross until nearly one in the morning."

"Then, in that case, I shall write to Miss Gibson and excuse myself."

"Oh, I wouldn't do that," said Thorndyke; "it will disappoint them, and
really it is not necessary."

"I shall write forthwith," I said firmly, "so please don't try to
dissuade me. I have been feeling quite uncomfortable at the thought
that, all the time I have been in your employ, I seem to have done
nothing but idle about and amuse myself. The opportunity of doing
something tangible for my wage is too precious to be allowed to slip."

Thorndyke chuckled indulgently. "You shall do as you please, my dear
boy," he said; "but don't imagine that you have been eating the bread of
idleness. When you see this Hornby case worked out in detail, you will
be surprised to find how large a part you have taken in unravelling it.
Your worth to me has been far beyond your poor little salary, I can
assure you."

"It is very handsome of you to say that," I said, highly gratified to
learn that I was really of use, and not, as I had begun to suspect, a
mere object of charity.

"It is perfectly true," he answered; "and now, since you are going to
help me in this case, I will set you your task. The case, as I have
said, appears to be quite simple, but it never does to take the
simplicity for granted. Here is the letter from the solicitors giving
the facts as far as they are known at present. On the shelves there you
will find Casper, Taylor, Guy and Ferrier, and the other authorities on
medical jurisprudence, and I will put out one or two other books that
you may find useful. I want you to extract and make classified notes of
everything that may bear on such a case as the present one may turn out
to be. We must go prepared to meet any contingency that may arise. This
is my invariable practice, and even if the case turns out to be quite
simple, the labour is never wasted, for it represents so much experience
gained."

"Casper and Taylor are pretty old, aren't they?" I objected.

"So is suicide," he retorted drily. "It is a capital mistake to neglect
the old authorities. 'There were strong men before Agamemnon,' and some
of them were uncommonly strong, let me tell you. Give your best
attention to the venerable Casper and the obsolete Taylor and you will
not be without your reward."

As a result of these injunctions, I devoted the remainder of the day to
the consideration of the various methods by which a man might contrive
to effect his exit from the stage of human activities. And a very
engrossing study I found it, and the more interesting in view of the
problem that awaited solution on the morrow; but yet not so engrossing
but that I was able to find time to write a long, rather intimate and
minutely explanatory letter to Miss Gibson, in which I even mentioned
the hour of our return as showing the impossibility of my keeping my
engagement. Not that I had the smallest fear of her taking offence, for
it is an evidence of my respect and regard for her that I cancelled the
appointment without a momentary doubt that she would approve of my
action; but it was pleasant to write to her at length and to feel the
intimacy of keeping her informed of the details of my life.

The case, when we came to inquire into it on the spot, turned out to be
a suicide of the most transparent type; whereat both Thorndyke and I
were, I think, a little disappointed--he at having apparently done so
little for a very substantial fee, and I at having no opportunity for
applying my recently augmented knowledge.

"Yes," said my colleague, as we rolled ourselves up in our rugs in
adjacent corners of the railway carriage, "it has been a flat affair,
and the whole thing could have been managed by the local solicitor. But
it is not a waste of time after all, for, you see, I have to do many a
day's work for which I get not a farthing of payment, nor even any
recognition, so that I do not complain if I occasionally find myself
receiving more payment than my actual services merit. And as to you, I
take it that you have acquired a good deal of valuable knowledge on the
subject of suicide, and knowledge, as the late Lord Bacon remarked with
more truth than originality, is power."

To this I made no reply, having just lit my pipe and feeling uncommonly
drowsy; and, my companion having followed my example, we smoked in
silence, becoming more and more somnolent, until the train drew up in
the terminus and we turned out, yawning and shivering, on to the
platform.

"Bah!" exclaimed Thorndyke, drawing his rug round his shoulders; "this
is a cheerless hour--a quarter past one. See how chilly and miserable
all these poor devils of passengers look. Shall we cab it or walk?"

"I think a sharp walk would rouse our circulation after sitting huddled
up in the carriage for so long," I answered.

"So do I," said Thorndyke, "so let us away; hark forward! and also Tally
Ho! In fact one might go so far as to say Yoicks! That gentleman appears
to favour the strenuous life, if one may judge by the size of his
sprocket-wheel."

He pointed to a bicycle that was drawn up by the kerb in the approach--a
machine of the road-racer type, with an enormous sprocket-wheel,
indicating a gear of, at least, ninety.

"Some scorcher or amateur racer, probably," I said, "who takes the
opportunity of getting a spin on the wood pavement when the streets are
empty." I looked round to see if I could identify the owner, but the
machine appeared to be, for the moment, taking care of itself.  King's
Cross is one of those districts of which the inhabitants are slow in
settling down for the night, and even at a quarter past one in the
morning its streets are not entirely deserted. Here and there the
glimmer of a street lamp or the far-reaching ray from a tall electric
light reveals the form of some nocturnal prowler creeping along with
cat-like stealthiness, or bursting, cat-like, into unmelodious song. Not
greatly desirous of the society of these roysterers, we crossed quickly
from the station into the Gray's Inn Road, now silent and excessively
dismal in aspect, and took our way along the western side. We had turned
the curve and were crossing Manchester Street, when a series of yelps
from ahead announced the presence of a party of merry-makers, whom we
were not yet able to see, however, for the night was an exceptionally
dark one; but the sounds of revelry continued to increase in volume as
we proceeded, until, as we passed Sidmouth Street, we came in sight of
the revellers. They were some half-dozen in number, all of them roughs
of the hooligan type, and they were evidently in boisterous spirits,
for, as they passed the entrance to the Royal Free Hospital, they halted
and battered furiously at the gate. Shortly after this exploit they
crossed the road on to our side, whereupon Thorndyke caught my arm and
slackened his pace.

"Let them draw ahead," said he. "It is a wise precaution to give all
hooligan gangs a very wide berth at this time of night. We had better
turn down Heathcote Street and cross Mecklenburgh Square."

We continued to walk on at reduced speed until we reached Heathcote
Street, into which we turned and so entered Mecklenburgh Square, where
we mended our pace once more.

"The hooligan," pursued Thorndyke, as we walked briskly across the
silent square, "covers a multitude of sins, ranging from highway robbery
with violence and paid assassination (technically known as 'bashing')
down to the criminal folly of the philanthropic magistrate, who seems to
think that his function in the economy of nature is to secure the
survival of the unfittest. There goes a cyclist along Guildford Street.
I wonder if that is our strenuous friend from the station. If so, he has
slipped past the hooligans."

We were just entering Doughty Street, and, as Thorndyke spoke, a man on
a bicycle was visible for an instant at the crossing of the two streets.
When we reached Guildford Street we both looked down the long,
lamp-lighted vista, but the cyclist had vanished.

"We had better go straight on into Theobald's Road," said Thorndyke, and
we accordingly pursued our way up the fine old-world street, from whose
tall houses our footfalls echoed, so that we seemed to be accompanied by
an invisible multitude, until we reached that part where it
unaccountably changes its name and becomes John Street.

"There always seems to me something very pathetic about these old
Bloomsbury streets," said Thorndyke, "with their faded grandeur and
dignified seediness. They remind me of some prim and aged gentlewoman in
reduced circumstances who--Hallo! What was that?"

A faint, sharp thud from behind had been followed instantly by the
shattering of a ground-floor window in front.

We both stopped dead and remained, for a couple of seconds, staring into
the gloom, from whence the first sound had come; then Thorndyke darted
diagonally across the road at a swift run and I immediately followed.

At the moment when the affair happened we had gone about forty yards up
John Street, that is, from the place where it is crossed by Henry
Street, and we now raced across the road to the further corner of the
latter street. When we reached it, however, the little thoroughfare was
empty, and, as we paused for a moment, no sound of retreating footsteps
broke the silence.

"The shot certainly came from here!" said Thorndyke; "come on," and he
again broke into a run. A few yards up the street a mews turns off to
the left, and into this my companion plunged, motioning me to go
straight on, which I accordingly did, and in a few paces reached the top
of the street. Here a narrow thoroughfare, with a broad, smooth
pavement, bears off to the left, parallel with the mews, and, as I
arrived at the corner and glanced up the little street, I saw a man on a
bicycle gliding swiftly and silently towards Little James' Street.

With a mighty shout of "Stop thief!" I started in hot pursuit, but,
though the man's feet were moving in an apparently leisurely manner, he
drew ahead at an astonishing pace, in spite of my efforts to overtake
him; and it then dawned upon me that the slow revolutions of his feet
were due, in reality, to the unusually high gear of the machine that he
was riding. As I realised this, and at the same moment recalled the
bicycle that we had seen in the station, the fugitive swung round into
Little James' Street and vanished.

The speed at which the man was travelling made further pursuit utterly
futile, so I turned and walked back, panting and perspiring from the
unwonted exertion. As I re-entered Henry Street, Thorndyke emerged from
the mews and halted on seeing me.

"Cyclist?" he asked laconically, as I came up.

"Yes," I answered; "riding a machine geared up to about ninety."

"Ah! he must have followed us from the station," said Thorndyke. "Did
you notice if he was carrying anything?"

"He had a walking-stick in his hand. I didn't see anything else."

"What sort of walking-stick?"

"I couldn't see very distinctly. It was a stoutish stick--I should say a
Malacca, probably--and it had what looked like a horn handle. I could
see that as he passed a street lamp."

"What kind of lamp had he?"

"I couldn't see; but, as he turned the corner, I noticed that it seemed
to burn very dimly."

"A little vaseline, or even oil, smeared on the outside of the glass
will reduce the glare of a lamp very appreciably," my companion
remarked, "especially on a dusty road. Ha! here is the proprietor of the
broken window. He wants to know, you know."

We had once more turned into John Street and now perceived a man,
standing on the wide doorstep of the house with the shattered window,
looking anxiously up and down the street.

"Do either of you gents know anything about this here?" he asked,
pointing to the broken pane.

"Yes," said Thorndyke, "we happened to be passing when it was done; in
fact," he added, "I rather suspect that the missile, whatever it was,
was intended for our benefit."

"Oh!" said the man. "Who done it?"

"That I can't say," replied Thorndyke. "Whoever he was, he made off on a
bicycle and we were unable to catch him."

"Oh!" said the man once more, regarding us with growing suspicion. "On a
bicycle, hay! Dam funny, ain't it? What did he do it with?"

"That is what I should like to find out," said Thorndyke. "I see this
house is empty."

"Yes, it's empty--leastways it's to let. I'm the caretaker. But what's
that got to do with it?"

"Merely this," answered Thorndyke, "that the object--stone, bullet or
whatever it may have been--was aimed, I believe, at me, and I should
like to ascertain its nature. Would you do me the favour of permitting
me to look for it?"

The caretaker was evidently inclined to refuse this request, for he
glanced suspiciously from my companion to me once or twice before
replying, but, at length, he turned towards the open door and gruffly
invited us to enter.

A paraffin lamp was on the floor in a recess of the hall, and this our
conductor took up when he had elosed the street door.

"This is the room," he said, turning the key and thrusting the door
open; "the library they call it, but it's the front parlour in plain
English." He entered and, holding the lamp above his head, stared
balefully at the broken window.

Thorndyke glanced quickly along the floor in the direction that the
missile would have taken, and then said--

"Do you see any mark on the wall there?"

As he spoke, he indicated the wall opposite the window, which obviously
could not have been struck by a projectile entering with such extreme
obliquity; and I was about to point out this fact when I fortunately
remembered the great virtue of silence.

Our friend approached the wall, still holding up the lamp, and
scrutinised the surface with close attention; and while he was thus
engaged, I observed Thorndyke stoop quickly and pick up something, which
he deposited carefully, and without remark, in his waistcoat pocket.

"I don't see no bruise anywhere," said the caretaker, sweeping his hand
over the wall.

"Perhaps the thing struck this wall," suggested Thorndyke, pointing to
the one that was actually in the line of fire. "Yes, of course," he
added, "it would be this one--the shot came from Henry Street."

The caretaker crossed the room and threw the light of his lamp on the
wall thus indicated.

"Ah! here we are!" he exclaimed, with gloomy satisfaction, pointing to a
small dent in which the wall-paper was turned back and the plaster
exposed; "looks almost like a bullet mark, but you say you didn't hear
no report."

"No," said Thorndyke, "there was no report; it must have been a
catapult."

The caretaker set the lamp down on the floor and proceeded to grope
about for the projectile, in which operation we both assisted; and I
could not suppress a faint smile as I noted the earnestness with which
Thorndyke peered about the floor in search of the missile that was
quietly reposing in his waistcoat pocket.

We were deep in our investigations when there was heard an
uncompromising double knock at the street door, followed by the loud
pealing of a bell in the basement.

"Bobby, I suppose," growled the caretaker. "Here's a blooming fuss about
nothing." He caught up the lamp and went out, leaving us in the dark.

"I picked it up, you know," said Thorndyke, when we were alone.

"I saw you," I answered.

"Good; I applaud your discretion," he rejoined. The caretaker's
supposition was correct. When he returned, he was accompanied by a burly
constable, who saluted us with a cheerful smile and glanced facetiously
round the empty room.

"Our boys," said he, nodding towards the broken window; "they're playful
lads, that they are. You were passing when it happened, sir, I hear."
"Yes," answered Thorndyke; and he gave the constable a brief account of
the occurrence, which the latter listened to, notebook in hand.

"Well," said he when the narrative was concluded, "if those hooligan
boys are going to take to catapults they'll make things lively all
round."

"You ought to run some of 'em in," said the caretaker.

"Run 'em in!" exclaimed the constable in a tone of disgust; "yes! And
then the magistrate will tell 'em to be good boys and give 'em five
shillings out of the poor-box to buy illustrated Testaments. I'd
Testament them, the worthless varmints!"

He rammed his notebook fiercely into his pocket and stalked out of the
room into the street, whither we followed.

"You'll find that bullet or stone when you sweep up the room," he said,
as he turned on to his beat; "and you'd better let us have it. Good
night, sir."

He strolled off towards Henry Street, while Thorndyke and I resumed our
journey southward.

"Why were you so secret about that projectile?" I asked my friend as we
walked up the street.

"Partly to avoid discussion with the caretaker," he replied; "but
principally because I thought it likely that a constable would pass the
house and, seeing the light, come in to make inquiries."

"And then?"

"Then I should have had to hand over the object to him."  "And why not?
Is the object a specially interesting one?"

"It is highly interesting to me at the present moment," replied
Thorndyke, with a chuckle, "because I have not examined it. I have a
theory as to its nature, which theory I should like to test before
taking the police into my confidence."

"Are you going to take me into your confidence?" I asked.

"When we get home, if you are not too sleepy," he replied.

On our arrival at his chambers, Thorndyke desired me to light up and
clear one end of the table while he went up to the workshop to fetch
some tools. I turned back the table cover, and, having adjusted the gas
so as to light this part of the table, waited in some impatience for my
colleague's return. In a few minutes he re-entered bearing a small vice,
a metal saw and a wide-mouthed bottle.

"What have you got in that bottle?" I asked, perceiving a metal object
inside it.

"That is the projectile, which I have thought fit to rinse in distilled
water, for reasons that will presently appear."

He agitated the bottle gently for a minute or so, and then, with a pair
of dissecting forceps, lifted out the object and held it above the
surface of the water to drain, after which he laid it carefully on a
piece of blotting-paper.

I stooped over the projectile and examined it with great curiosity,
while Thorndyke stood by regarding me with almost equal interest.

"Well," he said, after watching me in silence for some time, "what do
you see?"

"I see a small brass cylinder," I answered, "about two inches long and
rather thicker than an ordinary lead pencil. One end is conical, and
there is a small hole at the apex which seems to contain a steel point;
the other end is flat, but has in the centre a small square projection
such as might fit a watch-key. I notice also a small hole in the side of
the cylinder close to the flat end. The thing looks like a miniature
shell, and appears to be hollow."

"It is hollow," said Thorndyke. "You must have observed that, when I
held it up to drain, the water trickled out through the hole at the
pointed end."

"Yes, I noticed that."

"Now take it up and shake it."

I did so and felt some heavy object rattle inside it.

"There is some loose body inside it," I said, "which fits it pretty
closely, as it moves only in the long diameter."

"Quite so; your description is excellent. And now, what is the nature of
this projectile?"

"I should say it is a miniature shell or explosive bullet."

"Wrong!" said Thorndyke. "A very natural inference, but a wrong one."

"Then what is the thing?" I demanded, my curiosity still further
aroused.

"I will show you," he replied. "It is something much more subtle than an
explosive bullet--which would really be a rather crude
appliance--admirably thought out and thoroughly well executed. We have
to deal with a most ingenious and capable man."

I was fain to laugh at his enthusiastic appreciation of the methods of
his would-be assassin, and the humour of the situation then appeared to
dawn on him, for he said, with an apologetic smile--

"I am not expressing approval, you must understand, but merely
professional admiration. It is this class of criminal that creates the
necessity for my services. He is my patron, so to speak; my ultimate
employer. For the common crook can be dealt with quite efficiently by
the common policeman!"

While he was speaking he had been fitting the little cylinder between
two pads of tissue-paper in the vice, which he now screwed up tight.
Then, with the fine metal saw, he began to cut the projectile,
lengthwise, into two slightly unequal parts. This operation took some
time, especially since he was careful not to cut the loose body inside,
but at length the section was completed and the interior of the cylinder
exposed, when he released it from the vice and held it up before me with
an expression of triumph.

"Now, what do you make it?" he demanded.

I took the object in my fingers and looked at it closely, but was at
first more puzzled than before. The loose body I now saw to be a
cylinder of lead about half an inch long, accurately fitting the inside
of the cylinder but capable of slipping freely backwards and forwards.
The steel point which I had noticed in the hole at the apex of the
conical end, was now seen to be the pointed termination of a slender
steel rod which projected fully an inch into the cavity of the cylinder,
and the conical end itself was a solid mass of lead.

"Well?" queried Thorndyke, seeing that I was still silent.

"You tell me it is not an explosive bullet," I replied, "otherwise I
should have been confirmed in that opinion. I should have said that the
percussion cap was carried by this lead plunger and struck on the end of
that steel rod when the flight of the bullet was suddenly arrested."

"Very good indeed," said Thorndyke. "You are right so far that this is,
in fact, the mechanism of a percussion shell.

"But look at this. You see this little rod was driven inside the bullet
when the latter struck the wall. Let us replace it in its original
position."

He laid the end of a small flat file against the end of the rod and
pressed it firmly, when the rod slid through the hole until it projected
an inch beyond the apex of the cone. Then he handed the projectile back
to me.

A single glance at the point of the steel rod made the whole thing
clear, and I gave a whistle of consternation; for the "rod" was a fine
tube with a sharply pointed end.

"The infernal scoundrel!" I exclaimed; "it is a hypodermic needle."

"Yes. A veterinary hypodermic, of extra large bore. Now you see the
subtlety and ingenuity of the whole thing. If he had had a reasonable
chance he would certainly have succeeded."

"You speak quite regretfully," I said, laughing again at the oddity of
his attitude towards the assassin.

"Not at all," he replied. "I have the character of a single-handed
player, but even the most self-reliant man can hardly make a
_post-mortem_ on himself. I am merely appreciating an admirable piece of
mechanical design most efficiently carried out. Observe the
completeness of the thing, and the way in which all the necessities of
the case are foreseen and met. This projectile was discharged from a
powerful air-gun--the walking-stick form--provided with a force-pump and
key. The barrel of that gun was rifled."

"How do you know that?" I asked.

"Well, to begin with, it would be useless to fit a needle to the
projectile unless the latter was made to travel with the point forwards;
but there is direct evidence that the barrel was rifled. You notice the
little square projection on the back surface of the cylinder. That was
evidently made to fit a washer or wad--probably a thin plate of soft
metal which would be driven by the pressure from behind into the grooves
of the rifling and thus give a spinning motion to the bullet. When the
latter left the barrel, the wad would drop off, leaving it free."

"I see. I was wondering what the square projection was for. It is, as
you say, extremely ingenious."

"Highly ingenious," said Thorndyke, enthusiastically, "and so is the
whole device. See how perfectly it would have worked but for a mere
fluke and for the complication of your presence. Supposing that I had
been alone, so that he could have approached to a shorter distance. In
that case he would not have missed, and the thing would have been done.
You see how it was intended to be done, I suppose?"

"I think so," I answered; "but I should like to hear your account of the
process."

"Well, you see, he first finds out that I am returning by a late
train--which he seems to have done--and he waits for me at the terminus.
Meanwhile he fills the cylinder with a solution of a powerful alkaloidal
poison, which is easily done by dipping the needle into the liquid and
sucking at the small hole near the back end, when the piston will be
drawn up and the liquid will follow it. You notice that the upper side
of the piston is covered with vaseline--introduced through the hole, no
doubt--which would prevent the poison from coming out into the mouth,
and make the cylinder secure from leakage. On my arrival, he follows me
on his bicycle until I pass through a sufficiently secluded
neighbourhood. Then he approaches me, or passes me and waits round a
corner, and shoots at pretty close range. It doesn't matter where he
hits me; all parts are equally vital, so he can aim at the middle of my
back. Then the bullet comes spinning through the air point foremost; the
needle passes through the clothing and enters the flesh, and, as the
bullet is suddenly stopped, the heavy piston flies down by its own great
momentum and squirts out a jet of the poison into the tissues. The
bullet then disengages itself and drops on to the ground.

"Meanwhile, our friend has mounted his bicycle and is off, and when I
feel the prick of the needle, I turn, and, without stopping to look for
the bullet, immediately give chase. I am, of course, not able to
overtake a man on a racing machine, but still I follow him some
distance. Then the poison begins to take effect--the more rapidly from
the violent exercise--and presently I drop insensible. Later on, my body
is found. There are no marks of violence, and probably the
needle-puncture escapes observation at the _post-mortem_, in which case
the verdict will be death from heart-failure. Even if the poison and the
puncture are discovered, there is no clue. The bullet lies some streets
away, and is probably picked up by some boy or passing stranger, who
cannot conjecture its use, and who would never connect it with the man
who was found dead. You will admit that the whole plan has been worked
out with surprising completeness and foresight."  "Yes," I answered;
"there is no doubt that the fellow is a most infernally clever
scoundrel. May I ask if you have any idea who he is?"

"Well," Thorndyke replied, "seeing that, as Carlyle has unkindly pointed
out, clever people are not in an overwhelming majority, and that, of the
clever people whom I know, only a very few are interested in my
immediate demise, I am able to form a fairly probable conjecture."

"And what do you mean to do?"

"For the present I shall maintain an attitude of masterly inactivity and
avoid the night air."

"But, surely," I exclaimed, "you will take some measures to protect
yourself against attempts of this kind. You can hardly doubt now that
your accident in the fog was really an attempted murder."

"I never did doubt it, as a matter of fact, although I prevaricated at
the time. But I have not enough evidence against this man at present,
and, consequently, can do nothing but show that I suspect him, which
would be foolish. Whereas, if I lie low, one of two things will happen;
either the occasion for my removal (which is only a temporary one) will
pass, or he will commit himself--will put a definite clue into my hands.
Then we shall find the air-cane, the bicycle, perhaps a little stock of
poison, and certain other trifles that I have in my mind, which will be
good confirmatory evidence, though insufficient in themselves. And now,
I think, I must really adjourn this meeting, or we shall be good for
nothing to-morrow."


CHAPTER XII

IT MIGHT HAVE BEEN


It was now only a week from the date on which the trial was to open. In
eight days the mystery would almost certainly be solved (if it was
capable of solution), for the trial promised to be quite a short one,
and then Reuben Hornby would be either a convicted felon or a free man,
clear of the stigma of the crime.

For several days past, Thorndyke had been in almost constant possession
of the laboratory, while his own small room, devoted ordinarily to
bacteriology and microscopical work was kept continually locked; a state
of things that reduced Polton to a condition of the most extreme nervous
irritation, especially when, as he told me indignantly, he met Mr.
Anstey emerging from the holy of holies, grinning and rubbing his hands
and giving utterance to genial but unparliamentary expressions of amused
satisfaction.

I had met Anstey on several occasions lately, and each time liked him
better than the last; for his whimsical, facetious manner covered a
nature (as it often does) that was serious and thoughtful; and I found
him, not only a man of considerable learning, but one also of a lofty
standard of conduct. His admiration for Thorndyke was unbounded, and I
could see that the two men collaborated with the utmost sympathy and
mutual satisfaction.

But although I regarded Mr. Anstey with feelings of the liveliest
friendship, I was far from gratified when, on the morning of which I am
writing, I observed him from our sitting-room window crossing the
gravelled space from Crown Office Row and evidently bearing down on our
chambers. For the fact is that I was awaiting the arrival of Juliet, and
should greatly have preferred to be alone at the moment, seeing that
Thorndyke had already gone out. It is true that my fair enslaver was not
due for nearly half-an-hour, but then, who could say how long Anstey
would stay, or what embarrassments might arise from my efforts to
escape? This time the attempt has failed, though at the foot of the vase,
not nine inches away, there lay a bunch of pine-needles which I
had placed there with the object of enticing the hungry ones.

Smell and sight told them nothing. Near as they were to the goal, they
went up again.

No matter, the endeavour has its uses. Threads were laid on the way
and will serve as a lure to further enterprise.

The road of deliverance has its first landmarks. And, two days later,
on the eighth day of the experiment, the caterpillars--now singly,
anon in small groups, then again in strings of some length--come
down from the ledge by following the staked-out path.

At sunset the last of the laggards is back in the nest.

Now for a little arithmetic. For seven times twenty-four hours the
caterpillars have remained on the ledge of the vase. To make an ample
allowance for stops due to the weariness of this one or that and
above all for the rest taken during the colder hours of the night,
we will deduct one-half of the time.

This leaves eighty-four hours' walking. The average pace is nine centimetres
a minute. (3 1/2 inches.--Translator's Note.)

The aggregate distance covered, therefore, is 453 metres, a good deal
more than a quarter of a mile, which is a great walk for these little
crawlers. The circumference of the vase, the perimeter of the track, is
exactly 1 metre 35. (4 feet 5 inches.--Translator's Note.) Therefore
the circle covered, always in the same direction and always without
result, was described three hundred and thirty-five times.

These figures surprise me, though I am already familiar with the
abysmal stupidity of insects as a class whenever the least accident
occurs.

I feel inclined to ask myself whether the Processionaries
were not kept up there so long by the difficulties and dangers of the
descent rather than by the lack of any gleam of intelligence in their
benighted minds. The facts, however, reply that the descent is as
easy as the ascent.

The caterpillar has a very supple back, well adapted for twisting
round projections or slipping underneath.

He can walk with the same ease vertically or horizontally, with his
back down or up. Besides, he never moves forward until he has fixed his
thread to the ground. With this support to his feet, he has no
falls to fear, no matter what his position.

I had a proof of this before my eyes during a whole week.

As I have already said, the track, instead of keeping on one level,
bends twice, dips at a certain point under the ledge of the vase
and reappears at the top a little farther on.

At one part of the circuit, therefore, the procession walks on the
lower surface of the rim; and this inverted position implies so
little discomfort or danger that it is renewed at each turn for all
the caterpillars from first to last.

It is out of the question then to suggest the dread of a false step on the
edge of the rim which is so nimbly turned at each point of inflexion. The
caterpillars in distress, starved, shelterless, chilled with cold
at night, cling obstinately to the silk ribbon covered hundreds of
times, because they lack the rudimentary glimmers of reason which
would advise them to abandon it.

Experience and reflection are not in their province. The ordeal
of a five hundred yards' march and three to four hundred turns teach
them nothing; and it takes casual circumstances to bring them back
to the nest.

They would perish on their insidious ribbon if the disorder of the nocturnal
encampments and the halts due to fatigue did not cast a few threads
outside the circular path.

Some three or four move along these trails, laid without an object, stray
a little way and, thanks to their wanderings, prepare the descent,
which is at last accomplished in short strings favoured by chance.

The school most highly honoured to-day is very anxious to find the
origin of reason in the dregs of the animal kingdom. Let me call its
attention to the Pine Processionary.

CHAPTER 9. THE SPIDERS.

THE NARBONNE LYCOSA, OR BLACK-BELLIED TARANTULA.

THE BURROW.

Michelet has told us how, as a printer's apprentice in a cellar,
he established amicable relations with a Spider. (Jules Michelet
(1798-1874), author of "L'Oiseau" and "L'Insecte," in addition to
the historical works for which he is chiefly known. As a lad, he
helped his father, a printer by trade, in setting type.--Translator's
Note.) At a certain hour of the day, a ray of sunlight would glint
through the window of the gloomy workshop and light up the little
compositor's case. Then his eight-legged neighbour would come down
from her web and on the edge of the case take her share of the sunshine.
The boy did not interfere with her; he welcomed the trusting visitor as
a friend and as a pleasant diversion from the long monotony.

When we lack the society of our fellow-men, we take refuge in that of
animals, without always losing by the change.

I do not, thank God, suffer from the melancholy of a cellar: my
solitude is gay with light and verdure; I attend, whenever I please,
the fields' high festival, the Thrushes' concert, the Crickets'
symphony; and yet my friendly commerce with the Spider is marked
by an even greater devotion than the young type-setter's.

I admit her to the intimacy of my study, I make room for her among
my books, I set her in the sun on my window-ledge, I visit her assiduously
at her home, in the country. The object of our relations is not to create
a means of escape from the petty worries of life, pin-pricks whereof I
have my share like other men, a very large share, indeed; I propose
to submit to the Spider a host of questions whereto, at times, she
condescends to reply.

To what fair problems does not the habit of frequenting her give
rise!

To set them forth worthily, the marvellous art which the little printer
was to acquire were not too much. One needs the pen of a Michelet; and
I have but a rough, blunt pencil. Let us try, nevertheless: even when
poorly clad, truth is still beautiful.

The most robust Spider in my district is the Narbonne Lycosa, or
Black-bellied Tarantula, clad in black velvet on the lower surface,
especially under the belly, with brown chevrons on the abdomen and
grey and white rings around the legs.

Her favourite home is the dry, pebbly ground, covered with sun-scorched
thyme. In my harmas laboratory there are quite twenty of this
Spider's burrows. Rarely do I pass by one of these haunts without
giving a glance down the pit where gleam, like diamonds, the four
great eyes, the four telescopes, of the hermit.

The four others, which are much smaller, are not visible at that depth.

Would I have greater riches, I have but to walk a hundred yards from my
house, on the neighbouring plateau, once a shady forest, to-day a dreary
solitude where the Cricket browses and the Wheat-ear flits from stone
to stone.

The love of lucre has laid waste the land. Because wine paid handsomely,
they pulled up the forest to plant the vine. Then came the Phylloxera,
the vine-stocks perished and the once green table-land is now no
more than a desolate stretch where a few tufts of hardy grasses
sprout among the pebbles.

This waste-land is the Lycosa's paradise: in an hour's time, if need were,
I should discover a hundred burrows within a limited range.

These dwellings are pits about a foot deep, perpendicular at first and
then bent elbow-wise. The average diameter is an inch. On the edge of
the hole stands a kerb, formed of straw, bits and scraps of all
sorts and even small pebbles, the size of a hazel-nut.

The whole is kept in place and cemented with silk.

Often, the Spider confines herself to drawing together the dry
blades of the nearest grass, which she ties down with the straps
from her spinnerets, without removing the blades from the stems;
often, also, she rejects this scaffolding in favour of a masonry
constructed of small stones.

The nature of the kerb is decided by the nature of the materials
within the Lycosa's reach, in the close neighbourhood of the
building-yard.

There is no selection: everything meets with approval, provided
that it be near at hand.

The direction is perpendicular, in so far as obstacles, frequent
in a soil of this kind, permit.

A bit of gravel can be extracted and hoisted outside; but a flint is
an immovable boulder which the Spider avoids by giving a bend to her
gallery. If more such are met with, the residence becomes a winding
cave, with stone vaults, with lobbies communicating by means of sharp
passages.

This lack of plan has no attendant drawbacks, so well does the owner, from
long habit, know every corner and storey of her mansion. If any interesting
buzz occur overhead, the Lycosa climbs up from her rugged manor with the
same speed as from a vertical shaft. Perhaps she even finds the
windings and turnings an advantage, when she has to drag into her den a
prey that happens to defend itself.

As a rule, the end of the burrow widens into a side-chamber, a lounge
or resting-place where the Spider meditates at length and is content
to lead a life of quiet when her belly is full.

When she reaches maturity and is once settled, the Lycosa becomes eminently
domesticated. I have been living in close communion with her for
the last three years.

I have installed her in large earthen pans on the window-sills of my
study and I have her daily under my eyes.

Well, it is very rarely that I happen on her outside, a few inches from
her hole, back to which she bolts at the least alarm.

We may take it then that, when not in captivity, the Lycosa does not
go far afield to gather the wherewithal to build her parapet and
that she makes shift with what she finds upon her threshold. In these
conditions, the building-stones are soon exhausted and the masonry ceases
for lack of materials.

The wish came over me to see what dimensions the circular edifice would
assume, if the Spider were given an unlimited supply. With captives to
whom I myself act as purveyor the thing is easy enough. Were it only
with a view to helping whoso may one day care to continue these
relations with the big Spider of the waste-lands, let me describe how my
subjects are housed.

A good-sized earthenware pan, some nine inches deep, is filled with
a red, clayey earth, rich in pebbles, similar, in short, to that
of the places haunted by the Lycosa.

Properly moistened into a paste, the artificial soil is heaped, layer by
layer, around a central reed, of a bore equal to that of the animal's
natural burrow. When the receptacle is filled to the top, I withdraw
the reed, which leaves a yawning, perpendicular shaft. I thus obtain the
abode which shall replace that of the fields.

To find the hermit to inhabit it is merely the matter of a walk in
the neighbourhood.

When removed from her own dwelling, which is turned topsy-turvy by my
trowel, and placed in possession of the den produced by my art,
the Lycosa at once disappears into that den.

She does not come out again, seeks nothing better elsewhere. A large
wire-gauze cover rests on the soil in the pan and prevents escape.

In any case, the watch, in this respect, makes no demand upon my
diligence.

The prisoner is satisfied with her new abode and manifests no regret
for her natural burrow. There is no attempt at flight on her part. Let
me not omit to add that each pan must receive not more than one
inhabitant.

The Lycosa is very intolerant. To her a neighbour is fair game, to be
eaten without scruple when one has might on one's side. Time was when,
unaware of this fierce intolerance, which is more savage still at
breeding time, I saw hideous orgies perpetrated in my overstocked
cages.

I shall have occasion to describe those tragedies later.

Let us meanwhile consider the isolated Lycosae. They do not touch up the
dwelling which I have moulded for them with a bit of reed; at most,
now and again, perhaps with the object of forming a lounge or
bedroom at the bottom, they fling out a few loads of rubbish.

But all, little by little, build the kerb that is to edge the mouth.

I have given them plenty of first-rate materials, far superior to those
which they use when left to their own resources. These consist, first,
for the foundations, of little smooth stones, some of which are as large
as an almond.

With this road-metal are mingled short strips of raphia, or palm-fibre,
flexible ribbons, easily bent. These stand for the Spider's usual
basket-work, consisting of slender stalks and dry blades of grass.

Lastly, by way of an unprecedented treasure, never yet employed by a Lycosa,
I place at my captives' disposal some thick threads of wool, cut
into inch lengths.

As I wish, at the same time, to find out whether my animals, with
the magnificent lenses of their eyes, are able to distinguish colours
and prefer one colour to another, I mix up bits of wool of different
hues: there are red, green, white, and yellow pieces.

If the Spider have any preference, she can choose where she pleases.

The Lycosa always works at night, a regrettable circumstance, which does
not allow me to follow the worker's methods. I see the result; and that
is all.

Were I to visit the building-yard by the light of a lantern, I
should be no wiser.

The Spider, who is very shy, would at once dive into her lair; and I
should have lost my sleep for nothing. Furthermore, she is not a very
diligent labourer; she likes to take her time. Two or three bits of
wool or raphia placed in position represent a whole night's work.
And to this slowness we must add long spells of utter idleness.

Two months pass; and the result of my liberality surpasses my expectations.
Possessing more windfalls than they know what to do with, all picked
up in their immediate neighbourhood, my Lycosae have built themselves
donjon-keeps the like of which their race has not yet known. Around the
orifice, on a slightly sloping bank, small, flat, smooth stones have
been laid to form a broken, flagged pavement.

The larger stones, which are Cyclopean blocks compared with the
size of the animal that has shifted them, are employed as abundantly
as the others.

On this rockwork stands the donjon. It is an interlacing of raphia and
bits of wool, picked up at random, without distinction of shade.

Red and white, green and yellow are mixed without any attempt at order.
The Lycosa is indifferent to the joys of colour.

The ultimate result is a sort of muff, a couple of inches high. Bands of
silk, supplied by the spinnerets, unite the pieces, so that the whole
resembles a coarse fabric. Without being absolutely faultless, for there
are always awkward pieces on the outside, which the worker could
not handle, the gaudy building is not devoid of merit. The bird lining
its nest would do no better. Whoso sees the curious, many-coloured
productions in my pans takes them for an outcome of my industry, contrived
with a view to some experimental mischief; and his surprise is great
when I confess who the real author is. No one would ever believe the
Spider capable of constructing such a monument.

It goes without saying that, in a state of liberty, on our barren
waste-lands, the Lycosa does not indulge in such sumptuous architecture.
I have given the reason: she is too great a stay-at-home to go in
search of materials and she makes use of the limited resources
which she finds around her.

Bits of earth, small chips of stone, a few twigs, a few withered grasses:
that is all, or nearly all. Wherefore the work is generally quite modest
and reduced to a parapet that hardly attracts attention.

My captives teach us that, when materials are plentiful, especially
textile materials that remove all fears of landslip, the Lycosa
delights in tall turrets.

She understands the art of donjon-building and puts it into practice
as often as she possesses the means.

What is the purpose of this turret?

My pans will tell us that. An enthusiastic votary of the chase, so long
as she is not permanently fixed, the Lycosa, once she has set up
house, prefers to lie in ambush and wait for the quarry. Every day,
when the heat is greatest, I see my captives come up slowly from under
ground and lean upon the battlements of their woolly castle-keep. They
are then really magnificent in their stately gravity. With their swelling
belly contained within the aperture, their head outside,
their glassy eyes staring, their legs gathered for a spring, for
hours and hours they wait, motionless, bathing voluptuously in the
sun.

Should a tit-bit to her liking happen to pass, forthwith the watcher
darts from her tall tower, swift as an arrow from the bow. With a
dagger-thrust in the neck, she stabs the jugular of the Locust, Dragon-fly
or other prey whereof I am the purveyor; and she as quickly scales
the donjon and retires with her capture. The performance is a wonderful
exhibition of skill and speed.

Very seldom is a quarry missed, provided that it pass at a convenient
distance, within the range of the huntress' bound.

But, if the prey be at some distance, for instance on the wire of the
cage, the Lycosa takes no notice of it. Scorning to go in pursuit, she
allows it to roam at will. She never strikes except when sure of
her stroke. She achieves this by means of her tower. Hiding behind
the wall, she sees the stranger advancing, keeps her eyes on him and
suddenly pounces when he comes within reach. These abrupt tactics
make the thing a certainty.

Though he were winged and swift of flight, the unwary one who approaches
the ambush is lost.

This presumes, it is true, an exemplary patience on the Lycosa's part;
for the burrow has naught that can serve to entice victims. At
best, the ledge provided by the turret may, at rare intervals, tempt
some weary wayfarer to use it as a resting-place. But, if the quarry
do not come to-day, it is sure to come to-morrow, the next day, or
later, for the Locusts hop innumerable in the waste-land, nor are
they always able to regulate their leaps. Some day or other, chance is
bound to bring one of them within the purlieus of the burrow. This is the
moment to spring upon the pilgrim from the ramparts.

Until then, we maintain a stoical vigilance. We shall dine when we
can; but we shall end by dining.

The Lycosa, therefore, well aware of these lingering eventualities,
waits and is not unduly distressed by a prolonged abstinence.

She has an accommodating stomach, which is satisfied to be gorged to-day
and to remain empty afterwards for goodness knows how long. I have
sometimes neglected my catering duties for weeks at a time; and
my boarders have been none the worse for it. After a more or less
protracted fast, they do not pine away, but are smitten with a wolf-like
hunger. All these ravenous eaters are alike: they guzzle to excess to-day,
in anticipation of to-morrow's dearth.

THE LAYING.

Chance, a poor stand-by, sometimes contrives very well. At the beginning
of the month of August, the children call me to the far side of the
enclosure, rejoicing in a find which they have made under the rosemary-bushes.
It is a magnificent Lycosa, with an enormous belly, the sign of an
impending delivery.

Early one morning, ten days later, I find her preparing for her
confinement. A silk network is first spun on the ground, covering
an extent about equal to the palm of one's hand.

It is coarse and shapeless, but firmly fixed. This is the floor on which
the Spider means to operate.

On this foundation, which acts as a protection from the sand, the Lycosa
fashions a round mat, the size of a two-franc piece and made of superb
white silk. With a gentle, uniform movement, which might be regulated
by the wheels of a delicate piece of clockwork, the tip of the abdomen
rises and falls, each time touching the supporting base a little
farther away, until the extreme scope of the mechanism is attained.

Then, without the Spider's moving her position, the oscillation is
resumed in the opposite direction.

By means of this alternate motion, interspersed with numerous
contacts, a segment of the sheet is obtained, of a very accurate
texture. When this is done, the Spider moves a little along a circular
line and the loom works in the same manner on another segment.

The silk disk, a sort of hardy concave paten, now no longer
receives anything from the spinnerets in its centre; the marginal belt
alone increases in thickness. The piece thus becomes a bowl-shaped
porringer, surrounded by a wide, flat edge.

The time for the laying has come. With one quick emission, the
viscous, pale-yellow eggs are laid in the basin, where they heap
together in the shape of a globe which projects largely outside the
cavity. The spinnerets are once more set going. With short movements,
as the tip of the abdomen rises and falls to weave the round mat,
they cover up the exposed hemisphere. The result is a pill set in the
middle of a circular carpet.

The legs, hitherto idle, are now working.

They take up and break off one by one the threads that keep the
round mat stretched on the coarse supporting network.

At the same time the fangs grip this sheet, lift it by degrees, tear it
from its base and fold it over upon the globe of eggs. It is a laborious
operation. The whole edifice totters, the floor collapses, fouled with
sand. By a movement of the legs, those soiled shreds are cast aside.
Briefly, by means of violent tugs of the fangs, which pull, and
broom-like efforts of the legs, which clear away, the Lycosa
extricates the bag of eggs and removes it as a clear-cut mass, free
from any adhesion.

It is a white-silk pill, soft to the touch and glutinous.

Its size is that of an average cherry. An observant eye will notice,
running horizontally around the middle, a fold which a needle is able
to raise without breaking it. This hem, generally undistinguishable
from the rest of the surface, is none other than the edge of the circular
mat, drawn over the lower hemisphere. The other hemisphere, through
which the youngsters will go out, is less well fortified: its only
wrapper is the texture spun over the eggs immediately after they
were laid.

The work of spinning, followed by that of tearing, is continued for
a whole morning, from five to nine o'clock.

Worn out with fatigue, the mother embraces her dear pill and remains
motionless. I shall see no more to-day. Next morning, I find the Spider
carrying the bag of eggs slung from her stern.

Henceforth, until the hatching, she does not leave go of the precious
burden, which, fastened to the spinnerets by a short ligament,
drags and bumps along the ground.

With this load banging against her heels, she goes about her business; she
walks or rests, she seeks her prey, attacks it and devours it. Should
some accident cause the wallet to drop off, it is soon replaced. The
spinnerets touch it somewhere, anywhere, and that is enough: adhesion
is at once restored.

When the work is done, some of them emancipate themselves, think they
will have a look at the country before retiring for good and all. It
is these whom we meet at times, wandering aimlessly and
dragging their bag behind them. Sooner or later, however, the
vagrants return home; and the month of August is not over before
a straw rustled in any burrow will bring the mother up, with her
wallet slung behind her.

I am able to procure as many as I want and, with them, to indulge in
certain experiments of the highest interest.

It is a sight worth seeing, that of the Lycosa dragging her treasure after
her, never leaving it, day or night, sleeping or waking, and defending
it with a courage that strikes the beholder with awe. If I try to
take the bag from her, she presses it to her breast in despair, hangs
on to my pincers, bites them with her poison-fangs. I can hear the
daggers grating on the steel. No, she would not allow herself
to be robbed of the wallet with impunity, if my fingers were not
supplied with an implement.

By dint of pulling and shaking the pill with the forceps, I take it from
the Lycosa, who protests furiously.

I fling her in exchange a pill taken from another Lycosa. It is at
once seized in the fangs, embraced by the legs and hung on to the
spinneret. Her own or another's: it is all one to the Spider, who walks
away proudly with the alien wallet. This was to be expected, in view
of the similarity of the pills exchanged.

A test of another kind, with a second subject, renders the mistake more
striking. I substitute, in the place of the lawful bag which I
have removed, the work of the Silky Epeira.

The colour and softness of the material are the same in both cases; but
the shape is quite different.

The stolen object is a globe; the object presented in exchange is an
elliptical conoid studded with angular projections along the edge of
the base. The Spider takes no account of this dissimilarity.
The box, when
the lid was raised, was seen to contain a single cigar--a large
cheroot--packed in cotton wool.

"A 'Trichy,' by Jove!" I exclaimed. "Your own special fancy, Thorndyke."

"Yes; and another anomaly, at once, you see, which might have escaped
our notice if we had not been on the _qui vive_."

"As a matter of fact, I _don't_ see," said I. "You will think me an
awful blockhead, but I don't perceive anything singular in a cigar
manufacturer sending a sample cigar."

"You read the label, I think?" replied Thorndyke. "However, let us look
at one of these leaflets and see what they say. Ah! here we are:
'Messrs. Bartlett and Sons, who own extensive plantations on the island
of Cuba, manufacture their cigars exclusively from selected leaves grown
by themselves.' They would hardly make a Trichinopoly cheroot from leaf
grown in the West Indies, so we have here a striking anomaly of an East
Indian cigar sent to us by a West Indian grower."

"And what do you infer from that?"

"Principally that this cigar--which, by the way, is an uncommonly fine
specimen and which I would not smoke for ten thousand pounds--is
deserving of very attentive examination." He produced from his pocket a
powerful doublet lens, with the aid of which he examined every part of
the surface of the cigar, and finally, both ends.  "Look at the small
end," he said, handing me the cigar and the lens, "and tell me if you
notice anything."

I focussed the lens on the flush-cut surface of closely-rolled leaf, and
explored every part of it minutely.

"It seems to me," I said, "that the leaf is opened slightly in the
centre, as if a fine wire had been passed up it."

"So it appeared to me," replied Thorndyke; "and, as we are in agreement
so far, we will carry our investigations a step further."

He laid the cigar down on the table, and, with the keen, thin-bladed
penknife, neatly divided it lengthwise into two halves.

"_Ecce signum_!" exclaimed Thorndyke, as the two parts fell asunder; and
for a few moments we stood silently regarding the dismembered cheroot.
For, about half an inch from the small end, there appeared a little
circular patch of white, chalky material which, by the even manner in
which it was diffused among the leaf, had evidently been deposited from
a solution.

"Our ingenious friend again, I surmise," said Thorndyke at length,
taking up one of the halves and examining the white patch through his
lens. "A thoughtful soul, Jervis, and original too. I wish his talents
could be applied in some other direction. I shall have to remonstrate
with him if he becomes troublesome."  "It is your duty to society,
Thorndyke," I exclaimed passionately, "to have this infernal,
cold-blooded scoundrel arrested instantly. Such a man is a standing
menace to the community. Do you really know who sent this thing?"

"I can form a pretty shrewd guess, which, however, is not quite the same
thing. But, you see, he has not been quite so clever this time, for he
has left one or two traces by which his identity might be ascertained."

"Indeed! What traces has he left?"

"Ah! now there is a nice little problem for us to consider." He settled
himself in his easy chair and proceeded to fill his pipe with the air of
a man who is about to discuss a matter of merely general interest.

"Let us consider what information this ingenious person has given us
about himself. In the first place, he evidently has a strong interest in
my immediate decease. Now, why should he feel so urgent a desire for my
death? Can it be a question of property? Hardly; for I am far from a
rich man, and the provisions of my will are known to me alone. Can it
then be a question of private enmity or revenge? I think not. To the
best of my belief I have no private enemies whatever. There remains only
my vocation as an investigator in the fields of legal and criminal
research. His interest in my death must, therefore, be connected with my
professional activities. Now, I am at present conducting an exhumation
which may lead to a charge of murder; but if I were to die to-night the
inquiry would be carried out with equal efficiency by Professor Spicer
or some other toxicologist. My death would not affect the prospects of
the accused. And so in one or two other cases that I have in hand; they
could be equally well conducted by someone else. The inference is that
our friend is not connected with any of these cases, but that he
believes me to possess some exclusive information concerning
him--believes me to be the one person in the world who suspects and can
convict him. Let us assume the existence of such a person--a person of
whose guilt I alone have evidence. Now this person, being unaware that I
have communicated my knowledge to a third party, would reasonably
suppose that by making away with me he had put himself in a position of
security.

"Here, then, is our first point. The sender of this offering is probably
a person concerning whom I hold certain exclusive information.

"But see, now, the interesting corollary that follows from this. I,
alone, suspect this person; therefore I have not published my
suspicions, or others would suspect him too. Why, then, does he suspect
me of suspecting him, since I have not spoken? Evidently, he too must be
in possession of exclusive information. In other words, my suspicions
are correct; for if they were not, he could not be aware of their
existence.

"The next point is the selection of this rather unusual type of cigar.
Why should he have sent a Trichinopoly instead of an ordinary Havana
such as Bartletts actually manufacture? It looks as if he were aware of
my peculiar predilection, and, by thus consulting my personal tastes,
had guarded against the chance of my giving the cigar to some other
person. We may, therefore, infer that our friend probably has some
knowledge of my habits.

"The third point is, What is the social standing of this gentle
stranger, whom we will call X? Now, Bartletts do not send their
advertisements and samples to Thomas, Richard and Henry. They send,
chiefly, to members of the professions and men of means and position. It
is true that the original package might have been annexed by a clerk,
office boy or domestic servant; but the probabilities are that X
received the package himself, and this is borne out by the fact that he
was able to obtain access to a powerful alkaloidal poison--such as this
undoubtedly is."

"In that case he would probably be a medical man or a chemist," I
suggested.

"Not necessarily," replied Thorndyke. "The laws relating to poisons are
so badly framed and administered that any well-to-do person, who has the
necessary knowledge, can obtain almost any poison that he wants. But
social position is an important factor, whence we may conclude that X
belongs, at least, to the middle class.

"The fourth point relates to the personal qualities of X. Now it is
evident, from this instance alone, that he is a man of exceptional
intelligence, of considerable general information, and both ingenious
and resourceful. This cigar device is not only clever and original, but
it has been adapted to the special circumstances with remarkable
forethought. Thus the cheroot was selected, apparently, for two
excellent reasons: first, that it was the most likely form to be smoked
by the person intended, and second, that it did not require to have the
end cut off--which might have led to a discovery of the poison. The plan
also shows a certain knowledge of chemistry; the poison was not intended
merely to be dissolved in the moisture of the mouth. The idea evidently
was that the steam generated by the combustion of the leaf at the
distal end, would condense in the cooler part of the cigar and dissolve
the poison, and the solution would then be drawn into the mouth. Then
the nature of the poison and certain similarities of procedure seem to
identify X with the cyclist who used that ingenious bullet. The poison
in this case is a white, non-crystalline solid; the poison contained in
the bullet was a solution of a white, non-crystalline solid, which
analysis showed to be the most poisonous of all akaloids.

"The bullet was virtually a hypodermic syringe; the poison in this cigar
has been introduced, in the form of an alcoholic or ethereal solution,
by a hypodermic syringe. We shall thus be justified in assuming that the
bullet and the cigar came from the same person; and, if this be so, we
may say that X is a person of considerable knowledge, of great ingenuity
and no mean skill as a mechanician--as shown by the manufacture of the
bullet.

"These are our principal facts--to which we may add the surmise that he
has recently purchased a second-hand Blickensderfer of the literary form
or, at least, fitted with a literary typewheel."

"I don't quite see how you arrive at that," I said, in some surprise.

"It is merely a guess, you know," he replied, "though a probable one. In
the first place he is obviously unused to typing, as the numerous
mistakes show; therefore he has not had the machine very long. The type
is that which is peculiar to the Blickensderfer, and, in one of the
mistakes, an asterisk has been printed in place of a letter. But the
literary typewheel is the only one that has the asterisk. As to the age
of the machine, there are evident signs of wear, for some of the letters
have lost their sharpness, and this is most evident in the case of those
letters which are the most used--the 'e,' you will notice, for instance,
is much worn; and 'e' occurs more frequently than any other letter of
the alphabet. Hence the machine, if recently purchased, was bought
second-hand."

"But," I objected, "it may not have been his own machine at all."

"That is quite possible," answered Thorndyke, "though, considering the
secrecy that would be necessary, the probabilities are in favour of his
having bought it. But, in any case, we have here a means of identifying
the machine, should we ever meet with it."

He picked up the label and handed it to me, together with his pocket
lens.

"Look closely at the 'e' that we have been discussing; it occurs five
times; in 'Thorndyke,' in 'Bench,' in 'Inner,' and in 'Temple.' Now in
each case you will notice a minute break in the loop, just at the
summit. That break corresponds to a tiny dent in the type--caused,
probably, by its striking some small, hard object."

"I can make it out quite distinctly," I said, "and it should be a most
valuable point for identification."

"It should be almost conclusive," Thorndyke replied, "especially when
joined to other facts that would be elicited by a search of his
premises. And now let us just recapitulate the facts which our friend X
has placed at our disposal.

"First: X is a person concerning whom I possess certain exclusive
information.

"Second: He has some knowledge of my personal habits.

"Third: He is a man of some means and social position.

"Fourth: He is a man of considerable knowledge, ingenuity and mechanical
skill.

"Fifth: He has probably purchased, quite recently, a second-hand 'Blick'
fitted with a literary typewheel.  "Sixth: That machine, whether his
own or some other person's property, can be identified by a
characteristic mark on the small 'e.'

"If you will note down those six points and add that X is probably an
expert cyclist and a fairly good shot with a rifle, you may possibly be
able, presently, to complete the equation, X = ?"

"I am afraid," I said, "I do not possess the necessary data; but I
suspect you do, and if it is so, I repeat that it is your duty to
society--to say nothing of your clients, whose interests would suffer by
your death--to have this fellow laid by the heels before he does any
mischief."

"Yes; I shall have to interfere if he becomes really troublesome, but I
have reasons for wishing to leave him alone at present."

"You do really know who he is, then?"

"Well, I think I can solve the equation that I have just offered to you
for solution. You see, I have certain data, as you suggest, which you do
not possess. There is, for instance, a certain ingenious gentleman
concerning whom I hold what I believe to be exclusive information, and
my knowledge of him does not make it appear unlikely that he might be
the author of these neat little plans."

"I am much impressed," I said, as I put away my notebook, after having
jotted down the points that Thorndyke had advised me to consider--"I am
much impressed by your powers of observation and your capacity for
reasoning from apparently trivial data; but I do not see, even now, why
you viewed that cigar with such immediate and decided suspicion. There
was nothing actually to suggest the existence of poison in it, and yet
you seemed to form the suspicion at once and to search for it as though
you expected to find it."

"Yes," replied Thorndyke; "to a certain extent you are right. The idea
of a poisoned cigar was not new to me--and thereby hangs a tale."

He laughed softly and gazed into the fire with eyes that twinkled with
quiet amusement. "You have heard me say," he resumed, after a short
pause, "that when I first took these chambers I had practically nothing
to do. I had invented a new variety of medico-legal practice and had to
build it up by slow degrees, and the natural consequence was that, for a
long time, it yielded nothing but almost unlimited leisure. Now, that
leisure was by no means wasted, for I employed it in considering the
class of cases in which I was likely to be employed, and in working out
theoretical examples; and seeing that crimes against the person have
nearly always a strong medical interest, I gave them special attention.
For instance, I planned a series of murders, selecting royal personages
and great ministers as the victims, and on each murder I brought to bear
all the special knowledge, skill and ingenuity at my command. I inquired
minutely into the habits of my hypothetical victims; ascertained who
were their associates, friends, enemies and servants; considered their
diet, their residences, their modes of conveyance, the source of their
clothing and, in fact, everything which it was necessary to know in
order to achieve their deaths with certainty and with absolute safety to
the murderer."

"How deeply gratified and flattered those great personages would have
felt," I remarked, "if they had known how much attention they were
receiving."

"Yes; I suppose it would have been somewhat startling, to the Prime
Minister, for instance, to have learned that he was being watched and
studied by an attentive observer and that the arrangements for his
decease had been completed down to the minutest detail. But, of course,
the application of the method to a particular case was the essential
thing, for it brought into view all the incidental difficulties, in
meeting which all the really interesting and instructive details were
involved. Well, the particulars of these crimes I wrote out at length,
in my private shorthand, in a journal which I kept for the purpose--and
which, I need not say, I locked up securely in my safe when I was not
using it. After completing each case, it was my custom to change sides
and play the game over again from the opposite side of the board; that
is to say, I added, as an appendix to each case, an analysis with a
complete scheme for the detection of the crime. I have in my safe at the
present moment six volumes of cases, fully indexed; and I can assure you
that they are not only highly instructive reading, but are really
valuable as works of reference."

"That I can readily believe," I replied, laughing heartily,
nevertheless, at the grotesqueness of the whole proceeding, "though they
might have proved rather incriminating documents if they had passed out
of your possession."

"They would never have been read," rejoined Thorndyke. "My shorthand is,
I think, quite undecipherable; it has been so made intentionally with a
view to secrecy."

"And have any of your theoretical cases ever turned up in real life?"

"Several of them have, though very imperfectly planned and carried out
as a rule. The poisoned cigar is one of them, though, of course I
should never have adopted such a conspicuous device for presenting it;
and the incident of the other night is a modification--for the worse--of
another. In fact, most of the intricate and artistic crimes with which I
have had to deal professionally have had their more complete and
elaborate prototypes in my journals."

I was silent for some time, reflecting on the strange personality of my
gifted friend and the singular fitness that he presented for the part he
had chosen to play in the drama of social life; but presently my
thoughts returned to the peril that overshadowed him, and I came back,
once more, to my original question.

"And now, Thorndyke," I said, "that you have penetrated both the motives
and the disguise of this villain, what are you going to do? Is he to be
put safely under lock and key, or is he to be left in peace and security
to plan some other, and perhaps more successful, scheme for your
destruction?"

"For the present," replied Thorndyke, "I am going to put these things in
a place of safety. To-morrow you shall come with me to the hospital and
see me place the ends of the cigar in the custody of Dr. Chandler, who
will make an analysis and report on the nature of the poison. After that
we shall act in whatever way seems best."

Unsatisfactory as this conclusion appeared, I knew it was useless to
raise further objections, and, accordingly, when the cigar with its
accompanying papers and wrappings had been deposited in a drawer, we
dismissed it, if not from our thoughts, at least from our conversation.


CHAPTER XIV

A STARTLING DISCOVERY


The morning of the trial, so long looked forward to, had at length
arrived, and the train of events which it has been my business to
chronicle in this narrative was now fast drawing to an end. To me those
events had been in many ways of the deepest moment. Not only had they
transported me from a life of monotonous drudgery into one charged with
novelty and dramatic interest; not only had they introduced me to a
renascence of scientific culture and revived under new conditions my
intimacy with the comrade of my student days; but, far more momentous
than any of these, they had given me the vision--all too fleeting--of
happiness untold, with the reality of sorrow and bitter regret that
promised to be all too enduring.

Whence it happened that on this morning my thoughts were tinged with a
certain greyness. A chapter in my life that had been both bitter and
sweet was closing, and already I saw myself once more an Ishmaelite and
a wanderer among strangers.

This rather egotistical frame of mind, however, was soon dispelled when
I encountered Polton, for the little man was in a veritable twitter of
excitement at the prospect of witnessing the clearing up of the
mysteries that had so severely tried his curiosity; and even Thorndyke,
beneath his habitual calm, showed a trace of expectancy and pleasurable
anticipation.

"I have taken the liberty of making certain little arrangements on your
behalf," he said, as we sat at breakfast, "of which I hope you will not
disapprove. I have written to Mrs. Hornby, who is one of the witnesses,
to say that you will meet her at Mr. Lawley's office and escort her and
Miss Gibson to the court. Walter Hornby may be with them, and, if he is,
you had better leave him, if possible, to come on with Lawley."

"You will not come to the office, then?"

"No. I shall go straight to the court with Anstey. Besides, I am
expecting Superintendent Miller from Scotland Yard, who will probably
walk down with us."

"I am glad to hear that," I said; "for I have been rather uneasy at the
thought of your mixing in the crowd without some kind of protection."

"Well, you see that I am taking precautions against the assaults of the
too-ingenious X, and, to tell the truth--and also to commit a flagrant
bull--I should never forgive myself if I allowed him to kill me before I
had completed Reuben Hornby's defence. Ah, here is Polton--that man is
on wires this morning; he has been wandering in and out of the rooms
ever since he came, like a cat in a new house."

"It's quite true, sir," said Polton, smiling and unabashed, "so it's no
use denying it. I have come to ask what we are going to take with us to
the court."

"You will find a box and a portfolio on the table in my room," replied
Thorndyke. "We had better also take a microscope and the micrometers,
though we are not likely to want them; that is all, I think."

"A box and a portfolio," repeated Polton in a speculative tone. "Yes,
sir, I will take them with me." He opened the door and was about to
pass out, when, perceiving a visitor ascending the stairs, he turned
back.

"Here's Mr. Miller, from Scotland Yard, sir; shall I show him in?"

"Yes, do." He rose from his chair as a tall, military-looking man
entered the room and saluted, casting, at the same time, an inquiring
glance in my direction.

"Good morning, Doctor," he said briskly. "I got your letter and couldn't
make such of it, but I have brought down a couple of plain-clothes men
and a uniform man, as you suggested. I understand you want a house
watched?"

"Yes, and a man, too. I will give you the particulars presently--that
is, if you think you can agree to my conditions."

"That I act entirely on my own account and make no communication to
anybody? Well, of course, I would rather you gave me all the facts and
let me proceed in the regular way; but if you make conditions I have no
choice but to accept them, seeing that you hold the cards."

Perceiving that the matter in hand was of a confidential nature, I
thought it best to take my departure, which I accordingly did, as soon
as I had ascertained that it wanted yet half-an-hour to the time at
which Mrs. Hornby and Juliet were due at the lawyer's office.

Mr. Lawley received me with stiffness that bordered on hostility. He was
evidently deeply offended at the subordinate part that he had been
compelled to play in the case, and was at no great pains to conceal the
fact.

"I am informed," said he, in a frosty tone, when I had explained my
mission, "that Mrs. Hornby and Miss Gibson are to meet you here. The
arrangement is none of my making; none of the arrangements in this case
are of my making. I have been treated throughout with a lack of ceremony
and confidence that is positively scandalous. Even now, I--the
solicitor for the defence--am completely in the dark as to what defence
is contemplated, though I fully expect to be involved in some ridiculous
fiasco. I only trust that I may never again be associated with any of
your hybrid practitioners. _Ne sutor ultra crepidam_, sir, is an
excellent motto; let the medical cobbler stick to his medical last."

"It remains to be seen what kind of boot he can turn out on the legal
last," I retorted.

"That is so," he rejoined; "but I hear Mrs. Hornby's voice in the outer
office, and as neither you nor I have any time to waste in idle talk, I
suggest that you make your way to the court without delay. I wish you
good morning!"

Acting on this very plain hint, I retired to the clerks' office, where I
found Mrs. Hornby and Juliet, the former undisguisedly tearful and
terrified, and the latter calm, though pale and agitated.

"We had better start at once," I said, when we had exchanged greetings.
"Shall we take a cab, or walk?"

"I think we will walk, if you don't mind," said Juliet. "Mrs. Hornby
wants to have a few words with you before we go into court. You see, she
is one of the witnesses, and she is terrified lest she should say
something damaging to Reuben."

"By whom was the subpoena served?" I asked.

"Mr. Lawley sent it," replied Mrs. Hornby, "and I went to see him about
it the very next day, but he wouldn't tell me anything--he didn't seem
to know what I was wanted for, and he wasn't at all nice--not at all."

"I expect your evidence will relate to the 'Thumbograph,'" I said.
"There is really nothing else in connection with the case that you have
any knowledge of."

"That is just what Walter said," exclaimed Mrs. Hornby. "I went to his
rooms to talk the matter over with him. He is very upset about the whole
affair, and I am afraid he thinks very badly of poor Reuben's prospects.
I only trust he may be wrong! Oh dear! What a dreadful thing it is, to
be sure!" Here the poor lady halted to mop her eyes elaborately, to the
surprise and manifest scorn of a passing errand boy.

"He was very thoughtful and sympathetic--Walter, I mean, you know,"
pursued Mrs. Hornby, "and most helpful. He asked me all I knew about
that horrid little book, and took down my answers in writing. Then he
wrote out the questions I was likely to be asked, with my answers, so
that I could read them over and get them well into my head. Wasn't it
good of him! And I made him print them with his machine so that I could
read them without my glasses, and he did it beautifully. I have the
paper in my pocket now."

"I didn't know Mr. Walter went in for printing," I said. "Has he a
regular printing press?"

"It isn't a printing press exactly," replied Mrs. Hornby; "it is a small
thing with a lot of round keys that you press down--Dickensblerfer, I
think it is called--ridiculous name, isn't it? Walter bought it from one
of his literary friends about a week ago; but he is getting quite clever
with it already, though he does make a few mistakes still, as you can
see."  She halted again, and began to search for the opening of a
pocket which was hidden away in some occult recess of her clothing, all
unconscious of the effect that her explanation had produced on me. For,
instantly, as she spoke, there flashed into my mind one of the points
that Thorndyke had given me for the identification of the mysterious X.
"He has probably purchased, quite recently, a second-hand
Blickensderfer, fitted with a literary typewheel." The coincidence was
striking and even startling, though a moment's reflection convinced me
that it was nothing more than a coincidence; for there must be hundreds
of second-hand "Blicks" on the market, and, as to Walter Hornby, he
certainly could have no quarrel with Thorndyke, but would rather be
interested in his preservation on Reuben's account.

These thoughts passed through my mind so rapidly that by the time Mrs.
Hornby had run her pocket to earth I had quite recovered from the
momentary shock.

"Ah! here it is," she exclaimed triumphantly, producing an obese Morocco
purse. "I put it in here for safety, knowing how liable one is to get
one's pocket picked in these crowded London streets." She opened the
bulky receptacle and drew it out after the manner of a concertina,
exhibiting multitudinous partitions, all stuffed with pieces of paper,
coils of tape and sewing silk, buttons, samples of dress materials and
miscellaneous rubbish, mingled indiscriminately with gold, silver, and
copper coins.

"Now just run your eye through that, Dr. Jervis," she said, handing me a
folded paper, "and give me your advice on my answers."

I opened the paper and read: "The Committee of the Society for the
Protection of Paralysed Idiots, in submitting this--"

"Oh! that isn't it; I have given you the wrong paper. How silly of me!
That is the appeal of--you remember, Juliet, dear, that troublesome
person--I had, really, to be quite rude, you know, Dr. Jervis; I had to
tell him that charity begins at home, although, thank Heaven! none of us
are paralysed, but we must consider our own, mustn't we? And then--"

"Do you think this is the one, dear?" interposed Juliet, in whose pale
cheek the ghost of a dimple had appeared. "It looks cleaner than most of
the others."

She selected a folded paper from the purse which Mrs. Hornby was holding
with both hands extended to its utmost, as though she were about to
produce a burst of music, and, opening it, glanced at its contents.

"Yes, this is your evidence," she said, and passed the paper to me.

I took the document from her hand and, in spite of the conclusion at
which I had arrived, examined it with eager curiosity. And at the very
first glance I felt my head swim and my heart throb violently. For the
paper was headed: "Evidence respecting the Thumbograph," and in every
one of the five small "e's" that occurred in that sentence I could see
plainly by the strong out-door light a small break or interval in the
summit of the loop.

I was thunderstruck.

One coincidence was quite possible and even probable; but the two
together, and the second one of so remarkable a character, were beyond
all reasonable limits of probability. The identification did not seem to
admit of a doubt, and yet--

"Our legal adviser appears to be somewhat preoccupied," remarked Juliet,
with something of her old gaiety of manner; and, in fact, though I held
the paper in my hand, my gaze was fixed unmeaningly on an adjacent
lamp-post. As she spoke, I pulled myself together, and, scanning the
paper hastily, was fortunate enough to find in the first paragraph
matter requiring comment.

"I observe, Mrs. Hornby," I said, "that in answer to the first question,
'Whence did you obtain the "Thumbograph"?' you say, 'I do not remember
clearly; I think I must have bought it at a railway bookstall.' Now I
understood that it was brought home and given to you by Walter himself."

"That was what I thought," replied Mrs. Hornby, "but Walter tells me
that it was not so, and, of course, he would remember better than I
should."

"But, my dear aunt, I am sure he gave it to you," interposed Juliet.
"Don't you remember? It was the night the Colleys came to dinner, and we
were so hard pressed to find amusement for them, when Walter came in and
produced the 'Thumbograph.'"

"Yes, I remember quite well now," said Mrs. Hornby. "How fortunate that
you reminded me. We must alter that answer at once."

"If I were you, Mrs. Hornby," I said, "I would disregard this paper
altogether. It will only confuse you and get you into difficulties.
Answer the questions that are put, as well as you can, and if you don't
remember, say so."

"Yes, that will be much the wisest plan," said Juliet. "Let Dr. Jervis
take charge of the paper and rely on your own memory."  "Very well, my
dear," replied Mrs. Hornby, "I will do what you think best, and you can
keep the paper, Dr. Jervis, or throw it away."

I slipped the document into my pocket without remark, and we proceeded
on our way, Mrs. Hornby babbling inconsequently, with occasional
outbursts of emotion, and Juliet silent and abstracted. I struggled to
concentrate my attention on the elder lady's conversation, but my
thoughts continually reverted to the paper in my pocket, and the
startling solution that it seemed to offer of the mystery of the
poisoned cigar.

Could it be that Walter Hornby was in reality the miscreant X? The thing
seemed incredible, for, hitherto, no shadow of suspicion had appeared to
fall on him. And yet there was no denying that his description tallied
in a very remarkable manner with that of the hypothetical X. He was a
man of some means and social position; he was a man of considerable
knowledge and mechanical skill, though as to his ingenuity I could not
judge. He had recently bought a second-hand Blickensderfer which
probably had a literary typewheel, since it was purchased from a
literary man; and that machine showed the characteristic mark on the
small "e." The two remaining points, indeed, were not so clear.
Obviously I could form no opinion as to whether or not Thorndyke held
any exclusive information concerning him, and, with reference to his
knowledge of my friend's habits, I was at first inclined to be doubtful
until I suddenly recalled, with a pang of remorse and self-accusation,
the various details that I had communicated to Juliet and that she might
easily, in all innocence, have handed on to Walter. I had, for instance,
told her of Thorndyke's preference for the Trichinopoly cheroot, and of
this she might very naturally have spoken to Walter, who possessed a
supply of them. Again, with regard to the time of our arrival at King's
Cross, I had informed her of this in a letter which was in no way
confidential, and again there was no reason why the information should
not have been passed on to Walter, who was to have been one of the party
at the family dinner. But it may be said that the method of Zadig,
which is simple reasoning from analogy, does not account for
the most striking feats of modern palaeontology--the reconstruction
of entire animals from a tooth or perhaps a fragment of a bone;
and it may be justly urged that Cuvier, the great master of this
kind of investigation, gave a very different account of the process
which yielded such remarkable results.

Cuvier is not the first man of ability who has failed to make his own
mental processes clear to himself, and he will not be the last.
The matter can be easily tested. Search the eight volumes of the
"Recherches sur les Ossemens Fossiles" from cover to cover, and
nothing but the application of the method of Zadig will be found in
the arguments by which a fragment of a skeleton is made to reveal the
characters of the animal to which it belonged.

There is one well-known case which may represent all. It is an excellent
illustration of Cuvier's sagacity, and he evidently takes some pride
in telling his story about it. A split slab of stone arrived from the
quarries of Montmartre, the two halves of which contained the greater
part of the skeleton of a small animal. On careful examinations of
the characters of the teeth and of the lower jaw, which happened to be
exposed, Cuvier assured himself that they presented such a very close
resemblance to the corresponding parts in the living opossums that
he at once assigned the fossil to that genus.

Now the opossums are unlike most mammals in that they possess two
bones attached to the fore part of the pelvis, which are commonly called
"marsupial bones." The name is a misnomer, originally conferred because
it was thought that these bones have something to do with the support
of the pouch, or marsupium, with which some, but not all, of the
opossums are provided.

As a matter of fact, they have nothing to do with the support of the
pouch, and they exist as much in those opossums which have no pouches
as in those which possess them. In truth, no one knows what the use
of these bones may be, nor has any valid theory of their physiological
import yet been suggested. And if we have no knowledge of the physiological
importance of the bones themselves, it is obviously absurd to pretend
that we are able to give physiological reasons why the presence
of these bones is associated with certain peculiarities of the teeth
and of the jaws.

If any one knows why four molar teeth and an inflected angle of the
jaw are very generally found along with marsupial bones, he has not
yet communicated that knowledge to the world.

If, however, Zadig was right in concluding from the likeness of the
hoof-prints which he observed to be a horse's that the creature
which made them had a tail like that of a horse, Cuvier, seeing
that the teeth and jaw of his fossil were just like those of an
opossum, had the same right to conclude that the pelvis would also
be like an opossum's; and so strong was his conviction that this
retrospective prophecy, about an animal which he had never seen
before, and which had been dead and buried for millions of years,
would be verified, that he went to work upon the slab which contained
the pelvis in confident expectation of finding and laying bare the
"marsupial bones," to the satisfaction of some persons whom he had
invited to witness their disinterment.

As he says:--"Cette operation se fit en presence de quelques personnes
a qui j'en avais annonce d'avance le resultat, dans l'intention de
leur prouver par le fait la justice de nos theories zoologiques;
puisque le vrai cachet d'une theorie est sans contredit la faculte qu'elle
donne de prevoir les phenomenes."
In the "Ossemens Fossiles" Cuvier leaves his paper just as it
first appeared in the "Annales du Museum," as "a curious monument
of the force of zoological laws and of the use which may be made
of them."
Zoological laws truly, but not physiological laws. If one sees a live
dog's head, it is extremely probable that a dog's tail is not far off,
though nobody can say why that sort of head and that sort of tail go
together; what physiological connection there is between the two.
So, in the case of the Montmartre fossil, Cuvier, finding a thorough
opossum's head, concluded that the pelvis also would be like an
opossum's.

But, most assuredly, the most advanced physiologist of the present day
could throw no light on the question why these are associated, nor could
pretend to affirm that the existence of the one is necessarily connected
with that of the other. In fact, had it so happened that the pelvis of
the fossil had been originally exposed, while the head lay hidden, the
presence of the "marsupial bones," though very like an opossum's, would
by no means have warranted the prediction that the skull would turn out
to be that of the opossum.
On our left rose the dock--suggestively
large and roomy--enclosed at the sides with high glazed frames; and
above it, near the ceiling, was the spectators' gallery.

"What a hideous place!" exclaimed Juliet, who separated me from Mrs.
Hornby. "And how sordid and dirty everything looks!"

"Yes," I answered. "The uncleanness of the criminal is not confined to
his moral being; wherever he goes, he leaves a trail of actual,
physical dirt. It is not so long ago that the dock and the bench alike
used to be strewn with medicinal herbs, and I believe the custom still
survives of furnishing the judge with a nosegay as a preventive of
jail-fever."

"And to think that Reuben should be brought to a place like this!"
Juliet continued bitterly; "to be herded with such people as we saw
downstairs!"

She sighed and looked round at the benches that rose behind us, where a
half-dozen reporters were already seated and apparently in high spirits
at the prospect of a sensational case.

Our conversation was now interrupted by the clatter of feet on the
gallery stairs, and heads began to appear over the wooden parapet.
Several junior counsel filed into the seats in front of us; Mr. Lawley
and his clerk entered the attorney's bench; the ushers took their stand
below the jury-box; a police officer seated himself at a desk in the
dock; and inspectors, detectives and miscellaneous officers began to
gather in the entries or peer into the court through the small glazed
openings in the doors.


CHAPTER XV

THE FINGER-PRINT EXPERTS


The hum of conversation that had been gradually increasing as the court
filled suddenly ceased. A door at the back of the dais was flung open;
counsel, solicitors, and spectators alike rose to their feet; and the
judge entered, closely followed by the Lord Mayor, the sheriff, and
various civic magnates, all picturesque and gorgeous in their robes and
chains of office. The Clerk of Arraigns took his place behind his table
under the dais; the counsel suspended their conversation and fingered
their briefs; and, as the judge took his seat, lawyers, officials, and
spectators took their seats, and all eyes were turned towards the dock.

A few moments later Reuben Hornby appeared in the enclosure in company
with a warder, the two rising, apparently, from the bowels of the earth,
and, stepping forward to the bar, stood with a calm and self-possessed
demeanour, glancing somewhat curiously around the court. For an instant
his eye rested upon the group of friends and well-wishers seated behind
the counsel, and the faintest trace of a smile appeared on his face; but
immediately he turned his eyes away and never again throughout the trial
looked in our direction.

The Clerk of Arraigns now rose and, reading from the indictment which
lay before him on the table, addressed the prisoner--

"Reuben Hornby, you stand indicted for that you did, on the ninth or
tenth day of March, feloniously steal a parcel of diamonds of the goods
and chattels of John Hornby. Are you guilty or not guilty?"

"Not guilty," replied Reuben.

The Clerk of Arraigns, having noted the prisoner's reply, then
proceeded--

"The gentlemen whose names are about to be called will form the jury who
are to try you. If you wish to object to any of them, you must do so as
each comes to the book to be sworn, and before he is sworn. You will
then be heard."

In acknowledgment of this address, which was delivered in clear, ringing
tones, and with remarkable distinctness, Reuben bowed to the clerk, and
the process of swearing-in the jury was commenced, while the counsel
opened their briefs and the judge conversed facetiously with an
official in a fur robe and a massive neck chain.

Very strange, to unaccustomed eyes and ears, was the effect of this
function--half solemn and half grotesque, with an effect intermediate
between that of a religious rite and that of a comic opera. Above the
half-suppressed hum of conversation the clerk's voice arose at regular
intervals, calling out the name of one of the jurymen, and, as its owner
stood up, the court usher, black-gowned and sacerdotal of aspect,
advanced and proffered the book. Then, as the juryman took the volume in
his hand, the voice of the usher resounded through the court like that
of a priest intoning some refrain or antiphon--an effect that was
increased by the rhythmical and archaic character of the formula--

"Samuel Seppings!"

A stolid-looking working-man rose and, taking the Testament in his hand,
stood regarding the usher while that official sang out in a solemn
monotone--

"You shall well and truly try and true deliverance make between our
Sovereign Lord the King and the prisoner at the bar, whom you shall have
in charge, and a true verdict give according to the evidence. So help
you God!"

"James Piper!" Another juryman rose and was given the Book to hold; and
again the monotonous sing-song arose--

"You shall well and truly try and true deliverance make, etc."

"I shall scream aloud if that horrible chant goes on much longer,"
Juliet whispered. "Why don't they all swear at once and have done with
it?"

"That would not meet the requirements," I answered. "However, there are
only two more, so you must have patience."

"And you will have patience with me, too, won't you? I am horribly
frightened. It is all so solemn and dreadful."

"You must try to keep up your courage until Dr. Thorndyke has given his
evidence," I said. "Remember that, until he has spoken, everything is
against Reuben; so be prepared."

"I will try," she answered meekly; "but I can't help being terrified."

The last of the jurymen was at length sworn, and when the clerk had once
more called out the names one by one, the usher counting loudly as each
man answered to his name, the latter officer turned to the Court and
spectators, and proclaimed in solemn tones--

"If anyone can inform my Lords the King's justices, the King's
attorney-general, or the King's serjeant, ere this inquest be now taken
between our Sovereign Lord the King and the prisoner at the bar, of any
treason, murder, felony or misdemeanour, committed or done by him, let
him come forth and he shall be heard; for the prisoner stands at the bar
upon his deliverance."

This proclamation was followed by a profound silence, and after a brief
interval the Clerk of Arraigns turned towards the jury and addressed
them collectively--

"Gentlemen of the jury, the prisoner at the bar stands indicted by the
name of Reuben Hornby, for that he, on the ninth or tenth of March,
feloniously did steal, take and carry away a parcel of diamonds of the
goods of John Hornby. To this indictment he has pleaded that he is not
guilty, and your charge is to inquire whether he be guilty or not and to
hearken to the evidence."

When he had finished his address the clerk sat down, and the judge, a
thin-faced, hollow-eyed elderly man, with bushy grey eyebrows and a very
large nose, looked attentively at Reuben for some moments over the tops
of his gold-rimmed pince-nez. Then he turned towards the counsel nearest
the bench and bowed slightly.

The barrister bowed in return and rose, and for the first time I
obtained a complete view of Sir Hector Trumpler, K.C., the counsel for
the prosecution. His appearance was not prepossessing nor--though he was
a large man and somewhat florid as to his countenance--particularly
striking, except for a general air of untidiness. His gown was slipping
off one shoulder, his wig was perceptibly awry, and his pince-nez
threatened every moment to drop from his nose.

"The case that I have to present to you, my lord and gentlemen of the
jury," he began in a clear, though unmusical voice, "is one the like of
which is but too often met with in this court. It is one in which we
shall see unbounded trust met by treacherous deceit, in which we shall
see countless benefactions rewarded by the basest ingratitude, and in
which we shall witness the deliberate renunciation of a life of
honourable effort in favour of the tortuous and precarious ways of the
criminal. The facts of the case are briefly as follows: The prosecutor
in this case--most unwilling prosecutor, gentlemen--is Mr. John Hornby,
who is a metallurgist and dealer in precious metals. Mr. Hornby has two
nephews, the orphan sons of his two elder brothers, and I may tell you
that since the decease of their parents he has acted the part of a
father to both of them. One of these nephews is Mr. Walter Hornby, and
the other is Reuben Hornby, the prisoner at the bar. Both of these
nephews were received by Mr. Hornby into his business with a view to
their succeeding him when he should retire, and both, I need not say,
occupied positions of trust and responsibility.

"Now, on the evening of the ninth of March there was delivered to Mr.
Hornby a parcel of rough diamonds of which one of his clients asked him
to take charge pending their transfer to the brokers. I need not burden
you with irrelevant details concerning this transaction. It will suffice
to say that the diamonds, which were of the aggregate value of about
thirty thousand pounds, were delivered to him, and the unopened package
deposited by him in his safe, together with a slip of paper on which he
had written in pencil a memorandum of the circumstances. This was on the
evening of the ninth of March, as I have said. Having deposited the
parcel, Mr. Hornby locked the safe, and shortly afterwards left the
premises and went home, taking the keys with him.

"On the following morning, when he unlocked the safe, he perceived with
astonishment and dismay that the parcel of diamonds had vanished. The
slip of paper, however, lay at the bottom of the safe, and on picking it
up Mr. Hornby perceived that it bore a smear of blood, and in addition,
the distinct impression of a human thumb. On this he closed and locked
the safe and sent a note to the police station, in response to which a
very intelligent officer--Inspector Sanderson--came and made a
preliminary examination. I need not follow the case further, since the
details will appear in the evidence, but I may tell you that, in effect,
it has been made clear, beyond all doubt, that the thumb-print on that
paper was the thumb-print of the prisoner, Reuben Hornby."

He paused to adjust his glasses, which were in the very act of falling
from his nose, and hitch up his gown, while he took a leisurely survey
of the jury, as though he were estimating their impressionability. At
this moment I observed Walter Hornby enter the court and take up a
position at the end of our bench nearest the door; and, immediately
after, Superintendent Miller came in and seated himself on one of the
benches opposite.

"The first witness whom I shall call," said Sir Hector Trumpler, "is
John Hornby."

Mr. Hornby, looking wild and agitated, stepped into the witness-box, and
the usher, having handed him the Testament, sang out--

"The evidence you shall give to the court and jury sworn, between our
Sovereign Lord the King and the prisoner at the bar shall be the truth,
the whole truth, and nothing but the truth; so help you God!"

Mr. Hornby kissed the Book, and, casting a glance of unutterable misery
at his nephew, turned towards the counsel.

"Your name is John Hornby, is it not?" asked Sir Hector.

"It is."

"And you occupy premises in St. Mary Axe?"

"Yes. I am a dealer in precious metals, but my business consists
principally in the assaying of samples of ore and quartz and bars of
silver and gold."

"Do you remember what happened on the ninth of March last?"

"Perfectly. My nephew Reuben--the prisoner--delivered to me a parcel of
diamonds which he had received from the purser of the _Elmina Castle_,
to whom I had sent him as my confidential agent. I had intended to
deposit the diamonds with my banker, but when the prisoner arrived at my
office, the banks were already closed, so I had to put the parcel, for
the night, in my own safe. I may say that the prisoner was not in any
way responsible for the delay."

"You are not here to defend the prisoner," said Sir Hector. "Answer my
questions and make no comments, if you please. Was anyone present when
you placed the diamonds in the safe?"  "No one was present but myself."

"I did not ask if you were present when you put them in," said Sir
Hector (whereupon the spectators sniggered and the judge smiled
indulgently). "What else did you do?"

"I wrote in pencil on a leaf of my pocket memorandum block, 'Handed in
by Reuben at 7.3 p.m., 9.3.01,' and initialled it. Then I tore the leaf
from the block and laid it on the parcel, after which I closed the safe
and locked it."

"How soon did you leave the premises after this?"

"Almost immediately. The prisoner was waiting for me in the outer
office--"

"Never mind where the prisoner was; confine your answers to what is
asked. Did you take the keys with you?"

"Yes."

"When did you next open the safe?"

"On the following morning at ten o'clock."

"Was the safe locked or unlocked when you arrived?"

"It was locked. I unlocked it."

"Did you notice anything unusual about the safe?"

"No."

"Had the keys left your custody in the interval?"

"No. They were attached to a key-chain, which I always wear."

"Are there any duplicates of those keys?--the keys of the safe, I mean."

"No, there are no duplicates."

"Have the keys ever gone out of your possession?"

"Yes. If I have had to be absent from the office for a considerable
time, it has been my custom to hand the keys to one of my nephews,
whichever has happened to be in charge at the time."

"And never to any other person?"

"Never to any other person."

"What did you observe when you opened the safe?"

"I observed that the parcel of diamonds had disappeared."

"Did you notice anything else?"

"Yes. I found the leaf from my memorandum block lying at the bottom of
the safe. I picked it up and turned it over, and then saw that there
were smears of blood on it and what looked like the print of a thumb in
blood. The thumb-mark was on the under-surface, as the paper lay at the
bottom of the safe."

"What did you do next?"

"I closed and locked the safe, and sent a note to the police station
saying that a robbery had been committed on my premises."

"You have known the prisoner several years, I believe?"

"Yes; I have known him all his life. He is my eldest brother's son."

"Then you can tell us, no doubt, whether he is left-handed or
right-handed?"

"I should say he was ambidextrous, but he uses his left hand by
preference."

"A fine distinction, Mr. Hornby; a very fine distinction. Now tell me,
did you ascertain beyond all doubt that the diamonds were really gone?"

"Yes; I examined the safe thoroughly, first by myself and afterwards
with the police. There was no doubt that the diamonds had really gone."

"When the detective suggested that you should have the thumb-prints of
your two nephews taken, did you refuse?"

"I refused."

"Why did you refuse?"

"Because I did not choose to subject my nephews to the indignity.
Besides, I had no power to make them submit to the proceeding."

"Had you any suspicions of either of them?"

"I had no suspicions of anyone."

"Kindly examine this piece of paper, Mr. Hornby," said Sir Hector,
passing across a small oblong slip, "and tell us if you recognise it."

Mr. Hornby glanced at the paper for a moment, and then said--

"This is the memorandum slip that I found lying at the bottom of the
safe."

"How do you identify it?"

"By the writing on it, which is in my own hand, and bears my initials."

"Is it the memorandum that you placed on the parcel of diamonds?"

"Yes."

"Was there any thumb-mark or blood-smear on it when you placed it in the
safe?"

"No."

"Was it possible that there could have been any such marks?"

"Quite impossible. I tore it from my memorandum block at the time I
wrote upon it."

"Very well." Sir Hector Trumpler sat down, and Mr. Anstey stood up to
cross-examine the witness.

"You have told us, Mr. Hornby," said he, "that you have known the
prisoner all his life. Now what estimate have you formed of his
character?"

"I have always regarded him as a young man of the highest
character--honourable, truthful, and in every way trustworthy. I have
never, in all my experience of him, known him to deviate a
hair's-breadth from the strictest honour and honesty of conduct."

"You regarded him as a man of irreproachable character. Is that so?"

"That is so; and my opinion of him is unchanged."

"Has he, to your knowledge, any expensive or extravagant habits?"

"No. His habits are simple and rather thrifty."

"Have you ever known him to bet, gamble, or speculate?"

"Never."

"Has he ever seemed to be in want of money?"

"No. He has a small private income, apart from his salary, which I know
he does not spend, since I have occasionally employed my broker to
invest his savings."

"Apart from the thumb-print which was found in the safe, are you aware
of any circumstances that would lead you to suspect the prisoner of
having stolen the diamonds?"

"None whatever."

Mr. Anstey sat down, and as Mr. Hornby left the witness-box, mopping the
perspiration from his forehead, the next witness was called.

"Inspector Sanderson!"

The dapper police officer stepped briskly into the box, and having been
duly sworn, faced the prosecuting counsel with the air of a man who was
prepared for any contingency.

"Do you remember," said Sir Hector, after the usual preliminaries had
been gone through, "what occurred on the morning of the tenth of March?"

"Yes. A note was handed to me at the station at 10.23 a.m. It was from
Mr. John Hornby, and stated that a robbery had occurred at his premises
in St. Mary Axe. I went to the premises and arrived there at 10.31 a.m.
There I saw the prosecutor, Mr. John Hornby, who told me that a parcel
of diamonds had been stolen from the safe. At his request I examined the
safe. There were no signs of its having been forced open; the locks
seemed to be quite uninjured and in good order. Inside the safe, on the
bottom, I found two good-sized drops of blood, and a slip of paper with
pencil-writing on it. The paper bore two blood-smears and a print of a
human thumb in blood."

"Is this the paper?" asked the counsel, passing a small slip across to
the witness.

"Yes," replied the inspector, after a brief glance at the document.

"What did you do next?"  "I sent a message to Scotland Yard acquainting
the Chief of the Criminal Investigation Department with the facts, and
then went back to the station. I had no further connection with the
case."

Sir Hector sat down, and the judge glanced at Anstey.

"You tell us," said the latter, rising, "that you observed two
good-sized drops of blood on the bottom of the safe. Did you notice the
condition of the blood, whether moist or dry?"

"The blood looked moist, but I did not touch it. I left it undisturbed
for the detective officers to examine."

The next witness called was Sergeant Bates, of the Criminal
Investigation Department. He stepped into the box with the same ready,
business-like air as the other officer, and, having been sworn,
proceeded to give his evidence with a fluency that suggested careful
preparation, holding an open notebook in his hand but making no
references to it.

"On the tenth of March, at 12.8 p.m., I received instructions to proceed
to St. Mary Axe to inquire into a robbery that had taken place there.
Inspector Sanderson's report was handed to me, and I read it in the cab
on my way to the premises. On arriving at the premises at 12.30 p.m., I
examined the safe carefully. It was quite uninjured, and there were no
marks of any kind upon it. I tested the locks and found them perfect;
there were no marks or indications of any picklock having been used. On
the bottom of the inside I observed two rather large drops of a dark
fluid. I took up some of the fluid on a piece of paper and found it to
be blood. I also found, in the bottom of the safe, the burnt head of a
wax match, and, on searching the floor of the office, I found, close by
the safe, a used wax match from which the head had fallen. I also found
a slip of paper which appeared to have been torn from a perforated
block. On it was written in pencil, 'Handed in by Reuben at 7.3 p.m.
9.3.01. J.H.' There were two smears of blood on the paper and the
impression of a human thumb in blood. I took possession of the paper in
order that it might be examined by the experts. I inspected the office
doors and the outer door of the premises, but found no signs of forcible
entrance on any of them. I questioned the housekeeper, but obtained no
information from him. I then returned to headquarters, made my report
and handed the paper with the marks on it to the Superintendent."

"Is this the paper that you found in the safe?" asked the counsel, once
more handing the leaflet across.

"Yes; this is the paper."

"What happened next?"

"The following afternoon I was sent for by Mr. Singleton, of the
Finger-print Department. He informed me that he had gone through the
files and had not been able to find any thumb-print resembling the one
on the paper, and recommended me to endeavour to obtain prints of the
thumbs of any persons who might have been concerned in the robbery. He
also gave me an enlarged photograph of the thumb-print for reference if
necessary. I accordingly went to St. Mary Axe and had an interview with
Mr. Hornby, when I requested him to allow me to take prints of the
thumbs of all the persons employed on the premises, including his two
nephews. This he refused, saying that he distrusted finger-prints and
that there was no suspicion of anyone on the premises. I asked if he
would allow his nephews to furnish their thumb-prints privately, to
which he replied, 'Certainly not.'"

"Had you then any suspicion of either of the nephews?"

"I thought they were both open to some suspicion. The safe had certainly
been opened with false keys, and as they had both had the real keys in
their possession it was possible that one of them might have taken
impressions in wax and made counterfeit keys."

"Yes."

"I called on Mr. Hornby several times and urged him, for the sake of his
nephews' reputations, to sanction the taking of the thumb-prints; but he
refused very positively and forbade them to submit, although I
understood that they were both willing. It then occurred to me to try if
I could get any help from Mrs. Hornby, and on the fifteenth of March I
called at Mr. Hornby's private house and saw her. I explained to her
what was wanted to clear her nephews from the suspicion that rested on
them, and she then said that she could dispose of those suspicions at
once, for she could show me the thumb-prints of the whole family: she
had them all in a 'Thumbograph.'"

"A 'Thumbograph'?" repeated the judge. "What is a 'Thumbograph'?"

Anstey rose with the little red-covered volume in his hand.

"A 'Thumbograph,' my lord," said he, "is a book, like this, in which
foolish people collect the thumb-prints of their more foolish
acquaintances."

He passed the volume up to the judge, who turned over the leaves
curiously and then nodded to the witness.

"Yes. She said she had them all in a 'Thumbograph.'"

"Then she fetched from a drawer a small red-covered book which she
showed to me. It contained the thumb-prints of all the family and some
of her friends."

"Is this the book?" asked the judge, passing the volume down to the
witness.

The sergeant turned over the leaves until he came to one which he
apparently recognised, and said--

"Yes, m'lord; this is the book. Mrs. Hornby showed me the thumb-prints
of various members of the family, and then found those of the two
nephews. I compared them with the photograph that I had with me and
discovered that the print of the left thumb of Reuben Hornby was in
every respect identical with the thumb-print shown in the photograph."

"What did you do then?"

"I asked Mrs. Hornby to lend me the 'Thumbograph' so that I might show
it to the Chief of the Finger-print Department, to which she consented.
I had not intended to tell her of my discovery, but, as I was leaving,
Mr. Hornby arrived home, and when he heard of what had taken place, he
asked me why I wanted the book, and then I told him. He was greatly
astonished and horrified, and wished me to return the book at once. He
proposed to let the whole matter drop and take the loss of the diamonds
on himself; but I pointed out that this was impossible as it would
practically amount to compounding a felony. Seeing that Mrs. Hornby was
so distressed at the idea of her book being used in evidence against her
nephew, I promised her that I would return it to her if I could obtain a
thumb-print in any other way.

"I then took the 'Thumbograph' to Scotland Yard and showed it to Mr.
Singleton, who agreed that the print of the left thumb of Reuben Hornby
was in every respect identical with the thumb-print on the paper found
in the safe. On this I applied for a warrant for the arrest of Reuben
Hornby, which I executed on the following morning. I told the prisoner
what I had promised Mrs. Hornby, and he then offered to allow me to take
a print of his left thumb so that his aunt's book should not have to be
used in evidence."

"How is it, then," asked the judge, "that it has been put in evidence?"

"It has been put in by the defence, my lord," said Sir Hector Trumpler.

"I see," said the judge. "'A hair of the dog that bit him.' The
'Thumbograph' is to be applied as a remedy on the principle that
_similia similibus curantur_. Well?"

"When I arrested him, I administered the usual caution, and the prisoner
then said, 'I am innocent. I know nothing about the robbery.'"

The counsel for the prosecution sat down, and Anstey rose to
cross-examine.

"You have told us," said he, in his clear musical voice, "that you found
at the bottom of the safe two rather large drops of a dark fluid which
you considered to be blood. Now, what led you to believe that fluid to
be blood?"

"I took some of the fluid up on a piece of white paper, and it had the
appearance and colour of blood."

"Was it examined microscopically or otherwise?"

"Not to my knowledge."

"Was it quite liquid?"

"Yes, I should say quite liquid."

"What appearance had it on paper?"

"It looked like a clear red liquid of the colour of blood, and was
rather thick and sticky."

Anstey sat down, and the next witness, an elderly man, answering to the
name of Francis Simmons, was called.

"You are the housekeeper at Mr. Hornby's premises in St. Mary Axe?"
asked Sir Hector Trumpler.

"I am."

"Did you notice anything unusual on the night of the ninth of March?"

"I did not."

"Did you make your usual rounds on that occasion?"

"Yes. I went all over the premises several times during the night, and
the rest of the time I was in a room over the private office."

"Who arrived first on the morning of the tenth?"

"Mr. Reuben. He arrived about twenty minutes before anybody else."

"What part of the building did he go to?"

"He went into the private office, which I opened for him. He remained
there until a few minutes before Mr. Hornby arrived, when he went up to
the laboratory."

"Who came next?"

"Mr. Hornby, and Mr. Walter came in just after him."

The counsel sat down, and Anstey proceeded to cross-examine the witness.

"Who was the last to leave the premises on the evening of the ninth?"

"I am not sure."

"Why are you not sure?"

"I had to take a note and a parcel to a firm in Shoreditch. When I
started, a clerk named Thomas Holker was in the outer office and Mr.
Walter Hornby was in the private office. When I returned they had both
gone."

"Was the outer door locked?"

"Yes."

"Had Holker a key of the outer door?"

"No. Mr. Hornby and his two nephews had each a key, and I have one. No
one else had a key."

"How long were you absent?"

"About three-quarters of an hour."

"Who gave you the note and the parcel?"

"Mr. Walter Hornby."

"When did he give them to you?"

"He gave them to me just before I started, and told me to go at once for
fear the place should be closed before I got there."

"And was the place closed?"

"Yes. It was all shut up, and everybody had gone."

Anstey resumed his seat, the witness shuffled out of the box with an air
of evident relief, and the usher called out, "Henry James Singleton."

Mr. Singleton rose from his seat at the table by the solicitors for the
prosecution and entered the box. Sir Hector adjusted his glasses, turned
over a page of his brief, and cast a steady and impressive glance at the
jury.

"I believe, Mr. Singleton," he said at length, "that you are connected
with the Finger-print Department at Scotland Yard?"

"Yes. I am one of the chief assistants in that department."

"What are your official duties?"

"My principal occupation consists in the examination and comparison of
the finger-prints of criminals and suspected persons. These
finger-prints are classified by me according to their characters and
arranged in files for reference."

"I take it that you have examined a great number of finger-prints?"

"I have examined many thousands of finger-prints, and have studied them
closely for purposes of identification."

"Kindly examine this paper, Mr. Singleton" (here the fatal leaflet was
handed to him by the usher); "have you ever seen it before?"

"Yes. It was handed to me for examination at my office on the tenth of
March."

"There is a mark upon it--the print of a finger or thumb. Can you tell
us anything about that mark?"  "It is the print of the left thumb of
Reuben Hornby, the prisoner at the bar."

"You are quite sure of that?"

"I am quite sure."

"Do you swear that the mark upon that paper was made by the thumb of the
prisoner?"

"I do."

"Could it not have been made by the thumb of some other person?"

"No; it is impossible that it could have been made by any other person."

At this moment I felt Juliet lay a trembling hand on mine, and, glancing
at her, I saw that she was deathly pale. I took her hand in mine and,
pressing it gently, whispered to her, "Have courage; there is nothing
unexpected in this."

"Thank you," she whispered in reply, with a faint smile; "I will try;
but it is all so horribly unnerving."

"You consider," Sir Hector proceeded, "that the identity of this
thumb-print admits of no doubt?"  "It admits of no doubt whatever,"
replied Mr. Singleton.

"Can you explain to us, without being too technical, how you have
arrived at such complete certainty?"

"I myself took a print of the prisoner's thumb--having first obtained
the prisoner's consent after warning him that the print would be used in
evidence against him--and I compared that print with the mark on this
paper. The comparison was made with the greatest care and by the most
approved method, point by point and detail by detail, and the two prints
were found to be identical in every respect.

"Now it has been proved by exact calculations--which calculations I have
personally verified---that the chance that the print of a single finger
of any given person will be exactly like the print of the same finger of
any other given person is as one to sixty-four thousand millions. That
is to say that, since the number of the entire human race is about
sixteen thousand millions, the chance is about one to four that the
print of a single finger of any one person will be identical with that
of the same finger of any other member of the human race.

"It has been said by a great authority--and I entirely agree with the
statement--that a complete, or nearly complete, accordance between two
prints of a single finger affords evidence requiring no corroboration
that the persons from whom they were made are the same.

"Now, these calculations apply to the prints of ordinary and normal
fingers or thumbs. But the thumb from which these prints were taken is
not ordinary or normal. There is upon it a deep but clean linear
scar--the scar of an old incised wound--and this scar passes across the
pattern of the ridges, intersecting the latter at certain places and
disturbing their continuity at others. Now this very characteristic scar
is an additional feature, having a set of chances of its own. So that we
have to consider not only the chance that the print of the prisoner's
left thumb should be identical with the print of some other person's
left thumb--which is as one to sixty-four thousand millions--but the
further chance that these two identical thumb-prints should be traversed
by the impression of a scar identical in size and appearance, and
intersecting the ridges at exactly the same places and producing
failures of continuity in the ridges of exactly the same character. But
these two chances, multiplied into one another, yield an ultimate chance
of about one to four thousand trillions that the prisoner's left thumb
will exactly resemble the print of some other person's thumb, both as to
the pattern and the scar which crosses the pattern; in other words such
a coincidence is an utter impossibility."

Sir Hector Trumpler took off his glasses and looked long and steadily at
the jury as though he should say, "Come, my friends; what do you think
of that?" Then he sat down with a jerk and turned towards Anstey and
Thorndyke with a look of triumph.

"Do you propose to cross-examine the witness?" inquired the judge,
seeing that the counsel for the defence made no sign.

"No, my lord," replied Anstey.

Thereupon Sir Hector Trumpler turned once more towards the defending
counsel, and his broad, red face was illumined by a smile of deep
satisfaction. That smile was reflected on the face of Mr. Singleton as
he stepped from the box, and, as I glanced at Thorndyke, I seemed to
detect, for a single instant, on his calm and immovable countenance, the
faintest shadow of a smile.

"Herbert John Nash!"

A plump, middle-aged man, of keen, though studious, aspect, stepped into
the box, and Sir Hector rose once more.

"You are one of the chief assistants in the Finger-print Department, I
believe, Mr. Nash?"

"I am."

"Have you heard the evidence of the last witness?"

"I have."

"Do you agree with the statements made by that witness?"

"Entirely. I am prepared to swear that the print on the paper found in
the safe is that of the left thumb of the prisoner, Reuben Hornby."

"And you are certain that no mistake is possible?"

"I am certain that no mistake is possible."

Again Sir Hector glanced significantly at the jury as he resumed his
seat, and again Anstey made no sign beyond the entry of a few notes on
the margin of his brief.

"Are you calling any more witnesses?" asked the judge, dipping his pen
in the ink.

"No, my lord," replied Sir Hector. "That is our case."

Upon this Anstey rose and, addressing the judge, said--

"I call witnesses, my lord."

The judge nodded and made an entry in his notes while Anstey delivered
his brief introductory speech--

"My lord and gentlemen of the jury, I shall not occupy the time of the
Court with unnecessary appeals at this stage, but shall proceed to take
the evidence of my witnesses without delay."

There was a pause of a minute or more, during which the silence was
broken only by the rustle of papers and the squeaking of the judge's
quill pen. Juliet turned a white, scared face to me and said in a hushed
whisper--

"This is terrible. That last man's evidence is perfectly crushing. What
can possibly be said in reply? I am in despair; oh! poor Reuben! He is
lost, Dr. Jervis! He hasn't a chance now."

"Do you believe that he is guilty?" I asked.

"Certainly not!" she replied indignantly. "I am as certain of his
innocence as ever."

"Then," said I, "if he is innocent, there must be some means of proving
his innocence."

"Yes. I suppose so," she rejoined in a dejected whisper. "At any rate we
shall soon know now."

At this moment the usher's voice was heard calling out the name of the
first witness for the defence.

"Edmund Horford Rowe!"

A keen-looking, grey-haired man, with a shaven face and close-cut
side-whiskers, stepped into the box and was sworn in due form.

"You are a doctor of medicine, I believe," said Anstey, addressing the
witness, "and lecturer on Medical Jurisprudence at the South London
Hospital?"

"I am."

"Have you had occasion to study the properties of blood?"

"Yes. The properties of blood are of great importance from a
medico-legal point of view."

"Can you tell us what happens when a drop of blood--say from a cut
finger--falls upon a surface such as the bottom of an iron safe?"

"A drop of blood from a living body falling upon any non-absorbent
surface will, in the course of a few minutes, solidify into a jelly
which will, at first, have the same bulk and colour as the liquid
blood."

"Will it undergo any further change?"

"Yes. In a few minutes more the jelly will begin to shrink and become
more solid so that the blood will become separated into two parts, the
solid and the liquid. The solid part will consist of a firm, tough jelly
of a deep red colour, and the liquid part will consist of a pale yellow,
clear, watery liquid."

"At the end, say, of two hours, what will be the condition of the drop
of blood?"

"It will consist of a drop of clear, nearly colourless liquid, in the
middle of which will be a small, tough, red clot."

"Supposing such a drop to be taken up on a piece of white paper, what
would be its appearance?"

"The paper would be wetted by the colourless liquid, and the solid clot
would probably adhere to the paper in a mass."

"Would the blood on the paper appear as a clear, red liquid?"

"Certainly not. The liquid would appear like water, and the clot would
appear as a solid mass sticking to the paper."

"Does blood always behave in the way you have described?"

"Always, unless some artificial means are taken to prevent it from
clotting."

"By what means can blood be prevented from clotting or solidifying?"

"There are two principal methods. One is to stir or whip the fresh blood
rapidly with a bundle of fine twigs. When this is done, the fibrin--the
part of the blood that causes solidification--adheres to the twigs, and
the blood that remains, though it is unchanged in appearance, will
remain liquid for an indefinite time. The other method is to dissolve a
certain proportion of some alkaline salt in the fresh blood, after which
it no longer has any tendency to solidify."

"You have heard the evidence of Inspector Sanderson and Sergeant Bates?"

"Yes."

"Inspector Sanderson has told us that he examined the safe at 10.31 a.m.
and found two good-sized drops of blood on the bottom. Sergeant Bates
has told us that he examined the safe two hours later, and that he took
up one of the drops of blood on a piece of white paper. The blood was
then quite liquid, and, on the paper, it looked like a clear, red liquid
of the colour of blood. What should you consider the condition and
nature of that blood to have been?"

"If it was really blood at all, I should say that it was either
defibrinated blood--that is, blood from which the fibrin has been
extracted by whipping--or that it had been treated with an alkaline
salt."

"You are of opinion that the blood found in the safe could not have been
ordinary blood shed from a cut or wound?"

"I am sure it could not have been."

"Now, Dr. Rowe, I am going to ask you a few questions on another
subject. Have you given any attention to finger-prints made by bloody
fingers?"

"Yes. I have recently made some experiments on the subject."

"Will you give us the results of those experiments?"

"My object was to ascertain whether fingers wet with fresh blood would
yield distinct and characteristic prints. I made a great number of
trials, and as a result found that it is extremely difficult to obtain a
clear print when the finger is wetted with fresh blood. The usual result
is a mere red blot showing no ridge pattern at all, owing to the blood
filling the furrows between the ridges. But if the blood is allowed to
dry almost completely on the finger, a very clear print is obtained."

"Is it possible to recognise a print that has been made by a nearly dry
finger?"

"Yes; quite easily. The half-dried blood is nearly solid and adheres to
the paper in a different way from the liquid, and it shows minute
details, such as the mouths of the sweat glands, which are always
obliterated by the liquid."

"Look carefully at this paper, which was found in the safe, and tell me
what you see."

The witness took the paper and examined it attentively, first with the
naked eye and then with a pocket-lens.

"I see," said he, "two blood-marks and a print, apparently of a thumb.
Of the two marks, one is a blot, smeared slightly by a finger or thumb;
the other is a smear only. Both were evidently produced with quite
liquid blood. The thumb-print was also made with liquid blood."

"You are quite sure that the thumb-print was made with liquid blood?"

"Quite sure."

"Is there anything unusual about the thumb-print?"

"Yes. It is extraordinarily clear and distinct. I have made a great
number of trials and have endeavoured to obtain the clearest prints
possible with fresh blood; but none of my prints are nearly as distinct
as this one."

Here the witness produced a number of sheets of paper, each of which was
covered with the prints of bloody fingers, and compared them with the
memorandum slip.

The papers were handed to the judge for his inspection, and Anstey sat
down, when Sir Hector Trumpler rose, with a somewhat puzzled expression
on his face, to cross-examine.

"You say that the blood found in the safe was defibrinated or
artificially treated. What inference do you draw from that fact?"

"I infer that it was not dropped from a bleeding wound."

"Can you form any idea how such blood should have got into the safe?"

"None whatever."

"You say that the thumb-print is a remarkably distinct one. What
conclusion do you draw from that?"

"I do not draw any conclusion. I cannot account for its distinctness at
all."

The learned counsel sat down with rather a baffled air, and I observed a
faint smile spread over the countenance of my colleague.

"Arabella Hornby."

A muffled whimpering from my neighbour on the left hand was accompanied
by a wild rustling of silk. Glancing at Mrs. Hornby, I saw her stagger
from the bench, shaking like a jelly, mopping her eyes with her
handkerchief and grasping her open purse. She entered the witness-box,
and, having gazed wildly round the court, began to search the
multitudinous compartments of her purse.

"The evidence you shall give," sang out the usher--whereat Mrs. Hornby
paused in her search and stared at him apprehensively--"to the court and
jury sworn, between our Sovereign Lord the King and the prisoner at the
bar shall be the truth,--"

"Certainly," said Mrs. Hornby stiffly, "I--"

"--the whole truth, and nothing but the truth; so help you God!"

He held out the Testament, which she took from him with a trembling hand
and forthwith dropped with a resounding bang on to the floor of the
witness-box, diving after it with such precipitancy that her bonnet
jammed violently against the rail of the box.

She disappeared from view for a moment, and then rose from the depths
with a purple face and her bonnet flattened and cocked over one ear like
an artillery-man's forage cap.

"Kiss the Book, if you please," said the usher, suppressing a grin by an
heroic effort, as Mrs. Hornby, encumbered by her purse, her handkerchief
and the Testament, struggled to unfasten her bonnet-strings. She clawed
frantically at her bonnet, and, having dusted the Testament with her
handkerchief, kissed it tenderly and laid it on the rail of the box,
whence it fell instantly on to the floor of the court.

"I am really very sorry!" exclaimed Mrs. Hornby, leaning over the rail
to address the usher as he stooped to pick up the Book, and discharging
on to his back a stream of coins, buttons and folded bills from her open
purse; "you will think me very awkward, I'm afraid."

She mopped her face and replaced her bonnet rakishly on one side, as
Anstey rose and passed a small red book across to her.

"Kindly look at that book, Mrs. Hornby."

"I'd rather not," said she, with a gesture of repugnance. "It is
associated with matters of so extremely disagreeable a character--"

"Do you recognise it?"

"Do I recognise it! How can you ask me such a question when you must
know--"

"Answer the question," interposed the judge. "Do you or do you not
recognise the book in your hand?"

"Of course I recognise it. How could I fail to--"

"Then say so," said the judge.

"I have said so," retorted Mrs. Hornby indignantly.

The judge nodded to Anstey, who then continued--"It is called a
'Thumbograph,' I believe."

"Yes: the name 'Thumbograph' is printed on the cover, so I suppose that
is what it is called."

"Will you tell us, Mrs. Hornby, how the 'Thumbograph' came into your
possession?"

For one moment Mrs. Hornby stared wildly at her interrogator; then she
snatched a paper from her purse, unfolded it, gazed at it with an
expression of dismay, and crumpled it up in the palm of her hand.

"You are asked a question," said the judge.

"Oh! yes," said Mrs. Hornby. "The Committee of the Society--no, that is
the wrong one--I mean Walter, you know--at least--"

"I beg your pardon," said Anstey, with polite gravity.

"You were speaking of the committee of some society," interposed the
judge. "What society were you referring to?"

Mrs. Hornby spread out the paper and, after a glance at it, replied--

"The Society of Paralysed Idiots, your worship," whereat a rumble of
suppressed laughter arose from the gallery.

"But what has that society to do with the 'Thumbograph'?" inquired the
judge.

"Nothing, your worship. Nothing at all."

"Then why did you refer to it?"

"I am sure I don't know," said Mrs. Hornby, wiping her eyes with the
paper and then hastily exchanging it for her handkerchief.

The judge took off his glasses and gazed at Mrs. Hornby with an
expression of bewilderment. Then he turned to the counsel and said in a
weary voice--"Proceed, if you please, Mr. Anstey."

"Can you tell us, Mrs. Hornby, how the 'Thumbograph' came into your
possession?" said the latter in persuasive accents.

"I thought it was Walter, and so did my niece, but Walter says it was
not, and he ought to know, being young and having a most excellent
memory, as I had myself when I was his age, and really, you know, it
can't possibly matter where I got the thing--"

"But it does matter," interrupted Anstey. "We wish particularly to
know."

"If you mean that you wish to get one like it--"

"We do not," said Anstey. "We wish to know how that particular
'Thumbograph' came into your possession. Did you, for instance, buy it
yourself, or was it given to you by someone?"

"Walter says I bought it myself, but I thought he gave it to me, but he
says he did not, and you see--"

"Never mind what Walter says. What is your own impression?"

"Why I still think that he gave it to me, though, of course, seeing that
my memory is not what it was--"

"You think that Walter gave it to you?"

"Yes, in fact I feel sure he did, and so does my niece."

"Walter is your nephew, Walter Hornby?"

"Yes, of course. I thought you knew."

"Can you recall the occasion on which the 'Thumbograph' was given to
you?"

"Oh yes, quite distinctly. We had some people to dinner--some people
named Colley--not the Dorsetshire Colleys, you know, although they are
exceedingly nice people, as I have no doubt the other Colleys are, too,
when you know them, but we don't. Well, after dinner we were a little
dull and rather at a loss, because Juliet, my niece, you know, had cut
her finger and couldn't play the piano excepting with the left hand, and
that is so monotonous as well as fatiguing, and the Colleys are not
musical, excepting Adolphus, who plays the trombone, but he hadn't got
it with him, and then, fortunately, Walter came in and brought the
'Thumbograph' and took all our thumb-prints and his own as well, and we
were very much amused, and Matilda Colley--that is the eldest daughter
but one--said that Reuben jogged her elbow, but that was only an
excuse--"

"Exactly," interrupted Anstey. "And you recollect quite clearly that
your nephew Walter gave you the 'Thumbograph' on that occasion?"

"Oh, distinctly; though, you know, he is really my husband's nephew--"

"Yes. And you are sure that he took the thumb-prints?"

"Quite sure."

"And you are sure that you never saw the 'Thumbograph' before that?"

"Never. How could I? He hadn't brought it."

"Have you ever lent the 'Thumbograph' to anyone?"

"No, never. No one has ever wanted to borrow it, because, you see--"

"Has it never, at any time, gone out of your possession?"

"Oh, I wouldn't say that; in fact, I have often thought, though I hate
suspecting people, and I really don't suspect anybody in particular, you
know, but it certainly was very peculiar and I can't explain it in any
other way. You see, I kept the 'Thumbograph' in a drawer in my writing
table, and in the same drawer I used to keep my handkerchief-bag--in
fact I do still, and it is there at this very moment, for in my hurry
and agitation, I forgot about it until we were in the cab, and then it
was too late, because Mr. Lawley--"

"Yes. You kept it in a drawer with your handkerchief-bag."

"That was what I said. Well, when Mr. Hornby was staying at Brighton he
wrote to ask me to go down for a week and bring Juliet--Miss Gibson, you
know--with me. So we went, and, just as we were starting, I sent Juliet
to fetch my handkerchief-bag from the drawer, and I said to her,
'Perhaps we might take the thumb-book with us; it might come in useful
on a wet day.' So she went, and presently she came back and said that
the 'Thumbograph' was not in the drawer. Well, I was so surprised that I
went back with her and looked myself, and sure enough the drawer was
empty. Well, I didn't think much of it at the time, but when we came
home again, as soon as we got out of the cab, I gave Juliet my
handkerchief-bag to put away, and presently she came running to me in a
great state of excitement. 'Why, Auntie,' she said,' the "Thumbograph"
is in the drawer; somebody must have been meddling with your writing
table.' I went with her to the drawer, and there, sure enough, was the
'Thumbograph.' Somebody must have taken it out and put it back while we
were away."

"Who could have had access to your writing table?"

"Oh, anybody, because, you see, the drawers were never locked. We
thought it must have been one of the servants."

"Had anyone been to the house during your absence?"

"No. Nobody, except, of course, my two nephews; and neither of them had
touched it, because we asked them, and they both said they had not."

"Thank you." Anstey sat down, and Mrs. Hornby having given another
correcting twist to her bonnet, was about to step down from the box when
Sir Hector rose and bestowed upon her an intimidating stare.

"You made some reference," said he, "to a society--the Society of
Paralysed Idiots, I think, whatever that may be. Now what caused you to
make that reference?"

"It was a mistake; I was thinking of something else."

"I know it was a mistake. You referred to a paper that was in your
hand."

"I did not refer to it, I merely looked at it. It is a letter from the
Society of Paralysed Idiots. It is nothing to do with me really, you
know; I don't belong to the society, or anything of that sort."

"Did you mistake that paper for some other paper?"

"Yes, I took it for a paper with some notes on it to assist my memory."

"What kind of notes?"

"Oh, just the questions I was likely to be asked."

"Were the answers that you were to give to those questions also written
on the paper?"

"Of course they were. The questions would not have been any use without
the answers."

"Have you been asked the questions that were written on the paper?"

"Yes; at least, some of them."

"Have you given the answers that were written down?"

"I don't think I have--in fact, I am sure I haven't, because, you see--"

"Ah! you don't think you have." Sir Hector Trumpler smiled significantly
at the jury, and continued--

"Now who wrote down those questions and answers?"

"My nephew, Walter Hornby. He thought, you know--"

"Never mind what he thought. Who advised or instructed him to write them
down?"

"Nobody. It was entirely his own idea, and very thoughtful of him, too,
though Dr. Jervis took the paper away from me and said I must rely on my
memory."

Sir Hector was evidently rather taken aback by this answer, and sat down
suddenly, with a distinctly chapfallen air.

"Where is this paper on which the questions and answers are written?"
asked the judge. No, no--there is no one like him. But I will mortify Mrs.
Adair, that I will! To think that I must not go to my Aunt's on Thursday!
And there will be my cousins, and Edward Warner, and Margaret James,
and some one who is worth them all; though I don't talk of him as you
talk of your Papa."
After musing a few minutes, with her pencil in her hand, and her
head resting upon a slate, she joyfully exclaimed, "I have it, I
have it indeed!"

"And what have you got?" cried Isabella, as she sprang from her seat,
and looked over Miss Bruce's shoulder.

"Only my ideas; neither apples nor plums.

But I wish you would not wipe my face with your curls.

I have got the clue to my fable; I will have Mrs. Adair, and I
think your papa too."
"I am sure you never shall: you never saw papa!"

"Indeed Miss Isabella, you are quite mistaken; I have seen him in shop
windows, in magazines, and I am certain he is in a fine gilt frame in
our study."

"I wish people would not take such liberties. Papa has no business to
be in windows, and other people's frames."
"Why, don't you know that only great writers, and great fighters,
and very good men, and very bad men, are noticed that way!

If your papa was not good as well as great, he would not be fixed
in our house, unless in the servant's room, with Jemmy and Sandy,
and the Storm, and Auld Robin Grey.

Whatever you may think, it is a very great honour to be noticed by somebody
that I could name."

"I have not any thing to do with honour," cried Isabella, "and talking
of things I don't know."
"Hush! don't speak! Can't you see that I am busy. I wish I knew
what people do when they have great books to write.

My thoughts jumble so together, I can't tell what to make of them; it is
sad teasing work."

"If Caroline was here, she could tell you what to write."
"And do you think that I should ask a dunce?

If I could but begin, I know I could go on." Here Miss Bruce considered a
little. "I must think of my thoughts: no, I must write them down."

"O, Miss Bruce, Miss Bruce!"

cried Isabella, eagerly, "do look through the window; there is a
balloon flying, and a paper boy tied to it!"

"I wish you were flying too: don't you see that I want to write my fable.
Let me see: Ass, 1; Farmer Killwell, 2; somebody's papa, but not mine.
Turkey, 3; Barn-fowls, 4; Little schoolgirl, 5. O, how shall I put all
these words together to make any thing of them! O, that I could
but begin! There it is!" said Miss Bruce joyfully; and she wrote several
words upon her slate. "Well, there is nothing like a good beginning! I
will finish to-night; so now let us go to the ladies," and Miss Bruce
skipped out of the room, with her slate and Isabella.

CHAPTER XII.

With some surprise, Miss Damer, in looking over the themes, read the
following fable:

"One bleak, cold winter morning, an ass and her foals were loitering
upon the edge of a wild common; not a tree was to be seen, and
scarcely a bit of herbage for their breakfast to be found.

'This is a comfortless life!' said the ass; 'the winds are chilly, the
snow will soon fall, and we have not a shed to cover us!

What shall we do? for I fear we shall be lost.'

The ass turned her head, for she heard the tinkling of bells, and
saw a shepherd driving sheep from the common.

'Ah! a happy thought!

we will go to Farmer Killwell, and tell our sorrows unto him.' No sooner
said than done; they plodded through miry lanes, waded through
shallow brooks, and at length arrived at the farmer's gate.

The tale was soon told.

The farmer pitied their piteous case; 'but,' said he, 'idleness
bringeth want.

Exert yourselves, and you will find friends. Begin a school at
once; here are my poultry, my birds, and my young cattle to teach:
not a moment is to be lost.'

--'It is a good thing to have a good friend!'

said the ass, as she stalked into the farm-yard.

Here she brayed with a most audible voice: 'Hearken to me, parents and
little ones!'

she cried; 'I am come hither to inspire you all with wisdom.'

"The goose, as wise as a goose can be, stared at the speaker; tossed
her head on one side, gave a loud quack, and returned to comfort
her goslings, who were fluttering in every direction.

"'You little ducklings,' continued the ass, 'don't spread your feet
so vulgarly.

Mrs. Turkey, I have long sighed for the honour of your patronage:
the charming little poults, I hope, will gain new beauties from
our exertions.

Mrs.

Barn-fowl, your chickens are too timid; we shall soon teach them
to hop with grace.

As for these awkward maudlin rabbits, I fear we cannot do any thing with
them; and these ill-bred creatures, Mrs.

Sow's progeny, we cannot attempt to teach.'

A sturdy mastiff, who had followed the group of gazers, now barked
furiously; dispersed the poultry, pushed Mrs.

Sow and her family into the mud; and, spite of Farmer Killwell, drove
the ass and her foals out of the farm-yard.

A little girl, who was witness to the hubbub, exclaimed, 'Ah!

this is excellent! Mrs.

Adair has borrowed a garment from the ass, to teach simple ones
wisdom; but she will never teach little girls to love new rules.'"

"Where is the moral to your fable?" asked Miss Damer, with some degree
of anger.

"I never thought of the moral; of what use would it be to my theme?"

returned Miss Bruce.

"And of what use is any theme or fable without a moral? But I wish to know
your motive for writing this ridiculous piece."
"To vex Mrs.

Adair, certainly, because she won't let me go to my Aunt's on
Thursday."

"And do you really think that it is in your power to vex Mrs. Adair
with this trifling nonsense?

You may be assured of this, Miss Bruce, the only notice she will take of
this childish, insignificant fable, will be to make you read it to
the ladies."

"I won't be talked to in this way, though you are my monitress. I will
write what I please;" so saying, she snatched the slate from Miss Damer,
and in haste rubbed off the words.

"The wisest thing you could do," said Miss Damer. "Now sit
down, and reflect seriously upon your conduct, and then tell me
whether you feel quite satisfied with yourself, or whether you are
grateful to Mrs.

Adair for her care of you, and attention to you.

You are the only little girl who has not a mamma: who would be so
indulgent, so tender to you, as Mrs.

Adair?"

At these words Miss Bruce sobbed violently; but her sorrow was of short
duration: "You would vex any thing, Miss Damer, with talking so quietly.
I like people to be angry with me, and then I can be angry myself."
"My dear, I shall not listen to you, so I advise you to cease
talking:
it is my plan never to argue with unruly little girls. Come, Miss Grey,
and Isabella; we will go into the play-ground."
Isabella whispered to Miss Bruce as she passed her; "do, dear Miss
Bruce, be good.

Why should you vex Miss Damer when she is so kind to you?" Miss Bruce
pushed her companion's hand from her shoulder, and turned her face
to the wall, and there they found her on their return.

When the bell rang for prayers, Miss Bruce sprang across the room to
Miss Damer, who was seated, talking to Miss Arden, and throwing
her arms round her neck, she exclaimed, "You must indeed forgive
me; I cannot sleep unless you say, 'good night.'"

Miss Damer turned round, and kissed her: "Now, my dear, I hope you
will never offend me again."
"Oh, Miss Damer! I will love you for ever, for forgiving me so soon." The
bell rang, and she hastened out of the room.

"Should you not have been a little more stern?" said Miss Arden.

"My dear friend, ask yourself whether you could be so to a little
girl who has no mother."
Tears started into Miss Arden's eyes. "I did not think of that."

CHAPTER XIII.

One evening after school-hours, Mrs. Adair went into Jane's apartment,
who at this time was chiefly confined to her chamber, and found
her busily employed sealing small parcels.

One was directed, "For my friend Miss Damer;" another, "For my dear
little Isabella Vincent;" and a third, "For my amiable young friend
Miss Arden." Mrs. Adair seated herself with the work in which she was
engaged: and as her eyes glanced to the sealed parcels, tears stole
down her cheeks.

"My dear mother," said Jane with tenderness, "I am only making a little
preparation before my journey. You must have been aware, some time, that
the days of my life were numbered; and they will now be very few.
But do not grieve on my account: it is the appointment of One,
who is unerring in his ways. Excepting the separation from you and my
sister, I feel that I have no regret at leaving this world.

"Death is a subject that I have often contemplated. The grave, and the
last perishable garment in which I shall be clothed, have now lost
all their terrors.

The evening I first arrived at school, when my mind was filled with grief
at our separation, I remember being greatly shocked at the slow, solemn,
deep tones of the village church-bell. I cannot describe my feelings
at the time. Sorrow at leaving home rendered the awful muffled peal
more dismal to my ears: but from that night I may date my first serious
thoughts of another world.

I have never troubled my friends with my reflections, but that bell
was as a monitor, to warn me that I was not for this world."
Miss Arden now entered the room; and Mrs. Adair gladly escaped, to
indulge her tears in secret. With a calm collected countenance she then
re-joined her pupils; but at the same time experienced the sorrow of a
parent, who knows she is soon to be deprived of a beloved child. For
Jane's appearance too plainly denoted, that the period was at hand
"when the keepers of the house would tremble." At this time her
uneasiness was increased by a melancholy, distressing letter from Mrs.
Vincent, urging her not to delay a moment coming to her; that she was
to undergo an operation, that would either close life or restore her to
her family. Various feelings agitated Mrs. Adair's mind as she read
the letter. After a little reflection, she fixed upon the proper mode
of acting, and in an hour a chaise was at the door, to convey her to her
old friend.

Jane had now been confined wholly to her chamber a fortnight. Her disease
was of a fluctuating nature: sometimes she appeared almost in perfect
health; at others, as one dropping into the grave. She was seated in
an arm-chair, supported with pillows. When Mrs. Adair entered the
chamber, one hand rested upon a book that lay open upon a small table,
and near the book was her watch; her head was thrown back, and her face
was covered with a muslin handkerchief. Mrs. Adair, who had slowly
opened the door, now as cautiously advanced; listened to hear her daughter
breathe; and then gently raised the handkerchief. Jane started.

Afraid of disturbing her, Mrs. Adair remained some time with fixed
attention, holding the handkerchief from her face.

A hectic flush was upon her cheeks; but her countenance was placid
and happy. When she returned into her own chamber, Elizabeth was
there, who anxiously inquired if she had seen her sister. "But
have you taken leave of her?" she cried.

Mrs. Adair drew the veil of her bonnet over her face, as she said, "taking
leave is a trial of all others--" and here she paused; "this is not of
any consequence to you."
"O, my dear mother, we have no earthly hope, no support but yourself;
let my sister's eyes rest for the last time upon the mother she has
so tenderly loved; she will not die in peace unless you are with
her."

"My feelings are as irritable as your own," said Mrs. Adair; "leave
me to act according to my own judgment: not another word. Bring Isabella
to me, for the chaise is at the door."

While the ladies were walking with Miss Wilkins, the teacher,
Elizabeth went into her sister's chamber; and at the door met Mrs.

Lloyd, the housekeeper, who had been ordered by Mrs. Adair to explain the
motive of the journey to Jane.

"O, sister," cried Elizabeth, "how could my mother, so considerate
and good as she is, leave you in this state!"

"We cannot tell all her motives," said Jane; "only consider what were my
mother's feelings, when she fixed her eyes upon this poor emaciated
frame, as she supposed, for the last time."

"It was cruelty in the extreme," cried Elizabeth.

"Do no speak rashly, my dear Elizabeth; we will hope--" and her eyes
brightened with an expression of joy, "that all will yet be well;
that, through the mercy of Providence, Mrs. Vincent will be restored
to health, and that I shall be permitted to remain a little longer
with you."

"O, that it were to the day of my own death," exclaimed Elizabeth with
fervency.

"There are few persons to whom my heart earnestly inclines, and I would
have them with me through this life, and all eternity."
"My dear sister, these things are not at our disposal.

But let us consider the subject: every night we experience temporary
dissolution:
and then we are separated, even as if the hand of death had smitten
us; when we go to rest, we have no positive assurance that we are
to open our eyes again upon the objects of this world; still we
project schemes; calculate upon probable and improbable events; but
the entire suspension of our faculties is never taken into the
account.

Yet we are ignorant whether we are to open our eyes on the objects of
this world, or that which is to come.

I own I have not any desponding thoughts; I rest alone upon the mercies
and the merits of a suffering and a redeeming Saviour; he is my sole
refuge. To our mother, my conscience acquits me either of intentional
errors, or errors of omission.

This is a source of the purest consolation; it clears the rough, the
thorny path to the valley of death. Elizabeth, my dearest sister,
listen to me before I go hence, and be no more seen.

Every night recall to mind the actions of the day.
Let this be the question you put to yourself: "Have I done my duty in all
things?" Where you have failed, let the morning sun, as it rises, be
a token to you that another day is given for wise and good purposes;
in the grave there is no remembrance of error, no atonement to be
made for transgression, for neglect of the social duties of life."

Elizabeth gazed at her sister with feelings of tenderness and sorrow.

"All things pass away," said Jane, as she raised her eyes to her
sister's agitated face; "but 'when this mortal has put on immortality,'
then Elizabeth, when we meet again, it will not be for transient
days, and years, but for ages of eternity."

Exhausted with speaking so long, she pointed to the book upon the table.

"The spirit is willing," said she, faintly, "but my voice is weak; will
you oblige me, sister?"

"From my heart I will," exclaimed Elizabeth; "would that I could not only
oblige, but retain you for our comfort, for this world to my mother
will be a wilderness indeed."
"Not so," said Jane, tears flowing into her eyes; "my affectionate, my
warm-hearted sister will be my substitute! O, Elizabeth, friend dearest
to me, may you be blessed where your heart is fixed."

Elizabeth started, and her countenance became pale as death.

"Sister," Jane slowly added, "you could not keep the secret from me; I
have traced it in all your actions; but, rest assured, it will
descend with me to the grave."

CHAPTER XIV.

Elizabeth was restless and uneasy the whole of the day that her mother
had taken her departure for Colonel Vincent's. The evening was wet and
gloomy; the young people could not, therefore, take their usual
exercise in the play-ground.

After sitting some time with her sister and Miss Arden, she sauntered into
the school-room, to observe how they were employed. Some of the young
ladies were attending to their lessons for the following day.

One party had spread the road to happiness upon a work-box; all anxious
to attain the desired haven. Another young lady was seated alone, joining
the map of Europe. In a corner of the room, apart from all her companions,
Miss Bruce was reading the admirable instructive tale "Display." Elizabeth
looked over her shoulder, "My dear, I thought you had read that book
six months ago."
"O yes, ma'am; but I can read it over and over again: there is not a
new book now in the school."
"You mean," said Elizabeth, smiling, "that you have read them all. But
can you explain the word "Display?"

for I think most young ladies are partial to it, in one shape or another."
A carriage now stopped at the door; and Elizabeth exclaimed, "who is in
that carriage?"

Miss Grey, who was near the window, raised herself upon a box, and looking
over the blind, cried, "Mrs. Adair, ma'am, and Miss Isabella Vincent."

Elizabeth hastened from the room, and met her mother at the hall door,
joyfully exclaiming, "O, my dear mother, this is an unexpected, welcome
pleasure! But how is Mrs. Vincent?"
"Composed and comfortable; the operation was performed yesterday: but
it was not my intention to desert you: how could you think so?"
The truth was, Mrs. Adair had called upon the physician, and begged that
he would inform her daughter that she would return in the evening: but
a press of engagements had prevented his visit to Jane, who now with
joy beheld her mother enter her chamber.

"I thought you would return to see me on my journey," she exclaimed; "and
you are returned, my dear mother. Blessed be this hour!"
Miss Arden and Miss Damer, from the hour they met in the summer-house,
were strict friends. Their capacities were similar, and they were
at the head of the different classes. On the days appointed for
geography, the young ladies were in a room called the study.

Miss Arden had observed that one of the servants, a respectable looking
young woman, generally contrived to enter the apartment, and busy herself
with one thing or another: but always looked, anxiously at the globes,
or the maps, and stopped a moment to listen, either to the teacher
or the pupils.

Miss Arden noticed the circumstance to her friend; "I will certainly ask
Catherine," she said, "if she has any motive in attending to our pursuits;
there is something in her countenance that excites my curiosity."
The first time she met her alone, she made the inquiry.

"I have, indeed, ma'am, a motive," said Catherine; "I would give all
my wages, could I but learn as you do."

"But of what use, Catherine, would learning be to you? You can read
your Bible; and it will shew you all that is necessary for you to know.
Your duty as a servant, and the way to heaven, the place where we all
hope to meet, when we have done with this world, and its cares."
"Ah, ma'am, I am not satisfied even with knowing this, though it
is all that a servant should know."

"I do not understand you, Catherine. Tell me why you wish to gain other
knowledge?"

"Because, ma'am, I am most wishful to be useful to my parents.

They are poor, and have a large family to bring up.

If I could but open a little school in our village, what a blessing should
I be to them!"
"Well, Catherine," said Miss Arden, after considering a little, "I will
do what I can for you--I mean if Miss Damer approves; for I dare not
trust to my own judgment. Meet me in the school-room early to-morrow
morning, and I well tell you how it is to be."
When the friends met in the play-ground, they talked the subject
over.

"There cannot, I think, be any thing wrong in doing good to a
fellow-creature," said Miss Damer, "therefore I think we may
venture; but we must rise an hour earlier than usual."

Catherine was delighted when she heard the result of their conference;
and, with many expressions of thankfulness, promised to leave a
lamp at their door.

The young ladies began the employment of teaching with alacrity. They
endeavoured to ground Catherine in those things that would be
useful in a village school.

But geography her mind was bent upon, so Miss Arden presented to her a
book; likewise several little works, which she thought would be
useful.

One morning, however, they were surprised in the midst of their lessons.

"Begin that line again," said Miss Arden. Elizabeth had walked gently
into the room, and now stood by the table where the two young ladies
were seated, and Catherine standing.

When they beheld her, they all started, and looked aghast. "You are very
early at your tasks, young ladies!

But I did not know that we had a new pupil. Pray when did she arrive?"
"I beg you a thousand pardons, ma'am, for leading the young ladies
to do wrong!

It was all my fault," said Catherine.

Miss Arden related the matter plainly as it was.

"I commend Catherine," said Elizabeth, "for her wish to serve her
parents; nor am I offended with you, young ladies, for wishing to
serve her.

But you must beware that we are not to do a wrong thing, even with the
very best motives. There is always something mean in acting
clandestinely.

Why could you not have been candid, and told me her wish?

You must not meet here again. Catherine, when you have leisure, continue
your lessons; and I will fix upon some other mode of instructing
you; at least a proper time, not by the light of a lamp."

CHAPTER XV.

When the physician was first called in to attend Jane, he strictly
forbad any person sleeping with her: Elizabeth, therefore, removed
to a small camp bed, which was placed by her sister.

A few mornings after Mrs. Adair's visit to Mrs.

Vincent, Jane suddenly awoke; and in an earnest, quick tone of voice,
begged that her sister would come to her. "But first draw aside the
window curtain," said she, "That is right. Now come into my bed--only
this morning--never--never again."

Surprised at a request so unusual, Elizabeth instantly obeyed. "Do not
sit up, sister, nor creep from me; lay your head upon my pillow."
Jane now folded her arms round her sister's neck, and kissed her
tenderly.

--"This is my first and last proof of affection! O, sister!
where--and when shall we meet again?"

The sun had risen, and gilded every part of the room. Jane raised
herself, as if by magic. "Let me behold every thing--for I shall never
behold any objects upon earth again!

This day my soul will be required by my Heavenly Father!

Ah, my soul!

it is an awful thing to die; even with hope and trust in thy Almighty
Power! But Thou art mighty to strike,--merciful and gracious in raising
thy servants unto glory."
Jane now paused; other thoughts seemed to arise.

Her glazed eyes wandered from object to object. "Ah!

there is my writing-desk; give that to my mother! There is my Bible;
that is for my dear little favourite!
Here is my watch; but I cannot see the minute finger move. It is
of no consequence: time will soon be over!Singleton, having passed his notes up to the
judge, retired from the box, giving place to his colleague.

Mr. Nash, who had listened with manifest satisfaction to the evidence,
stepped into the box with all his original confidence restored. His
selection of the true and the false thumb-prints was practically
identical with that of Mr. Singleton, and his knowledge of this fact led
him to state his conclusions with an air that was authoritative and even
dogmatic.

"I am quite satisfied of the correctness of my statements," he said, in
reply to Anstey's question, "and I am prepared to swear, and do swear,
that those thumb-prints which I have stated to be forgeries, are
forgeries, and that their detection presents no difficulty to an
observer who has an expert acquaintance with finger-prints."

"There is one question that I should like to ask," said the judge, when
the expert had left the box and Thorndyke had re-entered it to continue
his evidence. "The conclusions of the expert witnesses--manifestly _bona
fide_ conclusions, arrived at by individual judgement, without collusion
or comparison of results--are practically identical. They are virtually
in complete agreement. Now, the strange thing is this: their conclusions
are wrong in every instance" (here I nearly laughed aloud, for, as I
glanced at the two experts, the expression of smug satisfaction on their
countenances changed with lightning rapidity to a ludicrous spasm of
consternation); "not sometimes wrong and sometimes right, as would have
been the case if they had made mere guesses, but wrong every time. When
they are quite certain, they are quite wrong; and when they are
doubtful, they incline to the wrong conclusion. This is a very strange
coincidence, Dr. Thorndyke. Can you explain it?"

Thorndyke's face, which throughout the proceedings had been as
expressionless as that of a wooden figurehead, now relaxed into a dry
smile.

"I think I can, my lord," he replied. "The object of a forger in
executing a forgery is to produce deception on those who shall examine
the forgery."

"Ah!" said the judge; and _his_ face relaxed into a dry smile, while the
jury broke out into unconcealed grins.

"It was evident to me," continued Thorndyke, "that the experts would be
unable to distinguish the real from the forged thumb-prints, and, that
being so, that they would look for some collateral evidence to guide
them. I, therefore, supplied that collateral evidence. Now, if ten
prints are taken, without special precautions, from a single finger, it
will probably happen that no two of them are exactly alike; for the
finger being a rounded object of which only a small part touches the
paper, the impressions produced will show little variations according to
the part of the finger by which the print is made. But a stamp such as I
have used has a flat surface like that of a printer's type, and, like a
type, it always prints the same impression. It does not reproduce the
finger-tip, but a particular print of the finger, and so, if ten prints
are made with a single stamp, each print will be a mechanical repetition
of the other nine. Thus, on a sheet bearing twenty finger-prints, of
which ten were forgeries made with a single stamp, it would be easy to
pick out the ten forged prints by the fact that they would all be
mechanical repetitions of one another; while the genuine prints could be
distinguished by the fact of their presenting trifling variations in the
position of the finger.

"Anticipating this line of reasoning, I was careful to make each print
with a different stamp and each stamp was made from a different
thumb-print, and I further selected thumb-prints which varied as widely
as possible when I made the stamps. Moreover, when I made the real
thumb-prints, I was careful to put the thumb down in the same position
each time as far as I was able; and so it happened that, on the sheet
submitted to the experts, the real thumb-prints were nearly all alike,
while the forgeries presented considerable variations. The instances in
which the witnesses were quite certain were those in which I succeeded
in making the genuine prints repeat one another, and the doubtful cases
were those in which I partially failed."

"Thank you, that is quite clear," said the judge, with a smile of deep
content, such as is apt to appear on the judicial countenance when an
expert witness is knocked off his pedestal. "We may now proceed, Mr.
Anstey."

"You have told us," resumed Anstey, "and have submitted proofs, that it
is possible to forge a thumb-print so that detection is impossible. You
have also stated that the thumb-print on the paper found in Mr. Hornby's
safe is a forgery. Do you mean that it _may_ be a forgery, or that it
actually is one?"

"I mean that it actually is a forgery."

"When did you first come to the conclusion that it was a forgery?"

"When I saw it at Scotland Yard. There are three facts which suggested
this conclusion. In the first place the print was obviously produced
with liquid blood, and yet it was a beautifully clear and distinct
impression. But such an impression could not be produced with liquid
blood without the use of a slab and roller, even if great care were
used, and still less could it have been produced by an accidental smear.

"In the second place, on measuring the print with a micrometer, I found
that it did not agree in dimensions with a genuine thumb-print of Reuben
Hornby. It was appreciably larger. I photographed the print with the
micrometer in contact and on comparing this with a genuine thumb-print,
also photographed with the same micrometer in contact, I found that the
suspected print was larger by the fortieth of an inch, from one given
point on the ridge-pattern to another given point. I have here
enlargements of the two photographs in which the disagreement in size is
clearly shown by the lines of the micrometer. I have also the micrometer
itself and a portable microscope, if the Court wishes to verify the
photographs."

"Thank you," said the judge, with a bland smile; "we will accept your
sworn testimony unless the learned counsel for the prosecution demands
verification."

He received the photographs which Thorndyke handed up and, having
examined them with close attention, passed them on to the jury.

"The third fact," resumed Thorndyke, "is of much more importance, since
it not only proves the print to be a forgery, but also furnishes a very
distinct clue to the origin of the forgery, and so to the identity of
the forger." (Here the court became hushed until the silence was so
profound that the ticking of the clock seemed a sensible interruption. I
glanced at Walter, who sat motionless and rigid at the end of the bench,
and perceived that a horrible pallor had spread over his face, while his
forehead was covered with beads of perspiration.) "On looking at the
print closely, I noticed at one part a minute white mark or space. It
was of the shape of a capital S and had evidently been produced by a
defect in the paper--a loose fibre which had stuck to the thumb and been
detached by it from the paper, leaving a blank space where it had been.
But, on examining the paper under a low power of the microscope, I found
the surface to be perfect and intact. No loose fibre had been detached
from it, for if it had, the broken end or, at least, the groove in which
it had lain, would have been visible. The inference seemed to be that
the loose fibre had existed, not in the paper which was found in the
safe, but in the paper on which the original thumb-mark had been made.
Now, as far as I knew, there was only one undoubted thumb-print of
Reuben Hornby's in existence--the one in the 'Thumbograph.' At my
request, the 'Thumbograph' was brought to my chambers by Mrs. Hornby,
and, on examining the print of Reuben Hornby's left thumb, I perceived
on it a minute, S-shaped white space occupying a similar position to
that in the red thumb-mark; and when I looked at it through a powerful
lens, I could clearly see the little groove in the paper in which the
fibre had lain and from which it had been lifted by the inked thumb. I
subsequently made a systematic comparison of the marks in the two
thumb-prints; I found that the dimensions of the mark were
proportionally the same in each--that is to say, the mark in the
'Thumbograph' print had an extreme length of 26/1000 of an inch and an
extreme breadth of 14.5/1000 of an inch, while that in the red
thumb-mark was one-fortieth larger in each dimension, having an extreme
length of 26.65/1000 of an inch and an extreme breadth of 14.86/1000 of
an inch; that the shape was identical, as was shown by superimposing
tracings of greatly enlarged photographs of each mark on similar
enlargements of the other; and that the mark intersected the ridges of
the thumb-print in the same manner and at exactly the same parts in the
two prints."

"Do you say that--having regard to the facts which you have stated--it
is certain that the red thumb-mark is a forgery?"

"I do; and I also say that it is certain that the forgery was executed
by means of the 'Thumbograph.'"

"Might not the resemblances be merely a coincidence?"

"No. By the law of probabilities which Mr. Singleton explained so
clearly in his evidence, the adverse chances would run into untold
millions. Here are two thumb-prints made in different places and at
different times--an interval of many weeks intervening. Each of them
bears an accidental mark which is due not to any peculiarity of the
thumb, but to a peculiarity of the paper. On the theory of coincidences
it is necessary to suppose that each piece of paper had a loose fibre of
exactly identical shape and size and that this fibre came, by accident,
in contact with the thumb at exactly the same spot. But such a
supposition would be more opposed to probabilities even than the
supposition that two exactly similar thumb-prints should have been made
by different persons. And then there is the further fact that the paper
found in the safe had no loose fibre to account for the mark."  "What
is your explanation of the presence of defibrinated blood in the safe?"

"It was probably used by the forger in making the thumb-print, for which
purpose fresh blood would be less suitable by reason of its clotting. He
would probably have carried a small quantity in a bottle, together with
the pocket slab and roller invented by Mr. Galton. It would thus be
possible for him to put a drop on the slab, roll it out into a thin film
and take a clean impression with his stamp. It must be remembered that
these precautions were quite necessary, since he had to make a
recognisable print at the first attempt. A failure and a second trial
would have destroyed the accidental appearance, and might have aroused
suspicion."

"You have made some enlarged photographs of the thumb-prints, have you
not?"

"Yes. I have here two enlarged photographs, one of the 'Thumbograph'
print and one of the red thumb-print. They both show the white mark very
clearly and will assist comparison of the originals, in which the mark
is plainly visible through a lens."

He handed the two photographs up to the judge, together with the
'Thumbograph,' the memorandum slip, and a powerful doublet lens with
which to examine them.

The judge inspected the two original documents with the aid of the lens
and compared them with the photographs, nodding approvingly as he made
out the points of agreement. Then he passed them on to the jury and made
an entry in his notes.

While this was going on my attention was attracted by Walter Hornby. An
expression of terror and wild despair had settled on his face, which was
ghastly in its pallor and bedewed with sweat. He looked furtively at
Thorndyke and, as I noted the murderous hate in his eyes, I recalled our
midnight adventure in John Street and the mysterious cigar.

Suddenly he rose to his feet, wiping his brow and steadying himself
against the bench with a shaking hand; then he walked quietly to the
door and went out. Apparently, I was not the only onlooker who had been
interested in his doings, for, as the door swung to after him,
Superintendent Miller rose from his seat and went out by the other door.

"Are you cross-examining this witness?" the judge inquired, glancing at
Sir Hector Trumpler.

"No, my lord," was the reply.

"Are you calling any more witnesses, Mr. Anstey?"

"Only one, my lord," replied Anstey--"the prisoner, whom I shall put in
the witness-box, as a matter of form, in order that he may make a
statement on oath."

Reuben was accordingly conducted from the dock to the witness-box, and,
having been sworn, made a solemn declaration of his innocence. A brief
cross-examination followed, in which nothing was elicited, but that
Reuben had spent the evening at his club and gone home to his rooms
about half-past eleven and had let himself in with his latchkey. Sir
Hector at length sat down; the prisoner was led back to the dock, and
the Court settled itself to listen to the speeches of the counsel.

"My lord and gentlemen of the jury," Anstey commenced in his clear,
mellow tones, "I do not propose to occupy your time with a long speech.
The evidence that has been laid before you is at once so intelligible,
so lucid, and so conclusive, that you will, no doubt, arrive at your
verdict uninfluenced by any display of rhetoric either on my part or on
the part of the learned counsel for the prosecution.

"Nevertheless, it is desirable to disentangle from the mass of evidence
those facts which are really vital and crucial.

"Now the one fact which stands out and dominates the whole case is this:
The prisoner's connection with this case rests solely upon the police
theory of the infallibility of finger-prints. Apart from the evidence of
the thumb-print there is not, and there never was, the faintest breath
of suspicion against him. You have heard him described as a man of
unsullied honour, as a man whose character is above reproach; a man who
is trusted implicitly by those who have had dealings with him. And this
character was not given by a casual stranger, but by one who has known
him from childhood. His record is an unbroken record of honourable
conduct; his life has been that of a clean-living, straightforward
gentleman. And now he stands before you charged with a miserable, paltry
theft; charged with having robbed that generous friend, the brother of
his own father, the guardian of his childhood and the benefactor who has
planned and striven for his well-being; charged, in short, gentlemen,
with a crime which every circumstance connected with him and every trait
of his known character renders utterly inconceivable. Now upon what
grounds has this gentleman of irreproachable character been charged with
this mean and sordid crime? Baldly stated, the grounds of the accusation
are these: A certain learned and eminent man of science has made a
statement, which the police have not merely accepted but have, in
practice, extended beyond its original meaning. That statement is as
follows: 'A complete, or nearly complete, accordance between two prints
of a single finger ... affords evidence requiring no corroboration, that
the persons from whom they were made are the same.'

"That statement, gentlemen, is in the highest degree misleading, and
ought not to have been made without due warning and qualification. So
far is it from being true, in practice, that its exact contrary is the
fact; the evidence of a finger-print, in the absence of corroboration,
is absolutely worthless. Of all forms of forgery, the forgery of a
finger-print is the easiest and most secure, as you have seen in this
court to-day. Consider the character of the high-class forger--his
skill, his ingenuity, his resource. Think of the forged banknotes, of
which not only the engraving, the design and the signature, but even the
very paper with its private watermarks, is imitated with a perfection
that is at once the admiration and the despair of those who have to
distinguish the true from the false; think of the forged cheque, in
which actual perforations are filled up, of which portions are cut out
bodily and replaced by indistinguishable patches; think of these, and
then of a finger-print, of which any photo-engraver's apprentice can
make you a forgery that the greatest experts cannot distinguish from the
original, which any capable amateur can imitate beyond detection after a
month's practice; and then ask yourselves if this is the kind of
evidence on which, without any support or corroboration, a gentleman of
honour and position should be dragged before a criminal court and
charged with having committed a crime of the basest and most sordid
type.  "But I must not detain you with unnecessary appeals. I will
remind you briefly of the salient facts. The case for the prosecution
rests upon the assertion that the thumb-print found in the safe was made
by the thumb of the prisoner. If that thumb-print was not made by the
prisoner, there is not only no case against him but no suspicion of any
kind.

"Now, was that thumb-print made by the prisoner's thumb? You have had
conclusive evidence that it was not. That thumb-print differed in the
size, or scale, of the pattern from a genuine thumb-print of the
prisoner's. The difference was small, but it was fatal to the police
theory; the two prints were not identical.

"But, if not the prisoner's thumb-print, what was it? The resemblance of
the pattern was too exact for it to be the thumb-print of another
person, for it reproduced not only the pattern of the ridges on the
prisoner's thumb, but also the scar of an old wound. The answer that I
propose to this question is, that it was an intentional imitation of the
prisoner's thumb-print, made with the purpose of fixing suspicion on the
prisoner, and so ensuring the safety of the actual criminal. Are there
any facts which support this theory? Yes, there are several facts which
support it very strongly.

"First, there are the facts that I have just mentioned. The red
thumb-print disagreed with the genuine print in its scale or dimensions.
It was not the prisoner's thumb-print; but neither was it that of any
other person. The only alternative is that it was a forgery.

"In the second place, that print was evidently made with the aid of
certain appliances and materials, and one of those materials, namely
defibrinated blood, was found in the safe.

"In the third place, there is the coincidence that the print was one
which it was possible to forge. The prisoner has ten digits--eight
fingers and two thumbs. But there were in existence actual prints of the
two thumbs, whereas no prints of the fingers were in existence; hence it
would have been impossible to forge a print of any of the fingers. So it
happens that the red thumb-print resembled one of the two prints of
which forgery was possible.

"In the fourth place, the red thumb-print reproduces an accidental
peculiarity of the 'Thumbograph' print. Now, if the red thumb-print is a
forgery, it must have been made from the 'Thumbograph' print, since
there exists no other print from which it could have been made. Hence we
have the striking fact that the red thumb-print is an exact
replica--including accidental peculiarities--of the only print from
which a forgery could have been made. The accidental S-shaped mark in
the 'Thumbograph' print is accounted for by the condition of the paper;
the occurrence of this mark in the red thumb-print is not accounted for
by any peculiarity of the paper, and can be accounted for in no way,
excepting by assuming the one to be a copy of the other. The conclusion
is thus inevitable that the red thumb-print is a photo-mechanical
reproduction of the 'Thumbograph' print.

"But there is yet another point. If the red thumb-print is a forgery
reproduced from the 'Thumbograph' print, the forger must at some time
have had access to the 'Thumbograph.' Now, you have heard Mrs. Hornby's
remarkable story of the mysterious disappearance of the 'Thumbograph'
and its still more mysterious reappearance. That story can have left no
doubt in your minds that some person had surreptitiously removed the
'Thumbograph' and, after an unknown interval, secretly replaced it. Thus
the theory of forgery receives confirmation at every point, and is in
agreement with every known fact; whereas the theory that the red
thumb-print was a genuine thumb-print, is based upon a gratuitous
assumption, and has not had a single fact advanced in its support.

"Accordingly, gentlemen, I assert that the prisoner's innocence has been
proved in the most complete and convincing manner, and I ask you for a
verdict in accordance with that proof."

As Anstey resumed his seat, a low rumble of applause was heard from the
gallery. It subsided instantly on a gesture of disapproval from the
judge, and a silence fell upon the court, in which the clock, with
cynical indifference, continued to record in its brusque monotone the
passage of the fleeting seconds.

"He is saved, Dr. Jervis! Oh! surely he is saved!" Juliet exclaimed in
an agitated whisper. "They must see that he is innocent now."

"Have patience a little longer," I answered. "It will soon be over now."

Sir Hector Trumpler was already on his feet and, after bestowing on the
jury a stern hypnotic stare, he plunged into his reply with a really
admirable air of conviction and sincerity.  "My lord and gentlemen of
the jury: The case which is now before this Court is one, as I have
already remarked, in which human nature is presented in a highly
unfavourable light. But I need not insist upon this aspect of the case,
which will already, no doubt, have impressed you sufficiently. It is
necessary merely for me, as my learned friend has aptly expressed it, to
disentangle the actual facts of the case from the web of casuistry that
has been woven around them.

"Those facts are of extreme simplicity. A safe has been opened and
property of great value abstracted from it. It has been opened by means
of false keys. Now there are two men who have, from time to time, had
possession of the true keys, and thus had the opportunity of making
copies of them. When the safe is opened by its rightful owner, the
property is gone, and there is found the print of the thumb of one of
these two men. That thumb-print was not there when the safe was closed.
The man whose thumb-print is found is a left-handed man; the print is
the print of a left thumb. It would seem, gentlemen, as if the
conclusion were so obvious that no sane person could be found to contest
it; and I submit that the conclusion which any sane person would arrive
at--the only possible conclusion--is, that the person whose thumb-print
was found in the safe is the person who stole the property from the
safe. But the thumb-print was, admittedly, that of the prisoner at the
bar, and therefore the prisoner at the bar is the person who stole the
diamonds from the safe.

"It is true that certain fantastic attempts have been made to explain
away these obvious facts. Certain far-fetched scientific theories have
been propounded and an exhibition of legerdemain has taken place which,
I venture to think, would have been more appropriate to some place of
public entertainment than to a court of justice. That exhibition has, no
doubt, afforded you considerable amusement. It has furnished a pleasing
relaxation from the serious business of the court. It has even been
instructive, as showing to what extent it is possible for plain facts to
be perverted by misdirected ingenuity. But unless you are prepared to
consider this crime as an elaborate hoax--as a practical joke carried
out by a facetious criminal of extraordinary knowledge, skill and
general attainments--you must, after all, come to the only conclusion
that the facts justify: that the safe was opened and the property
abstracted by the prisoner. Accordingly, gentlemen, I ask you, having
regard to your important position as the guardians of the well-being and
security of your fellow-citizens, to give your verdict in accordance
with the evidence, as you have solemnly sworn to do; which verdict, I
submit, can be no other than that the prisoner is guilty of the crime
with which he is charged."

Sir Hector sat down, and the jury, who had listened to his speech with
solid attention, gazed expectantly at the judge, as though they should
say: "Now, which of these two are we to believe?"

The judge turned over his notes with an air of quiet composure, writing
down a word here and there as he compared the various points in the
evidence. Then he turned to the jury with a manner at once persuasive
and confidential--

"It is not necessary, gentlemen," he commenced, "for me to occupy your
time with an exhaustive analysis of the evidence. That evidence you
yourselves have heard, and it has been given, for the most part, with
admirable clearness. Moreover, the learned counsel for the defence has
collated and compared that evidence so lucidly, and, I may say, so
impartially, that a detailed repetition on my part would be
superfluous. I shall therefore confine myself to a few comments which
may help you in the consideration of your verdict.

"I need hardly point out to you that the reference made by the learned
counsel for the prosecution to far-fetched scientific theories is
somewhat misleading. The only evidence of a theoretical character was
that of the finger-print experts. The evidence of Dr. Rowe and of Dr.
Thorndyke dealt exclusively with matters of fact. Such inferences as
were drawn by them were accompanied by statements of the facts which
yielded such inferences.

"Now, an examination of the evidence which you have heard shows, as the
learned counsel for the defence has justly observed, that the entire
case resolves itself into a single question, which is this: 'Was the
thumb-print that was found in Mr. Hornby's safe made by the thumb of the
prisoner, or was it not?' If that thumb-print was made by the prisoner's
thumb, then the prisoner must, at least, have been present when the safe
was unlawfully opened. If that thumb-print was not made by the
prisoner's thumb, there is nothing to connect him with the crime. The
question is one of fact upon which it will be your duty to decide; and I
must remind you, gentlemen, that you are the sole judges of the facts of
the case, and that you are to consider any remarks of mine as merely
suggestions which you are to entertain or to disregard according to your
judgement.

"Now let us consider this question by the light of the evidence. This
thumb-print was either made by the prisoner or it was not. What evidence
has been brought forward to show that it was made by the prisoner? Well,
there is the evidence of the ridge-pattern. That pattern is identical
with the pattern of the prisoner's thumb-print, and even has the
impression of a scar which crosses the pattern in a particular manner
in the prisoner's thumb-print. There is no need to enter into the
elaborate calculations as to the chances of agreement; the practical
fact, which is not disputed, is that if this red thumb-print is a
genuine thumb-print at all, it was made by the prisoner's thumb. But it
is contended that it is not a genuine thumb-print; that it is a
mechanical imitation--in fact a forgery.

"The more general question thus becomes narrowed down to the more
particular question: 'Is this a genuine thumb-print or is it a forgery?'
Let us consider the evidence. First, what evidence is there that it is a
genuine thumb-print? There is none. The identity of the pattern is no
evidence on this point, because a forgery would also exhibit identity of
pattern. The genuineness of the thumb-print was assumed by the
prosecution, and no evidence has been offered.

"But now what evidence is there that the red thumb-print is a forgery?

"First, there is the question of size. Two different-sized prints could
hardly be made by the same thumb. Then there is the evidence of the use
of appliances. Safe-robbers do not ordinarily provide themselves with
inking-slabs and rollers with which to make distinct impressions of
their own fingers. Then there is the accidental mark on the print which
also exists on the only genuine print that could have been used for the
purpose of forgery, which is easily explained on the theory of a
forgery, but which is otherwise totally incomprehensible. Finally, there
is the strange disappearance of the 'Thumbograph' and its strange
reappearance. All this is striking and weighty evidence, to which must
be added that adduced by Dr. Thorndyke as showing how perfectly it is
possible to imitate a finger-print.

"These are the main facts of the case, and it is for you to consider
them. HARRY TIGHE is something of a problem to me. With the best will in
the world to appreciate what looked like unusual promise I can only
regard him at present as one who is neglecting the good gifts of
heaven in the pursuit apparently of some Jack-o'-lanthorn idea of
popularity. No doubt you recall his first novel, _The Sheep Path_, a
sincere and well-observed study of feminine temperament. This was
followed by one that (though it had its friends) marked, to my
thinking, a lamentable fall from grace.

He has now published a third, _Day Dawn_ (WESTALL). Here, though
popularity of a kind may be its reward, the work is still woefully
beneath what should be Mr.

TIGHE'S level.

Certainly not one of the demands of the circulating libraries is
unfulfilled. We have a fair-haired heroine (victim to cocaine), a dark
and villainous foreigner, a dashing hero, a middle-aged woman who
adores him despite the presence of her husband, himself called
throughout _Baron Brinthall_, a style surely more common in pantomimic
circles than in the drawing-rooms of Mayfair; and the incidents
embrace both murder and suicide.

Moreover there is "plenty of conversation," and the intrigue moves
sufficiently quickly (if jerkily) to keep one curious about the
next page.

But having very willingly admitted so much I return to my contention,
that for Mr.

TIGHE to neglect his sensitive and delicate art for the antics of
these tawdry dolls is to betray both himself and the craft of which
he may still become a distinguished exponent

.

* * * * *
From the official who is interested in officialdom to the Infantry
officer who is interested in tactics, from the mechanical expert who
can appreciate the technical details of diagrams to the child who
revels in faultless photographs of hair-raising monsters ("I may
read it, mother, mayn't I, when I've unstickied my fingers?"

In view of the
evidence which has been given, I consider that no other verdict was
possible, and I venture to say that you leave this court with your
innocence fully established, and without a stain upon your character. In
the distress which you have recently suffered, as well as in your
rejoicing at the verdict of the jury, you have the sympathy of the
Court, and of everyone present, and that sympathy will not be diminished
by the consideration that, with a less capable defence, the result might
have been very different.

"I desire to express my admiration at the manner in which that defence
was conducted, and I desire especially to observe that not you alone,
but the public at large, are deeply indebted to Dr. Thorndyke, who, by
his insight, his knowledge and his ingenuity, has probably averted a
very serious miscarriage of justice. The Court will now adjourn until
half-past two."

The judge rose from his seat and everyone present stood up; and, amidst
the clamour of many feet upon the gallery stairs, the door of the dock
was thrown open by a smiling police officer and Reuben came down the
stairs into the body of the court.


CHAPTER XVII

AT LAST


"We had better let the people clear off," said Thorndyke, when the first
greetings were over and we stood around Reuben in the fast-emptying
court. "We don't want a demonstration as we go out."

"No; anything but that, just now," replied Reuben. He still held Mrs.
Hornby's hand, and one arm was passed through that of his uncle, who
wiped his eyes at intervals, though his face glowed with delight.

"I should like you to come and have a little quiet luncheon with me at
my chambers--all of us friends together," continued Thorndyke.

"I should be delighted," said Reuben, "if the programme would include a
satisfactory wash."

"You will come, Anstey?" asked Thorndyke.

"What have you got for lunch?" demanded Anstey, who was now disrobed and
in his right mind--that is to say, in his usual whimsical,
pseudo-frivolous character.

Johnson has remarked that the French are fond of Young's _Night
Thoughts_, a fact which is hard to be accounted for, that a nation
so celebrated for their gaiety should have a regard for an author
treating on such serious subjects.

_Wigs_.
"Polton has gone for a four-wheeler, but it won't hold us
all."

"It will hold four of us," said Reuben, "and Dr. Jervis will bring
Juliet; won't you, Jervis?"

The request rather took me aback, considering the circumstances, but I
was conscious, nevertheless, of an unreasonable thrill of pleasure and
answered with alacrity: "If Miss Gibson will allow me, I shall be very
delighted." My delight was, apparently, not shared by Juliet, to judge
by the uncomfortable blush that spread over her face. She made no
objection, however, but merely replied rather coldly: "Well, as we can't
sit on the roof of the cab, we had better go by ourselves."

But the king, who only meant to give him a fright, forgave him freely,
and, going into the castle, feasted on his own venison, which Buchanan
had intercepted.
Buchanan of Arnpryor was ever afterwards called King of
Kippen.

W.G.C.

_Remarkable Murder_.Then we turned and walked quickly
down the Old Bailey towards Ludgate Hill.  "Shall we take a hansom?" I
asked.

"No; let us walk," replied Juliet; "a little fresh air will do us good
after that musty, horrible court. It all seems like a dream, and yet
what a relief--oh! what a relief it is."

"It is rather like the awakening from a nightmare to find the morning
sun shining," I rejoined.

"Yes; that is just what it is like," she agreed; "but I still feel dazed
and shaken."

We turned presently down New Bridge Street, towards the Embankment,
walking side by side without speaking, and I could not help comparing,
with some bitterness, our present stiff and distant relations with the
intimacy and comradeship that had existed before the miserable incident
of our last meeting.

"You don't look so jubilant over your success as I should have
expected," she said at length, with a critical glance at me; "but I
expect you are really very proud and delighted, aren't you?"

"Delighted, yes; not proud. Why should I be proud? I have only played
jackal, and even that I have done very badly."

"That is hardly a fair statement of the facts," she rejoined, with
another quick, inquisitive look at me; "but you are in low spirits
to-day--which is not at all like you. Is it not so?"

Why are these little pebbles preferred to chips of lime-stone, when both
materials are found in equal abundance around the nest?

A yet more remarkable feature: we find pretty often, encrusted
on the dome, a few tiny, empty snail-shells, bleached by the sun. The
species usually selected by the Eumenes is one of the smaller Helices--Helix
strigata--frequent on our parched slopes. I have seen nests where this
Helix took the place of pebbles almost entirely. They were like boxes
made of shells, the work of a patient hand.

A comparison offers here. Certain Australian birds, notably the
Bower-birds, build themselves covered walks, or playhouses, with
interwoven twigs, and decorate the two entrances to the portico by
strewing the threshold with anything that they can find in the shape
of glittering, polished, or bright-coloured objects.

Every door-sill is a cabinet of curiosities where the collector gathers
smooth pebbles, variegated shells, empty snail-shells, parrot's feathers,
bones that have come to look like sticks of ivory. The odds and ends
mislaid by man find a home in the bird's museum, where we see pipe-stems,
metal buttons, strips of cotton stuff and stone axe-heads.

The collection at either entrance to the bower is large enough to fill
half a bushel. As these objects are of no use to the bird, its only motive
for accumulating them must be an art-lover's hobby.

Our common Magpie has similar tastes: any shiny thing that he comes
upon he picks up, hides and hoards.The gratitude
of the family was a matter of little consequence to me.

"Well, it is no secret now," replied Juliet. "I mean the girl whom
Reuben is going to marry. What is the matter, Dr. Jervis?" she added, in
a tone of surprise.

We were passing through the gate that leads from the Embankment to
Middle Temple Lane, and I had stopped dead under the archway, laying a
detaining hand upon her arm and gazing at her in utter amazement.

"The girl that Reuben is going to marry!" I repeated. "Why, I had always
taken it for granted that he was going to marry you."

"But I told you, most explicitly, that was not so!" she exclaimed with
some impatience.

"I know you did," I admitted ruefully; "but I thought--well, I imagined
that things had, perhaps, not gone quite smoothly and--"

"Did you suppose that if I had cared for a man, and that man had been
under a cloud, I should have denied the relation or pretended that we
were merely friends?" she demanded indignantly.

"I am sure you wouldn't," I replied hastily. "I was a fool, an idiot--by
Jove, what an idiot I have been!"

"It was certainly very silly of you," she admitted; but there was a
gentleness in her tone that took away all bitterness from the reproach.

"The reason of the secrecy was this," she continued; "they became
engaged the very night before Reuben was arrested, and, when he heard of
the charge against him, he insisted that no one should be told unless,
and until, he was fully acquitted. I was the only person who was in
their confidence, and as I was sworn to secrecy, of course I couldn't
tell you; nor did I suppose that the matter would interest you. Why
should it?"

"Imbecile that I am," I murmured. "If I had only known!"

"Well, if you _had_ known," said she; "what difference could it have
made to you?"

This question she asked without looking at me, but I noted that her
cheek had grown a shade paler.

"Only this," I answered. "That I should have been spared many a day and
night of needless self-reproach and misery."

"But why?" she asked, still keeping her face averted. "What had you to
reproach yourself with?"

"A great deal," I answered, "if you consider my supposed position. If
you think of me as the trusted agent of a man, helpless and deeply
wronged--a man whose undeserved misfortunes made every demand upon
chivalry and generosity; if you think of me as being called upon to
protect and carry comfort to the woman whom I regarded as, virtually,
that man's betrothed wife; and then if you think of me as proceeding
straightway, before I had known her twenty-four hours, to fall
hopelessly in love with her myself, you will admit that I had something
to reproach myself with."

She was still silent, rather pale and very thoughtful, and she seemed to
breathe more quickly than usual.

"Of course," I continued, "you may say that it was my own look-out, that
I had only to keep my own counsel, and no one would be any the worse.
But there's the mischief of it. How can a man who is thinking of a woman
morning, noon and night; whose heart leaps at the sound of her coming,
whose existence is a blank when she is away from him--a blank which he
tries to fill by recalling, again and again, all that she has said and
the tones of her voice, and the look that was in her eyes when she
spoke--how can he help letting her see, sooner or later, that he cares
for her? And if he does, when he has no right to, there is an end of
duty and chivalry and even common honesty."

"Yes, I understand now," said Juliet softly. "Is this the way?" She
tripped up the steps leading to Fountain Court and I followed
cheerfully. Of course it was not the way, and we both knew it, but the
place was silent and peaceful, and the plane-trees cast a pleasant shade
on the gravelled court. I glanced at her as we walked slowly towards the
fountain. The roses were mantling in her cheeks now and her eyes were
cast down, but when she lifted them to me for an instant, I saw that
they were shining and moist.

"Did you never guess?" I asked.

"Yes," she replied in a low voice, "I guessed; but--but then," she
added shyly, "I thought I had guessed wrong."

We walked on for some little time without speaking again until we came
to the further side of the fountain, where we stood listening to the
quiet trickle of the water, and watching the sparrows as they took their
bath on the rim of the basin. A little way off another group of sparrows
had gathered with greedy joy around some fragments of bread that had
been scattered abroad by the benevolent Templars, and hard by a more
sentimentally-minded pigeon, unmindful of the crumbs and the marauding
sparrows, puffed out his breast and strutted and curtsied before his
mate with endearing gurgles.

Juliet had rested her hand on one of the little posts that support the
chain by which the fountain is enclosed and I had laid my hand on hers.
Presently she turned her hand over so that mine lay in its palm; and so
we were standing hand-in-hand when an elderly gentleman, of dry and
legal aspect, came up the steps and passed by the fountain. He looked at
the pigeons and then he looked at us, and went his way smiling and
shaking his head.

"Juliet," said I.

She looked up quickly with sparkling eyes and a frank smile that was yet
a little shy, too.

"Yes."

I know you're doing all you can, and I don't want to seem repining
and ungrateful--for I'm not, Beriah--you know I'm not, don't you?"

"Lord bless you, child, I know you are the very best little woman
that ever lived--that ever lived on the whole face of the Earth!

And I know that I would be a dog not to work for you and think for you and
scheme for you with all my might.

And I'll bring things all right yet, honey --cheer up and don't you
fear. The railroad----"
"Oh, I had forgotten the railroad, dear, but when a body gets blue,
a body forgets everything.

Yes, the railroad--tell me about the railroad."
"Aha, my girl, don't you see?

Things ain't so dark, are they? Now I didn't forget the railroad.

"I can forgive you anything when you say that," she answered softly.

Here the voice of the distant Temple clock was heard uttering a polite
protest. With infinite reluctance we turned away from the fountain,
which sprinkled us with a parting benediction, and slowly retraced our
steps to Middle Temple Lane and thence into Pump Court.

"You haven't said it, Juliet," I whispered, as we came through the
archway into the silent, deserted court.

"Haven't I, dear?" she answered; "but you know it, don't you? You know I
do."

"Yes, I know," I said; "and that knowledge is all my heart's desire."

She laid her hand in mine for a moment with a gentle pressure and then
drew it away; and so we passed through into the cloisters.


THE END