Now, it is well known that you may follow a hunted fox through whatever
country he may take you to, if only your hounds are hunting him
continuously. And one hound for that purpose is as good as thirty, and
if a hound can only "show a line" he is held to be hunting. Mr. Fairlawn
was quite sure that one of his hounds had been showing a line, and had
been whipped off it by one of Mr. Harkaway's men. The man swore that he
had only been collecting his own hounds. On this plea Mr. Fairlawn
demanded to take his whole pack into Greasegate Wood,--the very covert
that Mr. Harkaway had been about to draw. "I'm d----d if you do!" said Mr.
Harkaway, standing, whip in hand, in the middle of the road, so as to
prevent the enemy's huntsman passing by with his hounds. It was
afterward declared that Mr. Harkaway had not been heard to curse and
swear for the last fifteen years. "I'm d----d if I don't!" said Mr.
Fairlawn, riding up to him. Mr. Harkaway was ten years the older man,
and looked as though he had much less of fighting power. But no one saw
him quail or give an inch. Those who watched his face declared that his
lips were white with rage and quivered with passion.

To tell the words which passed between them after that would require
Homer's pathos and Homer's imagination. The two old men scowled and
scolded at each other, and, had Mr. Fairlawn attempted to pass, Mr.
Harkaway would certainly have struck him with his whip. And behind their
master a crowd of the Puckeridge men collected themselves,--foremost
among whom was Joshua Thoroughbung. "Take 'em round to the covert by
Winnipeg Lane," said Mr. Fairlawn to his huntsman. The man prepared to
take his pack round by Winnipeg Lane, which would have added a mile to
the distance. But the huntsman, when he had got a little to the left,
was soon seen scurrying across the country in the direction of the
covert, with a dozen others at his heels, and the hounds following him.
But old Mr. Harkaway had seen it too, and having possession of the road,
galloped along it at such a pace that no one could pass him.

All the field declared that they had regarded it as impossible that
their master should move so fast. And Dillon, and the whips, and
Thoroughbung, and Harry Annesley, with half a dozen others, kept pace
with him. They would not sit there and see their master outmanoeuvred by
any lack of readiness on their part. They got to the covert first, and
there, with their whips drawn, were ready to receive the second pack.
The word "present" is often used in place of "introduce." While it is
customary to repeat the names of the two parties introduced at the close
of the introduction, it is often omitted as a useless formality. It is
of the utmost importance that each name should be spoken distinctly.

If either of the parties does not distinctly hear the name of the other
he should say at once, without hesitation or embarrassment, before making
the bow, "I beg your pardon; I did not catch (or understand) the
name," when it may be repeated to him.

If several persons are to be introduced to one individual, mention the
name of the single individual first, and then call the others in
succession, bowing slightly as each name is pronounced.

It is the part of true politeness, after introductions, to explain
to each person introduced something of the business or residence
of each, as they will assist in opening conversation.

Or, if one party has recently returned from a foreign trip, it is courteous
to say so.

CASUAL INTRODUCTIONS.

While it is not necessary to introduce people who chance to meet in your
house during a morning call; yet, if there is no reason for supposing
that such an introduction will be objectionable to either party,
it seems better to give it, as it sets both parties at ease in
conversation. Acquaintanceship may or may not follow such an
introduction, at the option of the parties. People who meet at the
house of a mutual friend need not recognize each other as acquaintances
if they meet again elsewhere, unless they choose to do so.When Dick, the Hitchin whip,
went down, and Thoroughbung, with his horse, was over him,--two men and
two horses struggling together on the ground,--all desire to carry on the
fight was over.

The huntsman came up, and at last Mr. Fairlawn also, and considered it
to be their duty to pick up Dick, whose breath was knocked out of him by
the weight of Joshua Thoroughbung, and the Puckeridge side felt it to be
necessary to give their aid to the valiant brewer. There was then no
more attempt to draw the covert. Each general in gloomy silence took off
his forces, and each afterward deemed that the victory was his. Dick
swore, when brought to himself, that one of his hounds had gone in,
whereas Squire 'Arkaway "had swore most 'orrid oaths that no 'Itchiner
'ound should ever live to put his nose in. One of 'is 'ounds 'ad, and
Squire 'Arkaway would have to be--" Well, Dick declared that he would
not say what would happen to Mr. Harkaway.


CHAPTER XXIX.

RIDING HOME.


The two old gentlemen rode away, each in his own direction, in gloomy
silence. Not a word was said by either of them, even to one of his own
followers. It was nearly twenty miles to Mr. Harkaway's house, and along
the entire twenty miles he rode silent. "He's in an awful passion," said
Thoroughbung; "he can't speak from anger." But, to tell the truth, Mr.
Harkaway was ashamed of himself. He was an old gentleman, between
seventy and eighty, who was supposed to go out for his amusement, and
had allowed himself to be betrayed into most unseemly language. What
though the hound had not "shown a line?" Was it necessary that he, at
his time of life, should fight on the road for the maintenance of a
trifling right of sport. But yet there came upon him from time to time a
sense of the deep injury done to him. That man Fairlawn, that
blackguard, that creature of all others the farthest removed from a
gentleman, had declared that in his, Mr. Harkaway's teeth, he would draw
his, Mr. Harkaway's covert! Then he would urge on his old horse, and
gnash his teeth; and then, again, he would be ashamed. "Tantaene animis
coelestibus irae?"

But Thoroughbung rode home high in spirits, very proud, and conscious of
having done good work. He was always anxious to stand well with the hunt
generally, and was aware that he had now distinguished himself. Harry
Annesley was on one side of him, and on the other rode Mr. Florin, the
banker. "He's an abominable liar!" said Thoroughbung, "a wicked,
wretched liar!" He was alluding to the Hitchiner's whip, whom in his
wrath he had nearly sent to another world. "He says that one of his
hounds got into the covert, but I was there and saw it all. Not a nose
was over the little bank which runs between the field and the covert."

"You must have seen a hound if he had been there," said the banker.

"I was as cool as a cucumber, and could count the hounds he had with
him. There were three of them. A big black-spotted bitch was leading,
the one that I nearly fell upon. When the man went down the hound
stopped, not knowing what was expected of him. How should he? The man
would have been in the covert, but, by George! I managed to stop him."

"What did you mean to do to him when you rode at him so furiously?"
asked Harry.

"Not let him get in there. That was my resolute purpose. I suppose I
should have knocked him off his horse with my whip."

"But suppose he had knocked you off your horse?" suggested the banker.

"There is no knowing how that might have been. I never calculated those
chances. When a man wants to do a thing like that he generally does it."

"And you did it?" said Harry.

"Yes; I think I did. I dare say his bones are sore. I know mine are. But
I don't care for that in the least. When this day comes to be talked
about, as I dare say it will be for many a long year, no one will be
able to say that the Hitchiners got into that covert." Thoroughbung,
with the genuine modesty of an Englishman, would not say that he had
achieved by his own prowess all this glory for the Puckeridge Hunt, but
he felt it down to the very end of his nails.

Had he not been there that whip would have got into the wood, and a very
different tale would then have been told in those coming years to which
his mind was running away with happy thoughts. He had ridden the
aggressors down; he had stopped the first intrusive hound. But though he
continued to talk of the subject, he did not boast in so many words that
he had done it. His "veni, vidi, vici," was confined to his own bosom.

As they rode home together there came to be a little crowd of men round
Thoroughbung, giving him the praises that were his due. But one by one
they fell off from Annesley's side of the road. He soon felt that no one
addressed a word to him. He was, probably, too prone to encourage them
in this. It was he that fell away, and courted loneliness, and then in
his heart accused them. There was do doubt something of truth in his
accusations; but another man, less sensitive, might have lived it down.
He did more than meet their coldness half-way, and then complained to
himself of the bitterness of the world. "They are like the beasts of the
field," he said, "who when another beast has been wounded, turn upon him
and rend him to death." His future brother-in-law, the best natured
fellow that ever was born, rode on thoughtless, and left Harry alone for
three or four miles, while he received the pleasant plaudits of his
companions. In Joshua's heart was that tale of the whip's discomfiture.
He did not see that Molly's brother was alone as soon as he would have
done but for his own glory. "He is the same as the others," said Harry
to himself. "Because that man has told a falsehood of me, and has had
the wit to surround it with circumstances, he thinks it becomes him to
ride away and cut me." Then he asked himself some foolish questions as
to himself and as to Joshua Thoroughbung, which he did not answer as he
should have done, had he remembered that he was then riding
Thoroughbung's horse, and that his sister was to become Thoroughbung's
wife.

After half an hour of triumphant ovation, Joshua remembered his
brother-in-law, and did fall back so as to pick him up. "What's the
matter, Harry? Why don't you come on and join us?"

"I'm sick of hearing of that infernal squabble."

"Well; as to a squabble, Mr. Harkaway behaved quite right. If a hunt is
to be kept up, the right of entering coverts must be preserved for the
hunt they belong to. There was no line shown. You must remember that
there isn't a doubt about that. The hounds were all astray when we
joined them. It's a great question whether they brought their fox into
that first covert. There are they who think that Bodkin was just riding
across the Puckeridge country in search of a fox." Bodkin was Mr.
Fairlawn's huntsman. "If you admit that kind of thing, where will you
be? As a hunting country, just nowhere. Then as a sportsman, where are
you? It is necessary to put down such gross fraud. My own impression is
that Mr. THE MANNER OF INTRODUCTION.

The proper form of introduction is to present the gentleman to the lady,
the younger to the older, the inferior in social standing to the
superior. In introducing, you bow to the lady and say, "Miss C.,
allow me to introduce to you Mr.Then Mr. Proctor rode by, the gentleman who in the early part of the day
disgusted Harry by calling him "mister." "Now, Mr. Proctor," continued
Joshua, "I appeal to you whether Mr. Harkaway was not quite right? If
you won't stick up for your rights in a hunting county--" But Mr.
Proctor rode on, wishing them good-night, very discourteously declining
to hear the remainder of the brewer's arguments. "He's in a hurry, I
suppose," said Joshua.

"You'd better follow him. You'll find that he'll listen to you then."

"I don't want him to listen to me particularly."

"I thought you did." Then for half an hour the two men rode on in
silence.

"What's the matter with you Harry?" said Joshua. "I can see there's
something up that riles you. I know you're a fellow of your college, and
have other things to think of besides the vagaries of a fox."

"The fellow of a college!" said Harry, who, had he been in a good-humor,
would have thought much more of being along with a lot of fox-hunters
than of any college honors.

"Well, yes; I suppose it is a great thing to be a fellow of a college. I
never could have been one if I had mugged forever."

"My being a fellow of a college won't do me much good. Did you see that
old man Proctor go by just now?"

"Oh yes; he never likes to be out after a certain hour."

"And did you see Florin, and Mr. Harkaway, and a lot of others? You
yourself have been going on ahead for the last hour without speaking to
me."

"How do you mean without speaking to you?" said Joshua, turning sharp
round.

Then Harry Annesley reflected that he was doing an injustice to his
future brother-in-law.

"Perhaps I have done you wrong," he said.

"You have."

"I beg your pardon. I believe you are as honest and true a fellow as
there is in Hertfordshire, but for those others--"

"You think it's about Mountjoy Scarborough, then?" asked Joshua.

"I do. That infernal fool, Peter Prosper, has chosen to publish to the
world that he has dropped me because of something that he has heard of
that occurrence. A wretched lie has been told with a purpose by
Mountjoy Scarborough's brother, and my uncle has taken it into his wise
head to believe it. The truth is, I have not been as respectful to him
as he thinks I ought, and now he resents my neglect in this fashion. He
is going to marry your aunt in order that he may have a lot of children,
and cut me out. In order to justify himself, he has told these lies
about me, and you see the consequence;--not a man in the county is
willing to speak to me."

"I really think a great deal of it's fancy."

"You go and ask Mr. Harkaway. He's honest, and he'll tell you. Ask this
new cousin of yours, Mr. Prosper."

"I don't know that they are going to make a match of it, after all."

"Ask my own father. Only think of it,--that a puling, puking idiot like
that, from a mere freak, should be able to do a man such a mischief! He
can rob me of my income, which he himself has brought me up to expect.
That he can do by a stroke of his pen. He can threaten to have sons like
Priam. All that is within his own bosom. But to justify himself to the
world at large, he picks up a scandalous story from a man like Augustus
Scarborough, and immediately not a man in the county will speak to me. I
say that that is enough to break a man's heart,--not the injury done
which a man should bear, but the injustice of the doing. Who wants his
beggarly allowance! He can do as he likes about his own money. I shall
never ask him for his money. But that he should tell such a lie as this
about the county is more than a man can endure."

"What was it that did happen?" asked Joshua.

"The man met me in the street when he was drunk, and he struck at me and
was insolent. Of course I knocked him down. Who wouldn't have done the
same? Then his brother found him somewhere, or got hold of him, and sent
him out of the country, and says that I had held my tongue when I left
him in the street. Of course I held my tongue. What was Mountjoy to me?
Then Augustus has asked me sly questions, and accuses me of lying
because I did not choose to tell him everything. It all comes out of
that."

Here they had reached the rectory, and Harry, after seeing that the
horses were properly supplied with gruel, took himself and his ill-humor
up-stairs to his own chamber. But Joshua had a word or two to say to one
of the inmates of the rectory.

He felt that it would be improper to ride his horse home without giving
time to the animal to drink his gruel, and therefore made his way into
the little breakfast-parlor, where Molly had a cup of tea and buttered
toast ready for him. He of course told her first of the grand occurrence
of the day,--how the two packs of hounds had mixed themselves together,
how violently the two masters had fallen out and had nearly flogged each
other, how Mr. Harkaway had sworn horribly,--who had never been heard to
swear before,--how a final attempt had been made to seize a second
covert, and how, at last, it had come to pass that he had distinguished
himself. "Do you mean to say that you absolutely rode over the
unfortunate man?" asked Molly.

"I did. Not that the man had the worst of it,--or very much the worse.
There we were both down, and the two horses, all in a heap together."

"Oh, Joshua, suppose you had been kicked!"

"In that case I should have been--kicked."

"But a kick from an infuriated horse!"

"There wasn't much infuriation about him. The man had ridden all that
out of the beast."

"You are sure to laugh at me, Joshua, because I think what terrible
things might have happened to you. Why do you go putting yourself so
forward in every danger, now that you have got somebody else to depend
upon you and to care for you? It's very, very wrong."

"Somebody had to do it, Molly. It was most important, in the interests
of hunting generally, that those hounds should not have been allowed to
get into that covert. I don't think that outsiders ever understand how
essential it is to maintain your rights. It isn't as though it were an
individual. The whole county may depend upon it."

"Why shouldn't it be some man who hasn't got a young woman to look
after?" said Molly, half laughing and half crying.

"It's the man who first gets there who ought to do it," said Joshua. "A
man can't stop to remember whether he has got a young woman or not."

"I don't think you ever want to remember." Then that little quarrel was
brought to the usual end with the usual blandishments, and Joshua went
on to discuss with her that other source of trouble, her brother's fall.
"Harry is awfully cut up," said the brewer.

"You mean these affairs about his uncle?"

"Yes. It isn't only the money he feels, or the property, but people
look askew at him. You ought all of you to be very kind to him."

"I am sure we are."

"There is something in it to vex him. That stupid old fool, your
uncle--I beg your pardon, you know, for speaking of him in that way--"

"He is a stupid old fool."

"Is behaving very badly. I don't know whether he shouldn't be treated as
I did that fellow up at the covert."

"Ride over him?"

"Something of that kind. Of course Harry is sore about it, and when a
man is sore he frets at a thing like that more than he ought to do. As
for that aunt of mine at Buntingford, there seems to be some hitch in
it. I should have said she'd have married the Old Gentleman had he asked
her."

"Don't talk like that, Joshua."

"But there is some screw loose. Simpson came up to my father about it
yesterday, and the governor let enough of the cat out of the bag to make
me know that the thing is not going as straight as she wishes."

"He has offered, then?"

"I am sure he has asked her."

"And your aunt will accept him?" asked Molly.

"There's probably some difference about money. It's all done with the
intention of injuring poor Harry. If he were my own brother I could not
be more unhappy about him. And as to Aunt Matilda, she's a fool. There
are two fools together. If they choose to marry we can't hinder them.
But there is some screw loose, and if the two young lovers don't know
their own minds things may come right at last." Then, with some farther
blandishments, the prosperous brewer walked away.


CHAPTER XXX.

PERSECUTION.


In the mean time Florence Mountjoy was not passing her time pleasantly
at Brussels. Various troubles there attended her. All her friends around
her were opposed to her marriage with Harry Annesley. Harry Annesley had
become a very unsavory word in the mouths of Sir Magnus and the British
Embassy generally. Mrs. Mountjoy told her grief to her brother-in-law,
who thoroughly took her part, as did also, very strongly, Lady Mountjoy.
It got to be generally understood that Harry was a _mauvais sujet_. Such
was the name that was attached to him, and the belief so conveyed was
thoroughly entertained by them all. Sir Magnus had written to friends in
London, and the friends in London bore out the reports that were so
conveyed. The story of the midnight quarrel was told in a manner very
prejudicial to poor Harry, and both Sir Magnus and his wife saw the
necessity of preserving their niece from anything so evil as such a
marriage. But Florence was very firm, and was considered to be very
obstinate. To her mother she was obstinate but affectionate To Sir
Magnus she was obstinate and in some degree respectful. But to Lady
Mountjoy she was neither affectionate nor respectful. She took a great
dislike to Lady Mountjoy, who endeavored to domineer; and who, by the
assistance of the two others, was in fact tyrannical. It was her opinion
that the girl should be compelled to abandon the man, and Mrs. Mountjoy
found herself constrained to follow this advice. She did love her
daughter, who was her only child. The main interest of her life was
centred in her daughter. Her only remaining ambition rested on her
daughter's marriage. She had long revelled in the anticipation of being
the mother-in-law of the owner of Tretton Park. She had been very proud
of her daughter's beauty.

Then had come the first blow, when Harry Annesley had come to Montpelier
Place and had been welcomed by Florence. Mrs. Mountjoy had seen it all
long before Florence had been aware of it. And the first coming of Harry
had been long before the absolute disgrace of Captain Scarborough,--at
any rate, before the tidings of that disgrace had reached Cheltenham.
Mrs. Mountjoy had been still able to dream of Tretton Park, after the
Jews had got their fingers on it,--even after the Jews had been forced to
relinquish their hold. It can hardly be said that up to this very time
Mrs. Mountjoy had lost all hope in her nephew, thinking that as the
property had been entailed some portion of it must ultimately belong to
him. She had heard that Augustus was to have it, and her desires had
vacillated between the two. Then Harry had positively declared himself,
and Augustus had given her to understand how wretched, how mean, how
wicked had been Harry's conduct. And he fully explained to her that
Harry would be penniless. She had indeed been aware that Buston,--quite a
trifling thing compared to Tretton,--was to belong to him. But entails
were nothing nowadays. It was part of the radical abomination to which
England was being subjected. Not even Buston was now to belong to Harry
Annesley. The small income which he had received from his uncle was
stopped. He was reduced to live upon his fellowship,--which would be
stopped also if he married. She even despised him because he was the
fellow of a college;--she had looked for a husband for her daughter so
much higher than any college could produce. It was not from any lack of
motherly love that she was opposed to Florence, or from any innate
cruelty that she handed her daughter over to the tender mercies of Lady
Mountjoy.

And since she had been at Brussels there had come up farther hopes.
Another mode had shown itself of escaping Harry Annesley, who was of all
catastrophes the most dreaded and hated. Mr. Anderson, the second
secretary of legation,--he whose business it was to ride about the
boulevard with Sir Magnus,--had now declared himself in form. "Never saw
a fellow so bowled over," Sir Magnus had declared, by which he had
intended to signify that Mr. Anderson was now truly in love. "I've seen
him spooney a dozen times," Sir Magnus had said, confidentially, to his
sister-in-law, "but he has never gone to this length. He has asked a lot
of girls to have him, but he has always been off it again before the
week was over. He has written to his mother now."

And Mr. Anderson showed his love by very unmistakable signs. Sir Magnus
too, and Lady Mountjoy, were evidently on the same side as Mr. Anderson.
Sir Magnus thought there was no longer any good in waiting for his
nephew, the captain, and of that other nephew, Augustus, he did not
entertain any very high idea. Sir Magnus had corresponded lately with
Augustus, and was certainly not on his side. But he so painted Mr.
Anderson's prospects in life, as did also Lady Mountjoy, as to make it
appear that if Florence could put up with young Anderson she would do
very well with herself.

"He's sure to be a baronet some of these days, you know," said Sir
Magnus.

"I don't think that would go very far with Florence," said her mother.

"But it ought. Look about in the world and you'll see that it does go a
long way. He'd be the fifth baronet."

"But his elder brother is alive."

"The queerest fellow you ever saw in your born days, and his life is not
worth a year's purchase. He's got some infernal disease,--nostalgia, or
what 'd'ye call it?--which never leaves him a moment's peace, and then
he drinks nothing but milk. Sure to go off;--cock sure."

"I shouldn't like Florence to count upon that."

"And then Hugh Anderson, the fellow here, is very well off as it is. He
has four hundred pounds here, and another five hundred pounds of his
own. Florence has, or will have, four hundred pounds of her own. I
should call them deuced rich. I should, indeed, as beginners. She could
have her pair of ponies here, and what more would she want?"

These arguments did go very far with Mrs. Mountjoy, the farther because
in her estimation Sir Magnus was a great man. He was the greatest
Englishman, at any rate, in Brussels, and where should she go for advice
but to an Englishman? And she did not know that Sir Magnus had succeeded
in borrowing a considerable sum of money from his second secretary of
legation.

"Leave her to me for a little;--just leave her to me," said Lady
Mountjoy.

"I would not say anything hard to her," said the mother, pleading for
her naughty child.

"Not too hard, but she must be made to understand. You see there have
been misfortunes. As to Mountjoy Scarborough, he's past hoping for."

"You think so?"

"Altogether. When a man has disappeared there's an end of him. There was
Lord Baltiboy's younger son disappeared, and he turned out to be a
Zouave corporal in a French regiment. They did get him out, of course,
but then he went preaching in America. You may take it for granted, that
when a man has absolutely vanished from the clubs, he'll never be any
good again as a marrying man."

"But there's his brother, who, they say, is to have the property."

"A very cold-blooded sort of young man, who doesn't care a straw for his
own family." He had received very sternly the overtures for a loan from
Sir Magnus. "And he, as I understand, has never declared himself in
Florence's favor. You can't count upon Augustus Scarborough."

"Not just count upon him."

"Whereas there's young Anderson, who is the most gentleman-like young
man I know, all ready. It will have been such a turn of luck your coming
here and catching him up."

"I don't know that it can be called a turn of luck. Florence has a very
nice fortune of her own--"

"And she wants to give it to this penniless reprobate. It is just one of
those cases in which you must deal roundly with a girl. She has to be
frightened, and that's about the truth of it."

After this, Lady Mountjoy did succeed in getting Florence alone with
herself into her morning-room. When her mother told her that her aunt
wished to see her, she answered first that she had no special wish to
see her aunt. Her mother declared that in her aunt's house she was bound
to go when her aunt sent for her. To this Florence demurred. She was,
she thought, her aunt's guest, but by no means at her aunt's disposal.
But at last she obeyed her mother. She had resolved that she would obey
her mother in all things but one, and therefore she went one morning to
her aunt's chamber.

But as she went she was, on the first instance, caught by her uncle, and
taken by him into a little private sanctum behind his official room. "My
dear," he said, "just come in here for two minutes."

"I am on my way up to my aunt."

"I know it, my dear. Lady Mountjoy has been talking it all over with me.
Upon my word you can't do anything better than take young Anderson."

"I can't do that, Uncle Magnus."

"Why not? There's poor Mountjoy Scarborough, he has gone astray."

"There is no question of my cousin."

"And Augustus is no better."

"There is no question of Augustus either."

"As to that other chap, he isn't any good;--he isn't indeed."

"You mean Mr. Annesley?"

"Yes; Harry Annesley, as you call him. He hasn't got a shilling to bless
himself with, or wouldn't have if he was to marry you."

"But I have got something."

"Not enough for both of you, I'm afraid. That uncle of his has
disinherited him."

"His uncle can't disinherit him."

"He's quite young enough to marry and have a family, and then Annesley
will be disinherited. He has stopped his allowance, anyway, and you
mustn't think of him. He did something uncommonly unhandsome the other
day, though I don't quite know what."

"He did nothing unhandsome, Uncle Magnus."

"Of course a young lady will stand up for her lover, but you will
really have to drop him. I'm not a hard sort of man, but this was
something that the world will not stand. When he thought the man had
been murdered he didn't say anything about it for fear they should tax
him with it. And then he swore he had never seen him. It was something
of that sort."

"He never feared that any one would suspect him."

"And now young Anderson has proposed. I should not have spoken else, but
it's my duty to tell you about young Anderson. He's a gentleman all
round."

"So is Mr. Annesley."

"And Anderson has got into no trouble at all. He does his duty here
uncommonly well. I never had less trouble with any young fellow than I
have had with him. No licking him into shape,--or next to none,--and he
has a very nice private income. You together would have plenty, and
could live here till you had settled on apartments. A pair of ponies
would be just the thing for you to drive about and support the British
interests. You think of it, my dear, and you'll find that I'm right."
Then Florence escaped from that room and went up to receive the much
more severe lecture which she was to have from her aunt.

"Come in, my dear," said Lady Mountjoy, in her most austere voice. She
had a voice which could assume austerity when she knew her power to be
in the ascendant. As Florence entered the room Miss Abbott left it by a
door on the other side. "Take that chair, Florence. I want to have a few
minutes' conversation with you." Then Florence sat down. "When a young
lady is thinking of being married, a great many things have to be taken
into consideration." This seemed to be so much a matter of fact that
Florence did not feel it necessary to make any reply. "Of course I am
aware you are thinking of being married."

"Oh yes," said Florence.

"But to whom?"

"To Harry Annesley," said Florence, intending to imply that all the
world knew that.

"I hope not; I hope not. Indeed, I may say that it is quite out of the
question. In the first place, he is a beggar."

"He has begged from none," said Florence.

"He is what the world calls a beggar, when a young man without a penny
thinks of being married."

"I'm not a beggar, and what I've got will be his."

"My dear, you're talking about what you don't understand. A young lady
cannot give her money away in that manner; it will not be allowed.
Neither your mother, nor Sir Magnus, nor will I permit it." Here
Florence restrained herself, but drew herself up in her chair as though
prepared to speak out her mind if she should be driven. Lady Mountjoy
would not permit it! She thought that she would feel herself quite able
to tell Lady Mountjoy that she had neither power nor influence in the
matter, but she determined to be silent a little longer. "In the first
place, a gentleman who is a gentleman never attempts to marry a lady for
her money."

"But when a lady has the money she can express herself much more clearly
than she could otherwise."

"I don't quite understand what you mean by that, my dear."

"When Mr. Annesley proposed to me he was the acknowledged heir to his
uncle's property."

"A trumpery affair at the best of it."

"It would have sufficed for me. Then I accepted him."

"That goes for nothing from a lady. Of course your acceptance was
contingent on circumstances."

"It was so;--on my regard. Having accepted him, and as my regard remains
just as warm as ever, I certainly shall not go back because of anything
his uncle may do. I only say this to explain that he was quite justified
in his offer. It was not for my small fortune that he came to me."

"I'm not so sure of that."

"But if my money can be of any use to him, he's quite welcome to it. Sir
Magnus spoke to me about a pair of ponies. I'd rather have him than a
pair of ponies."

"I'm coming to that just now. Here is Mr. Anderson."

"Oh yes; he's here."

There was certainly a touch of impatience in the tone in which this was
uttered. It was as though she had said that Mr. Anderson had so
contrived that she could have no doubt whatever about his continued
presence. Mr. Anderson had made himself so conspicuous as to be visible
to her constantly. Lady Mountjoy, who intended at present to sing Mr.
Anderson's praises, felt this to be impertinent.

"I don't know what you mean by that. Mr. Anderson has behaved himself
quite like a gentleman, and you ought to be very proud of any token you
may receive of his regard and affection."

"But I'm not bound to return to it."

"You are bound to think of it when those who are responsible for your
actions tell you to do so."

"Mamma, you mean?"

"I mean your uncle, Sir Magnus Mountjoy." She did not quite dare to say
that she had meant herself. "I suppose you will admit that Sir Magnus is
a competent judge of young men's characters?"

"He may be a judge of Mr. Anderson, because Mr. Anderson is his clerk."

There was something of an intention to depreciate in the word "clerk."
Florence had not thought much of Mr. Anderson's worth, nor, as far as
she had seen them, of the duties generally performed at the British
Embassy. She was ignorant of the peculiar little niceties and
intricacies which required the residence at Brussels of a gentleman with
all the tact possessed by Sir Magnus. She did not know that while the
mere international work of the office might be safely intrusted to Mr.
Blow and Mr. Bunderdown, all those little niceties, that smiling and
that frowning, that taking off of hats and only half taking them off,
that genial, easy manner, and that stiff hauteur, formed the peculiar
branch of Sir Magnus himself,--and, under Sir Magnus, of Mr. Anderson.
She did not understand that even to that pair of ponies which was
promised to her were to be attached certain important functions, which
she was to control as the deputy of the great man's deputy And now she
had called the great man's deputy a clerk!

"Mr. Anderson is no such thing," said Lady Mountjoy.

"His young man, then,--or private secretary;--only somebody else is
that."

"You are very impertinent and very ungrateful. Mr. Anderson is second
secretary of legation. There is no officer attached to our establishment
of more importance. I believe you say it on purpose to anger me. And
then you compare this gentleman to Mr. Annesley, a man to whom no one
will speak."

"I will speak to him." Had Harry heard her say that, he ought to have
been a happy man in spite of his trouble.

"You! What good can you do him?" Florence nodded her head, almost
imperceptibly, but still there was a nod, signifying more than she could
possibly say. She thought that she could do him a world of good if she
were near him, and some good, too, though she were far away. If she were
with him she could hang on to his arm,--or perhaps at some future time
round his neck,--and tell him that she would be true to him though all
others might turn away. And she could be just as true where she was,
though she could not comfort him by telling him so with her own words.
Then it was that she resolved upon writing that letter. He should
already have what little comfort she might administer in his absence.
"Now, listen to me, Florence. He is a thorough reprobate."

"I will not hear him so called. He is no reprobate."

"He has behaved in such a way that all England is crying out about him.
He has done that which will never allow any gentleman to speak to him
again."

"Then there will be more need that a lady should do so. But it is not
true."

"You put your knowledge of character against that of Sir Magnus."

"Sir Magnus does not know the gentleman; I do. What's the good of
talking of it, aunt? Harry Annesley has my word, and nothing on earth
shall induce me to go back from it. Even were he what you say I would be
true to him."

"You would?"

"Certainly I would. I could not willingly begin to love a man whom I
knew to be base; but when I had loved him I would not turn because of
his baseness;--I couldn't do it. It would be a great--a terrible
misfortune; but it would have to be borne. But here--I know all the
story to which you allude."

"I know it too."

"I am quite sure that the baseness has not been on his part. In defence
of my name he has been silent. He might have spoken out, if he had known
all the truth then. I was as much his own then as I am now. One of these
days I suppose I shall be more so."

"You mean to marry him, then?"

"Most certainly I do, or I will never be married; and as he is poor now,
and I must have my own money when I am twenty-four, I suppose I shall
have to wait till then."

"Will your mother's word go for nothing with you?"

"Poor mamma! I do believe that mamma is very unhappy, because she makes
me unhappy. What may take place between me and mamma I am not bound, I
think, to tell you. We shall be away soon, and I shall be left to mamma
alone."

And mamma would be left alone to her daughter, Lady Mountjoy thought.
The visit must be prolonged so that at last Mr. Anderson might be
enabled to prevail.

The visit had been originally intended for a month, but was now
prolonged indefinitely. After that conversation between Lady Mountjoy
and her niece two or three things happened, all bearing upon our story.
Florence at once wrote her letter. If things were going badly in England
with Harry Annesley, Harry should at any rate have the comfort of
knowing what were her feelings,--if there might be comfort to him in
that. "Perhaps, after all, he won't mind what I may say," she thought to
herself; but only pretended to think it, and at once flatly contradicted
her own "perhaps." Then she told him most emphatically not to reply. It
was very important that she should write. He was to receive her letter,
and there must be an end of it. She was quite sure that he would
understand her. He would not subject her to the trouble of having to
tell her own people that she was maintaining a correspondence, for it
would amount to that. But still when the time came for the answer she
had counted it up to the hour. And when Sir Magnus sent for her and
handed to her the letter,--having discussed that question with her
mother,--she fully expected it, and felt properly grateful to her uncle.
She wanted a little comfort, too, and when she had read the letter she
knew that she had received it.

There had been a few words spoken between the two elder ladies after the
interview between Florence and Lady Mountjoy. "She is a most self-willed
young woman," said Lady Mountjoy.

"Of course she loves her lover," said Mrs. Mountjoy, desirous of making
some excuse for her own daughter. The girl was very troublesome, but not
the less her daughter. "I don't know any of them that don't who are
worth anything."

"If you regard it in that light, Sarah, she'll get the better of you. If
she marries him she will be lost; that is the way you have got to look
at it. It is her future happiness you must think of--and respectability.
She is a headstrong young woman, and has to be treated accordingly."

"What would you do?"

"I would be very severe."

"But what am I to do? I can't beat her; I can't lock her up in her
room."

"Then you mean to give it up?"

"No, I don't. You shouldn't be so cross to me," said poor Mrs. Mountjoy.
When it had reached this the two ladies had become intimate. "I don't
mean to give it up at all; but what am I to do?"

"Remain here for the next month, and--and worry her; let Mr. Anderson
have his chance with her. When she finds that everything will smile
with her if she accepts him, and that her life will be made a burden to
her if she still sticks to her Harry Annesley, she'll come round, if she
be like other girls. Of course a girl can't be made to marry a man, but
there are ways and means." By this Lady Mountjoy meant that the utmost
cruelty should be used which would be compatible with a good breakfast,
dinner, and bedroom. Now, Mrs. Mountjoy knew herself to be incapable of
this, and knew also, or thought that she knew, that it would not be
efficacious.

"You stay here,--up to Christmas, if you like it," said Sir Magnus to his
sister-in-law. "She can't but see Anderson every day, and that goes a
long way. She, of course, puts on a resolute air as well as she can.
They all know how to do that. Do you be resolute in return. The deuce is
in it if we can't have our way with her among us. When you talk of ill
usage nobody wants you to put her in chains. There are different ways of
killing a cat. You get friends to write to you from England about young
Annesley, and I'll do the same. The truth, of course, I mean."

"Nothing can be worse than the truth," said Mrs. Mountjoy, shaking her
head, sorrowfully.

"Just so," said Sir Magnus, who was not at all sorrowful to hear so bad
an account of the favored suitor. "Then we'll read her the letters. She
can't help hearing them. Just the true facts, you know. That's fair;
nobody can call that cruel. And then, when she breaks down and comes to
our call, we'll all be as soft as mother's milk to her. I shall see her
going about the boulevards with a pair of ponies yet." Mrs. Mountjoy
felt that when Sir Magnus spoke of Florence coming to his call he did
not know her daughter. But she had nothing better to do than to obey Sir
Magnus. Therefore she resolved to stay at Brussels another period of six
weeks and told Florence that she had so resolved. Just at present
Brussels and Cheltenham would be all the same to Florence.

"It will be a dreadful bore having them so long," said poor Lady
Mountjoy, piteously, to her husband. For in the presence of Sir Magnus
she was by no means the valiant woman that she was with some of her
friends.

"You find everything a bore. What's the trouble?"

"What am I to do with them?"

"Take 'em about in the carriage. Lord bless my soul! what have you got a
carriage for?"

"Then, with Miss Abbott, there's never room for any one else."

"Leave Miss Abbott at home, then. What's the good of talking to me about
Miss Abbott? I suppose it doesn't matter to you whom my brother's
daughter marries?" Lady Mountjoy did not think that it did matter much;
but she declared that she had already evinced the most tender
solicitude. "Then stick to it. The girl doesn't want to go out every
day. Leave her alone, where Anderson can get at her."

"He's always out riding with you."

"No, he's not; not always. And leave Miss Abbott at home. Then there'll
be room for two others. Don't make difficulties. Anderson will expect
that I shall do something for him, of course."

"Because of the money," said Lady Mountjoy, whispering.

"And I've got to do something for her too." Now, there was a spice of
honesty about Sir Magnus. He knew that as he could not at once pay back
these sums, he was bound to make it up in some other way. The debts
would be left the same. But that would remain with Providence.

Then came Harry's letter, and there was a deep consultation. It was
known to have come from Harry by the Buntingford post-mark. Mrs.
Mountjoy proposed to consult Lady Mountjoy; but to that Sir Magnus would
not agree. "She'd take her skin off her if she could, now that she's
angered," said the lady's husband, who no doubt knew the lady well. "Of
course she'll learn that the letter has been written, and then she'll
throw it in our teeth. She wouldn't believe that it had gone astray in
coming here. We should give her a sort of a whip-hand over us." So it
was decided that Florence should have her letter.


CHAPTER XXXI.

FLORENCE'S REQUEST.


Thus it was arranged that Florence should be left in Mr. Anderson's way.
Mr. Anderson, as Sir Magnus had said, was not always out riding. There
were moments in which even he was off duty. And Sir Magnus contrived to
ride a little earlier than usual so that he should get back while the
carriage was still out on its rounds. Lady Mountjoy certainly did her
duty, taking Mrs. Mountjoy with her daily, and generally Miss Abbott, so
that Florence was, as it were, left to the mercies of Mr. Anderson. She
could, of course, shut herself up in her bedroom, but things had not as
yet become so bad as that. Mr. Anderson had not made himself terrible to
her. She did not, in truth, fear Mr. Anderson at all, who was courteous
in his manner and complimentary in his language, and she came at this
time to the conclusion that if Mr. Anderson continued his pursuit of her
she would tell him the exact truth of the case. As a gentleman, and as a
young man, she thought that he would sympathize with her. The one enemy
whom she did dread was Lady Mountjoy. She too had felt that her aunt
could "take her skin off her," as Sir Magnus had said. She had not heard
the words, but she knew that it was so, and her dislike to Lady Mountjoy
was in proportion. It cannot be said that she was afraid. She did not
intend to leave her skin in her aunt's hands. For every inch of skin
taken she resolved to have an inch in return. She was not acquainted
with the expressive mode of language which Sir Magnus had adopted, but
she was prepared for all such attacks. For Sir Magnus himself, since he
had given up the letter to her, she did feel some regard.

Behind the British minister's house, which, though entitled to no such
name, was generally called the Embassy, there was a large garden, which,
though not much used by Sir Magnus or Lady Mountjoy, was regarded as a
valuable adjunct to the establishment. Here Florence betook herself for
exercise, and here Mr. Anderson, having put off the muddy marks of his
riding, found her one afternoon. It must be understood that no young man
was ever more in earnest than Mr. Anderson. He, too, looking through the
glass which had been prepared for him by Sir Magnus, thought that he saw
in the not very far distant future a Mrs. Hugh Anderson driving a pair
of gray ponies along the boulevard and he was much pleased with the
sight. It reached to the top of his ambition. Florence was to his eyes
really the sort of a girl whom a man in his position ought to marry. A
secretary of legation in a small foreign capital cannot do with a dowdy
wife, as may a clerk, for instance, in the Foreign Office. A secretary
of legation,--the second secretary, he told himself,--was bound, if he
married at all, to have a pretty and _distinguée_ wife. He knew all
about the intricacies which had fallen in a peculiar way into his own
hand. Mr. Blow might have married a South Sea Islander, and would have
been none the worse as regarded his official duties. Mr. Blow did not
want the services of a wife in discovering and reporting all the secrets
of the Belgium iron trade. There was no intricacy in that, no nicety.
There was much of what, in his lighter moments, Mr. Anderson called
"sweat." He did not pretend to much capacity for such duties; but in his
own peculiar walk he thought that he was great. But it was very
fatiguing, and he was sure that a wife was necessary to him. There were
little niceties which none but a wife could perform. He had a great
esteem for Sir Magnus. Sir Magnus was well thought of by all the court,
and by the foreign minister at Brussels. But Lady Mountjoy was really of
no use. The beginning and the end of it all with her was to show herself
in a carriage. It was incumbent upon him, Anderson, to marry.

He was loving enough, and very susceptible. He was too susceptible, and
he knew his own fault, and he was always on guard against it,--as
behooved a young man with such duties as his. He was always falling in
love, and then using his diplomatic skill in avoiding the consequences.
He had found out that though one girl had looked so well under waxlight
she did not endure the wear and tear of the day. Another could not be
always graceful, or, though she could talk well enough during a waltz,
she had nothing to say for herself at three o'clock in the morning. And
he was driven to calculate that he would be wrong to marry a girl
without a shilling. "It is a kind of thing that a man cannot afford to
do unless he's sure of his position," he had said on such an occasion to
Montgomery Arbuthnot, alluding especially to his brother's state of
health. When Mr. Anderson spoke of not being sure of his position he was
always considered to allude to his brother's health. In this way he had
nearly got his little boat on to the rocks more than once, and had given
some trouble to Sir Magnus. But now he was quite sure. "It's all there
all round," he had said to Arbuthnot more than once. Arbuthnot said that
it was there--"all round, all round." Waxlight and daylight made no
difference to her. She was always graceful. "Nobody with an eye in his
head can doubt that," said Anderson. "I should think not, by Jove!"
replied Arbuthnot. "And for talking,--you never catch her out; never." "I
never did, certainly," said Arbuthnot, who, as third secretary, was
obedient and kind-hearted. "And then look at her money. Of course a
fellow wants something to help him on. My position is so uncertain that
I cannot do without it." "Of course not." "Now, with some girls it's so
deuced hard to find out. You hear that a girl has got money, but when
the time comes it depends on the life of a father who doesn't think of
dying;--damme, doesn't think of it."

"Those fellows never do," said Arbuthnot. "But here, you see, I know all
about it. When she's twenty-four,--only twenty-four,--she'll have ten
thousand pounds of her own. I hate a mercenary fellow." "Oh yes; that's
beastly." "Nobody can say that of me. Circumstanced as I am, I want
something to help to keep the pot boiling. She has got it,--quite as much
as I want,--quite, and I know all about it without the slightest doubt in
the world." For the small loan of fifteen hundred pounds Sir Magnus paid
the full value of the interest and deficient security. "Sir Magnus tells
me that if I'll only stick to her I shall be sure to win. There's some
fellow in England has just touched her heart,--just touched it, you
know." "I understand," said Arbuthnot, looking very wise. "He is not a
fellow of very much account," said Anderson; "one of those handsome
fellows without conduct and without courage." "I've known lots of 'em,"
said Arbuthnot. "His name is Annesley," said Anderson. "I never saw him
in my life, but that's what Sir Magnus says. He has done something
awfully disreputable. I don't quite understand what it is, but it's
something which ought to make him unfit to be her husband. Nobody knows
the world better than Sir Magnus, and he says that it is so." "Nobody
does know the world better than Sir Magnus," said Arbuthnot. And so that
conversation was brought to an end.

One day soon after this he caught her walking in the garden. Her mother
and Miss Abbot were still out with Lady Mountjoy in the carriage, and
Sir Magnus had retired after the fatigue of his ride to sleep for half
an hour before dinner. "All alone, Miss Mountjoy?" he said.

"Yes, alone, Mr. Anderson. I'm never in better company."

"So I think; but then if I were here you wouldn't be all alone, would
you?"

"Not if you were with me."

"That's what I mean. But yet two people may be alone, as regards the
world at large. Mayn't they?"

"I don't understand the nicety of language well enough to say. We used
to have a question among us when we were children whether a wild beast
could howl in an empty cavern. It's the same sort of thing."

"Why shouldn't he?"

"Because the cavern would not be empty if the wild beast were in it.
Did you ever see a girl bang an egg against a wall in a stocking, and
then look awfully surprised because she had smashed it?"

"I don't understand the joke."

"She had been told she couldn't break an egg in an empty stocking. Then
she was made to look in, and there was the broken egg for her pains. I
don't know what made me tell you that story."

"It's a very good story. I'll get Miss Abbott to do it to-night. She
believes everything."

"And everybody? Then she's a happy woman."

"I wish you'd believe everybody."

"So I do;--nearly everybody. There are some inveterate liars whom nobody
can believe."

"I hope I am not regarded as one."

"You? certainly not. If anybody were to speak of you as such behind your
back no one would take your part more loyally than I. But nobody would."

"That's something, at any rate. Then you do believe that I love you?"

"I believe that you think so."

"And that I don't know my own heart?"

"That's very common, Mr. Anderson. I wasn't quite sure of my own heart
twelve months ago, but I know it now." He felt that his hopes ran very
low when this was said. She had never before spoken to him of his rival,
nor had he to her. He knew, or fancied that he knew, that "her heart had
been touched," as he had said to Arbuthnot. But the "touch" must have
been very deep if she felt herself constrained to speak to him on the
subject. It had been his desire to pass over Mr. Annesley, and never to
hear the name mentioned between them. "You were speaking of your own
heart."

"Well I was, no doubt. It is a silly thing to talk of, I dare say."

"I'm going to tell you of my heart, and I hope you won't think it silly.
I do so because I believe you to be a gentleman, and a man of honor." He
blushed at the words and the tone in which they were spoken, but his
heart fell still lower. "Mr. Anderson, I am engaged." Here she paused a
moment, but he had nothing to say. "I am engaged to marry a gentleman
whom I love with all my heart, and all my strength, and all my body. I
love him so that nothing can ever separate me from him, or, at least,
from the thoughts of him. As regards all the interests of life, I feel
as though I were already his wife. If I ever marry any man I swear to
you that it will be him." Then Mr. Anderson felt that all hope had
utterly departed from him. She had said that she believed him to be a
man of truth. He certainly believed her to be a true-speaking woman. He
asked himself, and he found it to be quite impossible to doubt her word
on this subject. "Now I will go on and tell you my troubles. My mother
disapproves of the man. Sir Magnus has taken upon himself to disapprove,
and Lady Mountjoy disapproves especially. I don't care two straws about
Sir Magnus and Lady Mountjoy. As to Lady Mountjoy, it is simply an
impertinence on her part, interfering with me." There was something in
her face as she said this which made Mr. Anderson feel that if he could
only succeed in having her and the pair of ponies he would be a prouder
man than the ambassador at Paris. But he knew that it was hopeless. "As
to my mother, that is indeed a sorrow. She has been to me the dearest
mother, putting her only hopes of happiness in me. No mother was ever
more devoted to a child, and of all children I should be the most
ungrateful were I to turn against her. But from my early years she has
wished me to marry a man whom I could not bring myself to love. You have
heard of Captain Scarborough?"

"The man who disappeared?"

"He was and is my first cousin."

"He is in some way connected with Sir Magnus."

"Through mamma. Mamma is aunt to Captain Scarborough, and she married
the brother of Sir Magnus. Well, he has disappeared and been
disinherited. I cannot explain all about it, for I don't understand it;
but he has come to great trouble. It was not on that account that I
would not marry him. It was partly because I did not like him, and
partly because of Harry Annesley. I will tell you everything because I
want you to know my story. But my mother has disliked Mr. Annesley,
because she has thought that he has interfered with my cousin."

"I understand all that."

"And she has been taught to think that Mr. Annesley has behaved very
badly. I cannot quite explain it, because there is a brother of Captain
Scarborough who has interfered. I never loved Captain Scarborough, but
that man I hate. He has spread those stories. Captain Scarborough has
disappeared, but before he went he thought it well to revenge himself on
Mr. Annesley. He attacked him in the street late at night, and
endeavored to beat him."

"But why?"

"Why indeed. That such a trumpery cause as a girl's love should operate
with such a man!"

"I can understand it; oh yes,--I can understand it."

"I believe he was tipsy, and he had been gambling, and had lost all his
money--more than all his money. He was a ruined man, and reckless and
wretched. I can forgive him, and so does Harry. But in the struggle
Harry got the best of it, and left him there in the street. No weapons
had been used, except that Captain Scarborough had a stick. There was no
reason to suppose him hurt, nor was he much hurt. He had behaved very
badly, and Harry left him. Had he gone for a policeman he could only
have given him in charge. The man was not hurt, and seems to have walked
away."

"The papers were full of it."

"Yes, the papers were full of it, because he was missing. I don't know
yet what became of him, but I have my suspicions."

"They say that he has been seen at Monaco."

"Very likely. But I have nothing to do with that. Though he was my
cousin, I am touched nearer in another place. Young Mr. Scarborough,
who, I suspect, knows all about his brother, took upon himself to
cross-question Mr. Annesley. Mr. Annesley did not care to tell anything
of that struggle in the streets, and denied that he had seen him. In
truth, he did not want to have my name mentioned. My belief is that
Augustus Scarborough knew exactly what had taken place when he asked the
question. It was he who really was false. But he is now the heir to
Tretton and a great man in his way, and in order to injure Harry
Annesley he has spread abroad the story which they all tell here."

"But why?"

"He does;--that is all I know. But I will not be a hypocrite. He chose to
wish that I should not marry Harry Annesley. I cannot tell you farther
than that. But he has persuaded mamma, and has told every one. He shall
never persuade me."

"Everybody seems to believe him," said Mr. Anderson, not as intending to
say that he believed him now, but that he had done so.

"Of course they do. He has simply ruined Harry. He too has been
disinherited now. I don't know how they do these things, but it has been
done. His uncle has been turned against him, and his whole income has
been taken from him. But they will never persuade me. Nor, if they did,
would I be untrue to him. It is a grand thing for a girl to have a
perfect faith in the man she has to marry, as I have--as I have. I know
my man, and will as soon disbelieve in Heaven as in him. But were he
what they say he is, he would still have to become my husband. I should
be broken-hearted, but I should still be true. Thank God, though,--thank
God,--he has done nothing and will do nothing to make me ashamed of him.
Now you know my story."

"Yes; now I know it." The tears came very near the poor man's eyes as he
answered.

"And what will you do for me?"

"What shall I do?"

"Yes; what will you do? I have told you all my story, believing you to
be a fine-tempered gentleman. You have entertained a fancy which has
been encouraged by Sir Magnus. Will you promise me not to speak to me of
it again? Will you relieve me of so much of my trouble? Will you;--will
you?" Then, when he turned away, she followed him, and put both her
hands upon his arm. "Will you do that little thing for me?"

"A little thing!"

"Is it not a little thing,--when I am so bound to that other man that
nothing can move me? Whether it be little or whether it be much, will
you not do it?" She still held him by the arm, but his face was turned
from her so that she could not see it. The tears, absolute tears, were
running down his cheeks. What did it behoove him as a man to do? Was he
to believe her vows now and grant her request, and was she then to give
herself to some third person and forget Harry Annesley altogether? How
would it be with him then? A faint heart never won a fair lady. All is
fair in love and war. You cannot catch cherries by holding your mouth
open. A great amount of wisdom such as this came to him at the spur of
the moment. But there was her hand upon his arm, and he could not elude
her request. "Will you not do it for me?" she asked again.

"I will," he said, still keeping his face turned away.

"I knew it;--I knew you would. You are high-minded and honest, and cannot
be cruel to a poor girl. And if in time to come, when I am Harry
Annesley's wife, we shall chance to meet each other,--as we will,--he
shall thank you."

"I shall not want that. What will his thanks do for me? You do not think
that I shall be silent to oblige him?" Then he walked forth from out of
the garden, and she had never seen his tears. But she knew well that he
was weeping, and she sympathized with him.


CHAPTER XXXII.

MR. ANDERSON IS ILL.


When they went down to dinner that day it became known that Mr. Anderson
did not intend to dine with them. "He's got a headache," said Sir
Magnus. "He says he's got a headache. I never knew such a thing in my
life before." It was quite clear that Sir Magnus did not think that his
lieutenant ought to have such a headache as would prevent his coming to
dinner, and that he did not quite believe in the headache. There was a
dinner ready, a very good dinner, which it was his business to provide.
He always did provide it, and took a great deal of trouble to see that
it was good. "There isn't a table so well kept in all Brussels," he used
to boast. But when he had done his share he expected that Anderson and
Arbuthnot should do theirs, especially Anderson. There had been
sometimes a few words,--not quite a quarrel but nearly so,--on the subject
of dining out. Sir Magnus only dined out with royalty, cabinet
ministers, and other diplomats. Even then he rarely got a good
dinner--what he called a good dinner. He often took Anderson with him.
He was the _doyen_ among the diplomats in Brussels, and a little
indulgence was shown to him. Therefore he thought that Anderson should
be as true to him as was he to Anderson. It was not for Anderson's sake,
indeed, who felt the bondage to be irksome;--and Sir Magnus knew that his
subordinate sometimes groaned in spirit. But a good dinner is a good
dinner,--especially the best dinner in Brussels,--and Sir Magnus felt that
something ought to be given in return. He had not that perfect faith in
mankind which is the surest evidence of a simple mind. Ideas crowded
upon him. Had Anderson a snug little dinner-party, just two or three
friends, in his own room? Sir Magnus would not have been very angry,--he
was rarely very angry,--but he should like to show his cleverness by
finding it out. Anderson had been quite well when he was out riding, and
he did not remember him ever before to have had a headache. "Is he very
bad, Arbuthnot?"

"I haven't seen him, sir, since he was riding."

"Who has seen him?"

"He was in the garden with me," said Florence, boldly.

"I suppose that did not give him a headache."

"Not that I perceived."

"It is very singular that he should have a headache just when dinner is
ready," continued Sir Magnus.

"You had better leave the young man alone," said Lady Mountjoy.

And one who knew the ways of living at the British Embassy would be sure
that after this Sir Magnus would not leave the young man alone. His
nature was not simple. It seemed to him again that there might be a
little dinner-party, and that Lady Mountjoy knew all about it.
"Richard," he said to the butler, "go into Mr. Anderson's room and see
if he is very bad." Richard came back, and whispered to the great man
that Anderson was not in his room. "This is very remarkable. A bad
headache, and not in his room! Where is he? I insist on knowing where
Mr. Anderson is!"

"You had better leave him alone," said Lady Mountjoy.

"Leave a man alone because he's ill! He might die."

"Shall I go and see?" said Arbuthnot.

"I wish you would, and bring him in here, if he's well enough to show. I
don't approve of a young man going without his dinner. There's nothing
so bad."

"He'll be sure to get something, Sir Magnus," said Lady Mountjoy. But
Sir Magnus insisted that Mr. Arbuthnot should go and look after his
friend.

It was now November, and at eight o'clock was quite dark, but the
weather was fine, and something of the mildness of autumn remained.
Arbuthnot was not long in discovering that Mr. Anderson was again
walking in the garden. He had left Florence there and had gone to the
house, but had found himself to be utterly desolate and miserable. She
had exacted from him a promise which was not compatible with any kind of
happiness to which he could now look forward. In the first place, all
Brussels knew that he had been in love with Florence Mountjoy. He
thought that all Brussels knew it. And they knew that he had been in
earnest in this love. He did believe that all Brussels had given him
credit for so much. And now they would know that he had suddenly ceased
to make love. It might be that this should be attributed to gallantry on
his part,--that it should be considered that the lady had been deserted.
But he was conscious that he was not so good a hypocrite as not to show
that he was broken-hearted. He was quite sure that it would be seen that
he had got the worst of it. But when he asked himself questions as to
his own condition he told himself that there was suffering in store for
him more heavy to bear than these. There could be no ponies, with
Florence driving them, and a boy in his own livery behind, seen upon the
boulevards. That vision was gone, and forever. And then came upon him an
idea that the absence of the girl from other portions of his life might
touch him more nearly. He did feel something like actual love. And the
more she had told him of her devotion to Harry Annesley, the more
strongly he had felt the value of that devotion. Why should this man
have it and not he? He had not been disinherited. He had not been
knocked about in a street quarrel. He had not been driven to tell a lie
as to his having not seen a man when he had, in truth, knocked him down.
He had quite agreed with Florence that Harry was justified in the lie;
but there was nothing in it to make the girl love him the better for it.

And then, looking forward, he could perceive the possibility of an event
which, if it should occur, would cover him with confusion and disgrace.
If, after all, Florence were to take, not Harry Annesley, but somebody
else? How foolish, how credulous, how vain would he have been then to
have made the promise! Girls did such things every day. He had promised,
and he thought that he must keep his promise; but she would be bound by
no promise! As he thought of it, he reflected that he might even yet
exact such a promise from her.

But when the dinner-time came he really was sick with love,--or sick with
disappointment. He felt that he could not eat his dinner under the
battery of raillery which was always coming from Sir Magnus, and
therefore he had told the servants that as the evening progressed he
would have something to eat in his own room. And then he went out to
wander in the dusk beneath the trees in the garden. Here he was
encountered by Mr. Arbuthnot, with his dress boots and white cravat.
"What the mischief are you doing here, old fellow?"

"I'm not very well. I have an awfully bilious headache."

"Sir Magnus is kicking up a deuce of a row because you're not there."

"Sir Magnus be blowed! How am I to be there if I've got a bilious
headache? I'm not dressed. I could not have dressed myself for a
five-pound note."

"Couldn't you, now? Shall I go back and tell him that? But you must have
something to eat. I don't know what's up, but Sir Magnus is in a
taking."

"He's always in a taking. I sometimes think he's the biggest fool out."

"And there's the place kept vacant next to Miss Mountjoy. Grascour
wanted to sit there, but her ladyship wouldn't let him. And I sat next
Miss Abbott because I didn't want to be in your way."

"Tell Grascour to go and sit there, or you may do so. It's all nothing
to me." This he said in the bitterness of his heart, by no means
intending to tell his secret, but unable to keep it within his own
bosom.

"What's the matter, Anderson?" asked the other piteously.

"I am clean broken-hearted. I don't mind telling you. I know you're a
good fellow, and I'll tell you everything. It's all over."

"All over--with Miss Mountjoy?" Then Anderson began to tell the whole
story; but before he had got half through, or a quarter through, another
message came from Sir Magnus. "Sir Magnus is becoming very angry
indeed," whispered the butler. "He says that Mr. Arbuthnot is to go
back."

"I'd better go, or I shall catch it."

"What's up with him, Richard?" asked Anderson.

"Well, if you ask me, Mr. Anderson, I think he's--a-suspecting of
something."

"What does he suspect?"

"I think he's a-thinking that perhaps you are having a jolly time of
it." Richard had known his master many years, and could almost read his
inmost thoughts. "I don't say as it so, but that's what I am thinking."

"You tell him I ain't. You tell him I've a bad bilious headache, and
that the air in the garden does it good. You tell him that I mean to
have something to eat up-stairs when my head is better; and do you mind
and let me have it, and a bottle of claret."

With this the butler went back, and so did Arbuthnot, after asking one
other question: "I'm so sorry it isn't all serene with Miss Mountjoy?"

"It isn't then. Don't mind now, but it isn't serene. Don't say a word
about her; but she has done me. I think I shall get leave of absence and
go away for two months. You'll have to do all the riding, old fellow. I
shall go,--but I don't know where I shall go. You return to them now, and
tell them I've such a bilious headache I don't know which way to turn
myself."

Arbuthnot went back, and found Sir Magnus quarrelling grievously with
the butler. "I don't think he's doing anything as he shouldn't," the
butler whispered, having seen into his master's mind.

"What do you mean by that?"

"Do let the matter drop," said Lady Mountjoy, who had also seen into her
husband's mind, and saw, moreover, that the butler had done so. "A young
man's dinner isn't worth all this bother."

"I won't let the matter drop. What does he mean when he says that he
isn't doing anything that he shouldn't? I've never said anything about
what he was doing."

"He isn't dressed, Sir Magnus. He finds himself a little better now, and
means to have something up-stairs." Then there came an awful silence,
during which the dinner was eaten. Sir Magnus knew nothing of the truth,
simply suspecting the headache to be a myth. Lady Mountjoy, with a
woman's quickness, thought that there had been some words between
Florence and her late lover, and, as she disliked Florence, was inclined
to throw all the blame upon her. A word had been said to Mrs.
Mountjoy,--"I don't think he'll trouble me any more, mamma,"--which Mrs.
Mountjoy did not quite understand, but which she connected with the
young man's absence. But Florence understood it all, and liked Mr.
Anderson the better. Could it really be that for love of her he would
lose his dinner? Could it be that he was so grievously afflicted at the
loss of a girl's heart? There he was, walking out in the dark and the
cold, half-famished, all because she loved Harry Annesley so well that
there could be no chance for him! Girls believe so little in the truth
of the love of men that any sign of its reality touches them to the
core. Poor Hugh Anderson! A tear came into her eye as she thought that
he was wandering there in the dark, and all for the love of her. The
rest of the dinner passed away in silence, and Sir Magnus hardly became
cordial and communicative with M. Grascour, even under the influence of
his wine.

On the next morning just before lunch Florence was waylaid by Mr.
Anderson as she was passing along one of the passages in the back part
of the house. "Miss Mountjoy," he said, "I want to ask from your great
goodness the indulgence of a few words."

"Certainly."

"Could you come into the garden?"

"If you will give me time to go and change my boots and get a shawl. We
ladies are not ready to go out always, as are you gentlemen."

"Anywhere will do. Come in here," and he led the way into a small parlor
which was not often used.

"I was so sorry to hear last night that you were unwell, Mr. Anderson."

"I was not very well, certainly, after what I had heard before dinner."
He did not tell her that he so far recovered as to be able to drink a
bottle of claret and to smoke a couple of cigars in his bedroom. "Of
course you remember what took place yesterday."

"Remember! Oh yes. I shall not readily forget it."

"I made you a promise--"

"You did--very kindly."

"And I mean to keep it."

"I'm sure you do, because you're a gentleman."

"I don't think I ought to have made it."

"Oh, Mr. Anderson!"

"I don't think I ought. See what I am giving up."

"Nothing, except the privilege of troubling me."

"But if it should be something else? Do not be angry with me, but,
loving you as I do, of course my mind is full of it. I have promised,
and must be dumb."

"And I shall be spared great vexation."

"But suppose I were to hear that in six months' time you had married
some one else?"

"Mr. Annesley, you mean. Not in six months."

"Somebody else. Not Mr. Annesley."

"There is nobody else."

"But there might be."

"It is impossible. After all that I told you, do not you understand?"

"But if there were?" The poor man, as he made the suggestion, looked
very piteous. "If there were, I think you should promise me I shall be
that somebody else. That would be no more than fair."

She paused a moment to think, frowning the while. "Certainly not."

"Certainly not?"

"I can make no such promise, nor should you ask it. I am to promise that
under certain circumstances I would become your wife, when I know that
under no circumstances I would do so."

"Under no circumstances?"

"Under none. What would you have me say, Mr. Anderson? Supposing
yourself engaged to marry a girl--"

"I wish I were--to you."

"To a girl who loved you, and whom you loved?"

"There's no doubt about my loving her."

"You can follow my meaning, and I wish that you would do so. What would
you think if you were to hear that she had promised to marry some one
else in the event of your deserting her? It is out of the question. I
mean to be the wife of Harry Annesley. Say that it is not to be so, and
you will simply destroy me. Of one thing I may be sure,--that I will
marry him or nobody. You promised me, not because your promise was
necessary for that, but to spare me from trouble till that time shall
come. And I am grateful,--very grateful." Then she left him suffering
from another headache.

"Was there anything said between you and Mr. Anderson yesterday?" her
aunt inquired, that afternoon.

"Why do you ask?"

"Because it is necessary that I should know."

"I do not see the necessity. Mr. Anderson has, at any rate, your
permission to say what he likes to me, but I am not on that account
bound to tell you all that he does say. But I will tell you. He has
promised to trouble me no farther. I told him that I was engaged to Mr.
Annesley, and he, like a gentleman, has assured me that he will desist."

"Just because you asked him?"

"Yes, aunt; just because I asked him."

"He will not be bound by such a promise for a moment. It is a thing not
to be heard of. If that kind of thing is to go on, any young lady will
be entitled to ask any young gentleman not to say a word of marriage,
just at her request."

"Some of the young ladies would not care for that, perhaps."

"Don't be impertinent."

"I should not, for one, aunt; only that I am already engaged."

"And of course the young ladies would be bound to make such requests,
which would go for nothing at all. I never heard of anything so
monstrous. You are not only to have the liberty of refusing, but are to
be allowed to bind a gentleman not to ask!"

"He has promised."

"Pshaw! It means nothing."

"It is between him and me. I asked him because I wished to save myself
from being troubled."

"As for that other man, my dear, it is quite out of the question. From
all that I hear, it is on the cards that he may be arrested and put into
prison. I am quite sure that at any rate he deserves it. The letters
which Sir Magnus gets about him are fearful. The things that he has
done,--well, penal servitude for life would be the proper punishment. And
it will come upon him sooner or later. I never knew a man of that kind
escape. And you now to come and tell us that you intend to be his wife!"

"I do," said Florence, bobbing her head.

"And what your uncle says to you has no effect?"

"Not the least in the world; nor what my aunt says. I believe that
neither the one nor the other know what they are talking about. You have
been defaming a gentleman of the highest character, a Fellow of a
college, a fine-hearted, noble, high-spirited man, simply
because--because--because--" Then she burst into tears and rushed out of
the room; but she did not break down before she had looked at her aunt,
and spoken to her aunt with a fierce indignation which had altogether
served to silence Lady Mountjoy for the moment.


PART II.


CHAPTER XXXIII.

MR. BARRY.


"Good-bye, sir. You ought not to be angry with me. I am sure it will be
better for us both to remain as we are." This was said by Miss Dorothy
Grey, as a gentleman departed from her and made his way out of the
front-door at the Fulham Manor-house. Miss Grey had received an offer of
marriage, and had declined it. The offer had been made by a worthy man,
he being no other than her father's partner, Mr. Barry.

It may be remembered that, on discussing the affairs of the firm with
her father, Dolly Grey had been accustomed to call this partner "the
Devil." It was not that she had thought this partner to be specially
devilish, nor was he so. It had ever been Miss Grey's object to have the
affairs of the firm managed with an integrity which among lawyers might
be called Quixotic. Her father she had dubbed "Reason," and herself
"Conscience;" but in calling Mr. Barry "the Devil" she had not intended
to signify any defalcation from honesty more than ordinary in lawyers'
offices. She did, in fact, like Mr. Barry. He would occasionally come
out and dine with her father. He was courteous and respectful, and
performed his duties with diligence. He spent nobody's money but his
own, and not all of that; nor did he look upon the world as a place to
which men were sent that they might play. He was nearly forty years old,
was clean, a little bald, and healthy in all his ways. There was nothing
of a devil about him, except that his conscience was not peculiarly
attentive to abstract honesty and abstract virtue. There must, according
to him, be always a little "give and take" in the world; but in the
pursuit of his profession he gave a great deal more than he took. He
thought himself to be an honest practitioner, and yet in all domestic
professional conferences with her father Mr. Barry had always been Miss
Grey's "Devil."

The possibility of such a request as had been now made had been already
discussed between Dolly and her father. Dolly had said that the idea was
absurd. Mr. Grey had not seen the absurdity. There had been nothing more
common, he had said, than that a young partner should marry an old
partner's daughter. "It's not put into the partnership deed?" Dolly had
rejoined. But Dolly had never believed that the time would come. Now it
had come.

Mr. Barry had as yet possessed no more than a fourth of the business. He
had come in without any capital, and had been contented with a fourth.
He now suggested to Dolly that on their marriage the business should be
equally divided. And he had named the house in which they would live.
There was a pleasant, genteel residence on the other side of the water,
at Putney. Miss Grey had suggested that the business might be divided in
a manner that would be less burdensome to Mr. Barry. As for the house,
she could not leave her father. Upon the whole, she had thought that it
would be better for both of them that they should remain as they were.
By that Miss Grey had not intended to signify that Mr. Barry was to
remain single, but that he would have to do so in reference to Miss
Grey.

When he was gone Dolly Grey spent the remainder of the afternoon in
contemplating what would have been her condition had she agreed to join
her lot to that of Mr. Barry, and she came to the conclusion that it
would have been simply unendurable. There was nothing of romance in her
nature; but as she looked at matrimony, with all its blisses,--and Mr.
Barry among them,--she told herself that death would be preferable. "I
know myself," she said. "I should come to hate him with a miserable
hatred. And then I should hate myself for having done him so great an
evil." And as she continued thinking she assured herself that there was
but one man with whom she could live, and that that was her father. And
then other questions presented themselves to her, which were not so
easily answered. What would become of her when he should go? He was now
sixty-six, and she was only thirty-two. He was healthy for his age, but
would complain of his work. She knew that he must in course of nature go
much the first. Ten years he might live, while she might probably be
called upon to endure for thirty more. "I shall have to do it all
alone," she said; "all alone; without a companion, without one soul to
whom I can open my own. But if I were to marry Mr. Barry," she
continued, "I should at once be encumbered with a soul to whom I could
not open my own. I suppose I shall be enabled to live through it, as do
others." Then she began to prepare for her father's coming. As long as
he did remain with her she would make the most of him.

"Papa," she said, as she took him by the hand as he entered the house
and led him into the dining-room,--"who do you think has been here?"

"Mr. Barry."

"Then he has told you?"

"Not a word,--not even that he was coming. But I saw him as he left the
chambers, and he had on a bright hat and a new coat."

"And he thought that those could move me."

"I have not known that he has wanted to move you. You asked me to guess,
and I have guessed right, it seems."

"Yes; you have guessed right."

"And why did he come?"

"Only to ask me to be his wife."

"And what did you say to him, Dolly?"

"What did I say to the Devil?" She still held him by the hand, and now
she laughed lightly as she looked into his face. "Cannot you guess what
I said to him?"

"I am sorry for it;--that's all."

"Sorry for it? Oh, papa, do not say that you are sorry. Do you want to
lose me?"

"I do not want to think that for my own selfish purposes I have retained
you. So he has asked you?"

"Yes; he has asked me."

"And you have answered him positively?"

"Most positively."

"And for my sake?"

"No, papa; I have not said that. I was joking when I asked whether you
wished to lose me. Of course you do not want to lose me." Then she wound
her arm round him, and put up her face to be kissed. "But now come and
dress yourself, as you call it. The dinner is late. We will talk about
it again after dinner."

But immediately after dinner the conversation went away to Mr.
Scarborough and the Scarborough matters. "I am to see Augustus, and he
is to tell me something about Mountjoy and his affairs. They say that
Mountjoy is now in Paris. The money can be given to them now, if he will
consent and will sign the deed releasing the property. But the men have
not all as yet agreed to accept the simple sums which they advanced.
That fellow Hart stands out, and says that he would sooner lose it all."

"Then he will lose it all," said Dolly.

"But the squire will consent to pay nothing unless they all agree.
Augustus is talking about his excessive generosity."

"It is generous on his part," said Dolly.

"He sees his own advantage, though I cannot quite understand where. He
tells Tyrrwhit that as there is so great an increase to the property he
is willing, for the sake of the good name of the family, to pay all that
has been in truth advanced; but he is most anxious to do it now, while
his father is alive. I think he fears that there will be lawsuits, and
that they may succeed. I doubt whether he thanks his father."

"But why should his father lie for his sake, since they are on such bad
terms?"

"Because his father was on worse terms with Mountjoy when he told the
lie. That is what I think Augustus thinks. But his father told no lie at
that time, and cannot now go back to falsehood. My belief is that if he
were confident that such is the fact he would not surrender a shilling
to pay these men their moneys. He may stop a lawsuit, which is like
enough, though they could only lose it. And if Mountjoy should turn out
to be the heir, which is impossible, he will be able to turn round and
say that by his efforts he had saved so much of the property."

"My head becomes so bewildered," said Dolly, "that I can hardly
understand it yet."

"I think I understand it; but I can only guess at his mind. But he has
got Tyrrwhit to accept forty thousand pounds, which is the sum he, in
truth, advanced. The stake is too great for the man to lose it without
ruin. He can get it back now, and save himself. But Hart is the more
determined blackguard. He, with two others, has a claim for thirty-five
thousand pounds, for which he has given but ten thousand pounds in hard
cash, and he thinks that he may get some profit out of Tyrrwhit's money,
and holds out."

"For how much?"

"For the entire debt, he tells me; but I know that he is trying to deal
with Tyrrwhit. Tyrrwhit would pay him five thousand, I think, so as to
secure the immediate payment of his own money. Then there are a host of
others who are contented to take what they have advanced, but not
contented if Hart is to have more. There are other men in the background
who advanced the money. All the rascaldom of London is let loose upon
me. But Hart is the one man who holds his head the highest."

"But if they will accept no terms they will get nothing," said Dolly.
"If once they attempt to go to law all will be lost."

"There are wheels within wheels. When the old man dies Mountjoy himself
will probably put in a claim to the entire estate, and will get some
lawyer to take up the case for him."

"You would not?"

"Certainly not, because I know that Augustus is the eldest legitimate
son. As far as I can make it out, Augustus is at present allowing
Mountjoy the money on which he lives. His father does not. But the old
man must know that Augustus does, though he pretends to be ignorant."

"But why is Hart to get money out of Tyrrwhit?"

"To secure the payment of the remainder. Mr. Tyrrwhit would be very glad
to get his forty thousand pounds back; would pay five thousand pounds to
get the forty back. But nothing will be paid unless they all agree to
join in freeing the property. Therefore Hart, who is the sharpest rascal
of the lot, stands out for some share of his contemplated plunder."

"And you must be joined in such an arrangement?"

"Not at all. I cannot help surmising what is to be done. In dealing with
the funds of the property I go to the men, and say to them so much, and
so much, and so much you have actually lost. Agree among yourselves to
accept that, and it shall be paid to you. That is honest?"

"I do not know."

"But I do. Every shilling that the son of my client has had from them my
client is ready to pay. There is some hitch among them, and I make my
surmises. But I have no dealings with them. It is for them to come to me
now." Dolly only shook her head. "You cannot touch pitch and not be
defiled." That was what Dolly said, but said it to herself. And then she
went on and declared to herself still farther, that Mr. Barry was pitch.
She knew that Mr. Barry had seen Hart, and had seen Tyrrwhit, and had
been bargaining with them. She excused her father because he was her
father; but according to her thinking there should have been no
dealings with such men as these, except at the end of a pair of tongs.

"And now, Dolly," said her father, after a long pause, "tell me about
Mr. Barry."

"There is nothing more to be told."

"Not of what you said to him, but of the reasons which have made you so
determined. Would it not be better for you to be married?"

"If I could choose my husband."

"Whom would you choose?"

"You."

"That is nonsense. I am your father."

"You know what I mean. There is no one else among my circle of
acquaintances with whom I should care to live. There is no one else with
whom I should care to do more than die. When I look at it all round it
seems to be absolutely impossible. That I should on a sudden entertain
habits of the closest intimacy with such a one as Mr. Barry! What should
I say to him when he went forth in the morning? How should I welcome him
when he came back at night? What would be our breakfast, and what would
be our dinner? Think what are yours and mine,--all the little
solicitudes, all the free abuse, all the certainty of an affection which
has grown through so many years; all the absolute assurance on the part
of each that the one does really know the inner soul of the other."

"It would come."

"With Mr. Barry? That is your idea of my soul with which you have been
in communion for so many years? In the first place, you think that I am
a person likely to be able to transfer myself suddenly to the first man
that comes my way?"

"Gradually you might do so,--at any rate so as to make life possible. You
will be all alone. Think what it will be to have to live all alone."

"I have thought. I do know that it would be well that you should be able
to take me with you."

"But I cannot."

"No. There is the hardship. You must leave me, and I must be alone. That
is what we have to expect. But for her sake, and for mine, we may be
left while we can be left. What would you be without me? Think of that."

"I should bear it."

"You couldn't. You'd break your heart and die. And if you can imagine my
living there, and pouring out Mr. Barry's tea for him, you must imagine
also what I should have to say to myself about you. 'He will die, of
course. But then he has come to that sort of age at which it doesn't
much signify.' Then I should go on with Mr. Barry's tea. He'd come to
kiss me when he went away, and I--should plunge a knife into him."

"Dolly!"

"Or into myself, which would be more likely. Fancy that man calling me
Dolly." Then she got up and stood behind his chair and put her arm round
his neck. "Would you like to kiss him?--or any man, for the matter of
that? There is no one else to whom my fancy strays, but I think that I
should murder them all,--or commit suicide. In the first place, I should
want my husband to be a gentleman. There are not a great many gentlemen
about."

"You are fastidious."

"Come now;--be honest; is our Mr. Barry a gentleman?" Then there was a
pause, during which she waited for a reply. "I will have an answer. I
have a right to demand an answer to that question, since you have
proposed the man to me as a husband."

"Nay, I have not proposed him."

"You have expressed a regret that I have not accepted him. Is he a
gentleman?"

"Well;--yes; I think he is."

"Mind; we are sworn, and you are bound to speak the truth. What right
has he to be a gentleman? Who was his father and who was his mother? Of
what kind were his nursery belongings? He has become an attorney, and so
have you. But has there been any one to whisper to him among his
teachings that in that profession, as in all others, there should be a
sense of high honor to guide him? He must not cheat, or do anything to
cause him to be struck off the rolls; but is it not with him what his
client wants, and not what honor demands? And in the daily intercourse
of life would he satisfy what you call my fastidiousness?"

"Nothing on earth will ever do that."

"You do. I agree with you that nothing else on earth ever will. The man
who might, won't come. Not that I can imagine such a man, because I know
that I am spoiled. Of course there are gentlemen, though not a great
many. But he mustn't be ugly and he mustn't be good-looking. He mustn't
seem to be old, and certainly he mustn't seem to be young. I should not
like a man to wear old clothes, but he mustn't wear new. He must be well
read, but never show it. He must work hard, but he must come home to
dinner at the proper time." Here she laughed, and gently shook her head.
"He must never talk about his business at night. Though, dear, darling
old father, he shall do that if he will talk like you. And then, which
is the hardest thing of all, I must have known him intimately for at any
rate, ten years. As for Mr. Barry, I never should know him intimately,
though I were married to him for ten years."

"And it has all been my doing?"

"Just so. You have made the bed and you must lie on it. It hasn't been a
bad bed."

"Not for me. Heaven knows it has not been bad for me."

"Nor for me, as things go; only that there will come an arousing before
we shall be ready to get up together. Your time will probably be the
first. I can better afford to lose you than you to lose me."

"God send that it shall be so!"

"It is nature," she said. "It is to be expected, and will on that
account be the less grievous because it has been expected. I shall have
to devote myself to those Carroll children. I sometimes think that the
work of the world should not be made pleasant to us. What profit will it
be to me to have done my duty by you? I think there will be some profit
if I am good to my cousins."

"At any rate, you won't have Mr. Barry?" said the father.

"Not if I know it," said the daughter; "and you, I think, are a wicked
old man to suggest it." Then she bade him good-night and went to bed,
for they had been talking now till near twelve.

But Mr. Barry, when he had gone home, told himself that he had
progressed in his love-suit quite as far as he had expected on the first
opportunity. He went over the bridge and looked at the genteel house,
and resolved as to certain little changes which should be made. Thus one
room should look here, and the nursery should look there. The walk to
the railway would only take five minutes, and there would be five
minutes again from the Temple Station in London. He thought it would do
very well for domestic felicity. And as for a fortune, half the business
would not be bad. And then the whole business would follow, and he in
his turn would be enabled to let some young fellow in who should do the
greater part of the work and take the smaller part of the pay, as had
been the case with himself.

But it had not occurred to him that the young lady had meant what she
said when she refused him. It was the ordinary way with young ladies. Of
course he had expected no enthusiasm of love;--nor had he wanted it. He
would wait for three weeks and then he would go to Fulham again.


CHAPTER XXXIV.

MR. JUNIPER.


Though there was an air of badinage, almost of tomfoolery, about Dolly
when she spoke of her matrimonial prospects to her father,--as when she
said that she would "stick a knife" into Mr. Barry,--still there was a
seriousness in all she said which was more than grave. She was pathetic
and melancholy. She knew that there was nothing before her but to stay
with her father, and then to devote herself to her cousins, from whom
she was aware that she recoiled almost with hatred. And she knew that it
would be a good thing to be married,--if only the right man would come.
The right man would have to bear with her father, and live in the same
house with him to the end. The right man must be a _preux chevalier sans
peur et sans reproche_. The right man must be strong-minded and
masterful, and must have a will of his own; but he must be strong-minded
always for good. And where was she to find such a man as this? she who
was only an attorney's daughter,--plain, too, and with many
eccentricities. She was not intended to marry, and consequently the only
man who came in her way was her father's partner, for whom, in regard to
a share in the business, she might be desirable.

Devotion to the Carroll cousins was manifestly her duty. The two eldest
girls she absolutely did hate, and their father. To hate the father,
because he was vicious beyond cure, might be very well; but she could
not hate the girls without being aware that she was guilty of a grievous
sin. Every taste possessed by them was antagonistic to her. Their
amusements, their literature, their clothes, their manners,--especially
in regard to men,--their gestures and color, were distasteful to her.
"They hide their dirt with a thin veneer of cheap finery," said Dolly to
her father. He had replied by telling her that she was nasty. "No; but,
unfortunately, I cannot but see nastiness." Dolly herself was clean to
fastidiousness. Take off her coarse frock, and there the well-dressed
lady began. "Look at the heels of Sophie's boots! Give her a push, and
she'd fall off her pins as though they were stilts. They're always
asking to have a shoemaker's bill paid, and yet they won't wear stout
boots." "I'll pay the man," she said to Amelia one day, "if you'll
promise to wear what I'll buy you for the next six months." But Amelia
had only turned up her nose. These were the relatives to whom it would
become her duty to devote her life!

The next morning she started off to call in Bolsover Terrace with an
intention, not to begin her duty, but to make a struggle at the adequate
performance of it. She took with her some article of clothing intended
for one of the younger children, but which the child herself was to
complete. But when she entered the parlor she was astounded at finding
that Mr. Carroll was there. It was nearly twelve o'clock, and at that
time Mr. Carroll never was there. He was either in bed, or at
Tattersall's, or--Dolly did not care where. She had long since made up
her mind that there must be a permanent quarrel between herself and her
uncle, and her desire was generally respected. Now, unfortunately, he
was present, and with him were his wife and two elder daughters. To be
devoted, thought Dolly to herself, to such a family as this,--and without
anybody else in the world to care for! She gave her aunt a kiss, and
touched the girls' hands, and made a very distant bow to Mr. Carroll.
Then she began about the parcel in her hands, and, having given her
instructions, was preparing to depart.

But her aunt stopped her. "I think you ought to know, Dorothea."

"Certainly," said Mr. Carroll. "It is quite right that your cousin
should know."

"If you think it proper, I'm sure I can't object," said Amelia.

"She won't approve, I'm sure," said Sophie.

"Her young man has come forward and spoken," said Mr. Carroll.

"And quite in a proper spirit," said Amelia.

"Of course," said Mrs. Carroll, "we are not to expect too much. Though
we are respectable in birth, and all that, we are poor. Mr. Carroll has
got nothing to give her."

"I've been the most unfortunate man in the world," said Mr. Carroll.

"We won't talk about that now," continued Mrs. Carroll. "Here we are
without anything."

"You have decent blood," said Dolly; "at any rate on one side,"--for she
did not believe in the Carrolls.

"On both,--on both," said Mr. Carroll, rising up, and putting his hand
upon his heart. "I can boast of royal blood among my ancestors."

"But here we are without anything," said Mrs. Carroll again. "Mr.
Juniper is a most respectable man."

"He has been attached to some of the leading racing establishments in
the kingdom," said Mr. Carroll. Dolly had heard of Mr. Juniper as a
trainer, though she did not accurately know what a trainer meant.

"He is almost as great a man as the owner, for the matter of that," said
Amelia, standing up for her lover.

"He is not to say young,--perhaps forty," said Mrs. Carroll, "and he has
a very decent house of his own at Newmarket." Dolly immediately began to
think whether this might be for the better or for the worse. Newmarket
was a long way off, and the girl would be taken away; and it might be a
good thing to dispose of one of such a string of daughters, even to Mr.
Juniper. Of course there would be the disagreeable nature of the
connection. But, as Dolly had once said to her father, their share of
the world's burdens had to be borne, and this was one of them. Her first
cousin must marry the trainer. She, who had spoken so enthusiastically
about gentlemen, must put up with it. She knew that Mr. Juniper was but
a small man in his own line, but she would never disown him by word of
mouth. He should be her cousin Juniper. But she did hope that she might
not be called upon to see him frequently. After all, he might be much
more respectable than Mr. Carroll.

"I am glad he has a house of his own," said Dolly.

"It is a much better house than Fulham Manor," said Amelia.

Dolly was angered, not at the comparison between the houses, but at the
ingratitude and insolence of the girl. Supper was served at once, but not
before he had cried to his wife, "I smell men's flesh!"
The wife answered, "What are you thinking of, husband?"
At last, after talking for some time of this thing and that, she
asked him, "Would you do any harm to my brothers if they were to
come here?"

The Emperor said, "It would surely go hard with the eldest and the
second, but I would do nothing to the youngest."

Then she told him of her youngest brother's arrival.

The Falcon-emperor commanded his wife to bring her brother
before him, and as soon as he beheld him he fell upon his neck and
kissed him.
"Welcome, dear brother-in-law!"

"A lucky and joyful meeting, dear sister's husband!" answered the Prince;
upon which they sat down to supper.

After supper the Emperor asked his brother-in-law concerning the object
of his journey, and the Prince replied that he was seeking Steelpacha,
and told him all his adventures.

But the Emperor began to counsel him.

"Give up your journey," said he.

"Just let me tell you something about Steelpacha. That very day on
which he stole your wife I was awaiting him with five thousand falcons,
and waged a fearful battle with him.
Blood flowed knee-deep around us, yet we could not prevail against
him. And how shall you, a single man, overmaster him? So I give you
this well-meant advice: Go back home. So much of my treasure as your
heart desires is yours; take it and go."
But the Prince answered, "Hearty thanks for your offer, but go back with
my task unperformed I will not.

No, never! I must yet find Steelpacha."

For he thought to himself, "Why should I not? Have I not three lives?"

When the Falcon-emperor became convinced that he could not move him
from his purpose he drew a feather out of his wing and gave it to
him, with these words, "Here, take this feather of mine, and if you
come into great danger strike a fire and burn it I will come at
once to your aid with all my forces."

So the Prince took the feather and set forth to seek Steelpacha.

For a long time he went up and down through the wide world, until
at last he reached a third city.

He had hardly entered it when a woman called to him from a balcony,
"Dismount and come into the court!"

The Prince turned his horse and rode into the court.

Behold, there was his youngest sister! They fell into each other's arms
and lavished kisses upon each other.

She led the horse into the stable, the brother into the castle. Then
the Prince asked, "Sister, whom have you married?"

And she answered, "My consort is the Emperor of the Eagles; it is he
whom I have married."
When the Eagle-emperor came home that night his wife met him affectionately;
but he paid no attention to her greeting, but asked her, "What man
has come into my castle? Tell me at once!"
She answered, "There is no one here," and they sat down to supper.
During supper she asked him, as if by chance, "Would you do any harm to
my brothers if they should suddenly arrive?"

The Emperor answered, "The eldest and the second I should kill without
hesitation, but not the youngest. On the contrary, I would hasten to
his aid at any time, as far as it was in my power."
Then she said to the Emperor, "My youngest brother is come to pay us a
visit."
The Emperor commanded that he should be presented at once, went to meet
him and greeted him with "Welcome, dear brother-in-law!"
The other answered, "A lucky and joyful meeting, dear sister's husband!"

So they sat down to the table.

After supper they talked of one thing and another, and at last the
Prince told them that he was seeking for Steelpacha. When the
Eagle-emperor heard this he said everything he could think of to
dissuade him from this idea.

"Dear brother-in-law," said he, "leave that fiend alone and give
up your journey.

Stay, rather, here with me; you shall be made happy in every respect."

But the Prince paid no heed to his words, and as soon as morning
dawned he made ready and set off to seek Steelpacha.

But before he went away the Eagle-emperor, who saw that he could
not turn him from his purpose, drew forth a feather from his wing
and said:
"Take this feather, brother-in-law, and if ever you are in need or
danger, strike a fire and burn it.

I will come at once with my eagles to help you."
The Prince put the feather in his pocket and set forth.

Thus he roved around the world from city to city, going ever farther
and farther till at last one day he discovered his wife in a cavern.

She was not a little surprised to see him, and cried out to him, "In the
name of heaven, husband, how came you here?"

He hastily told her his adventures, and added, "Wife, my wife!

Quick, let us flee!"
But she hesitated. "Where shall we go, since Steelpacha can overtake us
in a moment? He will kill you on the spot, and bring me back here again."

But the Prince, being mindful of the three lives which Steelpacha had
given him, still coaxed his wife to flee, and they set out. Hardly had
they started when Steelpacha heard of it, gave rapid chase, and
overtook them.

"Oho, little Prince!" he cried out, "you would steal my wife, would
you?"
He tore her away from the Prince, and continued, "This time I give
you your life, for I have not forgotten that I promised you three
lives; but go now, and never come back again after her, for if you
do your life is at stake."

With these words Steelpacha took the woman away, while the Prince
remained alone, in doubt what to do next.

At last he resolved to go after his wife again.

When he arrived near the cavern he waited for his opportunity till
Steelpacha should be gone away; and once more he fled, taking his
wife with him.

Steelpacha soon heard of it, pursued after them, overtook them,
fitted an arrow to his bow, and cried out, "Would you rather that
I kill you with this arrow, or shall I cut you down with my sword?"

The Prince began to beg with all his might, and Steelpacha said to
him, "This second time I give you your life, but let me tell you
one thing: don't you try again to carry away this woman, for I will
not again give you your life, but will kill you on the spot as dead
as a mouse."

With these words he seized the woman and carried her away, while
the Prince again remained alone, always planning how to rescue his
wife.

Finally he said to himself, "After all, why should I be afraid?

I still have two lives--that one which he gave me and the one I had
before."

So he resolved to go back to his wife the next day when Steelpacha was
absent.

"Come," he said to her, "let us flee!" She objected that it was useless
to flee, since they would be at once overtaken; but he constrained
her to go with him.

But very soon Steelpacha overtook them, and cried out to the Prince,
"Wait, just wait!

I will never forgive you this!" The Prince was terrified and began to
beg for mercy, but Steelpacha silenced him.

"You remember that I gave you three lives?

All right; now I give you the third, and you have nothing more to expect
from me. So go home in peace, and beware of hazarding the life which God
lent you."
When the Prince saw that he was powerless against the might of
Steelpacha he turned back homeward with a heavy heart.

Suddenly he remembered what his brothers-in-law had said to him
when they gave him the feathers, and he said to himself, "Come what
come may, I will go once more to rescue my wife, and in case of
need I will burn the feathers and call my brothers-in-law to my
assistance."

So said and so done.

He went back to the cavern and saw his wife in Steelpacha's arms. He
waited around till the latter had gone away, and then showed himself to
his wife. She was not a little frightened, and cried out in terror,
"In the name of heaven!

Is life so hateful that you come back again for me?"
He calmed her and told her that his brothers-in-law had promised to
help him in utmost need. "And therefore," said he, "I am come for you
once more; make ready to flee."
She did so, and they hastened away; but Steelpacha soon got news
of their flight, and cried to them from afar, "Just wait, little
Prince; you haven't escaped me yet!"

But as soon as the Prince saw Steelpacha he drew the three feathers
and his tinder-box out of his pocket, struck a light, and kindled
the feathers one by one.

But while they were kindling Steelpacha overtook him, drew his
sword, and cleft the Prince in half.

That very moment what a prodigy occurred! There came flying the Dragon-emperor
with his dragons, the Falcon-emperor with his falcons, and the
Eagle-emperor with all his eagles, and waged battle with Steelpacha.

Blood flowed in streams, but fortune favoured Steelpacha, and he
made off safely, carrying his prize, the Princess, with him.

The three emperors now took counsel over their brother-in-law's body, and
decided to recall him to life.

So they summoned three of the swiftest dragons and asked which one
of them could most speedily bring some water from the river Jordan.

The first one said, "I can do it within half an hour;" the second said,
"I can do it in a quarter of an hour;" the third said, "I will have
it here in nine minutes." The emperors said to this one, "Then set out,
Dragon, as fast as possible."
The Dragon put forth all his impetuous strength, and truly within nine
minutes he brought back the water from the Jordan. The emperors took the
water, poured it over the two portions of the Prince's body and
scarcely had the water touched them when the young man sprang upon
his feet, safe and sound, as if nothing had happened to him.

The emperors then counselled him, "Now go back home, since you have been
restored to life!"
But the Prince answered that he must once more try his luck, and, by one
means or another, free his wife from the clutches of that fiend.

His imperial brothers-in-law remonstrated:

"Do give it up!

You will surely perish this time, for you have no life at command except
the one God lent you!"

But for all answer the Prince remained dumb.

Then the emperors said, "All right; if you are bent upon trying
again, come what come may, at least don't attempt to get your wife
away by flight, but beg her to wheedle Steelpacha into telling her
wherein his strength lies.

Then bring us word, that we may help you to get the best of him."

So the Prince stole secretly to his wife and told her how she should
coax Steelpacha to tell her the secret of his strength.

Then he betook himself to some place of safety.

When Steelpacha came home the Princess beset him with questions.

"In heaven's name, do tell me wherein your strength lies!"

Steelpacha answered, "My pretty wife, my strength lies in my sword."

Then the Princess prayed to the sword as if to God.

At sight of this Steelpacha burst into a mocking laugh and said to
her, "Oh, you simple woman! my strength lies not in my sword but in
my arrow."
Therefore she fell upon her knees before the arrow and began to
pray to it.

Then Steelpacha said, "My wife, some one must have well taught you
how to coax from me the secret of my strength.

If your husband were alive I should say it was he who had taught you."
But she swore by body and soul that no one had taught her, no one had
been there.

After several days her husband came again, and she told him that thus
far it had been impossible to learn from Steelpacha wherein his strength
lay. But the Prince answered, "Try again," and went away.

When Steelpacha came home she asked him anew wherein his strength
lay.

Upon which he answered her, "Since I see that you have a high respect for
my strength, I will confess the truth about it."
Then he told her: "Far from here is a mountain-peak. On this mountain-peak
lives a Fox. The Fox has a heart in which a bird is concealed; this
bird holds my strength. But that Fox is very hard to catch, for he has
many transformations."
The next day, when Steelpacha was away from home, the Prince came
again to his wife to learn what he had told her.

She repeated everything carefully, and the Prince went straight
away to his brothers-in-law with the much-longed-for news.

They received it with joy, and at once set out with the Prince to go to
that mountain-peak.

Arrived there, they set the eagles upon the Fox, which immediately took
refuge in a lake and there changed himself into a gull with six
wings.

But the falcons gave battle to the gull and drove him thence.

He flew high amid the clouds, the falcons ever following.

In a trice the gull changed himself into a fox again and tried to escape
into the earth; but, falling into the power of the eagles and all the
rest of the mighty host, he was surrounded and taken prisoner.

Then the emperors commanded that the Fox should be cut open and his heart
taken out. A fire was kindled, the heart cut open, and the bird taken
out and cast into the flames.

As soon as the bird was burned Steelpacha vanished forever.

So the Prince took his wife and went happily home.

_The Buried Moon_

Long ago in my grandmother's time, the Carland was all in bogs, great
pools of black water, and creeping trickles of green water, and
squishy mools which squirted when you stepped on them.

Well, granny used to say how long before her time the Moon herself was
once dead and buried in the marshes, and as she used to tell me, I'll
tell you all about it.

The Moon up yonder shone and shone just as she does now, and when she
shone she lighted up the bogpools, so that one could walk about almost
as safe as in the day.

But when she didn't shine, out came the Things that dwelt in the
darkness and went about seeking to do evil and harm; Bogles and Crawling
Horrors, all came out when the Moon didn't shine.

Well, the Moon heard of this, and being kind and good--as she surely
is, shining for us in the night instead of taking her natural
rest--she was main troubled.

"I'll see for myself, I will," said she, "maybe it's not so bad as
folks make out."

Sure enough, at the month's end down she stepped, wrapped up in a black
cloak, and a black hood over her yellow shining hair. Straight she
went to the bog edge and looked about her. Water here and water
there; waving tussocks and trembling mools, and great black snags all
twisted and bent. Before her all was dark--dark but for the glimmer of
the stars in the pools, and the light that came from her own white
feet, stealing out of her black cloak.

The Moon drew her cloak faster about her and trembled, but she wouldn't
go back without seeing all there was to be seen; so on she went, stepping
as light as the wind in summer from tuft to tuft between the muddy,
gurgling water holes. Just as she came near a big black pool her
foot slipped and she was nigh tumbling in. She grabbed with both hands
at a snag near by, to steady herself with, but as she touched it, it
twined itself round her wrists, like a pair of handcuffs, and
gripped her so that she couldn't move.

She pulled and twisted and fought, but it was no good. She was fast, and
must stay fast.

Presently as she stood trembling in the dark, wondering if help would
come, she heard something calling in the distance, calling, calling, and
then dying away with a sob, till the marshes were full of this pitiful
crying sound; then she heard steps floundering along, squishing in
the mud and slipping on the tufts, and through the darkness she saw
a white face with great feared eyes.

'T was a man strayed in the bogs.

Mazed with fear he struggled on toward the flickering light that looked
like help and safety. And when the poor Moon saw that he was coming
nigher and nigher to the deep hole, farther and farther from the
path, she was so mad and so sorry that she struggled and fought and
pulled harder than ever.

And though she couldn't get loose she twisted and turned, till her black
hood fell back off her shining yellow hair, and the beautiful light
that came from it drove away the darkness.

Oh, but the man cried with joy to see the light again. And at once
all evil things fled back into the dark corners, for they cannot
abide the light.

So he could see where he was, and where the path was, and how he
could get out of the marsh.

And he was in such haste to get away from the Quicks, and Bogles,
and Things that dwelt there, that he scarce looked at the brave
light that came from the beautiful shining yellow hair, streaming
out over the black cloak and falling to the water at his feet.

And the Moon herself was so taken up with saving him, and with
rejoicing that he was back on the right path, that she clean forgot
that she needed help herself, and that she was held fast by the
Black Snag.

So off he went, spent and gasping, and stumbling and sobbing
with joy, flying for his life out of the terrible bogs. Then it came over
the Moon, she would main like to go with him. So she pulled and fought
as if she were mad, till she fell on her knees, spent with tugging,
at the foot of the snag. And as she lay there, gasping for breath, the
black hood fell forward over her head. So out went the blessed light and
back came the darkness, with all its Evil Things, with a screech
and a howl.

They came crowding round her, mocking and snatching and beating;
shrieking with rage and spite, and swearing and snarling, for they
knew her for their old enemy, that drove them back into the corners,
and kept them from working their wicked wills.

"Drat thee!" yelled the witch-bodies, "thou 'st spoiled our spells
this year agone!"

"And us thou sent'st to brood in the corners!" howled the Bogles.

And all the Things joined in with a great "Ho, ho!" till the very tussocks
shook and the water gurgled. And they began again.

"We'll poison her--poison her!" shrieked the witches.

And "Ho, ho!" howled the Things again.

"We'll smother her--smother her!"

whispered the Crawling Horrors, and twined themselves round her knees.

And "Ho, ho!" mocked the rest of them.

And again they all shouted with spite and ill-will. And the poor Moon
crouched down, and wished she was dead and done with.

And they fought and squabbled what they should do with her, till a
pale gray light began to come in the sky; and it drew nigh the
dawning.

And when they saw that, they were feared lest they shouldn't have
time to work their will; and they caught hold of her, with horrid bony
fingers, and laid her deep in the water at the foot of the snag.
And the Bogles fetched a strange big stone and rolled it on top
of her, to keep her from rising.

And they told two of the Will-o-the-wykes to take turns in watching on
the black snag, to see that she lay safe and still, and couldn't get
out to spoil their sport.

And there lay the poor Moon, dead and buried in the bog; till some one
would set her loose; and who'd know where to look for her?

Well, the days passed, and 't was the time for the new moon's coming,
and the folk put pennies in their pockets and straws in their caps
so as to be ready for her, and looked about, for the Moon was a
good friend to the marsh folk, and they were main glad when the
dark time was gone, and the paths were safe again, and the Evil
Things were driven back by the blessed Light into the darkness and
the waterholes.

But days and days passed, and the new Moon never came, and the
nights were aye dark, and the Evil Things were worse than ever.

And still the days went on, and the new Moon never came. Naturally the
poor folk were strangely feared and mazed, and a lot of them went
to the Wise Woman who dwelt in the old mill, and asked if so be she
could find out where the Moon was gone.

"Well," said she, after looking in the brewpot, and in the mirror, and
in the Book, "it be main queer, but I can't rightly tell ye what's
happened to her.

If ye hear aught, come and tell me."
So they went their ways; and as days went by, and never a Moon came,
naturally they talked--my word!

I reckon they _did_ talk!

their tongues wagged at home, and at the inn, and in the garth.

But so came one day, as they sat on the great settle in the Inn,
a man from the far end of the bog lands was smoking and listening,
when all at once he sat up and slapped his knee.

"My faicks!"

said he, "I'd clean forgot, but I reckon I kens where the Moon be!" and
he told them of how he was lost in the bogs, and how, when he was
nigh dead with fright, the light shone out, and he found the path
and got home safe.

So off they all went to the Wise Woman, and told her about it, and
she looked long in the pot and the Book again, and then she nodded
her head.

"It's dark still, childer, dark!"

says she, "and I can't rightly see, but do as I tell ye, and ye'll
find out for yourselves.

He had lent, he said, a certain sum of
money to help the captain in his embarrassment, and expected to get it
back again. Now, latterly inquiries had been made very disagreeable in
their nature to Mr. Juniper; but Mr. Juniper, seeing how the the land
lay,--to use his own phrase,--consented only to accept so much as he had
advanced. "It don't make much difference to me," he had said. "Let me
have the three hundred and fifty pounds which the captain got in hard
money." Then the inquiries were made by Mr. Barry,--that very Mr. Barry
to whom subsequent inquiries were committed,--and Mr. Barry could not
satisfy himself as to the three hundred and fifty pounds which the
captain was said to have got in hard money. There had been words spoken
which seemed to Mr. Juniper to make it very inexpedient,--and we may say
very unfair,--that these farther inquiries into his character as a
husband should be intrusted to the same person. He regarded Mr. Barry as
an enemy to the human race, from whom, in the general confusion of
things, no plunder was to be extracted. Mr Barry had asked for the check
by which the three hundred and fifty pounds had been paid to Captain
Scarborough in hard cash. There had been no check, Mr. Juniper had said.
Such a small sum as that had been paid in notes at Newmarket. He said
that he could not, or, rather, that he would not, produce any evidence
as to the money. Mr. Barry had suggested that even so small a sum as
three hundred and fifty pounds could not have come and could not have
gone without leaving some trace. Mr. Juniper very indignantly had
referred to an acknowledgment on a bill-stamp for six hundred pounds
which he had filled in, and which the captain had undoubtedly signed.
"It's not worth the paper it's written on," Mr. Barry had said.

"We'll see about that," said Mr. Juniper. "As soon as the breath is out
of the old squire's body we'll see whether his son is to repudiate his
debts in that way. Ain't that the captain's signature?" and he slapped
the bill with his hand.

The old ceremony was gone through of explaining that the captain had no
right to a shilling of the property. It had become an old ceremony now.
"Mr. Augustus Scarborough is going to pay out of his own good will only
those sums of the advance of which he has indisputable testimony."

"Ain't he my testimony of this?" said Mr. Juniper.

"This bill is for six hundred pounds."

"In course it is."

"Why don't you say you advanced him five hundred and fifty pounds
instead of three hundred and fifty pounds?"

"Because I didn't."

"Why do you say three hundred and fifty pounds instead of one hundred
and fifty pounds?"

"Because I did."

"Then we have only your bare word. We are not going to pay any one a
shilling on such a testimony." Then Mr. Juniper had sworn an awful oath
that he would have every man bearing the name of Scarborough hanged. But
Mr. Barry's firm did not care much for any law proceedings which might
be taken by Mr. Juniper alone. No law proceedings would be taken. The
sum to be regained would not be worth the while of any lawyer to insure
the hopeless expense of fighting such a battle. It would be shown in
court, on Mr. Barry's side, that the existing owner of the estate, out
of his own generosity, had repaid all sums of money as to which evidence
existed that they had been advanced to the unfortunate illegitimate
captain. They would appear with clean hands; but poor Mr. Juniper would
receive the sympathy of none. Of this Mr. Juniper had by degrees become
aware, and was already looking on his claim on the Scarborough property
as lost. And now, on this other little affair of his, on this
matrimonial venture, it was very hard that inquiries as to his character
should be referred to the same Mr. Barry.

"I'm d---- if I stand it!" he said, thumping his fist down on Mr.
Carroll's bed, on which he was sitting.

"It isn't any of my doing. I'm on the square with you."

"I don't know so much about that."

"What have I done? Didn't I send her to the girl's uncle, and didn't she
get from him a very liberal promise?"

"Promises! Why didn't he stump up the rhino? What's the good of
promises? There's as much to do about a beggarly five hundred pounds as
though it were fifty thousand pounds. Inquiries!" Of course he knew very
well what that meant. "It's a most ungentlemanlike thing for one
gentleman to take upon himself to make inquiries about another. He is
not the girl's father. What right has he to make inquiries?"

"I didn't put it into his head," said Carroll, almost sobbing.

"He must be a low-bred, pettifogging lawyer."

"He is a lawyer," said Carroll, on whose mind the memory of the great
benefit he had received had made some impression. "I have admitted
that."

"Pshaw!"

"But I don't think he's pettifogging; not Mr. Grey. Four hundred pounds
down, with fifty pounds for dress, and the same, or most the same, to
all the girls, isn't pettifogging. If you ever comes to have a family,
Juniper--"

"I ain't in the way."

"But when you are, and there comes six of 'em, you won't find an uncle
pettifogging when he speaks out like Mr. Grey."

The conversation was carried on for some time farther, and then Mr.
Juniper left the house without again visiting the ladies. His last word
was that if inquiries were made into him they might all go to--Bath! If
the money were forthcoming, they would know where to find him; but it
must be five hundred pounds "square," with no parings made from it on
behalf of petticoats and pelisses. With this last word Mr. Juniper
stamped down the stairs and out of the house.

"He's a brute, after all!" said Sophie.

"No, he isn't. What do you know about brutes? Of course a gentleman has
to make the best fight he can for his money." This was what Amelia said
at the moment; but in the seclusion of their own room she wept bitterly.
"Why didn't he come in to see me and just give me one word? I hadn't
done anything amiss. It wasn't my fault if Uncle John is stingy."

"And he isn't so very stingy, after all," said Sophie.

"Of course papa hasn't got anything, and wouldn't have anything, though
you were to pour golden rivers into his lap."

"There are worse than papa," said Sophie.

"But he knows all that, and that our uncle isn't any more than an uncle.
And why should he be so particular just about a hundred pounds? I do
think gentlemen are the meanest creatures when they are looking after
money! Ladies ain't half so bad. He'd no business to expect five hundred
pounds all out."

This was very melancholy, and the house was kept in a state of silent
sorrow for four or five days, till the result of the inquiries had
come. Then there was weeping and gnashing of teeth. Mr. Barry came to
Bolsover Terrace to communicate the result of the inquiry, and was shut
up for half an hour with poor Mrs. Carroll. He was afraid that he could
not recommend the match. "Oh, I'm sorry for that,--very sorry!" said Mrs.
Carroll. "The young lady will be--disappointed." And her handkerchief
went up to her eyes. Then there was silence for awhile, till she asked
why an opinion so strongly condemnatory had been expressed.

"The gentleman, ma'am,--is not what a gentleman should be. You may take
my word for it. I must ask you not to repeat what I say to him."

"Oh dear, no."

"But perhaps the least said the soonest mended. He is not what a
gentleman should be."

"You mean a--fine gentleman."

"He is not what a man should be. I cannot say more than that. It would
not be for the young lady's happiness that she should select such a
partner for her life."

"She is very much attached to him."

"I am sorry that it should be so. But it will be better that she
should--live it down. At any rate, I am bound to communicate to you Mr.
Grey's decision. Though he does not at all mean to withhold his bounty
in regard to any other proposed marriage, he cannot bring himself to pay
money to Mr. Juniper."

"Nothing at all?" asked Mrs. Carroll.

"He will make no payment that will go into the pocket of Mr. Juniper."

Then Mr. Barry went, and there was weeping and wailing in the house in
Bolsover Terrace. So cruel an uncle as Mr. Grey had never been heard of
in history, or even in romance. "I know it's that old cat, Dolly," said
Amelia. "Because she hasn't managed to get a husband for herself, she
doesn't want any one else to get one."

"My poor child," said Mr. Carroll, in a maudlin condition, "I pity thee
from the bottom of my heart!"

"I wish that Mr. Barry may be made to marry a hideous old maid past
forty," said Georgina.

"I shouldn't care what they said, but would take him straight off," said
Sophie.

Upon this Mrs. Carroll shook her head. "I don't suppose that he is quite
all that he ought to be."

"Who is, I should like to know?" said Amelia.

"But my brother has to give his money according to his judgment." As
she said this the poor woman thought of those other five who in process
of time might become claimants. But here the whole family attacked her,
and almost drove her to confess that her brother was a stingy old
curmudgeon.


CHAPTER XXXVI.

"GURNEY & MALCOLMSON'S."


In Red Lion Square, on the first floor of a house which partakes of the
general dinginess of the neighborhood, there are two rooms which bear on
the outside door the well-sounding names of Gurney & Malcolmson; and on
the front door to the street are the names of Gurney & Malcolmson,
showing that the business transacted by Messrs. Gurney & Malcolmson
outweighs in importance any others conducted in the same house. In the
first room, which is the smaller of the two occupied, sits usually a
lad, who passes most of his time in making up and directing circulars,
so that a stranger might be led to suppose that the business of Gurney &
Malcolmson was of an extended nature.

But on the occasion to which we are about to allude the door of the
premises was closed, and the boy was kept on the alert posting, or
perhaps delivering, the circulars which were continually issued. This
was the place of business affected by Mr. Tyrrwhit, or at any rate one
of them. Who were Gurney & Malcolmson it is not necessary that our
chronicle should tell. No Gurney or no Malcolmson was then visible; and
though a part of the business of the firm in which it is to be supposed
that Gurney & Malcolmson were engaged was greatly discussed, their name
on the occasion was never mentioned.

A meeting had been called at which the presiding genius was Mr.
Tyrrwhit. You might almost be led to believe that, from the manner in
which he made himself at home, Mr. Tyrrwhit was Gurney & Malcolmson. But
there was another there who seemed to be almost as much at home as Mr.
Tyrrwhit, and this was Mr. Samuel Hart, whom we last saw when he had
unexpectedly made himself known to his friend the captain at Monaco. He
had a good deal to say for himself; and as he sat during the meeting
with his hat on, it is to be presumed that he was not in awe of his
companions. Mr. Juniper also was there. He took a seat at one corner of
the table, and did not say much. There was also a man who, in speaking
of himself and his own affairs, always called himself Evans & Crooke.
And there was one Spicer, who sat silent for the most part, and looked
very fierce. In all matters, however, he appeared to agree with Mr.
Tyrrwhit. He is especially named, as his interest in the matter
discussed was large. There were three or four others, whose affairs were
of less moment, though to them they were of intense interest. These
gentlemen assembled were they who had advanced money to Captain
Scarborough, and this was the meeting of the captain's creditors, at
which they were to decide whether they were to give up their bonds on
payment of the sums they had actually advanced, or whether they would
stand out till the old squire's death, and then go to law with the owner
of the estate.

At the moment at which we may be presumed to be introduced, Mr. Tyrrwhit
had explained the matter in a nervous, hesitating manner, but still in
words sufficiently clear. "There's the money down now if you like to
take it, and I'm for taking it." These were the words with which Mr.
Tyrrwhit completed his address.

"Circumstances is different," said the man with his hat on.

"I don't know much about that, Mr. Hart," said Tyrrwhit.

"Circumstances is different. I can't 'elp whether you know it or not."

"How different?"

"They is different,--and that's all about it. It'll perhaps shuit you and
them other shentlemen to take a pershentage."

"It won't suit Evans & Crooke," said the man who represented that firm.

"But perhaps Messrs. Evans & Crooke may be willing to save so much of
their property," said Mr. Tyrrwhit.

"They'd like to have what's due to 'em."

"We should all like that," said Spicer, and he gnashed his teeth and
shook his head.

"But we can't get it all," said Tyrrwhit.

"Speak for yourself, Mr. Tyrrwhit," said Hart. "I think I can get mine.
This is the most almighty abandoned swindle I ever met in all my born
days." The whole meeting, except Mr. Tyrrwhit, received this assertion
with loudly expressed applause. "Such a blackguard, dirty, thieving job
never was up before in my time. I don't know 'ow to talk of it in
language as a man isn't ashamed to commit himself to. It's downright
robbery."

"I say so too," said Evans & Crooke.

"By George!" continued Mr. Hart, "we come forward to 'elp a shentleman
in his trouble and to wait for our moneys till the father is dead, and
then when 'e's 'ad our moneys the father turns round and says that 'is
own son is a--Oh, it's too shocking! I 'aven't slept since I 'eard
it,--not a regular night's rest. Now, it's my belief the captain 'as no
'and in it."

Here Mr. Juniper scratched his head and looked doubtful, and one or two
of the other silent gentlemen scratched their heads. Messrs. Evans &
Crooke scratched his head. "It's a matter on which I would not like to
give an opinion one way or the other," said Tyrrwhit.

"No more wouldn't I," said Spicer.

"Let every man speak as he finds," continued Hart. "That's my belief. I
don't mind giving up a little of my claim, just a thousand or so, for
ready cash. The old sinner ought to be dead, and can't last long. My
belief is when 'e's gone I'm so circumstanced I shall get the whole.
Whether or no, I've gone in for 'elping the captain with all my savings,
and I mean to stick to them."

"And lose everything," said Tyrrwhit.

"Why don't we go and lug the old sinner into prison?" said Evans &
Crooke.

"Certainly that's the game," said Juniper, and there was another loud
acclamation of applause from the entire room.

"Gentlemen, you don't know what you're talking about, you don't indeed,"
said Tyrrwhit.

"I don't believe as we do," said Spicer.

"You can't touch the old gentleman. He owes you nothing, nor have you a
scratch of his pen. How are you to lug an old gentleman to prison when
he's lying there cut up by the doctors almost to nothing? I don't know
that anybody can touch him. The captain perhaps might, if the present
story be false; and the younger son, if the other be true. And then
they'd have to prove it. Mr. Grey says that no one can touch him."

"He's in the swim as bad as any of 'em," said Evans & Crooke.

"Of course he is," said Hart. "But let everybody speak for himself. I've
gone in to 'earn a 'eavy stake honestly."

"That's all right," said Evans & Crooke.

"And I mean to 'ave it or nothing. Now, Mr. Tyrrwhit, you know a piece
of my mind. It's a biggish lot of money."

"We know what your claim is."

"But no man knows what the captain got, and I don't mean 'em to know."

"About fifteen thousand," came in a whisper from some one in the room.

"That's a lie," said Mr. Hart; "so there's no getting out of that. If
the shentleman will mind 'is own concerns I'll mind mine. Nobody
knows,--barring the captain, and he like enough has forgot,--and nobody's
going to know. What's written on these eight bits of paper everybody may
know," and he pulled out of a large case or purse, which he carried in
his breast coat-pocket, a fat sheaf of bills. "There are five thou'
written on each of them, and for five thou' on each of them I means to
stand out. 'It or miss.' If any shentleman chooses to talk to me about
ready money I'll take two thou' off. I like ready money as well as
another."

"We can all say the same as that, Mr. Hart," said Tyrrwhit.

"No doubt. And if you think you can get it, I advise you to stick to it.
If you thought you could get it you would say the same. But I should
like to get that old man's 'ead between my fists. Wouldn't I punch it!
Thief! scoundrel! 'orrid old man! It ain't for myself that I'm speaking
now, because I'm a-going to get it,--I think I'm a-going to get it;--it's
for humanity at large. This kind of thing wiolates one's best feelings."

"'Ear, 'ear, 'ear!" said one of the silent gentlemen.

"Them's the sentiments of Evans & Crooke," said the representative of
that firm.

"They're all our sentiments, in course," said Spicer; "but what's the
use?"

"Not a ha'p'orth," said Mr. Tyrrwhit.

"Asking your pardon, Mr. Tyrrwhit," said Mr. Hart, "but, as this is a
meeting of creditors who 'ave a largish lot of money to deal with, I
don't think they ought to part without expressing their opinions in the
way of British commerce. I say crucifying 'd be too good for 'im."

"You can't get at him to crucify him."

"There's no knowing about that," said Mr. Hart.

"And now," said Mr. Tyrrwhit, drawing out his watch, "I expect Mr.
Augustus Scarborough to call upon us."

"You can crucify _him_," said Evans & Crooke.

"It is the old man, and neither of the sons, as have done it," said
Hart.

"Mr. Scarborough," continued Tyrrwhit, "will be here, and will expect to
learn whether we have accepted his offer. He will be accompanied by Mr.
Barry. If one rejects, all reject."

"Not at all," said Hart.

"He will not consent to pay anything unless he can make a clean hit of
it. He is about to sacrifice a very large sum of money."

"Sacrifice!" said Juniper.

"Yes; sacrifice a very large sum of money. His father cannot pay it
without his consent. The father may die any day, and then the money will
belong altogether to the son. You have, none of you, any claim upon him.
It is likely he may think you will have a claim on the estate, not
trusting his own father."

"I wouldn't trust him, not 'alf as far as I could see him, though he was
twice my father." This again came from Mr. Hart.

"I want to explain to these gentlemen how the matter stands."

"They understand," said Hart.

"I'm for securing my own money. It's very hard,--after all the risk. I
quite agree with Mr. Hart in what he says about the squire. Such a piece
of premeditated dishonesty for robbing gentlemen of their property I
never before heard. It's awful."

"'Orrid old man!" said Mr. Hart.

"Just so. But half a loaf is better than no bread. Now, here is a list,
prepared in Mr. Grey's chambers."

"'E's another, nigh as 'orrid."

"On this list we're all down, with the sums he says we advanced. Are we
to take them? If so we must sign our names, each to his own figure."
Then he passed the list down the table.

The men there assembled all crowded to look at the list, and among
others Mr. Juniper. He showed his anxiety by the eager way in which he
nearly annihilated Messrs. Evans & Crooke, by leaning over him as he
struggled to read the paper. "Your name ain't down at all," said Evans &
Crooke. Then a tremendous oath, very bitter and very wicked, came from
the mouth of Mr. Juniper, most unbefitting a young man engaged to marry
a young lady. "I tell you it isn't here," said Evans & Crooke, trying to
extricate himself.

"I shall know how to right myself," said Juniper, with another oath.
And he then walked out of the room.

"The captain, when he was drunk one night, got a couple of ponies from
him. It wasn't a couple all out. And Juniper made him write his name for
five hundred pounds. It was thought then that the squire 'd have been
dead next day, and Juniper 'd 've got a good thing."'

"I 'ate them ways," said Mr. Hart. "I never deal with a shentleman if
he's, to say--drunk. Of course it comes in my way, but I never does."

Now there was heard a sound of steps on the stairs, and Mr. Tyrrwhit
rose from his chair so as to perform the duty of master of the
ceremonies to the gentlemen who were expected. Augustus Scarborough
entered the room, followed by Mr. Barry. They were received with
considerable respect, and seated on two chairs at Mr. Tyrrwhit's right
hand. "Gentlemen, you most of you know these two gentlemen. They are Mr.
Augustus Scarborough and Mr. Barry, junior partner in the firm of
Messrs. Grey & Barry."

"We knows 'em," said Hart.

"My client has made a proposition to you," said Mr. Barry. "If you will
give up your bonds against his brother, which are not worth the paper
they are written on--"

"Gammon!" said Mr. Hart.

"I will sign checks paying to you the sums of money written on that
list. But you must all agree to accept such sums in liquidation in full.
I see you have not signed the paper yet. No time is to be lost. In fact,
you must sign it now, or my client will withdraw from his offer."

"Withdraw; will 'e?" said Hart. "Suppose we withdraw? 'O does your
client think is the honestest man in this 'ere swim?"

Mr. Barry seemed somewhat abashed by this question. "It isn't necessary
to go into that, Mr. Hart," said he.

Mr. Hart laughed long and loud, and all the gentlemen laughed. There was
something to them extremely jocose in their occupying, as it were, the
other side of the question, and appearing as the honest, injured party.
They enjoyed it thoroughly, and Mr. Hart was disposed to make the most
of it. "No; it ain't necessary; is it? There ain't no question of
honesty to be asked in this 'ere business. We quite understand that."

Then up and spoke Augustus Scarborough. He rose to his feet, and the
very fact of his doing so quieted for a time the exuberant mirth of the
party. "Gentlemen, Mr. Hart speaks to you of honesty. I am not going to
boast of my own. I am here to consent to the expenditure of a very large
sum of money, for which I am to get nothing, and which, if not paid to
you, will all go into my own pocket;--unless you believed that you
wouldn't be here to meet me."

"We don't believe nothing," said Hart.

"Mr. Hart, you should let Mr. Scarborough speak," said Tyrrwhit.

"Vell, let 'im speak. Vat's the odds?"

"I do not wish to delay you, nor to delay myself," continued Augustus.
"I can go, and will go, at once. But I shall not come back. There is no
good discussing this matter any longer."

"Oh no; not the least. Ve don't like discussion; do ve, captain?" said
Mr. Hart. "But you ain't the captain; is you?"

"As there seems to be no intention of signing that document, I shall
go," said Augustus. Then Mr. Tyrrwhit took the paper, and signed it on
the first line with his own name at full length. He wrote his name to a
very serious sum of money, but it was less than half what he and others
had expected to receive when the sum was lent. Had that been realized
there would have been no farther need for the formalities of Gurney &
Malcolmson, and that young lad must have found other work to do than the
posting of circulars. The whole matter, however, had been much
considered, and he signed the document. Mr. Hart's name came next, but
he passed it on. "I ain't made up my mind yet. Maybe I shall have to
call on Mr. Barry. I ain't just consulted my partner." Then the document
went down to Mr. Spicer, who signed it, grinning horribly; as did also
Evans & Crooke and all the others. They did believe that was the only
way in which they could get back the money they had advanced. It was a
great misfortune, a serious blow. But in this way there was something
short of ruin. They knew that Scarborough was about to pay the money, so
that he might escape a lawsuit, which might go against him; but then
they also wished to avoid the necessity of bringing the lawsuit. Looking
at the matter all round, we may say that the lawyers were the persons
most aggrieved by what was done on that morning. They all signed it as
they sat there,--except Mr. Hart, who passed it on, and still wore his
hat.

"You won't agree, Mr. Hart?" said Tyrrwhit.

"Not yet I von't," said Hart. "I ain't thought it out. I ain't in the
same boat with the rest. I'm not afraid of my money. I shall get that
all right."

"Then I may as well go," said Augustus.

"Don't be in a hurry, Mr. Scarborough," said Tyrrwhit. "Things of this
kind can't be done just in a moment." But Augustus explained that they
must be done in a very few moments, if they were to be done at all. It
was not his intention to sit there in Gurney & Malcolmson's office
discussing the matter with Mr. Hart. Notice of his intention had been
given, and they might take his money or leave it.

"Just so, captain," said Mr. Hart. "Only I believe you ain't the
captain. Where's the captain now? I see him last at Monte Carlo, and he
had won a pot of money. He was looking uncommon well after his little
accident in the streets with young Annesley."

Mr. Tyrrwhit contrived to get all the others out of the room, he
remaining there with Hart and Augustus Scarborough and Mr. Barry. And
then Hart did sign the document with altered figures: only that so much
was added on to the sum which he agreed to accept, and a similar
deduction made from that to which Mr. Tyrrwhit's name was signed. But
this was not done without renewed expostulation from the latter
gentleman. It was very hard, he said, that all the sacrifice should be
made by him. He would be ruined, utterly ruined by the transaction. But
he did sign for the altered sum, and Mr. Hart also signed the paper.
"Now, Mr. Barry, as the matter is completed, I think I will withdraw,"
said Augustus.

"It's five thousand pounds clean gone out of my pocket," said Hart, "and
I vas as sure of it as ever I vas in my life. There vas no better money
than the captain's. Vell, vell! This vorld's a queer place." So saying,
he followed Augustus and Mr. Barry out of the room, and left Mr.
Tyrrwhit alone in his misery.


CHAPTER XXXVII.

VICTORIA STREET.


Lounging in an arm-chair in a small but luxuriously furnished room in
Victoria Street sat Captain Mountjoy Scarborough, and opposite to him,
equally comfortably placed, as far as externals were concerned, but
without any of that lounging look which the captain affected, sat his
brother. It was nearly eight o'clock, and the sound of the dinner-plates
could be heard through the open doors from the next room. It was
evident, or at any rate was the fact, that Augustus found his brother's
presence a bore, and as evident that the captain intended to disregard
the dissatisfaction evinced by the owner of the chambers. "Do shut the
door, Mountjoy," said the younger. "I don't suppose we want the servant
to hear everything that we say."

"He's welcome for me," said Mountjoy, without moving. Then Augustus got
up and banged the door. "Don't be angry because I sometimes forget that
I am no longer considered to be your elder brother," said Mountjoy.

"Bother about elder brothers! I suppose you can shut a door?"

"A man is sometimes compelled by circumstances to think whether he can
or not. I'd've shut the door for you readily enough the other day. I
don't know that I can now. Ain't we going to have some dinner? It's
eight o'clock."

"I suppose they'll get dinner for you;--I'm not going to dine here." The
two men were both dressed and after this they remained silent for the
next five minutes. Then the servant came in and said that dinner was
ready.

All this happened in December. It must be explained that the captain had
come to London at his brother's instance, and was there, in his rooms,
at his invitation. Indeed, we may say that he had come at his brother's
command. Augustus had during the last few months taken upon himself to
direct the captain's movements; and though he had not always been
obeyed, still, upon the whole, his purposes had been carried out as well
as he could expect. He had offered to supply the money necessary for the
captain's tour, and had absolutely sent a servant to accompany the
traveller. When the traveller had won money at Monaco he had been
unruly, but this had not happened very often. When we last saw him he
had expressed his intention to Mr. Hart of making a return journey to
the Caucasian provinces. But he got no farther than Genoa on his way to
the Caucasus, and then, when he found that Mr. Hart was not at his back,
he turned round and went back to Monte Carlo. Monte Carlo, of all places
on the world's surface, had now charms for him.

There was no longer a club open to him, either in London or Paris, at
which be could win or lose one hundred pounds. At Monte Carlo he could
still do so readily; and, to do so, need not sink down into any
peculiarly low depth of social gathering. At Monte Carlo the _ennui_ of
the day was made to disappear. At Monte Carlo he could lie in bed till
eleven, and then play till dinner-time. At Monte Carlo there was always
some one who would drink a glass of wine with him without inquiring too
closely as to his antecedents. He had begun by winning a large sum of
money. He had got some sums from his brother, and when at last he was
summoned home he was penniless. Had his pocket been still full of money
it may be doubted whether he would have come, although he understood
perfectly the importance of the matter on which he had been recalled.

He had been sent for in order that he might receive from Mr. Grey a
clear statement of what it was intended to do in reference to the
payment of money to the creditors. Mr. Grey had, in the first place,
endeavored to assure him that his co-operation was in no respect made
necessary by the true circumstances of the case, but in order to satisfy
the doubts of certain persons. The money to be paid was the joint
property of his father and his brother,--of his father, as far as the use
of it for his life was concerned, and of his brother, as to its
continued and perpetual enjoyment. They were willing to pay so much for
the redemption of the bonds given by him, the captain. As far as these
bonds were concerned the captain would thus be a free man. There could
be no doubt that nothing but benefit was intended for him,--as though he
were himself the heir. "Though as to that I have no hesitation in
telling you that, you will at your father's death have no right to a
shilling of the property." The captain had said that he was quite
willing, and had signed the deed. He was glad that these bonds should be
recovered so cheaply. But as to the property,--and here he spoke with
much spirit to Mr. Grey,--it was his purpose at his father's death to
endeavor to regain his position. He would never believe, he said, that
his mother was--Then he turned away, and, in spite of all that had come
and gone, Mr. Grey respected him.

But he had signed the deed, and the necessity for his presence was over.
What should his brother do with him now? He could not keep him
concealed,--or not concealed,--in his rooms. But something must be done.
Some mode of living must be invented for him. Abroad! Augustus said to
himself,--and to Septimus Jones, who was his confidential friend,--that
Mountjoy must live "abroad."

"Oh yes; he must go abroad. There's no doubt about that. It's the only
place for him." So spoke Septimus Jones, who, though confidential
friend, was not admitted to the post of confidential adviser. Augustus
liked to have a depositary for his resolutions, but would admit no
advice. And Septimus Jones had become so much his creature that he had
to obey him in all things.

We are apt to think that a man may be disposed of by being made go
abroad; or, if he is absolutely penniless and useless, by being sent to
the colonies,--that he may become a shepherd and drink himself out of the
world. To kill the man, so that he may be no longer a nuisance, is
perhaps the chief object in both cases. But it was not easy to get the
captain to go abroad unless, indeed, he was sent back to Monte Carlo.
Some Monte Carlo, such as a club might be with stakes practically
unlimited, was the first desire of his heart. But behind that, or
together with it, was an anxious longing to remain near Tretton and "see
it out," as he called it, when his father should die. His father must
die very shortly, and he would like "to see it out," as he told Mr.
Grey; and, with this wish, there was a longing also for the company of
Florence Mountjoy.

He used to tell himself, in those moments of sad thoughts,--thoughts
serious as well as sad, which will come even to a gambler,--that if he
could have Tretton and Florence Mountjoy he would never touch another
card. And there was present to him an assurance that his aunt, Mrs.
Mountjoy, would still be on his side. If he could talk over his
circumstances with Mrs. Mountjoy, he thought that he might be encouraged
to recover his position as an English gentleman. His debts at the club
had already been paid, and he had met on the sly a former friend, who
had given him some hope that he might be re-admitted. But at the present
moment his mind turned to Brussels. He had learned that Florence and her
mother were at the embassy there, and, though he hesitated, still he
desired to go. But this was not the "abroad" contemplated by Augustus.
Augustus did not think it well that his father's bastard son, who had
been turned out of a London club for not paying his card debts, and had
then disappeared in a mysterious way for six months, should show himself
at the British embassy, and there claim admittance and relationship. Nor
was he anxious that his brother should see Florence Mountjoy. He had
suggested a prolonged tour in South America, which he had declared to be
the most interesting country in the world. "I think I had rather go to
Brussels," Mountjoy had answered, gallantly, keeping his seat in the
arm-chair and picking his teeth the while. This occurred on the evening
before that on which we found them just now. On the morning of that day
Mountjoy had had his interview with Mr. Grey.

Augustus had declared that he intended to dine out. This he had said in
disgust at his brother's behavior. No doubt he could get his dinner at
ten minutes' notice. He had not been expelled from his club. But he had
ordered the dinner on that day with a view to eat it himself, and in
effect he carried out his purpose. The captain got up, thinking to go
alone when the dinner was announced, but expressed himself gratified
when his brother said that he "had changed his mind." "You made yourself
such an ass about shutting the door that I resolved to leave you to
yourself. But come along." And he accompanied the captain into the other
room.

A very pretty little dinner was prepared,--quite such as one loving
friend might give to another, when means are sufficient,--such a dinner
as the heir of Tretton might have given to his younger brother. The
champagne was excellent, and the bottle of Leoville. Mountjoy partook of
all the good things with much gusto, thinking all the while that he
ought to have been giving the dinner to his younger brother. When that
conversation had sprung up about going to Brussels or South America,
Mountjoy had suggested a loan. "I'll pay your fare to Rio, and give you
an order on a banker there." Mountjoy had replied that that would not at
all suit his purpose. Then Augustus had felt that it would be almost
better to send his brother even to Brussels than to keep him concealed
in London. He had been there now for three or four days, and, even in
respect of his maintenance, had become a burden. The pretty little
dinners had to be found every day, and were eaten by the captain alone,
when left alone, without an attempt at an apology on his part. Augustus
had begun with some intention of exhibiting his mode of life. He would
let his brother know what it was to be the heir of Tretton. No doubt he
did assume all the outward glitter of his position, expecting to fill
his brother's heart with envy. But Mountjoy had seen and understood it
all; and remembering the days, not long removed, when he had been the
heir, he bethought himself that he had never shown off before his
brother. And he was determined to express no gratitude or thankfulness.
He would go on eating the little dinners exactly as though they had been
furnished by himself. It certainly was dull. There was no occupation for
him, and in the matter of pocket-money he was lamentably ill-supplied.
But he was gradually becoming used to face the streets again and had
already entered the shops of one or two of his old tradesmen. He had
quite a confidential conversation with his boot-maker, and had ordered
three or four new pairs of boots.

Nobody could tell how the question of the property would be decided till
his father should have died. His father had treated him most cruelly,
and he would only wait for his death. He could assure the boot-maker
that when that time came he should look for his rights. He knew that
there was a suspicion abroad that he was in a conspiracy with his father
and brother to cheat his creditors. No such thing. He himself was
cheated. He pledged himself to the boot-maker that, to the best of his
belief, his father was robbing him, and that he would undoubtedly assert
his right to the Tretton property as soon as the breath should be out of
his father's body. The truth of what he told the boot-maker he certainly
did believe. There was some little garnishing added to his tale,--which,
perhaps, under the circumstances, was to be forgiven. The blow had come
upon him so suddenly, he said, that he was not able even to pay his card
account, and had left town in dismay at the mine which had been exploded
under his feet. The boot-maker believed him so far that he undertook to
supply his orders.

When the dinner had been eaten the two brothers lit their cigars and
drew to the fire. "There must, unfortunately, come an end to this, you
know," said Augustus.

"I certainly can't stand it much longer," said Mountjoy.

"You, at any rate, have had the best of it. I have endeavored to make my
little crib comfortable for you."

"The grub is good, and the wine. There's no doubt about that. Somebody
says somewhere that nobody can live upon bread alone. That includes the
whole _menu_, I suppose."

"What do you suggest to do with yourself?"

"You said, go abroad."

"So I did--to Rio."

"Rio is a long way off,--somewhere across the equator, isn't it?"

"I believe it is."

"I think we'd better have it out clearly between us, Augustus. It won't
suit me to be at Rio Janeiro when our father dies."

"What difference will his death make to you?"

"A father's death generally does make a difference to his eldest son,
particularly if there is any property concerned."

"You mean to say that you intend to dispute the circumstances of your
birth?"

"Dispute them! Do you think that I will allow such a thing to be said of
my mother without disputing it? Do you suppose that I will give up my
claim to one of the finest properties in England without disputing it?"

"Then I had better stop the payment of that money, and let the gentlemen
know that you mean to raise the question on their behalf."

"That's your affair. The arrangement is a very good one for me; but you
made it."

"You know very well that your present threat means nothing. Ask Mr.
Grey. You can trust him."

"But I can't trust him. After having been so wickedly deceived by my own
father, I can trust no one. Why did not Mr. Grey find it out before, if
it be true? I give you my word, Augustus, the lawyers will have to fight
it out before you will be allowed to take possession."

"And yet you do not scruple to come and live here at my cost."

"Not in the least. At whose cost can I live with less scruple than at
yours? You, at any rate, have not robbed our mother of her good name, as
my father has done. The only one of the family with whom I could not
stay is the governor. I could not sit at the table with a man who has so
disgraced himself."

"Upon my word I am very much obliged to you for the honor you do me."

"That's my feeling. The chance of the game and his villany have given
you for the moment the possession of all the good things. They are all
mine by rights."

"Cards have had nothing to do with it."

"Yes; they have. But they have had nothing to do with my being the
eldest legitimate son of my father. The cards have been against me, but
they have not affected my mother. Then there came the blow from the
governor, and where was I to look for my bread but to you? I suppose, if
the truth be known, you get the money from the governor."

"Of course I do. But not for your maintenance."

"On what does he suppose that I have been living since last June? It
mayn't be in the bond, but I suppose he has made allowance for my
maintenance. Do you mean to say that I am not to have bread-and-cheese
out of Tretton?"

"If I were to turn you out of these rooms you'd find it very difficult
to get it."

"I don't think you'll do that."

"I'm not so sure."

"You're meditating it,--are you? I shouldn't go just at present, because
I have not got a sovereign in the world. I was going to speak to you
about money. You must let me have some."

"Upon my word, I like your impudence!"

"What the devil am I to do? The governor has asked me to go down to
Tretton, and I can't go without a five-pound note in my pocket."

"The governor has asked you to Tretton?"

"Why not? I got a letter from him this morning." Then Augustus asked to
see the letter, but Mountjoy refused to show it. From this there arose
angry words, and Augustus told his brother that he did not believe him.
"Not believe me? You do believe me! You know that what I say is the
truth, He has asked me with all his usual soft soap. But I have refused
to go. I told him that I could not go to the house of one who had
injured my mother so seriously."

All that Mountjoy said as to the proposed visit to Tretton was true. The
squire had written to him without mentioning the name of Augustus, and
had told him that, for the present, Tretton would be the best home for
him. "I will do what I can to make you happy, but you will not see a
card," the squire had said. It was not the want of cards which prevented
Mountjoy, but a feeling on his part that for the future there could be
nothing but war between him and his father. It was out of the question
that he should accept his father's hospitality without telling him of
his intention, and he did not know his father well enough to feel that
such a declaration would not affect him at all. He had, therefore,
declined.

Then Harry Annesley's name was mentioned. "I think I've done for that
fellow," said Augustus.

"What have you done?"

"I've cooked his goose. In the first place, his uncle has stopped his
allowance, and in the second place the old fellow is going to marry a
wife. At any rate, he has quarrelled with Master Harry _à outrance_.
Master Harry has gone back to the parental parsonage, and is there
eating the bread of affliction and drinking the waters of poverty.
Flossy Mountjoy may marry him if she pleases. But in some persons we find
an abundance of courage, nobleness and kindness of heart, without
kindness of manner, and we can only think and speak of them as not
only impolite, but even rude and gruff.

Such a man was Dr.

Johnson, whose rudeness secured for him the nickname of Ursa Major,
and of whom Goldsmith truthfully remarked, "No man alive has a more
tender heart; he has nothing of the bear about him but his skin."

To acquire that ease and grace of manners which is possessed by and which
distinguishes every well-bred person, one must think of others
rather than of himself, and study to please them even at his own
inconvenience.

"Do unto others as you would that others should do unto you"--the
golden rule of life--is also the law of politeness, and such
politeness implies self-sacrifice, many struggles and conflicts.

It is an art and tact, rather than an instinct and inspiration. An
eminent divine has said: "A noble and attractive every-day bearing comes
of goodness, of sincerity, of refinement. And these are bred in
years, not moments. The principle that rules our life is the sure
posture-master.

Sir Philip Sidney was the pattern to all England of a perfect
gentleman; but then he was the hero that, on the field of Zutphen,
pushed away the cup of cold water from his own fevered and parched
lips, and held it out to the dying soldier at his side."

A Christian by the very conditions of his creed, and the obligations
of his faith is, of necessity, in mind and soul--and therefore in
word and act--a gentleman, but a man may be polite without being a
Christian.

[Illustration]

CHAPTER III.

Introductions.

An acquaintanceship or friendship usually begins by means of introductions,
though it is by no means uncommon that when it has taken place under
other circumstances--without introduction--it has been a great advantage
to both parties; nor can it be said that it is improper to begin an
acquaintance in this way. The formal introduction has been called the
highway to the beginning of friendship, and the "scraped" acquaintance
the by-path.

PROMISCUOUS INTRODUCTION.

There is a large class of people who introduce friends and acquaintances
to everybody they meet, whether at home or abroad, while walking or
riding out. Such promiscuous introductions are neither necessary,
desirable, nor at all times agreeable.

AN INTRODUCTION A SOCIAL ENDORSEMENT.

It is to be remembered that an introduction is regarded as a social
endorsement of the person introduced, and that, under certain
circumstances, it would be wrong to introduce to our friends casual
acquaintances, of whom we know nothing, and who may afterwards prove
to be anything but desirable persons to know.

Care should be taken, therefore, in introducing two individuals,
that the introduction be mutually agreeable. Whenever it is practicable,
it is best to settle the point by inquiring beforehand. When this is
inexpedient from any cause, a thorough acquaintance with both parties
will warrant the introducer to judge of the point for him or
herself.

UNIVERSAL INTRODUCTIONS.

While the habit of universal introductions is a bad one, there are many
men in cities and villages who are not at all particular whom they
introduce to each other.

As a general rule, a man should be as careful about the character of the
person he introduces to his friends, as he is of him whose notes he would
endorse.
THE INTRODUCTION OF A GENTLEMAN TO A LADY.No doubt Augustus had, till the spring of this present year,
been kept in the background; but no injury had come to him from that.
His father, of his own good will, with infinite labor and successful
ingenuity, had struggled to put him back in the place which had been
taken from him. Augustus might, not unnaturally, have expressed himself
as angry. He had not done so but had made himself persistently
disagreeable, and had continued to show that he was waiting impatiently
for his father's death. It had come to pass that at their last meeting
he had hardly scrupled to tell his father that the world would be no
world for him till his father had left it. This was the reward which the
old man received for having struggled to provide handsomely and
luxuriously for his son! He still made his son a sufficient allowance
befitting the heir of a man of large property, but he had resolved never
to see him again. It was true that he almost hated him, and thoroughly
despised him.

But since the departure and mysterious disappearance of his eldest son
his regard for the sinner had returned. He had become apparently a
hopeless gambler. His debts had been paid and repaid. At last the
squire had learned that Mountjoy owed so much on post-obits that the
farther payment of them was an impossibility. There was no way of saving
him. To save the property he must undo the doings of his early youth,
and prove that the elder son was illegitimate. He had still kept the
proofs, and he did it.

To the great disgust of Mr. Grey, to the dismay of creditors, to the
incredulous wonder of Augustus, and almost to the annihilation of
Mountjoy himself, he had done it. But there had been nothing in
Mountjoy's conduct which had in truth wounded him. Mountjoy's vices had
been dangerous, destructive, absurdly foolish, but not, to his father, a
shame. He ridiculed gambling as a source of excitement. No man could win
much without dishonest practices, and fraud at cards would certainly be
detected. But he did not on that account hate cards. There was no reason
why Mountjoy should not become to him as pleasant a companion as ever
for the few days that might be left to him, if only he would come. But,
when asked, he refused to come. When the squire received the letter
above given he was not in the least angry with his son, but simply
determined, if possible, that he should be brought to Tretton.
Mountjoy's debts would now be paid, and something, if possible, should
be done for him. He was so angry with Augustus that he would, if
possible, revoke his last decision;--but that, alas! would be impossible.

Sir William Brodrick had, when he last saw him, expressed some hope,--not
of his recovery, which was by all admitted to be impossible,--but of his
continuance in the land of the living for another three months, or
perhaps six, as Sir William had finally suggested, opening out, as he
himself seemed to think, indefinite hope. "The most wonderful
constitution, Mr. Scarborough, I ever saw in my life. I've never known a
dog even so cut about, and yet bear it." Mr. Scarborough bowed and
smiled, and accepted the compliment. He would have taken the hat off his
head, had it been his practice to wear a hat in his sitting-room. Mr.
Merton had gone farther. Of course he did not mean, he said, to set up
his opinion against Sir William's; but if Mr. Scarborough would live
strictly by rule, Mr. Merton did not see why either three months or six
should be the end of it. Mr. Scarborough had replied that he could not
undertake to live precisely by rule, and Mr. Merton had shaken his head.
But from that time forth Mr. Scarborough did endeavor to obey the
injunctions given to him. He had something worth doing in the six months
now offered to him.

He had heard lately very much of the story of Harry Annesley, and had
expressed great anger at the ill-usage to which that young man had been
subjected. It had come to his ears that it was intended that Harry
should lose the property he had expected, and that he had already lost
his immediate income. This had come to him through Mr. Merton, between
whom and Augustus Scarborough there was no close friendship. And the
squire understood that Florence Mountjoy had been the cause of Harry's
misfortune. It is the duty of Mr. D.
upon bowing to say, "It gives me great pleasure to form your acquaintance,
Miss C.," or a remark of this nature.

If gentlemen are to be introduced to one another, the form is,
"Col.
Blank, permit me to introduce to you Mr."What!" he had exclaimed to Mr. Merton; "he wants both the
property and the girl. There is nothing on earth that he does not want.
The greater the impropriety in his craving, the stronger the craving."
Then he picked up by degrees all the details of the midnight feud
between Harry and Mountjoy, and set himself to work to undermine
Augustus. But he had steadily carried out the plan for settling with the
creditors, and, with the aid of Mr. Grey, had, as he thought, already
concluded that business. Conjunction with Augustus had been necessary,
but that had been obtained.

It is not too much to say that, at the present moment of his life, the
idea of doing some injury to Augustus was the one object which exercised
Mr. Scarborough's mind. Since he had fallen into business relations with
his younger son he had become convinced that a more detestable young man
did not exist. The reader will, perhaps, agree with Mr. Scarborough, but
it can hardly be hoped that he should entertain the opinion as strongly.

Augustus was now the recognized eldest legitimate son of the squire; and
as the property was entailed it must no doubt belong to him. But the
squire was turning in his mind all means of depriving that condition as
far as was possible of its glory. When he had first heard of the injury
that had been done to Harry Annesley, he thought that he would leave to
our hero all the furniture, all the gems, all the books, all the wine,
all the cattle which were accumulated at Tretton. Augustus should have
the bare acres, and still barer house, but nothing else. In thinking of
this he had been actuated by a conviction that it would be useless for
him to leave them to Mountjoy. Whatever might be left to Mountjoy would
in fact be left to the creditors; and therefore Harry Annesley with his
injuries had been felt to be a proper recipient, not of the squire's
bounty, but of the results of his hatred for his son.

To run counter to the law! That had ever been the chief object of the
squire's ambition. To arrange everything so that it should be seen that
he had set all laws at defiance! That had been his great pride. He had
done so notably, and with astonishing astuteness, in reference to his
wife and two sons. But now there had come up a condition of things in
which he could again show his cleverness. Augustus had been most anxious
to get up all the post-obit bonds which the creditors held, feeling, as
his father well understood, that he would thus prevent them from making
any farther inquiry when the squire should have died. Why should they
stir in the matter by going to law when there would be nothing to be
gained? Those bonds had now been redeemed, and were in the possession of
Mr. Grey. They had been bought up nominally by himself, and must be
given to him. Mr. Grey, at any rate, would have the proof that they had
been satisfied. They could not be used again to gratify any spite that
Augustus might entertain. The captain, therefore, could now enjoy any
property which might be left to him. Of course, it would all go to the
gaming-table. It might even yet be better to leave it to Harry Annesley.
But blood was thicker than water,--though it were but the blood of a
bastard. He would do a good turn for Harry in another way. All the
furniture, and all the gems, and all the money, should again be the
future property of Mountjoy.

But in order that this might be effected before he died he must not let
the grass grow under his feet. He thought of the promised three months,
with a possible extension to six, as suggested by Sir William. "Sir
William says three months," he said to Mr. Merton, speaking in the
easiest way of the possibility of his living.

"He said six."

"Ah! that is, if I do what I'm told. But I shall not exactly do that.
Three or six would be all the same, only for a little bit of business I
want to get through. Sir William's orders would include the abandonment
of my business."

"The less done the better. Then I do not see why Sir William should
limit you to six months."

"I think that three will nearly suffice."

"A man does not want to die, I suppose," said Merton.

"There are various ways of looking at that question," replied the
squire. "Many men desire the prolongation of life as a lengthened period
of enjoyment. There is, perhaps, something of that feeling with me; but
when you see how far I am crippled and curtailed, how my enjoyments are
confined to breathing the air, to eating and drinking, and to the
occasional reading of a few pages, you must admit that there cannot be
much of that. A conversation with you is the best of it. Some want to
live for the sake of their wives and children. In the ordinary
acceptation of the words, that is all over with me. Many desire to live
because they fear to die. There is nothing of that in me, I can assure
you. I am not afraid to meet my Creator. But there are those who wish
for life that their purposes of love, or stronger purposes of hatred,
may be accomplished. I am among the number. But, on that account, I only
wish it till those purposes have been completed. I think I'll go to
sleep for an hour; but there are a couple of letters I want you to write
before post-time." Then Mr. Scarborough turned himself round and thought
of the letters he was to write. Mr. Merton went out, and as he wandered
about the park in the dirt and slush of December tried to make up his
mind whether he most admired his patron's philosophy or condemned his
general lack of principle.

At the proper hour he appeared again, and found Mr. Scarborough quite
alert. "I don't know whether I shall have the three months, unless I
behave better," he said. "I have been thinking about those letters, and
very nearly made an attempt to write them. There are things about a son
which a father doesn't wish to communicate to any one." Merton only
shook his head. "I'm not a bit afraid of you, nor do I care for your
knowing what I have to say. But there are words which it would be
difficult even to write, and almost impossible to dictate." But he did
make the attempt, though he did not find himself able to say all that he
had intended. The first letter was to the lawyer:

"My dear Mr. Grey,--You will be surprised at my writing to summon you
once again to my bedside. I think there was some kind of a promise made
that the request should not be repeated; but the circumstances are of
such a nature that I do not well know how to avoid it. However, if you
refuse to come, I will give you my instructions. It is my purpose to
make another will, and to leave everything that I am capable of leaving
to my son Mountjoy. You are aware that he is now free from debt, and
capable of enjoying any property that he may possess. As circumstances
are at present he would on my death be absolutely penniless, and Heaven
help the man who should find himself dependent on the mercy of Augustus
Scarborough.

"What I possess would be the balance at the bank, the house in town, and
everything contained in and about Tretton, as to which I should wish
that the will should be very explicit in making it understood that every
conceivable item of property is to belong to Mountjoy. I know the
strength of an entail, and not for worlds would I venture to meddle with
anything so holy." There came a grin of satisfaction over his face as he
uttered these words, and his scribe was utterly unable to keep from
laughing. "But as Augustus must have the acres, let him have them bare."

"Underscore that word, if you please;" and the word was underscored. "If
I had time I would have every tree about the place cut down."

"I don't think you could under the entail," said Merton.

"I would use up every stick in building the farmers' barns and mending
the farmers' gates, and I would cover an acre just in front of the house
with a huge conservatory. I respect the law, my boy, and they would find
it difficult to prove that I had gone beyond it. It creates an instantaneous
impression in his behalf, while gruffness or coarseness excites
as quick a prejudice against him.

It is an ornament, worth more as a means of winning favor than the
finest clothes and jewels ever worn. Lord Chesterfield said the art of
pleasing is, in truth, the art of rising, of distinguishing one's self,
of making a figure and a fortune in the world. Some years ago a drygoods
salesman in a London shop had acquired such a reputation for courtesy
and exhaustless patience, that it was said to be impossible to
provoke from him any expression of irritability, or the smallest
symptom of vexation.

A lady of rank learning of his wonderful equanimity, determined to
put it to the test by all the annoyances with which a veteran
shop-visitor knows how to tease a shopman.

She failed in her attempt to vex or irritate him, and thereupon set
him up in business.

He rose to eminence in trade, and the main spring of his later, as
of his earlier career, was politeness.

Hundreds of men, like this salesman, have owed their start in life
wholly to their pleasing address and manners.

CULTIVATION OF GOOD MANNERS.

The cultivation of pleasing, affable manners should be an important
part of the education of every person of whatever calling or station
in life.

Many people think that if they have only the substance, the form
is of little consequence.

But manners are a compound of spirit and form--spirit acted into form.

Your
brother has kindly interfered for the payment of your creditors; and as
all the outstanding bonds have been redeemed, you would now, by his
generosity, be enabled to enjoy any property which might be left to you.
There are a few tables and chairs at my disposal, and a gem or two, and
some odd volumes which perhaps you might like to possess. I have written
to Mr. Grey on the subject, and I would wish you to see him. This you
might do, whether you come here or not. But I do not the less wish that
you should come.

"Your affectionate father,

"JOHN SCARBOROUGH."

"I think that the odd volumes will fetch him. He was always fond of
literature."

"I suppose it means the entire library?" replied Merton.

"And he likes tables and chairs. I think he will come and look after the
tables and chairs."

"Why not beds and washhand-stands?" said Mr. Merton.

"Well, yes; he may have the beds and washhand-stands. Mountjoy is not a
fool, and will understand very well what I mean. I wonder whether I
could scrape the paper off the drawing-room walls, and leave the scraps
to his brother, without interfering with the entail? But now I am tired,
and will rest."

But he did not even then go to rest, but lay still scheming, scheming,
scheming, about the property. There was now another letter to be
written, for the writing of which he would not again summon Mr. Merton.
He was half ashamed to do so, and at last sent for his sister. "Martha,"
said he, "I want you to write a letter for me."

"Mr. Merton has been writing letters for you all the morning."

"That's just the reason why you should write one now. I am still in some
slight degree afraid of his authority, but I am not at all afraid of
yours."

"You ought to be quiet, John; indeed you ought."

"And, in order that I may be quiet, you must write this letter. It's
nothing particular, or I should not have asked you to do it. It's only
an invitation."

"An invitation to ask somebody here?"

"Yes; to ask somebody to come here. I don't know whether he'll come."

"Do I know him?"

"I hope you may, if he comes. He's a very good-looking young man, if
that is anything."

"Don't talk nonsense, John."

"But I believe he's engaged to another young lady, with whom I must beg
you not to interfere. You remember Florence?"

"Florence Mountjoy? Of course I remember my own niece."

"The young man is engaged to her."

"She was intended for poor Mountjoy."

"Poor Mountjoy has put himself beyond all possibility of a wife."

"Poor Mountjoy!"--and the soft-hearted aunt almost shed tears.

"But we haven't to do with Mountjoy now. Sit down there and begin. 'Dear
Mr. Annesley--'"

"Oh! It's Mr. Annesley, is it?"

"Yes, it is. Mr. Annesley is the handsome young man. Have you any
objection?"

"Only people do say--"

"What do they say?"

"Of course I don't know; only I have heard--"

"That he is a scoundrel!"

"Scoundrel is very strong," said the old lady, shocked.

"A villain, a liar, a thief, and all the rest of it. That's what you
have heard. And I'll tell you who has been your informant. Either first
or second hand, it has come to you from Mr. Augustus Scarborough. Now
we'll begin again. 'Dear Mr. Annesley--'" The old lady paused a moment,
and then, setting herself firmly to the task, commenced and finished her
letter, as follows:

"Dear Mr. Annesley,--You spent a few days here on one occasion, and I
want to renew the pleasure which your visit gave me. Will you extend
your kindness so far as to come to Tretton for any time you may please
to name beyond two or three days? I am sorry to say that your friend
Augustus Scarborough cannot be here to meet you. My other son, Mountjoy,
may be here. If you wish to escape him, I will endeavor so to fix the
time when I shall have heard from you. But I think there need be no ill
blood there. Neither of you did anything of which you are, probably,
ashamed; though as an old man I am bound to express my disapproval."

("Surely he must be ashamed," said Miss Scarborough.

"Never you mind. Believe me, you know nothing about it." Then he went on
with his letter.)

"But it is not merely for the pleasure of your society that I ask you. I
have a word to say to you which may be important. Yours faithfully,

"JOHN SCARBOROUGH."


CHAPTER XXXIX.

HOW THE LETTERS WERE RECEIVED.


We must now describe the feelings of Mr. Scarborough's correspondents as
they received his letters. When Mr. Grey begun to read that which was
addressed to him he declared that on no consideration would he go down
to Tretton. But when he came to inquire within himself as to his
objection he found that it lay chiefly in his great dislike to Augustus
Scarborough. For poor Mountjoy, as he called him, he entertained a
feeling of deep pity,--and pity we know, is akin to love. And for the
squire, he in his heart felt but little of that profound dislike which
he was aware such conduct as the squire's ought to have generated. "He
is the greatest rascal that I ever knew," he said again and again, both
to Dolly and to Mr. Barry. But yet he did not regard him as an honest
man regards a rascal, and was angry with himself in consequence. He knew
that there remained with him even some spark of love for Mr.
Scarborough, which to himself was inexplicable. From the moment in which
he had first admitted the fact that Augustus Scarborough was the true
heir-at-law, he had been most determined in taking care that that
heirship should be established. It must be known to all men that
Mountjoy was not the eldest son of his father, as the law required him
to be for the inheritance of the property, and that Augustus was the
eldest son; but in arranging that these truths should be notorious it
had come to pass that he had learned to hate Augustus with an intensity
that had redounded to the advantage both of Mountjoy and their father.
It must be so. Augustus must become Augustus Scarborough, Esquire, of
Tretton,--but the worse luck for Tretton and all connected with it. And
Mr. Grey did resolve that, when that day should come, all relation
between himself and Tretton should cease.

It had never occurred to him that, by redeeming the post-obit bonds,
Mountjoy would become capable of owning and enjoying any property that
might be left to him. With Tretton, all the belongings of Tretton, in
the old-fashioned way, would, of course, go to the heir. The belongings
of Tretton, which were personal property, would, in themselves, amount
to wealth for a younger son. That which Mr. Scarborough would in this
way be able to bequeath might, probably, be worth thirty thousand
pounds. Out of the proceeds of the real property the debts had been
paid. And because Augustus had consented so to pay them he was now to be
mulcted of those loose belongings which gave its charm to Tretton!
Because Augustus had paid Mountjoy's debts Mountjoy was to be enabled to
rob Augustus! There was a wickedness in this redolent of the old squire.
But it was a wickedness in arranging which Mr. Grey hesitated to
participate. As he thought of it, however, he could not but feel what a
very clever man he had for a client.

"It will all go to the gambling-table, of course," he said that night to
Dolly.

"It is no affair of ours."

"No; but when a lawyer is consulted he has to think of the prudent or
imprudent disposition of property."

"Mr. Scarborough hasn't consulted you, papa."

"I must look at it as though he had. He tells me what he intends to do,
and I am bound to give him my advice. I cannot advise him to bestow all
these things on Augustus, whom I regard as a long way the worst of the
family."

"You need not care about that."

"And here, again," continued Mr. Grey, "comes up the question,--what is
it that duty demands? Augustus is the eldest son, and is entitled to
what the law allots him; but Mountjoy was brought up as the eldest son,
and is certainly entitled to what provision the father can make him."

"You cannot provide for such a gambler."

"I don't know that that comes within my duty. It is not my fault that
Mountjoy is a gambler, any more than that it is my fault that Augustus
is a beast. Gambler and beast, there they are. And, moreover, nothing
will turn the squire from his purpose. I am only a tool in his hands,--a
trowel for the laying of his mortar and bricks. Of course I must draw
his will, and shall do it with some pleasure, because it will dispossess
Augustus."

Then Mr. Grey went to bed, as did also Dolly; but she was not at all
surprised at being summoned to his couch after she had been an hour in
her own bed.

"I think I shall go down to Tretton," said Mr. Grey.

"You declared that you would never go there again."

"So I did; but I did not know then how much I might come to hate
Augustus Scarborough."

"Would you go to Tretton merely to injure him?" said his daughter.

"I have been thinking about that," said Mr. Grey. "I don't know that I
would go simply to do him an injury; but I think that I would go to see
that justice is properly done."

"That can be arranged without your going to Tretton."

"By putting our heads together I think we can contrive that the deed
shall be more effectually performed. What we must attempt to do is to
save this property from going to the gambling-table. There is only one
way that occurs to me."

"What is that?"

"It must be left to his wife."

"He hasn't a wife."

"It must be left to some woman whom he will consent to marry. There are
three objects:--to keep it from Augustus; to give the enjoyment of it to
Mountjoy; and to prevent Mountjoy from gambling with it. The only thing
I can see is a wife."

"There is a girl he wants to marry," said Dolly.

"But she doesn't want to marry him, and I doubt whether he can be got to
marry any one else. There is still a peck of difficulties."

"Oh, papa, I wish you would wash your hands of the Scarboroughs."

"I must go to Tretton first," said he. "And now, my dear, you are doing
no good by sitting up here and talking to me." Then, with a smile, Dolly
took herself off to her own chamber.

Mountjoy, when he got his letter, was sitting over a late breakfast in
Victoria Street. It was near twelve o'clock, and he was enjoying the
delicious luxury of having his breakfast to eat, with a cigar after it,
and nothing else that he need do. But the fruition of all these comforts
was somewhat marred by the knowledge that he had no such dinner to
expect. He must go out and look for a dinner among the eating-houses.
The next morning would bring him no breakfast, and if he were to remain
longer in Victoria Street he must do so in direct opposition to the
owner of the establishment. He had that morning received notice to quit,
and had been told that the following breakfast would be the last meal
served to him. "Let it be good of its kind," Mountjoy had said.

"I believe you care for nothing but eating and drinking."

"There's little else that you can do for me." And so they had parted.

Mountjoy had taken the precaution of having his letters addressed to the
house of the friendly bootmaker; and now, as he was slowly pouring out
his first cup of coffee, and thinking how nearly it must be his last,
his father's letter was brought to him. The letter had been delayed one
day, as he himself had omitted to call for it. It was necessarily a sad
time for him. He was a man who fought hard against melancholy, taking it
as a primary rule of life that, for such a one as he had become, the
pleasures of the immediate moment should suffice. If one day, or better
still, one night of excitement was in store for him, the next day should
be regarded as the unlimited future, for which no man can be
responsible. But such philosophy will too frequently be insufficient for
the stoutest hearts. Mountjoy's heart would occasionally almost give
way, and then his thoughts would be dreary enough. There is no society
where smiles, pleasant looks and animal spirits are not welcomed and
deemed of more importance than sallies of wit, or refinements of
understanding. The little civilities, which form the small change of
life may appear separately of little moment, but, like the spare
pennies which amount to such large fortunes in a lifetime, they owe
their importance to repetition and accumulation.

VALUE OF PLEASING MANNERS.

The man who succeeds in any calling in life is almost invariably he who
has shown a willingness to please and to be pleased, who has responded
heartily to the advances of others, through nature and habit, while
his rival has sniffed and frowned and snubbed away every helping
hand. "The charming manners of the Duke of Marlborough," it is said,
"often changed an enemy to a friend, and to be denied a favor by him
was more pleasing than to receive one from another. It was these personal
graces that made him both rich and great. His address was so exquisitely
fascinating as to dissolve fierce jealousies and animosities, lull suspicion
and beguile the subtlest diplomacy of its arts. His fascinating smile and
winning tongue, equally with his sharp sword, swayed the destinies
of empires."

The gracious manners of Charles James Fox preserved him from
personal dislike, even when he had gambled away his last shilling, and
politically, was the most unpopular man in England.

MANNERS AND PERSONAL APPEARANCE.

A charming manner not only enhances personal beauty, but even hides
ugliness and makes plainness agreeable.

An ill-favored countenance is not necessarily a stumbling-block, at the
outset, to its owner, which cannot be surmounted, for who does not
know how much a happy manner often does to neutralize the ill effects
of forbidding looks? The fascination of the demagogue Wilkes's manner
triumphed over both physical and moral deformity, rendering even his
ugliness agreeable; and he boasted to Lord Townsend, one of the handsomest
men in Great Britain, that "with half an hour's start he would get ahead
of his lordship in the affections of any woman in the kingdom." The
ugliest Frenchman, perhaps, that ever lived was Mirabeau; yet such was
the witchery of his manner, that the belt of no gay Lothario was hung
with a greater number of bleeding female hearts than this "thunderer
of the tribune," whose looks were so hideous that he was compared to
a tiger pitted with the small-pox.
FORTUNES MADE BY PLEASING MANNERS.He had only
breakfasted at his own club, much less comfortably than he would have
done at home, in order that he might not sit at table with his brother.
He had now returned so that he might see to Mountjoy's departure. "After
all, Augustus, I am going down to Tretton," said the elder brother as he
folded up his father's letter.

"What argument has the old man used now?" Mountjoy did not think it well
to tell his brother the exact nature of the arguments used, and
therefore put the letter into his pocket.

"He wishes to say something to me about property," said Mountjoy.

Then some idea of the old squire's scheme fell with a crushing weight of
anticipated sorrow on Augustus. In a moment it all occurred to him what
his father might do, what injuries he might inflict; and,--saddest of all
feelings,--there came the immediate reflection that it had all been
rendered possible by his own doings. With the conviction that so much
might be left away from him, there came also a farther feeling that,
after all, there was a chance that his father had invented the story of
his brother's illegitimacy, that Mountjoy was now free from debt, and
that Tretton, with all its belongings, might now go back to him. That
his father would do it if it were possible he did not doubt. From week
to week he had waited impatiently for his father's demise, and had
expected little or none of that mental activity which his father had
exercised. "What a fool he had been," he said to himself, sitting
opposite to Mountjoy, who in the vacancy of the moment had lighted
another cigar; "what an ass!" Had he played his cards better, had he
comforted and flattered and cosseted the old man, Mountjoy might have
gone his own way to the dogs. Now, at the best, Tretton would come to
him stripped of everything; and,--at the worst,--no Tretton would come to
him at all. "Well, what are you going to do?" he said, roughly.

"I think I shall, probably, go down and just see the governor."

"All your feelings about your mother, then, are blown to the winds?"

"My feelings about your mother are not blown to the winds at all; but to
speak of her to you would be wasting breath."

"I hadn't the pleasure of knowing her," said Augustus. "And I am not
aware that she did me any great kindness in bringing me into the world.
Do you go to Tretton this afternoon?"

"Probably not."

"Or to-morrow?"

"Possibly to-morrow," said Mountjoy.

"Because I shall find it convenient to have your room."

"To-day, of course, I cannot stir. To-morrow morning I should, at any
rate, like to have my breakfast." Here he paused for a reply, but none
came from his brother. "I must have some money to go down to Tretton
with; I suppose you can lend it me just for the present?"

"Not a shilling," said Augustus, in thorough ill-humor.

"I shall be able to pay you very shortly."

"Not a shilling. The return I have had from you for all that I have done
is not of a nature to make me do more."

"If I had ever thought that you had expended a sovereign except for the
object of furthering some plot of your own, I should have been grateful.
As it is I do not know that we owe very much to each other." Then he
left the room, and, getting into a cab, went away to Lincoln's Inn.

Harry Annesley received Mr. Scarborough's letter down at Buston, and was
much surprised by it. He had not spent the winter hitherto very
pleasantly. His uncle he had never seen, though he had heard from day
to day sundry stories of his wooing. He had soon given up his hunting,
feeling himself ashamed, in his present nameless position, to ride
Joshua Thoroughbung's horses. He had taken to hard reading, but the hard
reading had failed, and he had been given up to the miseries of his
position. The hard reading had been continued for a fortnight or three
weeks, during which he had, at any rate, respected himself, but in an
evil hour he had allowed it to escape from him, and now was again
miserable. Then the invitation from Tretton had been received. "I have
got a letter; 'tis from Mr. Scarborough of Tretton."

"What does Mr. Scarborough say?"

"He wants me to go down there."

"Do you know Mr. Scarborough? I believe you have altogether quarrelled
with his son?"

"Oh yes; I have quarrelled with Augustus, and have had an encounter with
Mountjoy not on the most friendly terms. But the father and Mountjoy
seem to be reconciled. You can see his letter. I, at any rate, shall go
there." To this Mr. Annesley senior had no objection to make.


CHAPTER XL.

VISITORS AT TRETTON.


It so happened that the three visitors who had been asked to Tretton all
agreed to go on the same day. The ladies should always grant such
permission, unless there is a strong reason for refusing. The French,
and to some extent the English, dispense with introductions at a private
ball. The fact that they have been invited to meet each other is regarded
as a guaranty that they are fit to be mutually acquainted, and is a
sufficient warrant for self-introduction. At a public ball partners must
be introduced to each other. Special introducing may be made with
propriety by the master of ceremonies.Mountjoy had said that it would suffice
amply, and then, returning to his brother's rooms, had waited there with
what patience he possessed till he sallied forth to The Continental to
get the best dinner which that restaurant could afford him. He was
beginning to feel that his life was very sad in London, and to look
forward to the glades of Tretton with some anticipation of rural
delight.

He went down by the same train with Mr. Grey,--"a great grind," as
Mountjoy called it, when Mr. Grey proposed a departure at ten o'clock.
Harry followed so as to reach Tretton only in time for dinner. "If I may
venture to advise you," said Mr. Grey in the train, "I should do in this
matter whatever my father asked me." Hereupon Mountjoy frowned. "He is
anxious to make some provision for you."

"I'm not grateful to my father, if you mean that."

"It is hard to say whether you should be grateful. But, from the first,
he has done the best he could for you, according to his lights."

"You believe all this about my mother?"

"I do."

"I don't. That's the difference. And I don't think that Augustus
believes it."

"The story is undoubtedly true."

"You must excuse me if I will not accept it."

"At any rate, you had parted with your share in the property."

"My share was the whole."

"After your father's death," said Mr. Grey; "and that was gone."

"We needn't discuss the property. What is it that he expects me to do
now?"

"Simply to be kind in your manner to him, and to agree to what he says
about the personal property. It is his intention, as far as I understand
it, to leave you everything."

"He is very kind."

"I think he is."

"Only it would all have been mine if he had not cheated me of my
birthright."

"Or Mr. Tyrrwhit's, and Mr. Hart's, and Mr. Spicer's."

"Mr. Tyrrwhit, and Mr. Hart, and Mr. Spicer could not have robbed me of
my name. Let them have done what they would with their bonds, I should
have been, at any rate, Scarborough of Tretton. My belief is that I need
not blush for my mother. He has made it appear that I should do so. I
can't forgive him because he gives me the chairs and tables."

"They will be worth thirty thousand pounds," said Mr. Grey.

"I can't forgive him."

The cloud sat very black upon Mountjoy Scarborough's face as he said
this, and the blacker it sat the more Mr. Grey liked him. If something
could be done to redeem from ruin a young man who so felt about his
mother,--who so felt about his mother simply because she had been his
mother,--it would be a good thing to do. Augustus had entertained no
such feeling. He had said to Mr. Grey, as he had said also to his
brother, that "he had not known the lady." When the facts as to the
distribution of the property had been made known to him he had cared
nothing for the injury done by the story to his mother's name. The story
was too true. Mr. Grey knew that it was true; but he could not on that
account do other than feel an intense desire to confer some benefit on
Mountjoy Scarborough. He put his hand out affectionately and laid it on
the other man's knee. "Your father has not long to live, Captain
Scarborough."

"I suppose not."

"And he is at present anxious to make what reparation is in his power.
What he can leave you will produce, let us say, fifteen hundred a year.
Without a will from him you would have to live on your brother's
bounty."

Because I cannot be sure whether the Pentateuch was written, as
long supposed, by Moses--or whether the fourth Gospel comes as it
stands from the beloved apostle--am I less in need of the divine
teaching which both these Scriptures contain?

Surely not.

That I am a spiritual being, and have spiritual needs craving to
be satisfied, and that God is a spiritual power above me, of whom
Christ is the revelation, are facts which I may know or may not
know, quite irrespective of such matters.

The one class of facts are intellectual and literary. The other are
spiritual if they exist at all. If I ever know them, I can only know them
through my own spiritual experience; but if I know them--if I
realise myself as a sinner and in darkness, and Christ as my Saviour
and the light of my life--I have within me all the genuine forces
of religious strength and peace.

I may not have all the faith of the Church.

I may have many doubts, and may come far short of the catholic dogma.

But faith is a progressive insight, and dogma is a variable factor. No
sane man nowadays has the faith of the medievalist.

No modern Christian can think in many respects as the Christians
of the seventeenth century, or of the twelfth century, or of the
fourth century.

No primitive Christian would have fully understood Athanasius in his
contest against the world. It was very easy at one time to chant the
Athanasian hymn--it is easy for some still; but very hard for others.
Are the latter worse or better Christians on this account?

Think, brethren, of St Peter and St Andrew taken from their boats;
of St Matthew as he sat at the receipt of custom; of the good
Samaritan; the devout centurion; of curious Zaccheus; of the repentant
prodigal; of St James, as he wrote that a man is "justified by
works, and not by faith only;"[5] of Apollos, "mighty in the
Scriptures," who "was instructed in the way of the Lord; and being
fervent in the spirit, spake and taught diligently the things of
the Lord," and yet who only knew "the baptism of John;"[6] of the
disciples at Ephesus who had "not so much as heard whether there
be any Holy Ghost;"[7] think of all the poor and simple ones who
have gone to heaven with Christ in their hearts, "the hope of glory,"
and yet who have never known with accuracy any Christian dogma
whatever,--and you can hardly doubt how distinct are the spheres
of religion and of theology, and how far better than all theological
definitions is the "honest and good heart," which, "having heard
the Word, keeps it, and brings forth fruit with patience

."[8]

II. But religion differs from theology, not only in the comparatively
simple and universal order of the facts with which it deals, but also
because the facts are so much more verifiable in the one case than
in the other. They can so much more easily be found out to be true or
not.

It has been sought of late, in a well-known quarter, to bring all
religion to this test--and the test is not an unfair one if
legitimately applied.

But it is not legitimate to test spiritual facts simply as we test natural
facts; such facts, for example, as that fire burns, or that a stone
thrown from the hand falls to the ground. The presumption of all
supernatural religion is that there is a spiritual or supernatural
sphere, as real and true as the natural sphere in which we continually
live and move; and the facts which belong to this sphere must be tested
within it.

Morality and moral conditions may be so far verified from without. If
we do wrong we shall finally find ourselves in the wrong; and that there
is a "Power not ourselves which makes for righteousness" and which
will not allow us to rest in wrong.
This constantly verified experience of a kingdom of righteousness is a
valuable basis of morality. But religion could not live or nourish
itself within such limits. It must rest, not merely on certain facts of
divine order, but on such personal relations as are ever uppermost
in the mind of St Paul, and are so clearly before him in this very
passage.

Moreover, the higher experience which reveals to us a Power of
righteousness in the world, no less reveals to us the living personal
character of this Power.
But to the general stripping of Tretton
for the benefit of Mountjoy he gave a cordial agreement.

"I am not quite sure that I have done with Augustus as yet," said the
squire. "I had made up my mind not to be put out by trifles; not to be
vexed at a little. My treatment of my children has been such that,
though I have ever intended to do them good, I must have seemed to each
at different periods to have injured him. I have not, therefore,
expected much from them. But I have received less than nothing from
Augustus. It is possible that he may hear from me again." To this Mr.
Grey said nothing, but he had taken his instructions about the drawing
of the will.

Harry came down by the train in time for dinner. On the journey down he
had been perplexed in his mind, thinking of various things. He did not
quite understand why Mr. Scarborough had sent for him. His former
intimacy had been with Augustus, and though there had been some
cordiality of friendship shown by the old man to the son's companion, it
had amounted to no more than might be expected from one who was notably
good-natured. A great injury had been done to Harry, and he supposed
that his visit must have some reference to that injury. He had been told
in so many words that, come when he might, he would not find Augustus at
Tretton. From this and from other signs he almost saw that there existed
a quarrel between the squire and his son. Therefore he felt that
something was to be said as to the state of his affairs at Buston.

But if, as the train drew near to Tretton, he was anxious as to his
meeting with the squire, he was much more so as to the captain. The
reader will remember all the circumstances under which they two had last
seen each other Harry had been furiously attacked by Mountjoy, and had
then left him sprawling,--dead, as some folks had said on the following
day,--under the rail. His only crime had been that he was drunk. If the
disinherited one would give him his hand and let by-gones be by-gones,
he would do the same. He felt no personal animosity. But there was a
difficulty.

As he was driven up to the door in a cab belonging to the squire there
was Mountjoy, standing before the house. He too had thought of the
difficulties, and had made up his mind that it would not do for him to
meet his late foe without some few words intended for the making of
peace. "I hope you are well, Mr. Annesley," he said, offering his hand
as the other got out of the cab. "It may be as well that I should
apologize at once for my conduct. I was at that moment considerably
distressed, as you may have heard. I had been declared to be penniless,
and to be nobody. The news had a little unmanned me, and I was beside
myself."

"I quite understand it; quite understand it," said Annesley, giving his
hand. "I am very glad to see you back again, and in your father's
house." Then Mountjoy turned on his heel, and went through the hall,
leaving Harry to the care of the butler. The captain thought that he had
done enough, and that the affair in the street might now be regarded as
a dream. Harry was taken up to shake hands with the old man, and in due
time came down to dinner, where he met Mr. Grey and the young doctor.
They were all very civil to him, and upon the whole, he spent a pleasant
evening. On the next day, about noon, the squire sent for him. He had
been told at breakfast that it was the squire's intention to see him in
the middle of the day, and he had been unable, therefore, to join
Mountjoy's shooting-party.

"Sit down, Mr. Annesley," said the old man. "You were surprised, no
doubt, when you got my invitation?"

"Well, yes; perhaps so; but I thought it very kind."

"I meant to be kind; but still, it requires some explanation. You see, I
am such an old cripple that I cannot give invitations like anybody else.
Now you are here I must not eat and drink with you, and in order to say
a few words to you I am obliged to keep you in the house till the doctor
tells me I am strong enough to talk."

"I am glad to find you so much better than when I was here before."

"I don't know much about that. There will never be a 'much better' in
my case. The people about me talk with the utmost unconcern of whether I
can live one month or possibly two. Anything beyond that is quite out of
the question." The squire took a pride in making the worst of his case,
so that the people to whom he talked should marvel the more at his
vitality. "But we won't mind my health now. It is true, I fear, that you
have quarrelled with your uncle."

"It is quite true that he has quarrelled with me."

"I am afraid that that is more important. He means, if he can, to cut
you out of the entail."

"He does not mean that I shall have the property if he can prevent it."

"I don't think very much of entails myself," said the squire. "If a man
has a property he should be able to leave it as he pleases; or--or else
he doesn't have it."

"That is what the law intends, I suppose," said Harry.

"Just so; but the law is such an old woman that she never knows how to
express herself to any purpose. I haven't allowed the law to bind me. I
dare say you know the story."

"About your two sons,--and the property? I think all the world knows the
story."

"I suppose it has been talked about a little," said the squire, with a
chuckle. "My object has been to prevent the law from handing over my
property to the fraudulent claims which my son's creditors were enabled
to make, and I have succeeded fairly well. On that head I have nothing
to regret. Now your uncle is going to take other means."

"Yes; he is going to take means which, are, at any rate, lawful."

"But which will be tedious, and may not, perhaps, succeed. He is
intending to have an heir of his own."

"That I believe is his purpose," said Harry.

"There is no reason why he shouldn't;--but he mayn't, you know."

"He is not married yet."

"No;--he is not married yet. And then he has also stopped the allowance
he used to make you." Harry nodded assent. "Now, all this is a great
shame."

"I think so."

"The poor gentleman has been awfully bamboozled."

"He is not so very old," said Harry, "I don't think he is more than
fifty."

"But he is an old goose. You'll excuse me, I know. Augustus Scarborough
got him up to London, and filled him full of lies."

"I am aware of it."

"And so am I aware of it. He has told him stories as to your conduct
with Mountjoy which, added to some youthful indiscretions of your own--"

"It was simply because I didn't like to hear him read sermons."

"That was an indiscretion, as he had the power in his hands to do you an
injury. Most men have got some little bit of petty tyranny in their
hearts. I have had none." To this Harry could only bow. "I let my two
boys do as they pleased, only wishing that they should lead happy lives.
I never made them listen to sermons, or even to lectures. Probably I was
wrong. Had I tyrannized over them, they would not have tyrannized over
me as they have done. Now I'll tell you what it is that I propose to do.
I will write to your uncle, or will get Mr. Merton to write for me, and
will explain to him, as well as I can, the depth, and the blackness, and
the cruelty,--the unfathomable, heathen cruelty, together with the
falsehoods, the premeditated lies, and the general rascality on all
subjects,--of my son Augustus. I will explain to him that, of all men I
know, he is the least trustworthy. I will explain to him that, if led in
a matter of such importance by Augustus Scarborough, he will be surely
led astray. And I think that between us,--between Merton and me, that
is,--we can concoct a letter that shall be efficacious. But I will get
Mountjoy also to go and see him, and explain to him out of his own mouth
what in truth occurred that night when he and you fell out in the
streets. Mr. Prosper must be a more vindictive man than I take him to be
in regard to sermons if he will hold out after that." Then Mr.
Scarborough allowed him to go out, and if possible find the shooters
somewhere about the park.


CHAPTER XLI.

MOUNTJOY SCARBOROUGH GOES TO BUSTON.


Mr. Grey returned to London after staying but one night, having received
fresh instructions as to the will. The will was to be prepared at once,
and Mr. Barry was to bring it down for execution. "Shall I not inform
Augustus?" asked Mr. Grey.

But this did not suit with Mr. Scarborough's views of revenge. "I think
not. I would do by him whatever honesty requires; but I have never told
him that I mean to leave him anything. Of course he knows that he is to
have the estate. He is revelling in the future poverty of poor Mountjoy.
He turned him out of his house just now because Mountjoy would not obey
him by going to--Brazil. He would turn him out of this house if he could
because I won't at once go--to the devil. He is something overmasterful,
is Master Augustus, and a rub or two will do him good. I'd rather you
wouldn't tell him, if you please." Then Mr. Grey departed, without
making any promise, but he determined that he would be guided by the
squire's wishes. Augustus Scarborough was not of a nature to excite very
warmly the charity of any man.

Harry remained for two or three days' shooting with Mountjoy, and once
or twice he saw the squire again. "Merton and I have managed to concoct
that letter," said the squire. "I'm afraid your uncle will find it
rather long. Is he impatient of long letters?"

"He likes long sermons."

"If anybody will listen to his reading. I think you have a deal to
answer for yourself, when you could not make so small a sacrifice to the
man to whom you were to owe everything. But he ought to look for a wife
in consequence of that crime, and not falsely allege another. If, as I
fear, he finds the wife-plan troublesome, our letter may perhaps move
him, and Mountjoy is to go down and open his eyes. Mountjoy hasn't made
any difficulty about it."

"I shall be greatly distressed--" Harry begun.

"Not at all. He must go. I like to have my own way in these little
matters. He owes you as much reparation as that, and we shall be able to
see what members of the Scarborough family you would trust the most."

Harry, during the two days, shot some hares in company with Mountjoy,
but not a word more was said about the adventure in London. Nor was the
name of Florence Mountjoy ever mentioned between the two suitors. "I'm
going to Buston, you know," Mountjoy said once.

"So your father told me."

"What sort of a fellow shall I find your uncle?"

"He's a gentleman, but not very wise." No more was said between them on
that head, but Mountjoy spoke at great length about his own brother and
his father's will.

"My father is the most singular man you ever came across."

"I think he is."

"I am not going to say a good word for him. I wouldn't let him think
that I had said a good word for him. In order to save the property he
has maligned my mother, and has cheated me and the creditors most
horribly--most infernally. That's my conviction, though Grey thinks
otherwise. I can't forgive him,--and won't; and he knows it. But after
that he is going to do the best thing he can for me. And he has begun by
making me a decent allowance again as his son. But I'm to have that only
as long as I remain here at Tretton. Of course I have been fond of
cards."

"I suppose so."

"Not a doubt of it. But I haven't touched a card now for a month nearly.
And then he is going to leave me what property he has to leave. And he
and my brother have paid off those Jews among them. I'm not a bit
obliged to my brother. He's got some game of his own which I don't quite
clearly see, and my father is doing this for me simply to spite my
brother. He'd cut down every tree upon the place if Grey would allow it.
And yet, to give Augustus the property, my father has done this gross
injustice."

"I suppose the money-lenders would have had the best of it had he not."

"That's true. They would have had it all. They had measured every yard
of it, and had got my name down for the full value. Now they're paid."

"That's a comfort."

"Nothing's a comfort. I know that they're right, and that if I got the
money into my own hand it would be gone to-morrow. I should be off to
Monte Carlo like a shot; and, of course it would go after the other.
There is but one thing would redeem me."

"What's that?"

"Never mind. We won't talk of it." Then he was silent, but Harry
Annesley knew very well that he had alluded to Florence Mountjoy.

Then Harry went, and Mountjoy was left to the companionship of Mr.
Merton, and such pleasure as he could find in a daily visit to his
father. He was, at any rate, courteous in his manner to the old man, and
abstained from those irritating speeches which Augustus had always
chosen to make. He had on one occasion during this visit told his father
what he thought about him, but this the squire had taken quite as a
compliment.

"I believe, you know, that you've done a monstrous injustice to
everybody concerned."

"I rather like doing what you call injustices."

"You have set the law at defiance."

"Well, yes; I think I have done that."

"According to my belief, it's all untrue."

"You mean about your mother. I like you for that; I do, indeed. I like
you for sticking up for your poor mother. Well, now you shall have fifty
pounds a month,--say twelve pounds ten a week,--as long as you remain at
Tretton, and you may have whom you like here, as long as they bring no
cards with them. And if you want to hunt there are horses, and if they
ain't good enough you can get others. But if you go away from Tretton
there's an end of it. It will all be stopped the next day."
Nevertheless, he did make arrangements by which Mountjoy should proceed
to Buston, stopping two nights as he went to London. "There isn't a club
he can enter," said the squire, comforting himself, "nor a Jew that will
lend him a five-pound note."

Mountjoy had told the truth when he had said that nothing was a comfort.
Though it seemed to his father and to the people around him at Tretton
that he had everything that a man could want, he had, in fact,
nothing,--nothing to satisfy him. In the first place, he was quite alive
to the misery of that decision given by the world against him, which had
been of such comfort to his father. Not a club in London would admit
him. He had been proclaimed a defaulter after such a fashion that all
his clubs had sent to him for some explanation; and as he had given
none, and had not answered their letters, his name had been crossed out
in the books of them all. He knew himself to be a man disgraced, and
when he had fled from London he had gone under the conviction that he
would certainly never return. There were the pistol and bullet as his
last assured resource; but a certain amount of good-fortune had awaited
him,--enough to save him from having recourse to their aid. His brother
had supplied him with small sums of money, and from time to time a
morsel of good luck had enabled him to gamble, not to his heart's
content, but still in some manner so as to make his life bearable. But
now he was back in his own country, and he could gamble not at all, and
hardly even see those old companions with whom he had lived. It was not
only for the card-tables that he sighed, but for the companions of the
card-table. And though he knew that he had been scratched out from the
lists of all clubs as a dishonest man, he knew also, or thought that he
knew, that he had been as honest as the best of those companions. As
long as he could by any possibility raise money he had paid it away,
and by no false trick had he ever endeavored to get it back again.

Had a little time been allowed him all would have been paid; and all had
been paid. He knew that by the rules of such institutions time could not
be granted; but still he did not feel himself to have been a dishonest
man. Yet he had been so disgraced that he could hardly venture to walk
about the streets of London in the daylight. And then there came upon
him, when he found himself alone at Tretton, an irrepressible desire for
gambling. It was as though his throat were parched with an implacable
thirst. He walked about ever meditating certain fortunate turns of the
cards; and when he had worked himself up to some realization of his old
excitement he would remember that it was all a vain and empty bubble. He
had money in his pocket, and could rush up to London if he would, and if
he did so he could, no doubt, find some coarse hell at which he could
stake it till it would be all gone; but the gates of the A---- and the
B---- and the C---- would be closed against him; and he would then be
driven to feel that he had indeed fallen into the nethermost pit. Were
he once to play at such places as his mind painted to him he could never
play at any other; and yet when the day drew nigh on which he was to go
to London, on his way to Buston, he did bethink himself where these
places were to be found. His throat was parched, and the thirst upon him
was extreme. Cards were the weapons he had used. He had played ecarte,
piquet, whist, and baccarat, with an occasional night of some foolish
game such as cribbage or vingt-et-un. Though he had always lost, he had
always played with men who had played honestly. There is much that is,
in truth, dishonest even in honest play. A man who can keep himself
sober after dinner plays with one who flusters himself with drink. The
man with a trained memory plays with him who cannot remember a card. The
cool man plays with the impetuous; the man who can hold his tongue with
him who cannot but talk; the man whose practised face will tell no
secrets with him who loses a point every rubber by his uncontrolled
grimaces. And then there is the man who knows the game, and plays with
him who knows it not at all. Of course, the cool, the collected, the
thoughtful, the practised,--they who have given up their whole souls to
the study of cards,--will play at a great advantage, which in their
calculations they do not fail to recognize. See the man standing by and
watching the table, and leaving all the bets he can on A and B as against
C and D; and, however ignorant you may be, you will soon become sure
that A and B know the game, whereas C and D are simply infants. That is
all fair and acknowledged; but looking at it from a distance, as you lie
under your apple-trees in your orchard, far from the shout of "Two by
honors," you will come to doubt the honesty of making your income after
such a fashion.

Such as it is, Mountjoy sighed for it bitterly,--sighed for it, but could
not see where it was to be found. He had a gentleman's horror of those
resorts in gin-shops, or kept by the disciples of gin-shops, where he
would surely be robbed,--which did not appal him,--but robbed in bad
company. Thinking of all this, he went up to London late in the
afternoon, and spent an uncomfortable evening in town. It was absolutely
innocent as regarded the doings of the night itself, but was terrible to
him. There was a slow drizzling rain; but not the less after dinner at
his hotel he started off to wander through the streets. With his
great-coat and his umbrella he was almost hidden; and as he passed
through Pall Mall, up St. James's Street, and along Piccadilly, he could
pause and look in at the accustomed door. He saw men entering whom he
knew, and knew that within five minutes they could be seated at their
tables. "I had an awfully heavy time of it last night," one said to
another as he went up the steps; and Mountjoy, as he heard the words,
envied the speaker. Then he passed back and went again a tour of all the
clubs. What had he done that he, like a poor Peri, should be unable to
enter the gates of all these paradises? He had now in his pocket fifty
pounds. Could he have been made absolutely certain that he would have
lost it, he would have gone into any paradise and have staked his money
with that certainty.

At last, having turned up Waterloo Place, he saw a man standing in the
door-way of one of these palaces, and he was aware at once that the man
had seen him. He was a man of such a nature that it would be impossible
that he should have seen a worse. He was a small, dry, good-looking
little fellow, with a carefully preserved mustache, and a head from the
top of which age was beginning to move the hair. He lived by cards, and
lived well. He was called Captain Vignolles, but it was only known of
him that he was a professional gambler. He probably never cheated. Men
who play at the clubs scarcely ever cheat,--there are so many with whom
they play sharp enough to discover them; and with the discovered gambler
all in this world is over. Captain Vignolles never cheated; but he found
that an obedience to those little rules which I have named above stood
him well in lieu of cheating. He was not known to have any particular
income, but he was known to live on the best of everything as far as
club life was concerned.

He immediately followed Mountjoy down into the street and greeted him.
"Captain Scarborough as I am a living man!"

"Well, Vignolles; how are you?"

"And so you have come back once more to the land of the living! I was
awfully sorry for you, and think that they treated you uncommon harshly.
As you've paid your money, of course they'll let you in again." In
answer to this, Mountjoy had very little to say: but the interview ended
by his accepting an invitation from Captain Vignolles to supper for the
following evening. If Captain Scarborough would come at eleven o'clock
Captain Vignolles would ask a few fellows to meet him, and they would
have--just a little rubber of whist. Mountjoy knew well the nature of
the man who asked him, and understood perfectly what would be the
result; but there thrilled through his bosom, as he accepted the
invitation, a sense of joy which he could himself hardly understand.

On the following morning Mountjoy was up, for him, very early, and
taking a return ticket went down to Buston. He had written to Mr.
Prosper, sending his compliments, and saying that he would do himself
the honor of calling at a certain hour.

At the hour named he drew up at Buston Hall in a fly from Buntingford
Station, and was told by Matthew, the old butler, that his master was at
home. If Captain Mountjoy would step into the drawing-room Mr. Prosper
should be informed. Mountjoy did as he was bidden, and after half an
hour he was joined by Mr. Prosper. "You have received a letter from my
father," he began by saying.

"A very long letter," said the Squire of Buston.

"I dare say; I did not see it, and have in fact very little to say as to
its contents. I do not know, indeed, what they were."

"The letter refers to my nephew, Mr. Henry Annesley."

"I suppose so. What I have to say refers to Mr. Henry Annesley also."

"You are kind,--very kind."

"I don't know about that; but I have come altogether at my father's
instance, and I think, indeed, that, in fairness, I ought to tell you
the truth as to what took place between me and your nephew."

"You are very good; but your father has already given me his
account,--and I suppose yours."

"I don't know what my father may have done, but I think that you ought
to desire to hear from my lips an account of the transaction. An untrue
account has been told to you."

"I have heard it all from your own brother."

You have twice acted nobly by me; prove yourself a man a third time
and I will give you a third life.

Take this jug, fill it to the brim, and pour it over my head; and
for this labour of love I will give you a third life."

When the Prince heard this he turned back, took the jug, filled it
with water, and poured it over the man's head.

The moment the water touched him the chains about his neck fell
asunder and all the bonds which held him were unloosed.

In point of fact,
your nephew behaved through the whole of that matter as well as a man
could do. Practically, he told no lie at all. He did just what a man
ought to do, and anything that you have heard to the contrary is
calumnious and false. As I am told that you have been led by my
brother's statement to disinherit your nephew--"

"I have done nothing of the kind."

"I am very glad to hear it. He has not, at any rate, deserved it; and I
have felt it to be my duty to come and tell you."

Then Mountjoy retired, not without hospitality having been coldly
offered by Mr. Prosper, and went back to Buntingford and to London. Now
at last would come, he said to himself through the whole afternoon, now
at last would come a repetition of those joys for which his very soul
had sighed so eagerly.


CHAPTER XLII.

CAPTAIN VIGNOLLES ENTERTAINS HIS FRIENDS.


Mountjoy, when he reached Captain Vignolles's rooms, was received
apparently with great indifference. "I didn't feel at all sure you
would come. But there is a bit of supper, if you like to stay. I saw
Moody this morning, and he said he would look in if he was passing this
way. Now sit down and tell me what you have been doing since you
disappeared in that remarkable manner." This was not at all what
Mountjoy had expected, but he could only sit down and say that he had
done nothing in particular. Of all club men, Captain Vignolles would be
the worst with whom to play alone during the entire evening. And
Mountjoy remembered now that he had never been inside four walls with
Vignolles except at a club. Vignolles regarded him simply as a piece of
prey whom chance had thrown up on the shore. And Moody, who would no
doubt show himself before long, was another bird of the same covey,
though less rapacious. Mountjoy put his hand up to his breast-pocket,
and knew that the fifty pounds was there, but he knew also that it would
soon be gone.

