Produced by David S. Miller


THE INFERNO

BY HENRI BARBUSSE
AUTHOR OF "UNDER FIRE"

TRANSLATED FROM THE 100TH FRENCH EDITION WITH AN INTRODUCTION
BY EDWARD J. O'BRIEN
1918


INTRODUCTION


In introducing M. Barbusse's most important book to a public already
familiar with "Under Fire," it seems well to point out the relation of
the author's philosophy to his own time, and the kinship of his art to
that of certain other contemporary French and English novelists.

"L'Enfer" has been more widely read and discussed in France than any
other realistic study since the days of Zola.  The French sales of the
volume, in 1917 alone, exceeded a hundred thousand copies, a popularity
all the more remarkable from the fact that its appeal is based as much
on its philosophical substance as on the story which it tells.

Although M. Barbusse is one of the most distinguished contemporary
French writers of short stories, he has found in the novel form the
most fitting literary medium for the expression of his philosophy, and
it is to realism rather than romanticism that he turns for the
exposition of his special imaginative point of view.  And yet this
statement seems to need some qualification.  In his introduction to
"Pointed Roofs," by Dorothy Richardson, Mr. J.D. Beresford points out
that a new objective literary method is becoming general in which the
writer's strict detachment from his objective subject matter is united
to a tendency, impersonal, to be sure, to immerse himself in the life
surrounding his characters.  Miss May Sinclair points out that writers
are beginning to take the complete plunge for the first time, and
instances as examples, not only the novels of Dorothy Richardson, but
those of James Joyce.

Now it is perfectly true that Miss Richardson and Mr. Joyce have
introduced this method into English fiction, and that Mr. Frank
Swinnerton has carried the method a step further in another direction,
but before these writers there was a precedent in France for this
method, of which perhaps the two chief exemplars were Jules Romains and
Henri Barbusse.  _whist_: hushed; _Pan_: used here for the Lord of all;
_Lars and Lemures_: household Gods and spirits of relations dead;
_Flamens_: Roman priests; _That twice-batter'd god_: Dagon.

_Osiris_, the Egyptian god of Agriculture (here, perhaps by confusion
with Apis, figured as a Bull), was torn to pieces by Typho and embalmed
after death in a sacred chest. This myth, reproduced in Syria and
Greece in the legends of Thammuz, Adonis, and perhaps Absyrtus,
represents the annual death of the Sun or the Year under the influences
of the winter darkness. Horus, the son of Osiris, as the New Year, in
his turn overcomes Typho.

--It suited the genius of Milton's time to regard this primaeval poetry
and philosophy of the seasons, which has a further reference to the
contest of Good and Evil in Creation, as a malignant idolatry. Shelley's
Chorus in _Hellas_, "Worlds on worlds," treats the subject in a larger
and sweeter spirit.

_unshower'd grass_: as watered by the Nile only.

Poem 64.

_The Late Massacre_: the Vaudois persecution, carried on in 1655 by the
Duke of Savoy. This "collect in verse," as it has been justly
named, is the most mighty Sonnet in any language known to the Editor.
Readers should observe that, unlike our sonnets of the sixteenth century,
it is constructed , on the original Italian or Provençal
model,--unquestionably far superior to the imperfect form
employed by Shakespeare and Drummond.

Poem 65.

Cromwell returned from Ireland in 1650. Hence the prophecies, not
strictly fulfilled, of his deference to the Parliament, in stanzas
21-24.

This Ode, beyond doubt one of the finest in our language, and more
in Milton's style than has been reached by any other poet, is occasionally
obscure from imitation of the condensed Latin syntax. The meaning
of st.
5 is "rivalry or hostility are the same to a lofty spirit, and
limitation more hateful than opposition."

The allusion in st. 11 is to the old physical doctrines of the non-existence
of a vacuum and the impenetrability of matter:--in st. 17 to the omen
traditionally connected with the foundation of the Capitol at Rome. The
ancient belief that certain years in life complete natural periods
and are hence peculiarly exposed to death, is introduced in stanza 26
by the word _climacteric_.

Poem 66.

_Lycidas_. The person lamented is Milton's college friend Edward King,
drowned in 1637 whilst crossing from Chester to Ireland.

Strict Pastoral Poetry was first written or perfected by the Dorian
Greeks settled in Sicily: but the conventional use of it, exhibited
more magnificently in _Lycidas_ than in any other pastoral, is
apparently of Roman origin.

Milton, employing the noble freedom of a great artist, has here united
ancient mythology, with what may be called the modern mythology of
Camus and Saint Peter,--to direct Christian images.--The metrical
structure of this glorious poem is partly derived from Italian
models.

_Sisters of the sacred well_: the Muses, said to frequent the fountain
Helicon on Mount Parnassus.

_Mona_: Anglesea, called by the Welsh Inis Dowil or the Dark Island,
from its dense forests.
_Deva_: the Dee: a river which probably derived its magical character
from Celtic traditions: it was long the boundary of Briton and
Saxon.--These places are introduced, as being near the scene of the
shipwreck.
_Orpheus_ was torn to pieces by Thracian women; _Amaryllis_ and
_Neaera_ names used here for the love idols of poets: as _Damoetas_
previously for a shepherd.
_the blind Fury_: Atropos, fabled to cut the thread of life.
_Arethuse_ and _Mincius_: Sicilian and Italian waters here alluded
to as synonymous with the pastoral poetry of Theocritus and
Virgil.
_oat_: pipe, used here like Collins' _oaten stop_, No. 146, for
_Song_.
_Hippotades_: Aeolus, god of the Winds. _Panope_ a Nereid. The names
of local deities in the Hellenic mythology express generally some
feature in the natural landscape, which the Greeks studied and
analysed with their usual unequalled insight and feeling. Panope
represents the boundlessness of the ocean-horizon when seen from a
height, as compared with a limited horizon of the land in hilly
countries such as Greece or Asia Minor.
_Camus_: the Cam; put for King's University.Their mouths will join and they
will grow tender.  They will exchange a first or a last useless glance.
They will open their arms, they will caress each other.  They will love
life and be afraid to disappear....

"I have heard the annunciation of whatever finer things are to come.
Through me has passed, without staying me in my course, the Word which
does not lie, and which said over again, will satisfy."

Truly a great and pitiless book, but there is a cleansing wind running
through it, which sweeps away life's illusions, and leaves a new hope
for the future in our hearts.

EDWARD J. O'BRIEN.

BASS RIVER, MASS.,
July, 10, 1918.


CHAPTER I


The landlady, Madame Lemercier, left me alone in my room, after a short
speech impressing upon me all the material and moral advantages of the
Lemercier boarding-house.

I stopped in front of the glass, in the middle of the room in which I
was going to live for a while.  I looked round the room and then at
myself.

The room was grey and had a dusty smell.  I saw two chairs, one of
which held my valise, two narrow-backed armchairs with smeary
upholstery, a table with a piece of green felt set into the top, and an
oriental carpet with an arabesque pattern that fairly leaped to the
eye.

This particular room I had never seen before, but, oh, how familiar it
all was--that bed of imitation mahogany, that frigid toilet table, that
inevitable arrangement of the furniture, that emptiness within those
four walls.

The room was worn with use, as if an infinite number of people had
occupied it.  The carpet was frayed from the door to the window--a path
trodden by a host of feet from day to day.  The moulding, which I could
reach with my hands, was out of line and cracked, and the marble
mantelpiece had lost its sharp edges.  Human contact wears things out
with disheartening slowness.

Things tarnish, too.  Little by little, the ceiling had darkened like a
stormy sky.  The places on the whitish woodwork and the pink wallpaper
that had been touched oftenest had become smudgy--the edge of the door,
the paint around the lock of the closet and the wall alongside the
window where one pulls the curtain cords.  A whole world of human
beings had passed here like smoke, leaving nothing white but the
window.

And I?  I am a man like every other man, just as that evening was like
every other evening.

. . . . .

I had been travelling since morning.  Hurry, formalities, baggage, the
train, the whiff of different towns.

I fell into one of the armchairs.  Everything became quieter and more
peaceful.

My coming from the country to stay in Paris for good marked an epoch in
my life.  I had found a situation here in a bank.  My days were to
change.  It was because of this change that I got away from my usual
thoughts and turned to thoughts of myself.

I was thirty years old.  I had lost my father and mother eighteen or
twenty years before, so long ago that the event was now insignificant.
I was unmarried.  I had no children and shall have none.  There are
moments when this troubles me, when I reflect that with me a line will
end which has lasted since the beginning of humanity.

Was I happy?  Yes, I had nothing to mourn or regret, I had no
complicated desires.  Therefore, I was happy.  I remembered that since
my childhood I had had spiritual illuminations, mystical emotions, a
morbid fondness for shutting myself up face to face with my past.  I
had attributed exceptional importance to myself and had come to think
that I was more than other people.  But this had gradually become
submerged in the positive nothingness of every day.

. . . . .

There I was now in that room.

I leaned forward in my armchair to be nearer the glass, and I examined
myself carefully.

Rather short, with an air of reserve (although there are times when I
let myself go); quite correctly dressed; nothing to criticise and
nothing striking about my appearance.

I looked close at my eyes.  They are green, though, oddly enough,
people usually take them for black.

I believed in many things in a confused sort of way, above all, in the
existence of God, if not in the dogmas of religion.  However, I
thought, these last had advantages for poor people and for women, who
have less intellect than men.

As for philosophical discussions, I thought they are absolutely
useless.  You cannot demonstrate or verify anything.  What was truth,
anyway?

I had a sense of good and evil.  I would not have committed an
indelicacy, even if certain of impunity.  I would not have permitted
myself the slightest overstatement.

If everyone were like me, all would be well.

. . . . .

It was already late.  I was not going to do anything.  I remained
seated there, at the end of the day, opposite the looking-glass.  In
the setting of the room that the twilight began to invade, I saw the
outline of my forehead, the oval of my face, and, under my blinking
eyelids, the gaze by which I enter into myself as into a tomb.

My tiredness, the gloominess (I heard rain outside), the darkness that
intensified my solitude and made me look larger, and then something
else, I knew not what, made me sad.  It bored me to be sad.  I shook
myself.  What was the matter?  Nothing.  Only myself.

I have not always been alone in life as I was that evening.  Love for
me had taken on the form and the being of my little Josette.  We had
met long before, in the rear of the millinery shop in which she worked
at Tours.  She had smiled at me with singular persistence, and I caught
her head in my hands, kissed her on the lips--and found out suddenly
that I loved her.

I no longer recall the strange bliss we felt when, we first embraced.
It is true, there are moments when I still desire her as madly as the
first time.  This is so especially when she is away.  When she is with
me, there are moments when she repels me.

We discovered each other in the holidays.  The days when we shall see
each other again before we die--we could count them--if we dared.

To die!  The idea of death is decidedly the most important of all
ideas.  I should die some day.  Had I ever thought of it?  I reflected.
No, I had never thought of it.  I could not.  You can no more look
destiny in the face than you can look at the sun, and yet destiny is
grey.

And night came, as every night will come, until the last one, which
will be too vast.

But all at once I jumped up and stood on my feet, reeling, my heart
throbbing like the fluttering of wings.

What was it?  In the street a horn resounded, playing a hunting song.
Apparently some groom of a rich family, standing near the bar of a
tavern, with cheeks puffed out, mouth squeezed tight, and an air of
ferocity, astonishing and silencing his audience.

But the thing that so stirred me was not the mere blowing of a horn in
the city streets.  I had been brought up in the country, and as a child
I used to hear that blast far in the distance, along the road to the
woods and the castle.  The same air, the same thing exactly.  How could
the two be so precisely alike?

And involuntarily my hand wavered to my heart.

Formerly--to-day--my life--my heart--myself!  I thought of all this
suddenly, for no reason, as if I had gone mad.

. . . . .

My past--what had I ever made of myself?  Nothing, and I was already on
the decline.  Ah, because the refrain recalled the past, it seemed to
me as if it were all over with me, and I had not lived.  And I had a
longing for a sort of lost paradise.

But of what avail to pray or rebel?  I felt I had nothing more to
expect from life.  Thenceforth, I should be neither happy nor unhappy.
I could not rise from the dead.  I would grow old quietly, as quiet as
I was that day in the room where so many people had left their traces,
and yet no one had left his own traces.

This room--anywhere you turn, you find this room.  It is the universal
room.  You think it is closed.  No, it is open to the four winds of
heaven.  It is lost amid a host of similar rooms, like the light in the
sky, like one day amid the host of all other days, like my "I" amid a
host of other I's.

I, I!  I saw nothing more now than the pallor of my face, with deep
orbits, buried in the twilight, and my mouth filled with a silence
which gently but surely stifles and destroys.

I raised myself on my elbow as on a clipped wing.  I wished that
something partaking of the infinite would happen to me.

I had no genius, no mission to fulfil, no great heart to bestow.  I had
nothing and I deserved nothing.  But all the same I desired some sort
of reward.

Love.  I dreamed of a unique, an unheard-of idyll with a woman far from
the one with whom I had hitherto lost all my time, a woman whose
features I did not see, but whose shadow I imagined beside my own as we
walked along the road together.

Something infinite, something new!  A journey, an extraordinary journey
into which to throw myself headlong and bring variety into my life.
Luxurious, bustling departures surrounded by solicitous inferiors, a
lazy leaning back in railway trains that thunder along through wild
landscapes and past cities rising up and growing as if blown by the
wind.

Steamers, masts, orders given in barbarous tongues, landings on golden
quays, then strange, exotic faces in the sunlight, puzzlingly alike,
and monuments, familiar from pictures, which, in my tourist's pride,
seem to have come close to me.

My brain was empty, my heart arid.  I had never found anything, not
even a friend.  I was a poor man stranded for a day in a boarding-house
room where everybody comes and everybody goes.  And yet I longed for
glory!  For glory bound to me like a miraculous wound that I should
feel and everybody would talk about.  I longed for a following of which
I should be the leader, my name acclaimed under the heavens like a new
clarion call.

But I felt my grandeur slip away.  My childish imagination played in
vain with those boundless fancies.  There was nothing more for me to
expect from life.  There was only I, who, stripped by the night, rose
upward like a cry.

I could hardly see any more in the dark.  I guessed at, rather than
saw, myself in the mirror.  I had a realising sense of my weakness and
captivity.  I held my hands out toward the window, my outstretched
fingers making them look like something torn.  I lifted my face up to
the sky.  I sank back and leaned on the bed, a huge object with a vague
human shape, like a corpse.  God, I was lost!  I prayed to Him to have
pity on me.  I thought that I was wise and content with my lot.  I had
said to myself that I was free from the instinct of theft.  Alas, alas,
it was not true, since I longed to take everything that was not mine.


CHAPTER II


The sound of the horn had ceased for some time.  The street and the
houses had quieted down.  Silence.  I passed my hand over my forehead.
My fit of emotion was over.  So much the better.  I recovered my
balance by an effort of will-power.

I sat down at the table and took some papers out of my bag that I had
to look over and arrange.

Something spurred me on.  I wanted to earn a little money.  I could
then send some to my old aunt who had brought me up.  She always waited
for me in the low-ceilinged room, where her sewing-machine, afternoons,
whirred, monotonous and tiresome as a clock, and where, evenings, there
was a lamp beside her which somehow seemed to look like herself.

Notes--the notes from which I was to draw up the report that would show
my ability and definitely decide whether I would get a position in
Monsieur Berton's bank--Monsieur Berton, who could do everything for me,
who had but to say a word, the god of my material life.

I started to light the lamp.  I scratched a match.  It did not catch
fire, the phosphorous end breaking off.  I threw it away and waited a
moment, feeling a little tired.

Then I heard a song hummed quite close to my ear.

. . . . .

Some one seemed to be leaning on my shoulder, singing for me, only for
me, in confidence.

Ah, an hallucination!  Surely my brain was sick--my punishment for
having thought too hard.

I stood up, and my hand clutched the edge of the table.  I was
oppressed by a feeling of the supernatural.  I sniffed the air, my
eyelids blinking, alert and suspicious.

The singing kept on.  I could not get rid of it.  My head was beginning
to go round.  The singing came from the room next to mine.  Why was it
so pure, so strangely near?  Why did it touch me so?  I looked at the
wall between the two rooms, and stifled a cry of surprise.

High up, near the ceiling, above the door, always kept locked, there
was a light.  The song fell from that star.

There was a crack in the partition at that spot, through which the
light of the next room entered the night of mine.

I climbed up on the bed, and my face was on a level with the crack.
Rotten woodwork, two loose bricks.  The plaster gave way and an opening
appeared as large as my hand, but invisible from below, because of the
moulding.

I looked.  I beheld.  The next room presented itself to my sight
freely.

It spread out before me, this room which was not mine.  The voice that
had been singing had gone, and in going had left the door open, and it
almost seemed as though the door were still swinging on its hinges.
There was nothing in the room but a lighted candle, which trembled on
the mantelpiece.

At that distance the table looked like an island, the bluish and
reddish pieces of furniture, in their vague outline, like the organs of
a body almost alive.

I looked at the wardrobe.  Bright, confused lines going straight up,
its feet in darkness.  The ceiling, the reflection of the ceiling in
the glass, and the pale window like a human face against the sky.

I returned to my room--as if I had really left it--stunned at first, my
thoughts in a whirl, almost forgetting who I was.

I sat down on my bed, thinking things over quickly and trembling a
little, oppressed by what was to come.

I dominated, I possessed that room.  My eyes entered it.  I was in it.
All who would be there would be there with me without knowing it.  I
should see them, I should hear them, I should be as much in their
company as though the door were open.

. . . . .

A moment later I raised my face to the hole and looked again.

The candle was out, but some one was there.  It was the maid.  No doubt
she had come in to put the room in order.  Then she paused.

She was alone.  She was quite near me.  But I did not very well see the
living being who was moving about, perhaps because I was dazzled by
seeing it so truly--a dark blue apron, falling down from her waist like
rays of evening, white wrists, hands darker than her wrists from toil,
a face undecided yet striking, eyes hidden yet shining, cheeks
prominent and clear, a knot on top of her head gleaming like a crown.

A short time before I had seen the girl on the staircase bending over
cleaning the banisters, her reddened face close to her large hands.  I
had found her repulsive because of those blackened hands of hers and
the dusty chores that she stooped over.  I had also seen her in a
hallway walking ahead of me heavily, her hair hanging loose and her
body giving out an unpleasant odour, so that you felt it was obnoxious
and wrapped in dirty underwear.

. . . . .

And now I looked at her again.  The evening gently dispelled the
ugliness, wiped out the misery and the horror, changed the dust into
shadow, like a curse turned into a blessing.  All that remained of her
was colour, a mist, an outline; not even that; a thrill and the beating
of her heart.  Every trace of her had disappeared save her true self.

That was because she was alone.  An extraordinary thing, a dash of the
divine in it, to be actually alone.  She was in that perfect innocence,
that purity which is solitude.

I desecrated her solitude with my eyes, but she did not know it, and so
/she/ was not desecrated.

She went over to the window with brightening eyes and swinging hands in
her apron of the colour of the nocturnal sky.  Her face and the upper
part of her body were illuminated.  She seemed to be in heaven.

She sat down on the sofa, a great low red shadow in the depths of the
room near the window.  She leaned her broom beside her.  Her dust cloth
fell to the floor and was lost from sight.

She took a letter from her pocket and read it.  In the twilight the
letter was the whitest thing in the world.  The double sheet trembled
between her fingers, which held it carefully, like a dove in the air.
She put the trembling letter to her lips, and kissed it.  From whom was
the letter?  Not from her family.  A servant girl is not likely to have
so much filial devotion as to kiss a letter from her parents.  A lover,
her betrothed, yes.  Many, perhaps, knew her lover's name.  I did not,
but I witnessed her love as no other person had.  And that simple
gesture of kissing the paper, that gesture buried in a room, stripped
bare by the dark, had something sublime and awesome in it.

She rose and went closer to the window, the white letter folded in her
grey hand.

The night thickened--and it seemed to me as if I no longer knew her age,
nor her name, nor the work she happened to be doing down here, nor
anything about her--nothing at all.  She gazed at the pale immensity,
which touched her.  Her eyes gleamed.  You would say she was crying,
but no, her eyes only shed light.  She would be an angel if reality
flourished upon the earth.

She sighed and walked to the door slowly.  The door closed behind her
like something falling.

She had gone without doing anything but reading her letter and kissing
it.

. . . . .

I returned to my corner lonely, more terribly alone than before.  The
simplicity of this meeting stirred me profoundly.  Yet there had been
no one there but a human being, a human being like myself.  Then there
is nothing sweeter and stronger than to approach a human being, whoever
that human being may be.

This woman entered into my intimate life and took a place in my heart.
How?  Why?  I did not know.  But what importance she assumed!  Not of
herself.  I did not know her, and I did not care to know her.  She
assumed importance by the sole value of the momentary revelation of her
existence, by the example she gave, by the wake of her actual presence,
by the true sound of her steps.

It seemed to me as if the supernatural dream I had had a short while
before had been granted, and that what I called the infinite had come.
What that woman, without knowing it, had given me by showing me her
naked kiss--was it not the crowning beauty the reflection of which
covers you with glory?

. . . . .

The dinner bell rang.

This summons to everyday reality and one's usual occupations changed
the course of my thoughts for the moment.  I got ready to go down to
dinner.  I put on a gay waistcoat and a dark coat, and I stuck a pearl
in my cravat.  Then I stood still and listened, hoping to hear a
footstep or a voice.

While doing these conventional things, I continued to be obsessed by
the great event that had happened--this apparition.

I went downstairs and joined the rest of my fellow-boarders in the
brown and gold dining-room.  There was a general stir and bustle and
the usual empty interest before a meal.  A number of people seated
themselves with the good manners of polite society.  Smiles, the sound
of chairs being drawn up to the table, words thrown out, conversations
started.  Then the concert of plates and dishes began and grew steadily
louder.

My neighbours talked to those beside them.  I heard their murmur, which
accentuated my aloneness.  I lifted my eyes.  In front of me a shining
row of foreheads, eyes, collars, shirtfronts, waists, and busy hands
above a table of glistening whiteness.  All these things attracted my
attention and distracted it at the same time.

I did not know what these people were thinking about.  I did not know
who they were.  They hid themselves from one another.  Their shining
fronts made a wall against which I dashed in vain.

Bracelets, necklaces, rings.  The sparkling of the jewels made me feel
far away from them as do the stars.  A young girl looked at me with
vague blue eyes.  What could I do against that kind of sapphire?

They talked, but the noise left each one to himself, and deafened me,
as the light blinded me.

Nevertheless, at certain moments these people, because in the course of
conversation they thought of things they had at heart, revealed
themselves as if they were alone.  I recognized the revelation of this
truth, and felt myself turning pale on remembering that other
revelation.

Some one spoke of money, and the subject became general.  The assembly
was stirred by an ideal.  A dream of grasping and touching shone
through their eyes, just as a little adoration had come into the eyes
of the servant when she found herself alone.

They recalled military heroes triumphantly, and some men thought, "Me,
too!" and worked themselves up into a fever, showing what they were
thinking of, in spite of their ridiculously low station and the slavery
of their social position.  One young girl seemed dazzled, looked
overwhelmed.  She could not restrain a sigh of ecstasy.  She blushed
under the effect of an inscrutable thought.  I saw the surge of blood
mount to her face.  I saw her heart beaming.

They discussed the phenomena of occultism and the Beyond.  "Who knows?"
some one said.  Then they discussed death.  Two diners, at opposite
ends of the table, a man and a woman who had not spoken to each other
and seemed not to be acquainted, exchanged a glance that I caught.  And
seeing that glance leap from their eyes at the same time, under the
shock of the idea of death, I understood that these two loved each
other.

. . . . .

The meal was over.  The young people went into the parlour.  A lawyer
was telling some people around him about a murder case that had been
decided that day.  The nature of the subject was such that he expressed
himself very cautiously, as though confiding a secret.  A man had
injured and then murdered a little girl and had kept singing at the top
of his voice to prevent the cries of his little victim from being
heard.  One by one the people stopped talking and listened with the air
of really not listening, while those not so close to the speaker felt
like drawing up right next to him.  About this image risen in their
midst, this paroxysm so frightful to our timid instincts, the silence
spread in a circle in their souls like a terrific noise.

Then I heard the laugh of a woman, of an honest woman, a dry crackling
laugh, which she thought innocent perhaps, but which caressed her whole
being, a burst of laughter, which, made up of formless instinctive
cries, was almost fleshy.  She stopped and turned, silent again.  And
the speaker, sure of his effect, continued in a calm voice to hurl upon
these people the story of the monster's confession.

A young mother, whose daughter was sitting beside her, half got up, but
could not leave.  She sat down again and bent forward to conceal her
daughter.  She was eager and yet ashamed to listen.

Another woman was sitting motionless, with her head leaning forward,
but her mouth compressed as if she were defending herself tragically.
And beneath the worldly mask of her face, I saw a fanatical martyr's
smile impress itself like handwriting.

And the men!  I distinctly heard one man, the man who was so calm and
simple, catch his breath.  Another man, with a characterless business
man's face, was making a great effort to talk of this and that to a
young girl sitting next to him, while he watched her with a look of
which he was ashamed and which made him blink.  And everybody condemned
the satyr in terms of the greatest abuse.

And so, for a moment, they had not lied.  They had almost confessed,
perhaps unconsciously, and even without knowing what they had
confessed.  They had almost been their real selves.  Desire had leaped
into their eyes, and the reflection passed--and I had seen what happened
in the silence, sealed by their lips.

It is this, it is this thought, this kind of living spectre, that I
wished to study.  I rose, shrugging my shoulders, and hurried out,
impelled by eagerness to see the sincerity of men and women unveiled
before my eyes, beautiful as a masterpiece in spite of its ugliness.
The series was actively continued during the fifteenth century, when
we find, besides others, the romances of _Iwain and Gawain_, _Sir
Percival_, and _Sir Cleges_; _The Sowdon_ (Sultan) _of Babylon_;
_The Aunturs_ (Adventures) _of Arthur_, _Sir Amadas_, _The Avowing
of Arthur_, and _The Life of Ipomidoun_; _The Wars of Alexander_,
_The Seven Sages_ (later version, edited by Wright); _Torrent of
Portugal_, _Sir Gowther_, _Sir Degrevant_, _Sir Eglamour_, _Le Bone
Florence of Rome_, and _Partonope of Blois_; the prose version of
_Merlin_, the later version of _Sir Guy of Warwick_, and the verse
Romance, of immense length, of _The Holy Grail_; _Emare_, _The Erl
of Tolous_, and _The Squire of Low Degree_.

Towards the end of the century, when the printing-press was already at
work, we find Caxton greatly busying himself to continue the list. Not
only did he give us the whole of Sir Thomas Malory's _Morte D'Arthur_,
"enprynted and fynysshed in thabbey Westmestre the last day of
Iuyl, the yere of our lord MCCCCLXXXV"; but he actually translated
several romances into very good English prose on his own account,
viz.

_Godefroy of Boloyne_ (1481), _Charles the Grete_ (1485), _The
Knight Paris and the fair Vyene_ (1485), _Blanchardyn and Eglantine_
(about 1489), and _The Four Sons of Aymon_ (about 1490).

We must further put to the credit of the fifteenth century the
remarkable English version of the _Gesta Romanorum_, and many more
versions by Caxton, such as _The Recuyell of the Historyes of Troye_,
_The Life of Jason_, _Eneydos_ (which is Virgil's _Æneid_ in the
form of a prose romance), _The Golden Legend_ or Lives of Saints,
and _Reynard the Fox_.

When all these works are considered, the fifteenth century emerges with
considerable credit.

It remains to look at some of the above-named romances a little more
closely, in order to see if any of them are in the dialect of
Northern England.

Some of them are written by scribes belonging to other parts, but there
seems to be little doubt that the following were in that dialect
originally, viz. (1) _Iwain and Gawain_, printed in Ritson's _Ancient
Metrical Romances_, and belonging to the very beginning of the
century, extant in the same MS. as that which contains Minot's
_Poems_: (2) _The Wars of Alexander_ (Early English Text Society,
1886), edited by myself; see the Preface, pp. xv, xix, for proofs
that it was originally written in a pure Northumbrian dialect, which
the better of the two MSS. very fairly preserves.

Others exhibit strong traces of a Northern dialect, such as _The Aunturs
of Arthur_, _Sir Amadas_, and _The Avowing of Arthur_, but they
may be in a West Midland dialect, not far removed from the North. In the
preface to _The Sege of Melayne_ (Milan) _and Roland and Otuel_,
edited for the Early English Text Society by S.J. Herrtage, it is
suggested that both these poems were by the author of _Sir Percival_,
and that all three were originally in the dialect of the North of
England.

_Iwain and Gawain_ and _The Wars of Alexander_ belong to quite the
beginning of the fifteenth century, and they appear to be among the
latest examples of the literary use of dialect in the North of
England considered as a vehicle for romances; but we must not forget
the "miracle plays," and in particular _The Towneley Mysteries_ or
plays acted at or near Wakefield in Yorkshire, and _The York Plays_,
lately edited by Miss Toulmin Smith.

Examples of Southern English likewise come to an end about the same
time; it is most remarkable how very soon, after the death of Chaucer,
the Midland dialect not only assumed a leading position, but enjoyed
that proud position almost alone.

The rapid loss of numerous inflexions, soon after 1400, made
that dialect, which was already in possession of such important centres
as London, Oxford, and Cambridge, much easier to learn, and brought
its grammar much nearer to that in use in the North. It even compromised,
as it were, with that dialect by accepting from it the general use of
such important words as _they_, _their_, _them_, the plural verb
_are_, and the preposition _till_.

There can be little doubt that one of the causes of the cessation of
varying forms of words in literary use was the civil strife known
as the Wars of the Roses, which must for a brief period have been
hostile to all literary activity; and very shortly afterwards the
printing-presses of London all combined to recognise, in general,
one dialect only.

Hence it came about, by a natural but somewhat rapid process, that the
only dialect which remained unaffected by the triumph of the Midland
variety was that portion of the Northern dialect which still held
its own in Scotland, where it was spoken by subjects of another king.

As far as literature was concerned, only two dialects were available,
the Northumbrian of Scotland and the East Midland in England. It is
obvious that the readiest way of distinguishing between the two is to
call the one "Scottish" and the other "English," ignoring accuracy
for the sake of practical convenience.

This is precisely what happened in course of time, and the new nomenclature
would have done no harm if the study of Middle English had been at all
general. But such was not the case, and the history of our literature
was so much neglected that even those who should have been well
informed knew no better than others. The chief modern example is
the well-known case of that most important and valuable book
entitled _An Etymological Dictionary of the Scottish Language_, by
John Jamieson, D.D., first published in Edinburgh in 1808. There is
no great harm in the title, if for "Language" we read "Dialect";
but this great and monumental work was unluckily preceded by a "Dissertation
on the Origin of the Scottish Language," in which wholly mistaken
and wrongheaded views are supported with great ingenuity and much
show of learning.

In the admirable new edition of "Jamieson" by Longmuir and Donaldson,
published at Paisley in 1879, this matter is set right.

They quite rightly reprint this "Dissertation," which affords valuable
testimony as to the study of English in 1808, but accompany it with most
judicious remarks, which are well worthy of full repetition.

"That once famous Dissertation can now be considered only a notable feat
of literary card-building; more remarkable for the skill and ingenuity
of its construction than for its architectural correctness, strength
and durability, or practical usefulness.

That the language of the Scottish Lowlands is in all important
particulars the same as that of the northern counties of England,
will be evident to any unbiassed reader who takes the trouble to
compare the Scottish Dictionary with the Glossaries of Brockett,
Atkinson, and Peacock.

And the similarity is attested in another way by the simple but
important fact, that regarding some of our Northern Metrical Romances
it is still disputed whether they were composed to the north or
the south of the Tweed....

And to this conclusion all competent scholars have given their
consent."
For those who really understand the situation there is no harm in accepting
the distinction between "Scottish" and "English," as explained above.
Hence it is that the name of "Middle Scots" has been suggested for
"the literary language of Scotland written between the latter half of
the fifteenth century and the early decades of the seventeenth."

Most of this literature is highly interesting, at any rate much more
so than the "English" literature of the same period, as has been
repeatedly remarked. Indeed, this is so well known that special examples
are needless; I content myself with referring to the _Specimens of Middle
Scots_, by G. Gregory Smith, Edinburgh and London, 1902. These specimens
include extracts from such famous authors as Henryson, Dunbar,
Gawain (or Gavin) Douglas, Sir David Lyndesay, John Knox, and
George Buchanan.

Perhaps it is well to add that "Scottis" or "Scots" is the Northern form
of "Scottish" or "Scotch"; just as "Inglis" is the Northern form
of "English."

"Middle Scots" implies both "Old Scots" and "Modern Scots." "Old
Scots" is, of course, the same thing as Northumbrian or Northern English
of the Middle English Period, which may be roughly dated as extant from
1300 to 1400 or 1450. "Modern Scots" is the dialect (when they employ
dialect) illustrated by Allan Ramsay, Alexander Ross, Robert
Tannahill, John Galt, James Hogg (the Ettrick Shepherd), Robert
Burns, Sir Walter Scott, and very many others.

I conclude this chapter with a characteristic example of Middle
Scots.

The following well-known passage is from the conclusion to Dunbar's
_Golden Targe_.

And as I did awake of my sweving{1}, The ioyfull birdis merily did
syng For myrth of Phebus tendir bemës schene{2}; Swete war the
vapouris, soft the morowing{3}, Halesum the vale, depaynt wyth
flouris ying{4}; The air attemperit, sobir, and amene{5}; In quhite
and rede was all the feld besene{6} Throu Naturis nobil fresch
anamalyng{7}, In mirthfull May, of eviry moneth Quene.

O reverend Chaucere, rose of rethoris{8} all, As in oure tong ane
flour{9} imperiall, That raise{10} in Britane evir, quho redis
rycht, Thou beris of makaris{11} the tryúmph riall; Thy fresch
anamalit termës celicall{12} This mater coud illumynit have full
brycht; Was thou noucht of oure Inglisch all the lycht, Surmounting
eviry tong terrestriall Als fer as Mayis morow dois mydnycht?

O morall Gower, and Ludgate laureate, Your sugurit lippis and tongis
aureate{13} Bene to oure eris cause of grete delyte; Your angel mouthis
most mellifluate{14} Oure rude langage has clere illumynate, And faire
our-gilt{15} oure speche, that imperfýte Stude, or{16} your goldyn
pennis schupe{17} to wryte; This ile before was bare, and desolate Of
rethorike, or lusty{18} fresch endyte{19}.

{Footnotes:
1: _dream_ 2: _bright_ 3: _morn_ 4: _young_ 5: _pleasant_ 6: _arrayed_
7: _enamelling_ 8: _orators_ 9: _flower_ 10: _didst rise_ 11: _poets_
12: _heavenly_ 13: _golden_ 14: _honeyed_ 15: _overgilt_ 16: _ere_
17: _undertook_ 18: _pleasant_ 19: _composition_} 

CHAPTER VI
THE SOUTHERN DIALECT
We have seen that the earliest dialect to assume literary supremacy
was the Northern, and that at a very early date, namely, in the
seventh, eighth, and ninth centuries; but its early documents have
nearly all perished.

If, with the exception of one short fragment, any of Cædmon's poems
have survived, they only exist in Southern versions of a much later
date.

The chief fosterer of our rather extensive Wessex (or Southern) literature,
commonly called Anglo-Saxon, was the great Alfred, born at Wantage
in Berkshire, to the south of the Thames.

We may roughly define the limits of the Old Southern dialect by saying
that it formerly included all the counties to the south of the Thames
and to the west and south-west of Berkshire, including Wiltshire,
Dorsetshire, Somersetshire, and Devonshire, but excluding Cornwall,
in which the Cornish dialect of Celtic prevailed.

It was at Athelney in Somersetshire, near the junction of the
rivers Tone and Parrett, that Alfred, in the memorable year 878, when
his dominions were reduced to a precarious sway over two or three
counties, established his famous stronghold; from which he issued to
inflict upon the foes of the future British empire a crushing and
decisive defeat.

And it was near Athelney, in the year 1693, that the ornament of gold
and enamel was found, with its famous legend--ÆLFRED MEC HEHT
GEWYRCAN--"Ælfred commanded (men) to make me."

From his date to the Norman Conquest, the MSS. in the Anglo-Saxon or
Southern dialect are fairly numerous, and it is mainly to them that we
owe our knowledge of the grammar, the metre, and the pronunciation
of the older forms of English.

Sweet's _Anglo-Saxon Primer_ will enable any one to begin the study of
this dialect, and to learn something valuable about it in the
course of a month or two.

The famous _Anglo-Saxon Chronicle_, beginning with a note concerning
the year 1, when Augustus was emperor of Rome, not only continues
our history down to the Conquest, but for nearly a century beyond
it, to the year 1154.

The language of the latter part, as extant in the (Midland) Laud
MS., belongs to the twelfth century, and shows considerable changes
in the spelling and grammar as compared with the Parker MS., which
(not counting in a few later entries) ends with the year 1001.

After the Conquest, the Southern dialect continued to be the literary
language, and we have several examples of it.

Extracts from some of the chief works are given in Part I of Morris's
_Specimens of Early English_.

They are selected from the following: (1) _Old English Homilies_,
1150-1200, as printed for the Early English Text Society, and
edited by Dr Morris, 1867-8. (2) _Old English Homilies, Second
Series_, before 1200, ed.

Morris (E.E.T.S.), 1873. (3) _The Brut_, being a versified chronicle
of the legendary history of Britain, compiled by Layamon, a
Worcestershire priest, and extending to 32,240 (short) lines; in
two versions, the date of the earlier being about 1205. (4) _A Life
of St Juliana_, in two versions, about 1210; ed.

Cockayne and Brock (E.E.T.S.), 1872. (5) _The Ancren Riwle_, or
Rule of anchorite nuns (Camden Society), ed.

Morton, 1853; the date of composition is about 1210. (6) _The
Proverbs of Alfred_, about 1250; printed in Dr Morris's _Old English
Miscellany_ (E.E.T.S.), 1872.

A later edition, by myself, was printed at Oxford in 1907. (7) A
poem by Nicholas de Guildford, entitled _The Owl and the Nightingale_,
about 1250; ed.

Rev. J. Stevenson, 1838; ed. T. Wright, 1843; ed. F.H.
Stratmann, of Krefeld, 1868. (8) A curious poem of nearly 400 long
lines, usually known as _A Moral Ode_, which seems to have been
originally written at Christchurch, Hampshire, and frequently printed;
one version is in Morris's _Old English Homilies_, and another in
the Second Series of the same. (9) _The Romance of King Horn_;
before 1300, here printed in full.

Just at the very end of the century we meet with two Southern poems
of vast length.

_The Metrical Chronicle_ of Robert of Gloucester, comprising the
History of Britain from the Siege of Troy to the year 1272, the
date of the accession of Edward I, and written in the dialect of
Gloucester, was completed in 1298.

It must seem strange to many to find that our history is thus
connected with the Siege of Troy; but it must be remembered that
our old histories, including Layamon's poem of _The Brut_ mentioned
above, usually included the fabulous history of very early Britain
as narrated by Geoffrey of Monmouth; and it is useful to remember
that we owe to this circumstance such important works as Shakespeare's
_King Lear_ and _Cymbeline_, as well as the old play of _Locrine_,
once attributed to Shakespeare.

According to Robert's version of Geoffrey's story, Britain was
originally called Brutain, after Brut or Brutus, the son of Æneas.

Locrin was the eldest son of Brutus and his wife Innogen, and
defeated Humber, king of Hungary, in a great battle; after which
Humber was drowned in the river which still bears his name.

Locrin's daughter Averne (or Sabre in Geoffrey) was drowned likewise,
in the river which was consequently called Severn. The British king
Bathulf (or, in Geoffrey, Bladud) was the builder of Bath; and the
son of Bladud was Leir, who had three daughters, named Gornorille,
Began, and Cordeille.

Kymbel (in Geoffrey, Kymbelinus), who had been brought up by Augustus
Cæsar, was king of Britain at the time of the birth of Christ; his
sons were Guider and Arvirag (Guiderius and Arviragus).

Another king of Britain was King Cole, who gave name (says Geoffrey
falsely) to Colchester. We come into touch with authentic history
with the reign of Vortigern, when Hengist and Horsa sailed over
to Britain.

An extract from Robert of Gloucester is given in _Specimens of
Early English_, Part II.

The other great work of the same date is the vast collection edited
for the Early English Text Society by Dr Horstmann in 1887, entitled,
_The Early South-English Legendary_, or Lives of Saints.

It is extant in several MSS., of which the oldest (MS.

Laud 108) originally contained 67 Lives; with an Appendix, in a later
hand, containing two more. The eleventh Life is that of St Dunstan,
which is printed in _Specimens of Early English_, Part II, from
another MS.

Then they rose, and as they did so, the door opened.  There stood the
old stooping grandmother.  She came out of the grey, out of the realm
of phantoms, out of the past.  She was looking for them as if they had
gone astray.  She called them in a low voice.  She put into her tone a
great gentleness, almost sadness, strangely harmonising with the
children's presence.

"You are here, children?" she said, with a kind little laugh.  "What
are you doing here?  Come, they are looking for you."

She was old and faded, but she was angelic, with her gown fastened up
to her neck.  Beside these two, who were preparing for the large life,
she was, thenceforth, like a child, inactive, useless.

They rushed into her arms, and pressed their foreheads against her
saintly mouth.  They seemed to be saying good-by to her forever.

. . . . .

She went out.  And a moment afterwards they followed her, hastily, as
they had come, united now by an invisible and sublime bond.  On the
threshold, they looked at each other once more.

And now that the room was empty like a deserted sanctuary, I thought of
their glance, their first glance of love, which I had seen.

No one before me had ever seen a first glance of love.  I was beside
them, but, far away.  I understood and read it without being part of
the infatuation myself, without being lost in the sensation.  That is
why I saw that glance.  They did not know when it began, they did not
know that it was the first.  Afterwards they would forget.  The urgent
flowering of their hearts would destroy those preludes.  We can no more
know our first glance of love than our last.  I shall remember it when
they will have forgotten it.

I do not recall my own first glance of love, my own first gift of love.
Yet it happened.  Those divine simplicities are erased from my heart.
Good God, then what do I retain that is of value?  The little boy that
I was is dead forever, before my eyes.  I survived him, but
forgetfulness tormented me, then overcame me, the sad process of living
ruined me, and I scarcely know what he knew.  I remember things at
random only, but the most beautiful, the sweetest memories are gone.

Well, this tender canticle that I overheard, full of infinity and
overflowing with fresh laughter, this precious song, I take and hold
and cherish.  It pulses in my heart.  I have stolen, but I have
preserved truth.


CHAPTER V


For a day, the Room remained vacant.  Twice I had high hopes, then
disillusionment.

Waiting had become a habit, an occupation.  I put off appointments,
delayed my walks, gained time at the risk of losing my position.  I
arranged my life as for a new love.  I left my room only to go down to
dinner, where nothing interested me any more.

The second day, I noticed that the Room was ready to receive a new
occupant.  It was waiting.  I had a thousand dreams of who the guest
would be, while the Room kept its secret, like some one thinking.

Twilight came, then evening, which magnified the room but did not
change it.  I was already in despair, when the door opened in the
darkness, and I saw on the threshold the shadow of a man.

. . . . .

He was scarcely to be distinguished in the evening light.

Dark clothing, milky white cuffs from which his grey tapering hands
hung down; a collar a little whiter than the rest.  In his round
greyish face I could see the dusky hollows of his eyes and mouth, under
the chin a cavity of shadow.  The yellow of his forehead shone
unclearly.  His cheekbone made an obscure bar in the dusk.  You would
have called him a skeleton.  What was this being whose physiognomy was
so monstrously simple?

He came nearer, and his face kindled, assumed life.  I saw that he was
handsome.

He had a charming serious face, fringed with a fine black beard, a high
forehead and sparkling eyes.  A haughty grace guided and refined his
movements.

He came forward a step or two, then returned to the door, which was
still open.  The shadow of the door trembled, a silhouette appeared and
took shape.  A little black-gloved hand grasped the knob, and a woman
stole into the room, with a questioning face.

She must have been a few steps behind him in the street.  They had not
wished to enter the room together, in which they both sought refuge to
escape pursuit.

She closed the door, and leaned her whole weight against it, to close
it still tighter.  Slowly she turned her head to him, paralysed for a
moment, it seemed to me, with fear that it was not he.  They stared
into each other's faces.  A cry burst from them, passionate,
restrained, almost mute, echoing from one to the other.  It seemed to
open up their wound.

"You!"

"You!"

She almost fainted.  She dropped on his breast as though swept by a
storm.  She had just strength enough to fall into his arms.  I saw the
man's two large pale hands, opened but slightly crooked, resting on the
woman's back.  A sort of desperate palpitation seized them, as if an
immense angel were in the Room, struggling and making vain efforts to
escape.  And it seemed to me that the Room was too small for this
couple, although it was full of the evening.

"They didn't see us!"

It was the same phrase which had come the other day from the two
children.

He said, "Come!" leading her over to the sofa, near the window, and
they seated themselves on the red velvet.  I saw their arms joined
together as though by a cord.  They remained there, engrossed,
gathering about them all the shadow of the world, reviving, beginning
to live again in their element of night and solitude.

What an entry, what an entry!  What an irruption of anathema!

I had thought, when this form of sin presented itself before me, when
the woman appeared at the door, plainly driven toward him, that I
should witness bliss in its plenitude, a savage and animal joy, as
momentous as nature.  On the contrary, I found that this meeting was
like a heart-rending farewell.

"Then we shall always be afraid?"

She seemed just a little more tranquil, and said this with an anxious
glance at him, as if really expecting a reply.

She shuddered, huddled in the shadows, feverishly stroking and pressing
the man's hand, sitting upright, stiffly.  I saw her throat rising and
falling like the sea.  They stayed there, touching one another; but a
lingering terror mingled with their caresses.

"Always  afraid--always  afraid,  always.  Far from the street, far from
the sun, far from everything.  I who had so much wanted full daylight
and sunlight!" she said, looking at the sky.

They were afraid.  Fear moulded them, burrowed into their hearts.
Their eyes, their hearts were afraid.  Above all, their love was
afraid.

A mournful smile glided across the man's face.  He looked at his friend
and murmured:

"You are thinking of /him."/

She was sitting with her cheeks in her hands and her elbows on her
knees and her face thrust forward.  She did not reply.

She /was/ thinking of him.  Doubled up, small as a child, she gazed
intently into the distance, at the man who was not there.  She bowed to
this image like a suppliant, and felt a divine reflection from it
falling upon her--from the man who was not there, who was being
deceived, from the offended man, the wounded man, from the master, from
him who was everywhere except where they were, who occupied the immense
outside, and whose name made them bow their heads, the man to whom they
were a prey.

Night fell, as if shame and terror were in its shadows, over this man
and woman, who had come to hide their embraces in this room, as in a
tomb where dwells the Beyond.

. . . . .

He said to her:

"I love you!"

I distinctly heard those grand words.

I love you!  I shuddered to the depths of my being on hearing the
profound words which came from those two human beings.  I love you!
The words which offer body and soul, the great open cry of the creature
and the creation.  I love you!  I beheld love face to face.

Then it seemed to me that sincerity vanished in the hasty incoherent
things he next said while clasping her to him.  It was as though he had
a set speech to make and was in a hurry to get through with it.

"You and I were born for each other.  There is a kinship in our souls
which must triumph.  It was no more possible to prevent us from meeting
and belonging to each other than to prevent our lips from uniting when
they came together.  What do moral conventions or social barriers
matter to us?  Our love is made of infinity and eternity."

"Yes," she said, lulled by his voice.

But I knew he was lying or was letting his words run away with him.
Love had become an idol, a thing.  He was blaspheming, he was invoking
infinity and eternity in vain, paying lip service to it by daily prayer
that had become perfunctory.

They let the banality drop.  The woman remained pensive for a while,
then she shook her head and she--/she/ pronounced the word of excuse, of
glorification; more than that, the word of truth:

"I was so unhappy!"

. . . . .

"How long ago it was!" she began.

It was her work of art, her poem and her prayer, to repeat this story,
low and precipitately, as if she were in the confessional.  You felt
that she came to it quite naturally, without transition, so completely
did it possess her whenever they were alone.

She was simply dressed.  She had removed her black gloves and her coat
and hat.  She wore a dark skirt and a red waist upon which a thin gold
chain was hanging.

She was a woman of thirty, perhaps, with regular features and smooth
silken hair.  It seemed to me that I knew her, but could not place her.

She began to speak of herself quite loudly, and tell of her past which
had been so hard.

"What a life I led!  What monotony, what emptiness!  The little town,
our house, the drawing-room with the furniture always arranged just so,
their places never changed, like tombstones.  One day I tried to put
the table that stood in the centre in another place.  I could not do
it."

Her face paled, grew more luminous.

He listened to her.  A smile of patience and resignation, which soon
was like a pained expression of weariness, crept across his handsome
face.  Yes, he was really handsome, though a little disconcerting, with
his large eyes, which women must have adored, his drooping moustache,
his tender, distant air.  He seemed to be one of those gentle people
who think too much and do evil.  You would have said that he was above
everything and capable of everything.  Listening to her with a certain
remoteness, but stirred by desire for her, he had the air of waiting.

And suddenly the veil fell from my eyes, and reality lay stripped
before me.  I saw that between these two people there was an immense
difference, like an infinite discord, sublime to behold because of its
depths, but so painful that it bruised my heart.

/He/ was moved only by his longing for her; /she,/ by her need of
escaping from her ordinary life.  Their desires were not the same.
They seemed united, but they dwelt far apart.

They did not talk the same language.  When they spoke of the same
things, they scarcely understood each other, and to my eyes, from the
very first, their union appeared to be broken more than if they had
never known each other.

But he did not say what was really in his mind.  You felt it in the
sound of his voice, the very charm of his intonation, his lyrical
choice of words.  He thought to please her, and he lied.  He was
evidently her superior, but she dominated him by a kind of inspired
sincerity.  While he was master of his words, she offered her whole
self in her words.

She described her former life.

"From the windows in my room and the dining-room, I could look out on
the square.  The fountain in the centre, with its shadow at its base.
I watched the day go round there, on that little, white, round place,
like a sundial.

"The postman crossed it regularly, without thinking.  At the arsenal
gate stood a soldier doing nothing.  Nobody else ever came there.  When
noon rang like a knell, still no one.  What I remember best of all was
the way noon rang like a knell--the middle of the day, absolute ennui.

"Nothing ever happened to me, nothing ever would happen to me.  There
was nothing for me.  The future no longer existed for me.  If my days
were to go on like that, nothing would separate me from my death--
nothing!  Not a thing!  To be bored is to die!  My life was dead, and
yet I had to live.  It was suicide.  Others killed themselves with
poison or with a revolver.  I killed myself with minutes and hours."

"Amy!" said the man.

"Then, by dint of seeing the days born in the morning and miscarrying
in the evening, I became afraid to die, and this fear was my first
passion.

"Often, in the middle of a visit I was paying, or in the night, or when
I came home after a walk, the length of the convent wall, I shuddered
with hope because of this passion.

"But who would free me from it?  Who would save me from this invisible
shipwreck, which I perceived only from time to time?  Around me was a
sort of conspiracy, composed of envy, meanness and indifference.
Whatever I saw, whatever I heard, tended to throw me back into the
narrow road, that stupid narrow road along which I was going.

"Madame Martet, the one friend with whom I was a little bit intimate,
you know, only two years older than I am, told me that I must be
content with what I had.  I replied, 'Then, that is the end of
everything, if I must be content with what I have.  Do you really
believe what you say?'  She said she did.  Oh, the horrid woman!

"But it was not enough to be afraid.  I had to hate my ennui.  How did
I come to hate it?  I do not know.

"I no longer knew myself.  I no longer was myself.  I had such need of
something else.  In fact, I did not know my own name any more.

"One day, I remember (although I am not wicked) I had a happy dream
that my husband was dead, my poor husband who had done nothing to me,
and that I was free, free, as large as the world!

"It could not last.  I couldn't go on forever hating monotony so much.
Oh, that emptiness, that monotony!  Of all the gloomy things in the
world monotony is the darkest, the gloomiest.  In comparison night is
day.

"Religion?  It is not with religion that we fill the emptiness of our
days, it is with our own life.  It was not with beliefs, with ideas
that I had to struggle, it was with myself.

"Then I found the remedy!"

She almost cried, hoarsely, ecstatically:

"Sin, sin!  To rid myself of boredom by committing a crime, to break up
monotony by deceiving.  To sin in order to be a new person, another
person.  To hate life worse than it hated me.  To sin so as not to die.

"I met you.  You wrote verses and books.  You were different from the
rest.  Your voice vibrated and gave the impression of beauty, and above
all, you were there, in my existence, in front of me!  I had only to
hold out my arms.  Then I loved you with all my heart, if you can call
it love, my poor little friend!"

She spoke now in a low quick voice, both oppressed and enthusiastic,
and she played with her companion's hand as if it were a child's toy.

"And you, too, you loved me, naturally.  And when we slipped into a
hotel one evening, the first time, it seemed to me as if the door
opened of itself, and I was grateful for having rebelled and having
broken my destiny.  And then the deceit--from which we suffer sometimes,
but which, after reflection, we no longer detest--the risks, the dangers
that give pleasure to each minute, the complications that add variety
to life, these rooms, these hiding-places, these black prisons, which
have fled from the sunlight I once knew!

"Ah!" she said.

It seemed to me that she sighed as if, now that her aspiration was
realized, she had nothing so beautiful to hope for any more.

. . . . .

She thought a moment, and then said:

"See what we are.  I too may have believed at first in a sort of
thunderbolt, a supernatural and fatal attraction, because of your
poetry.  But in reality I came to you--I see myself now--with clenched
fists and closed eyes."

She added:

"We deceive ourselves a good deal about love.  It is almost never what
they say it is.

"There may be sublime affinities, magnificent attractions.  I do not
say such a love may not exist between two human beings.  But we are not
these two.  We have never thought of anything but ourselves.  I know,
of course, that I am in love with you.  So are you with me.  There is
an attraction for you which does not exist for me, since I do not feel
any pleasure.  You see, we are making a bargain.  You give me a dream,
I give you joy.  But all this is not love."

He shrugged his shoulders, half in doubt, half in protest.  He did not
want to say anything.  All the same, he murmured feebly:

"Even in the purest of loves we cannot escape from ourselves."

"Oh," she said with a gesture of pious protest, the vehemence of which
surprised me, "that is not the same thing.  Don't say that, don't say
that!"

It seemed to me there was a vague regret in her voice and the dream of
a new dream in her eyes.

She dispelled it with a shake of her head.

"How happy I was!  I felt rejuvenated, like a new being.  I had a sense
of modesty again.  I remember that I did not dare to show the tip of my
foot from under my dress.  I even had a feeling about my face, my
hands, my very name."

. . . . .

Then the man continued the confession from the point where she had left
off, and spoke of their first meetings.  He wished to caress her with
words, to win her over gradually with phrases and with the charm of
memories.

"The first time we were alone--"

She looked at him.

"It was in the street, one evening," he said.  "I took your arm.  You
leaned more and more upon my shoulder.  People swarmed around us, but
we seemed to be quite alone.  Everything around us changed into
absolute solitude.  It seemed to me that we were both walking on the
waves of the sea."

"Ah!" she said.  "How good you were!  That first evening your face was
like what it never was afterwards, even in our happiest moments."

"We spoke of one thing and another, and while I held you close to me,
clasped like a bunch of flowers, you told me about people we knew, you
spoke of the sunlight that day and the coolness of the evening.  But
really you were telling me that you were mine.  I felt your confession
running through everything you said, and even if you did not express
it, you actually gave me a confession of love.

"Ah, how great things are in the beginning!  There is never any
pettiness in the beginning.

"Once when we met in the public garden, I took you back at the end of
the afternoon through the suburbs.  The road was so peaceful and quiet
that our footsteps seemed to disturb nature.  Benumbed by emotion, we
slackened our pace.  I leaned over and kissed you."

"There," she said.

She put her finger on his neck.

"Gradually the kiss grew warmer.  It crept toward your lips and stopped
there.  The first time it went astray, the second time it pretended it
went astray.  Soon I felt against my mouth"--he lowered his voice--"your
mouth."

She bowed her head, and I saw her rosy mouth.

"It was all so beautiful in the midst of the watchfulness imprisoning
me," she sighed, ever returning to her mild, pathetic preoccupation.

How she needed the stimulus of remembering her emotions, whether
consciously or not!  The recalling of these little dramas and former
perils warmed her movements, renewed her love.  That was the reason why
she had had the whole story told her.

And he encouraged her.  Their first enthusiasm returned, and now they
tried to evoke the most exciting memories.

"It was sad, the day after you became mine, to see you again at a
reception in your own home--inaccessible, surrounded by other people,
mistress of a regular household, friendly to everybody, a bit timid,
talking commonplaces.  You bestowed the beauty of your face on
everybody, myself included.  But what was the use?

"You were wearing that cool-looking green dress, and they were teasing
you about it.  I did not dare to look at you when you passed me, and I
thought of how happy we had been the day before."

"Ah," she sighed, as the beauty widened before her of all her memories,
her thoughts, of all her soul, "love is not what they say it is.  I,
too, was stirred with anguish.  How I had to conceal it, dissimulating
every sign of my happiness, locking it hastily away within the coffer
of my heart.  At first I was afraid to go to sleep for fear of saying
your name in a dream, and often, fighting against the stealthy invasion
of sleep, I have leaned on my elbow, and remained with wide-open eyes,
watching heroically over my heart.

"I was afraid of being recognised.  I was afraid people would see the
purity in which I was bathed.  Yes, purity.  When in the midst of life
one wakes up from life, and sees a different brilliance in the
daylight, and recreates everything, I call that purity.

. . . . .

"Do you remember the day we lost our way in the cab in Paris--the day he
thought he recognised us from a distance, and jumped into another cab
to follow us?"

She gave a start of ecstasy.

"Oh, yes," she murmured, "that was the great day!"

His voice quivered as if shaken by the throbbing of his heart, and his
heart said:

"Kneeling on the seat, you looked out of the little window in the back
of the cab and cried to me, 'He is nearer!  He is further off!  He will
catch us.  I do not see him any more.  He has lost us.'  Ah!"

And with one and the same movement their lips joined.

She breathed out like a sigh:

"That was the one time I enjoyed."

"We shall always be afraid," he said.

These words interlaced and changed into kisses.  Their whole life
surged into their lips.

Yes, they had to revive their past so as to love each other, they had
constantly to be reassembling the pieces so as to keep their love from
dying through staleness, as if they were undergoing, in darkness and in
dust, in an icy ebbing away, the ruin of old age, the impress of death.

They clasped each other.

They were drowned in the darkness.  They fell down, down into the
shadows, into the abyss that they had willed.

He stammered:

"I will love you always."

But she and I both felt that he was lying again.  We did not deceive
ourselves.  But what matter, what matter?

Her lips on his lips, she murmured like a thorny caress among the
caresses:

"My husband will soon be home."

How little they really were at one!  How, actually, there was nothing
but their fear that they had in common, and how they stirred their fear
up desperately.  But their tremendous effort to commune somehow was
soon to be over.

They stopped talking.  Words had already accomplished the work of
reviving their love.  She merely murmured:

"I am yours, I am yours.  I give myself to you.  No, I do not give
myself to you.  How can I give myself when I do not belong to myself?"

"Are you happy?" Thinking this place highly unusual, the fisherman advanced once
again in wanting to see how far it went.

The peach trees stopped at the stream's source, where the fisherman
came to a mountain with a small opening through which it seemed he
could see light.

Leaving his boat, he entered the opening.

At first it was so narrow that he could barely pass, but after advancing
a short distance it suddenly opened up to reveal a broad, flat
area with imposing houses, good fields, beautiful ponds, mulberry
trees, bamboo, and the like.

The fisherman saw paths extending among the fields in all directions,
and could hear the sounds of chickens and dogs.

Men and women working in the fields all wore clothing that looked
like that of foreign lands.

The elderly and children all seemed to be happy and enjoying
themselves.

The people were amazed to see the fisherman, and they asked him
from where he had come.

He told them in detail, then the people invited him to their home, set
out wine, butchered a chicken [5], and prepared a meal. Other
villagers heard about the fisherman, and they all came to ask him
questions.
Then the villagers told him, "To avoid the chaos of war during the
Qin Dynasty [6], our ancestors brought their families and villagers
to this isolated place and never left it, so we've had no contact
with the outside world."

They asked the fisherman what the present reign was. They were
not even aware of the Han Dynasty [7], let alone the Wei [8] and
Jin.

The fisherman told them everything he knew in great detail, and the
villagers were amazed and heaved sighs.

Then other villagers also invited the fisherman to their homes, where
they gave him food and drink. After several days there, the fisherman
bid farewell, at which time some villagers told him, "It's not
worth telling people on the outside about us." [9]
The fisherman exited through the opening, found his boat, and
retraced his route while leaving markers to find this place again.

Upon his arrival at the prefecture town he went to the prefect and
told him what had happened. The prefect immediately sent a person to
follow the fisherman and look for the trail markers, but they got
lost and never found the way.

Liu Ziji [10] of Nanyang [11] was a person of noble character.
When he heard this story he was happy and planned to visit the
Shangri-la, but he died of illness before he could accomplish it.

After that no one else ever looked for the place.

<><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><>

Translator's Notes

[1] Chinese nature poet, c. 365-427. This prose story is one of the
poet's most well-known works.

[2] 376-396

.

[3] 265-420 (actually two sequential dynasties, the "Western" and the
"Eastern").
The echo of those two cries lingered in my ears.
Those two cries, not shouted but uttered in a low scarcely audible
voice, who shall declare their grandeur and the distance between them?

Who shall say?  Above all, who shall know?

The man who can reply must be placed, as I am, above humanity, he must
be both among and apart from human beings to see the smile turn into
agony, the joy become satiety, and the union dissolve.  For when you
take full part in life you do not see this, you know nothing about it.
You pass blindly from one extreme to the other.  The man who uttered
the two cries that I still hear, "Everything!" and "Nothing!" had
forgotten the first when he was carried away by the second.

Who shall say?  I wish some one would tell.  What do words matter or
conventions?  Of what use is the time-honoured custom of writers of
genius or mere talent to stop at the threshold of these descriptions,
as if full descriptions were forbidden?  The thing ought to be sung in
a poem, in a masterpiece.  It ought to be told down to the very bottom,
if the purpose be to show the creative force of our hopes, of our
wishes, which, when they burst into light, transform the world,
overthrow reality.

What richer alms could you bestow on these two lovers, when again love
will die between them?  For this scene is not the last in their double
story.  They will begin again, like every human being.  Once more they
will try together, as much as they can, to seek shelter from life's
defeats, to find ecstasy, to conquer death.  Once more they will seek
solace and deliverance.  Again they will be seized by a thrill, by the
force of sin, which clings to the flesh like a shred of flesh.

Yet once again, when once again they see that they put infinity into
desire all in vain, they will be punished for the grandeur of their
aspiration.

I do not regret having surprised this simple, terrible secret.  Perhaps
my having taken in and retained this sight in all its breadth, my
having learned that the living truth is sadder and more sublime than I
had ever believed, will be my sole glory.


CHAPTER VI


All was silent.  They were gone.  They had hidden elsewhere.  The
husband was coming.  I gathered that from what they had said.  But did
I really know what they had said?

I paced up and down in my room, then dined, as in a dream, and went
out, lured by humanity.

A cafe!  The bright lighting beckoned to me to enter.  Calm, simple,
care-free people, who have no task like mine to accomplish.

Sitting by herself at a table, constantly looking around, was a girl
with a painted face.  A full glass was set in front of her and she held
a little dog on her lap.  His head reached over the edge of the marble
table, and he comically sued on behalf of his mistress for the glances,
even the smiles of the passersby.

The woman looked at me with interest.  She saw I was not waiting for
anybody or anything.

A sign, a word, and she, who was waiting for everybody, would come over
to me with a smile.  But no!  I was simpler than that.  If love
troubled me, it was because of a great thought and not a mere instinct.

It was my misfortune to have a dream greater and stronger than I could
bear.

Woe to those who dream of what they do not possess!  They are right,
but they are too right, and so are outside of nature.  The simple, the
weak, the humble pass carelessly by what is not meant for them.  They
touch everything lightly, without anguish.  But the others!  But I!

I wanted to take what was not mine.  I wanted to steal.  I wanted to
live all lives, to dwell in all hearts.

Ah!  I saw now how I should be punished for having entered into the
living secrets of man.  My punishment would fit my crime.  I was
destined to undergo the infinite misery I read in the others.  I was to
be punished by every mystery that kept its secret, by every woman who
went by.

Infinity is not what we think.  We associate it with heroes of legend
and romance, and we invest fiery, exceptional characters, like a
Hamlet, with infinity as with a theatrical costume.  But infinity
resides quietly in that man who is just passing by on the street.  It
resides in me, just as I am, with my ordinary face and name, in me, who
want everything I have not.  And there is no reason why there should be
any limits to what I want.

So, step by step, I followed the track of the infinite.  It made me
suffer.  Ah, if I did wrong, that great misery of mine, the tragedy of
striving for the impossible, redeemed me.  But I do not believe in
redemption.  I was suffering, and doubtless I looked like a martyr.

I had to go home to fulfil my martyrdom in the whole of its wretched
duration.  I had to go on looking.  I was losing time in the world
outside.  I returned to my room, which welcomed me like a living being.

. . . . .

I passed two idle days, watching fruitlessly.

I took to my hasty pacing to and fro again and succeeded, not without
difficulty, in gaining a few days of respite, in making myself forget
for a while.

I dwelt within these walls quiet in a feverish sort of way and inactive
as a prisoner.  I walked up and down my room a great part of the day,
attracted by the opening in the wall and not daring to go away to a
distance from it again.

The long hours went by, and in the evening I was worn out by my
indefatigable hope.

. . . . .

The room was in disorder.  Amy was there with her husband.  They had
come back from a journey.

I had not heard them enter.  I must have been too tired.

He had his hat on and was sitting on a chair beside the bed.  She was
dressing.  I saw her disappear behind the washroom door.  I looked at
the husband.  His features were regular and even seemed to show a
certain nobility.  The line of his forehead was clear cut.  Only his
mouth and moustache were somewhat coarse.  He had a healthier, stronger
appearance than her lover.  His hand, which was toying with a cane, was
fine, and there was a forceful elegance about his whole personality.

That was the man she hated and was deceiving.  It was that head, that
face, that expression which had lowered and disfigured themselves in
her eyes, and were synonymous with her unhappiness.

All at once she was there in full view.  My heart stood still and
contracted and drew me toward her.  She had nothing on but a short,
thin chemise.  She had come back a bit tired out by the thousands of
little nothings she had already done.  She had a toothbrush in her
hand, her lips were moist and red, her hair dishevelled.  Her legs were
dainty, and the arch of her little feet was accentuated by her high-
heeled shoes.

The air in the closed room was heavy with a mixture of odours--soap,
face powder, the pungent scent of cologne.

She went out and came back again, warm and soapy, drying her face.
This time she was all fresh and rosy.

He was talking about something, with his legs stretched out a little,
sometimes looking at her, sometimes not looking at her.

"You know, the Bernards have not accepted."

He glanced at her, then looked down at the carpet and gave a
disappointed cluck with his tongue, absorbed in this matter that
interested him, while she kept going and coming, showing the lovely
curves of her body.

She /was/ lovely.  But her husband went on droning his commonplaces,
phrases that meant nothing to her, that were strange to her, and that
seemed blasphemous in the room which held her beauty.

She put her garments on, one by one.  Her husband continued in his
bestial indifference, and dropped back into his reflections.

She went to the mirror over the mantelpiece with toilet articles spread
out before her.  Probably the mirror in the washroom was too small.

While keeping on with her toilet, she spoke as if to herself in a gay,
animated, chatty way, because it was still the springtime of the day.
She gave herself careful attention and took much time to groom herself.
But this was an important matter, and the time was not lost.  Besides,
she was really hurrying.

Now she went to a wardrobe and took out a light dress of delicate
texture, which she held out in her arms carefully.

She started to put the dress on, then an idea suddenly occurred to her
and she stopped.

"No, no, no, decidedly not," she said.

She put the dress back and looked for another one, a dark skirt and a
blouse.

She took a hat, fluffed the ribbon a bit, then held the trimming of
roses close to her face in front of the mirror.  Then she began to
sing, evidently satisfied.

. . . . .

He did not look at her, and when he did look at her, he did not see
her.

It was a solemn spectacle, a drama, but a drama dismal and depressing.
That man was not happy, and yet I envied him his happiness.  How
explain this except by the fact that happiness is within us, within
each of us, and is the desire for what we do not possess?

These two were together, but in reality far apart.  They had left each
other without leaving each other.  A sort of intrigue about nothing
held them together.  They would never come nearer again, for between
them lay the impassable barrier of love over and done with.  This
silence and this mutual ignorance are the cruelest things in the world.
To cease to love is worse than to hate, for say what you will, death is
worse than suffering.

I am sorry for the men and women who go through life together in the
chains of indifference.  I am sorry for the poor heart that has what it
has for so short a time.  I am sorry for the men who have the heart not
to love any more.

And for a moment, seeing this simple harrowing scene, I underwent a
little of the enormous suffering of those innumerable people who suffer
all.

. . . . .

Amy finished dressing.  She put on a coat to match her skirt, leaving
it partly open to show her transparent flesh-coloured lingerie waist.
Then she left us--her husband and me.

He, too, made ready to leave, but the door opened again.  Was it Amy
coming back?  No, it was the maid, who, seeing the room was occupied,
started to withdraw.

"Excuse me, sir.  I came to put the room in order, but I don't want to
disturb you."

"You may stay."

She began to pick things up and close drawers.  He raised his head and
looked at her out of the corner of his eye.  Then he rose and went over
to her awkwardly, as though fascinated.  A scuffling and an outcry,
stifled by a coarse laugh.  She dropped her brush and the gown she was
holding.  He caught her from behind and put his arms around her waist.

"Oh, go on!  Stop!  What-che doing?"

He did not say anything, but pressed her closer to him.

She laughed.  Her hair came partly undone and fell down over her blowsy
face.  He trod on Amy's gown, which had dropped from the girl's hand.
Then she felt the thing had gone far enough.

"Now, that'll do, that'll do," she said.

Since he still said nothing and brought his jaw close to her neck, she
got angry.

"I told you, that'll do.  Stop, I say.  What's the matter with you?"

At length he let her go, and left, laughing a devilish laugh of shame
and cynicism.

He went out, his passion still seething.  But it was not only the
overwhelming instinct that was stirring in him.  A moment before that
exquisite woman had unfolded herself in his presence in all her
exquisite beauty, and he had not desired her.

Perhaps she denied herself to him.  Perhaps they had an agreement with
each other.  But I plainly saw that even his eyes did not care, those
same eyes which kindled at the sight of the servant girl, that ignoble
Venus with untidy hair and dirty finger nails.

Because he did not know her, because she was different from the one
whom he knew.  To have what one has not.  So, strange as it may seem,
it was an idea, a lofty, eternal idea that guided his instinct.

I understood--I to whom it was given to behold these human crises--I
understood that many things which we place outside ourselves are really
inside ourselves, and that this was the secret.

How the veils drop off!  How the intricacies unravel, and simplicity
appears!

. . . . .

One dark stormy night two women came and occupied the Room.  I could
not see them and caught only fragments of their strange, whispered talk
of love.  From that time on the meals of the boarding-house had a magic
attraction for me.  I studied all the faces, trying to identify those
two beings.

But I questioned pairs of faces in vain.  I made efforts to detect
resemblances.  There was nothing to guide me.  I knew them no more than
if they had been buried in the dark night outside.

There were five girls or young women in the dining-room.  One of them,
at least, must have been an occupant of the Room that night.  But a
stronger will than mine shut off her countenance.  I did not know, and
I was overwhelmed by the nothingness of what I saw.

They left, one at a time.  I did not know.  My hands twitched in the
infinity of uncertainty, and my fingers pressed the void.  My face was
there, my face, which was a definite thing, confronting everything
possible, everything indefinite.

. . . . .

The lady there!  I recognised Amy.  She was talking to the landlady
beside the window.  I did not notice her at first, because of the other
boarders between us.

She was eating grapes, daintily, with a rather studied manner.

I turned towards her.  Her name was Madame Montgeron or Montgerot.  It
sounded funny to me.  Why did she have that name?  It seemed not to
suit her, or to be useless.  It struck me how artificial words and
signs are.

The meal was over.  Almost everybody had gone out.  Coffee cups and
sticky little liqueur glasses were scattered on the table on which a
sunbeam shone, mottling the tablecloth and making the glasses sparkle.
A coffee stain had dried on the cloth and gave out fragrance.

I joined in the conversation between Amy and Madame Lemercier.  She
looked at me.  I scarcely recognised her look, which I had seen so
clearly before.

The man-servant came in and whispered a few words to Madame Lemercier.
She rose, excused herself, and went out of the room.  I was left with
Amy.  There were only two or three people in the dining-room, who were
discussing what they were going to do in the afternoon.

I did not know what to say to her.  The conversation flagged and died
out.  She must have thought that she did not interest me--this woman,
whose heart I had seen, and whose destiny I knew as well as God
Himself.

She reached for a newspaper lying on the table, read a line or two,
then folded it, rose and also left the room.

Sickened by the commonplaceness of life and dull from the heaviness of
the after-lunch hour, I leaned drowsily on the long, long table, the
sunlit table disappearing into infinity, and I made an effort to keep
my arms from giving way, my chin from dropping, and my eyes from
closing.

And in that disorderly room, where the servants were already hastening
quietly to clear the table and make ready for the evening meal, I
lingered almost alone, not knowing whether I was happy or unhappy, not
knowing what was real and what was supernatural.

Then I understood.  It came upon me softly, heavily.  I looked around
at all those simple, peaceful things.  Then I closed my eyes, and said
to myself, like a seer who gradually becomes conscious of the nature of
the revelation he has seen, "The infinite--why, this is the infinite.
It is true.  I can no longer doubt."  It came upon me with force that
there is nothing strange on earth, that the supernatural does not
exist, or, rather, that it is everywhere.  It is in reality, in
simplicity, in peace.  It is here, inside these walls.  The real and
the supernatural are one and the same.  There can no more be mystery in
life than there can be a fourth dimension.

I, like other men, am moulded out of infinity.  But how confused it all
was to me!  And I dreamed of myself, who could neither know myself well
nor rid me of myself--myself who was like a deep shadow between my heart
and the sun.


CHAPTER VII


The same background, the same half-light tarnishing them as when I
first saw them together.  Amy and her lover were seated beside each
other, not far from me.

They seemed to have been talking for some time already.

She was sitting behind him, on the sofa, concealed by the shadow of the
evening and the shadow of the man.  He was bending over, pale and
vaguely outlined, with his hands on his knees.

The night was still cloaked in the grey silken softness of evening.
Soon it would cast off this mantle and appear in all its bare darkness.
It was coming on them like an incurable illness.  They seemed to have a
presentiment of it and sought refuge from the fatal shadows in talking
and thinking of other things.

They talked apathetically about this and that.  I heard the names of
places and people.  They mentioned a railway station, a public walk, a
florist.

All at once she stopped and hid her face in her hands.

He took her wrists, with a sad slowness that showed how much he was
used to these spells, and spoke to her without knowing what to say,
stammering and drawing as close as he could to her.

"Why are you crying?  Tell me why you are crying."

She did not answer.  Then she took her hands away from her eyes and
looked at him.

"Why?  Do I know?  Tears are not words."

. . . . .

I watched her cry--drown herself in a flood of tears.  It is a great
thing to be in the presence of a rational being who cries.  A weak,
broken creature shedding tears makes the same impression as an all-
powerful god to whom one prays.  In her weakness and defeat Amy was
above human power.

A kind of superstitious admiration seized me before this woman's face
bathed from an inexhaustible source, this face sincere and truthful.

. . . . .

She stopped crying and lifted her head.  Without his questioning her
again she said:

"I am crying because one is alone.

"One cannot get away from one's self.  One cannot even confess
anything.  One is alone.  And then everything passes, everything
changes, everything takes flight, and as soon as everything takes
flight one is alone.  There are times when I see this better than at
other times.  And then I cannot help crying."

She was getting sadder and sadder, but then she had a little access of
pride, and I saw a smile gently stir her veil of melancholy.

"I am more sensitive than other people.  Things that other people would
not notice awaken a distinct echo in me, and in such moments of
lucidity, when I look at myself, I see that I am alone, all alone, all
alone."

Disturbed to see her growing distress, he tried to raise her spirits.

"We cannot say that, we who have reshaped our destiny.  You, who have
achieved a great act of will--"

But what he said was borne away like chaff.

"What good was it?  Everything is useless.  In spite of what I have
tried to do, I am alone.  My sin cannot change the face of things.

"It is not by sin that we attain happiness, nor is it by virtue, nor is
it by that kind of divine fire by which one makes great instinctive
decisions and which is neither good nor evil.  It is by none of these
things that one reaches happiness.  One /never/ reaches happiness."

She paused, and said, as if she felt her fate recoiling upon her:

"Yes, I know I have done wrong, that those who love me most would
detest me if they knew.  My mother, if she knew--she who is so
indulgent--would be so unhappy.  I know that our love exists with the
reprobation of all that is wise and just and is condemned by my
mother's tears.  But what's the use of being ashamed any more?  Mother,
if you knew, you would have pity on my happiness."

"You are naughty," he murmured feebly.

She stroked the man's forehead lightly, and said in a tone of
extraordinary assurance:

"You know I don't deserve to be called naughty.  You know what I am
saying is above a personal application.  You know better than I do that
one is alone.  One day when I was speaking about the joy of living and
you were as sad as I am to-day, you looked at me, and said you did not
know what I was thinking, in spite of my explanations.  You showed me
that love is only a kind of festival of solitude, and holding me in
your arms, you ended by exclaiming, 'Our love--I am our love,' and I
gave the inevitable answer, alas, 'Our love--I am our love.'"

He wanted to speak, but she checked him.

"Stop!  Take me, squeeze my hands, hold me close, give me a long, long
kiss, do with me what you want--just to bring yourself close to me,
close to me!  And tell me that you are suffering.  Why, don't you feel
/my/ grief?"

He said nothing, and in the twilight shroud that wrapped them round, I
saw his head make the needless gesture of denial.  I saw all the misery
emanating from these two, who for once by chance in the shadows did not
know how to lie any more.

It was true that they were there together, and yet there was nothing to
unite them.  There was a void between them.  Say what you will, do what
you will, revolt, break into a passion, dispute, threaten--in vain.
Isolation will conquer you.  I saw there was nothing to unite them,
nothing.

She kept on in the same strain.

He seemed to be used to these sad monologues, uttered in the same tone,
tremendous invocations to the impossible.  He did not answer any more.
He held her in his arms, rocked her quietly, and caressed her with
delicate tenderness.  He treated her as if she were a sick child he was
nursing, without telling her what was the matter.

But he was disturbed by her contact.  Even when prostrate and desolate,
she quivered warm in his arms.  He coveted this prey even though
wounded.  I saw his eyes fixed on her, while she gave herself up freely
to her sadness.  He pressed his body against hers.  It was she whom he
wanted.  Her words he threw aside.  He did not care for them.  They did
not caress him.  It was she whom he wanted, she!

Separation!  They were very much alike in ideas and temperament, and
just then they were helping each other as much as they could.  But I
saw clearly--I who was a spectator apart from men and whose gaze soared
above them--that they were strangers, and that in spite of all
appearances they did not see nor hear each other any more.  They
conversed as best they could, but neither could yield to the other, and
each tried to conquer the other.  And this terrible battle broke my
heart.

. . . . .

She understood his desire.  She said plaintively, like a child at
fault:

"I am not feeling well."

Then, in a sudden change of mood, she gave herself up to love, offering
her whole self with her wounded woman's heart.

*  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *

They rose and shook off the dream that had cast them to the ground.

He was as dejected as she.  I bent over to catch what he was saying.

"If I had only known!" he breathed in a whisper.

Prostrated but more distrustful of each other with a crime between
them, they went slowly over to the grey window, cleansed by a streak of
twilight.

How much they were like themselves on the other evening.  It /was/ the
other evening.  Never had the impression been borne in upon me so
strongly that actions are vain and pass like phantoms.

The man was seized with a trembling.  And, vanquished, despoiled of all
his pride, of all his masculine reserve, he no longer had the strength
to keep back the avowal of shamed regret.

"One can't master one's self," he stammered, hanging his head.  "It is
fate."

They caught hold of each other's hands, shuddered slightly, panting,
dispirited, tormented by their hearts.

. . . . .

Fate!

In so speaking they saw further than the flesh.  In their remorse and
disgust it was not mere physical disillusionment that so crushed them.
They saw further.  They were overcome by an impression of bleak truth,
of aridity, of growing nothingness, at the thought that they had so
many times grasped, rejected, and vainly grasped again their frail
carnal ideal.

They felt that everything was fleeting, that everything wore out, that
everything that was not dead would die, and that even the illusory ties
holding them together would not endure.  Their sadness did not bring
them together.  On the contrary, they were separated by all the force
of their two sorrows.  To suffer together, alas, what disunion!

And the condemnation of love itself came from her, in a cry of agony:

"Oh, our great, our immense love!  I feel that little by little I am
recovering from it!"

. . . . .

She threw back her head, and raised her eyes.

"Oh, the first time!" she said.

She went on, while both of them saw that first time when their hands
had found each other.

"I knew that some day all that emotion would die, and, in spite of our
promises, I wanted time to stand still.

"But time did not stand still, and now we scarcely love each other."

He made a gesture as of denial.

"It is not only you, my dear, who are drifting away," she continued.
"I am, too.  At first I thought it was only you.  But then I understood
my poor heart and realised that in spite of you, I could do nothing
against time."

She went on slowly, now with her eyes turned away, now looking at him.

"Alas, some day, I may say to you, 'I no longer love you.'  Alas, alas,
some day I may say to you, 'I have never loved you!'

"This is the wound--time, which passes and changes us.  The separation
of human beings that deceive themselves is nothing in comparison.  One
can live even so.  But the passage of time!  To grow old, to think
differently, to die.  I am growing old and I am dying, I.  It has taken
me a long time to understand it.  I am growing old.  I /am/ not old,
but I am growing old.  I have a few grey hairs already.  The first grey
hair, what a blow!

"Oh, this blotting out of the colour of your hair.  It gives you the
feeling of being covered with your shroud, of dry bones, and
tombstones."

She rose and cried out into the void:

"Oh, to escape the network of wrinkles!"

. . . . .

She continued:

"I said to myself, 'By slow degrees you will get there.  Your skin will
wither.  Your eyes, which smile even in repose, will always be
watering. Your breasts will shrink and hang on your skeleton like loose
rags.  Your lower jaw will sag from the tiredness of living.  You will
be in a constant shiver of cold, and your appearance will be
cadaverous.  Your voice will be cracked, and people who now find it
charming to listen to you will be repelled.  The dress that hides you
too much now from men's eyes will not sufficiently hide your monstrous
nudity, and people will turn their eyes away and not even dare to think
of you.'"

She choked and put her hands to her mouth, overcome by the truth, as if
she had too much to say.  It was magnificent and terrifying.

He caught her in his arms, in dismay.  But she was as in a delirium,
transported by a universal grief.  You would have thought that this
funereal truth had just come to her like a sudden piece of bad news.

"I love you, but I love the past even more.  I long for it, I long for
it, I am consumed with longing for it.  The past!  I shall cry, I shall
suffer because the past will never come back again.

"But love the past as much as you will, it will never come back.  Death
is everywhere, in the ugliness of what has been too long beautiful, in
the tarnishing of what has been clean and pure, in the forgetfulness of
what is long past, in daily habits, which are the forgetfulness of what
is near.  We catch only glimpses of life.  Death is the one thing we
really have time to see.  Death is the only palpable thing.  Of what
use is it to be beautiful and chaste?  They will walk over our graves
just the same.

"A day is coming when I shall be no more.  I am crying because I shall
surely die.  There is an invincible nothingness in everything and
everybody.  So when one thinks of that, dear, one smiles and forgives.
One does not bear grudges.  But goodness won in that way is worse than
anything else."

. . . . .

He bent over and kissed her hands.  He enveloped her in a warm,
respectful silence, but, as always, I felt he was master of himself.

"I have always thought of death," she continued in a changed voice.
"One day I confessed to my husband how it haunted me.  He launched out
furiously.  He told me I was a neurasthenic and that he must look after
me.  He made me promise to be like himself and never think of such
things, to be healthy and well-balanced, as he was.

"That was not true.  It was he who suffered from the disease of
tranquillity and indifference, a paralysis, a grey malady, and his
blindness was an infirmity, and his peace was that of a dog who lives
for the sake of living, of a beast with a human face.

"What was I to do?  Pray?  No.  That eternal dialogue in which you are
always alone is crushing.  Throw yourself into some occupation?  Work?
No use.  Doesn't work always have to be done over again?  Have children
and bring them up?  That makes you feel both that you are done and
finished and that you are beginning over again to no purpose.  However,
who knows?"

It was the first time that she softened.

"I have not been given the chance to practise the devotion, the
submission, the humiliation of a mother.  Perhaps that would have
guided me in life.  I was denied a little child."

For a moment, lowering her eyes, letting her hands fall, yielding to
the maternal impulse, she only thought of loving and regretting the
child that had not been vouchsafed to her--without perceiving that if
she considered it her only possible salvation, it was because she did
not have it.

"Charity?  They say that it makes us forget everything.  Oh, yes, to go
distributing alms on the snowy streets, in a great fur cloak," she
murmured and made a tired gesture, while the lover and I felt the
shiver of the cold rainy evening and of all the winters past and yet to
come.

"All that is diversion, deception.  It does not alter the truth a
particle.  We shall die, we are going to die."

She stopped crying, dried her eyes and assumed a tone so positive and
calm that it gave the impression that she was leaving the subject.

"I want to ask you a question.  Answer me frankly.  Have you ever
dared, dear, even in the depths of your heart, to set a date, a date
relatively far off, but exact and absolute, with four figures, and to
say, 'No matter how old I shall live to be, on that day I shall be
dead--while everything else will go on, and little by little my empty
place will be destroyed or filled again?'"

The directness of her question disturbed him.  But it seemed to me that
he tried most to avoid giving her a reply that would heighten her
obsession.

And all at once, she remembered something he had once said to her, and
cleverly reminded him of it so as to close his mouth in advance and
torture herself still more.

"Do you remember?  One evening, by lamplight.  I was looking through a
book.  You were watching me.  You came to me, you knelt down and put
your arms around my waist, and laid your head in my lap.  There were
tears in your eyes.  I can still hear you.  'I am thinking,' you said,
'that this moment will never come again.  I am thinking that you are
going to change, to die, and go away.  I am thinking so truly, so
hotly, how precious these moments are, how precious you are, you who
will never again be just what you are now, and I adore your ineffable
presence as it is now.'  You looked at my hand, you found it small and
white, and you said it was an extraordinary treasure, which would
disappear.  Then you repeated, 'I adore you,' in a voice which trembled
so, that I have never heard anything truer or more beautiful, for you
were right as a god is right.

"Alas!" he said.

He saw the tears in her eyes.  Then he bowed his head.  When he lifted
it again, I had a vague intuition that he would know what to answer,
but had not yet formulated how to say it.

"Poor creatures, a brief existence, a few stray thoughts in the depths
of a room--that is what we are," she said, lifting her head and looking
at him, hoping for an impossible contradiction, as a child cries for a
star.

He murmured:

"Who knows what we are?"

. . . . .

She interrupted him with a gesture of infinite weariness.

"I know what you are going to say.  You are going to talk to me about
the beauty of suffering.  I know your noble ideas.  I love them, my
love, your beautiful theories, but I do not believe in them.  I would
believe them if they consoled me and effaced death."

With a manifest effort, as uncertain of himself as she was of herself,
feeling his way, he replied:

"They would efface it, perhaps, if you believed in them."

She turned toward him and took one of his hands in both of hers.  She
questioned him with inexorable patience, then she slipped to her knees
before him, like a lifeless body, humbled herself in the dust, wrecked
in the depths of despair, and implored him:

"Oh, answer me!  I should be so happy if you could answer me.  I feel
as though you really could!"

He bent over her, as if on the edge of an abyss of questioning:
"Do you know what we are?" he murmured.  "Everything we say, everything
we think, everything we believe, is fictitious.  We know nothing.
Nothing is sure or solid."

"You are wrong," she cried.  "There /is/ something absolute, our
sorrow, our need, our misery.  We can see and touch it.  Deny
everything else, but our beggary, who can deny that?"

"You are right," he said, "it is the only absolute thing in the world."

. . . . .

"Then, /we/ are the only absolute thing in the world," he deduced.

He caught at this.  He had found a fulcrum.  "We--" he said.  He had
found the cry against death, he repeated it, and tried again.  "We--"

It was sublime to see him beginning to resist.

"It is we who endure forever."

"Endure forever!  On the contrary, it is we who pass away."

"We see things pass, but we endure."

She shrugged her shoulders with an air of denial.  There almost was
hatred in her voice as she said:

"Yes--no--perhaps.  After all, what difference does it make to me?  That
does not console me."

"Who knows--maybe we need sadness and shadow, to make joy and light."

"Light would exist without shadow," she insisted.

"No," he said gently.

"That does not console me," she said again.

. . . . .

Then he remembered that he had already thought out all these things.

"Listen," he said, in a voice tremulous and rather solemn as if he were
making a confession.  "I once imagined two beings who were at the end
of their life, and were recalling all they had suffered."

"A poem!" she said, discouraged.

"Yes," he said, "one of those which might be so beautiful."

It was remarkable to see how animated he became.  For the first time he
appeared sincere--when abandoning the living example of their own
destiny for the fiction of his imagination.  In referring to his poem,
he had trembled.  You felt he was becoming his genuine self and that he
had faith.  She raised her head to listen, moved by her tenacious need
of hearing something, though she had no confidence in it.

"The man and the woman are believers," he began.  "They are at the end
of their life, and they are happy to die for the reasons that one is
sad to live.  They are a kind of Adam and Eve who dream of the paradise
to which they are going to return.  The paradise of purity.  Paradise
is light.  Life on earth is obscurity.  That is the motif of the song I
have sketched, the light that they desire, the shadow that they are."

"Like us," said Amy.

He told of the life of the man and the woman of his poem.  Amy listened
to him, and accepted what he was saying.  Once she put her hands on her
heart and said, "Poor people!"  Then she got a little excited.  She
felt he was going too far.  She did not wish so much darkness, maybe
because she was tired or because the picture when painted by some one
else seemed exaggerated.

Dream and reality here coincided.  The woman of the poem also protested
at this point.

I was carried away by the poet's voice, as he recited, swaying
slightly, in the spell of the harmony of his own dream:

"At the close of a life of pain and suffering the woman still looked
ahead with the curiosity she had when she entered life.  Eve ended as
she had begun.  All her subtle eager woman's soul climbed toward the
secret as if it were a kind of kiss on the lips of her life.  She
wanted to be happy."

Amy was now more interested in her companion's words.  The curse of the
lovers in the poem, sister to the curse she felt upon herself, gave her
confidence.  But her personality seemed to be shrinking.  A few moments
before she had dominated everything.  Now she was listening, waiting,
absorbed.

"The lover reproached the woman for contradicting herself in claiming
earthly and celestial happiness at the same time.  She answered him
with profundity, that the contradiction lay not in herself, but in the
things she wanted.

"The lover then seized another healing wand and with desperate
eagerness, he explained, he shouted, 'Divine happiness has not the same
form as human happiness.  Divine happiness is outside of ourselves.'

"The woman rose, trembling.

"'That is not true!  That is not true!' she exclaimed.  'No, my
happiness is not outside of me, seeing it is /my/ happiness.  The
universe is God's universe, but I am the god of my own happiness.  What
I want,' she added, with perfect simplicity, 'is to be happy, I, just
as I am, and with all my suffering.'"

Amy started.  The woman in the poem had put her problem in a clearer
and deeper manner, and Amy was more like that woman than herself.

"'I, with all my suffering,' the man repeated.

"Suffering--important word!  It leads us to the heart of reality. Human
suffering is a positive thing, which requires a positive answer, and
sad as it is, the word is beautiful, because of the absolute truth it
contains.  'I, with all my suffering!'  It is an error to believe that
we can be happy in perfect calm and clearness, as abstract as a
formula.  We are made too much out of shadow and some form of
suffering.  If everything that hurts us were to be removed, what would
remain?

"And the woman said, 'My God, I do not wish for heaven!'"

"Well, then," said Amy, trembling, "it follows that we can be miserable
in paradise."

"Paradise is life," said the poet.

Amy was silent and remained with her head lifted, comprehending at last
that the whole poem was simply a reply to her question and that he had
revived in her soul a loftier and a juster thought.

"Life is exalted to perfection as it ends," the poet went on.  "'It is
beautiful to reach the end of one's days,' said the lover.  'It is in
this way that we have lived paradise.'

"There is the truth," the poet concluded.  "It does not wipe out death.
It does not diminish space, nor halt time.  But it makes us what we are
in essential.  Happiness needs unhappiness.  Joy goes hand in hand with
sorrow.  It is thanks to the shadow that we exist.  We must not dream
of an absurd abstraction.  We must guard the bond that links us to
blood and earth.  'Just as I am!'  Remember that.  We are a great
mixture.  We are more than we believe.  Who knows what we are?"

On the woman's face, which the terror of death had rigidly contracted,
a smile dawned.  She asked with childish dignity:

"Why did you not tell me this right away when I asked you?"

"You would not have understood me then.  You had run your dream of
distress into a blind alley.  I had to take the truth along a different
way so as to present it to you anew."

. . . . .

Old English Homilies. The Brut. St Juliana. The Ancren Riwle. The
Proverbs of Alfred. The Owl and the Nightingale. A Moral Ode.
Robert of Gloucester. Early history of Britain. The South-English Legendary.
The Harleian MS. 2253. The Vernon MS. John Trevisa.
The Testament of Love.

VII.

THE SOUTHERN DIALECT OF KENT. Quotation from Beda. Extract from an Old
Kentish Charter. Kentish Glosses. Kentish Sermons. William of Shoreham;
with an extract. The Ayenbite of Inwyt. The Apostles' Creed in Old
Kentish. The use of _e_ for A.S. _y_ in Kentish. Use of Kentish by
Gower and Chaucer. Kentish forms in modern English.

VIII. THE MERCIAN DIALECT. East Midland. Old Mercian Glossaries of
the eighth century. The Lorica Prayer. The Vespasian Psalter. The
Rushworth MS. Old Mercian and Wessex compared. Laud MS. of the Anglo-Saxon
Chronicle. The Ormulum. The English Proclamation of Henry III.
(_see the facsimile_). Robert Mannyng of Brunne (Bourn).
West Midland. The Prose Psalter. William of Palerne. The Pearl and
Alliterative Poems. Sir Gawayne and the Grene Knight.

IX. FOREIGN ELEMENTS IN THE DIALECTS. Words from Norman, Italian, Spanish,
Dutch, etc. Celtic. List of Celtic words. Examples of Latin words.
Greek words.

Hebrew words. List of Scandinavian words. French words. Anglo-French
words; _gauntree_. Literary French words, as used in dialects.

X. LATER HISTORY OF THE DIALECTS. Spenser. John Fitzherbert. Thomas
Tusser.

Skinner's Etymologicon (Lincolnshire words). John Ray.

Dialect glossaries. Dr Ellis on Early English Pronunciation. The English
Dialect Society.

The English Dialect Dictionary.

The English Dialect Grammar.

XI. THE MODERN DIALECTS. Prof. Wright's account of the modern English
Dialects.

XII. A FEW SPECIMENS. Some writers in dialect. Specimens: Scottish
(Aberdeen, Ayrshire, Edinburgh). Northern England (Westmorland).
Midland (Lincoln, S.E. Lancashire, Sheffield, Cheshire). Eastern (N.

Essex, Norfolk).

Western (S.W. Shropshire). Southern (Wiltshire, Isle of Wight,
Sussex).

BIBLIOGRAPHY

INDEX
FACSIMILE. The only English Proclamation of Henry III. Oct. 18, 1258

*** _For a transcription of the Facsimile see_ pp. 75-6.

{Transcriber's Note:

The Facsimile is not included in this e-text.}

CHAPTER I
DIALECTS AND THEIR VALUE

According to the New English Dictionary, the oldest sense, in English,
of the word _dialect_ was simply "a manner of speaking" or
"phraseology," in accordance with its derivation from the Greek
_dialectos_, a discourse or way of speaking; from the verb
_dialegesthai_, to discourse or converse.

The modern meaning is somewhat more precise.

In relation to a language such as English, it is used in a special
sense to signify "a local variety of speech differing from the standard
or literary language."

When we talk of "speakers of dialect," we imply that they employ a
provincial method of speech to which the man who has been educated
to use the language of books is unaccustomed.

Such a man finds that the dialect-speaker frequently uses words or
modes of expression which he does not understand or which are at
any rate strange to him; and he is sure to notice that such words
as seem to be familiar to him are, for the most part, strangely
pronounced.

Such differences are especially noticeable in the use of vowels and
diphthongs, and in the mode of intonation.

The speaker of the "standard" language is frequently tempted to
consider himself as the dialect-speaker's superior, unless he has already
acquired some elementary knowledge of the value of the science of
language or has sufficient common sense to be desirous of learning to
understand that which for the moment lies beyond him. I remember once
hearing the remark made--"What is the good of dialects? Why not sweep
them all away, and have done with them?"

But the very form of the question betrays ignorance of the facts;
for it is no more possible to do away with them than it is possible
to suppress the waves of the sea.

English, like every other literary language, has always had its
dialects and will long continue to possess them in secluded districts,
though they are at the present time losing much of that archaic
character which gives them their chief value.

The spread of education may profoundly modify them, but the spoken
language of the people will ever continue to devise new variations
and to initiate developments of its own.

Even the "standard" language is continually losing old words and admitting
new ones, as was noted long ago by Horace; and our so-called
"standard" pronunciation is ever imperceptibly but surely changing, and
never continues in one stay.

In the very valuable _Lectures on the Science of Language_ by Professor
F. Max Müller, the second Lecture, which deserves careful study, is
chiefly occupied by some account of the processes which he names
respectively "phonetic decay" and "dialectic regeneration"; processes
to which all languages have always been and ever will be subject.

By "phonetic decay" is meant that insidious and gradual alteration in
the sounds of spoken words which, though it cannot be prevented, at
last so corrupts a word that it becomes almost or wholly unmeaning.

Such a word as _twenty_ does not suggest its origin.

Many might perhaps guess, from their observation of such numbers
as _thirty, forty_, etc., that the suffix _-ty_ may have something
to do with _ten_, of the original of which it is in fact an extremely
reduced form; but it is less obvious that _twen-_ is a shortened
form of _twain_.

And perhaps none but scholars of Teutonic languages are aware that
_twain_ was once of the masculine gender only, while _two_ was so
restricted that it could only be applied to things that were feminine
or neuter.

As a somewhat hackneyed example of phonetic decay, we may take the
case of the Latin _mea domina_, i.e. my mistress, which became in
French _ma dame_, and in English _madam_; and the last of these has
been further shortened to _mam_, and even to _'m_, as in the phrase
"Yes, 'm."

This shows how nine letters may be reduced to one.

Similarly, our monosyllable _alms_ is all that is left of the Greek
_ele{-e}mosyn{-e}_. Ten letters have here been reduced to four.

This irresistible tendency to indistinctness and loss is not, however,
wholly bad; for it has at the same time largely contributed,
especially in English, to such a simplification of grammatical
inflexions as certainly has the practical convenience of giving us
less to learn.

But in addition to this decay in the forms of words, we have also to
reckon with a depreciation or weakening of the ideas they express. Many
words become so hackneyed as to be no longer impressive.
As late as in 1820, Keats could say, in stanza 6 of his poem of
_Isabella_, that "His heart beat awfully against his side"; but at
the present day the word _awfully_ is suggestive of schoolboys'
slang.

It is here that we may well have the benefit of the principle of "dialectic
regeneration." We shall often do well to borrow from our dialects many
terms that are still fresh and racy, and instinct with a full
significance.

Tennyson was well aware of this, and not only wrote several poems
wholly in the Lincolnshire dialect, but introduced dialect words
elsewhere.

Thus in _The Voyage of Maeldune_, he has the striking line: "Our voices
were thinner and fainter than any flittermouse-shriek."

In at least sixteen dialects a _flittermouse_ means "a bat."
I have mentioned Tennyson in this connexion because he was a careful
student of English, not only in its dialectal but also in its older
forms.

But, as a matter of fact, nearly all our chief writers have recognised
the value of dialectal words.

Tennyson was not the first to use the above word. Near the end of the
Second Act of his _Sad Shepherd_, Ben Jonson speaks of:

Green-bellied snakes, blue fire-drakes in the sky, And giddy
flitter-mice with leather wings.

Similarly, there are plenty of "provincialisms" in Shakespeare. In an
interesting book entitled _Shakespeare, his Birthplace and its
Neighbourhood_, by J.R.

Wise, there is a chapter on "The Provincialisms of Shakespeare," from
which I beg leave to give a short extract by way of specimen.

"There is the expressive compound 'blood-boltered' in _Macbeth_ (Act IV,
Sc. 1), which the critics have all thought meant simply blood-stained.
Miss Baker, in her _Glossary of Northamptonshire Words_, first pointed
out that 'bolter' was peculiarly a Warwickshire word, signifying to
clot, collect, or cake, as snow does in a horse's hoof, thus giving
the phrase a far greater intensity of meaning.

And Steevens, too, first noticed that in the expression in _The
Winter's Tale_ (Act III, Sc. 3), 'Is it a boy or a child?'

--where, by the way, every actor tries to make a point, and the
audience invariably laughs--the word 'child' is used, as is sometimes
the case in the midland districts, as synonymous with girl; which
is plainly its meaning in this passage, although the speaker has
used it just before in its more common sense of either a boy or a
girl."

In fact, the _English Dialect Dictionary_ cites the phrase "is it
a lad or a child?"

as being still current in Shropshire; and duly states that, in
Warwickshire, "dirt collected on the hairs of a horse's leg and
forming into hard masses is said to _bolter_."

Trench further points out that many of our pure Anglo-Saxon words
which lived on into the formation of our early English, subsequently
dropped out of our usual vocabulary, and are now to be found only
in the dialects.

A good example is the word _eme_, an uncle (A.S.

_{-e}am_), which is rather common in Middle English, but has seldom
appeared in our literature since the tune of Drayton.

Yet it is well known in our Northern dialects, and Sir Walter Scott
puts the expression "Didna his _eme_ die" in the mouth of Davie
Deans (_Heart of Midlothian_, ch. XII). In fact, few things are more
extraordinary in the history of our language than the singularly
capricious manner in which good and useful words emerge into or
disappear from use in "standard" talk, for no very obvious reason.

Such a word as _yonder_ is common enough still; but its corresponding
adjective _yon_, as in the phrase "yon man," is usually relegated to
our dialects.

Though it is common in Shakespeare, it is comparatively rare in the
Middle English period, from the twelfth to the fifteenth century.

It only occurs once in Chaucer, where it is introduced as being a Northern
word; and it absolutely disappears from record in the tenth,
eleventh, and twelfth centuries.

Bosworth's _Anglo-Saxon Dictionary_ gives no example of its use, and
it was long supposed that it would be impossible to trace it in
our early records.

Nevertheless, when Dr Sweet printed, for the first time, an edition
of King Alfred's translation of Pope Gregory's _Pastoral Care_,
an example appeared in which it was employed in the most natural
manner, as if it were in everyday use.

At p. 443 of that treatise is the sentence--"Aris and gong to geonre
byrg," i.e.

Arise and go to yon city. Here the A.S. _geon_ (pronounced like the modern
_yon_) is actually declined after the regular manner, being duly
provided with the suffix _-re_, which was the special suffix reserved
only for the genitive or dative feminine.

It is here a dative after the preposition _to_.

There is, in fact, no limit to the good use to which a reverent study
of our dialects may be put by a diligent student.

They abound with pearls which are worthy of a better fate than to be
trampled under foot.

I will content myself with giving one last example that is really too
curious to be passed over in silence.

It so happens that in the Anglo-Saxon epic poem of _Beowulf_, one
of the most remarkable and precious of our early poems, there is a
splendid and graphic description of a lonely mere, such as would
have delighted the heart of Edgar Allan Poe, the author of _Ulalume_.

In Professor Earle's prose translation of this passage, given in
his _Deeds of Beowulf_, at p. 44, is a description of two mysterious
monsters, of whom it is said that "they inhabit unvisited land,
wolf-crags, windy bluffs, the dread fen-track, where the mountain
waterfall amid precipitous gloom vanisheth beneath--flood under
earth.

Not far hence it is, reckoning by miles, that the Mere standeth, and
over it hang rimy groves; a wood with clenched roots overshrouds
the water."

The word to be noted here is the word _rimy_, i.e. covered with rime or
hoar-frost. The original Anglo-Saxon text has the form _hrinde_, the
meaning of which was long doubtful.

Grein, the great German scholar, writing in 1864, acknowledged that
he did not know what was intended, and it was not till 1880 that light
was first thrown upon the passage. In that year Dr Morris edited, for
the first time, some Anglo-Saxon homilies (commonly known as the
_Blickling Homilies_, because the MS. is in the library of Blickling
Hall, Norfolk); and he called attention to a passage (at p. 209)
where the homilist was obviously referring to the lonely mere of
the old poem, in which its overhanging groves were described as
being _hrimige_, which is nothing but the true old spelling of
_rimy_.

He naturally concluded that the word _hrinde_ (in the MS. of Beowulf)
was miswritten, and that the scribe had inadvertently put down
_hrinde_ instead of _hrimge_, which is a legitimate contraction of
_hrimige_.

Many scholars accepted this solution; but a further light was yet
to come, viz. in 1904.

In that year, Dr Joseph Wright printed the fifth volume of the
_English Dialect Dictionary_, showing that in the dialects of
Scotland, Northumberland, Durham, and Yorkshire, the word for
"hoarfrost" is not _rime_, but _rind_, with a derived adjective
_rindy_, which has the same sense as _rimy_.

At the same time, he called attention yet once more to the passage in
_Beowulf_. It is established, accordingly, that the suspected mistake
in the MS. is no mistake at all; that the form _hrinde_ is correct,
being a contraction of _hrindge_ or _hrindige_, plural of the adjective
_hrindig_, which is preserved in our dialects, in the form _rindy_,
to this very day.

In direct contradiction of a common popular error that regards our
dialectal forms as being, for the most part, "corrupt," it will
be found by experience that they are remarkably conservative and
antique.

CHAPTER II

DIALECTS IN EARLY TIMES

The history of our dialects in the earliest periods of which we have
any record is necessarily somewhat obscure, owing to the scarcity
of the documents that have come down to us.

The earliest of these have been carefully collected and printed in
one volume by Dr Sweet, entitled _The Oldest English Texts_, edited
for the Early English Text Society in 1885.

Here we already find the existence of no less than four dialects, which
have been called by the names of Northumbrian, Mercian, Wessex (or
Anglo-Saxon), and Kentish. These correspond, respectively, though not
quite exactly, to what we may roughly call Northern, Midland, Southern,
and Kentish.

Whether the limits of these dialects were always the same from the
earliest times, we cannot tell; probably not, when the unsettled state
of the country is considered, in the days when repeated invasions
of the Danes and Norsemen necessitated constant efforts to repel
them.

It is therefore sufficient to define the areas covered by these
dialects in quite a rough way.

We may regard the Northumbrian or Northern as the dialect or group of
dialects spoken to the north of the river Humber, as the name
implies; the Wessex or Southern, as the dialect or group of dialects
spoken to the south of the river Thames; the Kentish as being
peculiar to Kent; and the Mercian as in use in the Midland districts,
chiefly to the south of the Humber and to the north of the Thames.

The modern limits are somewhat different, but the above division
of the three chief dialects (excluding Kentish) into Northern,
Midland, and Southern is sufficient for taking a broad general view
of the language in the days before the Norman Conquest.

The investigation of the differences of dialect in our early documents
only dates from 1885, owing to the previous impossibility of
obtaining access to these oldest texts.

Before that date, it so happened that nearly all the manuscripts
that had been printed or examined were in one and the same dialect,
viz. the Southern (or Wessex).

The language employed in these was (somewhat unhappily) named "Anglo-Saxon";
and the very natural mistake was made of supposing that this
"Anglo-Saxon" was the sole language (or dialect) which served for
all the "Angles" and "Saxons" to be found in the "land of the Angles"
or England.

This is the reason why it is desirable to give the more general name
of "Old English" to the oldest forms of our language, because this
term can be employed collectively, so as to include Northumbrian,
Mercian, "Anglo-Saxon" and Kentish under one designation. The name
"Anglo-Saxon" was certainly rather inappropriate, as the speakers
of it were mostly Saxons and not Angles at all; which leads up to
the paradox that they did not speak "English"; for that, in the
extreme literal sense, was the language of the Angles only!

But now that the true relationship of the old dialects is known,
it is not uncommon for scholars to speak of the Wessex dialect as
"Saxon," and of the Northumbrian and Mercian dialects as "Anglian";
for the latter are found to have some features in common that differ
sharply from those found in "Saxon."

Manuscripts in the Southern dialect are fairly abundant, and
contain poems, homilies, land-charters, laws, wills, translations
of Latin treatises, glossaries, etc.; so that there is considerable
variety.
One of the most precious documents is the history known as the
_Anglo-Saxon Chronicle_, which was continued even after the Conquest
till the year 1154, when the death and burial of King Stephen were duly
recorded.

But specimens of the oldest forms of the Northern and Midland dialects
are, on the other hand, very much fewer in number than students
of our language desire, and are consequently deserving of special
mention.

They are duly enumerated in the chapters below, which discuss these
dialects separately.

Having thus sketched out the broad divisions into which our dialects may
be distributed, I shall proceed to enter upon a particular discussion
of each group, beginning with the Northern or Northumbrian.

CHAPTER III

THE DIALECTS OF NORTHUMBRIA; TILL A.D. 1000
In Professor Earle's excellent manual on Anglo-Saxon Literature,
chapter V is entirely occupied with "the Anglian Period," and begins
thus:--"While Canterbury was so important a seminary of learning,
there was, in the Anglian region of Northumbria, a development of
religious and intellectual life which makes it natural to regard
the whole brilliant period from the later seventh to the early ninth
century as the Anglian Period....

Anglia became for a century the light-spot of European history; and
we here recognise the first great stage in the revival of learning,
and the first movement towards the establishment of public order
in things temporal and spiritual."

Unfortunately for the student of English, though perhaps fortunately for
the historian, the most important book belonging to this period
was written in Latin.

"I do not know.  I see so much into the inside of people that their
outsides all look alike to me."

"They are especially alike in their vile pretense of being dissimilar
and enemies."

The young man seemed to shudder, as if the idea aroused a kind of
passion in him.  He rose, full of anger, changed.

"Oh," he said, "what a disgraceful spectacle humanity presents.  In
spite of its fearful wounds, humanity makes war upon humanity.  We who
deal with the sores afflicting mankind are struck more than others by
all the evil men involuntarily inflict upon one another.  I am neither
a politician nor a propagandist.  It is not my business to occupy
myself with ideas.  I have too much else to do.  But sometimes I am
moved by a great pity, as lofty as a dream.  Sometimes I feel like
punishing men, at other times, like going down on my knees to them."

The old doctor smiled sadly at this vehemence, then his smile vanished
at the thought of the undeniable outrage.

"Unfortunately you are right.  With all the misery we have to suffer,
we tear ourselves with our own hands besides--the war of the classes,
the war of the nations, whether you look at us from afar or from above,
we are barbarians and madmen."

"Why, why," said the young doctor, who was getting excited, "why do we
continue to be fools when we recognise our own folly?"

The old practitioner shrugged his shoulders, as he had a few moments
before when they spoke of incurable diseases.

"The force of tradition, fanned by interested parties.  We are not
free, we are attached to the past.  We study what has always been done,
and do it over again--war and injustice.  Some day perhaps humanity will
succeed in ridding itself of the ghost of the past.  Let us hope that
some day we shall emerge from this endless epoch of massacre and
misery.  What else is there to do than to hope?"

The old man stopped at this.  The young man said:

"To will."

The other man made a gesture with his hand.

"There is one great general cause for the world's ulcer," the younger
one kept on.  "You have said it--servility to the past, prejudice which
prevents us from doing things differently, according to reason and
morality.  The spirit of tradition infects humanity, and its two
frightful manifestations are--"

The old man rose from his chair, as if about to protest and as if to
say, "Don't mention them!"

But the young man could not restrain himself any more.

"--inheritance from the past and the fatherland."

"Hush!" cried the old man.  "You are treading on ground on which I
cannot follow.  I recognise present evils.  I pray with all my heart
for the new era.  More than that, I believe in it.  But do not speak
that way about two sacred principles."

"You speak like everybody else," said the young man bitterly.  "We must
go to the root of the evil, you know we must.  /You/ certainly do."
And he added violently, "Why do you act as if you did not know it?  If
we wish to cure ourselves of oppression and war, we have a right to
attack them by all the means possible--all!--the principle of inheritance
and the cult of the fatherland."

"No, we haven't the right," exclaimed the old man, who had risen in
great agitation and threw a look at his interlocutor that was hard,
almost savage.

"We have the right!" cried the other.

All at once, the grey head drooped, and the old man said in a low
voice:

"Yes, it is true, we have the right.  I remember one day during the
war.  We were standing beside a dying man.  No one knew who he was.  He
had been found in the debris of a bombarded ambulance--whether bombarded
purposely or not, the result was the same.  His face had been mutilated
beyond recognition.  All you could tell was that he belonged to one or
other of the two armies.  He moaned and groaned and sobbed and shrieked
and invented the most appalling cries.  We listened to the sounds that
he made in his agony, trying to find one word, the faintest accent,
that would at least indicate his nationality.  No use.  Not a single
intelligible sound from that something like a face quivering on the
stretcher.  We looked and listened, until he fell silent.  When he was
dead and we stopped trembling, I had a flash of comprehension.  I
understood.  I understood in the depths of my being that man is more
closely knit to man than to his vague compatriots.

"Yes, we have a right to attack oppression and war, we have a right to.
I saw the truth several times afterward again, but I am an old man, and
I haven't the strength to stick to it."

"My dear sir," said the young man, rising, with respect in his voice.
Evidently he was touched.

"Yes, I know, I know," the old scientist continued in an outburst of
sincerity.  "I know that in spite of all the arguments and the maze of
special cases in which people lose themselves, the absolute, simple
truth remains, that the law by which some are born rich and others poor
and which maintains a chronic inequality in society is a supreme
injustice.  It rests on no better basis than the law that once created
races of slaves.  I know patriotism has become a narrow offensive
sentiment which as long as it lives will maintain war and exhaust the
world.  I know that neither work nor material and moral prosperity, nor
the noble refinements of progress, nor the wonders of art, need
competition inspired by hate.  In fact, I know that, on the contrary,
these things are destroyed by arms.  I know that the map of a country
is composed of conventional lines and different names, that our innate
love of self leads us closer to those that are like-minded than to
those who belong to the same geographical group, and we are more truly
compatriots of those who understand and love us and who are on the
level of our own souls, or who suffer the same slavery than of those
whom we meet on the street.  The national groups, the units of the
modern world, are what they are, to be sure.  The love we have for our
native land would be good and praiseworthy if it did not degenerate, as
we see it does everywhere, into vanity, the spirit of predominance,
acquisitiveness, hate, envy, nationalism, and militarism.  The
monstrous distortion of the patriotic sentiment, which is increasing,
is killing off humanity.  Mankind is committing suicide, and our age is
an agony."

The two men had the same vision and said simultaneously:

"A cancer, a cancer!"

The older scientist grew animated, succumbing to the evidence.

"I know as well as you do that posterity will judge severely those who
have made a fetich of the institutions of oppression and have
cultivated and spread the ideas supporting them.  I know that the cure
for an abuse does not begin until we refuse to submit to the cult that
consecrates it.  And I, who have devoted myself for half a century to
the great discoveries that have changed the face of the world, I know
that in introducing an innovation one encounters the hostility of
everything that is.

"I know it is a vice to spend years and centuries saying of progress,
'I should like it, but I do not want it.'  But as for me, I have too
many cares and too much work to do.  And then, as I told you, I am too
old.  These ideas are too new for me.  A man's intelligence is capable
of holding only a certain quantum of new, creative ideas.  When that
amount is exhausted, whatever the progress around you may be, one
refuses to see it and help it on.  I am incapable of carrying on a
discussion to fruitful lengths.  I am incapable of the audacity of
being logical.  I confess to you, my boy, I have not the strength to be
right."

"My dear doctor," said the young man in a tone of reproach, meeting his
older colleague's sincerity with equal sincerity, "you have publicly
declared your disapproval of the men who publicly fought the idea of
patriotism.  The influence of your name has been used against them."

The old man straightened himself, and his face coloured.

"I will not stand for our country's being endangered."

I did not recognise him any more.  He dropped from his great thoughts
and was no longer himself.  I was discouraged.

"But," the other put in, "what you just said--"

"That is not the same thing.  The people you speak of have defied us.
They have declared themselves enemies and so have justified all
outrages in advance."

"Those who commit outrages against them commit the crime of ignorance,"
said the young man in a tremulous voice, sustained by a kind of vision.
"They fail to see the superior logic of things that are in the process
of creation."  He bent over to his companion, and, in a firmer tone,
asked, "How can the thing that is beginning help being revolutionary?
Those who are the first to cry out are alone, and therefore ignored or
despised.  You yourself just said so.  But posterity will remember the
vanguard of martyrs.  It will hail those who have cast a doubt on the
equivocal word 'fatherland,' and will gather them into the fold of all
the innovators who went before them and who are now universally
honoured."

"Never!" cried the old man, who listened to this last with a troubled
look.  A frown of obstinacy and impatience deepened in his forehead,
and he clenched his fists in hate.  "No, that is not the same thing.
Besides, discussions like this lead nowhere.  It would be better, while
we are waiting for the world to do its duty, for us to do ours and tell
this poor woman the truth."


CHAPTER X


The two women were alone beside the wide open window.  In the full,
wise light of the autumn sun, I saw how faded was the face of the
pregnant woman.

All of a sudden a frightened expression came into her eyes.  She reeled
against the wall, leaned there a second, and then fell over with a
stifled cry.

Anna caught her in her arms, and dragged her along until she reached
the bell and rang and rang.  Then she stood still, not daring to budge,
holding in her arms the heavy delicate woman, her own face close to the
face with the rolling eyes.  The cries, dull and stifled at first,
burst out now in loud shrieks.

The door opened.  People hurried in.  Outside the door the servants
were on the watch.  I caught sight of the landlady, who succeeded ill
in concealing her comic chagrin.

They laid the woman on the bed.  They removed ornaments, unfolded
towels, and gave hurried orders.

The crisis subsided and the woman stopped shrieking.  She was so happy
not to be suffering any more that she laughed.  A somewhat constrained
reflection of her laugh appeared on the faces bending over her.  They
undressed her carefully.  She let them handle her like a child.  They
fixed the bed.  Her legs looked very thin and her set face seemed
reduced to nothing.  All you saw was her distended body in the middle
of the bed.  Her hair was undone and spread around her face like a
pool.  Two feminine hands plaited it quickly.

Her laughter broke and stopped.

"It is beginning again."

A groan, which grew louder, a fresh burst of shrieks.  Anna, her only
friend, remained in the room.  She looked and listened, filled with
thoughts of motherhood.  She was thinking that she, too, held within
her such travail and such cries.

This lasted the whole day.  For hours, from morning until evening, I
heard the heart-rending wail rising and falling from that pitiful
double being.

At certain moments I fell back, overcome.  I could no longer look or
listen.  I renounced seeing so much truth.  Then once more, with an
effort, I stood up against the wall and looked into the Room again.

Anna kissed the woman on her forehead, in brave proximity to the
immense cry.

When the cry was articulate, it was: "No, no!  I do not want to!"

Serious, sickened faces, almost grown old in a few hours with fatigue,
passed and repassed.

I heard some one say:

"No need to help it along.  Nature must be allowed to take her course.
Whatever nature does she does well."

And in surprise my lips repeated this lie, while my eyes were fixed
upon the frail, innocent woman who was a prey to stupendous nature,
which crushed her, rolled her in her blood, and exacted all the
suffering from her that she could yield.

The midwife turned up her sleeves and put on her rubber gloves.  She
waved her enormous reddish-black, glistening hands like Indian clubs.

And all this turned into a nightmare in which I half believed.  My head
grew heavy and I was sickened by the smell of blood and carbolic acid
poured out by the bottleful.

At a moment when I, feeling too harrowed, was not looking, I heard a
cry different from hers, a cry that was scarcely more than the sound of
a moving object, a light grating.  It was the new being that had
unloosened itself, as yet a mere morsel of flesh taken from her flesh--
her heart which had just been torn away from her.

This shook me to the depths of my being.  I, who had witnessed
everything that human beings undergo, I, at this first signal of human
life, felt some paternal and fraternal chord--I do not know what--
vibrating within me.

She laughed.  "How quickly it went!" she said.

. . . . .

The day was coming to a close.  Complete silence in the room.  A plain
night lamp was burning, the flame scarcely flickering.  The clock, like
a poor soul, was ticking faintly.  There was hardly a thing near the
bed.  It was as in a real temple.

She lay stretched out in bed, in ideal quiet, her eyes turned toward
the window.  Bit by bit, she saw the evening descending upon the most
beautiful day in her life.

This ruined mass, this languid face shone with the glory of having
created, with a sort of ecstasy which redeemed her suffering, and one
saw the new world of thoughts that grew out of her experience.

She thought of the child growing up.  She smiled at the joys and
sorrows it would cause her.  She smiled also at the brother or sister
it would have some day.

And I thought of this at the same time that she did, and I saw her
martyrdom more clearly than she.

This massacre, this tragedy of flesh is so ordinary and commonplace
that every woman carries the memory and imprint of it, and yet nobody
really knows it.  The doctor, who comes into contact with so much of
the same sort of suffering, is not moved by it any more.  The woman,
who is too tender-hearted, never remembers it.  Others who look on at
travail have a sentimental interest, which wipes out the agony.  But I
who saw for the sake of seeing know, in all its horror, the agony of
childbirth.  I shall never forget the great laceration of life.

The night lamp was placed so that the bed was plunged in shadow.  I
could no longer see the mother.  I no longer knew her.  I believed in
her.


CHAPTER XI


The woman who had been confined was moved with exquisite care into the
next room, which she had occupied previously.  It was larger and more
comfortable.

They cleaned the room from top to bottom, and I saw Anna and Philip
seated in the room again.

"Take care, Philip," Anna was saying, "you do not understand the
Christian religion.  You really do not know /exactly/ what it is.  You
speak of it," she added, with a smile, "as women speak of men, or as
men when they try to explain women.  Its fundamental element is love.
It is a covenant of love between human beings who instinctively detest
one another.  It is also a wealth of love in our hearts to which we
respond naturally when we are little children.  Later all our
tenderness is added to it bit by bit, like treasure to treasure.  It is
a law of outpouring to which we give ourselves up, and it is the source
of that outpouring.  It is life, it is almost a work, it is almost a
human being."

"But, my dear Anna, that is not the Christian religion.  That is you."

. . . . .

In the middle of the night, I heard talking through the partition.  I
struggled with my sleepiness and got up.

The man was alone, in bed.  A lamp was burning dimly.  He was asleep
and talking in his sleep.

He smiled and said "No!" three times with growing ecstasy.  Then his
smile at the vision he saw faded away.  For a moment his face remained
set, as if he were waiting, then he looked terrified, and his mouth
opened.  "Anna! Ah, ah!--Ah, ah!" he cried through gaping lips.  At this
he awoke and rolled his eyes.  He sighed and quieted down.  He sat up
in bed, still struck and terrified by what had passed through his mind
a few seconds before.

He looked round at everything to calm himself and banish his nightmare
completely.  The familiar sight of the room, with the lamp, so wise and
motionless, enthroned in the middle, reassured him.  It was balm to
this man who had just seen what does not exist, who had just smiled at
phantoms and touched them, who had just been mad.

. . . . .

I rose the next morning, all broken up.  I was restless.  I had a
severe headache.  My eyes were bloodshot.  When I looked at them in the
mirror, it was as if I saw them through a veil of blood.

When I was alone, free from the visions and scenes to which I devoted
my life, all kinds of worries assailed me--worry about my position,
which I was risking, worry about the steps I ought to be taking and yet
was not taking, worry over myself that I was so intent upon casting off
all my obligations and postponing them, and repudiating my wage-earning
lot, by which I was destined to be held fast in the slow wheelwork of
office routine.

I was also worried by all kinds of minutiæ, annoying because they kept
cropping up every minute--not make any noise, not light a light when the
Room was dark, hide myself, and hide myself all the time.  One evening
I got a fit of coughing while listening at the hole.  I snatched up my
pillow and buried my head in it to keep the sound from coming out of my
mouth.

Everything seemed to be in a league to avenge itself upon me for I did
not know what.  I felt as though I should not be able to hold out much
longer.  Nevertheless, I made up my mind to keep on looking as long as
my health and my courage lasted.  It might be bad for me, but it was my
duty.

. . . . .

The man was sinking.  Death was evidently in the house.

It was quite late in the evening.  They were sitting at the table
opposite each other.

I knew their marriage had taken place that afternoon, and that its
purpose had been only to solemnise their approaching farewell.  Some
white blossoms, lilies and azaleas, were strewn on the table, the
mantelpiece, and one armchair.  He was fading away like those cut
flowers.

"We are married," he said.  "You are my wife.  You are my wife, Anna!"

It was for the sweetness of saying, "You are my wife," that he had so
longed.  Nothing more.  But he felt so poor, with his few days of life,
that it was complete happiness to him.

He looked at her, and she lifted her eyes to him--to him who adored her
sisterly tenderness--she who had become devoted to his adoration.  What
infinite emotion lay hidden in these two silences, which faced each
other in a kind of embrace; in the double silence of these two human
beings, who, I had observed, never touched each other, not even with
the tips of their fingers.

The girl lifted her head, and said, in an unsteady voice:

"It is late.  I am going to sleep."

She got up.  The lamp, which she set on the mantelpiece, lit up the
room.

She trembled.  She seemed to be in a dream and not to know how to yield
to the dream.  Then she raised her arm and took the pins out of her
hair.  It fell down her back and looked, in the night, as if it were
lit by the setting sun.

The man made a sudden movement and looked at her in surprise.  Not a
word.

She removed a gold brooch from the top of her blouse, and a bit of her
bosom appeared.

"What are you doing, Anna, what are you doing?"

"Why, undressing."

She wanted to say this in a natural voice, but had not succeeded.  He
replied with an inarticulate exclamation, a cry from his heart, which
was touched to the quick.  Stupefaction, desperate regret, and also the
flash of an inconceivable hope agitated him, oppressed him.

"You are my husband."

"Oh," he said, "you know I am nothing."  He spoke feebly in a tragic
tone.  "Married for form's sake," he went on, stammering out
fragmentary, incoherent phrases.  "I knew it, I knew it--formality--our
conventions--"

She stopped, with her hand hesitating on her blouse like a flower, and
said:

"You are my husband.  It is your right."

He made a faint gesture of denial.  She quickly corrected herself.

"No, no, it is not your right.  I want to do it."

I began to understand how kind she was trying to be.  She wished to
give this man, this poor man who was sinking at her feet, a reward that
was worthy of her.  She wanted to bestow upon him the gift of the sight
of her body.

But the thing was harder than the mere bestowal of a gift.  It must not
look like the mere payment of a debt.  He would not have consented to
that.  She must make him believe it was a voluntary wifely act, a
willing caress.  She must conceal her suffering and repugnance like a
vice.  Feeling the difficulty of giving this delicate shade to her
sacrifice, she was afraid of herself.

"No, Anna--dear Anna--think--"  He was going to say, "Think of Michel,"
but he did not have the strength at that moment to use this one
decisive argument, and only murmured, "You, you!"

"I want to do it," she repeated.

"But I do not want you to.  No, no."

He said this in a weaker voice now, overcome by love.  Through
instinctive nobility, he covered his eyes with his hand, but gradually
his hand surrendered and dropped.

She continued to undress, with uncertain movements that showed she
hardly knew what she was doing.  She took off her black waist, and her
bust emerged like the day.  When the light shone on her she quivered
and crossed her shining arms over her chest.  _Rouse Memnon's
mother_: Awaken the Dawn from the dark Earth and the clouds where she
is resting. Aurora in the old mythology is mother of Memnon (the East),
and wife of Tithonus (the appearances of Earth and Sky during the last
hours of Night). She leaves him every morning in renewed youth, to
prepare the way for Phoebus (the Sun), whilst Tithonus remains in
perpetual old age and grayness.

_by Peneus' streams_: Phoebus loved the Nymph Daphne whom he met
by the river Peneus in the vale of Tempe. This legend expressed
the attachment of the Laurel (Daphne) to the Sun, under whose heat the
tree both fades and flourishes.

It has been thought worth while to explain these allusions, because
they illustrate the character of the Grecian Mythology, which arose
in the Personification of natural phenomena, and was totally free
from those debasing and ludicrous ideas with which, through Roman
and later misunderstanding or perversion, it has been associated.

_Amphion's lyre_: He was said to have built the walls of Thebes to the
sound of his music.

_Night like a drunkard reels_: Compare Romeo and Juliet, Act II.

Scene 3: "The gray-eyed morn smiles," etc.

--It should be added that three lines, which appeared hopelessly misprinted,
have been omitted in this Poem.

Poem 4.

_Time's chest_: in which he is figuratively supposed to lay up
past treasures. So in Troilus, Act III.

Scene 3, "Time hath a wallet at his back," etc.

Poem 5.

A fine example of the high-wrought and conventional Elizabethan
Pastoralism, which it would be ludicrous to criticise on the ground
of the unshepherdlike or unreal character of some images suggested.
Stanza 6 was probably inserted by Izaak Walton.

Poem 9.

This Poem, with 25 and 94, is taken from Davison's "Rhapsody," first
published in 1602.

One stanza has been here omitted, in accordance with the principle
noticed in the Preface. Similar omissions occur in 45, 87, 100, 128,
160, 165, 227, 235.

The more serious abbreviation by which it has been attempted to
bring Crashaw's "Wishes" and Shelley's "Euganean Hills" within the
limits of lyrical unity, is commended with much diffidence to the
judgment of readers acquainted with the original pieces.

_Presence_ in line 12 is here conjecturally printed for _present_.

A very few similar corrections of (it is presumed) misprints have been
made:--as _thy_ for _my_, 22, line 9: _men_ for _me_, 41, line 3:
_viol_ for _idol_, 252, line 43, and _one_ for _our_, line 90:
_locks_ for _looks_, 271, line 5: _dome_ for _doom_, 275, line
25:--with two or three more less important.

Poem 15.

This charming little poem, truly "old and plain, and dallying with
the innocence of love" like that spoken of in Twelfth Night, is
taken with 5, 17, 20, 34, and 40, from the most characteristic
collection of Elizabeth's reign, "England's Helicon," first published
in 1600.

Poem 16.

Readers who have visited Italy will be reminded of more than one
picture by this gorgeous Vision of Beauty, equally sublime and pure
in its Paradisaical naturalness.

Lodge wrote it on a voyage to "the Islands of Terceras and the
Canaries"; and he seems to have caught, in those southern seas, no
small portion of the qualities which marked the almost contemporary
Art of Venice,--the glory and the glow of Veronese, or Titian, or
Tintoret, when he most resembles Titian, and all but surpasses him.

_The clear_: is the crystalline or outermost heaven of the old
cosmography.

For _resembling_ other copies give _refining_: the correct reading
is perhaps _revealing_.

_For a fair there's fairer none_: If you desire a Beauty, there is
none more beautiful than Rosaline.

Poem 18.

_that fair thou owest_: that beauty thou ownest.

Poem 23.

_the star Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken_:
apparently, Whose stellar influence is uncalculated, although his
angular altitude from the plane of the astrolabe or artificial
horizon used by astrologers has been determined.

Poem 27.

_keel_: skim.

Poem 29.

_expense_: waste.

Poem 30.

_Nativity once in the main of light_: when a star has risen and
entered on the full stream of light;--another of the astrological
phrases no longer familiar.

_Crooked eclipses_: as coming athwart the Sun's apparent course.

Wordsworth, thinking probably of the "Venus" and the "Lucrece,"
said finely of Shakespeare "Shakespeare _could_ not have written
an Epic; he would have died of plethora of thought."

This prodigality of nature is exemplified equally in his Sonnets. The
copious selection here given (which from the wealth of the material,
required greater consideration than any other portion of the Editor's
task) contains many that will not be fully felt and understood
without some earnestness of thought on the reader's part.

"Tell me, when you were travelling together, how did you arrange for
rooms and beds in the hotels?

"You say she took care of you?  What did she have to do for you?"

The two men scanned each other's faces keenly, and I saw the
misunderstanding between them growing.

The dying man withdrew into himself and became hardened, incredulous
before this stranger, with the vulgar appearance, in whose mouth the
words of God and truth assumed a grotesque aspect.

However, he made an effort:

"If I have sinned in spirit, to use your words," he said, "it proves
that I have not sinned in reality, and why should I repent of what was
suffering pure and simple?"

"No theories now.  We are not here for theorising.  I tell you, a sin
committed in spirit is committed in intention, and therefore in effect,
and must be confessed and redeemed.  Tell me how often you succumbed to
guilty thoughts.  Give me details."

"But I resisted," moaned the unfortunate man.  "That is all I have to
say."

"That is not enough.  The stain--you are now convinced, I presume, of
the justice of the term--the stain ought to be washed out by the truth."

"Very well," said the dying man.  "I confess I have committed the sin,
and I repent of it."

"That is not a confession, and is none of my business," retorted the
priest.  "Now tell me, under exactly what circumstances did you yield
to temptation with that person, to the suggestions of the evil spirit?"

The man was swept by a wave of rebellion.  He half rose and leaned on
his elbow, glaring at the stranger, who returned his look steadily.

"Why have I the evil spirit in me?" he demanded.

"You are not the only one.  All men have it."

Morris and Skeat, Part II, pp. 23-34, and is easily accessible.

In the same volume, the Specimens numbered VII, VIII, X, XI, and XVI are
also in Northumbrian, and can easily be examined. It will therefore
suffice to give a very brief account of each.

VII. _Cursor Mundi_, or _Cursor o Werld_, i.e. Over-runner of the World;
so called because it rehearses a great part of the world's history,
from the creation onwards.

It is a poem of portentous length, extending to 29,655 lines, and
recounts many of the events found in the Old and New Testaments,
with the addition of legends from many other sources, one of them,
for example, being the _Historia Scholastica_ of Peter Comestor.

Dr Murray thinks it may have been written in the neighbourhood of
Durham.

There's nothing that can excuse the
suffering of good people on earth.  It is an abomination."

The priest looked at the rebellious man blankly.

"How else could souls be tried?" he said quite calmly.

"Nothing can excuse the suffering of the good."

"God's designs are inscrutable."

The dying man flung out his emaciated arms.  His eyes became hollow.

"You are a liar!"

"Enough," said the priest.  "I have listened patiently to your
ramblings and feel sorry for you.  But there's no good arguing.  You
must prepare to appear before God, from whom you seem to have lived
apart.  If you have suffered, you will be consoled in His bosom.  Let
that suffice for you."

The invalid fell back and lay still for a while.  He remained
motionless under the white spread, like a reclining sepulchral statue
of marble with a face of bronze.

He regained his voice.

"God cannot console me."

"My son, my son, what are you saying?"

"God cannot console me, because He cannot give me what I want."

"Ah, my poor child, how far gone you are in your blindness!  Why did
you have me summoned?"

"I had hopes, I had hopes."

"Hopes?  Hopes of what?"

"I do not know.  The things we hope for are always the things we do not
know."

His hands wavered in the air, then fell down again.

"Time is passing," said the priest and began all over again.

"Tell me the circumstances of your sin.  Tell me.  When you were alone
with this person, when you two were close together, did you talk to
each other, or did you keep quiet?"

"I do not believe in you," said the man.

The priest frowned.

"Repent, and tell me that you believe in the Catholic religion, which
will save you."

But the other man shook his head in utter anguish and denied all his
happiness.

"Religion--" he began.

The priest interrupted brutally.

"You are not going to start over again!  Keep quiet.  All your
arguments are worthless.  Begin by /believing/ in religion and then you
will see what it means.  Hence, in many dialects, as for example, in the East Midland district,
the amount of words of "British" origin is practically _nil_.

For further remarks on this subject, see Chapter V of _Anglo-Saxon
Britain_, by Grant Allen, London, n.d.

"Yes."  He stressed the clear, elementary command.  "Whether you are
convinced or not, believe.  Evidence does not count.  The one important
thing is faith.  God does not deign to convince the incredulous.  These
are no longer the days of miracles.  The only miracle is in our hearts,
and it is faith.  Believe!"  He hurled the same word ceaselessly, like
stones.

"My son," he continued, more solemnly, standing up, with his large fat
hand uplifted, "I exact of you an act of faith."

"Get out!" said the man, with hatred.

But the priest did not stir.  Goaded by the urgence of the case,
impelled by the necessity of saving this soul in spite of itself, he
became implacable.

"You are going to die," he said, "you are going to die.  You have only
a few more minutes to live.  Submit."

"No," said the man.

The black-robed priest caught hold of both his hands.

"Submit.  No discussion.  You are losing precious time.  All your
reasoning is of no account.  We are alone, you and I before God."

He shook his head with the low bulging forehead, the prominent fleshy
nose, wide moist nostrils dark with snuff, thin yellow lips like twine
tight across two projecting teeth that showed by themselves in the
darkness.  There were lines on his forehead and between his eyebrows
and around his mouth.  His cheeks and chin were covered with a grey
layer.

"I represent God," he said.  "You are in my presence as if you were in
the presence of God.  Simply say 'I believe,' and I will absolve you.
'I believe,' that is all.  The rest makes no difference to me."

He bent lower and lower, almost gluing his face to that of the dying
man, trying to plant his absolution like a blow.

"Simply say with me, 'Our Father, who art in heaven.'  I do not ask you
to do anything else."

The sick man's face contracted.

"No--no!"

Suddenly the priest rose with a triumphant air.

"At last!  You have said it."

"No."

"Ah!" muttered the priest between his teeth.

He twisted the man's hands in his.  You felt he would have put his arms
around him to stifle him, assassinate him if his death rattle would
have brought a confession--so possessed was he with the desire to
persuade him, to snatch from him the words he had come to seek on his
lips.

He let the withered hands go, paced the room like a wild beast, then
came back and stationed himself in front of the bed again.

"Remember--you are going to die," he stammered to the miserable man.
"You will soon be in the earth.  Say, 'Our Father,' just these two
words, nothing else."

He hung over him with his eyes on his mouth, his dark, crouching figure
like a demon lying in wait for a soul, like the whole Church over dying
humanity.

"Say it!  Say it!  Say it!"

The sick man tried to wrest himself free.  There was a rattle of fury
in his throat.  With the remnant of his voice, in a low tone, he
gasped:

"No!"

"Scoundrel!" cried the priest.

And he struck him in the face.  After that neither man made a move for
a while.  Then the priest went at it again.

"At least you will die holding a crucifix," he snarled.

He drew a crucifix from his pocket, and put it down hard on his breast.

The other man shook himself in a dull horror, as if religion were
contagious, and threw the crucifix on the floor.

The priest stooped, mumbling insults.  "Carrion, you want to die like a
dog, but I am here!"  He picked up the crucifix, and with a gleam in
his eyes, sure of crushing him, waited for his final chance.

The dying man panted, completely at the end of his strength.  The
priest, seeing him in his power, laid the crucifix on his breast again.
This time the other man let it stay there, unable to do anything but
look at it with eyes of hatred.  But his eyes did not make it fall.

. . . . .

When the black man had gone out into the night, and the patient little
by little recovered from the struggle and felt free once more, it
occurred to me that the priest in his violence and coarseness was
horribly right.  A bad priest?  No, a good priest, who spoke strictly
according to his conscience and belief, and tried to apply his religion
simply, such as it was, without hypocritical concessions.  Ignorant,
clumsy, gross--yes, but honest and logical even in his fearful attempt.
_The pilot_: Saint Peter, figuratively introduced as the head of the
Church on earth, to foretell "the ruin of our corrupted clergy, then in
their heighth" under Laud's primacy.

_the wolf_: Popery.

_Alpheus_: a stream in Southern Greece, supposed to flow underseas
to meet the Arethuse.

_Swart star_: the Dogstar, called swarthy because its heliacal rising
in ancient times occurred soon after mid-summer.

_moist vows_: either tearful prayers, or prayers for one at sea.

_Bellerus_: a giant, apparently created here by Milton to personify
Bellerium, the ancient title of the Land's End.

_The great Vision_:--The story was that the Archangel Michael had appeared
on the rock by Marazion in Mount's Bay which bears his name.

Milton calls on him to turn his eyes from the south homeward, and to
pity Lycidas, if his body has drifted into the troubled waters of
the Land's End.

Finisterre being the land due south of Marazion, two places in that
district (then by our trade with Corunna probably less unfamiliar
to English ears), are named,--_Namancos_ now Mujio in Galicia,
_Bayona_ north of the Minho, or, perhaps a fortified rock (one of
the _Cies_ Islands) not unlike St.

Michael's Mount, at the entrance of Vigo Bay.

_ore_: rays of golden light. _Doric lay_: Sicilian, pastoral.

Poem 70.

_The assault_: was an attack on London expected in 1642, when the troops
of Charles I. reached Brentford. "Written on his door" was in the
original title of this sonnet. Milton was then living in Aldersgate
Street.

_Emathian Conqueror_: When Thebes was destroyed (B.C. 335) and the
citizens massacred by thousands, Alexander ordered the house of
Pindar to be spared.

He was as incapable of appreciating the Poet as Lewis XIV.
of appreciating Racine: but even the narrow and barbarian mind of
Alexander could understand the advantage of a showy act of homage
to Poetry.

_the repeated air \Of sad Electra's poet_: Amongst Plutarch's
vague stories, he says that when the Spartan confederacy in 404 B.C.
took Athens, a proposal to demolish it was rejected through the
effect produced on the commanders by hearing part of a chorus from
the Electra of Euripides sung at a feast.

There is however no apparent congruity between the lines quoted (167,
8 Ed. Dindorf) and the result ascribed to them.

Poem 73.

This high-toned and lovely Madrigal is quite in the style, and worthy of,
the "pure Simonides."

Poem 75.
Vaughan's beautiful though quaint verses should be compared with
Wordsworth's great Ode, No. 287.

Poem 76.
_Favonius_: the spring wind.

Poem 77.
_Themis_: the goddess of justice. Skinner was grandson by his mother
to Sir E. Coke;--hence, as pointed out by Mr. Keightley, Milton's
allusion to the _bench_.But once the crime is established, we must not look for
excuses for it.  We run the danger then of always finding excuses.  We
must condemn it in advance, by virtue of a cold principle.  Justice
should be as cold as steel.

But justice is not a virtue, as its name seems to indicate.  It is an
organisation the virtue of which is to be feelingless.  It does not aim
at expiation.  Its function is to establish warning examples, to make
of the criminal a thing to frighten off others.

Nobody, nothing has the right to exact expiation.  Besides, no one can
exact it.  Vengeance is too remote from the act and falls, so to speak,
upon another person.  Expiation, then, is a word that has no
application in the world.


CHAPTER XIII


He was very, very weak and lay absolutely still and silent, chained
fast by the baleful weight of his flesh.  Death had already put an end
to even his faintest quiverings.

His wonderful companion sat exactly where his fixed eyes fell on her,
at the foot of the bed.  She held her arms resting on the base board of
the bed with her beautiful hands drooping.  Her profile sloped downward
slightly, that fine design, that delicate etching of eternal sweetness
upon the gentle background of the evening.  Under the dainty arch of
her eyebrows her large eyes swam clear and pure, miniature skies.  The
exquisite skin of her cheeks and forehead gleamed faintly, and her
luxuriant hair, which I had seen flowing, gracefully encircled her
brow, where her thoughts dwelt invisible as God.

She was alone with the man who lay there as if already in his grave--she
who had wished to cling to him by a thrill and to be his chaste widow
when he died.  He and I saw nothing on earth except her face.  And in
truth, there was nothing else to be seen in the deep shadows of the
evening.

A voice came from the bed.  I scarcely recognised it.

"I haven't said everything yet that I want to say," said the voice.

Anna bent over the bed as if it were the edge of a coffin to catch the
words that were to issue for the last time, no doubt, from the
motionless and almost formless body.

"Shall I have the time?  Shall I?"

It was difficult to catch the whisper, which almost stuck in his
throat.  Then his voice accustomed itself to existence again and became
distinct.

"I should like to make a confession to you, Anna.  I do not want this
thing to die with me.  I am sorry to let this memory be snuffed out.  I
am sorry for it.  I hope it will never die.

"I loved once before I loved you.

"Yes, I loved the girl.  The image I have left of her is a sad, gentle
one.  I should like to snatch it from death.  I am giving it to you
because you happen to be here."

He gathered himself together to have a clear vision of the woman of
whom he was speaking.

"She was fair-haired and fair-skinned," he said.

"You needn't be jealous, Anna.  (People are jealous sometimes even when
they are not in love.)  It was a few years after you were born.  You
were a little child then, and nobody turned to look at you on the
streets except the mothers.

"We were engaged in the ancestral park of her parents.  She had bright
curls tied with ribbons.  I pranced on horseback for her.  She smiled
for me.

"I was young and strong then, full of hope and full of the beginning of
things.  I thought I was going to conquer the world, and even had the
choice of the means to conquer it.  Alas, all I did was to cross
hastily over its surface.  She was younger than I, a bud so recently,
blown, that one day, I remember, I saw her doll lying on the bench that
we were sitting on.  We used to say to each other, 'We shall come back
to this park when we are old, shall we not?'  We loved each other--you
understand--I have no time to tell you, but you understand, Anna, that
these few relics of memory that I give you at random are beautiful,
incredibly beautiful.

"She died the very day in spring when the date of our wedding was set.
We were both taken sick with a disease that was epidemic that year in
our country, and she did not have the strength to escape the monster.
That was twenty-five years ago.  Twenty-five years, Anna, between her
death and mine.

"And now here is the most precious secret, her name."

He whispered it.  I did not catch it.

"Say it over again, Anna."

She repeated it, vague syllables which I caught without being able to
unite them into a word.

"I confide the name to you because you are here.  If you were not here,
I should tell it to anyone, no matter whom, provided that would save
it."

He added in an even, measured voice, to make it hold out until the end:

"I have something else to confess, a wrong and a misfortune."

"Didn't you confess it to the priest?" she asked in surprise.

"I hardly told him anything," was all he replied.

And he resumed, speaking calmly, with his full voice:

"I wrote poems during our engagement, poems about ourselves.  The
manuscript was named after her.  We read the poems together, and we
both liked and admired them.  'Beautiful, beautiful!' she would say,
clapping her hands, whenever I showed her a new poem.  And when we were
together, the manuscript was always with us--the most beautiful book
that had ever been written, we thought.  She did not want the poems to
be published and get away from us.  One day in the garden she told me
what she wanted.  'Never! Never!' she said over and over again, like an
obstinate, rebellious child, tossing her dainty head with its dancing
hair."

The man's voice became at once surer and more tremulous, as he filled
in and enlivened certain details in the old story.

"Another time, in the conservatory, when it had been raining
monotonously since morning, she asked, 'Philip'--she used to pronounce
my name just the way you do."

He paused, himself surprised by the primitive simplicity of what he had
just expressed.

"'Do you know,' she asked, 'the story of the English painter Rossetti?'
and she told me the episode, which had so vividly impressed her, how
Rossetti had promised the lady he loved to let her keep forever the
manuscript of the book he had written for her, and if she died, to lay
it beside her in her coffin.  She died, and he actually carried out his
promise and buried the manuscript with her.  But later, bitten by the
love of glory, he violated his promise and the tomb.  'You will let me
have your book if I die before you, and will not take it back, will
you, Philip?'  And I promised laughingly, and she laughed too.

"I recovered from my illness slowly.  When I was strong enough, they
told me that she had died.  When I was able to go out, they took me to
the tomb, the vast family sepulchre which somewhere hid her new little
coffin.

"There's no use my telling you how miserable I was and how I grieved
for her.  Everything reminded me of her.  I was full of her, and yet
she was no more!  Then shalt thou be, on that day, a partaker, by
God's grace, of all the good things that any man doth for His name, and
all true-men will intercede for thee in heaven and in earth. Amen.

Another discovery was the assignment of a correct description to the
glosses found in a document known as the _Vespasian Psalter_; so called
because it is an early Latin Psalter, or book of Psalms, contained
in a Cotton MS. in the British Museum, marked with the class-mark
"Vespasian, A. 1."

This Psalter is accompanied throughout with glosses which were at
first mistakenly thought to be in a Northumbrian dialect, and were
published as such by the Surtees Society in 1843.

They were next, in 1875, wrongly supposed to be Kentish; but since
they were printed by Sweet in 1885 it has been shown that they are
really Mercian. This set of glosses is very important for the study of
Old Mercian, because they are rather extensive; they occupy 213
pages of the _Oldest English Texts_, and are followed by 20 more
pages of similar glosses to certain Latin canticles and hymns that
occur in the same MS.

There are also a few Charters extant in the Mercian dialect, but the
earliest contain little else than old forms of the names of persons
and places.

There are, however, some later Charters, from 836 to 1058 in the Mercian
dialect, which contain some boundaries of lands and afford other
information. Most of these relate to Worcestershire.

But the most interesting Mercian glosses are those to be found in the
Rushworth MS., which has already been mentioned as containing Northumbrian
glosses of the Latin Gospels of St Mark, St Luke, and St John. For the
Gospel of St Matthew was glossed by the scribe Farman, who was a
priest of Harewood, situate on the river Wharfe, in the West Riding
of Yorkshire; whose language, accordingly, was Mercian.

In my _Principles of English Etymology, First Series_ (second
edition, 1892), p. 44, I gave a list of words selected from these
glosses, in order to show how much nearer they stand, as a rule,
to modern English than do the corresponding Anglo-Saxon forms.

I here repeat this list, as it is very instructive.
"I asked myself if I should take a light.  With a light it would be
quick.  I should see the box at once and should not have to touch
anything else--but then I should see /everything!/  I preferred to grope
in the dark.  I had rubbed a handkerchief sprinkled with perfume over
my face, and I shall never forget the deception of this odour.  For an
instant, in the stupefaction of my terror, I did not recognise the
first thing I touched--her necklace--I saw it again on her living body.
The box!  The corpse gave it to me with a squashing sound.  Something
grazed me faintly.

"I had meant to tell you only a few things, Anna.  I thought I should
not have time to tell you how everything happened.  But it is better
so, better for me that you should know all.  Life, which has been so
cruel to me, is kind at this moment when you are listening, you who
will live.  And my desire to express what I felt, to revive the past,
which made of me a being accursed during the days I am telling you
about, is a benefit this evening which passes from me to you, and from
you to me."

The young woman was bending toward him attentively.  She was motionless
and silent.  What could she have said, what could she have done, that
would have been sweeter than her silent attention?

"The rest of the night I read the stolen manuscript.  Was it not the
only way to forget her death and think of her life?

"I soon saw that the poems were not what I had thought them to be.

"They game me a growing impression of being confused and much too
lengthy.  The book so long adored was no better than what I had done
afterwards.  I recalled, step by step, the background, the occasion,
the vanished gesture that had inspired these verses, and in spite of
their resurrection, I found them undeniably commonplace and
extravagant.

"An icy despair gripped me, as I bent my head over these remains of
song.  Their sojourn in the tomb seemed to have deformed and crushed
the life out of my verses.  They were as miserable as the wasted hand
from which I had taken them.  They had been so sweet!  'Beautiful,
beautiful!' the happy little voice had cried so many times while she
clasped her hands in admiration.

"It was because her voice and the poems had been vibrating with life
and because the ardour and delirium of our love had adorned my rhymes
with all their charms, that they seemed so beautiful.  But all that was
past, and in reality our love was no more.

"It was oblivion that I read at the same time as I read my book.  Yes,
death had been contagious.  My verses had remained there too long,
sleeping down below there in awful peace--in the sepulchre into which I
should never have dared to enter if love had still been alive.  She was
indeed dead.

"I thought of what a useless and sacrilegious thing I had done and how
useless and sacrilegious everything is that we promise and swear to
here below.

"She was indeed dead.  How I cried that night.  It was my true night of
mourning.  When you have just lost a beloved there is a wretched
moment, after the brutal shock, when you begin to understand that all
is over, and blank despair surrounds you and looms like a giant.  That
night was a moment of such despair when I was under the sway of my
crime and the disenchantment of my poems, greater than the crime,
greater than everything.

"I saw her again.  How pretty she was, with her bright, lively ways,
her animated charm, her rippling laugh, the endless number of questions
she was always asking.  I saw her again in the sunlight on the bright
lawn.  She was wearing a dress of old rose satin, and she bent over and
smoothed the soft folds of her skirt and looked at her little feet.
(Near us was the whiteness of a statue.)  I remembered how once I had
for fun tried to find a single flaw in her complexion.  Not a spot on
forehead, cheek, chin--anywhere.  Her skin was as smooth as if it had
been polished.  I felt as though that exquisite delicate face were
something ever in flight that had paused for an instant for my sake,
and I stammered, almost with tears in my voice, 'It is too much!  It is
too much!'  Everybody looked on her as a princess.  In the streets of
the town the shopkeepers were glad to see her pass by.  Did she not
have a queenly air as she sat half-reclining on the great carved stone
bench in the park, that great stone bench which was now a kind of empty
tomb?

"For a moment in the midst of time I knew how much I had loved her, she
who had been alive and who was dead, who had been the sun and who was
now a kind of obscure spring under the earth.

"And I also mourned the human heart.  

¶ And all in the same words is sent into every other shire over all
the kingdom in England, and eke into Ireland.

In the year 1303, Robert Manning, of Bourn in Lincolnshire, translated
a French poem entitled _Manuel des Pechiez_ (Manual of Sins) into
very fair East Midland verse, giving to his translation the title
of _Handling Synne_.

Many of the verses are easy and smooth, and the poem clearly shows us
that the East Midland dialect was by this time at least the equal of
the others, and that the language was good enough to be largely
permanent. When we read such lines as:

Than seyd echone that sate and stode, Here comth Pers, that never
dyd gode--
we have merely to modernise the spelling, and we at once have:
Then said each one that sat and stood, Here cometh Pierce, that
never did good, 
These are lines that could be written now.

An extract from Manning's _Handlyng Synne_ is given in _Specimens
of Early English_, Part II, most of which can be read with ease.

The obsolete words are not very numerous, and we meet now and then
with half a dozen consecutive lines that would puzzle no one. It is
needless to pursue the history of this dialect further.

It had, by this time, become almost the standard language, differing
from Modern English chiefly in date, and consequently in pronunciation.

We pass on from Manning to Chaucer, from Chaucer to Lydgate and
Caxton, and from Caxton to Lord Surrey and Sackville and Spenser,
without any real change in the actual dialect employed, but only
in the form of it.

II. WEST MIDLAND

We have seen that there are two divisions of the Mercian dialect,
into East and West Midland.

The West Midland does not greatly differ from the East Midland, but it
approaches more nearly, in some respects, to the Northumbrian. The
greatest distinction seems to be in the present and past participles
of verbs. In the West Midland, the present participle frequently ends
in _-and_, as in Northumbrian, especially in the Northern part of
the Midland area.

He did
not claw the bedclothes with his fingers, nor speak, nor cry.  No last
sigh, no last flash.

He had asked Anna for a drink.  As there was no more water in the room
and the nurse happened to be away at that moment, she had gone out to
get some quickly.  She did not even shut the door.

The lamplight filled the room.  I watched the man's face and felt, by
some sign, that the great silence at that moment was drowning him.

Then instinctively I cried out to him.  I could not help crying out so
that he should not be alone.

"I see you!"

My strange voice, disused from speaking, penetrated into the room.

But he died at the very instant that I gave him my madman's alms.  His
head dropped back stiffly, his eyeballs rolled.  Anna came in again.
She must have caught the sound of my outcry vaguely, for she hesitated.

She saw him.  A fearful cry burst from her with all the force of her
healthy body, a true widow's cry.  She dropped on her knees at the
bedside.

The nurse came in right after her and raised her arms.  Silence
reigned, that flashing up of incredible misery into which you sink
completely in the presence of the dead, no matter who you are or where
you are.  The woman on her knees and the woman standing up watched the
man who was stretched there, inert as if he had never lived.  They were
both almost dead.

Then Anna wept like a child.  She rose.  The nurse went to tell the
others.  Instinctively, Anna, who was wearing a light waist, picked up
a black shawl that the nurse had left on a chair and put it around her.

. . . . .

The room, so recently desolate, now filled with life.

They lit candles everywhere, and the stars, visible through the window,
disappeared.

They knelt down, and cried and prayed to him.  The dead man held
command.  "He" was always on their lips.  Servants were there whom I
had not yet seen but whom he knew well.  These people around him all
seemed to be lying, as though it was they who were suffering, they who
were dying, and he were alive.

"He must have suffered a great deal when he died," said the doctor, in
a low voice to the nurse, at a moment when he was quite near me.

"But he was so weak, the poor man!"

"Weakness does not prevent suffering except in the eyes of others,"
said the doctor.

. . . . .

The next morning the drab light of the early day fell upon the faces
and the melancholy funeral lights.  The coming of the day, keen and
cold, had a depressing effect upon the atmosphere of the room, making
it heavier, thicker.

A voice in a low apologetic tone for a moment interrupted the silence
that had lasted for hours.

"You mustn't open the window.  It isn't good for the dead body."

"It is cold," some one muttered.

Two hands went up and drew a fur piece close.  Some one rose, and then
sat down again.  Some one else turned his head.  There was a sigh.

It was as if they had taken advantage of these few words to come out of
the calm in which they had been concealed.  Then they glanced once more
at the man on the bier--motionless, inexorably motionless.

I must have fallen asleep when all at once I heard the church bells
ringing in the grey sky.

After that harassing night there was a relaxation from rigid attention
to the stillness of death, and an inexplicable sweetness in the ringing
of the bells carried me back forcibly to my childhood.  I thought of
the countryside where I used to hear the bells ringing, of my native
land, where everything was peaceful and good, and the snow meant
Christmas, and the sun was a cool disk that one could and should look
at.

_Late forgot_: lately.

Poem 41.

_haggards_: the least tameable hawks.

Poem 44.

_cypres_ or cyprus,--used by the old writers for _crape_: whether
from the French _crespe_ or from the Island whence it was imported. Its
accidental similarity in spelling to _cypress_ has, here and in
Milton's Penseroso, probably confused readers.

Poems 46, 47.

"I never saw anything like this funeral dirge," says Charles Lamb, "except
the ditty which reminds Ferdinand of his drowned father in the
Tempest.

As that is of the water, watery; so this is of the earth, earthy. Both
have that intenseness of feeling, which seems to resolve itself into the
element which it contemplates."
Poem 51.

_crystal_: fairness.

Poem 53.
This "Spousal Verse" was written in honour of the Ladies Elizabeth
and Katherine Somerset. Although beautiful, it is inferior to the
"Epithalamion" on Spenser's own marriage,--omitted with great
reluctance as not in harmony with modern manners.
_feateously_: elegantly.

_shend_: put out.
_a noble peer_: Robert Devereux, second Lord Essex, then at the
height of his brief triumph after taking Cadiz: hence the allusion
following to the Pillars of Hercules, placed near Gades by ancient
legend.
_Eliza_: Elizabeth; _twins of Jove_: the stars Castor and Pollux;
_baldric_: belt, the zodiac.

Poem 57.
A fine example of a peculiar class of Poetry;--that written by
thoughtful men who practised this Art but little. Wotton's, 72, is
another. Jeremy Taylor, Bishop Berkeley, Dr.I had seen the struggle to love and make
one's self understood, the refusal of two persons in conversation to
give themselves to each other, the coming together of two lovers, the
lovers with an infectious smile, who are lovers in name only, who bury
themselves in kisses, who press wound to wound to cure themselves,
between whom there is really no attachment, and who, in spite of their
ecstasy deriving light from shadow, are strangers as much as the sun
and the moon are strangers.  I had heard those who could find no crumb
of peace except in the confession of their shameful misery, and I had
seen faces pale and red-eyed from crying.  I wanted to grasp it all at
the same time.  All the truths taken together make only one truth.  I
had had to wait until that day to learn this simple thing.  It was this
truth of truths which I needed.

Not because of my love of mankind.  It is not true that we love
mankind.  No one ever has loved, does love, or will love mankind.  It
was for myself, solely for myself, that I sought to attain the full
truth, which is above emotion, above peace, even above life, like a
sort of death.  I wanted to derive guidance from it, a faith.  I wanted
to use it for my own good.

I went over the things I had seen since living in the boarding-house.
They were so numerous that I had become a stranger to myself.  I
scarcely had a name any more.  I fairly listened to the memory of them,
and in supreme concentration I tried to see and understand what I was.
It would be so beautiful to know who I was.

I thought of all those wise men, poets, artists before me who had
suffered, wept, and smiled on the road to truth.  I thought of the
Latin poet who wished to reassure and console men by showing them truth
as unveiled as a statue.  A fragment of his prelude came to my mind,
learned long ago, then dismissed and lost like almost everything that I
had taken the pains to learn up till then.  He said he kept watch in
the serene nights to find the words, the poem in which to convey to men
the ideas that would deliver them.  For two thousand years men have
always had to be reassured and consoled.  For two thousand years I have
had to be delivered.  Nothing has changed the surface of things.  The
teachings of Christ have not changed the surface of things, and would
not even if men had not ruined His teachings so that they can no longer
follow them honestly.  Will the great poet come who shall settle the
boundaries of belief and render it eternal, the poet who will be, not a
fool, not an ignorant orator, but a wise man, the great inexorable
poet?  I do not know, although the lofty words of the man who died in
the boarding-house have given me a vague hope of his coming and the
right to adore him already.

But what about me--me, who am only a glance from the eye of destiny?  I
am like a poet on the threshold of a work, an accursed, sterile poet
who will leave no glory behind, to whom chance /lent/ the truth that
genius would have /given/ him, a frail work which will pass away with
me, mortal and sealed to others like myself, but a sublime work
nevertheless, which will show the essential outlines of life and relate
the drama of dramas.

. . . . .

What am I?  I am the desire not to die.  I have always been impelled--
not that evening alone--by the need to construct the solid, powerful
dream that I shall never leave again.  We are all, always, the desire
not to die.  This desire is as immeasurable and varied as life's
complexity, but at bottom this is what it is:  To continue to /be,/ to
/be/ more and more, to develop and to endure.  All the force we have,
all our energy and clearness of mind serve to intensify themselves in
one way or another.  We intensify ourselves with new impressions, new
sensations, new ideas.  We endeavour to take what we do not have and to
add it to ourselves.  Humanity is the desire for novelty founded upon
the fear of death.  That is what it is.  I have seen it myself.
Instinctive movements, untrammelled utterances always tend the same
way, and the most dissimilar utterances are all alike.

. . . . .

But afterwards!  Where are the words that will light the way?  What is
humanity in the world, and what is the world?

Everything is within me, and there are no judges, and there are no
boundaries and no limits to me.  The /de profundis,/ the effort not to
die, the fall of desire with its soaring cry, all this has not stopped.
It is part of the immense liberty which the incessant mechanism of the
human heart exercises (always something different, always!).  And its
expansion is so great that death itself is effaced by it.  For how
could I imagine my death, except by going outside of myself, and
looking at myself as if I were not I but somebody else?

We do not die.  Each human being is alone in the world.  It seems
absurd, contradictory to say this, and yet it is so.  But there are
many human beings like me.  No, we cannot say that.  In saying that, we
set ourselves outside the truth in a kind of abstraction.  All we can
say is:  I am alone.

And that is why we do not die.

Once, bowed in the evening light, the dead man had said, "After my
death, life will continue.  Every detail in the world will continue to
occupy the same place quietly.  All the traces of my passing will die
little by little, and the void I leave behind will be filled once
more."

He was mistaken in saying so.  He carried all the truth with him.  Yet
we, /we/ saw him die.  He was dead for us, but not for himself.  I feel
there is a fearfully difficult truth here which we must get, a
formidable contradiction.  But I hold on to the two ends of it, groping
to find out what formless language will translate it.  Something like
this:  "Every human being is the whole truth."  I return to what I
heard.  We do not die since we are alone.  It is the others who die.
And this sentence, which comes to my lips tremulously, at once baleful
and beaming with light, announces that death is a false god.

But what of the others?  Granted that I have the great wisdom to rid
myself of the haunting dread of my own death, there remains the death
of others and the death of so many feelings and so much sweetness.  It
is not the conception of truth that will change sorrow.  Sorrow, like
joy, is absolute.

And yet!  The infinite grandeur of our misery becomes confused with
glory and almost with happiness, with cold haughty happiness.  Was it
out of pride or joy that I began to smile when the first white streaks
of dawn turned my lamp pale and I saw I was alone in the universe?


CHAPTER XV


It was the first time I had seen her in mourning, and that evening her
youth shone more resplendent than ever.

Her departure was close at hand.  She looked about to see if she had
left anything behind in the room, which had been made ready for other
people, the room which was already formless, already abandoned.

The door opened.  The young woman turned her head.  A man appeared in
the sunny doorway.

"Michel, Michel, Michel!" she cried.

She stretched out her arms, hesitated, and for a few seconds remained
motionless as light, with her full gaze upon him.

Then, in spite of where she was and the purity of her heart and the
chastity of her whole life, her legs shook and she was on the verge of
falling over.

F. _essuyer_, to dry); _assoilyie_, to absolve, acquit, and _assith_,
to compensate, both used by Sir W. Scott; _astre_, _aistre_, a hearth,
a Norman word found in 1292; _aunsel_, a steelyard, of which the etymology
is given in the _E.D.D._; _aunter_, an adventure, from the A.F. _aventure_;
_aver_, a beast of burden, horse, used by Burns, from the A.F.
_aveir_, property, cattle; _averous_, A.F.

_averous_, avaricious, in Wyclif's translation of 1 Cor. vi 10.

Here is ample proof of the survival of Anglo-French in our dialects.
Indeed, their chief philological use consists in the great antiquity
of many of the terms, which often preserve Old English and
Anglo-French forms with much fidelity. The charge often brought
against dialect speakers of using "corrupt" forms is only occasionally
and exceptionally true. Much worse "corruptions" have been made by
antiquaries, in order to suit their false etymologies.

CHAPTER X

LATER HISTORY OF THE DIALECTS

With the ascendancy of East Midland, and its acceptance as the chief
literary language, the other dialects practically ceased to be recorded,
with the exception (noted above) of the Scottish Northumbrian.

Of English Northumbrian, the sixteenth century tells us nothing beyond
what we can glean from belated copies of Northern ballads or such
traces of a Northern (apparently a Lancashire) dialect as appear
in Spenser's _Shepherd's Calendar_.

Fitzherbert's _Boke of Husbandry_ (1534) was reprinted for the E.D.S.
in 1882. It was written, not by Sir Anthony Fitzherbert, as I
erroneously said in the Preface, but by his brother, John Fitzherbert,
as has been subsequently shown.

It contains a considerable number of dialectal words. Thomas Tusser
(1525-1580), born in Essex, wrote _A Hundreth Good Pointes of
Husbandrie_ (1557), and _Fiue Hundred Pointes of Good Husbandrie_
(1573); see the edition by Payne and Herrtage, E.D.S., 1878.

He employs many country words, presumably Essex.

The dialect assumed by Edgar in Shakespeare's _King Lear_ is not
to be taken as being very accurate; he talks somewhat like a
Somersetshire peasant, but I suppose his speech to be in a conventional
stage dialect, such as we find also in _The London Prodigall_, Act
II, Sc. 4, where Olyver, "a Devonshire Clothier," uses similar
expressions, viz.

_chill_ for _Ich will_, I will; and _chy vor thee_, I warn thee.

Towards the end of the seventeenth century, the value of dialectal
words as helping to explain our English vocabulary began to be
recognised.

Particular mention may be made of the _Etymologicon Linguæ Anglicanæ_,
by Stephen Skinner, London, 1671; and it should be noted that this
is the Dictionary upon which Dr Johnson relied for the etymology
of native English words.

At the same time, we must not forget to note two Dictionaries of a
much earlier date, which are of high value.

The former of these is the _Promptorium Parvulorum_, completed in 1440,
published by the Camden Society in 1865; which contains a rather large
proportion of East Anglian words.
"I saw you in your
absence.  And often, when the light of dawn entered my room and touched
me, I thought of how completely consecrated I was to your love.
Thinking of you sometimes in my room in the evening, I would admire
myself."

A thrill went through him, and he smiled.

He kept saying the same things in scarcely different words, as if he
knew nothing else.  He had a childish soul and a limited mind behind
the perfect sculpture of his forehead and his great black eyes, in
which I saw distinctly the white face of the woman floating like a
swan.

She listened to him devoutly, her mouth half open, her head thrown back
lightly.  Had he not held her, she would have slipped to her knees
before this god who was as beautiful as she.

"The memory of you saddened my joys, but consoled my sorrows."

It was done by Rick Davis (Japan) with help from David Steelman
(Taiwan).

The original

捕魚為業。緣溪行﹐忘路之遠近。忽逢
桃花林﹐夾岸數百步中無雜樹﹐芳華鮮美落英繽紛。漁
人甚異之。復前行欲窮其林。林盡水源便得一山。山有
小口仿佛若有光。便捨船從口入。初極狹纔通人。復行
數十步豁然開朗。土地平礦屋舍儼然。有良田美池桑竹
之屬。阡陌交通雞犬相聞。"Be mine, Anna!"

She radiated consent, but her eyes faltered, and she glanced round the
room.

"Let us respect this room," she breathed.  Then she was ashamed at
having refused, and immediately stammered, "Excuse me."

The man also looked around the room.  His forehead darkened with a
savage frown of suspicion, and the superstition of his race shone in
his eyes.

"It was here--that he died?"

"No," she said.