Produced by Eric Eldred, Robert Connal
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.


LOOK BACK ON HAPPINESS

KNUT HAMSUN

Translated from the Norwegian
By PAULA WIKING


LOOK BACK ON HAPPINESS


I


I have gone to the forest.

Not because I am offended about anything, or very unhappy about men's evil
ways; but since the forest will not come to me, I must go to it. That is
all. I have not gone this time as a slave and a vagabond. I have money
enough and am overfed, stupefied with success and good fortune, if you
understand that. I have left the world as a sultan leaves rich food and
harems and flowers, and clothes himself in a hair shirt.

Really, I could make quite a song and dance about it. For I mean to roam
and think and make great irons red-hot. Nietzsche no doubt would have
spoken thus: The last word I spake unto men achieved their praise, and
they nodded. But it was my last word; and I went into the forest. For then
did I comprehend the truth, that my speech must needs be dishonest or
foolish.... But I said nothing of the kind; I simply went to the forest.

       *       *       *       *       *

You must not believe that nothing ever happens here. The snowflakes drift
down just as they do in the city, and the birds and beasts scurry about
from morning till night, and from night till morning. I could send solemn
stories from this place, but I do not. I have sought the forest for
solitude and for the sake of my great irons; for I have great irons which
lie within me and grow red-hot. So I deal with myself accordingly. Suppose
I were to meet a buck reindeer one day, then I might say to myself:

"Great heavens, this is a buck reindeer, he's dangerous!"

But if then I should be too frightened, I might tell myself a comforting
lie and say it was a calf or some feathered beast.

You say nothing happens here?

One day I saw two Lapps meet. A boy and a girl. At first they behaved as
people do. "_Boris!_" they said to each other and smiled. But
immediately after, both fell at full length in the snow and were gone from
my sight. After a quarter of an hour had passed, I thought, "You'd better
see to them; they may be smothered in the snow." But then they got up and
went their separate ways.

In all my weatherbeaten days, I have never seen such a greeting as that.

       *       *       *       *       *

Day and night I live in a deserted hut of peat into which I must crawl on
my hands and knees. Someone must have built it long ago and used it, for
lack of a better,--perhaps a man who was in hiding, a man who concealed
himself here for a few autumn days. There are two of us in the hut, that
is if you regard Madame as a person; otherwise there is only one. Madame
is a mouse I live with, to whom I have given this honorary title. She eats
everything I put aside for her in the nooks and corners, and sometimes she
sits watching me.

When I first came, there was stale straw in the hut, which Madame by all
means was allowed to keep; for my own bed I cut fresh pine twigs, as is
fitting. I have an ax and a saw and the necessary crockery. And I have a
sleeping bag of sheepskin with the wool inside. I keep a fire burning in
the fireplace all night, and my shirt, which hangs by it, smells of fresh
resin in the morning. When I want coffee, I go out, fill the kettle with
clean snow, and hang it over the fire till the snow turns to water.

Is this a life worth living?

There you have betrayed yourself. This is a life you do not understand.
Yes, your home is in the city, and you have furnished it with vanities,
with pictures and books; but you have a wife and a servant and a hundred
expenses. Asleep or awake you must keep pace with the world and are never
at peace. I have peace. You are welcome to your intellectual pastimes and
books and art and newspapers; welcome, too, to your bars and your whisky
that only makes me ill. Here am I in the forest, quite content. If you ask
me intellectual questions and try to trip me up, then I will reply, for
example, that God is the origin of all things and that truly men are mere
specks and atoms in the universe. You are no wiser than I. But if you
should go so far as to ask me what is eternity, then I know quite as much
in this matter, too, and reply thus: Eternity is merely unborn time,
nothing but unborn time.

My friend, come here to me and I will take a mirror from my pocket and
reflect the sun on your face, my friend.

You lie in bed till ten or eleven in the morning, yet you are weary,
exhausted, when you get up. I see you in my mind's eye as you go out into
the street; the morning has dawned too early on your blinking eyes. I rise
at five quite refreshed. It is still dark outdoors, yet there is enough to
look at--the moon, the stars, the clouds, and the weather portents for the
day. I prophesy the weather for many hours ahead. In what key do the winds
whistle? Is the crack of the ice in the Glimma light and dry, or deep and
long? These are splendid portents, and as it grows lighter, I add the
visible signs to the audible ones, and learn still more.

Then a narrow streak of daylight appears far down in the east, the stars
fade from the sky, and soon light reigns over all. A crow flies over the
woods, and I warn Madame not to go outside the hut or she will be
devoured.

But if fresh snow has fallen, the trees and copses and the great rocks
take on giant, unearthly shapes, as though they had come from another
world in the night. A storm-felled pine with its root torn up looks like a
witch petrified in the act of performing strange rites.

Here a hare has sprung by, and yonder are the tracks of a solitary
reindeer. I shake out my sleeping bag and after hanging it high in a tree
to escape Madame, who eats everything, I follow the tracks of the reindeer
into the forest. It has jogged along without haste, but toward a definite
goal--straight east to meet the day. By the banks of the Skiel, which is
so rapid that its waters never freeze, the reindeer has stopped to drink,
to scrape the hillside for moss, to rest a while, and then moved on.

And perhaps what this reindeer has done is all the knowledge and
experience I gain that day. It seems much to me. The days are short; at
two, I am already strolling homeward in the deep twilight, with the good,
still night approaching. Then I begin to cook. I have a great deal of meat
stored in three pure-white drifts of snow. In fact I have something even
better: eight fat cheeses of reindeer milk, to eat with butter and
crisp-bread.

While the pot is boiling I lie down, and gaze at the fire till I fall
asleep. I take my midday nap before my meal. And when I waken, the food is
cooked, filling the hut with an aroma of meat and resin. Madame darts back
and forth across the floor and at length gets her share. I eat, and light
my cutty-pipe.

The day is at an end. All has been well, and I have had no unpleasantness.
In the great silence surrounding me, I am the only adult, roaming man;
this makes me bigger and more important, God's kin. And I believe the
red-hot irons within me are progressing well, for God does great things
for his kin.

I lie thinking of the reindeer, the path it took, what it did by the
river, and how it continued on its journey. There under the trees it has
nibbled, and its horns have rubbed against the bark, leaving their marks;
there an osier bed has forced it to turn aside; but just beyond, it has
straightened its path and continued east once more. All this I think of.

And you? Have you read in a newspaper, which disagrees with another
newspaper, what the public in Norway is thinking of old-age insurance?


II


On stormy days I sit indoors and find something to occupy my time. Perhaps
I write letters to some acquaintance or other telling him I am well, and
hope to hear the same from him. But I cannot post the letters, and they
grow older every day. Not that it matters. I have tied the letters to a
string that hangs from the ceiling to prevent Madame from gnawing at them.


One day a man came to the hut. He walked swiftly and stealthily; his
clothes were ordinary and he wore no collar, for he was a laboring man. He
carried a sack, and I wondered what could be in it.

"Good morning," we said to each other. "Fine weather in the woods."

"I didn't expect to find anybody in the hut," said the man. His manner was
at once forceful and discontented; he flung down the sack without
humility.

"He may know something about me," I thought, "since he is such a man."

"Have you lived here long?" he asked. "And are you leaving soon?"

"Is the hut yours, perhaps?" I asked in my turn.

Then he looked at me.

"Because if the hut is yours, that's another matter," I said. "But I don't
intend like a pickpocket to take it with me when I leave."

I spoke gently and jestingly to avoid committing a blunder by my speech.

But I had said quite the right thing; the man at once lost his assurance.
Somehow I had made him feel that I knew more about him than he knew about
me.

When I asked him to come in, he was grateful and said:

"Thank you, but I'm afraid I'll get snow all over your floor."

Then he took special pains to wipe his boots clean, and bringing his sack
with him, crawled in.

"I could give you some coffee," I said.

"You shouldn't trouble on my account," he replied, wiping his face and
panting with the heat, "though I've been walking all night."

"Are you crossing the fjeld?"

"That depends. I don't suppose there's work to be got on a winter day on
the other side, either."

I gave him coffee.

"Got anything to eat?" he said. "It's a shame to ask you. A round of
crisp-bread? I had no chance to bring food with me."

"Yes, I've got bread, butter, and reindeer cheese. Help yourself."

"It's not so easy for a lot of people in the winter," said the man as he
ate.

"Could you take some letters to the village for me?" I asked. "I'll pay
you for it."

"Oh, no, I couldn't do that," the man replied. "I'm afraid that's
impossible. I must cross the fjeld now. I've heard there's work in
Hilling, in the Hilling Forest. So I can't."

"Must get his back up a bit again," I thought. "He just sits now there
without any guts at all. In the end he'll start begging for a few
coppers."

I felt his sack and said:

"What's this you're lugging about with you? Heavy things?"

"Mind your own business!" was his instant retort, as he drew the sack
closer to him.

"I wasn't going to steal any of it; I'm no thief," I said, jesting again.

"I don't care what you are," he muttered.

The day wore on. Since I had a visitor, I had no desire to go to the
woods, but wanted to sit and talk to him and ask him questions. He was a
very ordinary man, of no great interest to the irons in my fire, with
dirty hands, uneducated and uninteresting in his speech; probably he had
stolen the things in his sack. Later I learned that he was quick in much
small knowledge that life had taught him. He complained that his heels
felt cold, and took off his boots. And no wonder he felt cold, for where
the heels of his stockings should have been there were only great holes.
He borrowed a knife to cut away the ragged edges, and then drew on the
stockings again back to front, so that the torn soles came over his
instep. When he had put on his boots again, he said, "There, now it's nice
and warm."

He did no harm. If he took down the saw and the ax from their hooks to
inspect them, he put them back again where he had found them. When he
examined the letters, trying perhaps to read the addresses, he did not let
them go carelessly, leaving them to swing back and forth, but held the
string so that it hung motionless. I had no reason to complain about him.

He had his midday meal with me, and when he had eaten, he said:

"Do you mind if I cut myself some pine twigs to sit on?"

He went out to cut off some soft pine, and we had to move Madame's straw
to make room for the man inside the hut. Then we lay on our twigs, burning
resin and talking.

He was still there in the afternoon, still lying down as though to
postpone the time of his leaving. When it began to grow dark, he went to
the low doorway and looked out at the weather. Then, turning his head
back, he asked:

"Do you think there'll be snow tonight?"

"You ask me questions and I ask you questions," I said, "but it looks like
snow; the smoke is blowing down."

It made him uneasy to think it might snow, and he said he had better leave
that night. Suddenly he flew into a rage. For as I lay there, I stretched,
so that my hand accidentally touched his sack again.

"You leave me alone!" he shouted, tearing the sack from my grasp. "Don't
you touch that sack, or I'll show you!"

I replied that I had meant nothing by it, and had no intention of stealing
anything from him.

"Stealing, eh! What of it? I'm not afraid of you, and don't you go
thinking I am! Look, here's what I've got in the bag," said the man, and
began to rummage in it and to show me the contents: three pairs of new
mittens, some sort of thick cloth for garments, a bag of barley, a side of
bacon, sixteen rolls of tobacco, and a few large lumps of sugar candy. In
the bottom of the bag was perhaps half a bushel of coffee beans.

No doubt it was all from the general stores, with the exception of a heap
of broken crisp-bread, which might have been stolen elsewhere.

"So you've got crisp-bread after all," I said.

"If you knew anything about it, you wouldn't talk like that," the man
replied. "When I'm crossing the fjeld on foot, walking and walking, don't
I need food to put in my belly? It's blasphemy to listen to you!"

Neatly and carefully he put everything back into the sack, each article in
its turn. He took pains to build up the rolls of tobacco round the bacon,
to protect the cloth from grease stains.

"You might buy this cloth from me," he said. "I'll
let you have it cheap. It's duffle. It only gets in my way."

"How much do you want for it?" I asked.

"There's enough for a whole suit of clothes, maybe more," he said to
himself as he spread it out.

I said to the man:

"Truly you come here into the forest bringing with you life and the world
and intellectual values and news. Let us talk a little. Tell me something:
are you afraid your footprints will be visible tomorrow if there's fresh
snow tonight?"

"That's my business. I've crossed the field before and I know many paths,"
he muttered. "I'll let you have the cloth for a few crowns."

I shook my head, so the man again neatly folded the cloth and put it back
in the bag exactly as though it belonged to him.

"I'll cut it up into material for trousers; then the pieces won't be so
large, and I'll be able to sell it."

"You'd better leave enough for a whole suit in one piece," I said, "and
cut up the rest for trousers."

"You think so? Yes, maybe you're right."

We calculated how much would be necessary for a grown man's suit, and took
down the string from which the letters hung to measure our own clothes, so
as to be sure to get the measurements right. Then we cut into the edge of
the cloth, and tore it across. In addition to one complete suit, there was
enough left for two good-sized pairs of trousers.

Then the man offered to sell me other things out of his sack, and I bought
some coffee and a few rolls of tobacco. He put the money away in a leather
purse, and I saw how empty the purse was, and the circumstantial and
poverty-stricken fashion in which he put the money away, afterward feeling
the outside of his pocket.

"You haven't been able to sell me much," I said, "but I don't need any
more than that."

"Business is business," said he. "I don't complain."

It was quite decent of him.

While he was making ready to depart and clearing his bed of pine needles
out of the way, I thought pityingly of his sordid little theft. Stealing
because he was needy--a side of bacon and a length of cloth which he was
trying to sell in the forest! Theft has indeed ceased to be a matter of
great moment. This is because legal punishment for misdemeanors of all
kinds has also ceased to be of great moment. It is only a dull, human
punishment; the religious element has been removed from the law, and a
local magistrate is no longer a man of mystic power.

I well remember the last time I heard a judge explain the meaning of the
oath as it should be explained. It chilled us all to the bone to hear him.
We need some witchcraft again, and the Sixth Book of Moses, and the sin
against the Holy Ghost, and signing your name in the blood of a newly
baptized child! Steal a sack of money and silver treasure, if you like,
and hide the sack in the hills where on autumn evenings a blue flame will
hover over the spot. But don't come to me with three pairs of mittens and
a side of household bacon!

The man no longer worried about the sack; leaving it behind, he crawled
out of the hut to study the weather. The coffee and tobacco I had bought I
put back into the sack, for I did not need them. When he returned, he
said:

"I think after all I'd better stop the night here with you, if you don't
mind."

In the evening he gave no indication of being prepared to contribute any
of his own food. I cooked some coffee and gave him some dry bread to eat
with it.

"You shouldn't have expenses for me," he said.

Then he began to rummage in his sack again, pushing the bacon well down so
that the cloth might not be stained by it; after this he took off his
leather belt and put it round the sack, with a loop to carry over one
shoulder.

"Now if I take the neck of the sack over the other shoulder, I'll find it
easier to carry," he said.

I gave him my letters to post on the other side of the fjeld and he stowed
them away safely, slapping the outside of his pocket afterward; I also
gave him a special envelope in which to keep the money for the stamps, and
tied it to the neck of the sack.

"Where do you live?" I asked him.

"Where can a poor man live? Of course I live by the sea. I'm sorry to say
I have a wife and children--no use denying it."

"How many children have you?"

"Four. One's got a crippled arm and the others--there's something wrong
with all of them. It's not easy for a poor devil. My wife's ill, and a few
days ago she thought she was dying and wanted Communion."

A sad note crept into his voice. But the note was false. He was telling me
a pack of lies. When they came to look for him from the village, no
Christian would have the heart to accuse a man with such a large and sick
family. This, no doubt, was his meaning.

Man, oh man, thou art worse than a mouse!

I questioned him no further, but asked him to sing something, a ballad or
a song, since we had nothing else to do.

"I've no heart to sing now," he replied. "Except possibly a hymn."

"All right; sing a hymn, then."

"Not now. I'd like to do you a favor, but--"

His uneasiness was rising. A little later he took his sack and went out.

"Well, he's gone," I thought, "but he hasn't said the customary
peace-be-with-you. I'm glad I've come into the forest," I thought. "This
is my home, and from this day forth, no mother's son shall come within my
walls again."

I made an elaborate agreement with myself that I should have no more truck
with men.

"Madame, come here," I said. "I esteem you highly, and herewith, Madame, I
undertake to enter upon a union with you for life!"

Half an hour later, the man returned. He carried no sack.

"I thought you'd gone," I said.

"Gone? I'm not a dog," he replied. "I've met people before this, and I say
good morning when I come and peace-be-with-you when I go. You shouldn't
sneer at me, you know."

"What have you done with the sack?"

"I've carried it part of the way."

His concealing the sack in case anyone should come proved he had
forethought, for it was easier to get away scot-free without a burden on
one's back. To stop him from telling me any more lies about his poverty, I
said:

"I expect you've raised plenty of dust in your day? Still do, for that
matter?"

"Well, I do what I can," he replied cheerfully. "I can lift a barrel
easier than most, and nobody was able to dance me off the floor last
Christmas! Hush--is that someone coming?"

We listened. His eyes darted toward the entrance, and in a moment he had
chosen to meet danger halfway. He was taut and splendid; I could see his
jaw working.

"It's nothing," I said.

Resolute and strong as a bull, he crawled out of the hut and was gone for
a few minutes. When he returned, breathing heavily, he said:

"It's nothing."

We lay down for the night.

"In God's name!" he said, as he settled himself on his pine bed. I fell
asleep at once, and for some time slept deeply. But during the night
restlessness seized on the man again. "Peace be with you!" I heard him
mutter as he crawled out of the hut.

In the morning I burned the man's bed of pine needles; it made a lively
fire of crackling pine in the hut.

Outside, the ground was covered with new-fallen snow.


III


There is nothing like being left alone again, to walk peacefully with
oneself in the woods. To boil one's coffee and fill one's pipe, and to
think idly and slowly as one does it.

There, now I'll fill the kettle with snow, I think, and now I'm crushing
the coffee beans with a stone; later I must beat my sleeping bag well in
the snow and get the wool white again. There is nothing in this of
literature or great novels or public opinion; does it matter? But then I
haven't been toiling just to get this coffee into my life. Literature?
When Rome ruled the world, she was no more than Greece's apprentice in
literature. Yet Rome ruled the world. Let us look too at another country
we know: it fought a war of independence the glory of which still shines,
and it brought forth the greatest school of painting in the world. Yet it
had no literature, and has none today....

Day by day I grow more knowing in the ways of the trees and the moss and
the snow on the ground, and all things are my friends. The stump of a fir
tree stands thawing in the sun; I feel my familiarity with it grow, and
sometimes I stand there loving it, for there is something in it that moves
my soul. The bark is badly broken. One winter in the deep snow, the tree
must have been crippled, and now it points upward long and naked. I put
myself in its place, and look at it with pity. My eyes perhaps have the
simple, animal expression that human eyes had in the age of the mastodons.

No doubt you will seize this opportunity to mock me, for there are many
amusing things you can say about me and this stump of a fir. Yet in your
heart, you know that I am superior to you in this as in everything else,
with the single exception that I have not your conventional
accomplishments, nor have I passed examinations. About the forest and the
earth you can teach me nothing, for here I feel what no man else has felt.

Sometimes I take the wrong direction and lose my way. Yes, truly this may
happen sometimes. But I do not begin to twist and lose myself outside my
very door, like the children of the city. I am twelve miles out, far up
the opposite bank of the Skjel River, before I begin to get lost, and then
only on a sunless day, with perhaps thick, wild snow coming down, and no
north or south in the sky. Then you must know the special marks of this
kind of tree and that, the galipot of the pine, the bark of deciduous
trees, the moss that grows at their roots, the angle of the south and
north-pointing branches, the stones that are moss-covered and those that
are bare, and the pattern of the network of veins in the leaves. From all
these things while there is daylight I can find my way.

But if the dusk falls, I know it will be impossible for me to get home
till the next day. "How shall I pass this night?" I say to myself. And I
roam about till I find a sheltered spot; the best is a crag standing with
its back to the wind. Here I collect a few armfuls of pine needles, button
my jacket tight, and take a long time to settle. No one who has not tried
it knows anything of the fine pleasure that streams through the soul as
one sits in a snug shelter on such a night. I light my pipe to pass the
time, but the tobacco doesn't agree with me because I haven't eaten, so I
put some resin in my mouth to chew as I lie thinking of many things. The
snow continues to fall outside; if I have been lucky enough to find a
shelter facing the right way, the snowdrifts will close in over me and
form a crest like a roof above my retreat. Then I am quite safe, and may
sleep or wake as I please; there will be no danger of freezing my feet.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two men came to my hut; they were in a great hurry, and one of them called
to me:

"Good morning. Has a man passed this way?"

I didn't like his face. I was not his servant and his question was too
stupid.

"Many people may have passed this way. Do you mean have I _seen_ a
man go by?"

So much for him!

"I meant what I said," the man replied surlily. "I'm asking you in the
name of the law."

"Oh."

I had no desire for further conversation, and crawled into my hut.

The two men followed me. The constable grinned and said:

"Did you _see_ a man pass by here yesterday?"

"No," I said.

They looked at each other, and took counsel together; then they left the
hut and returned to the village.

I thought: What zeal this policeman showed in the execution of his duties,
how he shone with public spirit! There will be bonuses for the capture and
transport of the criminal; there will be honor in having carried out the
deed. All mankind should adopt this man because he is its son, created in
its image! Where are the irons? He would rattle the links a little and
lift them on his arm like the train of a riding skirt, to make me feel his
terrifying power to put people in irons ... I feel nothing.

And what tradesmen--what kings of trade--we have today! They instantly
miss what a man can carry off in a sack, and notify the police.

From now on I begin to long for the spring. My peat hut lies still too
near to mankind, and I will build myself another when the frost has gone
out of the ground. On the other side of the Skjel, I have chosen a spot in
the forest which I think I shall like. It is twenty-four miles from the
village and eighteen across the fjeld.


IV


Have I said that I was too near men? Heaven help me, for some days in
succession I have been taking strolls in the forest, saying good morning
and pretending I was in human company. If it was a man I imagined beside
me, we carried on a long, intelligent conversation, but if it was a woman,
I was polite: "Let me carry your parcel, miss." Once it must have been the
Lapp's daughter I seemed to meet, for I flattered her most lavishly and
offered to carry her fur cloak if she would take it off and walk in her
skin; tut, tut.

Heaven help me, I am no longer too near men. And probably I will not build
that peat hut still further away from them.

The days grow longer, and I do not mind. The truth is that in the winter I
suffered privation and learned much in order to master myself. It has
taken time and sometimes a resolute will, so it cannot be denied that I am
paying for my education rather dearly. Sometimes I have been needlessly
stern with myself.

"There is a loaf of bread," I said. "It doesn't surprise me, it doesn't
interest me; I am used to it. But if you see no bread for twelve hours, it
will mean something to you," I said, and hid the bread away.

That was in the winter.

Were they dreary days? No, good days. My liberty was so great that I could
do and think as I pleased; I was alone, the bear of the forest. But even
in the heart of the forest no man dares speak aloud without looking round;
rather, he walks in silence. For a time you console yourself that it's
typically English to be silent, it's regal to be silent. Such failures to
draw all the consequences from a new discovery are common enough,
however, in the history of scientific thought.

Parmenides cleared up this ambiguity, not by affirming the existence
of empty space, but by denying the possibility of such a thing,
even before it had been asserted by any one.

He saw that the Pythagoreans really implied it, though they were quite
unconscious of the fact. He is interesting to us as the first philosopher
who thought of expounding his system in verse. It was not a very happy
thought, as the arguments in which he deals do not readily lend
themselves to this mode of expression, and we may be thankful that
none of his successors except Empedocles followed his example.

It has the very great inconvenience of making it necessary to use
different words for the same thing to suit the exigencies of metre.

And if there ever was an argument that demanded precise statement,
it was that of Parmenides.

As it is, his poem has the faults we should look for in a metrical version
of Euclid. On the other hand, Parmenides is the first philosopher of
whom we have sufficient remains to enable us to follow a continuous
argument; for we have nothing of Pythagoras at all, and only
detached fragments of the rest.

We can see that he was ready to follow the argument wherever it might
lead. He took the conception of matter which had been elaborated by his
predecessors and he showed that, if it is to be taken seriously, it must
lead to the conclusion that reality is continuous, finite, and spherical,
with nothing outside it and no empty space within it. For such a reality
motion is impossible, and the world of the senses is therefore an
illusion. Of course that was not a result in which it was possible
for men to acquiesce for long, and historically speaking, the Eleatic
doctrine must be regarded as a _reductio ad absurdum_ of earlier
speculation.

There is no reason to believe, however, that Parmenides himself meant
it to be understood in this way. He believed firmly that he had found the
truth.

Several attempts were made to escape the conclusions of Parmenides,
and they all start by abandoning the assumption of the homogeneity
and continuity of matter which had been implicit in the earlier
systems, though it was first brought to the light of day by Parmenides.

Here again the influence of contemporary science on philosophic
thought is clearly marked.

Empedocles of Agrigentum (_c._ 460 B. C.), the only citizen of a Dorian
state who finds a place in the early history of science and
philosophy, was the founder of the Sicilian school of medicine, and
it was probably his pre-occupation with that science that led him
to revive the old doctrine of Fire, Air, Earth, and Water, which
the Milesians had cast aside, but which lent itself readily to the
physiological theories of the day.

He did not use the word afterwards translated 'elements' (στοιχεια
{stoicheia}) for these.

It means literally 'letters of the alphabet', and appears to have been
first employed in this connexion by the Pythagoreans at a later date, when
they found it necessary to take account of the new theory. Empedocles spoke
of the 'four roots' of things, and by this he meant to imply that these
four forms of matter were equally original and altogether disparate.

That furnished at least a partial answer to the arguments of Parmenides,
which depended on the assumption that matter was homogeneous.

He also found it necessary to assume two sources of motion or forces, as we
might call them, though Empedocles thought of them as substances, one of
which tended to separate the 'four roots' and the other to combine
them.

These he called Love and Strife, and he supposed the life of the world
to take the form of alternate cycles, in which one or the other prevailed
in turn. In all this he was plainly influenced by his physiological
studies.

He thinks of the world as an animal organism subject to what are
now called anabolism and catabolism.

The details of the theory make this quite clear. A similar doctrine was
taught by Anaxagoras (_c._ 460 B. C.), who came from Clazomenae in Asia
Minor to Athens after the Persian Wars, and was one of the
teachers of Pericles.
His doctrine of 'seeds', in which the traditional 'opposites'--wet and
dry, cold and hot--were combined in different proportions, is rather
more subtle than that of Empedocles, and it is possible to see in it
a curious anticipation of certain features in modern chemistry.
Anaxagoras too felt it necessary to assume a force or source of
motion, but he thought that one would suffice to account for the
rotation (περιχωρησις {perichôrêsis}) to which he attributed the
formation of the world.

He called that force Mind (νους {nous}), but his own description
of it shows that he regarded it as corporeal, though he thought it
was something more tenuous and unmixed than other bodies.

There is little doubt that he selected the term in order to mark the
identity of the source of motion in the world with that in the animal
organism.

That again is in accordance with the scientific interests of the time. In
his astronomical theories, however, Anaxagoras showed himself a true
eastern Ionian, and lagged far behind the Pythagoreans.
For him, as for the Ionians of the Aegean down to and including
Democritus, the earth was flat, and the eddy or vortex which gave
rise to the world was still rotation in a plane.

A more satisfying answer to Parmenides was the doctrine of Atomism,
which frankly accepted the existence of space, and asserted that
it was just as real as body.

The first hint of such a solution was given by Melissus (_c._ 444 B. C.),
who was a Samian but a member of the Eleatic school. He said, 'If things
are a many, then each of them must be such as I have shown the One to
be.' That was meant as a _reductio ad absurdum_; but, when Leucippus of
Miletus (_c._ 440 B. C.), who had also studied in the school of
Elea, ventured to assert the existence of the Void, there was no longer
any reason for shirking the conclusion which Melissus had stated only to
show its impossibility. The atoms are, in fact, just the continuous
indivisible One of Parmenides multiplied _ad infinitum_ in an infinite empty
space.

On that side at least, the theory of body was now complete, and the
question asked by Thales was answered, and it is of great interest to
observe that this was brought about by the renewal of intercourse
between the Ionians of Italy and those of the Aegean, a renewal
which was made possible by the establishment of the Athenian Empire.

Nothing makes us feel the historical connexion more vividly than
the re-emergence of the names of Miletus and Samos after all these
years.

  There were, however, certain more
  fundamental problems which Atomism
  could not solve, and which were first
  attacked at Athens itself.
  So far, it will be noted,
  Athens has played no part at all in our
  story, and in fact no more than two Athenians ever became philosophers
of the first rank.

  It is true that they were called
  Socrates and Plato, so the
  exception is a considerable one. It
  was the foundation of the Athenian Empire
  that made Athens the natural
  meeting-place of the most diverse philosophical
  and scientific views.

  It was here that the east and west
  of Hellas came together,
  and that the two streams of tradition
  became one, with the result that a
  new tradition was started which,
  though often interrupted for a time,
  continues to the present day.

  If we wish to understand the development
  of Greek philosophy, it is of the first
  importance that we should realize the intellectual
  ferment which existed at Athens in the
  great days of the Periclean age. It
  has been mentioned already that Anaxagoras
  of Clazomenae had settled there, and it was not long before his
example was followed by others.

In particular, Zeno of Elea (_c._ 450 B. C.), the favourite disciple of
Parmenides, had a considerable following at Athens. He made it his business
to champion the doctrine of his master by showing that those who
refused to accept it were obliged to give their assent to views
which were at least as repugnant to common sense, and in this way
he incidentally did much for mathematics and philosophy by raising
the difficulties of infinite divisibility and continuity in an acute
form.

All that is something quite apart from the influence of the 'sophists'
at a rather later date, though they too came both from the east and from
the west, and though they had been influenced by the more strictly
philosophical schools of these regions. It was into this Athens that
Socrates was born (470 B.

C.) about ten years after the battle of Salamis, and he was naturally
exposed to all these conflicting influences, of which Plato has
given us a vivid description in the _Phaedo_, from his earliest
youth.

He cannot, in fact, be understood at all unless this historical
background is kept constantly in view.

There can be no reasonable doubt that at a very early age he attached
himself to Archelaus, an Athenian who had succeeded Anaxagoras,
when that philosopher had to leave Athens for Lampsacus.

Ion of Chios, a contemporary witness, said that Socrates had visited
Asia Minor with Archelaus, and that appears to refer to the siege
of Samos, when Socrates was under thirty.

There is no reason whatever to doubt the statement, which Plato
makes more than once, that he had met Parmenides and Zeno at a still
earlier date.

At any rate, the influence of Zeno on the dialectic of Socrates is
unmistakable.

We may also take it that he was familiar with all sorts of Orphic
and Pythagorean sectaries.

Aeschines of Sphettos wrote a dialogue entitled _Telauges_, in which
he represented Socrates as rallying the extreme asceticism of the
strict followers of Pythagoras.

So far, however, as we can form a picture of him for ourselves, he
was not the sort of man to become the disciple of any one.

He was a genuine Athenian in respect of what is called his 'irony', which
implies a certain humorous reserve which kept him from all extravagances,
however interested he might be in the extravagances of others. Nevertheless,
while still quite a young man, he had somehow acquired a reputation
for 'wisdom', though he himself disclaimed anything of the sort.

He had also, it appears, gathered round him a circle of 'associates' (ἑταιροι
{hetairoi}). The only direct evidence we have for these early days is
the _Clouds_ of Aristophanes (423 B. C.), which is of course a comedy and
must not be taken too literally. On the other hand, a comic poet who
knew his business (and surely Aristophanes did) could hardly present a
well-known man to the Athenian public in a manner which had no
relation to fact at all.

It is fortunate that there is a passage in Xenophon's _Memorabilia_ (i. 6)
which seems to supply us with the very background we need to make the
_Clouds_ intelligible. It represents Socrates in an entirely different light
from that in which he appears in the rest of the work, and it can
hardly be Xenophon's own invention.

It seems to refer to a time when Plato and Xenophon were babies,
if not to a time before they were born, and it is probable that it
comes from some literary source which we can no longer trace.

We are told, then, that Antiphon the sophist was trying to detach his
companions (συνουσιασται {synousiastai}) from Socrates, and a conversation
followed in which he charged him with teaching his followers to be
miserable rather than happy, and added that he was right not to
charge a fee for his teaching, since in fact it was of no value.

It will be seen that this implies a regular relation between Socrates and
his followers which was sufficiently well known to arouse
professional jealousy. Socrates does not attempt to deny the fact. He says
that what he and his companions do is to spend their time together
in studying the wisdom of the men of old which they have left behind
them in books, and that, if they come upon anything which they think
is good, they extract it for their own use, and count it great gain
if, in doing this, they become friends to one another.

It is obvious that this suggests something quite different from the current
view of Socrates as a talker at street corners, something much more
like a regular school, and that, so far as it goes, it explains the
burlesque of Aristophanes.

The Socrates of whom we know most is, however, quite differently engaged.
He has devoted his life to a mission to his fellow men, and especially to
his fellow citizens. If we may so far trust Plato's _Apology_, the
occasion of that was the answer received from the Delphic oracle by
Chaerephon, whom we know from Aristophanes as one of the leading disciples
of Socrates in the earlier part of his life.
Chaerephon asked the god of Delphi whether there was any one wiser than
Socrates, and this of course implies that Socrates had a reputation for
'wisdom' before his mission began. The oracle declared that there was no
one wiser, and Plato makes Socrates say in the _Apology_ that this was
the real beginning of that mission. He set out at first to prove
that the oracle was wrong, and for that purpose he tried to discover
some one wiser than himself, a search in which he was disappointed, since
he could only find people who thought they were wise, and no one who
really was so. He therefore concluded that what the oracle really meant
was that Socrates was wiser than other people in one respect only. Neither
he nor any one else was really 'wise', but Socrates was wiser than the rest
because he knew he was not wise and they thought they were.

It ought to be clear that this is mostly 'irony', and it is not to be
supposed that Socrates attached undue importance to the oracle, which
he speaks of quite lightly, but he could hardly have told the story at
all unless it was generally known that his mission did in fact date
roughly from that period of his life.

Historically it would probably be truer to say that the outbreak
of the Peloponnesian War, in which Socrates served with great
distinction as a hoplite, marked the decisive turning-point.

It was in the camp at Potidaea that he once stood in a trance for
twenty-four hours (431 B.

C.), and that seems to point to some great psychological change, which
may very well have been occasioned or accelerated by his experiences in
the war. At any rate we now find him entirely devoted to the conversion
of his fellow citizens, and we must try to understand what the message he
had for them was.

In the _Apology_ Socrates declares that his mission was divinely imposed
upon him, so that he dare not neglect it, even if it should lead to his
death, as in fact it did.

The tone here is quite different from the half-humorous style in which he
deals with the Delphic oracle, and even the 'divine sign'. That only
warned him not to do things, mostly quite trivial things, which he was
about to do, and never told him to do anything; this, on the contrary,
was a positive command, laid upon him by God, and there can be no doubt
that Plato means us to understand this to have been the innermost
conviction of Socrates.

It is hard to believe that Plato could have misrepresented his master's
attitude on such a point. He was present at the trial, and the _Apology_
must have been written not very long afterwards, when the memory of it was
still fresh in people's minds. Now Plato tells us quite clearly that what
Socrates tried to get the Athenians to understand was the duty of
'caring for their souls' (ψυχης επιμελειο {psychês epimeleio}). That
is confirmed from other sources, and indeed it is generally admitted.

The phrase has, however, become so familiar that it does not at
once strike us as anything very new or important.

To an Athenian of the fifth century B.

C., on the other hand, it must have seemed very strange indeed. The word
translated 'soul' (ψυχη {psychê}) occurs often enough, no doubt,
in the literature of the period, but it is never used of anything
for which we could be called upon to 'care' in the sense evidently intended
by Socrates. Its normal use is to denote the breath of life, the
'ghost' a man 'gives up' at the moment of death. It can therefore be
rendered by 'life' in all cases where there is a question of risking or
losing life or of clinging to it when we ought to be prepared to
sacrifice it, but it is not used for the seat of conscious life at
all.

It is sometimes employed to signify the seat of the dream-consciousness
or of what is now called the subconscious or subliminal self, but never
of the ordinary waking consciousness which is the seat of knowledge
and ignorance, goodness and badness.[2] On the other hand, that use of the
word is quite common in the fourth century, and it may be inferred
that this change was due to Socrates.

More than once Aristophanes ridicules him for holding some strange view of
the 'soul', and these jests were made at a time when Plato was only a
child. We cannot, of course, expect to get any very definite idea from
them as to the real teaching of Socrates on this subject, but it is not
impossible to see what it was, if we take into account the views of the
soul which had been held by the philosophical schools of eastern and
western Ionia.

[2] See my paper on 'The Socratic Doctrine of the Soul'.
_Proceedings of the British Academy_, 1915-16, pp. 235 sqq.

The Ionians of Asia Minor had certainly identified the soul with that
in us which is conscious, and which is the seat of goodness and badness,
wisdom and folly; but they did not regard it as what we call the self
or treat it as an individual.

Anaximenes and his school held that the soul was what they called Air,
but that was just because they regarded Air as the primary substance of
which all things are made.

The soul was something, in fact, that comes to us from outside (θυραθεν
{thyrathen}) by means of respiration. As Diogenes of Apollonia expresses
it, it is 'a small portion of the god', that is, of the primary substance,
enclosed in a human body for a time, and returning at death to the larger
mass of the same substance outside.

The formula 'Earth to earth and air to air' was accepted as an
adequate description of what takes place at death.
The western Ionians, and especially the Pythagoreans, held a very different
view. For them, the soul was something divine. It was, in fact, a fallen
god, imprisoned in the body as a punishment for antenatal sin, and it
deserved our care in this sense, that it was our chief business in life
to purify it so as to secure its release from the necessity of
reincarnation in another body.

But, during this present life, they held that this divine element slumbers,
except in prophetic dreams. As Pindar puts it, 'It sleeps when the
limbs are active.' Neither of these views was familiar to the ordinary
Athenian, but Socrates of course knew both well, and felt satisfied with
neither. When he spoke of the soul he did not mean any mysterious
fallen god which was the temporary tenant of the body, but the conscious
self which it lies with us to try to make wise and good. On the other
hand, his insistence on our duty to 'care for' it is quite
inconsistent with the view that it is merely something extrinsic,
as all the eastern Ionians down to Anaxagoras had taught.

It is, on the contrary, our very self, the thing in us which is of more
importance to us than anything else whatever. It was to this doctrine of
the soul and our duty to it that Socrates felt he must convert mankind and
especially his fellow-citizens. It was a strange and novel doctrine
then; and, if it has become a commonplace since, that only shows that
he was successful, if not in persuading his fellowmen to act on this
knowledge, at least in making them aware of it.

It was in this way that Socrates healed the rift between science
and religion which had proved fatal to the Pythagorean society, and
it may be suggested that the significance of his teaching is not
exhausted yet.

As has been indicated above it is to be found clearly stated in Plato's
_Apology of Socrates_, and it furnishes the only clue to a right understanding
of the great series of Platonic dialogues down to and including
the _Republic_ in which Socrates is represented as the chief speaker.

Whether Plato added much or little of his own to the doctrine of
his master in these dialogues is an interesting historical problem,
but it need not concern the ordinary reader, at least in the first
instance.

We know from the allusions of Aristophanes that Socrates himself taught a
new doctrine of the soul when Plato was a child, and no sympathetic reader
can fail to see that the passage of the _Apology_ to which we have
referred is intended to be a faithful account of that doctrine.

All the rest is simply its legitimate development, and it is not of very
great importance for us to determine whether that development is due
to Socrates or to Plato. The inspiration which has been derived from
these writings by many generations will not be lessened by any decision
we may come to on this point, so long as we keep clearly in mind that the
new doctrine of soul is their principal theme, and that this must be
understood in the light of the doctrines which had prepared the
way for it.

What Socrates did was really this. He deepened the meaning of the Eastern
Ionian doctrine by informing it with some of the feeling and emotion
which had characterized the Pythagorean teaching on the subject,
while on the other hand he rationalized the Pythagorean theory by
identifying the soul with our conscious personality.

Now if this is a correct account of what Socrates taught, he must
be regarded as inaugurating an entirely new period in the history
of philosophy.

That is implied in the common term 'Presocratics' generally applied to
his predecessors, though the ordinary textbooks are by no means clear as
to the grounds for assigning this pre-eminent position to Socrates. We
can also see how natural it was for him to lay such emphasis on the conversion
of souls as he certainly did. That purpose continued to dominate Greek
philosophy to the very end.

No doubt successive schools varied in their conception of what conversion
meant, but that is the link which binds them all together. In fact, it gave
rise to a new literary form, the 'hortatory discourse' (προτρεπτικος
λογος {protreptikos logos}), which was more and more cultivated as time
went on, and was at last taken over by the fathers of the Christian
church along with much else of a more fundamental character.

It has been noted already that Socrates had followers among all the leading
philosophical schools of the time, and the possibility is not to
be excluded that we may still learn more of him from the discovery
of new sources.

For the present, the recovery of some new and fairly extensive
fragments of the _Alcibiades_ of Aeschines of Sphettos is the chief
addition to our sources of information.

We know that Aeschines was a disciple of Socrates, and the tradition of
antiquity was that his dialogues gave the most faithful picture of the man
as he really was.

If so, that was probably because Aeschines had no philosophy of his own.

For us the chief importance of the new fragments is that, if we read
them along with those already known (and it is unfortunate that the old and
the new have not yet been printed together), they strongly confirm the
impression we get from Plato of the manner of Socrates and his method of
argument, and that helps to reassure us as to the essentially
historical character of the Platonic Socrates.

The fragments of Aeschines also corroborate Plato by showing that the
conversion of Alcibiades (whose life he had saved when a young man) was
one of the things that lay nearest his heart.

Josephine, the dear girl, made her feet a breeze
beneath her skirts, and got him into the living room, with its piano and
its earthenware bowls with beaded edges. When he was leaving, he brought
out his small change, which Josephine received in her gray, young-girl's
fingers. On the other side of the fjeld, Solem was given two crowns for
acting as guide, and that was good pay. All went so well that the master
himself was content.

"Now they'll be coming," he said. "If only they would leave us in peace,"
he added.

By this he meant he regretted the good, carefree days that he and his
household had enjoyed till now; but in a few weeks a motor road would be
opened in the neighboring valley, and then it was a question whether the
tourist traffic might not be deflected there. His wife and Josephine were
a little afraid it would be; but he himself had held as long as possible
to the opinion that all their regular visitors who had come again year
after year would remain faithful. No matter how many roads and motor cars
they might have in other places, they could not get the peaks of the Tore
range anywhere but here.

The master of the house had felt so confident that once more he had much
timber lying by the wall of the barn, ready to be built into new cottages,
with six new guestrooms, a great hall with reindeer horns and log chairs,
and a bathroom. But what was the matter with him today; was he beginning
to doubt? "If only they would leave us in peace," he said.

A week later Mrs. Brede arrived with her children; she had a cottage to
herself, as in previous summers. So she must be rich and fashionable, this
Mrs. Brede, since she had a cottage to herself. She was a charming lady,
and her little daughters were well-grown, handsome children. They curtsied
to me, making me feel, I don't know why, as though they were giving me
flowers. A strange feeling.

Then came Miss Torsen and Mrs. Molie, who were both to stay for the
summer. They were followed by Schoolmaster Staur, who would stay a week.
Later came two schoolmistresses, the Misses Johnsen and Palm, and still
later Associate Schoolmaster Höy and several others--tradesmen, telephone
operators, a few people from Bergen, one or two Danes. There were many of
us at table now, and the talk was lively. When Schoolmaster Staur was
asked if he wanted more soup, he replied: "No, thank you; I require no
more!" and then rolled his eyes at us to show that this was the correct
thing to say. Between meals we made up small parties, going this way and
that on the sides of the fjeld and in the woods. But of transient guests
there were few or none at all, and it was really on these that the house
would earn well--on rooms for a night, on single meals, on cups of coffee.
Josephine seemed to be worrying lately, and her young fingers grew more
greedy as they counted silver coins.

Lean brook trout, goat's-meat stew, and tinned foods. Some of the guests
were dissatisfied people who spoke of leaving; others praised both the
food and the wild mountain scenery. Schoolmistress Torsen wanted to leave.
She was tall and handsome and wore a red hat on her dark hair; but there
were no suitable young men here, and in the long run it was a bore to
waste her holidays so completely. Tradesman Batt, who had been in both
Africa and America, was the only possibility, for even the Bergensians
amounted to nothing.

"Where's Miss Torsen?" Batt would ask us.

"Here I am; I'm coming," the lady answered.

They did not care for walks up the fjeld, but preferred to go to the woods
together, where they talked for hours. But Tradesman Batt did not amount
to much either; he was short and freckled, and talked of nothing but money
and trade. Besides, he had only a small shop in the town, and dealt in
tobacco and fruit. No, he did not amount to much.

One day, during a long spell of rain, I sat talking with Miss Torsen. She
was an extraordinary girl, ordinarily proud and reserved, but sometimes
talkative, lively, and perhaps a little inconsiderate, too. We sat in the
living room, with people coming and going continually, but she did not let
that disturb her, and talked in high, clear tones; in her eagerness she
sometimes clasped her hands, and then dragged them apart again. After we
had been sitting there for some time, Tradesman Batt came in, listened to
her for a moment, and then said:

"I'm going out now, Miss Torsen; are you coming?"

She swept him once with her eyes from head to foot; then she turned away
and went on talking, looking very proud and determined as she did so. No
doubt she had many good qualities; she was twenty-seven, she said, and
sick and tired of a teacher's life.

But why had she ever entered on such a life in the first place?

"Oh, just doing what everybody else did," she replied. "The girls next
door were also going to walk the road of scholarship; to study languages,
as they called it, study grammar; it all sounded so fine. We were going to
be independent and earn a lot of money. That's what I thought! Have a
home, however small, that was quite my own. How we slogged away all
through school! Some of the girls had money, but those of us who were poor
couldn't dress like them, and we hadn't well-kept hands like theirs. And
so we came to avoid all work at home for the sake of our hands.

"And we played up to the boys at school, too. We thought them such fine
gentlemen; one of them had a riding horse, bit of a fool, of course, but
he was a millionaire's son and awfully decent, gave us banknotes--me,
anyhow--and he kissed me many times. His name was Flaten; his father was a
merchant. Of course, he being so handsome and dashing, we wanted to be
nice to him too. I should have done anything he asked; I used to pray to
God for him.

"I'm sure I wasn't the only one who wanted to be smart and pretty. That
was how we passed the time. Washing and cooking and mending fell to the
lot of my mother and sisters; we students wouldn't do anything but sit
round being very learned and getting seraphic hands. We were quite mad, as
I don't mind admitting. It was in the course of those years that we
acquired all the distorted ideas we've been burdened with since; we grew
dull with school wisdom, anaemic, unbalanced: sometimes terribly unhappy
about our sad lot, sometimes hysterically happy, and pluming ourselves on
our examinations and our importance. We were the pride of the family.

"And of course we were independent. We got jobs in offices, at forty
_kroner_ a month. Because now there was no longer anything in the
least extraordinary about us students--we were no rarity, there were
hundreds of us--forty _kroner_ was the most they gave us. Thirty went
to Father and Mother for our keep, and ten for ourselves. It wasn't
enough. We had to have pretty clothes for the office, and we were young,
we liked to walk out; but everything was too dear for us, we went into
debt, and some of us got engaged to poor devils like ourselves. The narrow
school life during our years of development did more than hurt our
intelligence; we wanted to show spirit, too, and not recoil before any
experience, so some of us went to the bad, others married--and with such
antecedents, of course, there was first-rate mismanagement in the home;
others disappeared to America. But probably all of them are still boasting
their languages and their examinations. It's all they have left--not
happiness or health or innocence, but their matriculation. Good God!"

"But surely some of you have become schoolmistresses with good salaries?"

"Good salaries! Anyhow, first we had to start studying all over again. As
though Father and Mother and brothers and sisters hadn't sacrificed enough
for our sakes already! There was cramming again for long periods, and then
we began life in the schoolroom--to give to others the same unnatural
upbringing we had had ourselves. Oh, yes, ours was a noble vocation; it
was almost like being missionaries. But now if you'll excuse me, I'd like
to talk about something besides this exalted position. Anything else you
please."

Tradesman Batt opened the door and said:

"Are you coming, Miss Torsen? It's stopped raining now."

"Oh, leave me alone," she replied.

Tradesman Batt withdrew.

"Why do you turn him away like that?" I asked.

"Because ... well, the weather is bad," she said, looking out of the
window. "Besides, he's such a fool. And he takes such liberties."

How sure of herself she looked, and how right she seemed!

Poor Miss Torsen! True or not, the news gradually spread that Miss Torsen
had recently lost her post at the school, where indulgence had been
exercised for a long time toward her eccentric methods of teaching.

So that was it.

But certainly what she had told me was nonetheless true.


X


The news has leaked out that the master of the homestead here owes a huge
debt, and that because he needs cash he has sold new, valuable plots of
land to his cotters. I am finding out many things now. Mrs. Brede with the
handsome, well-modeled head knows something about everything, for her many
summers at the farm have given her knowledge. When she talks about
conditions here, she need not grope for words.

The master has taken a large mortgage.

No one would believe that all is not well here; the many new buildings and
flagpoles, the curtains at the windows and the red-painted well house--all
give an impression of great prosperity. The rooms, too, make a good
impression. I shall not speak of the piano, but here are pictures on the
walls and photographs of the farm seen from all angles; good newspapers
are kept and there is a selection of novels on the tables; though guests
sometimes take books away with them, the books are never missed. Or take a
thing like this: you get your bill on a handsomely printed paper, with a
picture at the top of the farm and the Tore range in the background. In
short, no one would doubt for a moment that there is a fortune here. And
why not, after twenty years as a kind of resort for tourists and
pensioners?

Nevertheless, the truth is that this homestead with all its interior and
exterior furnishings costs more than the business is worth. Manufacturer
Brede, too, has put money into it, and that is why Mrs. Brede comes here
every year with her children, to get their dividends in board and lodging.


No wonder she has a house to herself; after all, it's her own house.

"It was a good place in the old days," says Mrs. Brede. "Travelers stopped
here and had a meal and a bed for the night; it cost nothing to run the
place then. But the tourist traffic has forced him to make improvements
and enlargements. You have to keep pace with development, and be as good
as other such places in the country; they're all competing. And probably
the master here is not the right man to carry on such an irregular and
capricious business; he has learned to like idleness too much, and lets
the farm take care of itself. But the two cotters are hard-working
fellows. They're nephews of his, and bit by bit they're buying the farm
from him and cultivating it. My husband often says it will end with the
cotters or their children buying this whole place of his, Paul's."

"How can the cotters get power to do that?"

"They work hard; they're peasants. They started in the forest with three
or four goats each, first one of them, then the other one, working down in
the village and coming home with food and money, and all the time clearing
their own ground. The goats grew more numerous, a cow was added, they
bought more virgin land, and they acquired still more livestock. They
sowed grain and planted potatoes and cultivated pasture land; the owner
here buys root vegetables from his cotters; he hasn't time to toil with
such things himself; there's a great deal of work in it. Oh, no, they
don't sow anything but green fodder for the stock here; Paul says it's not
worth-while. And in a way he's right. He's tried hiring enough men to run
the farm too, but it won't work. It's just in the spring season that the
tourists start coming, and then the men are constantly being interrupted
in their work on the farm to pilot tourists across the fjeld, or to do
this or that for the guests. And this goes on all through the short summer
months; for several years, they haven't even found the time to spread all
their manure. But the worst time is really the autumn, when the tourists
are all rushing to get home again, and it's quite impossible to do the
harvesting undisturbed. It's almost become a custom here now, my husband
says, for the cotters to get half the harvest of the farm's outlying
fields."

On my wondering at Mrs. Brede's knowledge of farming, she told me with a
shake of the head that she herself knew very little about it, and had all
her information from her husband. The fact was that every time these
cotters wanted to buy a fresh piece of land from Paul, her husband had to
give his consent. This was because of the mortgage, and this, too, was how
they had learned of these matters. Manufacturer Brede, as a matter of
fact, was most anxious to be released from his undertaking, but this was
by no means easy. It was with great apprehensions that he now regarded the
new automobile route.

Mrs. Brede was full of a maternal gentleness; she played with her little
girls, and seemed to enjoy an admirable balance of mind. One day, for
example, a goat came home with one of its hind legs broken, and all the
guests hurried out with brandy and lanolin and bandages for the wound; but
Mrs. Brede remained quietly where she was, experienced, wise, and a little
surprised at all the excitement.

"All you can do with such a goat," she said, "is to slaughter it."

The lady, I understood, must have married early, for her two little girls
were twelve and ten. Her husband seemed to deal in important business, for
he spent a large part of the year in Iceland, and traveled a good deal
elsewhere as well. This, too, the lady bore quietly. And yet she was still
young and handsome, a little plump, perhaps, for her height, but with a
lovely, unwrinkled skin. She was quite unlike Miss Torsen, the only other
good-looking lady at the farm; Miss Torsen was tall and dark.

But perhaps Mrs. Brede was not always so calm as she seemed. One evening
when she went down to the men's hut and asked Solem to do her a service, I
saw that her face was strange and covered with blushes. Would Solem come
to her room and repair a window-blind that had fallen down? It was late in
the evening, and the lady seemed to have been in bed already, and to have
risen again. Solem did not appear very willing. Suddenly their eyes met,
and clung for a moment. Yes, certainly, of course he would come....

What an iron face he had, and what a rogue he was!

Mrs. Brede departed.

But a moment later she returned to say that she had changed her mind.
Never mind, thank you, she would fix the blind in position herself.


XI


An occasional tourist came or went, Solem accompanied him across the
fjeld, and he was gone. But where were all the foreigners this year?
Bennett's and Cook's conducted tours, the hordes that would "do" the
mountain peaks of Norway--where were they?

At last two solitary Englishmen turned up. They were middle-aged, unshaven
and ill-groomed altogether, two engineers or something of that sort, but
quite as speechless and uncivil as the grandest of the traveling British
clowns. "Guide! Guide!" they called. "You the guide?" Nothing about them
was any different from what we had grown to expect; these two traveled
brainlessly and solemnly to the mountain tops, were in a hurry, had a
purpose, behaved as though they were running to catch a doctor. Solem went
with them to the top and down the other side, and they offered him a
fifty-_öre_ bit. Solem held out the palm of his hand, he told me
afterwards, for he thought they would put more in it, but nothing came of
that. So he created a disturbance--Solem has grown spoiled and insolent
from all his idling with tourists.

_"Mehr,_ more," said he.

No, they would not. Solem flung the coin on the ground and struck his
hands together repeatedly. This had the required effect, and one
_krone_ made its appearance. But on Solem's taking the noble lord by
the shoulder and exerting a little pressure, two _kroner_ were at
last forthcoming.

At length a conducted party arrived. Many tongues, both sexes, huntsmen,
fishermen, dogs, mountaineers, porters. There was a tremendous commotion
at the farm; the flag was run up, Paul bent double under all the orders he
received, and Josephine ran, flew at every call. Mrs. Brede had to give up
her sitting room to three English ladies, and the rest of us were crowded
together as close as possible. I, for my part, was to be allowed to keep
my bed because of my settled age; but I said, "By no means, let this
English solicitor or whatever he is have my bed; what does it matter for a
night!"

Then I went out.

If one keeps one's eyes open, one may see a great deal at such a resort in
the daytime. And one may see much at night, too. What is the meaning of
all this bleating of goats in the shed? Why are the animals not at rest?
The door is closed; none of the visiting dogs has got in. Or--_have_
some of the visiting dogs got in? Vice, like virtue, walks in rings and
circles; nothing is new, all returns to its beginnings and repeats itself.
The Romans ruled the world, yes. They were so mighty, the Romans, so
invincible, that they could permit themselves a vice or two, they could
afford to live at the arena, they had their fun with young boys and
animals. Then one day retribution overtook them, their children's children
lost battles everywhere, and their children's children again only sat--sat
and looked backward. The ring was closed; none were less rulers of the
world than the Romans.

They paid no attention to me, the two Englishmen in the goats' shed; I was
merely one of the natives, a Norwegian, who had but to accept the ways of
the mighty tourists. But they themselves belonged to that nation of
gamblers, coachmen, and vice which one day the wholesome Gothic soul will
castigate to death....

The disturbance continued all night, and very early, the dogs began to
bark. The caravan awoke; it was six in the morning, and doors began to
bang in all the houses. They were in a great hurry, these travelers; they
were running to catch the doctor. They had breakfast in two sessions, but
though the household was bent double before them and gave of its best,
they were not satisfied. "If we had only known a little earlier," said
Paul. But they muttered that we should just wait; there were motor cars in
other places. Then Paul spoke--Paul, the master of the farm, the man who
lived under the Tore peaks:

"But I'm going to enlarge; don't you see all the timber outside? And I'm
planning to get a telephone...."

The caravan paid the exact amount of their small bill and departed,
accompanied by the master and Solem, both carrying trunks.

Peace descended on us again.

Schoolmaster Staur left now, too. He had been busy collecting plants round
the Tore peaks, and talked about his plants at table in a very learned
fashion, giving the Latin names, and pointing out their peculiarities.
Yes, indeed, he had learned a great deal at school.

"Here you see an _Artemis cotula_," he said.

Miss Torsen, who had also imbibed much learning, recognized the name and
said:

"Yes, take plenty of it with you."

"What for?"

"It's insect powder."

Schoolmaster Staur knew nothing of that, and there was a good deal of
discussion in which Associate Master Höy had to take a hand.

No, Schoolmaster Staur knew nothing of that. But he could classify plants
and learn their names by heart. He enjoyed that. The peasant children in
his neighborhood were ignorant of these classes and names, and he could
teach them. He enjoyed that so much.

But was the spirit of the soil his friend? The plant that is cut down one
year, yet grows again the next--did this miracle make him religious and
silent? The stones, and the heather, and the branches of trees, and the
grass, and the woods, and the wind, and the great heaven of all the
universe--were these his friends?

_Artemis cotula_....


XII


When I get tired of Associate Master Höy and the ladies.... Sometimes I
think of Mrs. Molie. She sits sewing while the Associate Master gravely
keeps her company; they talk about the servants at home whose only desire
is to stay out all night. Mrs. Molie is a thin, flat-chested lady, but
probably she has at one time been less plain; her bluish teeth look as
though they were cold, as though they were made of ice, but perhaps a few
years ago, her full lips and the dark down at the corners of her mouth
seemed to her husband the most beautiful thing he knew. Her husband--well,
he was a seafaring man, a ship's captain; he only came home on rare
occasions, just often enough to increase the family; usually he was in
Australia, China, or Mexico. It was hail and farewell with him. And here
is his wife now for the sake of her health. I wonder--is it only for her
health, or are she and the Associate Master possibly children of the same
provincial town?

When I get tired of Associate Master Höy and the ladies, I leave them and
go out. And then I stay out all day long and nobody knows where I keep
myself. It is fitting that a settled man should be different from the
Associate Master, who is very far from being so settled. So I go out. It
is a bright day with just the right amount of warmth, and my summer woods
are filled with the fragrance of plants. I rest frequently, not because I
need to, but because the ground is full of caresses. I go so far that no
one can find me; only then am I released. No sound reaches me from farms
or men, no one is in sight; only this overgrown little goat track, which
is green at the edges and lovely. Only a bit of a goat track which looks
as though it had fallen asleep in the woods, lying there so thin and
lonely.

You who read this feel nothing, but I who sit here writing feel a kind of
sweetness at the memory of a mere track in the woods. It was like meeting
a child.

With my hands under my neck and my nose in the air, my eyes flit across
the sky. High up above the peaks of Tore, a clustering mist sways in slow
rhythm, breaks apart and presses close again, fluctuates and strains to
give birth to something. But when I rise to walk on, the end is not yet in
sight.

I meet a line of ants, a procession of ants, busy travelers. They neither
toil nor carry anything; they simply move. I retrace my steps to see if I
can find their leader, but it is useless: farther and farther I retreat, I
begin to run, but the procession is endless before and behind me. Perhaps
they started a week ago. So I go on my way, and the other insects go on
theirs.

Surely this is not a mountainside I walk on; this is a bosom, an embrace,
in its softness. I tread gently, for I do not wish to stamp or weigh it
down, and I marvel: a mountain so tender and defenseless, indulgent like a
mother. To think of an ant walking on this! Here and there lie stones,
half-covered with moss, not because they have fallen there, but because
this is their home, and they have lived here long. This is peerless.

When I reach the top and look back, it is high noon. Far away on another
peak walks one of the cows of the cotters, a strange little cow with red
and white flanks. A crow sits on a high cliff above me and caws down at me
in a voice like an iron rasp scraping against the stone. A warm thrill
runs through me, and I feel, as I have done in the woods so many times
before, that someone has just been here, and has stepped to one side.
Someone is with me here, and a moment later I see his back disappearing
into the woods. "It is God," I think. There I stand, neither speaking nor
singing. I only see. I feel all my face being filled with the sight. "It
was God," I think.

"A vision," you say. "No, a little insight into things," I reply. "Am I
making a god of nature? Do not you? Have not the Mohammedans their god,
the Jews theirs, the Hindus theirs? No one knows God, my friend; man knows
only gods. And sometimes I meet mine."

I go home by a different route, which forms a vast arc with the one I came
by. The sun is warmer now and the ground less smooth. I reach a great
ruin, the remnant of a landslide, and here, to amuse myself, I pretend to
be tired, flinging myself on the ground exactly as though someone were
watching me and saw how exhausted I am. It is only for my amusement,
because my brain has been idle so long. The sky is clear everywhere; the
clusters of mist over the Tore peaks are gone, heaven knows where, but
they have stolen away. In their place, an eagle swings in great circles
over the valley. Huge, black, and inaccessible, he traces ring after ring
as though held on a rail in the air, moving with voluptuous languor, a
thick-necked male, a winged stallion exulting. It is like music to watch
him. At length he disappears behind the peaks.

And here are only myself and the ruin and the little juniper trees. What
miracles all things are! These stones in the ruin perhaps hold some
meaning; they have lain here for thousands of years, but perhaps they,
too, roam, and make an inexpressible journey. The glaciers move, the land
rises, and the land falls; there is no hurry here. But since my
consciousness cannot associate fact with such a conception, it grows blind
with fury and revolts: The ruin cannot move; these are mere words, a game!

This ruin is a town; here and there lie scattered buildings of stone. It's
a peaceable gathering, without sensations or suicides, and perhaps a
well-shaped soul sits in each of these stones. But heaven protect me just
the same from the inhabitants of these towns! Rolling stones cannot bark,
neither do they attract thieves; they are mere ballast. Quiet behavior:
that is what I hold against them, that they make no fiery gestures; it
would become them to roll a little, but there they lie, with even their
sex unknown. But you saw the eagle instead! Be still....

A gentle wind begins to blow, swaying the bracken a little, the flowers
and the straw; but the straw cannot sway, it only trembles.

I walk on along my great arc and come down by the first cotter's house.

"Well, I expect you'll end up by building a summer resort too," I tell him
in the course of our conversation.

"Oh, no; we couldn't venture on anything like that," he replies cunningly.
In his heart I daresay he has no desire to, for he has seen what it leads
to.

I didn't like him; his eyes were fawning and rested on the ground. He
thought of nothing but land; he was land-greedy, like an animal that
sought to escape its padlock. The other cotter had bought a slightly
larger piece of land than he, a marsh that would feed one cow more; but he
himself had only got this bit of a field. Still, this would amount to
something, too, as long as he kept his health to work it.

He gripped his spade again.


XIII


Solem was being discussed at dinner; I don't know who began it, but some
of the ladies thought he was good-looking, and they nodded and said, Yes,
he was the right sort.

"What do you mean by the right sort?" Associate Master Höy asked, looking
up from his plate.

No one answered.

Then Associate Master Höy could not help smiling broadly, and said:

"Well, well! I must have a look at this Solem some time. I've never paid
any attention to him."

Associate Master Höy might look at Solem all he pleased; he would grow no
bigger for that, nor Solem smaller. The good Mr. Höy was annoyed, and that
was the truth. It is catching for a woman to discover that a man is "the
right sort"; the other women grow curious, and stick their noses into it:
"So-o-o, is he?" And a few days later the whole flock of them are of one
opinion: "Yes, indeed, he's the right sort!"

Pity the poor, left-over associate masters then!

Poor Mr. Höy; there was Mrs. Molie, too, nodding her head for Solem. To
tell the truth, she had no appearance of knowing much about the matter,
but she could not lag behind the others.

"So, Mrs. Molie is nodding, too!" said Mr. Höy, and smiled again. He was
intensely annoyed. Mrs. Molie turned pink and pretty.

At the next meal, Mr. Höy could contain himself no longer.

"Ladies," he said, "mine eyes have now beheld Master Solem."

"Well?"

"Common sneak-thief!"

"Oh, shame!"

"You must admit he has a brazen look on his face. No beard. Blue chin, a
perfect horse-face...."

"There's no harm in that," said Mrs. Molie.

Mrs. Molie doesn't seem to have gone quite out of circulation after all, I
thought. In fact, she had lately been developing quite a little cushion
over her chest, and no longer looked so hunched up. She had eaten well and
slept well, and improved at this resort. Mrs. Molie, I suspect, still has
plenty of life left in her.

This proved true a few days later. Once again: poor Associate Master Höy!
For now we had a new visitor at the farm, a gay dog of a lawyer, and he
talked more to Mrs. Molie than to anyone else. Had there been anything
between her and Mr. Höy? True, he was not much to look at, but then
neither was she.

The young lawyer was a sportsman, yet he was learned in the social
sciences, too, had been in Switzerland and studied the principle of the
referendum. At first he had worked a few years in an architect's office,
he told us, but then he had changed to the law instead, which in its turn
had led him into social problems. No doubt he was a rich and unselfish man
to be able to change his vocation and to travel in this way. "Ah,
Switzerland!" he said, and his eyes watered. None of us could understand
his fervor.

"Yes, it must be a wonderful country," Mrs. Molie said.

The Associate Master looked ready to burst, and was quite incapable of
restraining himself.

Speaking of Solem, he said suddenly, "I've changed my mind about him
lately. He's ten times better than many another."

"There, you see!"

"Yes, he is. And he doesn't pretend to be anything more than he is. And
what he is, is of some use. I saw him slaughter the lame goat."

"Did you stop to watch that?"

"I happened to be passing. It was the work of a moment for him. And later
I saw him in the woodshed. He knows his job, that fellow. I can well
understand that the ladies see something in him."

How the Associate Master clowned! He finished by imploring the wife of the
captain who was sailing the China seas to be sure and remain faithful to
her Chinaman.

"Do be quiet and let the lawyer tell us about Switzerland," said Mrs.
Molie.

Witch! Did she want to drive her fellow-being the Associate Master into
jumping off the highest peak of the Tore tonight?

But then Mrs. Brede took a hand. She understood Mr. Höy's torment and
wanted to help him. Had not this same Mr. Höy just expressed himself
kindly about Solem, and was not Solem the lad who one fine evening had
caused her to tear down her window blind? There is cause and effect in all
things.

"Switzerland," said Mrs. Brede in her gentle fashion, and then she
reddened and laughed a little. "I don't know anything about Switzerland;
but once I bought some dress material that was Swiss, and I've never in my
life been so cheated."

The lawyer only smiled at this.

Schoolmistress Johnsen talked about what she had learned, watchmakers and
the Alps and Calvin---

"Yes, those are the only three things in a thousand years," said the
Associate Master, his face quite altered and pale with suppressed rage.

"Really, really, Associate Höy!" exclaimed Schoolmistress Palm with a
smile.

But the lawyer focused everyone's admiration on himself by telling them
all about Switzerland, that wonderful country, that model for all small
countries of the world. What social conditions, what a referendum, what
planning in the exploitation of the country's natural wonders! There they
had sanatoriums; there they knew how to deal with tourists! Tremendous!

"Yes, and what Swiss cheese," said the Associate Master. "It smells like
tourists' feet."

Dead silence. So Associate Master Höy was prepared to go to such lengths!

"Well, what about Norwegian old-milk cheese?" said a Danish voice mildly.

"Yes, that's filthy stuff, too," Mr. Höy replied. "Just the thing for
Schoolmaster Staur pontificating in his armchair."

Laughter.

Since matters were now smoothed over again, the lawyer could safely
continue:

"If we could only make such Swiss cheese here," he said, "we should not be
so poor. Generally speaking, I found after my modest investigations in
that country that they are ahead of us in every respect. We have
everything to learn from them: their frugality, their diligence, their
long working hours, the small home industries--"

"And so on," interrupted Associate Master Höy. "All trifles, nothingness,
negativity! A country that exists thanks only to the mercy of its
neighbors ought not to be a model for any other country on earth. We must
try to rise above the wretched stench of it, which only makes us ill. The
big countries and big circumstances should be our model. Everything grows,
even the small things, unless they're predestined to a Lilliput existence.
A child can learn from another child, of course, but the model is the
adult. Some day the child will be an adult itself. A pretty state of
affairs it would be if an eternal child, a born pygmy, were to be its
model! But that's what all this rubbish about Switzerland really amounts
to. Why on earth should we, of all people, take the smallest and meanest
country as our model? Things are small enough here anyhow. Switzerland is
the serf of Europe. Have you ever heard of a young South American country
of Norway's size trying to be on a level with Switzerland? Why do you
think Sweden is taking such great strides forward now? Not because it
looks to Switzerland, or to Norway, but to Germany! Honor to Sweden for
that! But what about us? We don't want to be a piddling little nation
stuck up in our mountains, a nation that brings forth peace conferences,
ski-runners, and an Ibsen once every thousand years; we have
potentialities for a thousand times more--"

The lawyer had for some time been holding up his hand to indicate that he
wanted to reply; now he shouted at the top of his voice:

"Just a moment!"

The Associate Master stopped.

"Just one question--a small, trifling question," said the lawyer,
preparing his ground well. "Have you ever once set foot in the country you
speak of?"

"I should think I have," replied the Associate Master.

There! The lawyer got nothing for his trifling question. And then it all
came out what a heartless jilt Mrs. Molie was. She had known all the time
that Mr. Höy had been on a traveling scholarship in Switzerland, but she
had never mentioned it. What a snake in the grass! She had even encouraged
the lawyer, but no one else, to talk about Switzerland.

It carried my mind instantly to the throbbing theme of the Niebelungs,
onomatopoetic of the little hammers forever busy in their underground
work.

I circled a small bush at my side, and found that the sound came from one
of the branches near the top; so with my glasses I began a systematic
search."

This was as far as I ever got, for a flock of parrakeets exploded close
at hand and blew the lesser sound out of mind. If I had stopped to
guess I would probably have considered the author a longicorn beetle or
some fiddling orthopter.

[Footnote 2: See page 34.]

Now, a year later, I suddenly stopped twenty yards away, for at the
end of the silvery cadence of a woodhewer, I heard the low, measured,
toneless rhythm which instantly revived to mind every detail of the
clearing.

I was headed toward a distant palm frond beneath whose tip was a nest of
Rufous Hermits, for I wished to see the two atoms of hummingbirds
at the moment when they rolled from their _petit pois_ egg-shells.

I gave this up for the day and turned up the hill, where fifty feet away
was the stump and bush near which I had sat and watched.

Three times I went past the place before I could be certain, and even at
the last I identified it only by the relative position of the giant
tauroneero tree, in which I had shot many cotingas.

The stump was there, a bit lower and more worn at the crevices,
leaking sawdust like an overloved doll--but the low shrub had become
a tall sapling, the weeds--vervain, boneset, velvet-leaf--all had
been topped and killed off by dense-foliaged bushes and shrubs,
which a year before had not raised a leaf above the meadow level.

The old vistas were gone, the landscape had closed in, the wilderness was
shutting down. Nature herself was "letting in the jungle." I felt like Rip
Van Winkle, or even more alien, as if the passing of time had been
accelerated and my longed-for leap had been accomplished, beyond
the usual ken of mankind's earthly lease of senses.

All these astounding changes had come to pass through the heat and
moisture of a tropical year, and under deliberate scientific
calculation there was nothing unusual in the alteration.

I remembered the remarkable growth of one of the laboratory bamboo shoots
during the rainy season--twelve and a half feet in sixteen days, but that
was a single stem like a blade of grass, whereas here the whole
landscape was altered--new birds, new insects, branches, foliage,
flowers, where twelve short months past, was open sky above low
weeds.

In the hollow root on the beach, my band of crane-flies had danced for a
thousand hours, but here was a sound which had apparently never ceased
for more than a year--perhaps five thousand hours of daylight.
It was a low, penetrating, abruptly reiterated beat, occurring about
once every second and a half, and distinctly audible a hundred feet
away.

The "low bush" from which it proceeded last year, was now a respectable
sapling, and the source far out of reach overhead.

I discovered a roundish mass among the leaves, and the first stroke
of the ax sent the rhythm up to once a second, but did not alter
the timbre.

A few blows and the small trunk gave way and I fled for my life.

But there was no angry buzzing and I came close. After a cessation of ten
or fifteen seconds the sound began again, weaker but steady. The foliage
was alive with small Azteca ants, but these were tenants of several
small nests near by, and at the catastrophe overran everything.

The largest structure was the smooth carton nest of a wasp, a
beautiful species, pale yellowish-red with wine-colored wings.

Only once did an individual make an attempt to sting and even when my
head was within six inches, the wasps rested quietly on the broken combs.

By careful watching, I observed that many of the insects jerked the abdomen
sharply downward, butting the comb or shell of smooth paper a
forceful blow, and producing a very distinct noise.

I could not at first see the mass of wasps which were giving forth
the major rhythm, as they were hidden deep in the nest, but the
fifty-odd wasps in sight kept perfect time, or occasionally an
individual skipped one or two beats, coming in regularly on every
alternate or every third beat.

Where they were two or three deep, the uppermost wasps struck the
insects below them with their abdomens in perfect rhythm with the
nest beat.

For half an hour the sound continued, then died down and was not
heard again.

The wasps dispersed during the night and the nest was deserted.

It reminded me of the telegraphing ants which I have often heard in Borneo,
a remarkable sweeping roll, caused by the host of insects striking the
leaves with their heads, and produced only when they are disturbed.

It appeared to be of the nature of a warning signal, giving me opportunity
to back away from the stinging legions which filled the thicket against
which I pushed.

The rhythm of these wasps was very different.

They were peaceable, not even resenting the devastation of their
home, but always and always must the inexplicable beat, beat, beat,
be kept up, serving some purpose quite hidden from me. During succeeding
months I found two more nests, with similar fetish of sound vibrations,
which led to their discovery.

From one small nest, which fairly shook with the strength of their
beats, I extracted a single wasp and placed him in a glass-topped,
metal box.

For three minutes he kept up the rhythmic beat. Then I began a more
rapid tattoo on the bottom of the box, and the changed tempo confused
him, so that he stopped at once, and would not tap again.

A few little Mazaruni daisies survived here and there, blossoming
bravely, trying to believe that the shade was lessening, and not
daily becoming more dense.

But their leaves were losing heart, and paling in the scant light. Another
six months and dead leaves and moss would have obliterated them, and the
zone of brilliant flowers and gorgeous butterflies and birds would shift
many feet into the air, with the tops of the trees as a new level.

As long as I remained by my stump my visitors were of the jungle.

A yellow-bellied trogon came quite close, and sat as trogons do,
very straight and stiff like a poorly mounted bird, watching passing
flycatchers and me and the glimpses of sky.

At first he rolled his little cuckoo-like notes, and his brown mate swooped
up, saw me, shifted a few feet farther off and perched full of curiosity,
craning her neck and looking first with one eye, then the other. Now the
male began a content song. With all possible variations of his few and
simple tones, on a low and very sweet timbre, he belied his unoscine perch
in the tree of bird life, and sang to himself. Now and then he was drowned
out by the shrilling of cicadas, but it was a delightful serenade,
and he seemed to enjoy it as much as I did.

A few days before, I had made a careful study of the syrinx of this bird,
whom we may call rather euphoniously _Trogonurus curucui_, and had been
struck by the simplicity both of muscles and bones. Now, having summoned
his mate in regular accents, there followed this unexpected whisper song.

It recalled similar melodies sung by pheasants and Himalayan partridges,
usually after they had gone to roost.

Once the female swooped after an insect, and in the midst of one of
the sweetest passages of the male trogon, a green grasshopper shifted
his position.

He was only two inches away from the singer, and all this time had been
hidden by his chlorophyll-hued veil. And now the trogon fairly fell
off the branch, seizing the insect almost before the tone died away.

Swallowing it with considerable difficulty, the harmony was taken up again,
a bit throaty for a few notes.

Then the pair talked together in the usual trogon fashion, and the sudden
shadow of a passing vulture, drew forth discordant cat calls, as both
birds swooped from sight to avoid the fancied hawk.

A few minutes later the vocal seal of the jungle was uttered by a
quadrille bird.

When the notes of this wren are heard, I can never imagine open, blazing
sunshine, or unobstructed blue sky.

Like the call of the wood pewee, the wren's radiates coolness and
shadowy quiet.

No matter how tropic or breathless the jungle, when the flute-like
notes arise they bring a feeling of freshness, they arouse a mental
breeze, which cools one's thoughts, and, although there may be no
water for miles, yet we can fairly hear the drip of cool drops
falling from thick moss to pools below.

First an octave of two notes of purest silver, then a varying strain of
eight or ten notes, so sweet and powerful, so individual and meaningful
that it might stand for some wonderful motif in a great opera.

I shut my eyes, and I was deaf to all other sounds while the wren
sang.

And as it dwelt on the last note of its phrase, a cicada took it up on the
exact tone, and blended the two final notes into a slow vibration,
beginning gently and rising with the crescendo of which only an
insect, and especially a cicada, is master.

Here was the eternal, hypnotic tom-tom rhythm of the East, grafted
upon supreme Western opera.

For a time my changed clearing became merely a sounding box for the
most thrilling of jungle songs.

I called the wren as well as I could, and he came nearer and nearer.

The music rang out only a few yards away. Then he became suspicious, and
after that each phrase was prefaced by typical wren scolding.

He could not help but voice his emotions, and the harsh notes told
plainly what he thought of my poor imitation.

Then another feeling would dominate, and out of the maelstrom of harshness,
of tumbled, volcanic vocalization would rise the pure silver stream of
single notes.

The wren slipped away through the masses of fragrant Davilla blossoms,
but his songs remained and are with me to this moment. And now I leaned
back, lost my balance, and grasping the old stump for support, loosened
a big piece of soft, mealy wood.

In the hollow beneath, I saw a rainbow in the heart of the dead
tree.

This rainbow was caused by a bug, and when we stop to think of it,
this shows how little there is in a name.

For when we say bug, or for that matter bogy or bugbear, we are garbling
the sound which our very, very forefathers uttered when they saw a specter
or hobgoblin. They said it _bugge_ or even _bwg_, but then they were
more afraid of specters in those days than we, who imprison
will-o'-the-wisps in Very lights, and rub fox-fire on our watch
faces.

At any rate here was a bug who seemed to ill-deserve his name,
although if the Niblelungs could fashion the Rheingold, why could
not a bug conceive a rainbow?

Whenever a human, and especially a house-human thinks of bugs, she thinks
unpleasantly and in superlatives. And it chances that evolution, or natural
selection, or life's mechanism, or fate or a creator, has wrought them
into form and function also in superlatives.
Cicadas are supreme in longevity and noise. One of our northern species sucks
in silent darkness for seventeen years, and then, for a single
summer, breaks all American long-distance records for insect voices. To
another group, known as Fulgorids, gigantic heads and streamers
of wax have been allotted.

Those possessing the former rejoice in the name of Lantern Flies,
but they are at present unfaithful vestal bugs, though it is extremely
doubtful if their wicks were ever trimmed or lighted.

To see a big wax bug flying with trailing ribbons slowly from tree to tree
in the jungle is to recall the streaming trains of a flock of peacocks
on the wing.

The membracids must of all deserve the name of "bugges" for no elf or hobgoblin
was ever more bizarre.

Their legs and heads and bodies are small and aphid-like, but aloft there
spring minarets and handles and towers and thorns and groups of
hairy balls, out of all reason and sense.

Only Stegosaurus and Triceratops bear comparison. Another group of
five-sided bugs are the skunks and civet-cats among insects, guarding
themselves from danger by an aura of obnoxious scent.

Not the least strange of this assemblage is the author of our rainbow in
the stump.

My awkwardness had broken into a hollow which opened to the light on the
other side of the rotten bole.

A vine had tendriled its way into the crevice where the little
weaver of rainbows had found board and lodging.

We may call him toad-hopper or spittle-bug, or as Fabre says,
"_Contentons-nous de Cicadelle, qui respecte le tympan._" Like all
of its kindred, the Bubble Bug finds Nirvana in a sappy green stem.

It has neither strong flight, nor sticky wax, thorny armature nor
gas barrage, so it proceeds to fashion an armor of bubbles, a cuirass
of liquid film.

This, in brief, was the rainbow which caught my eye when I broke open the
stump. Up to that moment no rainbow had existed, only a little
light sifting through from the vine-clad side.

But now a ray of sun shattered itself on the pile of bubbles, and sprayed
itself out into a curved glory.

Bubble Bugs blow their froth only when immature, and their bodies
are a distillery or home-brew of sorts.

No matter what the color, or viscosity or chemical properties of sap,
regardless of whether it flows in liana, shrub, or vine, yet the Bug's
artesian product is clear, tasteless and wholly without the possibility
of being blown into bubbles.

When a large drop has collected, the tip of the abdomen encloses a retort
of air, inserts this in the drop and forces it out.

In some way an imponderable amount of oil or dissolved wax is
extruded and mixed with the drop, an invisible shellac which toughens
the bubble and gives it an astounding glutinous endurance.

As long as the abdominal air-pump can be extended into the atmosphere,
so long does the pile of bubbles grow until the insect is deep
buried, and to penetrate this is as unpleasant an achievement for
small marauders as to force a cobweb entanglement.

I have draped a big pile of bubbles around the beak of an insect-eating bird,
and watched it shake its head and wipe its beak in evident disgust
at the clinging oily films.

In the north we have the bits of fine white foam which we characteristically
call frog-spittle, but these tropic relatives have bigger bellows and
their covering is like the interfering mass of films which emerges
from the soap-bubble bowl when a pipe is thrust beneath the surface
and that delicious gurgling sound produced.

The most marvelous part of the whole thing is that the undistilled
well which the Bubble Bug taps would often overwhelm it in an instant,
either by the burning acidity of its composition, or the rubber coating of
death into which it hardens in the air. Yet with this current
of lava or vitriol, our Bug does three wonderful things, it distills sweet
water for its present protective cell of bubbles, it draws purest
nourishment for continual energy to run its bellows and pump, and
simultaneously it fills its blood and tissues with a pungent flavor,
which in the future will be a safeguard against the attacks of birds
and lizards.

Little by little its wings swell to full spread and strength, muscles are
fashioned in its hind legs, which in time will shoot it through great
distances of space, and pigment of the most brilliant yellow and
black forms on its wing covers.

When at last it shuts down its little still and creeps forth through
the filmy veil, it is immature no longer, but a brilliant frog-hopper,
sitting on the most conspicuous leaves, trusting by pigmental warning to
advertise its inedibility, and watchful for a mate, so that the
future may hold no dearth of Bubble Bugs.

  On my first tramp each season in the
  tropical jungle, I see the legionary
  army ants hastening on
  their way to battle, and
  the leaf-cutters plodding
  along, with chlorophyll hods over
  their shoulders, exactly as they
  did last year, and the year
  preceding, and probably a hundred
  thousand years before
  that. The Colony Egos of army and
  leaf-cutters may quite reasonably
  be classified according to Kingdom. The former,
  with carnivorous, voracious, nervous,
  vitally active members, seems an
  intangible, animal-like organism; while the stolid, vegetarian,
unemotional, weather-swung Attas, resemble the flowing sap of the
food on which they subsist--vegetable.

  Yet, whatever the simile, the net of
  unconscious precedent is too closely
  drawn, the mesh of instinct is too
  fine to hope for any initiative.
  This was manifested by the most
  significant and spectacular
  occurrence I have ever observed in the
  world of insects.
  One year and a half ago I studied and
  reported upon, a nest
  of Ecitons or army ants.[3] Now,
  eighteen months later, apparently
  the same army appeared and made a
  similar nest of their own bodies,
  in the identical spot near
  the door of the outhouse, where I had found them before.

  Again we had to break up the
  temporary colony, and killed
  about three-quarters
  of the colony with various deadly
  chemicals.
  
  [Footnote 3: See page 58.]
  In spite of all the
  tremendous slaughter, the
  Ecitons, in late
  afternoon, raided a small colony
  of Wasps-of-the-Painted-Nest.
  When he reappeared at last, he was aloof and
reserved, pretending he had been very successful during his absence; he
should manage about the cars, never fear! In the evening, after he had had
a few more drinks, he became self-important in a different way: oh, those
fools in the village had no sense of any kind, and had refused to give
their consent to a road to his place. He was the only one with any sense.
Would not such a bit of a road be a blessing to the whole appendage?
Because then the caravans would come, scattering money over the valley.
They understood nothing, those fools!

"But sooner or later there will have to be a road here," said the lawyer.

"Of course," replied Paul with finality.

Then he went to his room and lay down again.

On another day, a small flock of strangers came again; they had toiled up
themselves, carrying their luggage in the hot sun, and now they wanted
some help. Solem was ready at once, but he could not possibly carry all
the bags and knapsacks; Paul was lying down in his room. I had seen Paul
again during the night go out to the woods, talking loudly and flinging
his arms about as though he had company.

And here were all the strangers.

Paul's wife and Josephine came out of the house and sent Solem across to
Einar, the first cotter, to ask if he would come and help them carry. In
the meantime the travelers grew impatient and kept looking at their
watches, for if they could not cross the Tore fjeld before nightfall, they
would have to spend the night outdoors. One of them suggested to the
others that perhaps this delay was intentional. The owner of the place
probably wanted them to spend the night there; they began to grumble among
themselves, and at last they asked:

"Where is the master, the host?"

"He's ill," said Josephine.

Solem returned and said:

"Einar hasn't time to come; he's lifting his potatoes."

A pause.

Then Josephine said:

"I've got to go across the fjeld anyhow--wait a minute!"

She was gone for a moment, then returned, loaded the bags and knapsacks on
her little back, and trotted off. The others followed.

I caught up with Josephine and took her burden from her. But I would not
allow her to turn back, for this little tour away from the house would do
her good. We walked together and talked on the way: she had really no
complaints, she said, for she had a tidy sum of money saved up.

When we reached the top of the fjeld, Josephine wanted to turn back. She
thought it a waste of time to walk by my side, with nothing to do but
walk.

"I thought you had to cross the fjeld anyhow?" I said.

She was too shrewd to deny it outright, for in that case she, the daughter
of the old man at the Tore Peak farm, would have been going with the
tourists solely to carry their luggage.

"Yes, but there's no hurry. I was to have visited someone, but that can
wait till the winter."

We stood arguing about this, and I was so stubborn that I threatened to
throw all the luggage down the mountainside, and then she would see!

"Then I'll just take them and carry them myself," replied Josephine, "and
then _you'll_ see!"

By this time the others had caught up with us, and before I knew what had
happened, one of the strangers had come forward and lifted the burden from
my back, taken off his cap with a great deal of ceremony, and told me his
own and his companions' names. I must excuse them, I really must forgive
them; this was too bad, he had been so unobserving....

I told him I could easily have carried him as well as the bags. It is not
strength I lack; but day and night I carry about with me the ape of all
the diseases, who is heavy as lead. Ah, well, many another groans under a
burden of stupidity, which is little better. We all have our cross to
bear....

Then Josephine and I turned homeward again.

       *       *       *       *       *

Yes, indeed, people treat me with uncontrollable politeness; this is
because of my age. People are indulgent toward me when I am troublesome to
others, when I am eccentric, when I have a screw loose; people forgive me
because my hair is gray. You who live by your compass will say that I am
respected for the writing I have been doing all these years. But if that
were so, I should have had respect in my young days when I deserved it,
not now when I no longer deserve it so well. No one--no one in the world--
can be expected to write after fifty nearly so well as before, and only
the fools or the self-interested pretend to improve after that age.

Now it is a fact that I have been practicing a most distinctive
authorship, better than most; I know that very well. But this is due, not
so much to my endeavors, as to the fact that I was born with this ability.

I have made a test of this, and I know it is true. I have thought to
myself: "Suppose someone else had said this!" Well, no doubt others have
said it sometimes, but that has not hurt me. I have gone even further than
this: I have intentionally exposed myself to direct contempt from other
literary men, and this has not hurt me either. So I am sure of my ground.
On the other hand, my way of life has lent me an inner distinction for
which I have a right to demand respect, because it is the fruit of my own
endeavors. You cannot make me out a small man without lying. Yet one can
endure even such a lie if one has character.

You may quote Carlyle against me--how authors are misjudged!--
"_Considering what book-writers do in the world, and what the world does
with book-writers, I should say it is the most anomalous thing the world
at present has to show_." You may quote many others as well; they will
assert that a great to-do is made over me for my authorship as well as my
native ability, and my struggle to hammer this ability into a useful
shape. And I say only what is the truth, that most of the fuss is made
because I have reached an age in which my years are revered.

And that is what seems to me so wrong; it is a custom which makes it easy
to hold down the gifted young in a most hostile and arrogant fashion. Old
age should not be honored for its own sake; it does nothing but halt and
delay the march of man. The primitive races, indeed, have no respect for
old age, and rid themselves unhesitatingly of it and of its defects. A
long time ago I deserved honor much more, and valued it; now, in more than
one sense, I am a richer man and can afford to do without.

Yet now I have it. If I enter a room, respectful silence falls. "How old
he's grown!" everyone present thinks. And they all remain silent so that I
may speak memorable words in that room. Amazing nonsense!

The noise should raise the roof when I enter: "Welcome, old fellow and old
companion; for pity's sake don't say anything memorable to us--you should
have done that when you were better able to. Sit down, old chap, and keep
us company. But don't let your old age cast a shadow on us, and don't
restrain us; you have had your day--now it's our turn..."

This is honest speech.

In peasant homes they still have the right instinct: the mothers preserve
their daughters, the fathers their sons, from the rough, unpleasant
labors. A proper mother lets her daughter sew while she herself works
among the cattle. And the daughter will do the same with her own daughter.
It is her instinct.


XVII


Dear me, these human beings grow duller every day, and I see nothing in
them that I have not known before. So I sink to the level of watching
Solem's increasing passion for Miss Torsen. But that too is familiar and
dull.

Solem, after all the attention the ladies have paid him, has a delusion of
greatness; he buys clothes and gilt watch chains for the money he earns,
and on Sundays wears a white woolen pullover, though it is very warm;
round his neck and over his chest lies a costly silk tie tied in a
sailor's knot. No one else is so smart as he, as he well knows; he sings
as he crosses the farmyard, and considers no one too good for him now.
Josephine objects to his loud singing, but Solem lad has grown so
indispensable at the resort that he no longer obeys all orders. He has his
own will in many things, and sometimes Paul himself takes a glass in his
company.

Miss Torsen appears to have settled down. She is very busy with the
lawyer, and makes him explain each and every angle he draws in his plans.
Quite right of her, too, for undeniably the lawyer is the right man for
her, a wit and a sportsman, well-to-do, rather simple-minded,
strong-necked. At first Mrs. Molie seemed unable to reconcile herself to
the constant companionship of these two in the living room, and she
frequently had some errand that took her there; what was she after, Mrs.
Molie, of the ice-blue teeth?

At last the lawyer finished his plans and was able to deliver them. He
began to speak again about a certain peak of the Tore range which no one
had yet climbed, and was therefore waiting to be conquered by him. Miss
Torsen objected to this plan, and as she grew to know him better, begged
him most earnestly not to undertake such a mad climb. So he promised with
a smile to obey her wishes. They were in such tender agreement, these two!

But the blue peak still haunted the lawyer's mind; he pointed it out to
his lady, and smacked his lips, his eyes watering again.

"Gracious, it makes me dizzy just to look at it!" she said.

So the lawyer put his arm round her to steady her.

The sight was painful to Solem, whose eyes were continually on the pair.
One day as we left the luncheon table, he approached Miss Torsen and said:

"I know another path; would you like to see it tonight?"

The lady was confused and a little embarrassed, and said at length:

"A path? No, thank you."

She turned to the lawyer, and as they walked away together, she said:

"I never heard of such brazenness!"

"What got into him?" said the lawyer.

Solem went away, his teeth gleaming in a sneer.

That evening, Solem repeated the performance. He went up to Miss Torsen
again and said:

"What about that path? Shall we go now?"

As soon as she saw him coming, she turned quickly and tried to elude him.
But Solem did not hesitate to follow her.

"Now I've just got one thing to say," she said, stopping. "If you're
insolent to me again, I'll see that you're driven off the farm...."

But it was not easy to drive Solem off the farm. After all, he was guide
and porter to the tourists, and the only permanent laborer on the farm as
well. And soon the hay would have to be brought in, and casual laborers
would be engaged to work under him. No, Solem could not be driven off.
Besides, the other ladies were on his side; the mighty Mrs. Brede alone
could save him by a word. She held the Tore Peak resort in the palm of her
hand.

Solem was not discharged; but he held himself in check and became a little
more civil. He seemed to suffer as much as ever. Once at midday, as he was
standing in the woodshed, I saw him make a scratch with the ax across the
nail of his thumb.

"What on earth are you doing?" I asked.

"Oh, I'm just marking myself," he replied, laughing gloomily. "When this
scratch grows out--"

He stopped.

"What then?"

"Oh, I'll be away from here then," he said.

But I had the impression that he meant to say something different, so I
probed further.

"Let me look. Well, it's not a deep scratch; you won't be here long then,
will you?"

"Nails grow slowly," he muttered.

Then he strolled away whistling, and I set about chopping wood.

A little later Solem returned across the farmyard with a cackling hen
under his arm. He went to the kitchen window and called:

"This the kind of hen you want me to kill?"

"Yes," was the reply.

Solem came back to the woodshed and asked me for the ax, as he wanted to
behead a few hens. It was easy to see that he did everything on the farm;
he was, hand and brain, indispensable.

He laid the hen on a block and took aim, but it was not easy, for she
twisted her head like a snake and would not lie still. She had stopped
cackling now.

"I can feel her heart jumping inside her," said Solem.

Suddenly he saw his chance and struck. There lay the head; Solem still
held the body, which jerked under his hand. The thing was done so quickly
that the two sections of the bird were still one in my eyes; I could not
grasp a separation so sudden and unbelievable, and it took my sight a
second or two to overtake the event. Bewilderment was in the expression of
this detached head, which looked as though it could not believe what had
happened, and raised itself a little as if to show there was nothing the
least bit wrong. Solem let the body go. It lay still for a moment, then
kicked its legs, leaped to the ground and began to hop, the headless body
reeling on one wing till it struck the wall and spattered blood in wide
arcs before it fell at last.

"I let her go too soon after all," said Solem.

Then he went off to fetch another hen.


XVIII


I return to the mad idea of Solem's being discharged. This would, to be
sure, have averted a certain disaster here at the farm: but who would
fetch and carry then? Paul? But I've told you he just lounges all day in
his room, and has been doing so lately more than ever; the guests never
see him except through an unsuccessful maneuver on his part.

One evening he came walking across the lawn. He must, in his disregard of
time, have thought the guests had already retired, but we all sat outside
in the mild darkness. When Paul saw us, he drew himself up and saluted as
he passed; then, calling Solem to him, he said:

"You mustn't cross the field again without letting me know. I was right
there in my room, writing. The idea of Josephine carrying luggage!"

Paul strode on. But even yet he felt he had not appeared important enough,
so he turned round and asked:

"Why didn't you take one of my cotters with you to act as porter?"

"They wouldn't go," Solem replied. "They were busy lifting potatoes."

"Wouldn't go?"

"That's what Einar said."

Paul thought this over.

"What insolence! They'd better not go too far or I'll drive them off the
place."

Then the law awoke in the lawyer's bosom, and he asked:

"Haven't they bought their land?"

"Yes," said Paul. "But I'm the master of this farm. I have a say in things
too. I'm not without power up here in Reisa, believe me...."

Then he said sternly to Solem:

"You come to me next time."

Whereupon he stalked off to the woods again.

"He's a bit tight again, our good Paul," said the lawyer.

Nobody replied.

"Can you imagine an innkeeper in Switzerland behaving like that?" the
lawyer remarked.

Mrs. Brede said gently:

"What a pity! He never drank before."

And at once the lawyer was charitable again:

"I'll have a good talk with him," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

There followed a period in which Paul was sober from morning till night,
when Manufacturer Brede paid us a visit. The flag was hoisted, and there
was great commotion at the farm; Josephine's feet said _whrr_ under
her skirt. The manufacturer arrived with a porter; his wife and children
went far down the road to meet him, and the visitors at the resort sallied
forth too.

"Good morning!" he greeted us with a great flourish of his hat. He won us
all over. He was big and friendly, fat and cheerful, with the broad good
cheer that plenty of money gives. He became good friends with us at once.

"How long are you staying, Daddy?" his little girls asked, as they clung
to him.

"Three days."

"Is that all!" said his wife.

"Is that all?" he replied, laughing. "That's not such a short time, my
dear; three days is a lot for me."

"But not for me and the children," she said.

"Three whole days," he repeated. "I can tell you I've had to do some
moving to be able to stay as quiet as this, ha, ha!"

They all went in. The manufacturer had been here before and knew the way
to his wife's cottage. He ordered soda water at once.

In the evening, when the children had gone to bed, the manufacturer and
his wife joined us in the living room; he had brought whisky with him for
the gentlemen, and ordered soda water; for the ladies he had wine. It was
quite a little party, the manufacturer playing the host with skill, and we
were all well satisfied. When Miss Palm played folk melodies on the piano,
this heavy-built man grew quiet and sentimental; but he didn't think only
of himself, for suddenly he went out and lowered the flag. Flags should be
lowered at sunset, he said. Once or twice he went across to the cottage,
too, to see if the children were sleeping well. Generally speaking, he
seemed fond of the children. Though he owned factories and hotels and many
other things, yet he seemed to take the greatest pride of all in
possessing a couple of children.

One of the men from Bergen struck his glass for silence, and began to make
a speech.

The Bergensians had all long been very quiet and retiring, but here was a
perfect occasion for making speeches. Was not here a man from the great
world outside, from the heart of life, who had brought them wine and good
cheer and festivity? Strange wares up here in this world of blue
mountains ... and so on.

He talked for about five minutes, and became very animated.

The manufacturer told us a little about Iceland--a neutral country that
neither the Associate Master nor the lawyer had visited, and therefore
could not disagree about. One of the Danes had been there and was able to
confirm the justness of the manufacturer's impressions.

But most of the time he told cheerful anecdotes:

"I have a servant, a young lad, who said to me one day, when I was in a
bad temper: 'You've become a great hand at swearing in Icelandic!' Ha, ha,
ha--he appreciated me: 'a great hand at swearing in Icelandic,' he said!"

Everybody laughed, and his wife asked:

"And what did you say?"

"What did I say? Why, I couldn't say anything, could I, ha, ha, ha!"

Then another man from Bergen took the floor: we must not forget we had the
family of a real man of the world with us here--his wife, "this peerless
lady, scattering charm and delight about her," and the children, dancing
butterflies! And a few minutes later, "Hip, hip, hurrah!" followed by a
flourish on the piano.

The manufacturer drank a toast with his wife.

"Well, that's that!" was all he said.

Mrs. Molie sat off in a corner talking in a loud voice with the Dane who
had come over the top of the Tore from the wrong end; she seemed purposely
to be talking so audibly. The manufacturer's attention was attracted, and
he asked for further information about the motor cars in the neighboring
valley: how many there were, and how fast they could go. The Dane told
him.

"But just imagine coming across the fjeld from the other side!" said Mrs.
Molie. "It hasn't been done before."

In response to the manufacturer's questions, the Dane told him about this
adventurous journey also.

"Isn't there a blue peak somewhere in the mountains about here?" said Mrs.
Molie. "I suppose you'll be going up that next. Where ever will you stop?"

Yes, the Dane felt quite tempted by this peak, but said he believed it was
unconquerable.

"I should have climbed that peak long ago if you, Miss Torsen, hadn't
forbidden me," said the lawyer.

"You'd never have made it," said Mrs. Molie in an indifferent tone. This
was probably her revenge. She turned to the Dane again as though ready to
believe him capable of anything.

"I shouldn't want anyone to think of climbing that peak," said Miss
Torsen. "It's as bare as a ship's mast."

"What if I tried it, Gerda?" the manufacturer asked his wife with a smile.
"After all, I'm an old sailor."

"Nonsense," she said, smiling a little.

"Well, I climbed the mast of a schooner last spring."

"Where?"

"In Iceland."

"What for?"

"I don't know, though--all this mountain climbing--I haven't much use for
it," said the manufacturer.

"What did you do it for? What did you climb the mast for?" his wife
repeated nervously.

The manufacturer laughed.

"The curiosity of the female sex--!"

"How can you do a thing like that! And what about me and the children if
you--"

She broke off. Her husband grew serious and took her hand.

"It was stormy, my dear; the sails were flapping, and it was a question of
life and death. But I shouldn't have told you. Well--we'd better say good
night now, Gerda."

The manufacturer and his wife got up.

Then the first man from Bergen made another speech.

       *       *       *       *       *

The manufacturer stayed with us for the promised three days, and then made
ready to travel again. His mood never changed; he was contented and
entertaining the whole time. Every evening one whisky and soda was brought
him--no more. Before their bedtime, his little girls had a wildly
hilarious half-hour with him. At night a tremendous snoring could be heard
from his cottage. Before his arrival, the little girls had spent a good
deal of time with me, but now they no longer knew I existed, so taken up
with their father were they. He hung a swing for them between the two
rowan trees in the field, taking care to pack plenty of rag under the rope
so as not to injure the tree.

He also had a talk with Paul; there were rumors that he was intending to
take his money out of the Tore Peak resort. Paul's head was bent now, but
he seemed even more hurt that the manufacturer should have paid a visit to
the cotters to see how they were getting on.

"So that's where he's gone?" he said. "Well, let him stay there, for all I
care!"

The manufacturer cracked jokes to the very end. Of course he was a little
depressed by the farewells, too, but he had to keep his family's courage
up. His wife stood holding one of his arms with both hands, and the
children clung to his other arm.

"I can't salute you," the manufacturer said to us, smiling. "I'm not
allowed to say good-bye."

The children rejoiced at this and cried, "No, he can't have his arm back;
Mummy, you hold him tight, too!"

"Come, come!" the father said. "I've got to go to Scotland, just a short
trip. And when you come home from the mountains, I'll be there, too."

"Scotland? What are you going to Scotland for?" the children asked.

He twisted round and nodded to us.

"These women! All curiosity!" he said.

But none of his family laughed.

He continued to us:

"I was telling my wife a story about a rich man who was curious, too. He
shot himself just to find out what comes after death. Ha, ha, ha! That's
the height of curiosity, isn't it? Shooting yourself to find out what
comes after death!"

But he could not make his family laugh at this tale, either. His wife
stood still; her face was beautiful.

"So you're leaving now," was all she said.

Mr. Brede's porter came out with his luggage; he had stayed at the farm
for these three days in order to be at hand.

Then the manufacturer walked down through the field, accompanied by his
wife and children.

I don't know--this man with his good humor and kindliness and money and
everything, fond of his children, all in all to his wife--

Was he really everything to his wife?

The first evening he wasted time on a party, and every night he wasted
time in snoring. And so the three days and nights went by....


XIX


It is very pleasant here at harvest time. Scythes are being sharpened in
the field, men and women are at work; they go thinly clad and bareheaded,
and call to one another and laugh; sometimes they drink from a bucket of
whey, then set to work again. There is the familiar fragrance of hay,
which penetrates my senses like a song of home, drawing me home, home,
though I am not abroad. But perhaps I am abroad after all, far away from
the soil where I have my roots.

Why, indeed, do I stay here any longer, at a resort full of
schoolmistresses, with a host who has once more said farewell to sobriety?
Nothing is happening to me; I do not grow here. The others go out and lie
on their backs; I steal off and find relish in myself, and feel poetry
within me for the night. The world wants no, poetry; it wants only verses
that have not been sung before.

And Norway wants no red-hot irons; only village smiths forge irons now,
for the needs of the mob and the honor of the country.

No one came; the stream of tourists went up and down Stordalen and left
our little Reisa valley deserted. If only the Northern Railway could have
come to Reisa with Cook's and Bennett's tours--then Stordalen in its turn
would have lain deserted. Meanwhile, the cotters who are cultivating the
soil will probably go on harvesting half the crop of the outlying fields
for the rest of time. There is every reason to think so--unless our
descendants are more intelligent than we, and refuse to be smitten with
the demoralizing effects of the tourist traffic.

Now, my friend, you mustn't believe me; this is the point where you must
shake your head. There is a professor scuttling about the country, a born
mediocrity with a little school knowledge about history; you had better
ask him. He'll give you just as much mediocre information, my friend, as
your vision can grasp and your brain endure.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hardly had Manufacturer Brede left when Paul began to live a most
irregular life again. More and more all roads were closed to him; he saw
no way out and therefore preferred to make himself blind, which gave him
an excuse for not seeing. Seven of our permanent guests now left together:
the telephone operators, Tradesman Batt, Schoolmistresses Johnsen and
Palm, and two men who were in some sort of business, I don't quite know
what. This whole party went across the fjeld to Stordalen to be driven
about in cars.

Cases of various kinds of foodstuffs arrived for Paul; they were carried
up one evening by a man from the village. He had to make several journeys
with the side of his cart let down, and bring the cases over the roughest
spots one by one. That was the kind of road it was. Josephine received the
consignment, and noticed that one of the cases gave forth the sound of a
liquid splashing inside. That had come to the wrong place, she said, and
writing another address on it, she told the man to take it back. It was
sirup that had come too late, she said; she had got sirup elsewhere in the
meantime.

Later in the evening we heard them discussing it in the kitchen; the sirup
had not come too late, Paul said angrily.

"And I've told you to clear these newspapers away!" he cried. We heard the
sound of paper and glass being swept to the floor.

Well, things were not too easy for Paul; the days went by dull and empty,
nor had he any children to give him pleasant thoughts at times. Though he
wanted to build still more houses, he could not use half those he had
already. There was Mrs. Brede living alone with her children in one of
them, and since seven of the guests had left, Miss Torsen was also alone
in the south wing. Paul wanted at all costs to build roads and share in
the development of the tourist traffic; he even wanted to run a fleet of
motor cars. But since he had not the power to do this alone and could get
no assistance, nothing was left him but to resign himself. And now to make
matters worse Manufacturer Brede had said he would withdraw his money....

Paul's careworn face looked out of the kitchen door. Before going out
himself he wanted to make sure there was no one about, but he was
disappointed in this, for the lawyer at once greeted him loudly: "Good
evening, Paul!" and drew him outside.

They strolled down the field in the dusk.

Assuredly there is little to be gained by "having a good talk" with a man
about his drinking; such matters are too vital to be settled by talking.
But Paul seems to have admitted that the lawyer was right in all he said,
and probably left him with good resolutions.

Paul went down to the village again. He was going to the post office; the
money he had from the seven departed guests would be scattered to all
quarters of the globe. And yet it was not enough to cover everything--in
fact not enough for anything, for interest, repayments, taxes, and
repairs. It paid only for a few cases of food from the city. And of course
he stopped the case of sirup from going back.

Paul returned blind-drunk because he no longer wished to see. It was the
same thing all over again. But his brain seemed in its own way to go on
searching for a solution, and one day he asked the lawyer:

"What do you call those square glass jars for keeping small fish in--
goldfish?"

"Do you mean an aquarium?"

"That's it," said Paul. "Are they dear?"

"I don't know. Why?"

"I wonder if I could get one."

"What do you want it for?"

"Don't you think it might attract people to the place? Oh, well, perhaps
it wouldn't."

And Paul withdrew.

Madder than ever. Some people see flies. Paul saw goldfish.


XX


The lawyer is constantly in Miss Torsen's company; he even swings her in
the children's swing, and puts his arm around her to steady her when the
swing stops. Solem watches all this from the field where he is working,
and begins to sing a ribald song. Certainly these two have so ill-used him
that if he is going to sing improper songs in self-defense, this is the
time to do it; no one will gainsay that. So he sang his song very loud,
and then began to yodel.

But Miss Torsen went on swinging, and the lawyer went on putting his arm
round her and stopping her....

It was a Saturday evening. I stood talking to the lawyer in the garden; he
didn't like the place, and wanted to leave, but Miss Torsen would not go
with him, and going alone was such a bore. He did not conceal that the
young woman meant something to him.

Solem approached, and lifted his cap in greeting. Then he looked round
quickly and began to talk to the lawyer--politely, as became his position
of a servant:

"The Danish gentleman is going to climb the peak tomorrow. I'm to take a
rope and go with him."

The lawyer was startled.

"Is he--?"

The blankness of the lawyer's face was a remarkable sight. His small,
athletic brain failed him. A moment passed in silence.

"Yes, early tomorrow morning," said Solem. "I thought I'd tell you.
Because after all it was your idea first."

"Yes, so it was," said the lawyer. "You're quite right. But now he'll be
ahead of me."

Solem knew how to get round that.

"No, I didn't promise to go," he said. "I told him I had to go to the
village tomorrow."

"But we can't deceive him. I don't want to do that."

"Pity," said Solem. "Everybody says the first one to climb the Blue Peak
will be in all the papers."

"He'll take offense," the lawyer murmured, considering the matter.

But Solem urged him on:

"I don't think so. Anyhow, you were the first one to talk about it."

"Everybody here will know, and I'll be prevented," said the lawyer.

"We can go at dawn," said Solem.

In the end they came to an agreement.

"You won't tell anyone?" the lawyer said to me.

       *       *       *       *       *

The lawyer was missed in the course of the morning; he was not in his
room, and not in the garden.

"Perhaps the Danish mountaineer can tell us where he is," I said. But it
transpired that the Dane had not even thought of climbing the Blue Peak
that day, and knew nothing whatever about the expedition.

This surprised me greatly.

I looked at the clock; it was eleven. I had been watching the peak through
my field glasses from the moment I got up, but there was nothing to be
seen. It was five hours since the two men had left.

At half-past eleven Solem came running back; he was drenched in sweat and
exhausted.

"Come and help us!" he called excitedly to the group of guests.

"What's happened?" somebody asked.

"He fell off."

How tired Solem was and drenched to the skin! But what could we do? Rush
up the mountainside and look at the accident too?

"Can't he walk?" somebody asked.

"No, he's dead," said Solem, looking from one to another of us as though
to read in our faces whether his message seemed credible. "He fell off; he
didn't want me to help him."

A few more questions and answers. Josephine was already halfway across the
field; she was going to the village to telephone for the doctor.

"We shall have to get him down," said the Danish mountaineer.

So he and I improvised a stretcher; Solem was instructed to take brandy
and bandages to the site of the accident, and the Bergensians, the
Associate Master, Miss Torsen, and Mrs. Molie went with him.

"Did you really say nothing to Solem about climbing the peak today?" I
asked the Dane.

"No," he replied. "I never said a word about it. If I had meant to go, I
should certainly not have wanted company...."

Later that afternoon we returned with the lawyer on the stretcher. Solem
kept explaining all the way home how the accident had happened, what he
had said and what the lawyer had said, pointing to objects on the way as
though this stone represented the lawyer and that the abyss into which he
had plunged.... Solem still carried the rope he had not had a chance to
use. Miss Torsen asked no more than anyone else, and made purely
conventional comments: "I advised him against it, I begged him not to
go...."

But however much we talked, we could not bring the lawyer back to life.
Strange--his watch was still going, but he himself was dead. The doctor
could do nothing here, and returned to his village.

There followed a depressing evening. Solem went to the village to send a
telegram to the lawyer's family, and the rest of us did what we thought
decent under the circumstances: we all sat in the living room with books
in our hands. Now and again, some reference would be made to the accident:
it was a reminder, we said, how small we mortals were! And the Associate
Master, who had not the soul of a tourist, greatly feared that this
disaster would injure the resort and make things still more difficult for
Paul; people would shun a place where they were likely to fall off and be
killed.

No, the Associate Master was no tourist, and did not understand the
Anglo-Saxon mind.

Paul himself seemed to sense that the accident might benefit him rather
than do him harm. He brought out a bottle of brandy to console us on this
mournful evening.

And since it was a death to which we owed this attention, one of the men
from Bergen made a speech.


XXI


The accident became widely known. Newspapermen came from the city, and
Solem had to pilot them up the mountain and show them the spot where it
had taken place. If the body had not been removed at once, they would have
written about that, too.

Children and ignoramuses might be inclined to think it foolish that Solem
should be taken from the work in the fields at harvest time, but must not
the business of the tourist resort go before all else?

"Solem, tourists!" someone called to him. And Solem left his work. A flock
of reporters surrounded him, asked him questions, made him take them to
the mountains, to the river. A phrase was coined at the farm for Solem's
absences:

"Solem's with death."

But Solem was by no means with death; on the contrary, he was in the very
midst of life, enjoying himself, thriving. Once again he was an important
personage, listened to by strangers, doling out information. Nor did his
audience now consist of ladies only--indeed, no; this was something new, a
change; these were keen, alert gentlemen from the city.

To me, Solem said:

"Funny the accident should have happened just when the scratch on my nail
has grown out, isn't it?"

He showed me his thumbnail; there was no mark on it.

The newspaper reporters wrote articles and sent telegrams, not only about
the Blue Peak and the dreadful death, but about the locality, and about
the Tore Peak resort, that haven for the weary, with its wonderful
buildings set like jewels in the mountains. What a surprise to come here:
gargoyles, living room, piano, all the latest books, timber outside ready
for new jewels in their setting, altogether a magnificent picture of
Norway's modern farming.

Yes, indeed, the newspapermen appreciated it. And they did their
advertising.

The English arrived.

"Where is Solem?" they asked, and "Where is the Blue Peak?" they asked.

"We ought to get the hay in," said Josephine and the wife at the farm.
"There'll be rain, and fifty cartloads are still out!"

That was all very well, but "Where is Solem?" asked the English. So Solem
had to go with them. The two casual laborers began to cart away the hay,
but then the women had no one to help them rake. Confusion was rife.
Everyone rushed wildly hither and thither because there was no one to lead
them.

The weather stayed fine overnight; it was patient, slow-moving weather. As
soon as the dew dried up, more hay would be brought in, perhaps all the
hay. Oh, we should manage all right.

More English appeared; and "Solem--the Blue Peak?" they said. Their
perverse, sportsmen's brains tingled and thrilled; they had successfully
eluded all the resorts on the way, and arrived here without being caught.
There was the Blue Peak, like a mast against the sky! They hurried up so
fast that Solem was hardly able to keep pace with them. They would have
felt for ever disgraced if they had neglected to stand on this admirable
site of a disaster, this most excellent abyss. Some said it would be a
lifelong source of regret to them if they did not climb the Blue Peak
forthwith; others had no desire but to gloat over the lawyer's death fall,
and to shout down the abyss, gaping at the echo, and advancing so far out
on the ledge that they stood with their toes on death.

But it's an ill wind that blows good to none, and the resort earned a
great deal of money. Paul began to revive again, and the furrows in his
face were smoothed out. A man of worth grows strong and active with good
fortune; in adversity he is defiant. One who is not defiant in adversity
is worth nothing; let him be destroyed! Paul stopped drinking; he even
began to take an interest in the harvesting, and worked in the field in
Solem's place. If only he had begun when the weather was still slow and
patient!

But at least Paul began to tackle things in the right spirit again; he
only regretted that he had set aside for the cotters those outlying fields
from which they were used to getting half the hay; this year he would have
liked to keep it himself. But he had given his word, and there was nothing
to be done about it.

Besides, it was raining now. Haymaking had to stop; they could not even
stack what had already been gathered. Outside, three cartloads of fodder
were going to waste.

       *       *       *       *       *

Before long the novelty of the Tore Peak resort wore off again. The
newspapermen wrote and sent telegrams about other gratifying misfortunes,
the death on the Blue Peak having lost its news value. It had been an
intoxication; now came the morning after.

The Danish mountaineer quite simply deserted. He strapped on his knapsack
and walked across the field like one of the villagers, caring no more for
the Blue Peak. The commotion he had witnessed in the last week had taught
him a lesson.

And the tourists swarmed on to other places.

"What harm have I done them," Paul probably
thought, "that they should be going again? Have I been
too much in the fields and too little with them? But I
greeted them humbly and took my man out of the
harvesting work to help them...."

Then two young men arrived, sprouts off the Norwegian tree, sportsmen to
their finger tips, who talked of nothing but sailing, cycling, and
football; they were going to be civil engineers--the young Norway. They,
too, wanted to see the Blue Peak to the best of their ability; after all,
one must keep pace with modern life. But they were so young that when they
looked up at the peak, they were afraid. Solem had learned more than one
trick in tourist company; craftily he led them on, and then extorted money
from them in return for a promise not to expose their foolishness. So all
was well; the young sprouts came down the mountain again, bragging and
showing off their sportsmanship. One of them brought down a bloodstained
rag which he flung on the ground, saying,

"There's what's left of your lawyer that fell off."

"Ha, ha, ha, ha!" laughed the other sprout.

Yes, truly, they had acquired dashing ways among their sporting
acquaintances.

It rained for three weeks; then came two fine days, and then rain again
for a fortnight. The sun was not to be seen, the sky was invisible, the
mountain tops had disappeared; we saw nothing but rain. The roofs at the
Tore Peak resort began to leak more and more.

The hay that still lay spread on the ground was black and rotting, and the
stacks had gone moldy.

The cotters had got their hay indoors during the patient spell. They had
carried it, man, woman, and child, on their backs.

The men from Bergen and Mrs. Brede with her children have left for home.
The little girls curtsied and thanked me for taking them walking in the
hills and telling them stories. The house is empty now. Associate Master
Höy and Mrs. Molie were the last to go; they left last week, traveling
separately, though both were going to the same small town.

He went by way of the village--a very roundabout route--while she crossed
the field. It is very quiet now, but Miss Torsen is still here.

Why do I not leave? Don't know. Why ask? I'm here. Have you ever heard
anyone ask: "How much is a northern light?" Hold your tongue.

Where should I go if I did leave? Do you imagine I want to go to the town
again? Or do you think I'm longing for my old hut and the winter, and
Madame? I'm not longing for any specific place; I am simply longing.

Of course I ought to be old enough to understand what all sensible
Norwegians know, that our country is once more on the right road. The
papers are all writing about the splendid progress the tourist traffic has
made in Stordalen since the motor road was opened--ought I not to go there
and feel gratified?

From old habit, I still take an interest in the few of us who are left;
Miss Torsen is still here.

Miss Torsen--what more is there to be said about her? Well, she does not
leave; she stays here to complete the picture of the woman Torsen, child
of the middle class who has read schoolbooks all through her formative
years, who has learned all about _Artemis cotula_, but undernourished
her soul. That is what she is doing here.

I remember a few weeks ago, when we were infested with Englishmen, a young
sprout coming down from the mountain top with a bloodstained rag which he
threw on the ground, saying, "Here's what's left of your lawyer that fell
off!" Miss Torsen heard it, and never moved a muscle. No, she never
mourned the death of the lawyer very keenly; on the contrary, she wrote
off at once to ask another friend to come. When he came, he turned out to
be a swaggering scatterbrain--a "free lance," he called himself in the
visitors' book. I have not mentioned him before because he was less
important than she; less important, in fact, than any of us. He was
beardless and wore his collar open; heaven knows if he wasn't employed at
a theater or in the films. Miss Torsen went to meet him when he came, and
said, "Welcome to our mountains," and "Thanks for coming." So evidently
she had sent for him. But why did she not leave? Why did she seem to
strike root in the place, and even ask others to come here? Yet she had
been the first to want to leave last summer! There was something behind
this.


XXII


I muse on all this, and understand that her staying here is somehow
connected with her carnal desires, with the fact that Solem is still here.
How muddled it all is, and how this handsome girl has been spoiled! I saw
her not long ago, tall and proud, upright, untouched, walking
intentionally close to Solem, yet not replying to his greeting. Did she
suspect him of complicity in the death of the lawyer and avoid him for
that reason? Not in the least; she avoided him less than before, even
letting him take her letters to the post office, which she had not done
previously. But she was unbalanced, a poor thing that had lost her
bearings. Whenever she could, she secretly defiled herself with pitch,
with dung; she sniffed at foulness and was not repelled.

One day, when Solem swore a needlessly strong oath at a horse that was
restless, she looked at him, shivered, and went a deep red. But she
mastered herself at once, and asked Josephine:

"Isn't that man leaving soon?"

"Yes," Josephine replied, "in a few days."

Though she had seized this opportunity to ask her question with a great
show of indifference, I am certain it was an important one to her. She
went away in silence.

Yes, Miss Torsen stayed, for she was sexually bound to Solem. Solem's
despair, Solem's rough passion that she herself had inflamed, his
brutality, his masculinity, his greedy hands, his looks--she sniffed at
all this and was excited by it. She had grown so unnatural that her sexual
needs were satisfied by keeping this man at a distance. The Torsen type no
doubt lies in her solitary bed at night, reveling in the sensation that in
another house a man lies writhing for her.

But her friend, the actor? He was in no sense the other's equal. There was
nothing of the bull in him, nothing of action, only the braggadocio of the
theater....

       *       *       *       *       *

Here am I, growing small and petty with this life. I question Solem about
the accident. We are alone together in the woodshed.

Why had he lied and said the Dane wanted to climb the Blue Peak that
unfortunate Sunday morning?

Solem looked at me, pretending not to understand.

I repeated my question.

Solem denied he had said any such thing.

"I heard you," I said.

"No, you didn't," he said.

A pause.

Suddenly he dropped to the floor of the shed, convulsed, without shape, an
outline merely; a few minutes passed before he got up again. When he was
on his feet once more, pulling his clothes to rights, we looked at each
other. I had no wish to speak to him further, and left him. Besides, he
was going away soon.

After this, everything was dull and empty again. I went out alone, aping
myself and shouting: "Bricks for the palace! The calf is much stronger
today!" And when this was done, I did other nothings, and when my money
began to run out, I wrote to my publisher, pretending I would soon send
him an unbelievably remarkable manuscript. In short, I behaved like a man
in love. These were the typical symptoms.

And to take the bull by the horns: no doubt you suspect me of dwelling on
the subject of Miss Torsen out of self-interest? In that case I must have
concealed well in these pages that I never think of her except as an
object, as a theme; turn back the pages and you will see! At my age, one
does not fall in love without becoming grotesque, without making even the
Pharaohs laugh.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Finis._

But there is one thing I cannot finish doing, and that is withdrawing to
my room, and sitting alone with the good darkness round me. This, after
all, is the last pleasure.

An interlude:

Miss Torsen and her actor are walking this way; I hear their footsteps and
their voices; but since I am sitting in the dark of the evening, I cannot
see them. They stop outside my open window, leaning against it, and the
actor says something, asks her to do something she does not want to do,
tries to draw her with him; but she resists.

Then he grows angry.

"What the devil did you send for me for?" he asks roughly.

And she begins to weep and says:

"So that's all you've come for! Oh, oh! But I'm not like that at all. Why
can't you leave me alone? I'm not hurting you."

Am I one who understands women? Self-deception. Vain boasting. I made my
presence known then because her weeping sounded so wretched; I moved a
chair and cleared my throat.

The sound caught his attention at once, and he hushed her, trying to
listen; but she said:

"No, it was nothing...."

But she knew very well this was not true; she knew what the sound was. It
was not the first time Miss Torsen used this trick with me; she had often
pretended that she thought I was not within hearing, and then created some
such delicate situation. Each time I had promised myself not to intervene;
but she had not wept before; now she wept.

Why did she use these wiles? To clear herself in my eyes--mine, the eyes
of a settled man--to make me believe how good she was, how well-behaved!
But, dear child, I knew that before; I could see it from your hands! You
are so unnatural that in your seven and twentieth year, you walk
unmarried, barren and unopen!

The pair drifted away.

And there is something else I cannot finish doing: withdrawing into
solitude in the woods, alone with the good darkness round me. This is the
last pleasure.

One needs solitude and darkness, not because one flees the company of
others and can endure only one's own, but because of their quality of
loftiness and religion. Strange how all things pass distantly, yet all is
near; we sit in an omnipresence. It must be God. It must be ourselves as a
part of all things.

  What would my heart, where would I stray?
  Shall I leave the forest behind me?
  It was my home but yesterday;
  now toward the city I wend my way;
  to the darkness of night I've resigned me.

  The world round me sleeps as I tarry, alone,
  soothing my ear with its quiet.
  How large and gray is the city of stone
  in which the many all hopes enthrone!
  Shall I, too, accept their fiat?

  Hark! Do the bells ring on the hillside?

  Back to the peace of the forest I turn
  in the nightly hour that's hoarest.
  There's a sweet-smelling hedgerow to which I yearn;
  I shall rest my head on heather and fern,
  and sleep in the depths of the forest.

  Hark, how the bells ring on the hillside!

Romantic? Yes. Mere sentimentality, mood, rhyme--nothing? Yes.

It is the last happiness.


XXIII


The sun has returned. Not darkly glowing and regal--more than that:
imperial, because it is flaming. This you do not understand, my friend,
whatever the language in which it is dished up for you. But I say there is
an imperial sun in the sky.

It's a good day for going to the woods; it is sweeping time, for the woods
are full of yellow things that have come suddenly into being. A short time
ago they were not there, or I did not see them, or they had the earth's
own complexion. There is something unborn about them, like embryos in an
early stage. But if I whirl them about, they are miracles of fulfillment.

Here are fungi of every sort, mushrooms and puffballs. How close is the
poisonous mushroom to the happy family of the edible mushroom, and how
innocently it stands there! Yet it is deadly. What magnificent cunning! A
spurious fruit, a criminal, habitual vice itself, but preening in splendor
and brilliance, a very cardinal of fungi. I break off a morsel to chew; it
is good and soft on the tongue, but I am a coward and spit it out again.
Was it not the poisonous mushroom that drove men berserker? But in the
dawn of our own day, we die of a hair in the throat.

The sun is already setting. Far up the mountainside are the cattle, but
they are moving homeward now; I can hear by their bells that they are
moving. Tinkling bells and deep-mouthed bells, sometimes sounding together
as though there were a meaning in it, a pattern of tones, a rapture.

And rapture, too, to see all the blades of grass and the tiny flowers and
plants. Beside me where I lie is a small pod plant, wonderfully meek, with
tiny seeds pushing out of the pod--God bless it, it's becoming a mother!
It has got caught in a dry twig and I liberate it. Life quivers within it;
the sun has warmed it today and called it to its destiny. A tiny, gigantic
miracle.

Now it is sunset, and the woods bend under a rustling that passes
through them sweet and heavy; it is the evening.

I lie for another hour or two; the birds have long since gone to rest, and
darkness falls thick and soft.... As I walk homeward, my feet feel their
way and I hold my hands before me till I reach the field, where it is a
little lighter. I walk on the hay that has been left outdoors; it is tough
and black, and I slip on it because it is already rotting. As I approach
the houses, bats fly noiselessly past me, as though on wings of foam. A
slight shudder convulses me whenever they pass.

Suddenly I stop.

A man is walking here. I can see him against the wall of the new house. He
has on a coat that looks like the actor's raincoat, but it is not the
little comedian himself. There he goes, into the house, right into the
house. It is Solem.

"Why, that's where she sleeps!" I think. "Ah, well. Alone in the building,
in the south wing, Miss Torsen alone--yes, quite alone. And Solem has just
gone in."

I stand there waiting to be at hand, to rush in to the rescue, for after
all I am a human being, not a brute. Several minutes pass. He has not even
bothered to be very quiet, for I hear him clicking the key in the lock.
Surely I ought to hear a cry now? I hear nothing, nothing; a chair
scraping across the floor, that is all.

"But good heavens, he may do her some harm! He may injure her; he may
overpower her with rape! Ought I not to tap on the window? I--what for?
But at the very first cry, I shall be on the spot, take my word for it."

Not a single cry.

The hours pass; I have settled down to wait. Of course I cannot go my way
and desert a helpless woman. But the hours wear on. A very thorough
business in there, nothing niggardly about this; it is almost dawn. It
occurs to me that he may be killing her, perhaps has killed her already; I
am alarmed and about to get up--when the key clicks in the lock again and
Solem emerges. He does not run, but walks back the way he came, down to
the veranda of my own house. There he hangs the actor's raincoat where it
hung before, and emerges again. But this time he is naked. He has been
naked under the coat all this time. Is it possible? Why not? No
inhibitions, no restraint, no covering; Solem has thought it all out. Now,
stark naked, he stalks to his room.

What a man!

I sit thinking and collecting myself and regaining my wits. What has
happened? The south wing is still wrapped in silence, but the lady is not
dead; I can see that from Solem's fearless manner as he goes to his room,
lights the lamp, and goes to bed.

It relieves me to know she is alive, revives me, and makes me
superlatively brave: if he has dared to kill her, I will report it at
once. I shall not spare him. I shall accuse him of both her death and the
lawyer's. I shall go further: I shall accuse others--the thief of last
winter, the man that stole the sides of bacon from a tradesman and sold me
rolls of tobacco out of his bag. No, I shall not keep silence about
anything then....


XXIV


When it grew light, Solem went to the kitchen, had his breakfast, settled
his business with Paul and the women, and returned to his room. He was in
no hurry; though it was no longer early in the day, he took his time about
tying his bundles, preparatory to leaving. Lingeringly he looked into the
windows of the south wing as he passed.

Then Solem was gone.

A little later Miss Torsen came in to breakfast. She asked at once about
Solem. And why might she be so interested in Solem? She had certainly
stopped in her room intentionally so as to give him time to leave; if she
wanted to see him she could have been here long ago. But was it not safest
to seem a little angry? Supposing, night owl that I was, that I had seen
something!

"Where is Solem?" she asked indignantly.

"Solem has gone now," Josephine replied.

"Lucky for him!"

"Why?" asked Josephine.

"Oh, he's a dreadful creature!"

How agitated she was! But in the course of the day she calmed down. Her
anger dissolved, and there was neither weeping nor a scene; only she did
not walk proudly, as was her habit, but preferred to sit in silence.

That passed too; she roused herself briskly soon after Solem's departure,
and in a few days she was the same as ever. She took walks, she talked and
laughed with us, she made the actor swing her in the children's swing, as
in the lawyer's day....

I went out one evening, for there was good weather and darkness for
walking; there was neither a moon nor stars. The gentle ripple of the
little Reisa river was all the sound I heard; there were God and Goethe
and _über allen Gipfeln ist Ruh'_ that night. On my return, I was in
the mood to walk softly and on tiptoe, so I undressed and went to bed in
the dark.

Then they came again to my window, those two lunatics, the lady and the
actor. What next? But it was not he that chose this spot; of that I was
sure. She chose it because she was convinced I had returned. There was
something she _wanted_ me to hear.

Why should I listen to him still pleading with her?

"I've had enough of this," he said. "I'm leaving tomorrow."

"Oh, well...." she said. "No, let's not tonight," she added suddenly;
"some other time. Yes? In a few days? We'll talk about it tomorrow. Good
night."

For the first time it struck me: she wants to rouse you, too, settled man
though you are; she wants to make you as mad as the others! That's what
she's after!

And now I remember, before the lawyer arrived, when there was Tradesman
Batt--I remember how during his first few days here, she would give me a
kind word or a look that was quite out of the picture, and as unmistakable
as her pride would permit. No, she had no objections to seeing old age
wriggle. And listen to this: before this she had been intent to show a
well-behaved indifference to sex, but that was finished; was she not at
this moment resisting only faintly, and raising definite hopes? "Not
tonight, but some other time," she had said. Yes, a half-refusal, a mere
postponement, that I was meant to hear. She was corrupt, but she was also
cunning, with the cunning of a madman. So corrupt.

Dear child, Pharaoh laughs before his pyramids; standing before his
pyramids he laughs. He would laugh at me, too.

       *       *       *       *       *

Next day we three remaining guests were sitting in the living room. The
lady and the actor read one book; I read another.

"Will you," she says to him, "do me a great favor?"

"With pleasure."

"Would you go out in the grounds where we sat yesterday and fetch my
galoshes?"

So he went out to do her this great favor. He sang a well-known popular
song as he crossed the yard, cheerful in his own peculiar way.

She turned to me.

"You seem silent."

"Do I?"

"Yes, you're very silent."

"Listen to this," I said, and began to read to her from the book I held in
my hands. I read a longish bit.

She tried to interrupt me several times, and at length said impatiently:

"What is this you want me to listen to?"

"The _Musketeers_. You must admit it's entertaining."

"I've read it," she said. And then she began to clasp her hands and drag
them apart again.

"Then you must hear something you haven't read before," I replied, and
went across to my room to fetch a few pages I had written. They were only
a few poems--nothing special, just a few small verses. Not that I am in
the habit of reading such things aloud, but I seized on this for the
moment because I wanted to prevent her from humbling herself, and telling
me anything more.

While I was reading the poems to her, the actor returned.

"I couldn't find any galoshes there," he said.

"No?" she replied absently.

"No, I really looked everywhere, but...."

She got up and left the room.

He looked after her in some surprise, and sat still for a moment. Then it
occurred to him.

"I believe her galoshes are in the passage outside her door," he said, and
hurried after her.

I sat back, thinking it over. There had been a sweetness in her face as
she said, "Yes, you're very silent." Had she seen through me and my
pretext for reading to her? Of course she had. She was no fool. I was the
fool, nobody else. I should have driven a sportsman to despair. Some
practice the sport of making conquests and the sport of making love,
because they find it so agreeable; I have never practiced sport of any
kind. I have loved and raged and suffered and stormed according to my
nature--that is all; I am an old-fashioned man. And here I sit in the
shadow of evening, the shadow of the half-century. Let me have done!

The actor returned to the living room confused and dejected. She had
turned him out; she had wept.

I was not surprised, for it was the mode of expression of her type.

"Have you ever heard the like of it? She told me to get out! I shall leave
tomorrow."

"Have you found the galoshes?" I asked.

"Of course," he replied. "They were right in the passage. 'Here they are,'
I said to her. 'Yes, yes,' she said. 'Right under your nose,' I said.
'Yes, yes, go away,' she said, and began to cry. So I went away."

"She'll get over it."

"Do you think so? Yes, I expect she will. Oh, well, it's my opinion nobody
can understand women, anyhow. But they're a mighty sex, the women, a
mighty sex. They certainly are."

He sat on a while, but he had no peace of mind, and soon went out again.

       *       *       *       *       *

That evening the lady was in the dining room before us; she was there when
we came in, and we all nodded slightly in greeting. To the actor she was
very kind, quite making up for her petulance of the afternoon.

When he sat down he found a letter in his table napkin: a written note
folded into the napkin. He was so surprised that he dropped everything he
was doing to unfold and read it. With an exclamation and a smile, his
blue, delighted eyes splashed over her; but she was looking down into her
lap with her forehead wrinkled, so he put the note away in his vest
pocket.

Then it probably dawned on him that he had betrayed her, and he tried to
cover it up somehow.

"Well, here goes for food!" he said, as though he were going to require
all his energy for the task of eating.

Why had she written? There was nothing to prevent her speaking to him. He
had, after all, been sitting on the doorstep when she emerged from her
room and passed him. Had she foreseen that the good comedian could not
contain himself, but would surely let a third person into the secret?

Why probe or question further? The actor did not eat much, but he looked
very happy. So the note must have said yes, must have been a promise;
perhaps she would not tantalize him further.


XXV


A few days later, they were going to leave. They would travel together,
and that would be the end.

I might have pitied them both, for though life is good, life is stern. One
result at any rate was accomplished. She had not sent for him in vain, nor
had he come in vain.

That was the end of the act. But there were more acts to come--many more.

She had lost much: having been ravished, she gave herself away; why be
niggardly now? And this is the destiny of her type, that they lose
increasingly much, retaining ever less; what need to hold back now? The
ground has been completely shifted: from half-measures to the immolation
of all virtue. The type is well-known, and can be found at resorts and
boarding-houses, where it grows and flourishes.

In spite of her wasted adolescence, her examination and her
"independence," she has been coming home from her office stool or her
teacher's desk more or less exhausted; suddenly she finds herself in the
midst of a sweet and unlimited idleness, with quantities of tinned food
for her meals. The company round her is continually changing, tourists
come and go, and she passes from hand to hand for walks and talks; the
tone is "country informality." This is sheer loose living; this is a life
stripped of all purpose. She does not even sleep enough because she hears
through the thin wall every sound made by her neighbor in the next room,
while arriving or departing Englishmen bang doors all night. In a short
time she has become a neurotic, sated with company, surfeited with herself
and the place. She is ready to go off with the next halfway respectable
organ grinder that happens along. And so she pairs off with the most
casual visitors, flirts with the guide, hovering about him and making
bandages for his fingers, and at last throws herself into the arms of a
nameless nobody who has arrived at the house today.

This is the Torsen type.

And now, at this very moment, she retires to her room to collect the
fragments of herself, in preparation for her departure--at the end of the
summer. It takes time; there are so many fragments, one in every corner.
But perhaps it consoles her to think that she knows the genitive of
_mensa_.

Things are not quite so bad for the actor. He has staked nothing, is
committed to nothing. No part of his life is destroyed, nor anything
within him. As he came, so he goes, cheerful, empty, nice. In fact he is
even something more of a man because he has really made a conquest. He has
no wish but to spend some pleasant hours with the Torsen type.

He strolled about the garden waiting for her to get ready. Once she was
visible through the doorway, and he called to her:

"Aren't you coming soon? Don't forget we've got to cross the mountain!"

"Well, I can't go bareheaded," she replied.

He was impatient.

"No, you've got to put your hat on, and what a lot of time that takes!
Ugh!"

She measured him coldly and said:

"You're very--familiar."

If he had paid her back in the same coin there would have been weeping and
gnashing of teeth and cries of "Go away! Go alone!" and an hour's delay,
and reconciliation and embraces. But the actor's manner changed at once,
and he replied docilely, as his nature was,

"Familiar? Well--perhaps. Sorry!"

Then he strolled about the garden again, humming occasionally and swinging
his stick. I took note of the oddly feminine shape of his knees, and the
unusual plumpness of his thighs; there was something unnatural about this
plumpness, as though it did not belong to his sex.

His shoes were down at the heel, and his collar was open. His raincoat
hung regally from his shoulders and flapped in the wind, though it was not
raining. He was a proud and comical sight. But why speak harsh words about
a raincoat? It was not he, the owner, that had abused it, and it hung from
his shoulders as innocently as a bridal veil.

Why speak harsh words about anyone? Life is good, but life is stern.
Perhaps when she comes out, I think to myself, the following scene will
take place: I stand here waiting only for this departure. So she gives me
her hand and says good-bye.

"Why don't you say something?" she asks in order to seem bright and easy
in her mind.

"Because I don't want to hurt you in the great error of your ways."

"Ha, ha, ha," she laughs, too loudly and in a forced tone; "the great
error of my ways! Well, really!"

And her anger grows, while I am assured and fatherly, standing on the firm
ground of conscious virtue. Yet I say an unworthy thing like this:

"Don't throw yourself away, Miss Torsen!"

She raises her head then; yes, the Torsen type would raise her head and
reply, pale and offended:

"Throw myself away?--I don't understand you."

But it is possible, too, that Miss Torsen, at heart a fine, proud girl,
would have a lucid moment and see things in their true light:

"Why not, why shouldn't I throw myself away? What is there to keep? I am
thrown away, wasted ever since my school days, and now I am seven and
twenty...."

My own thoughts run away with me as I stand there wishing I were somewhere
else. Perhaps she, too, in her room wishes me far away.

"Good-bye," I say to the actor. "Will you remember me to Miss Torsen? I
must go now."

"Good-bye," says he, shaking hands in some surprise. "Can't you wait a few
minutes? Well, all right, I'll give her your greeting. Good-bye,
good-bye."

I take a short cut to get out of the way, and as I know every nook and
corner, I am soon outside the farm, and find a good shelter. From here I
shall see when these two leave. She has only to say good-bye now to the
people of the farm.

It struck me that yesterday was the last time I spoke to her. We spoke
only a few insignificant words that I have forgotten, and today I have not
spoken to her....

Here they come.

Curious--they seemed somehow to have become welded together; though they
walked separately up the mountain track, yet they belonged together. They
did not speak; the essential things had probably already been said. Life
had grown ordinary for them; it still remained to them to be of use to
each other. He walked first, while she followed many paces behind; it was
lonely to look at against the rugged background of the mountain. Where had
her tall figure gone to? She seemed to have grown shorter because she had
hitched up her skirt and was carrying her knapsack on her back. They each
carried one, but he carried hers and she his, probably because, owing to
the greater number of her clothes, hers was the heavier sack. Thus had
they shifted their burdens; what burdens would they carry in the future?
She was, after all, no longer a schoolmistress, and perhaps he was no
longer with the theater or the films.

I watched those two crossing rocky, mountainous ground, bare ground, with
not a tree anywhere except a few stunted junipers; far away near the ridge
murmured the little Reisa. Those two had put their possessions together,
were walking together; at the next halt they would be man and wife, and
take only one room because it was cheaper.

Suddenly I started up and, moved by some impulse of human sympathy--nay,
of duty--I wanted to run across to her, talk to her, say a word of
warning: "Don't go on!" I could have done it in a few minutes--a good
deed, a duty....

They disappeared behind the shoulder of the hill.

Her name was Ingeborg.


XXVI


And now I, too, must wander on again, for I am the last at the Tore Peak
farm. The season is wearing on, and this morning it snowed for the first
time--wet, sad snow.

It is very quiet at the farm now, and Josephine might have played the
piano again and been friendly to the last guest; but now I am leaving,
too. Besides, Josephine has little to play and be cheerful for; things
have gone badly this year, and may grow worse as time goes on. The
prospect is not a good one. "But something will turn up," says Josephine.
She need not worry, for she has money in the bank, and no doubt there is a
young man in the offing, on the other side of the fjeld.

Oh, yes, Josephine will always manage; she thinks of everything. The other
day, for instance--when Miss Torsen and her friend left. The friend could
not pay his bill, and all he said was that he had expected money, but it
hadn't come, and he couldn't stay any longer because of his private
affairs. That was all very well, but when would the bill be paid? Why, he
would send it from the town, of course; that was where he had his money!

"But how do we know we'll get the money?--from him, anyway," said
Josephine. "We've had these actor-people here before. And I didn't like
the way he swanked about outside, thinking he was as good as anybody, and
throwing his stick up in the air and catching it again. And then when Miss
Torsen came in to say good-bye, I told her, and I wondered if she couldn't
let me have the money for him. Miss Torsen was shocked, and said, 'Hasn't
he paid himself?' 'No,' I said, 'he hasn't, and this year being such a bad
one, we need every penny.' So then Miss Torsen said of course we should
get the money; how much was it? And I told her, and she said she couldn't
pay for him now, but she would see the money was sent; we could trust her
for that. And I think we can, too. We'll get the money all right, if not
from him. I daresay she'll send it herself...."

And Josephine went off to serve me my dinner.

Paul is on his feet now, too. Not that his step is always very steady, but
at least he puts his feet to the ground. But he takes no interest in
things; he does little more than feeding the horses and chopping some
wood. He ought to be clearing the manure out of the summer cow houses for
autumn use, but he keeps putting it off, and probably it will not be done
at all. So far it hasn't mattered, but this morning's first wet snow has
covered the hay outdoors and the maltreated land. And so it will remain
till next spring. Poor Paul! He is an easygoing man at heart, but he
pushes doggedly on against a whirlwind; sometimes he smiles to himself,
knowing how useless it is to struggle--a distorted smile.

His father, the old man alone in his room, stands sometimes on his
threshold, as he used to do, and reflects. He is lost in memories, for he
has ninety years behind him. The many houses on the farm confuse him a
little; the roofs are all too big for him, and he is afraid they might
come down and carry him off. Once he asked Josephine if it was right that
his hands and fingers should run away from him every day across the
fields. So they put mittens on his hands, but he took to chewing them; in
fact he ate everything he was given, and enjoyed a good digestion. So they
must be thankful he had his health, Josephine said, and could be up and
about.

       *       *       *       *       *

I did not follow the others across the field, but returned the way I had
come last spring, down toward the woods and the sea. It is fitting that I
should go back, always back, never forward again.

I passed the hut where Solem and I had lived together, and then the
Lapps--the two old people and Olga, this strange cross between a human
being and a dwarf birch. A stove stood against the peat wall, and a
paraffin lamp hung from the roof of their stone-age dwelling. Olga was
kind and helpful, but she looked tiny and pathetic, like a ruffled hen; it
pained me to watch her flit about the room, tiny and crooked, as she
looked for a pair of reindeer cheeses for me.

Then I reached my own hut of last winter where I had passed so many lonely
months. I did not enter it.

Or rather, I did enter it, for I had to spend the night there. But I shall
skip this, so for the sake of brevity, I call it not entering. This
morning I wrote something playful about Madame, the mouse I left here last
spring; but tonight I am taking it out again because I am no longer in the
mood, and because there is no point in it. Perhaps it would have amused
you to read it, my friend; but there is no point in amusing you now. I
must deject you now and make you listen to me; there is not much more to
hear.

Am I moralizing? I am explaining. No, I am not moralizing; I am
explaining. If it is moralizing to see the truth and tell it to you, then
I am moralizing. Can I help that? Intuitively I see into what is distant;
you do not, for this is something you cannot learn from your little
schoolbooks. Do not let this rouse your hatred for me. I shall be merry
again with you later, when my strings are tuned to merriment. I have no
power over them. Now they are tuned to a chorale....

       *       *       *       *       *

At dawn, in the bright moonlight, I leave the hut and push on quickly in
order to reach the village as soon as possible. But I must have started
too early or walked too fast, for at this rate I shall reach the village
at high noon. What am I chasing after? Perhaps it is feeling the nearness
of the sea that drives me forward. And as I stand on the last high ridge,
with the glitter and roar of the sea far beneath, a sweetness darts
through me like a greeting from another world. "_Thalatta!_" I cry;
and I wipe my eyeglasses tremblingly. The roar from below is sleepless and
fierce, a tone of jungle passion, a savage litany. I descend the ridge as
though in a trance and reach the first house.

There was no one about, and a few children's faces at a window suddenly
disappeared. Everything here was small and poor, though only the barn was
of peat; the house was a timbered fisherman's home. As I entered the
house, I saw that though it was as poor within as without, the floor was
clean and covered with pine twigs. There were many children here. The
mother was busy cooking something over the fire.

I was offered a chair, and sitting down, began to chat with a couple of
small boys. As I was in no hurry and asked for nothing, the woman said:

"I expect you want a boat?"

"A boat?" I said in my turn, for I had not come by boat on my last visit;
I had walked instead over fjelds and valleys many miles from the sea.
"Yes, why not?" I said. "But where does it go?"

"I thought you wanted a boat to go to the trading center," she replied,
"because that's where the steamer stops. We've rowed over lots of people
this year."

Great changes here; the motor traffic in Stordalen must have completely
altered all the other traffic since my last visit ten months ago.

"Where can I stop for a few days?" I asked.

"At the trading center, the other side of the islands. Or there's Eilert
and Olaus; they're both on this side. You could go there; they've got big
houses."

She showed me the two places on this side of the water, close to the
shore, and I proceeded thither.


XXVII


A large house, with and upper story of planks built on later, displayed a
new signboard on the wall: Room and Board. The barn, as usual, was a peat
hut.

As I did not know which was Eilert and which Olaus, and had stopped to
consider which road to take, a man came hurrying toward me. Ah, well, the
world is a small place; we meet friends and acquaintances everywhere. Here
am I, meeting an old acquaintance, the thief of last winter, the pork
thief. What luck, what a satisfaction!

This was Eilert. He took in paying guests now.

At first he pretended not to recognize me, but he soon gave that up. Once
he had done so, however, he carried the thing off in style:

"Well, well," he said, "what a nice surprise! You are most welcome under
my humble roof, and such it is!"

My own response was rather less jaunty, and I stood still collecting my
thoughts. When I had asked a few questions, he explained that since the
motor traffic had started in Stordalen, many visitors came through this
way, and sometimes they wanted to stop over at his house before being
rowed across to the steamer. They always came down in the evenings, and it
might be fine, or it might not, and at night the fjord was often wild. He
had therefore had to arrange to house them, because after all, you can't
expect people to spend the night outdoors.

"So you've turned into a hotelkeeper," I said.

"Well, you can joke about it," he returned, "but all I do is to give
shelter to the people who come here. That's all the hotel there is to it.
My neighbor Olaus can't do any more either, even if he builds a place
that's ten times as big. Look over there--now he's building another
house--a shed, I'd call it--and he's got three grown men working on it so
he can get it done by next summer. But it won't be much bigger than my
place at that, and anyhow, the gentry don't want to be bothered walking
all that distance to his place when here's my house right at the car stop.
Smoothly and gracefully Guinevere moved about the aquarium. Her gills lifted
and closed rhythmically--twice as slowly as compared with the three or
four times every second of her breathless young tadpolehood.
Several times on the fourteenth day, she came quietly to the surface for a
gulp of air.

Looking at her from above, two little bulges were visible on either
side of the body--the ensheathed elbows pressing outward.

Twice, when she lurched forward in alarm, I saw these front limbs jerk
spasmodically; and when she was resting quietly, they rubbed and
pushed impatiently against their mittened tissue.

And now began a restless shifting, a slow, strange dance in mid-water, wholly
unlike any movement of her smaller companions; up and down, slowly
revolving on oblique planes, with rhythmical turns and sinkings--this
continued for an hour, when I was called for lunch.

And as if to punish me for this material digression and desertion, when
I returned, in half an hour, the miracle had happened.

Guinevere still danced in stately cadence, with the other Redfins at a
distance going about their several businesses. She danced alone--a dance
of change, of happenings of tremendous import, of symbolism as majestic
as it was age-old. Here in this little glass aquarium the tadpole Guinevere
had just freed her arms--she, with waving scarlet fins, watching me with
lidless white and staring eyes, still with fish-like, fin-bound
body.

She danced upright, with new-born arms folded across her breast, tail-tip
flagellating frenziedly, stretching long fingers with disks like cymbals,
reaching out for the land she had never trod, limbs flexed for leaps
she had never made.

A few days before and Guinevere had been a fish, then a helpless biped,
and now suddenly, somewhere between my salad and coffee, she became
an aquatic quadruped.

Strangest of all, her hands were mobile, her feet useless; and when the
dance was at an end, and she sank slowly to the bottom, she came to rest
on the very tips of her two longest fingers; her legs and toes still drifting
high and useless.
Just before she ceased, her arms stretched out right froggily, her weird
eyes rolled about, and she gulped a mighty gulp of the strange thin medium
that covered the surface of her liquid home.

At midnight of this same day only three things existed in the
world--on my table I turned from the _Bhagavad-Gita_ to Drinkwater's
_Reverie_ and back again; then I looked up to the jar of clear water
and watched Guinevere hovering motionless.

At six the next morning she was crouched safely on a bit of paper
a foot from the aquarium.

She had missed the open window, the four-foot drop to the floor, and a
neighboring aquarium stocked with voracious fish: surely the gods
of pollywogs were kind to me.

The great fins were gone--dissolved into blobs of dull pink; the
tail was a mere stub, the feet drawn close, and a glance at her
head showed that Guinevere had become a frog almost within an hour.

Three things I hastened to observe: the pupils of her eyes were
vertical, revealing her genus _Phyllomedusa_ (making apt our choice
of the feminine); by a gentle urging I saw that the first and second
toes were equal in length; and a glance at her little humped back
showed a scattering of white calcareous spots, giving the clue to
her specific personality--_bicolor_: thus were we introduced to
_Phyllomedusa bicolor_, alias Guinevere, and thus was established
beyond doubt her close relationship to Gawain.

       During that first day, within three hours, during most of which I
watched her closely, Guinevere's change in color was beyond belief.

For an hour she leaped from time to time; but after that, and for the rest
of her life, she crept in strange unfroglike fashion, raised high on all
four limbs, with her stubby tail curled upward, and reaching out one weird
limb after another. If one's hand approached within a foot, she saw it
and stretched forth appealing, skinny fingers.

At two o'clock she was clad in a general cinnamon buff; then a shade of
glaucous green began to creep over head and upper eyelids, onward over
her face, finally coloring body and limbs. Beneath, the little pollyfrog
fairly glowed with bright apricot orange, throat and tail amparo
purple, mouth green, and sides rich pale blue.

To this maze of color we must add a strange, new expression, born of
the prominent eyes, together with the line of the mouth extending
straight back with a final jeering, upward lift; in front, the lower
lip thick and protruding, which, with the slanting eyes, gave a
leering, devilish smirk, while her set, stiff, exact posture compelled
a vivid thought of the sphinx.

Never have I seen such a remarkable combination. It fascinated us. We looked
at Guinevere, and then at the tadpoles swimming quietly in their tank,
and evolution in its wildest conceptions appeared a tame truism.

This was the acme of Guinevere's change, the pinnacle of her development.
Thereafter her transformations were rhythmical, alternating with the
day and night. Through the nights of activity she was garbed in rich,
warm brown. With the coming of dawn, as she climbed slowly upward, her
color shifted through chestnut to maroon; this maroon then died out on
the mid-back to a delicate, dull violet-blue, which in turn became obscured
in the sunlight by turquoise, which crept slowly along the sides. Carefully
and laboriously she clambered up, up to the topmost frond, and there performed
her little toilet, scraping head and face with her hands, passing the
hinder limbs over her back to brush off every grain of sand.

The eyes had meanwhile lost their black-flecked, golden, nocturnal
iridescence, and had gradually paled to a clear silvery blue, while the
great pupil of darkness narrowed to a slit.

Little by little her limbs and digits were drawn in out of sight, and
the tiny jeweled being crouched low, hoping for a day of comfortable
clouds, a little moisture, and a swift passage of time to the next
period of darkness, when it was fitting and right for Guineveres
to seek their small meed of sustenance, to grow to frog's full
estate, and to fulfil as well as might be what destiny the jungle
offered.

To unravel the meaning of it all is beyond even attempting. The breath
of mist ever clouds the mirror, and only as regards a tiny segment
of the life-history of Guinevere can I say, "There is no need to
wipe the mirror."

VII
A JUNGLE LABOR-UNION

Pterodactyl Pups led me to the wonderful Attas--the most astounding
of the jungle labor-unions.

We were all sitting on the Mazaruni bank, the night before the full moon,
immediately in front of my British Guiana laboratory.

All the jungle was silent in the white light, with now and then the
splash of a big river fish.

On the end of the bench was the monosyllabic Scot, who ceased the exquisite
painting of mora buttresses and jungle shadows only for the equal
fascination of searching bats for parasites.

Then the great physician, who had come six thousand miles to peer into
the eyes of birds and lizards in my dark-room, working with a
gentle hypnotic manner that made the little beings seem to enjoy the
experience.

On my right sat an army captain, who had given more thought to the
possible secrets of French chaffinches than to the approaching
barrage.

There was also the artist, who could draw a lizard's head like a Japanese
print, but preferred to depict impressionistic Laocoön roots.

These and others sat with me on the long bench and watched the
moonpath.

The conversation had begun with possible former life on the moon, then
shifted to Conan Doyle's _The Lost World_, based on the great Roraima
plateau, a hundred and fifty miles west of where we were sitting. Then we
spoke of the amusing world-wide rumor, which had started no one knows
how, that I had recently discovered a pterodactyl. One delightful result
of this had been a letter from a little English girl, which would have
made a worthy chapter-subject for _Dream Days_. For years she and her
little sister had peopled a wood near her home with pterodactyls, but had
somehow never quite seen one; and would I tell her a little about
them--whether they had scales, or made nests; so that those in the
wood might be a little easier to recognize.

When strange things are discussed for a long time, in the light of
a tropical moon, at the edge of a dark, whispering jungle, the mind
becomes singularly imaginative and receptive; and, as I looked
through powerful binoculars at the great suspended globe, the dead
craters and precipices became very vivid and near.

Suddenly, without warning, there flapped into my field, a huge shapeless
creature. It was no bird, and there was nothing of the bat in its flight--the
wings moved with steady rhythmical beats, and drove it straight onward.
The wings were skinny, the body large and of a pale ashy hue. For a
moment I was shaken. One of the others had seen it, and he, too, did not
speak, but concentrated every sense into the end of the little tubes.
By the time I had begun to find words, I realized that a giant
fruit bat had flown from utter darkness across my line of sight;
and by close watching we soon saw others.

But for a very few seconds these Pterodactyl Pups, as I nicknamed
them, gave me all the thrill of a sudden glimpse into the life of
past ages.

The last time I had seen fruit bats was in the gardens of Perideniya,
Ceylon. I had forgotten that they occurred in Guiana, and was wholly
unprepared for the sight of bats a yard across, with a heron's flight,
passing high over the Mazaruni in the moonlight.

The talk ended on the misfortune of the configuration of human
anatomy, which makes sky-searching so uncomfortable a habit.

This outlook was probably developed to a greater extent during the
war than ever before; and I can remember many evenings in Paris and
London when a sinister half-moon kept the faces of millions turned
searchingly upward.

But whether in city or jungle, sky-scanning is a neck-aching affair.

The following day my experience with the Pterodactyl Pups was not forgotten,
and as a direct result of looking out for soaring vultures and
eagles, with hopes of again seeing a white-plumaged King and the
regal Harpy, I caught sight of a tiny mote high up in mid-sky.

I thought at first it was a martin or swift; but it descended, slowly
spiraling, and became too small for any bird. With a final, long,
descending curve, it alighted in the compound of our bungalow laboratory
and rested quietly--a great queen of the leaf-cutting Attas returning from
her marriage flight. After a few minutes she stirred, walked a few
steps, cleaned her antennæ, and searched nervously about on the sand.
A foot away was a tiny sprig of indigo, the offspring of some seed
planted two or three centuries ago by a thrifty Dutchman. In the shade of
its three leaves the insect paused, and at once began scraping at
the sand with her jaws.

She loosened grain after grain, and as they came free they were moistened,
agglutinated, and pressed back against her forelegs. When at last a
good-sized ball was formed, she picked it up, turned around and, after
some fussy indecision, deposited it on the sand behind her. Then she
returned to the very shallow, round depression, and began to gather
a second ball.

I thought of the first handful of sand thrown out for the base of Cheops,
of the first brick placed in position for the Great Wall, of a fresh-cut
trunk, rough-hewn and squared for a log-cabin on Manhattan; of the first
shovelful of earth flung out of the line of the Panama Canal. Yet none
seemed worthy of comparison with even what little I knew of the
significance of this ant's labor, for this was earnest of what would
make trivial the engineering skill of Egyptians, of Chinese patience,
of municipal pride and continental schism.

Imagine sawing off a barn-door at the top of a giant sequoia, growing
at the bottom of the Grand Cañon, and then, with five or six children
clinging to it, descending the tree, and carrying it up the cañon
walls against a subway rush of rude people, who elbowed and pushed
blindly against you.

This is what hundreds of leaf-cutting ants accomplish daily, when
cutting leaves from a tall bush, at the foot of the bank near the
laboratory.

There are three dominant labor-unions in the jungle, all social
insects, two of them ants, never interfering with each other's field
of action, and all supremely illustrative of conditions resulting
from absolute equality, free-and-equalness, communalism, socialism
carried to the (forgive me!)

anth power. The Army Ants are carnivorous, predatory, militant nomads; the
Termites are vegetarian scavengers, sedentary, negative and
provincial; the Attas, or leaf-cutting ants, are vegetarians, active
and dominant, and in many ways the most interesting of all.

The casual observer becomes aware of them through their raids upon gardens;
and indeed the Attas are a very serious menace to agriculture in
many parts of the tropics, where their nests, although underground,
may be as large as a house and contain millions of individuals.

While their choice among wild plants is exceedingly varied, it seems that
there are certain things they will not touch; but when any human-reared
flower, vegetable, shrub, vine, or tree is planted, the Attas rejoice,
and straightway desert the native vegetation to fall upon the newcomers.
Their whims and irregular feeding habits make it difficult to guard
against them. They will work all round a garden for weeks, perhaps pass
through it _en route_ to some tree that they are defoliating, and then
suddenly, one night, every Atta in the world seems possessed with
a desire to work havoc, and at daylight the next morning, the garden
looks like winter stubble--a vast expanse of stems and twigs, without
a single remaining leaf.

Volumes have been written, and a whole chemist's shop of deadly concoctions
devised, for combating these ants, and still they go steadily on,
gathering leaves which, as we shall see, they do not even use for
food.

       Although essentially a tropical family, Attas have pushed as far
north as New Jersey, where they make a tiny nest, a few inches
across, and bring to it bits of pine needles.

In a jungle Baedeker, we should double-star these insects, and paragraph
them as "_Atta_, named by Fabricius in 1804; the Kartabo species,
_cephalotes_; Leaf-cutting or Cushie or Parasol Ants; very abundant.

_Atta_, a subgenus of _Atta_, which is a genus of _Attii_, which
is a tribe of _Myrmicinæ_, which is a subfamily of _Formicidæ_,"
etc.

With a feeling of slightly greater intimacy, of mental possession, we set
out, armed with a name of one hundred and seventeen years' standing, and
find a big Atta worker carving away at a bit of leaf, exactly as
his ancestors had done for probably one hundred and seventeen
thousand years.

We gently lift him from his labor, and a drop of chloroform banishes from
his ganglia all memory of the hundred thousand years of pruning.
Under the lens his strange personality becomes manifest, and we
wonder whether the old Danish zoölogist had in mind the slender
toe-tips which support him, or in a chuckling mood made him a
namesake of C.

Quintius Atta. A close-up shows a very comic little being, encased in
a prickly, chestnut-colored armor, which should make him fearless in a
den of a hundred anteaters.

The front view of his head is a bit mephistophelian, for it is drawn
upward into two horny spines; but the side view recalls a little
girl with her hair brushed very tightly up and back from her face.

The connection between Atta and the world about him is furnished
by this same head: two huge, flail-shaped antennæ arching up like
aerial, detached eyebrows--vehicles, through their golden pile, of
senses which foil our most delicate tests.

Outside of these are two little shoe-button eyes; and we are not
certain whether they reflect to the head ganglion two or three
hundred bits of leaf, or one large mosaic leaf.

Below all is swung the pair of great scythes, so edged and hung that they
can function as jaws, rip-saws, scissors, forceps, and clamps.

The thorax, like the head of a titanothere, bears three pairs of horns--a
great irregular expanse of tumbled, rock-like skin and thorn, a foundation
for three pairs of long legs, and sheltering somewhere in its heart a
thread of ant-life; finally, two little pedicels lead to a rounded abdomen,
smaller than the head. This Third-of-an-inch is a worker Atta to the
physical eye; and if we catch another, or ten, or ten million, we find
that some are small, others much larger, but that all are cast in the
same mold, all indistinguishable except, perhaps, to the shoe-button
eyes.

When a worker has traveled along the Atta trails, and has followed the
temporary mob-instinct and climbed bush or tree, the same irresistible
force drives him out upon a leaf. Here, apparently, instinct slightly
loosens its hold, and he seems to become individual for a moment, to look
about, and to decide upon a suitable edge or corner of green leaf.

But even in this he probably has no choice.

At any rate, he secures a good hold and sinks his jaws into the
tissue.
Standing firmly on the leaf, he measures his distance by cutting across
a segment of a circle, with one of his hind feet as a center.
This gives a very true curve, and provides a leaf-load of suitable
size.

He does not scissor his way across, but bit by bit sinks the tip
of one jaw, hook-like, into the surface, and brings the other up
to it, slicing through the tissue with surprising ease.

He stands upon the leaf, and I always expect to see him cut himself
and his load free, Irishman-wise.

But one or two of his feet have invariably secured a grip on the plant,
sufficient to hold him safely. Even if one or two of his fellows are at
work farther down the leaf, he has power enough in his slight grip to
suspend all until they have finished and clambered up over him
with their loads.

Holding his bit of leaf edge-wise, he bends his head down as far
as possible, and secures a strong purchase along the very rim.

Then, as he raises his head, the leaf rises with it, suspended high over his
back, out of the way. Down the stem or tree-trunk he trudges, head
first, fighting with gravitation, until he reaches the ground. After a
few feet, or, measured by his stature, several hundred yards, his
infallible instinct guides him around pebble boulders, mossy orchards,
and grass jungles to a specially prepared path.

Thus in words, in sentences, we may describe the cutting of a single leaf;
but only in the imagination can we visualize the cell-like or
crystal-like duplication of this throughout all the great forests
of Guiana and of South America.

As I write, a million jaws snip through their stint; as you read,
ten million Attas begin on new bits of leaf.

And all in silence and in dim light, legions passing along the little jungle
roads, unending lines of trembling banners, a political parade of ultra
socialism, a procession of chlorophyll floats illustrating unreasoning
unmorality, a fairy replica of "Birnam Forest come to Dunsinane."

In their leaf-cutting, Attas have mastered mass, but not form. I have
never seen one cut off a piece too heavy to carry, but many a hard-sliced
bit has had to be deserted because of the configuration of the upper
edge. On almost any trail, an ant can be found with a two-inch stem of
grass, attempting to pass under a twig an inch overhead. After five
or ten minutes of pushing, backing, and pulling, he may accidentally
march off to one side, or reach up and climb over; but usually he
drops his burden.

His little works have been wound up, and set at the mark "home"; and though
he has now dropped the prize for which he walked a dozen ant-miles, yet
any idea of cutting another stem, or of picking up a slice of leaf from
those lying along the trail, never occurs to him. He sets off homeward,
and if any emotion of sorrow, regret, disappointment, or secret relief
troubles his ganglia, no trace of it appears in antennæ, carriage,
or speed. I can very readily conceive of his trudging sturdily all the way
back to the nest, entering it, and going to the place where he would have
dumped his load, having fulfilled his duty in the spirit at least. Then,
if there comes a click in his internal time-clock, he may set out upon
another quest--more cabined, cribbed, and confined than any member of a
Cook's tourist party.

I once watched an ant with a piece of leaf which had a regular
shepherd's crook at the top, and if his adventures of fifty feet
could have been caught on a moving-picture film, Charlie Chaplin
would have had an arthropod rival.

It hooked on stems and pulled its bearer off his feet, it careened
and ensnared the leaves of other ants, at one place mixing up with
half a dozen. A big thistledown became tangled in it, and well-nigh
blew away with leaf and all; hardly a foot of his path was
smooth-going.

But he persisted, and I watched him reach the nest, after two hours of
tugging and falling and interference with traffic.

Occasionally an ant will slip in crossing a twiggy crevasse, and his leaf
become tightly wedged. After sprawling on his back and vainly clawing at
the air for a while, he gets up, brushes off his antennæ, and sets to work.
For fifteen minutes I have watched an Atta in this predicament, stodgily
endeavoring to lift his leaf while standing on it at the same time.
The equation of push equaling pull is fourth dimensional to the Attas.

With all this terrible expenditure of energy, the activities of these
ants are functional within very narrow limits. The blazing sun causes
them to drop their burdens and flee for home; a heavy wind frustrates
them, for they cannot reef.

When a gale arises and sweeps an exposed portion of the trail, their only
resource is to cut away all sail and heave it overboard. A sudden downpour
reduces a thousand banners and waving, bright-colored petals to débris,
to be trodden under foot.

Sometimes, after a ten-minute storm, the trails will be carpeted with
thousands of bits of green mosaic, which the outgoing hordes will trample
in their search for more leaves. On a dark night little seems to be done;
but at dawn and dusk, and in the moonlight or clear starlight, the greatest
activity is manifest.

Attas are such unpalatable creatures that they are singularly free from
dangers. There is a tacit armistice between them and the other labor-unions.
The army ants occasionally make use of their trails when they are
deserted; but when the two great races of ants meet, each antennæs
the aura of the other, and turns respectfully aside.

       When termites wish to traverse an Atta trail, they burrow beneath
it, or build a covered causeway across, through which they pass and
repass at will, and over which the Attas trudge, uncaring and
unconscious of its significance.

Only creatures with the toughest of digestions would dare to include these
prickly, strong-jawed, meatless insects in a bill of fare. Now and then
I have found an ani, or black cuckoo, with a few in its stomach: but an
ani can swallow a stinging-haired caterpillar and enjoy it.

The most consistent feeder upon Attas is the giant marine toad. Two hundred
Attas in a night is not an uncommon meal, the exact number being verifiable
by a count of the undigested remains of heads and abdomens. _Bufo
marinus_ is the gardener's best friend in this tropic land, and
besides, he is a gentleman and a philosopher, if ever an amphibian
was one.

While the cutting of living foliage is the chief aim in life of
these ants, yet they take advantage of the flotsam and jetsam along
the shore, and each low tide finds a column from some nearby nest
salvaging flowerets, leaves, and even tiny berries.

A sudden wash of tide lifts a hundred ants with their burdens and
then sets them down again, when they start off as if nothing had
happened.

The paths or trails of the Attas represent very remarkable feats of
engineering, and wind about through jungle and glade for surprising distances.

The moonlight
is bright now, and it amuses him to give himself a certain address to
visit evening after evening, and to take up his post there as though
something depended on it. He is not expected anywhere else, so he has the
time. Then one evening someone finds him reading under a lamppost, stops
suddenly and stares, takes a few steps toward him, and bends forward
searchingly.

"Isn't it--? Oh, no, excuse me, I thought--"

"Yes, it is. Good evening, Miss Torsen."

"Why, good evening. I thought it looked like you. Good evening. Yes, thank
you, very well. And thanks for the knapsack; I understood all at once--I
quite understand--"

"Do you live here? What a strange coincidence!"

"Yes, I live here; those are my windows. You wouldn't like to come up,
would you? No, perhaps you wouldn't."

"But I know where there are some benches down by the shore. Unless you're
cold?" I suggested.

"No, I'm not cold. Yes, thank you, I'd like to."

We went down to a bench, looking like a father and daughter out walking.
There was nothing striking about us, and we sat the whole evening
undisturbed. Later we sat undisturbed on other evenings all through a cold
autumn month.

Then she told me first the short chapter of her journey home, some of it
only hinted, suggested, and some of it in full; sometimes with her head
deeply bowed, sometimes, when I asked a question, replying by a brief word
or a shake of the head. I write it down from memory; it was important to
her, and it became important for others as well.

Besides--in a hundred years it will all be forgotten. Why do we struggle?
In a hundred years someone will read about it in memoirs and letters and
think: "How she wriggled, how she fussed--dear me!" There are others about
whom nothing at all will be written or read; life will close over them
like a grave. Either way....

What sorrows she had--dear, dear, what sorrows! The day she had been
unable to pay the bill, she thought herself the center of the universe;
everybody stared at her, and she was at her wits' end. Then she heard a
man's voice outside saying: "Haven't you watered Blakka yet?" That was
_his_ preoccupation. So she was not the center of the universe after
all.

Then she and her companion had left the house, and set out on their tour.
The center? Not at all. Day after day they walked across fields, and
through valleys, had meals in houses by the way, and water from the
brooks. If they met other travelers, they greeted them, or they did not
greet them; no one was less a center of attention than they, and no one
more. Her companion walked in vacant thoughtlessness, whistling as he
went.

At one place they stopped for food.

"Will you pay for mine for the time being?" he said.

She hesitated and then said briefly that she could not pay "for the time
being" all the way.

"Of course not, by no means," said he. "Just for the moment. Perhaps we
can get a loan further down the valley."

"I don't borrow."

"Ingeborg!" said he, pretending playfully to whimper.

"What is it?"

"Nothing. Can't I say 'Ingeborg' to my own wife?"

"I'm not your own wife," she said, getting up.

"Pish! We were man and wife last night. It says so in the visitors' book."

She was silent at this. Yes, last night they had been man and wife; that
was to save getting two rooms, and travel economically. But she had been
very foolish to agree to it.

"'Miss Torsen,' then?" he whimpered.

And to put an end to the game, she paid for both of them and took her
knapsack on her back.

They walked again. At the next stop she paid for them both without
discussion--for the evening meal, for bed and breakfast. It grew to be a
habit. They walked on once more. They reached the end of the valley by the
sea, and here she revolted again.

"Go away--go on by yourself; I don't want you in my room any more!"

The old argument no longer held good. When he repeated that they saved
money by it, she replied that she for her part required no more than one
room, and was quite able to pay for it. He joked again, whimpered,
"Ingeborg!" and left her. He was beaten, and his back was bent.

She ate alone that evening.

"Isn't your husband coming in?" asked the woman of the house.

"Perhaps he doesn't want anything," she replied.

There he stood, away by the tiny barn pretending to be interested in the
roof, in the style of building, and walked round looking at it, pursing
his lips and whistling. But she could see perfectly well from the window
that his face was blue and dejected. When she had eaten, she walked down
to the shore, calling as she passed him:

"Go in and eat!"

But he had not sunk quite so low; he would not go in to eat, and slept
under no roof that night.

It ended as such things usually end: when she found him at last next
morning, regretting her action and shaken by his appearance, everything
slipped back again to where it had been.

They stopped at this place a few days, waiting for the mail boat, when one
evening an elderly man came to the house. She knew him, and he knew them
both; she was thrown into a state of the greatest excitement, made ready
to leave at once, wept and beat her breast, and wanted to go home,
immediately, at once. It ended as such things usually end: when she had
calmed down, she went to bed for the night. She was not the center of the
universe, and the old acquaintance who had happened to pass that way did
not appear to be looking only at her. Nevertheless, she staged a sort of
flight early next morning, in the gray dawn, before other people were up.
This much she did.

Aboard the mail boat she met no more acquaintances, and had leisure to
think things over calmly. She now broke with her companion in earnest. She
had a minor disagreement with him again, for he had no ticket, and one
word gave rise to the next. It was all very well for her, he said; she had
her return ticket in her pocket. Besides, had he not got himself involved
in all these trials and tribulations because of her letter last summer,
and was she not ashamed of herself? He would not have moved a foot outside
the town had it not been for that letter of hers. Then she gave him her
purse and all her money and asked him to leave her. There was probably
enough to buy him a ticket, and now she would be rid of him.

"Of course I shouldn't accept this, but there's no other way," he said,
and left her.

She stood gazing across the water, and wondering what to do. She was in a
bad way now, so very different from what she had once thought; what shame,
what utter futility she had wandered into! She brooded till she was worn
out; then she began to listen to what people about her were saying. Two
men were huddled on benches trying to shelter from the wind; she heard one
of them say he was a schoolmaster, and the other that he was an artisan.
The schoolmaster did not remain seated long, but got up and swaggered
toward her. She passed him in silence and took his place on the bench.

It was a raw autumn day, and it did her good to get out of the wind. The
artisan probably thought this tall, well-dressed lady had a berth, but
when she sat down, he moved over on his own bench. He was on the point of
lighting his pipe, but stopped.

"Go on, don't mind me," she said.

So he lit it, but he was careful not to blow the smoke into her face.

He was only a youngster, a little over twenty, with thick reddish hair
under his cap, and whitish eyebrows high up on his forehead. His chest was
broad and flat, but his back was round and his hands massive. A great
horse.

Then a tray was brought him, sandwiches and coffee, which he had evidently
been waiting for; he paid, but went on smoking and let the food stand.

"Please eat," she said. "You don't mind my sitting here?"

"Not at all," he replied. He knocked out his pipe slowly, taking plenty of
time over it; then sat still again.

"I don't really need anything to eat yet, either," he said.

"Oh--haven't you come far?"

"No, only last night. Where do you come from, lady?"

"From the town. I've been on holiday."

"That's what I thought," he said, nodding his head.

"I've been up at the Tore Peak farm," she added.

"The Tore Peak? So."

"Do you know it?"

"No, but I know some of the people there."

A pause.

"Josephine's there," he resumed.

"Yes. Do you know her?"

"Oh, no."

They talked a little more. The boat sailed on, and they sat there talking;
it was all they had to do. She asked where he came from and what his trade
was, and it seemed he was nothing important, only a paltry carpenter, and
his mother had a small farm. Would the lady like a simple cup of coffee?

"Why, yes, thank you." Could she have a little of his, "just a little in
the saucer?"

She poured some of the coffee into the saucer and asked for a bite of food
as well. Never had food tasted so good, and when she had finished, she
thanked him for that, too.

"Haven't you a berth?" he asked.

"Yes, but I'd rather stay here," she said. "If I go below, I'll be sick."

"That's what I thought. Well, now I wonder--"

With that he got up and walked slowly and heavily away. She watched his
back disappearing down the companion to the lower deck.

She waited for him a long time, fearing that someone else might come and
take his place. Coffee from the saucer, a good-sized sandwich with the
carpenter: nothing wily or unnatural about that; this sheltered corner
seemed to her like a tiny foothold in life.

There he was, coming back with more food and coffee, a whole tray in his
big hands. He laughed good-naturedly at himself for walking so carefully.

She threw up her hands and overdid things a little:

"Great heavens! Really, you're much, much too kind!"

"Well, I thought since you were sitting here anyhow--"

They both ate; she grew warm and sleepy, and leaned back half-dozing.
Every time she opened her eyes, she saw the carpenter lighting his pipe;
he struck two or three matches at once, but he was in no hurry; they were
always half burned before he put his pipe in his mouth and began to suck
at it. The schoolmaster called something to him, drew his attention to
something far inland, but the carpenter merely nodded and said nothing.

"I wonder if he's afraid he'll wake me," she thought.

At one stop, her former traveling companion turned up again; he had been
below in the cabin.

"Aren't you coming down, Ingeborg?" he asked.

She did not reply.

The carpenter looked from one to the other.

"Miss Torsen, then!" whimpered the traveling companion playfully. He stood
waiting a moment, and finally went away.

"Ingeborg," the carpenter was probably thinking. "Miss Torsen," he was
thinking.

"How long will you be in the town?" she asked, getting up.

"Oh, I'll be there some time."

"What are you doing there?"

He was a little embarrassed, and since his skin was so fair, she could see
at once that he reddened. He bent forward, planting his elbows on his
knees before he replied.

"I want to learn a little more in my trade, be an apprentice, maybe. It
all depends."

"Oh, I see."

"What do you think of it?" he asked.

"I think it's a good idea."

"Do you?"

They were on deck nearly the whole of the day, but toward evening it
turned bitter cold and windy. When she had grown stiff with sitting, she
got up and stamped her feet, and when she had stamped till she was tired,
she sat down again. Once when she was standing a little distance away, she
saw the carpenter place a parcel on the bench as though to keep her seat
for her.

Her quondam traveling companion stuck his head out of a doorway, the wind
blowing his hair forward over his forehead, and cried:

"Ingeborg, go below, will you!"

"Oh," she groaned. Suddenly she was seized with fury. The ship heeled over
on its side as she walked toward him, and she had to take a few skips to
keep her balance.

"I don't want you to talk to me again," she hissed at him. "Do you hear? I
mean it, by all that's holy!"

"Good gracious!" he exclaimed and disappeared.

At about three o'clock, the carpenter turned up with coffee and sandwiches
again.

"Really you mustn't be doing this all the time," she said.

He merely laughed good-naturedly again, and told her to eat if she thought
it was good enough.

"We'll soon be there now," she said as she ate. "Have you someone to go
to?"

"Oh, yes, I have a sister."

Slowly and thoughtfully he took another sandwich and turned it over,
looking at it absently before he took a bite out of it. When he had
finished one mouthful, he took another. And when he had finished that one,
too, he said:

"I thought that as I'm going to stay in town over the winter, I'd better
learn something. And what with the farm as well--"

"Yes, indeed."

"You think so too?"

"Oh, yes. I think so."

Why did he tell her about his private affairs? She had private affairs of
her own. She thanked him for the sandwiches and got up.

As the boat drew alongside the pier, he offered her his hand and said:

"My name is Nikolai."

"Oh, yes?"

"I thought in case we meet again--Nikolai Palm--but I expect the town's
too big--"

"Yes, I expect it is. Well, thanks ever so much for all your kindness.
Good-bye."


XXXII


I ask Miss Torsen:

"Have you met the carpenter since?"

"What carpenter? Oh--no, I haven't. I only told you about him because he's
a sort of mutual acquaintance."

"Acquaintance?"

"Yes, of yours and mine. Only indirectly, of course. He happens to be the
brother of that schoolmistress Miss Palm that was at the Tore Peak farm
last summer."

"Well, the world's a small place. We all belong to the same family."

"And that's why I've told you all this about him."

"But you didn't find out about this relationship on the boat, did you? So
you must have met him since."

"Yes,--well, no, that is to say I've seen him a few times, but not to
speak to. We just said good morning and how are you and so on. Then he
said he was her brother."

"Ha, ha, ha!"

"It was just in passing, quite by accident."

This gave me a good opportunity for saying: "What a lot of things are
accidental! It was an accident that I should have stopped under a
particular lamppost to look up something, to read a few lines. And then
you happened to live there."

"That's right."

"I expect you and the carpenter will be getting married," I said.

"Ha, ha! No, indeed, I shan't marry anyone."

"No?"

"You have to be pretty naïve to marry."

"Well, I don't know that being naïve does any harm--being not quite so
clever. Where does your cleverness lead you? Only to being cheated.
Because there isn't anybody who's quite clever enough."

"I should have thought being clever is just the thing to protect you
against being cheated. What else would it do?"

"Exactly. What else? But the trouble is we trust our cleverness so much
that we get cheated that way. Or else we let things go from bad to worse,
because why should we worry? After all we've got our cleverness to help
get us out of the mess!"

"Well, in that case it's pretty hopeless!"

"Relying on your cleverness--yes. That was your own opinion last summer,
you know."

"Yes, I remember that. I thought--oh, I don't know. But when I came back
to town again it was as though--"

A pause.

"I don't know what to think," she said.

"And I do because I'm old and wise. You see, Miss Torsen, in the old days
people didn't think so much about cleverness and secondary schools and the
right to vote; they lived their lives on a different plane, they were
naïve. I wonder if that wasn't a pretty good way to live. And so he is
floating along in a hopeless sort of daze, a wretched victim of diabolical
circumstances.

JEFFRY MAULBOY is visiting his brother JUDAS, at Terre Haute. He has signed
articles of agreement for the great Prize Fight with SANDY MCCORMICK,
known for his prowess in the Ring as the "nasty masher."

The fight will take place some time during the winter, and JEFFRY will
go into training early in September. And the papers are full of
biographical sketches of the two combatants, together with comments
on their weight, general appearance, and a list of fights heretofore
participated in, with vague speculations as to the number of eyes,
fragments of ears, &c., each one is supposed to possess, preserved
in alcohol as trophies.

And when JEFFRY appears in public the masses regard him with respectful
admiration, and _gamins_ applaud.

And when he gets home he finds a brigade of those literary drummers,
known as reporters, sitting on his doorsteps, from beneath whose
classic foreheads there glares a wild and hungry eye, to be pacified
only by a satisfactory interview.

The last exploit of the "Champion Nine" sinks into insignificance
beside this great, this momentous event, and the man who walked a
hundred miles in twenty-four hours is nowhere.

He realizes the cruel fact that Fame is fickle, and he makes one
desperate effort to grasp it, by offering determinedly to walk
around the world in ninety days, stopping for his gruel only at
Hong Kong.

(To be concluded

.)

* * * * *

NUISANCE ABATED.

G.F.T.--the apostle of Highfalutin, the most egregious nuisance of
modern times--has come to grief.

We have the pleasure of announcing that (for the present at least)
we are relieved from our very natural anxiety lest TRAIN should
re-appear on the American _tapis._ It seems that he is even more
intolerable in France than he is in this country.

He had only got as far as Lyons, in the course of his airy progress
through the new Republic, when the authorities concluded that about
the most sensible thing they could do with their guest would be to
lock him up.

It gives us pleasure to write that they did so.

They don't know how great is the favor they have conferred on the
world by this humane act.

We shall ever remember the magistrates of Lyons with feelings of
regard, for the judicious energy displayed by them in this matter

.

* * * * *

Ehau! France.

Unhappy France! Well may her children weep over the misfortunes that
have befallen her. But alas!

TITTERS cannot cure them

.

* * * * * 
THE OYSTER-SUPPER CRITIC.

He has a heavy head of hair; His heavy hands are cleanly kidded;
He twists a heavy dark moustache, And even his eyes are heavy-lidded.

He babbles in a heavy style, And heavily grows analytic, This
literary heavy-weight, This heavy oyster-supper critic.

There had been quite a
party, first out driving, then at supper together. It was a memory they
had in common. Miss Torsen didn't say much. She seemed a little
embarrassed, but smiling and beautiful. I began to look at the illustrated
papers displayed in the window, when suddenly the thought struck me: "Good
God, she's in love!"

"Look, I have a suggestion," he said. Then they discussed something,
agreed about something, and she nodded. After that he left her.

She came toward me slowly and in silence. I spoke to her about some of the
pictures in the window. "Yes," she said, "just think!" But she gazed at
them without seeing anything. Silently we walked on, and for several
minutes, at least, she said nothing.

"Hans Flaten never changes," she said finally.

"Is that who it was?" I asked.

"His name's Flaten."

"Yes, I remember you mentioned the name last summer. Who is he?"

"His father's a merchant."

"But he himself?"

"His father owns the big shop in Almes Street, you know."

"Yes, but what about _him_; what does he do?"

"I don't know if he does anything special; he just studies. His father's
so rich, you know."

I recalled old Flaten's shop in Almes Street, a good, solid countryman's
shop; in the mornings the yard was always full of horses, while the owners
were busy making purchases in the shop.

"He's such a man of the world," she went on. "He simply throws money
about--banknotes. When he goes anywhere, the people all whisper, 'That's
Flaten!'"

"He dresses as though he were a baron," I said.

"Yes," she replied, rather offended. "Yes, he dresses well--always has."

"Is that the man you want?" I asked lightly.

She was silent a moment, and then said with a resolute nod:

"Yes."

"What--that dandy?"

"Why not? We're old friends, we've gone to school together, spent a lot of
time together. It's really based on a firm foundation. He's the only man
I've ever been in love with in all my life, and it's lasted many years.
Sometimes, I'll admit, I forget him, but the moment I see him again, I'm
as much in love as ever. I've told him so, and we both laugh about it, but
that doesn't change it. It's queer."

"Then I suppose he's too rich to marry her," I thought, and asked nothing
more.

When we parted, I said:

"Where does Carpenter Nikolai work?"

"I don't know," she replied. "Oh, yes, I do know. We're near there, and I
can show you if you like. What do you want to see him for?"

"Nothing. I just wondered if he's at a good place, with a competent
master."

       *       *       *       *       *

Why did I, indeed, want to see Carpenter Nikolai, the artisan? Yet I have
visited him and made his acquaintance. He is a bull in stature, strong and
plain-featured, a man of few words. Last Saturday we saw the town
together; why, I don't know, but I suggested it myself.

I made friends with the carpenter for my own sake, because of my
loneliness. I no longer went to the benches by the shore, as the weather
was a little too cold, and Miss Torsen interested me very little now; she
had changed so much since returning to the town. She had become more the
ordinary type of girl, not in any one thing, but in general. She thought
of nothing but vanities and nonsense, and seemed quite to have forgotten
her last summer's wholesome, bitter view of life. Now she was back at
school again, in her leisure hours meeting the gentleman named Flaten, and
this occupied all of her time. Either she had no depths, or she had been
vitiated in the vital years of adolescence.

"What do you expect me to do?" she asked. "Of course I'm going to school
again; I've been going to school ever since I was a child. I'm no good at
anything else. I can only learn--that's what I'm used to. There isn't much
I can think or do on my own, and I don't enjoy it either. So what do you
expect?"

No, what could I expect?

Carpenter Nikolai went to the circus. He was not much surprised at
anything he saw there, or he pretended not to be. The acrobatics on
horseback--"Well, not bad, but after all--!" The tiger--"I thought tigers
were much bigger!" Besides, his big, heavy head seemed preoccupied with
other thoughts, and he paid little attention to the women riders who were
doing their tricks.

On the way home he said:

"I ought not to ask you, I expect, but would you go to the _Krone_
with me tomorrow evening?"

"The _Krone_--what's that?"

"It's a place where they dance."

"A dance hall, in other words. Where is it? Do you feel so much like
dancing?"

"No, not much."

"You want to see what goes on there?"

"Yes."

"All right, I'll go."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was on a Sunday evening, the girls' and boys' own evening, that the
carpenter and I went to the dance.

He had decked himself out in a starched collar and a heavy watch chain.
But he was very young, and when you are young, you look well in anything.
He had such remarkable strength that it was never necessary for him to
give way; this had lent him assurance and authority. If you spoke to him,
he was slow to reply, and if you slapped him on the shoulder, he was slow
in turning round to see who had greeted him. He was a pleasant,
good-humored companion.

We went to the booking office; there was no one there, and the window was
closed. Moreover a notice on the wall announced that the hall was let to a
private club for the first two hours of the evening.

A few young people came along as we were standing there, read the notice,
and went away again. The carpenter was unwilling to go, looked round, and
went in through the gate as though looking for someone.

"We can't do anything about it," I called after him.

"No," he said. "But I wonder--?"

He crossed the yard and began to look up at all the windows.

A man came down the stairs.

"What is it?" he asked.

"My friend wanted to buy a ticket," I replied. The carpenter still showed
no inclination to return from the yard.

The man approached me, and proved to be the landlord. He explained, like
the notice, that a club had rented the hall for the first two hours.

"Come along, we can't get in!" I called to my companion.

But he was in no hurry, so I chatted with the landlord while waiting for
him.

"Yes, it's rather an exclusive club. Only eight couples, but just the same
they've hired a full orchestra--rich people, you see."

They had refreshments and plenty of champagne, and then they danced as
though their lives depended on it. Why they did it? Oh, well, young
people, rich and fashionable, bored by Sunday evening at home; they wanted
to work off the week's idleness in two hours, so they danced. Not unusual,
really.

"And of course," said the landlord, "I earn more in those two hours than
in the whole of the evening otherwise. Liberal people--they don't count
the pennies. And yet there's no wear and tear, because of course people
like that don't dance on their heels."

The carpenter, who had come halfway back, stood listening to us.

"What sort of people are they, generally speaking?" I inquired.
"Businessmen, officers, or what?"

"Excuse me, but I can't tell you that," replied the landlord. "It's a
private party; that's all I can say. To-night, for instance, I don't even
know who they are. The money just came by special messenger."

"It's Flaten," said the carpenter.

"Flaten--is it?" said the landlord, as though he did not know it. "Mr.
Flaten has been here before; he's a fine gentleman, always in fashionable
company. So it's Mr. Flaten, is it? Well, excuse me, I must have another
look round the hall--"

The landlord left us.

But the carpenter followed him.

"Couldn't we look on?" he asked.

"What, at the dancing? Oh, no."

"In a corner somewhere?"

"No, I couldn't allow that. I don't even let my own wife and daughter in--
nobody, not a soul. They wouldn't like it."

"Are you coming or--?" I called, as though for the last time.

"Yes, I'm coming," said the carpenter, turning back.

"So you knew about this party?" I said.

"Yes," he replied. "She talked about it last Friday."

"Who talked about it? Miss Torsen?"

"Yes. She said I might sit in the gallery."

We walked on down the street, each busy with his own thoughts--or perhaps
with the same thought. I, at least, was furious.

"Really, my good Nikolai, I have no desire to buy
tickets in order to look at Mr. Flaten and his ladies!"

"No."

Curious idea of hers, inviting this man to watch her dance. It was
preposterous, but like her. Last summer, too--did she not like a third
party within hearing whenever she sailed close to the wind? A thought
struck me, and I asked the carpenter as calmly as I could:

"Did Miss Torsen want me to sit in the gallery, too--did she say anything
about that?"

"No," he replied.

"Didn't she say anything about me?"

"No."

"You're lying," I thought, "and I daresay she's told you to lie!" I was
highly incensed, but I could not squeeze the truth out of the carpenter.

Cars rolled up behind us and stopped at the _Krone_. Nikolai turned
and wanted to go back, but when he saw that I kept straight on, he
hesitated a moment and then followed me. I heard him once sighing heavily.


We strolled the streets for an hour, while I cooled off and made myself
agreeable to my companion again. We had a glass of beer together, then
went to a cinema, and afterward to a shooting gallery. Finally we went to
a skittle ground, where we stayed for some time. Nikolai was the first to
want to leave; he looked at his watch, and was suddenly in a tearing
hurry. He was hardly even willing to finish the game.

We had to pass the _Krone_ again. The cars had gone.

"Just as I thought," said the carpenter, looking very disappointed. I
believe he would have liked to be present when the party came out to enter
their cars. He looked up and down the empty street and repeated, "Just as
I thought!" He was suddenly anxious to go home.

"No, let's go inside," I said.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a big, handsome hall with a platform for the orchestra, and a
throng of people on the great floor. We sat in the gallery looking on.

There was a very mixed crowd: seamen, artisans, hotel staff, shop
assistants, casual workers; the ladies were apparently seamstresses,
servant girls, and shopgirls, with a sprinkling of light-footed damsels
who had no daytime occupation. The floor was crowded with dancers. In
addition to a constable whose duty it was to intervene if necessity arose,
the establishment had its own commissionaire, who walked about the hall
with a stick, keeping an eye on the assembled company. As soon as a dance
was finished, the gentlemen all crowded to the platform and paid ten
_öre_. If anyone seemed to be trying to cheat, the commissionaire
would tap him politely on the arm with his stick. Gentlemen who had to be
tapped many times were regarded as suspicious characters, and might, as a
last resource, even be expelled. Order was admirably maintained.

Waltz, mazurka, schottische, square dance, waltz. I soon noticed a man who
was dancing with great assiduity, never stopping once--tall, swarthy,
lively--a heartbreaker. The ladies clustered round him.

"Can that be Solem down there dominating the crowd?" I thought.

"Wouldn't you like to dance?" I asked Carpenter Nikolai.

"Oh, no," he replied with a smile.

"Then we can leave any time you like."

"All right," he said and remained seated.

"Your thoughts seem to be far away."

A long pause.

"I was thinking that I haven't a horse on my farm. I have to carry all the
manure and the wood myself."

"So that's why you're so strong."

"I'll have to go home in a few days and chop wood for the winter."

"Yes, of course you will."

"I was going to say--," he persisted, and then fell silent.

"Yes?"

"No, it's no use suggesting it. I'd have liked you to come with me this
winter, though--I've got a small spare room."

"Why should I go there?" Still--it wasn't a bad idea.

"It would be nice if you could," said the carpenter.

Just then I heard the name of Solem mentioned in the hall. Yes, there he
was, swaggering as usual, the self-same Solem from Tore Peak. He was
standing alone, in high spirits, announcing that he was Solem--"Solem, my
lad." He appeared not to be in the company of any one lady, for I saw him
choosing partners indiscriminately. Then he chose the wrong lady, and her
partner shook his head and said no. Solem remembered that. He allowed the
couple to dance the next dance, and when it was finished, approached again
and bowed to the lady. Once more he was refused.

The lady's appearance was striking--sophisticated or innocent, who could
tell? Ash-blonde, tall, Grecian, in a black frock without trimming. How
quiet and retiring she was! Of course she was a tart, but what a gentle
one--a nun of vice, with a face as pure as that of a repentant sinner.
Peerless!

This was a woman for Solem.

It was after he had received his second "No" from the gentleman that he
began to talk, to tell everyone that he was "Solem, my lad." But his
boasts were dull: Something was going to happen; he would show them an
image of sin! There was no sting in it; just old, familiar rubbish these
people had heard before. The commissionaire crossed over to him and asked
him to be quiet, pointing at the same time to the constable by the door.
This pouring of oil on the waters was successful, for Solem himself said:
"Hush, we mustn't make trouble." But he did not lose sight of the Grecian
and her partner.

He allowed a few dances to pass again, himself engaging other partners to
dance with. There was now a huge crowd, all the late-comers having by this
time arrived. Many were crowded off the floor and had to wait, rushing to
get first place in the next dance instead.

Then something happened.

A couple slipped and fell. It was Solem and his partner. As he was getting
up again, he tripped up another couple--the Grecian and her partner, both
of whom fell down. And Solem was so strangely clumsy as he rose that his
long arms and legs brought down a third couple. A few banked sharply at sight
of me, and wheeled to right or left. Others alighted and craned their
necks in suspicion; but all sooner or later disappeared eastward in the
direction of a mighty jungle tree just bursting into a myriad of berries.
They were sulphur-breasted toucans, and they were silent, heralded only by
the sound of their wings and the crash of their pigments. I can think of
no other assemblage of jungle creatures more fitted to impress one with
the prodigality of tropical nature.

Four years before, we set ourselves to work to discover the first eggs and
young of toucans, and after weeks of heartbreaking labor and disappointments
we succeeded. Out of the five species of toucans living in this part of
Guiana we found the nests of four, and the one which eluded us was the
big sulphur-breasted fellow. I remembered so vividly the painstaking
care with which, week after week, we and our Indians tramped the jungle
for miles,--through swamps and over rolling hills,--at last having to admit
failure; and now I sat and watched thirty, forty, fifty of the
splendid birds whirr past.

As the last of the fifty-four flew on to their feast of berries, I
recalled with difficulty my faded visions of northern birds.

And so ended, as in the great finale of a pyrotechnic display, my two hours
on a hillside clearing. I can neither enliven it with a startling escape,
nor add a thrill of danger, without using as many "ifs" as would be needed
to make a Jersey meadow untenable. For example, _if_ I had fallen over
backwards and been powerless to rise or move, I should have been
killed within half an hour, for a stray column of army ants was
passing within a yard of me, and death would await any helpless
being falling across their path.

But by searching out a copperhead and imitating Cleopatra, or with
patience and persistence devouring every toadstool, the same result
could be achieved in our home-town orchard.

When on the march, the army ants are as innocuous at two inches as at
two miles.

Had I sat where I was for days and for nights, my chief danger would have
been demise from sheer chagrin at my inability to grasp the deeper
significance of life and its earthly activities.

III

THE HOME TOWN OF THE ARMY ANTS

From uniform to civilian clothes is a change transcending mere alteration
of stuffs and buttons.

It is scarcely less sweeping than the shift from civilian clothes to
bathing-suit, which so often compels us to concentrate on remembered
mental attributes, to avoid demanding a renewed introduction to estranged
personality. In the home life of the average soldier, the relaxation
from sustained tension and conscious routine results in a gentleness
and quietness of mood for which warrior nations are especially
remembered.

Army ants have no insignia to lay aside, and their swords are too
firmly hafted in their own beings to be hung up as post-bellum mural
decorations, or--as is done only in poster-land--metamorphosed into
pruning-hooks and plowshares.

I sat at my laboratory table at Kartabo, and looked down river to the pink
roof of Kalacoon, and my mind went back to the shambles of Pit
Number Five.[1] I was wondering whether I should ever see the army
ants in any guise other than that of scouting, battling searchers
for living prey, when a voice of the jungle seemed to hear my
unexpressed wish.

The sharp, high notes of white-fronted antbirds--those white-crested
watchers of the ants--came to my ears, and I left my table and
followed up the sound.

Physically, I merely walked around the bungalow and approached the
edge of the jungle at a point where we had erected a small outhouse
a day or two before.

But this two hundred feet might just as well have been a single
step through quicksilver, hand in hand with Alice, for it took me
from a world of hyoids and syrinxes, of vials and lenses and
clean-smelling xylol, to the home of the army ants.

[Footnote 1: See _Jungle Peace_, p. 211.]
The antbirds were chirping and hopping about on the very edge of the jungle,
but I did not have to go that far.

As I passed the doorless entrance of the outhouse I looked up, and
there was an immense mass of some strange material suspended in the
upper corner.

It looked like stringy, chocolate-colored tow, studded with hundreds of
tiny ivory buttons.

I came closer and looked carefully at this mushroom growth which had appeared
in a single night, and it was then that my eyes began to perceive and my
mind to record, things that my reason besought me to reject. Such
phenomena were all right in a dream, or one might imagine them and tell
them to children on one's knee, with wind in the eaves--wild tales to be
laughed at and forgotten.

But this was daylight and I was a scientist; my eyes were in excellent
order, and my mind rested after a dreamless sleep; so I had to
record what I saw in that little outhouse.

This chocolate-colored mass with its myriad ivory dots was the home,
the nest, the hearth, the nursery, the bridal suite, the kitchen,
the bed and board of the army ants.

It was the focus of all the lines and files which ravaged the jungle
for food, of the battalions which attacked every living creature
in their path, of the unnumbered rank and file which made them known
to every Indian, to every inhabitant of these vast jungles.

Louis Quatorze once said, "_L'Etat, c'est moi!_" but this figure of speech
becomes an empty, meaningless phrase beside what an army ant could
boast,--"_La maison, c'est moi!

_" Every rafter, beam, stringer, window-frame and door-frame, hall-way, room,
ceiling, wall and floor, foundation, superstructure and roof, all were
ants--living ants, distorted by stress, crowded into the dense walls,
spread out to widest stretch across tie-spaces. I had thought it
marvelous when I saw them arrange themselves as bridges, walks, handrails,
buttresses, and sign-boards along the columns; but this new
absorption of environment, this usurpation of wood and stone, this
insinuation of themselves into the province of the inorganic
world, was almost too astounding to credit.

All along the upper rim the sustaining structure was more distinctly visible
than elsewhere. Here was a maze of taut brown threads stretching in
places across a span of six inches, with here and there a tiny knot.
These were actually tie-strings of living ants, their legs stretched
almost to the breaking-point, their bodies the inconspicuous knots or
nodes.

Even at rest and at home, the army ants are always prepared, for every
quiescent individual in the swarm was standing as erect as possible,
with jaws widespread and ready, whether the great curved mahogany
scimitars of the soldiers, or the little black daggers of the smaller
workers.

And with no eyelids to close, and eyes which were themselves a
mockery, the nerve shriveling and never reaching the brain, what
could sleep mean to them?

Wrapped ever in an impenetrable cloak of darkness and silence, life
was yet one great activity, directed, ordered, commanded by scent
and odor alone.

Hour after hour, as I sat close to the nest, I was aware of this
odor, sometimes subtle, again wafted in strong successive waves.

It was musty, like something sweet which had begun to mold; not
unpleasant, but very difficult to describe; and in vain I strove
to realize the importance of this faint essence--taking the place
of sound, of language, of color, of motion, of form.

I recovered quickly from my first rapt realization, for a dozen ants had
lost no time in ascending my shoes, and, as if at a preconcerted signal,
all simultaneously sank their jaws into my person.

Thus strongly recalled to the realities of life, I realized the
opportunity that was offered and planned for my observation.

No living thing could long remain motionless within the sphere of
influence of these six-legged Boches, and yet I intended to spend
days in close proximity.

There was no place to hang a hammock, no overhanging tree from which
I might suspend myself spider-wise. So I sent Sam for an ordinary
chair, four tin cans, and a bottle of disinfectant. I filled the tins
with the tarry fluid, and in four carefully timed rushes I placed the
tins in a chair-leg square.

The fifth time I put the chair in place beneath the nest, but I had
misjudged my distances and had to retreat with only two tins in
place.

Another effort, with Spartan-like disregard of the fiery bites, and my haven
was ready.

I hung a bag of vials, notebook, and lens on the
chairback, and, with a final rush, climbed on the seat and curled
up as comfortably as possible.

All around the tins, swarming to the very edge of the liquid, were the angry
hosts.

Close to my face were the lines ascending and descending, while just above
me were hundreds of thousands, a bushel-basket of army ants, with
only the strength of their threadlike legs as suspension cables.

It took some time to get used to my environment, and from first to last I
was never wholly relaxed, or quite unconscious of what would happen
if a chair-leg broke, or a bamboo fell across the outhouse.

I swiveled round on the chair-seat and counted eight lines of army
ants on the ground, converging to the post at my elbow.

Each was four or five ranks wide, and the eight lines occasionally divided
or coalesced, like a nexus of capillaries.

There was a wide expanse of sand and clay, and no apparent reason
why the various lines of foragers should not approach the nest in
a single large column.

The dividing and redividing showed well how completely free were
the columns from any individual dominance.

There was no control by specific individuals or soldiers, but, the
general route once established, the governing factor was the odor
of contact.

The law to pass where others have passed is immutable, but freedom of action
or individual desire dies with the malleable, plastic ends of the foraging
columns. Again and again came to mind the comparison of the entire colony
or army with a single organism; and now the home, the nesting
swarm, the focus of central control, seemed like the body of this
strange amorphous organism--housing the spirit of the army.

One thinks of a column of foragers as a tendril with only the tip
sensitive and growing and moving, while the corpuscle-like individual
ants are driven in the current of blind instinct to and fro, on
their chemical errands.

And then this whole theory, this most vivid simile, is quite upset
by the sights that I watch in the suburbs of this ant home!

The columns were most excellent barometers, and their reaction to
passing showers was invariable.

The clay surface held water, and after each downfall the pools would
be higher, and the contour of the little region altered.

At the first few drops, all the ants would hasten, the throbbing corpuscles
speeding up. Then, as the rain came down heavier, the column melted away,
those near each end hurrying to shelter and those in the center
crawling beneath fallen leaves and bits of clod and sticks.

A moment before, hundreds of ants were trudging around a tiny pool,
the water lined with ant handrails, and in shallow places, veritable
formicine pontoons,--large ants which stood up to their bodies in
water, with the booty-laden host passing over them.

Now, all had vanished, leaving only a bare expanse of splashing drops
and wet clay. The sun broke through and the residue rain tinkled from
the bamboos.

As gradually as the growth of the rainbow above the jungle, the
lines reformed themselves.

Scouts crept from the jungle-edge at one side, and from the post
at my end, and felt their way, fan-wise, over the rain-scoured
surface; for the odor, which was both sight and sound to these ants,
had been washed away--a more serious handicap than mere change in
contour.

Swiftly the wandering individuals found their bearings again. There was
deep water where dry land had been, but, as if by long-planned
study of the work of sappers and engineers, new pontoon bridges
were thrown across, washouts filled in, new cliffs explored, and
easy grades established; and by the time the bamboos ceased their
own private after-shower, the columns were again running smoothly,
battalions of eager light infantry hastening out to battle, and
equal hosts of loot-laden warriors hurrying toward the home nest.

Four minutes was the average time taken to reform a column across
the ten feet of open clay, with all the road-making and engineering
feats which I have mentioned, on the part of ants who had never
been over this new route before.

Leaning forward within a few inches of the post, I lost all sense
of proportion, forgot my awkward human size, and with a new perspective
became an equal of the ants, looking on, watching every passer-by
with interest, straining with the bearers of the heavy loads, and
breathing more easily when the last obstacle was overcome and home
attained.

For a period I plucked out every bit of good-sized booty and found
that almost all were portions of scorpions from far-distant dead
logs in the jungle, creatures whose strength and poisonous stings
availed nothing against the attacks of these fierce ants.

The loads were adjusted equably, the larger pieces carried by the
big, white-headed workers, while the smaller ants transported small eggs
and larvæ. Often, when a great mandibled soldier had hold of some insect,
he would have five or six tiny workers surrounding him, each grasping
any projecting part of the loot, as if they did not trust him in this
menial capacity,--as an anxious mother would watch with doubtful confidence
a big policeman wheeling her baby across a crowded street. These workers
were often diminutive Marcelines, hindering rather than aiding in
the progress.

But in every phase of activity of these ants there was not an ounce of
intentionally lost power, or a moment of time wilfully gone to waste.
What a commentary on Bolshevism!

Now that I had the opportunity of quietly watching the long, hurrying
columns, I came hour by hour to feel a greater intimacy, a deeper enthusiasm
for their vigor of existence, their unfailing life at the highest point of
possibility of achievement. In every direction my former desultory
observations were discounted by still greater accomplishments. Elsewhere
I have recorded the average speed as two and a half feet in ten
seconds, estimating this as a mile in three and a half hours. An observant
colonel in the American army has laid bare my congenitally hopeless
mathematical inaccuracy, and corrected this to five hours and
fifty-two seconds.

Now, however, I established a wholly new record for the straight-away dash
for home of the army ants.

With the handicap of gravity pulling them down, the ants, both laden
and unburdened, averaged ten feet in twenty seconds, as they raced
up the post.

I have now called in an artist and an astronomer to verify my
results, these two being the only living beings within hailing
distance as I write, except a baby red howling monkey curled up in
my lap, and a toucan, sloth, and green boa, beyond my laboratory
table.

Our results are identical, and I can safely announce that the amateur
record for speed of army ants is equivalent to a mile in two hours
and fifty-six seconds; and this when handicapped by gravity and
burdens of food, but with the incentive of approaching the end of
their long journey.

As once before, I accidentally disabled a big worker that I was
robbing of his load, and his entire abdomen rolled down a slope and
disappeared.

Hours later in the afternoon, I was summoned to view the same soldier,
unconcernedly making his way along an outward-bound column, guarding
it as carefully as if he had not lost the major part of his anatomy.

His mandibles were ready, and the only difference that I could see
was that he could make better speed than others of his caste.

That night he joined the general assemblage of cripples quietly
awaiting death, halfway up to the nest.

I know of no highway in the world which surpasses that of a big
column of army ants in exciting happenings, although I usually had
the feeling which inspired Kim as he watched the Great White Road,
of understanding so little of all that was going on.

Early in the morning there were only outgoing hosts; but soon eddies
were seen in the swift current, vortexes made by a single ant here
and there forcing its way against the stream.

Unlike penguins and human beings, army ants have no rule of the road as
to right and left, and there is no lessening of pace or turning
aside for a heavily laden drogher.

Their blindness caused them to bump squarely into every individual,
often sending load and carrier tumbling to the bottom of a vertical
path.

Another constant loss of energy was a large cockroach leg, or
scorpion segment, carried by several ants.

Their insistence on trying to carry everything beneath their bodies
caused all sorts of comical mishaps.

When such a large piece of booty appeared, it was too much of a
temptation, and a dozen outgoing ants would rush up and seize hold
for a moment, the consequent pulling in all directions reducing
progress at once to zero.

Until late afternoon few ants returned without carrying their bit.

The exceptions were the cripples, which were numerous and very
pitiful.
From such fierce strenuousness, such virile activity, as unending
as elemental processes, it seemed a very terrible drop to disability,
to the utilizing of every atom of remaining strength to return to
the temporary home nest--that instinct which drives so many creatures
to the same homing, at the approach of death.

Even in their helplessness they were wonderful. To see a big black-headed
worker struggling up a post with five short stumps and only one good hind
leg, was a lesson in achieving the impossible.

I have never seen even a suspicion of aid given to any cripple, no matter
how slight or how complete the disability; but frequently a strange
thing occurred, which I have often noticed but can never explain.

One army ant would carry another, perhaps of its own size and caste,
just as if it were a bit of dead provender; and I always wondered
if cannibalism was to be added to their habits.

I would capture both, and the minute they were in the vial, the dead ant
would come to life, and with equal vigor and fury both would rush
about their prison, seeking to escape, becoming indistinguishable
in the twinkling of an eye.

Very rarely an ant stopped and attempted to clean another which had
become partly disabled through an accumulation of gummy sap or
other encumbering substance.

But when a leg or other organ was broken or missing, the odor of
the ant-blood seemed to arouse only suspicion and to banish sympathy,
and after a few casual wavings of antennæ, all passed by on the
other side.

Not only this, but the unfortunates were actually in danger of attack within
the very lines of traffic of the legionaries.

Several times I noticed small rove-beetles accompanying the ants,
who paid little attention to them.

Whenever an ant became suspicious and approached with a raised-eyebrow gesture
of antennæ, the beetles turned their backs quickly and raised threatening
tails.

But I did not suspect the vampire or thug-like character of these
guests--tolerated where any other insect would have been torn to
pieces at once.

A large crippled worker, hobbling along, had slipped a little away from the
main line, when I was astonished to see two rove-beetles rush at him and
bite him viciously, a third coming up at once and joining in.

The poor worker had no possible chance against this combination,
and he went down after a short, futile struggle.

Two small army ants now happened to pass, and after a preliminary
whiffing with waving antennæ, rushed joyously into the _mêlée_. The
beetles had a cowardly weapon, and raising their tails, ejected a
drop or two of liquid, utterly confusing the ants, which turned and
hastened back to the column.

For the next few minutes, until the scent wore off, they aroused
suspicion wherever they went.

Meanwhile, the hyena-like rove-beetles, having hedged themselves
within a barricade of their malodor, proceeded to feast, quarreling
with one another as such cowards are wont to do.

Thus I thought, having identified myself with the army ants. From
a broader, less biased point of view, I realized that credit should be
given to the rove-beetles for having established themselves in a
zone of such constant danger, and for being able to live and thrive
in it.

The columns converged at the foot of the post, and up its surface
ran the main artery of the nest.

Halfway up, a flat board projected, and here the column divided for
the last time, half going on directly into the nest, and the other
half turning aside, skirting the board, ascending a bit of perpendicular
canvas, and entering the nest from the rear.

The entrance was well guarded by a veritable moat and drawbridge
of living ants.

A foot away, a flat mat of ants, mandibles outward, was spread,
over which every passing individual stepped.

She, too, is taciturn,
like all the peasants here, and usually keeps her large mouth shut.

I ask her how long she has been a widow, and she says, "For nearly a
generation--no, don't let me tell a lie," she corrects herself. "Sophie is
four and twenty now, and it was the year after her birth that he died."

They had only been married a couple of years. Nikolai is six and twenty.

I ponder over this arithmetic, but as I am old and incapable, I cannot
make it tally.

Petra was very proud of her children, especially Sophie, who had gone to
school and passed an examination, and now held such an important post. Of
course her inheritance was used up, but she had her learning instead.
Nobody could ever take that from her. A big, handsome girl, Sophie--look,
here is her portrait.

I said I had met her at Tore Peak.

At Tore Peak? Oh, yes, she spent her summers there so as to be among her
equals; you couldn't blame her for that. But she came home every year,
too, as sure as the year came round itself. So I had met her at Tore Peak?


Sometimes I went with Nikolai to the forest for timber, and made myself
slightly useful. He is as strong as an ox, and has endurance almost to the
point of insensibility--a cut, black eye--nothing. And now it becomes
evident that his brain works well, too. He should have had a horse, yes,
but he cannot keep a horse till he can provide more fodder. But he cannot
buy more pasture land till he has more money. But he was learning more
about his trade in the town, and when he had finished his course of
training, he would earn more money. After that he would buy a horse.

I visited the neighbors, too. The farms were small, but the farmers
cultivated as much land as they required, and there was no poverty. Here
were no flowerpots in the windows or pictures on the walls, as at Petra's;
but good, thick furs with woven backs hung over the doors, and the
children looked healthy and well-fed. The neighbors all knew I lived at
Petra's house; every visitor to this district lived at Petra's house--had
done so as long as they could remember. I could sense no hostility to
Petra in these silent people, but the old schoolmaster was more talkative,
and he was quite ready to spread gossip about her. This man was a
bachelor; he had his own house and did his own housework. Had he, perhaps,
at some time felt a secret desire for the widow Petra?

The schoolmaster gossiped thus:

People who had visited the village in Petra's girlhood always used to live
at her parents' house. There was a room and a loft, and the engineer that
planned the big road lived there, and so did the two traveling preachers,
to say nothing of the itinerant peddlers who toured the district all the
year round. So it went on for many a year, with the children growing up,
and Petra getting big and hearty. Then Palm came; he was a Swede, a big
merchant--a wholesale merchant, one might almost say, for that period,
with his own boat and even a boy to carry his wares. Well, there were
glass panes again in the windows of Petra's parents' house, and there was
meat on Sundays, for Palm liked things done in style. He gave Petra
presents of dress materials and sweets. Then he was finished with Petra,
and went away to do business elsewhere. But it happened that the child
Petra gave birth to was a boy, and when Palm returned and saw him, he
stayed, and traveled no more. They married, and Palm added two rooms to
the house, for it was his intention to open a shop there. But when he had
built honestly and well, he died. His widow was left with two small
children, but she had means enough, for Palm had had plenty of money. Then
why did not Petra remarry? She could have got a man in spite of the
handicap of two small children, for Petra herself was still a young girl.
But from her childhood days, said the schoolmaster, she had been spoiled
by this love of roving company, and again housed itinerant tramps and
Swedes and peddlers, and thoroughly disgraced herself. Some of them stayed
there for weeks, eating and drinking and idling. It was shameful. Her
parents saw nothing wrong in this because it had always been their way of
living, and besides it brought them a little money. So the years went by.
When the children were grown and Sophie was out of the way, she might have
married even then, for she still had half her money left, and being
childless again, it was not too late. But no, Petra didn't want to, and it
_was_ too late, she said; it was the children's turn to marry now,
she said.

"Well, she's pretty old now, isn't she?" I said.

"Yes, time passes," the schoolmaster replied. "I don't know whether anyone
has asked her this year, but last year there was someone--one person--or
so I've heard, so I've been told. But Petra didn't want to. If I could
only guess what she's waiting for."

"Perhaps she's not waiting at all."

"Well, it's all the same to me," says the schoolmaster. "But she takes in
all these tramps and peddlers and carries on and makes a public nuisance
of herself...."

As I walked home from the schoolmaster's, I found I understood Petra's
arithmetic much better.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nikolai has gone back to his workshop in the town, but I have remained
behind. It matters little where I am, for the winter makes a dead man of
me in any case.

To pass the time, I carefully measure the piece of land that Nikolai is
going to break up when he can afford it, and I calculate what it will cost
him, with drainage and everything: a bare two hundred _kroner_. Then
he could keep a horse. It would have been an act of charity to give him
this money in case his mother could not. He could have added another field
to his land then.

"Look here, Petra--why don't you give Nikolai the two hundred
_kroner_ he needs for fodder for a horse?"

"And four hundred to buy the horse," she muttered.

"That makes six."

"I haven't got such a lot of six hundred _kroners_ lying about."

"But wouldn't the horse be useful for plowing?"

A pause. Then:

"He can break the ground himself."

I was not unfamiliar with this line of reasoning. Everyone has his own
problems, and Petra had hers. But the strange thing is that each one of us
struggles for himself as though he had a hundred years to live. I once
knew two brothers named Martinsen who owned a large farm, the produce of
which they sold. Both were well-to-do bachelors without heirs. But both
had diseased lungs, the younger brother's much worse than the elder's. In
the spring, the younger brother became permanently bedridden, but though
he approached his end, he still maintained an interest in everything that
went on at the farm. He heard strangers talking in the kitchen and called
his brother in.

"What is it?" he asked.

"Only someone to buy eggs."

"What's the price per score now?"

His brother told him.

"Then give him the small eggs," he cautioned.

A few days later he was dead. His brother lived till his sixty-seventh
year, though his lungs were diseased. When anybody came to buy eggs, he
always gave him the smallest....

"But," I insisted to Petra, "Nikolai doesn't want to waste time breaking
his ground himself, does he? Surely if he works at his trade he'll earn
more!"

"They don't pay for joinery here," Petra replied. "People buy their chairs
and tables from the shops now; it's cheaper."

"Then why is Nikolai working as an apprentice?"

"I've asked him the same question," she replied. "Nikolai just wants to be
a carpenter, but it won't get him anywhere. Still, he can do as he likes."

"Well, what else could he do?"

A pause. Petra's big mouth is closed. But at length she says:

"There's plenty of traffic now and a lot of tourists in the summer, both
at Tore Peak and down here on the headland. One time we had two Danes
living here; they had traveled on foot. 'If you had a horse, you could
have driven us here,' they said to me."

"Ah," I thought to myself, "the cat sticking its nose out of the bag!"

"'You've got a big house and four rooms,' the Danes said, and 'There are
high mountains and big woods,' they said, 'and fish in the fjord and fish
in the river; there are lots of things here, and there's a broad road
here,' they said. Nikolai was standing next to them and heard it all, too.
'Now we're here,' they said, 'but we can't get away again unless we
walk.'"

Just to say something, I asked her:

"Four rooms--I thought you only had three?"

"Yes, but the workshop could be turned into a room, too," the big mouth
replied.

"So that's it!" I thought. With hardly a pause, I continued:

"But if Nikolai were going to deal with tourists, he'd have to get a
horse, wouldn't he?"

"Well, I suppose we could have managed it," Petra replied.

"It's four hundred _kroner_."

"Yes," she said, "and the carriage a hundred and fifty."

"But this land won't feed a horse!"

"What do other people feed horses on?" she asked. "They buy sacks of oats
on the headland."

"That's eighteen _kroner_ a sack."

"No, seventeen. And you earn as much as that on your first tourist."

Yes, Petra had it all figured out; she was the born landlady, and had
grown up in a lodginghouse. She could cook, too, for had she not put two
snakes of Italian macaroni in the barley broth? The money for coffee, for
the bed at night and waffles in the morning, had grown so dear to her that
she hid it away, watched it increase, and grew rich on it. She did not
produce like other peasant women, but no one can do everything at one
time, and Petra was a parasite. She did not want to live by earning
something; she wanted to live on the tourists who earned enough
themselves, and could afford to come.

Splendor and Englishmen, no doubt, in these parts! If it all works out as
it should--and it probably will.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is February. I have an idea, a vagrant idea that comes to me, and I
harbor it: now that there is a little snow, and its crust is hard, I shall
walk across the fields into Sweden. That is what I shall do.

But before I can do it, I must wait for my laundry, and Petra, who is
cleanly, washes in many waters. So I pass the time in Nikolai's workshop,
where there are many kinds of planes and saws and drills and lathes, and
there I fashion strange things. For the small boys of the neighboring
farm, I make a windmill that will really turn in the wind. It whirls and
rattles well, and I remember my own childhood when we called this
apparatus onomatopoeically a _windwhirr_.

Besides this, I go out walking, and use my winter head as well as I can,
which is not very well. I do not blame the winter, nor do I blame
anything. But where are the red-hot irons and the youth of omnipotence?
For hours sometimes I walk along a path in the woods with my hands folded
on my back, an old man, my mind gilded for a moment by an occasional
memory; I stop, and raise my eyebrows in surprise. Can this be an iron in
the fire? It is not, for it fades again, and I am left behind in a quiet
melancholy.

But in order to recall my young days, I pretend to be filled with a
heaven-sent energy. It is by no means all pretense, and pictures rise in
my mind, fragmentary flageolet tones:

  We came from the meadow
  and downy heather;
  we came from friendship,
  too-loo-loo-lay!
  A star that watched
  saw lips meet lips.
  None else so dear,
  so sweet as you.

  Those youthful days,
  those happy days,
  unmatched since then!
  but what am I now?
  The bees once swarmed,
  the swan once played.
  There's no play now,
  yet too-loo-loo-lay!

I break off, and put the pencil in my pocket with a tone still resounding
within me. I walk on with some pleasure to myself, at least.

There is a letter for me. Who on earth has found me out here? The letter
is as follows:


Forgive me for writing you, but I should like to talk to you about
something that has happened. I should like to see you as soon as you come
back. There's nothing the matter. Please don't say no.

Yours,

Ingeborg Torsen

I reread it many times. "Something that has happened." But I'm going to
Sweden, I'm going to move about a little, and stop losing myself in the
affairs of others. Do they think I am mankind's old uncle, that I can be
summoned hither and thither to give advice? Excuse me, but I am going to
assert myself and become quite inaccessible; the snow is just right, and I
have planned a big journey--a business tour, I might almost call it, very
important to me--I have a great deal at stake.... How composite is the
mind of man! As I sit talking drivel to myself, and even sometimes saying
an angry word aloud in order that Petra may hear it, I am not at all
displeased at having received this letter; in fact secretly I am so
pleased that I feel ashamed. It is merely because I shall soon see the
town again--the town with its frostbitten gardens and its ships.

But what on earth can this mean? Has she been to my landlady's and got my
address? Or has she met Nikolai?

I left at once.


XXXV


My landlady was surprised.

"Why, good evening. How well and happy you look! Here's your mail."

"Let it lie. I must tell you, Madame Henriksen, that you are a jewel."

"Ha, ha, ha!"

"Yes, you are. You are a very kind woman. But you have given my address to
someone."

"No, indeed; I swear I haven't."

"No? Well, then someone else must have done so. Yes, you're right, I am
happy, and tomorrow morning I shall get up very early and walk down by the
shore."

"But I did send a message," said my landlady. "I hope it wasn't wrong of
me. To a lady who wanted to know as soon as you arrived."

"A lady? You sent a message just now?"

"A little while ago, as soon as you came in. A young, handsome lady; she
might have been your daughter, you know."

"Thank you."

"Well, I'm only saying what's so. She said she would come at once, because
she had to see you about something."

The landlady left me.

So Miss Torsen was coming this very evening; something must have happened.
She had never visited me before. I looked round; yes, everything was neat
and tidy. I washed and made myself ready. There, she can have that chair;
I'd better light the other lamp, too. It might not be a bad idea to sit
down to my correspondence; that would make a good impression, and if I put
some letters in a small, feminine hand on top, it might even make her a
little jealous--hee, hee. Oh, God, ten or fifteen years ago one could play
such tricks; it's too late now....

Then she knocked and came in.

I made no move to shake hands, and neither did she; I merely drew out a
chair for her.

"Excuse my coming like this," she said. "I asked Mrs. Henriksen to send me
a message; it's nothing serious, and now I feel a little embarrassed about
it, but--"

I saw that it was something serious, and my heart began to pound. Why
should my heart be affected?

"This is the first time you've been in my rooms," I said, expectant and on
the defensive.

"Yes. It's very nice," she said, without looking round. She began to clasp
her hands and pull them apart again till the tips of her gloves projected
beyond her finger tips. She was in a state of great excitement.

"Perhaps _now_ I've done something you'll approve of?" she said,
suddenly pulling off her glove.

She had a ring on her finger.

"Good," I said. It didn't affect me immediately; I was to understand more
later, and merely asked:

"Are you engaged?"

"Yes," she replied. And she looked at me with a smile, though her mouth
shook.

I looked back at her, and I believe I said something like, "Well, now,
well, well!" Then I nodded in a fatherly fashion, bowed formally, and
said: "My heartiest congratulations!"

"Yes, that's what it's come to," she said. "I think it was the best thing
to do. Perhaps you think it's a bit unreliable of me or rash or--well,
don't you?"

"Oh, I don't know--"

"But it was absolutely the best thing. And I just thought I'd tell you."

I got up. She started, evidently in a very nervous state. But I had only
risen to turn down the lamp behind her, which had begun to smoke.

A pause. She said nothing more, so what could I say? But as the minutes
passed and I saw she was distressed, I said:

"Why did you want to tell me this?"

"Yes--why did I?"

"Perhaps for a moment you thought you were the center of the world again,
but--"

"Yes, I expect so."

She looked about her with great, roving eyes. Then she got up; she had
been sitting all this time as though about to spring at me. I rose, too.
An unhappy woman--I saw that plainly enough; but good heavens, what could
I do? She had come to tell me she was engaged, and at the same time looked
very unhappy. Was that a way to behave? But as she got up, I could see her
face better under her hat--I could see her hair--the hair that was
beginning to show silken and silver at the temples--how beautiful it was!
She was tall and handsome, and her breast was rising and falling--her
great breast--what a great breast she had, rising and falling! Her face
was brown, and her mouth open, just a little open, dry, feverishly dry--

"Miss Ingeborg!"

It was the first time I called her this. And I moved my hand toward her
slightly, longing to touch her, perhaps to fondle her--I don't know--

But she had collected herself now, and stood erect and hard. Her eyes had
grown cold; they looked at me, putting me in my place again, as she walked
toward the door. A cry of "No!" escaped me.

"What's the matter?" she asked.

"Don't go, not yet, not at once; sit down again and talk to me more."

"No, you're quite right," she said. "I'm not the center of the universe.
Here I come to bother you with my unimportant troubles, and you--well, of
course, you're busy with your extensive correspondence."

"Look here, sit down again, won't you? I shan't even read the letters;
they're nothing, only two or three letters perhaps, probably from complete
strangers. Now sit down; tell me everything; you owe me that much. Look, I
shan't even read the letters."

And with that I swept them up and threw them into the fire.

"Oh--what are you doing?" she cried, and ran to the fireplace, trying to
save them.

"Don't bother," I said. "I expect no happiness to come to me through the
post, and sorrows I do not seek."

She stood so close to me that I found myself again on the point of
touching her, just for a moment, touching her arm; but I caught myself in
time. I had already gone too far, so I said as gently and sympathetically
as I could:

"Dear child, you must not be unhappy; it will all turn out for the best;
you'll see. Now sit down--there, that's better."

No doubt she had been taken aback by my violence, for she sank into her
chair almost absently.

"I'm not unhappy," she said.

"Aren't you? So much the better!"

I began to chatter away at top speed, though I tried to restrain myself,
to show that I was nothing more than an uncle to her. I talked to distract
her, to distract us both; I let my tongue wag--I could hear it buzzing.
What could I say? A little of everything--a great deal, in fact:

"Well, well, child. And whom are you marrying, who is the lucky man? Nice
of you to come and tell me before anyone, really very nice; thank you very
much. You see I've only just come home and I haven't slept much on the
journey. I was anxious to know--well, perhaps not anxious exactly--but
still--You know what such a homecoming is: lots of people, noise, brr!--I
hardly got any sleep. Then I came home, and then you came along--thank you
for coming, Miss Ingeborg--I might be your father and you're just a
child; that's why I say 'Ingeborg.' But when you told me all this, I
hadn't had any sleep, I wasn't quite balanced--not enough to give you
advice; I mean, I hadn't quite appreciated--But now you can quite safely--
I'd like to know, of course--Is he old? Is he young? Young, of course. I
am imagining what will happen to you now, Miss Ingeborg, in your new
condition. I mean, it will be so entirely different from what you've been
accustomed to, but God bless you, it will all turn out for the best, I'm
sure of that--"

"But you don't even know who it is!" she interrupted, looking at me
apprehensively again.

"No, I don't, and I needn't if you'd rather not tell me yet. Who is it? A
dapper little man, I can see that from his ring, a schoolmaster perhaps, a
clever young schoolmaster--"

She shook her head.

"Then a big, good-natured man who wants to dance with you--"

"Yes, perhaps," she said slowly.

"There you are--you see I've guessed it. A bear who will carry you on his
paws. On your birthday--do you know what he'll give you for your
birthday?"

But perhaps I was getting too childish; I bored her, and for the first
time she looked away from me, looked at a picture on the wall, then at
another picture. But it was not easy for me to stop now, after having
spoken hardly at all for several weeks, and feeling profoundly excited
besides--heaven only knows why.

"How did you like the country?" she asked suddenly. As I could not see the
drift of this question, I merely looked at her.

"Weren't you at Nikolai's mother's house?" she persisted.

"Yes."

"What is she like?"

"Are you interested in her?"

"No, I don't suppose so. Oh dear!" she sighed wearily.

"Come, come, you mustn't sound like that when you're newly engaged! What
the country was like? Well, there was a schoolmaster--you know, an old
bachelor, sly, and amusing. Said he knew me, and put on the most
extraordinary airs the first day. And of course I returned the compliment
and said I had come exclusively to meet him. 'Impossible!' he said. 'Why
should it be?' I said; 'forty years a schoolmaster, a respected man,
permanent churchman, chairman, indispensable everywhere!' Well, then I
attended his class. Most impressive. He talked continually; for once he
had an audience, almost like a school inspection. 'You there, Peter!
Ahem,' he said. 'There was a horse and a man, and one of them was riding
on the other's back. Which one was riding, Peter?' 'The man,' Peter
replies. A pause. 'Well, maybe you're right, Peter--maybe the man was
riding. Just like sin, like the devil riding us....'"

But she was looking at the wall again, drifting away from me again. I
changed the subject clumsily:

"Of course you'd rather hear about people you know--about Tore Peak, for
instance. Josephine has been in town."

"Yes, I know," she said, nodding her head.

"Remember the old man at Tore Peak? I don't think I'll ever forget him. In
a certain number of years I shall be like him--perhaps not quite so old.
Then I shall be a child again with age. One day he came out, and went down
to the field. I saw him; he had mittens on. You know he eats all sorts of
things, and I saw him lie down and eat the hay."

She stared at me foolishly.

"But I must say he didn't look as though he had ever eaten hay
before--possibly because it was rotting. It was the hay that had been
left, you know--rotting down for next year--for the next tourist year."

"You seem to think," she said smiling, "that you have to cheer me up,
because I'm terribly unhappy. I'm quite the reverse. Perhaps he's too good
for me; that's what his sister seems to think, anyhow, because she tried
to stop it. But I'm going to enjoy snubbing that sister of his. Anyhow,
I'm not unhappy, and that isn't the reason I've come. I'd really much
rather have him than anyone else--since I can't get the one I really
want."

"You've told me this before, child--last winter, in fact. But the man you
want has gone his way--besides, you said yourself that you didn't belong
with him, or rather, that he didn't with you--I mean--"

"Belong? Do I belong anywhere? Do you think I belong in the place I'm
going to now? I'm afraid I'm not really suitable for anybody--at least I
can't think of anyone I'd suit. I wonder how I'll manage. I wonder if
he'll be able to stand me. But I'll do my very best; I've made up my mind
to that."

"Well, who is it--do I know him? Of course you suit each other. I can't
believe you don't. He must be in love with you, quite madly in love, and
you must love him in return. I'm sure you'll come through with flying
colors, Miss Ingeborg, because you're capable and intelligent."

"Oh, well," she said, rising suddenly to her feet. But she hesitated over
something, and seemed about to speak, then changed her mind again. At the
door, she stood with her back to me, pulling on her gloves, and said:

"So you think I ought to do it?"

I was taken aback by the question, and replied:

"Ought to do it? Haven't you done it already?"

"Yes. That is--well, yes, I've done it, I'm engaged. And I can tell from
your manner that I've done the right thing."

"Well, I don't know. I can't tell."

I crossed the room to her.

"Who is it?"

"Oh, God, no; let's drop it. I can't bear any more now. Good night."

She stretched her hand out fumblingly, but since she was looking at the
floor, she could not find mine, and both our hands circled helplessly
round each other for a moment. Then she opened the door and was gone. I
called to her, begging her to wait, seized my hat, and hurried after her.
An empty staircase. I rushed down and opened the street door. An empty
street. She must have run.

"I'll try to see her tomorrow," I thought.

       *       *       *       *       *

One day, two days, but I did not see her, though I went to all the usual
places. Another day--nothing. Then I thought I would go up to her home and
inquire about her. At first this did not seem to me too improper, but when
it came to the point, I hesitated. There is, after all, something to be
lost by making a fool of oneself. But was I not a kind of uncle? No--yes,
of course, but still--

A week passes, two weeks, three. The girl has quite disappeared; I hope
she hasn't had an accident. I mount the stairs to her home and ring the
bell....

She's already gone away; they left as soon as they were married, last
week. She's married to Nikolai, Carpenter Nikolai.

       *       *       *       *       *

March--what a month! The winter is over, yet there's no telling how much
longer it may still last. That's what March is for.

I have lived through another winter and seen the nigger entertainment at
the Anglo-Saxon theater. You were there too, my friend. You saw how
cleverly we all turned somersaults. Why, you even took part yourself, and
you carry about a broken rib as a cherished little memento of the
occasion. I saw it all from a slight distance away, ten miles, to be
exact; no people were near me, but there were seven heavens above.

And pretty soon I shall be reading what the officials have to say about
the year's harvest in our country; that is to say, the harvest at the
theater--in dollars, and in sterling.

The waggish professor is enjoying himself, quite in his element. There he
goes, self-assured and complacent, Sir Mediocrity in all his glory. By
next year, he will have dragged other progressive people in his wake; he
will have dressed up Norway still more, and made it still more attractive
to the Anglo-Saxons. More dollars, and more sterling.

What, do I hear someone objecting?

Yes, Switzerland.

Well, then, we shall invite Switzerland to dinner and toast her thus:
"Colleague, our great aim is to resemble you. Who else can squeeze so much
profit out of their mountains? Who else can file at such clockwork?
Switzerland, make yourself at home; we don't want to rob you; there are no
pickpockets at this table. Here's to you!"

But if that doesn't help, we shall have to roll up our sleeves and fight.
There are still Norwegians left in good old Norway, and our rival--is
Switzerland.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mrs. Henriksen brings catkins in a vase into my room.

"What, is it spring?"

"Oh, it's getting on."

"Then I shall be going away. You see, Mrs. Henriksen, I should very much
have liked to stay, because this is really where I belong; but what more
can I do here? I don't work; I merely idle. Do you understand me? I grieve
continually, and my heart sits wrinkled. My most brilliant achievement is
spinning coins: I toss a coin into the air and wait. When I came here last
autumn I wasn't so bad, not nearly so bad. I was only half a year younger
then, yet I was ten years younger. What has happened to me since? Nothing.
Only--I'm not a better man than I was last autumn."

"But you've been all right all winter, haven't you? And three weeks ago,
when you came back from the country, you were so happy!"

"Was I? I don't remember that. Ah, well, things don't move so fast, and
nothing has happened to me in these three weeks. Well, never mind; at all
events, I shall go away. I must travel when the spring comes. I have
always done so in the past, and I want to do the same thing now. Sit down,
Mrs. Henriksen."

"No, thank you, I'm too busy."

Too busy! Yes, you work--you're not ten years older than you were last
autumn. You think it's hard work to rest on Sundays, don't you? Dear
Madame Henriksen! You and your little daughter knit stockings for the
whole family, you let your rooms, you keep your family together like a
mother. But you mustn't let your little Louise sit for twelve years on a
school form. If you do, you'll hardly ever see her all through her youth,
those formative years of her life. And then she can't be like you or learn
from you. She'll learn to have children easily enough, but she won't learn
to be a mother, and when the time comes for her to keep her home and
family together, she will not be able to do it. She'll only know
"languages" and mathematics and the story of Bluebeard, but that is not
food for the heart of a woman. That is twelve years of continual famine
for her soul.

"Excuse my asking, but where are you going to?"

"I don't know, but I'm going. Why, where should I go? I shall go aboard a
steamship and sail, and when I have sailed long enough, I will go ashore.
If I find, on looking about me, that I have traveled too far or not far
enough, I shall board a ship again and sail on. Once I walked across into
Sweden as far as Kalmar and even Öland, but that was too far, so I turned
back. No one cares to know where I am, least of all myself."


XXXVI


You get used to everything; you even get used to the passage of two years.

And now it is spring again....

It is market day in the frontier town; my room is noisy, for there is
music down in the fields, the roundabout is whirling, the tightrope walker
is gossiping outside his tent, and people of every sort throng the
village. The crowds are great, and there is even a sprinkling of
Norwegians from across the border. Horses snort and whinny, cows low, and
trading is brisk.

In the display window of the goldsmith across the road, a great cow of
silver has made its appearance, a handsome breeder that the local farmers
stop to admire.

"She's too smart for my crags," says one of them with a laugh.

"What do you think's her price?" says another with a laugh.

"Why, do you want to buy her?"

"No, haven't got fodder enough this year."

A man trudges placidly down the road and also stops in front of this
window. I see him from behind, and take note of his massive back. He
stands there a long time, trying to make up his mind, no doubt, for now
and then he scratches his beard. There he goes, sure enough, entering the
shop with a ponderous tread. I wonder if he intends to buy the silver cow!


It takes him an age, and still he hasn't come out. What on earth is he
doing in there? Now that I have begun to watch him, I might as well go the
whole hog. So I put on my hat and cross to the goldsmith's window myself,
mingling with the other spectators, and watching the door.

At last the man re-emerges--yes, it _is_ Nikolai. It was his back and
hands, but he has got a beard now, too. He looks splendid. Imagine
Carpenter Nikolai being here!

We greet each other, and we talk as he shakes me slowly and ponderously by
the hand. Our conversation is halting, but we get on. Yes, of course, he
has gone into the shop on business, in a kind of way.

"You've not bought the silver cow, have you?"

"Oh, no, not that. It didn't amount to anything, really. In fact, I didn't
buy anything."

By degrees, I discover that he is buying a horse. And he tells me that he
has dug that piece of land of his, and is turning it into pasture, and his
wife--oh, yes, thank you for asking--she lives in health to this day.

"By the way," he said, "have you come here over the fjeld?"

"Yes, I came last winter. In December."

"What a pity I didn't know!"

I explained that I hadn't had the time to visit his home then; I was in a
hurry, there was some business---

"Yes, I understand," he said.

We said little more, for Nikolai was as taciturn as ever. Besides, he had
other business to attend to; he cannot absent himself from the farm for
long, and had to return next day.

"Have you bought your horse yet?"

"Well, no, I haven't."

"Do you think you will?"

"I don't know yet. I'm trying to split a difference of five and twenty
_kroner_."

Later I saw Nikolai going to the goldsmith's again. He seemed to do a
great deal of business there.

"I could have company across the fjeld now," I thought. "It's spring, and
do I not always travel in the spring?"

I began to pack my knapsack.

Nikolai emerged once more, apparently as empty-handed as he had entered. I
opened my window and called to him to ask if he had bought the horse.

"N-no--the man won't meet my price."

"Well, can't you meet his?"

"Y-yes, I could," he replied slowly. "But I don't think I've got enough
money on me."

"I could lend you some."

At this Nikolai smiled and shook his head as though my offer were a fairy
tale.

"Thank you just the same," he said, turning to walk away.

"Where are you going now?" I asked.

"To look at another horse. It's old and small, still--"

Was I thrusting myself on the man? I? Nonsense! I don't see that at all.
He felt offended because I had passed his door last winter without
stopping and now I wanted to make him friendly again. That was all. But as
I wanted no cause for self-reproach, I stopped packing, nor would I ask
Nikolai if I might go back with him. But I went out for a walk in the
town. I had as much right to do that as anyone.

I met Nikolai in the street with a colt, and we stopped to exchange a few
words.

"Is it yours?"

"Yes, I've bought her; the man met me halfway after all," he replied with
a smile.

We walked along to the stable together and fed and petted the horse. She
was a mare, two and a half years old, with a tawny coat and an off-white
mane and tail--a perfect little lady.

That evening Nikolai came over to my room of his own accord for a chat
about the mare and the state of the roads. When he was saying good-bye at
the door, he seemed struck by a sudden thought.

"By the way," he said, "I suppose it's no good asking you, but you could
get a lift for your knapsack, you know. We could be there day after
tomorrow," he added.

How could I offend him again?

We walked all next day, spent the night in the mountain hut at the
frontier, and then went on again. Nikolai carried my knapsack all the way,
as well as his own smaller parcels. When I suggested that we should share
the burden, he said it was no weight at all. I think Nikolai wanted to
spare the little tawny lady.

At noon we saw the fjord beneath us. Nikolai stopped and carefully rubbed
down the mare once more. As our path sloped downward, I felt a pressure, a
contraction in my chest; it was the sea air. Nikolai asked me what was the
matter, but it was nothing.

On reaching his home, we found the yard well swept, and in the doorway a
woman on her knees with her back toward us, scrubbing the floor. It was
the Saturday cleaning day.

"Hullo!" Nikolai roared in a tremendously loud voice, stopping dead in his
tracks as he did so.

The woman in the doorway looked round; her hair was gray, but it was she,
Miss Ingeborg, _Fru_ [Footnote:  Mrs. (Translator's note.)] Ingeborg.

"Good heavens!" she exclaimed, hastily mopping up the rest of the floor.

"Look at all the cleaning that goes on here!" Nikolai said, laughing.
"That's her idea of fun!"

And I had believed Carpenter Nikolai incapable of lightheartedness! Yet I
had seen how content he had been all the way home, how deeply content, and
proud of the little lady he was bringing with him. Even now he was still
stroking her.

Fru Ingeborg rose to her feet, her skirts dark with the damp. It all
seemed strange to me; her hair was so gray. I needed a little time, a
moment, to collect myself, and turned away to give her time, too.

"What a lovely horse!" I heard her exclaim.

Nikolai went on stroking the mare.

"I've brought a visitor with me," he said.

I went to her and perhaps--I don't know--perhaps I rather overdid my
unconcern. I greeted her and insisted on shaking her wet hand, which she
hesitated to give me. I was anxious to appear quite formal with her, and
shook her hand as I repeated my greeting.

"Well, of all people!" she replied.

I persisted in my formal attitude.

"You must blame your husband," I said. "It's his fault that I'm here."

"I wish you heartily welcome," she returned. "How lucky I've just got
through the cleaning!"

A slight pause. We looked at each other; two years had passed since our
last meeting. To break the silence, we all began to admire the mare,
Nikolai swelling with pride. Then we heard a child calling from within the
house, and the young mother ran off.

"Come in, won't you!" she called back over her shoulder.

As soon as I entered, I saw that the room had been changed. There was too
much middle-class frippery: white curtains at the windows, numerous
pictures on the walls, a lamp pendent from the ceiling, underneath it in
the center of the room a round table and chairs, knickknacks in a china
cupboard, a pink-painted spinning wheel, flowers in pots--in short, the
room was crowded. This, no doubt, was the sort of thing Fru Ingeborg had
been used to and considered in good taste. But in Petra's day, this had
been a light and spacious room.

"How's your mother?" I asked Nikolai.

As usual he was slow to reply. His wife answered for him:

"She's very well."

I wanted to ask, "Where is she?" but I refrained.

"Look, I want to show you something," said Fru Ingeborg.

It was the child in his bed--a boy, big and handsome, about a year old. He
frowned at me at first, but only for a moment. As soon as he was on his
mother's arm, he looked at me without fear.

How happy and beautiful the young mother looked! Peerless, indeed, with
her eyes full of an inscrutable graciousness she had not possessed before.


"What a fine little _man!_" I said, admiring the boy.

"I should think he was!" said the mother.

       *       *       *       *       *

You get used to everything. The sea air no longer oppresses me; I can
speak without losing my breath to the woman who is now the mistress of
this house. She likes to talk, too, pouring out her words nervously, as
though it had been a long time since she last opened her mouth. What we
talked about? Well, we neither asked nor answered questions about
measuring angles or analyzing Shakespeare's grammar.

Had she ever thought her matriculation would land her up here, amid
livestock and Saturday cleaning?

Oh, that parody of an education! She had taken the first toddling steps in
a dozen sciences, but if she met someone with fully adult knowledge she
was lost. She had other things to think about now, her home and her family
and the farm. Of course there wasn't much livestock, now that Nikolai's
mother had taken half of it with her--

"Has Petra gone away?"

Married--to the schoolmaster. No, Petra hadn't wanted to stay when the
young wife took possession. One evening a strange man had come to the
house, and Petra had wanted to admit him, but Fru Ingeborg would not. She
knew who he was and wanted him to leave. So there were quarrels between
the older woman and the young one.

Petra was also dissatisfied with the young wife's work in the barn. It was
true she was not very skillful, but she was learning all the time, and
enjoyed improving her skill. She never asked questions; that, she saw,
would have been foolish, but she worked things out by herself, and kept
her eyes open when she visited neighboring farms. That didn't mean to say
she could learn everything. There were things she never learned properly
because she was not "to the manner born." Often the wives of rural
officials are from small towns, and have not learned the ways of the
country, though they must learn them in time. But they never learn them
well. They know only just enough for their daily needs. To set up a weave,
you must have grown up with the sound of the shuttle in your ears; to tend
the cattle as they should be tended, you must have helped your mother
since childhood. You can learn from others, but it will not be in your
blood.

Not everyone has a man like Nikolai to live with, either. The young wife
is very fond of her Nikolai, this sound, hearty bear who loves her in
return. Besides, Nikolai is not exacting; his wife seems to him peerless
in all she does. Of course she has taken great pains; it has left its mark
on her, too, and she is not gray for nothing. A few months ago she lost a
front tooth, too--broke it on some bird shot left in the breast of a
ptarmigan she was eating. She hardly dared look in the mirror now--didn't
recognize herself. But what did it matter as long as Nikolai....

Look what he'd brought her, this brooch, bought at the goldsmith's at the
market: wasn't it lovely? Oh, Nikolai was mad; but she would do anything
in the world for him, too. Imagine using some of the money for the horse
on a brooch! Where is he now, where's he gone to? She'll bet anything he's
stroking the mare again.

"Nikolai!" she called.

"Yes," his reply came from the stable.

She sat down again, crossing her legs. Her face had turned pink; perhaps a
thought, a memory, passed through her mind. She was suffused with
excitement and beauty. Her dress clung to her body, outlining its
contours. She began gently to stroke her knee.

"Is the child asleep?" I asked. I had to say something.

"Yes, he's asleep. And think of him!" she exclaimed. "Can you imagine
anything more wonderful? Excuse my talking like this, but.... You know
he's not a year old yet. I never knew children were such a blessing."

"Well, you see they are."

"Yes, I thought differently once; I remember that perfectly well, and you
contradicted me. Of course it was stupid of me. Children? Miracles! And
when you're old, they're the only happiness--the last happiness. I shall
have more; I shall have many of them, a whole row of them, like organ
pipes, each taller than the last. They're lovely.... But I wish I hadn't
lost my tooth; it leaves such a black gap. I really feel quite bad about
it, on Nikolai's account. I suppose a false one could be put in, but I
shouldn't dream of it. Besides, I understand it's quite dear. But I've
given up using any arts; I only wish I'd stopped earlier--I've gone on
much too long. Think of all I've missed by it: all my childhood, all my
youth. Haven't I idled away whole summers at resorts, even as a grown
woman? I needed a holiday from my school work, a rest, and immediately
turned it into sheer futility, every day a disgrace. I could cry with
regret. I should have been married ten years ago, and had my husband all
that time, and a home and many children. Now I'm already old, cheated out
of ten years of my life, with gray hair and one tooth gone--"

"Well, you've lost one tooth, but I've hardly got one left!"

No sooner had I consoled her thus than I regretted it. Why should I make
myself worse than I am? Things were bad enough anyhow. I was sick with
fury at myself, and grinned and grimaced to show her my teeth: "Here,
don't miss them, have a good look!" But I'm afraid she saw what a fool I
was making of myself; everything I did was wrong.

Then she consoled me in her turn, as people do when they can well afford
it:

"What, you old? Nonsense!"

"Have you met the schoolmaster?" I asked abruptly.

"Of course. I remember what you told me about him: a horse and a man came
riding along the road.... But he's got sense, and he's terribly stingy.
Oh, he's cunning; he borrows our harrow because ours is new and good.
They've built a house at the end of the valley, and take in travelers--
quite a big hotel, in fact, with the waitresses dressed in national
costume. Of course Nikolai and I both went to the wedding; Petra really
looked a charming and lovely bride. They are the somatic cells of the body
politic, while deep within the nest are the guarded sexual cells--the
winged kings and queens, which from time to time, exactly as in isolated
organisms, are thrown off to propagate, and to found new nests. They,
no less than the workers, are parts of something more subtle than
the visible Attas and their material nest.

Whether I go to the ant as sluggard, or myrmocologist, or accidentally,
via Pterodactyl Pups, a day spent with them invariably leaves
me with my whole being concentrated on this mysterious Atta Ego. Call it
Vibration, Aura, Spirit of the nest, clothe ignorance in whatever term
seems appropriate, we cannot deny its existence and power.

As with the Army ants, the flowing lines of leaf-cutters always brought to
mind great arteries, filled with pulsating, tumbling corpuscles. When
an obstruction appeared, as a fallen leaf, across the great sandy track, a
dozen, or twenty or a hundred workers gathered--like leucocytes--and
removed the interfering object. If I injured a worker who was about to
enter the nest, I inoculated the Atta organism with a pernicious, foreign
body. Even the victim himself was dimly aware of the law of fitness. Again
and again he yielded to the call of the nest, only to turn aside at the
last moment. From a normal link in the endless Atta chain, he had become
an outcast--snapped at by every passing ant, self-banished, wandering
off at nightfall to die somewhere in the wilderness of grass. When well,
an Atta has relations but no friends, when ill, every jaw is against
him.

As I write this seated at my laboratory table, by turning down my lamp and
looking out, I can see the star dust of Orion's nebula, and without
moving from my chair, Rigel, Sirius, Capella and Betelgeuze--the
blue, white, yellow and red evolution of so-called lifeless cosmic
matter.

A few slides from the aquarium at my side reveal an evolutionary
sequence to the heavenly host--the simplest of earthly organisms
playing fast and loose with the borderland, not only of plants and animals,
but of the one and of the many-celled. First a swimming lily, Stentor,
a solitary animal bloom, twenty-five to the inch; Cothurnia, a double
lily, and Gonium, with a quartet of cells clinging tremulously
together, progressing unsteadily--materially toward the rim of my
field of vision--in the evolution of earthly life toward sponges,
peripatus, ants and man.

I was interrupted in my microcosmus just as it occurred to me that
Chesterton would heartily approve of my approximation of Sirius and Stentor,
of Capella and Cothurnia--the universe balanced. My attention was drawn
from the atom Gonium--whose brave little spirit was striving to keep his
foursome one--a primordial struggle toward unity of self and division
of labor; my consciousness climbed the microscope tube and came
to rest upon a slim glass of amber liquid on my laboratory table:
a servant had brought a cocktail, for it was New Year's Eve.

(Now the thought came that there were a number of worthy people who
would also approve of this approximation!)

I looked at the small spirituous luxury, and I thought of my friends
in New York, and then of the Attas in front of the laboratory.

With my electric flash I went out into the starlight, and found the usual
hosts struggling nestward with their chlorophyll burdens, and
rushing frantically out into the black jungle for more and yet more
leaves.

My mind swept back over evolution from star-dust to Kartabo compound,
from Gonium to man, and to these leaf-cutting ants.

And I wondered whether the Attas were any the better for being denied the
stimulus of temptation, or whether I was any the worse for the opportunity
of refusing a second glass.
Yes, it's Sunday today, and she, being the best educated of them,
naturally reads the service. Bravo! Magnificent! She has extended her
self-discipline even to this, for they are all orthodox Christians in this
neighborhood. Believing? No, but not hostile, either. One reads Scripture.
Rather a clever ruse, that of the clotheshorse.

She has become an excellent cook, too, in the peasant style. Delicious
broth, without noodles, but otherwise just as it should be, with barley,
carrots, and thyme. I doubt whether she has learned this at the domestic
science school. I consider all the things she has learned, and find them
numerous. Had she, perhaps, been a little overstrung in her talk about
children like organ pipes? I don't know, but her nostrils dilated like a
mare's as she spoke. Harrowing effects of the uncertainty of war
news--Shocking waste of literary ammunition--A bill against the
Provisional Government for damages.

TOURS, TENTH WEEK OF THE REPUBLIC, 1870.

It was late in the afternoon when the intelligence arrived of a
decisive victory for the army of General PALADINES, who had been
manoeuvring for nearly a fortnight to draw the Germans into a sort
of _cul-de-sac_ formed by the extension of the French lines from
Le Mans to Nogent and Etamps.

Really I ought to do
that....

Nikolai has got his tawny lady working on the farm; she's harnessed to a
neat cart that he has made himself and banded with iron. And now the lady
carts manure. The tiny farm with its few head of cattle doesn't yield too
much of this precious substance, so it is soon spread. Then the lady draws
the plow, and looks as though it were no more than the heavy train of a
ball dress behind her! Nikolai has never heard of such a horse before, and
neither has his wife.

I take a walk down to the newly dug field and look at it from every angle.
Then I take soil in my hand and feel it and nod, exactly as though I knew
something about it. Rich, black soil--sheer perfection.

I walk so far that I can see the gargoyles on Petra's hotel--and suddenly
turn off the path into the woods, to sheltered groves and catkins and
peace. The air is still; spring will soon be here.

And so the days wear on.

I am comfortable and feel very much at home; how I should like to stay
here! I should pay well for my keep, and make myself useful and popular; I
shouldn't harm a fly. But that evening I tell Nikolai that I must think of
moving on; this will not do.... And perhaps he will mention it....

"Can't you stop a while longer?" he says. "But I suppose it isn't the kind
of place--"

"God bless you, Nikolai; it _is_ the kind of place, but--well, it's
spring now, and I always travel in the spring. I should have to be very
low before I gave that up. And besides, I expect you're both pretty tired
of me, at least your wife."

This, too, I hoped he would mention.

Then I packed my knapsack and waited. No--no one came to take the knapsack
out of my hand and forbid me to pack any farther. So perhaps Nikolai
hasn't mentioned it. The man never does open his mouth. So I placed the
knapsack on a chair in the middle of the room, all packed and ready, for
everyone to see that we're leaving. And I waited for the morning of the
next day, and this time the knapsack _was_ observed. No, it wasn't.
So I had to wait till the housewife called us to the midday meal, and tell
her then, pointing to what was in the middle of the room:

"I'm afraid I shall have to be leaving today."

"No! Really? Why do you want to go away?" she said.

"Why? Well, don't you think I should?"

"Well, of course--But you might have stayed on a bit longer; the cows will
be going out to spring pasture now, and we should have had more milk."

That was all we said about it, and then she went back to her work.

Bravo, Fru Ingeborg. You're true-blue. It struck me then, as it had done
already on several occasions, that she had grown very like Josephine at
Tore Peak, both in her way of thinking and her mode of expression. Twelve
years of school had laid no foundations in her young mind, though it had
loosened much that was firm within her. But that did not matter, as long
as she kept a firm hold now.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nikolai is going down to the trading center, and since he will be bringing
back some sacks of flour, he intends to drive. I know very well that I
ought to go with him, because then I could catch the mail packet next day
but one. I explain this to Nikolai and pay my bill. While he is harnessing
the horse, I finish packing my bag.

Oh, these eternal journeys! Hardly am I settled in one place than I am
again unsettled in another--no home, no roots. What are those bells I
hear? Ah, yes--Fru Ingeborg lets the cows out. They are going to pasture
for the first time this spring, so that they shall give more milk.... Here
comes Nikolai to tell me he is ready. Yes, here is the knapsack....

"Nikolai, isn't it a bit early to let the cows out?"

"Yes, but they're getting restless in the cow houses."

"Yesterday I was in the woods and wanted to sit down, but I cannot sit in
the snow. No, I cannot, though I could ten years ago. I must wait till
there is really something to sit on. A rock is good enough, but you can't
sit on a rock for very long in May."

Nikolai looks uneasily at the mare through the window.

"Yes, let's go.... And there were no butterflies, either. You know those
butterflies that have wings exactly like pansies--there weren't any. And
if happiness lives in the forest, I mean if God himself--well, He hasn't
moved out yet; it's too early."

Nikolai does not reply to my nonsense. After all, it is only the
incoherent expression of a vague feeling, a gentle melancholy.

We go outside together.

"Nikolai, I'm not going."

He turns around and looks at me, his eyes smiling good-humoredly.

"You see, Nikolai, I think I have got an idea; I feel exactly as though an
idea had come to me that may turn into a great, red-hot iron. So I mustn't
disturb myself. I'm staying."

"Well, I'm very glad to hear that," says Nikolai. "As long as you like
being here...."

And a quarter of an hour later, I can see Nikolai and the mare trotting
briskly down the road. Fru Ingeborg stands in the yard with the boy on her
arm to watch the gamboling calves.

And here stand I. A fine old specimen, I am!

       *       *       *       *       *

Nikolai returned with my mail; quite a little pile had accumulated in the
past few weeks.

"I thought you're not in the habit of reading your letters," said Fru
Ingeborg banteringly. Nikolai sat listening to us.

"No," I returned. "Just say the word, and I'll burn them unread."

Suddenly she turned pale; she had put her hand with a smile on the
letters, brushing my hand as she did so. I felt a great ardor, a moment's
miraculous blood heat, more than blood heat--only for a moment--then she
withdrew her hand and said:

"Better read them."

She was deeply flushed now.

"I saw him burn his letters once," she explained to Nikolai. Then she
found something to do at the stove, while she asked her husband about his
journey, about the road, whether the mare had behaved well--which she had.


A minor occurrence, of no importance to anyone. Perhaps I should not have
mentioned it.

       *       *       *       *       *

A few days later.

The weather has grown warm, my window is open, my door to the living room
is open, all is still; I stand at the window looking out.

A man entered the courtyard carrying an unshapely burden. I could not see
his face very well, but thought it was Nikolai carrying something, so I
went back to my table to work again.

A little later I heard someone say "Good morning" in the living room.

Fru Ingeborg did not return the greeting. Instead, I heard her ask in
loud, hostile tones:

"What do you want?"

"I've come to pay you a visit."

"My husband isn't in--he's in the field."

"Never mind."

"I do mind," she cried. "Go away!"

I don't know what her face looked like then, but her voice was gray--gray
with tears and indignation. In a moment I was in the living room.

The stranger was Solem. Another meeting with Solem. He was everywhere. Our
eyes met.

"I think you were asked to leave?" I said.

"Take it easy, take it easy," he said, in a kind of half-Norwegian,
half-Swedish. "I trade in hides; I go round to the farms buying up hides.
Have you got any?"

"No!" she cried out. Her voice broke. She was completely distracted, and
suddenly dipped a ladle into a pot that was boiling on the stove: Perhaps
she was on the point of flinging it at him....

At this juncture, Nikolai entered the house.

He was a slow-moving man, but his eyes suddenly quickened as he took in
the situation. Did he know Solem, and had he seen him coming to the farm?
He laughed a little. Unlike the termites and Ecitons, who harbor a host of
weird boarders, the leaf-cutters are able to keep their nest free from
undesirables.

Once, far down in the nest, I came upon three young queens, recently
emerged, slow and stupid, with wings dull and glazed, who crawled
with awkward haste back into darkness.

And again twelve winged females were grouped in one small chamber, restless
and confused. This was the only glimpse I ever had of Atta royalty at
home.

Good fortune was with me, however, on a memorable fifth of May, when
returning from a monkey hunt in high jungle. As I came out into the edge
of a clearing, a low humming attracted my attention. It was ventriloquial,
and my ear refused to trace it. It sounded exactly like a great aerodrome
far in the distance, with a score or more of planes tuning up. I chanced
to see a large bee-like insect rising through the branches, and following
back along its path, I suddenly perceived the rarest of sights--an Atta
nest entrance boiling with the excitement of a flight of winged kings
and queens. So engrossed were the ants that they paid no attention
to me, and I was able to creep up close and kneel within two feet
of the hole.

The main nest was twenty feet away, and this was a special exit made for
the occasion--a triumphal gateway erected far away from the humdrum
leaf traffic.

The two-inch, arched hole led obliquely down into darkness, while
brilliant sunshine illumined the earthen take-off and the surrounding
mass of pink Mazaruni primroses.

Up this corridor was coming, slowly, with dignity, as befitted the occasion,
a pageant of royalty.

The king males were more active, as they were smaller in size than the
females, but they were veritable giants in comparison with the workers.
The queens seemed like beings of another race, with their great bowed thorax
supporting the folded wings, heads correspondingly large, with less jaw
development, but greatly increased keenness of vision. In comparison with
the Minims, these queens were as a human being one hundred feet in
height.

I selected one large queen as she appeared and watched her closely.
Slowly and with great effort she climbed the steep ascent into the blazing
sunlight. Five tiny Minims were clinging to her body and wings,
all scrubbing and cleaning as hard as they could.

She chose a clear space, spread her wings, wide and flat, stood high upon
her six legs and waited.

I fairly shouted at this change, for slight though it was, it worked
magic, and the queen Atta was a queen no more, but a miniature,
straddle-legged aeroplane, pushed into position, and overrun by a
crowd of mechanics, putting the finishing touches, tightening the
wires, oiling every pliable crevice.

A Medium came along, tugged at a leg and the obliging little plane
lifted it for inspection.

For three minutes this kept up, and then the plane became a queen
and moved restlessly.

Without warning, as if some irresponsible mechanic had turned the primed
propellers, the four mighty wings whirred--and four Minims were
hurled head over heels a foot away, snapped from their positions. The sound
of the wings was almost too exact an imitation of the snarl of a starting
plane--the comparison was absurd in its exactness of timbre and
resonance. It was only a test, however, and the moment the queen became
quiet the upset mechanics clambered back. They crawled beneath her, scraped
her feet and antennæ, licked her eyes and jaws, and went over every shred
of wing tissue. Then again she buzzed, this time sending only a single
Minim sprawling. Again she stopped after lifting herself an inch, but
immediately started up, and now rose rather unsteadily, but without
pause, and slowly ascended above the nest and the primroses. Circling
once, she passed through green leaves and glowing balls of fruit, into
the blue sky.

Thus I followed the passing of one queen Atta into the jungle world, as
far as human eyes would permit, and my mind returned to the mote which
I had detected at an equally great height--the queen descending after
her marriage--as isolated as she had started.

We have seen how the little blind roaches occasionally cling to an
emerging queen and so are transplanted to a new nest.

But the queen bears something far more valuable.
I wish now I hadn't
told you--I wish you didn't know; I should have kept it to myself till I
died. Now you just think I'm thoroughly dishonest."

"On the contrary."

"Really? Don't you think that?"

"Quite the contrary. What you've told me is absolutely right, entirely
true and right. And not only that--it's fine."

"God bless you," she said, and began to sob again.

"There now, you mustn't cry. Here comes Nikolai walking up the road as
good and placid as ever."

"Is he? Oh, thank God. You know, I haven't really any fault to find with
him; I was too hasty when I said that. Even if I tried to find something,
I couldn't. Of course he uses expressions sometimes--I mean he says some
words differently, but it was only his sister that put that into my head.
I must go out and meet him now."

She began to look around for something to slip over her shoulders, but it
took her a few minutes because she was still quite shaken. Before she had
found anything, Nikolai trudged into the yard.

"Oh, there you are! You haven't done anything rash, have you?"

Nikolai's features were still a little drawn as he replied:

"No, I just took him over to see his son."

"Has Solem got a son here?" I asked.

Neither of them replied. Nikolai turned to go back to his work, and his
wife went with him across the field.

Suddenly I understood: Sophie's child.

How well I remember that day at Tore Peak, when Schoolmistress Sophie Palm
came in to tell us the latest news about Solem, about the bandage on his
finger, the finger he never had time to get rid of--stout fellow! They
made each other's acquaintance then, and probably met again later in the
town. Solem was everywhere.

The ladies at the Tore Peak resort--well, Solem was no angel, but they did
little to improve him. And so he met this woman who had learned nothing
but to teach....

       *       *       *       *       *

I ought to have understood before this. I don't understand anything any
more.

But something has happened to me now.

At last I'm beginning to suspect that their chief reason for wanting to
keep me here is simply that they need money; my board and rent are to pay
for the mare. That's all it amounts to.

I should have known it long ago, but I am old. Perhaps I may add without
being misunderstood that the brain withers before the heart. You can see
it in all grandparents.

At first I said "Bravo!" to my discovery, "Bravo! Fru Ingeborg," I said,
"you are priceless once again!" But human nature is such that I began to
feel hurt. How much better it would be to pay for the mare once and for
all and depart; I should have been more than pleased to do so. But I
should not have succeeded. Nikolai would have shaken his head as though it
were a fairy tale. Then I began to calculate that in fact there couldn't
be much to pay for the mare now--perhaps nothing, perhaps she was paid
for....

Fru Ingeborg labors and slaves--I'm afraid she works too hard. She seldom
sits down, though her pregnancy is far advanced now and she needs rest.
She makes beds, cooks, sees to the animals, sews, mends, and washes. Often
a lock of gray hair falls down on either side of her face, and she is so
busy that she lets it hang; it's too short to be fastened back with a pin.
But she looks charming and motherly, with her fine skin and her
well-shaped mouth; she and the child together are sheer beauty. Of course
I help to carry wood and water, but I make more work for her just the
same. When I think of that, I grow hot about the ears.

But how could I have imagined that anyone would want to keep me for my own
sake? I should not have had all these years too many then, and these
ardors too few. A good thing I've found it out at last.

In a way the discovery made it easier for me to leave them, and this--time
when I packed my knapsack, I meant it. But at least the child, her boy,
had some love for me, and liked to sit on my arm because I showed him so
much that was strange. It was the child's instinct for the peerless
grandfather.

At about this time, a sister of Fru Ingeborg's came to the farm to help
with the housework. I began to pack then; overcome with grief, I packed.
To spare Nikolai and the mare, I decided to make my way down to the
steamship landing on foot. I shall also arrange to relieve all of us of
the need for farewells and handshakes and _au revoirs_, believe me!

But in spite of my resolution, I could not, after all, avoid taking them
both by the hand and thanking them for their hospitality. He has even
dreamed, on two separate nights, that he has done so, but he woke up both
times in a cold, clammy sort of ooze, and it has naturally shaken
his confidence, and so the words stick in his throat.

And he remembers ANN'S horrible threat of coming for him when she
wants him, and he makes it a point of doing all his out-door business
before dark, and the bare mention of her name will make him start
and glare wildly about him.

And still BELINDA courts him more persistently than ever, and it
is a scene calculated to touch the most rugged nature to watch them
together, she smoothing his hair, and calling him her "Tootsy-pootsy,"
or reading poetry to him, stopping between each verse to cast
languishing glances at him, and he bearing it all with that haggard,
imbecile look peculiar to an over-courted man.

Fru Ingeborg said to me:

"I'm afraid you think that just because my sister's here now--but we've
got another room. And besides, now that it's summer, she could easily
sleep in the loft."

"But, my dear child, I must leave _some_ time--I have work to do,
too, you know."

"Well, of course," said Fru Ingeborg, giving it up.

Nikolai offered to drive me, but did not press me when I thanked him and
refused.

They came to the gate with me, and watched me walk away, the boy sitting
on his mother's arm.

At the bend of the road, I turned round to wave--to the child, of course,
not to anyone else--only to the child. But there was no longer anyone
there.


XXXVIII


I have written this story for you.

Why have I written thus? Because my soul cries out with boredom before
every Christmas, boredom with all the books that are all written the same
way. I had even the intention of writing in dialect, so as to be truly
Norwegian; but when I saw you understood the country's language also, I
gave up writing in dialect because, for one thing, it is becoming
obsolete.

But why have I gathered so many incongruities within a single framework?
My friend, one of the most celebrated literary creations was written
during a plague, _because_ of a plague--this is my answer. And, my
friend, when you have lived for a long time away from the human beings you
know inside and out, then you indulge once more in the iniquity of speech;
your powers have been so little used that your head is filled with a
thousand sermons. But once, some others of a ruder and more barbaric temperament
advanced upon me unawares, and found me unprepared for their coming.

I was dozing quietly, glad to escape for an instant the insistent
screaming of a cicada which seemed to have gone mad in the heat, when
a low rustling caught my ear--a sound of moving leaves without wind; the
voice of a breeze in the midst of breathless heat. There was in it something
sinister and foreboding. I leaned over the edge of my hammock, and saw
coming toward me, in a broad, irregular front, a great army of
ants, battalion after battalion of them flowing like a sea of living
motes over twigs and leaves and stems.

I knew the danger and I half sat up, prepared to roll out and walk to
one side. Then I gaged my supporting strands; tested them until they vibrated
and hummed, and lay back, watching, to see what would come about. I knew
that no creature in the world could stay in the path of this horde and
live. To kill an insect or a great bird would require only a few minutes,
and the death of a jaguar or a tapir would mean only a few more. Against
this attack, claws, teeth, poison-fangs would be idle weapons.

In the van fled a cloud of terrified insects--those gifted with flight
to wing their way far off, while the humbler ones went running
headlong, their legs, four, six, or a hundred, making the swiftest
pace vouchsafed them.

There were foolish folk who climbed up low ferns, achieving the swaying,
topmost fronds only to be trailed by the savage ants and brought down
to instant death.

I should
have written this description long ago, but I had not years enough; only
now am I entering upon them, directly and indirectly. I should have done
it while the country was groping for long periods under the shadow of
superannuated incompetence. Instead I do it now, when I myself am being
accused of a tendency to cast shadows. "Sensationalism," you will say,
"chasing after fame!" My dear, chaste friend, I have fame enough for the
last twenty years of my life, and after that I shall be dead. And you? May
you live long; you deserve it. May you almost survive me--in the flesh.

I have just read what a man on the pinnacle of culture has said:
"Experience shows that when culture spreads, it grows thin and colorless."
Then one must not raise an outcry against the bearers of a new
renaissance. I can no longer herald a renaissance; it is too late now.
Once, when I had the power to do much and the desire to do more,
mediocrity everywhere was too strong. I was the giant with the feet of
clay--the lot of many youths. But now, my small, small friend, look about
you: there has appeared, within even your field of vision, a figure here
and a figure there, a shining crest, lavish with its bounty, geniuses
beneath the open sky--you and I should bid them welcome. I walk in the
evening of life and, trembling, recognize myself in them; they are youth
with jeweled eyes. Yet you begrudge them your recognition; yes, you
begrudge them fame. Because you are nobody.

To you--to the modern spirit of Norway! I have written this during a
plague, and because of the plague. I cannot stop the rot; no, it is
unassailable now, it flourishes under national protection,
tarara-boom-de-ay. But one day no doubt it will stop. Meanwhile I do what
I can to fight it; you do the reverse.

Of course I have shouted in the marketplace; perhaps that is why my voice
is hoarse now, cracked at times. There are worse things. A worse thing
would have been if it had not obeyed me. Is there any danger of that? No,
my friend, not for you; you will live till you die, be assured.

Why have I written to you, of all people? Why do you think? You refused to
be convinced of the truth and integrity of my conclusions; but I shall yet
force you to recognize that I am close to the truth. Not until then shall
I make allowance for the fool in you.