NORA [_smiling_]: It resulted in economy.

GIBSON: Have you made many economies?

NORA: Oh, a great many!

CARTER: Oh, my! Yes!

NORA: Economies! [_Her manner now is indulgent, amused, friendly, almost
pitying._] Mr. Gibson, have you any realization of what you threw away
at that place? Don't be afraid, I'll never bring you the figures. I
wouldn't do such a thing to anybody!

GIBSON: Do you think I was too lavish?

NORA: We couldn't believe it at first. Just what was being thrown away
on advertising, for instance. The bill you paid for the last month you
were there was five thousand dollars!

CARTER: That was the figger! It's certainly a good one on you, Mr.
Gibson.

NORA: We cut that five thousand dollars down to _three hundred_! That
was one item of forty-seven hundred dollars a month saved. Just one
item!

CARTER [_hilariously_]: Quite some item!

NORA [_seriously and gently_]: Five thousand dollars a month to
advertise a piano that sells for only a hundred and eighty-eight
dollars!

CARTER: That's the facts!

NORA: Mr. Gibson, did you really ever have any idea what you were
paying in commissions to agents?

GIBSON: Yes, I did.

NORA: Why, I can't believe it! Did you know that you paid them twenty
per cent. on each piano? Over thirty-seven dollars!

GIBSON: Yes.

NORA: But wasn't it thrown away? I can't understand how you kept the
factory going so long as you did, with such losses. Why, don't you know
it amounts to hundreds of thousands of dollars a year? When we found it
out we couldn't see how you made both ends meet, and we thought there
must have been some mistake, and you'd never realized what advantage
these agents were taking of you.

GIBSON: Yes, I knew what they got.

NORA [_triumphantly_]: We cut those commissions from thirty-seven
dollars--to _twelve_! And that's just one more item among our economies.
Now do you wonder at the success we're making?

GIBSON: And your profits have been--satisfactory?

NORA: The very first month our profits were _four thousand dollars_ more
than the last month you were there!

GIBSON: That's the month you say you cut out four thousand seven
hundred dollars' worth of advertising.

NORA: And the next month we cut down the commissions, and the profits
were _five_ thousand more!

GIBSON: But those were returns under the old commissions.

NORA: But last month, with new economies, we showed a larger profit than
you had!

GIBSON: And this month?

NORA: We shan't know that until the report's read at the meeting
to-morrow. I think it will be the largest profit of all.

CARTER: That bookkeeper's workin' on it to-day. Talked like he was going
to cut us down two or three thousand, mebbe. [_Laughing._] That's the
way he always talks.

NORA: He isn't a good influence.

CARTER: No--too gloomy, too gloomy to suit me!

GIBSON: What about the two other bookkeepers?

CARTER: The committee voted them into the packing department; and they
ain't much good even there. It's a crime!

NORA: They weren't needed. Our bookkeeping is so simplified since you
left!

GIBSON: It all seems to be simplified, Miss Gorodna.

NORA: Yes; and whatever problems come up, they're all settled at our
meetings.

     [_A sound of squabbling is heard upon the street, growing
     louder as the people engaging in it approach along the
     sidewalk._]

CARTER: There's one we got to bring up and do something about at the
meetin' to-morrow.

GIBSON: What is it? [CARTER _goes up to the gate._]

NORA: It's that Mrs. Simpson; she's a great nuisance.

CARTER: Yes, it's her and Simpson and Frankel. The Simpsons moved into a
flat right up in this neighbourhood. Quite some of the comrades live up
round here now.

     [FRANKEL _and_ MRS. SIMPSON _are heard disputing as they
     approach: "Well, what you goin' to do about it!" "I'll show you
     what we're goin' to do about it!" "You can't do nothing!" "You
     wait till to-morrow and see." "I got my rights, ain't I?" and
     so on._]

SIMPSON [_heard remonstrating_]: Now, Mamie, Mamie! Frankel, you
oughtn't to talk to Mamie that way.

     [GIBSON, _interested and amused, goes part way up to the
     hedge._ NORA _is somewhat mortified as the disputants reach the
     gate._ GIBSON _speaks to them._]

GIBSON: How do you do, Simpson! How do you do, Mrs. Simpson! How do you
do, Frankel! Won't you come in and argue here?

MRS. SIMPSON: Wha'd you say, Mr. Gibson?

GIBSON: I said come in; come in!

SIMPSON [_uncertainly_]: Well, I don't know.

GIBSON: Come in! Nobody here but friends of yours. Sit down. I'd like to
hear what the argument was about.

     [MRS. SIMPSON _is a large woman, domineering and noisy, dressed
     somewhat expensively. She is proud of some new furs and a pair
     of quite fancy shoes._ SIMPSON _has a new suit of clothes and a
     gold-headed cane._

     FRANKEL _wears a cheap cutaway suit and is smoking a cigar._]

MRS. SIMPSON: I don't care who hears the argument! Right's right and
wrong's wrong!

FRANKEL: You bet right's right, and so's my rights right!

MRS. SIMPSON: You ain't got any rights.

FRANKEL [_hotly to everybody_]: Do you hear she says I ain't got no
rights at all?

MRS. SIMPSON: You ain't got the rights you claim you got.

FRANKEL: She comes down there and tries to run the whole factory. Ask
any of 'em if she don't. Ask Carter!

MRS. SIMPSON: I own that factory just as much as anybody does.

SIMPSON: Now, Frankel, you be careful what you say to Mamie!

FRANKEL: I got shares in that factory and by rights ought to have as
many votes at the meetin' as I got shares--let alone your talking about
trying to root me out of my profits!

GIBSON: What's this about Frankel having shares?

FRANKEL [_violently_]: You bet your life I got shares! And I'm going to
have my shares of the money at that meetin' to-morrow!

MRS. SIMPSON: You bet your life you ain't!

SIMPSON: You think we're goin' to vote all our profits away to you?

CARTER: Wait a minute! Ain't I the chairman of that--

MRS. SIMPSON: You may be chairman yet--but not long!

FRANKEL [_sharply to_ CARTER]: You just try to rule me out once!

GIBSON: What's it all about?

MRS. SIMPSON: I'll soon enough tell anybody what it's about!

FRANKEL: You couldn't tell nothing straight!

CARTER [_deprecatingly_]: Now, now, this here's just one of our little
side difficulties, you might say. What's the use to git huffy over it,
we're gittin' along so well and all? The trouble is, some o' the men and
their families ain't been used to so much prosperity and money in the
house that way, all of a sudden. Of course some of 'em got to living too
high and run into some debt and everything.

FRANKEL: Well, what business is that of yours? The factory ain't a Home,
is it? And you ain't the Matron, are you?

CARTER: I don't claim such!

FRANKEL: It's my business, ain't it, if I take and live on the cheaps
and put by for a rainy day, and happen to have money when other people
need it from me?

SIMPSON: _That_ much may be your business, but I reckon it was our
business when you come blowin' round the factory, first that you owned
seven shares besides your own; then, a week after, you says seventeen;
then--

GIBSON: Well, how many shares has he got?

SIMPSON: He was claimin' twenty-four yesterday.

MRS. SIMPSON [_violently_]: He's bought two more since last night. Now
he claims twenty-six!

FRANKEL: Yes; and I _own_ twenty-six!

CARTER: That ain't never goin' to do! I don't say it's a condition as
you might say we exactly see how to handle right now, but the way it is,
you certainly got us all disturbed up and hard to git at the rights of
it. You claimin' all them shares--

FRANKEL: Well, my goodness, you git the _work_ fer them shares, don't
you? What you yelpin' about?

CARTER: I don't say we don't git the same amount o' work, but--

FRANKEL: Well, _how_ you git it, that's my lookout, ain't it, so it's
done?

CARTER: But you claim you got a right to draw out twenty-six profits!

FRANKEL: Sure I do when I furnish the labour for twenty-six. Am I
crazy?

CARTER: But that way you're makin' more than any ten men put together in
the whole factory!

FRANKEL: Ain't it just? What you goin' to do about it?

     [_During this speech_ SHOMBERG _has come along the street and
     stands looking over the gate._]

CARTER: Well, so fur, we ain't been able to see how to argue with you.
It don't look right, and yet it's hard to find jest what to say to you.

FRANKEL: You bet it is!

CARTER: 'Course, that's one of the points that's got to be settled at
the meeting to-morrow.

FRANKEL: You bet it'll be settled!

MRS. SIMPSON: If we had another kind of a chairman it'd been settled
long ago, and settled right!

CARTER: Now look here, Mrs. Simpson--

FRANKEL [_passionately_]: I got twenty-six shares, and I earned 'em,
too! [_To_ GIBSON.] Look at the trouble they make me--to git my legal
rights, let alone the rest the trouble I got! [_Fiercely to_ CARTER _and
to_ SIMPSON]: Yes, I had twenty-four shares yesterday and I got
twenty-six to-day! and I might have another by to-night. Don't think
I'm the only one that's got sense enough not to go smearin' his money
all round on cheap limousines and Queen Anne dinin'-room sets at
eighty-nine dollars per! [_Dramatically pointing at_ SHOMBERG]: There's
a man worth four shares right now! He had three and he bought Mitchell's
out last night at Steinwitz's pool room. Ask him whether he thinks I got
a right to my twenty-six profits or not!

SHOMBERG: You bet your life!

MRS. SIMPSON: I guess that Dutchman hasn't got the say-so, has he?

FRANKEL: No. _You_ run the factory now, Mrs. Simpson!

CARTER: Now look here; this ain't very much like comrades, is it, all
this arguin'? Sunday, too!

FRANKEL: Oh, I'm tryin' to be friendly!

CARTER [_to_ GIBSON]: This buyin' of shares and all has kind of
introduced a sort of an undesirable element into the factory, you might
say. That's kind of the bothersome side of it, and it can't be denied we
would have quite a good deal of bothersomeness if it wasn't for our
meeting.

NORA [_to everybody except_ GIBSON]: Don't you all think that these
arguments are pretty foolish when you know that nothing can be settled
except at the governing committee's meeting?

SIMPSON: That's so, Miss Gorodna. What's more, it don't look like as
good comrades as it ought to. I don't want to have no trouble with
Frankel. He might have the rights of it for all I know. Anyways, if he
hasn't I ain't got the brains to make out the case against him, and
anyways, as you say, the meetin' settles all them things.

NORA: Don't you think you and Frankel might shake hands now, like good
comrades?

FRANKEL [_with hostility_]: Sure, I'll shake hands with him!

SIMPSON: Well, I just as soon.

MRS. SIMPSON: Don't you do it, Henry!

SIMPSON: Well, but he's a comrade.

MRS. SIMPSON: Well, you can't help that! You don't have to shake hands
with him.

SIMPSON: Well, consider it done, Frankel. Consider it done!

CARTER: That's right, that's right! We can leave it to the meeting.

SHOMBERG: You bet you can! You goin' my way, Frankel?

     [FRANKEL, _joining him, speaks to_ MRS. SIMPSON.]

FRANKEL: I s'pose you're going to come to the meetin', Mrs. Simpson?

MRS. SIMPSON: Ain't my place where my husband is?

FRANKEL: Well, you don't git no vote!

MRS. SIMPSON: There's goin' to be a motion introduced for the wives _to_
vote.

FRANKEL: Watch it pass! Good-bye, Mr. Gibson!

     [GIBSON _nods._ FRANKEL _goes away with_ SHOMBERG.]

SIMPSON: Good-bye, Mr. Gibson! All this don't amount to much. It'll all
be settled to-morrow.

MRS. SIMPSON: Good-bye, Mr. Gibson! [_And as they go out the gate_]: You
bet your life it'll be settled! If that wall-eyed runt thinks he can
walk over _me_--

CARTER [_looking after them, laughing_]: Well, she's an awful
interfering woman! And she ain't the only one. If they'd all stay home
like my wife things would be smoother, I guess. Still, they're smooth
enough. [_Going_]: If you want to see that, Mr. Gibson, we'll be glad to
have you look in at the meeting. You're always welcome at the factory
and it'd be a treat to you to see how things work out. It's at eleven
o'clock if you'd like to come.

GIBSON: Thanks, Carter.

CARTER: Well, good afternoon, Mr. Gibson and Miss Gorodna. Good evening,
I should say, I reckon.

GIBSON: Good evening, Carter.

     [_The light has grown to be of sunset._ CARTER _goes._]

NORA [_going toward the gate_]: I'm glad to see you looking so well.
Good evening!

GIBSON: Oh, just a minute more.

NORA: Well?

GIBSON: It looks as if that might be a lively meeting to-morrow.

NORA: Is that the old capitalistic sneer?

GIBSON: Indeed it's not! It only seemed to me from what we've just heard
here--

NORA [_bitterly_]: Oh, I suppose all business men's meetings and
arguments, when their interests happen to clash, are angelically sweet
and amiable! Because you see that my comrades are human and have their
human differences--

GIBSON: Nora, don't be angry.

NORA: I'll try not. Of _course_ it isn't all a bed of roses! Of _course_
things don't run like oiled machinery!

GIBSON: But they do run?

NORA: It's magnificent!

GIBSON: Do you want me to come to that meeting to-morrow?

NORA: Yes; I'd like you to see how reasonable people settle their
differences when they have an absolutely equal and common interest.

GIBSON [_in a low voice_]: Aren't you ever tired?

     [_For a moment she has looked weary. She instantly braces up
     and answers with spirit._]

NORA: Tired of living out my ideals?

GIBSON: No; I just mean tired of working. Wouldn't you rather stop and
come here and live in this quiet house?

NORA [_incredulously_]: I?

GIBSON: Couldn't there even be a chance of it, Nora? That you'd marry
me?

NORA [_amazed and indignant_]: A chance that I would--

GIBSON: Well, then, wouldn't you even be willing to leave it to the
meeting to-morrow?

     [_Already in motion she gives him a look of terror and intense
     negation._]

NORA: Oh! [_She runs from the gateway._]


ACT III


     _The scene is the same as the first, the factory office--with a
     difference. It is now littered and disorderly. Files have been
     taken from the cases and left heaped upon the large table and
     upon chairs. Piles of mail are on the desk and upon the table.
     The safe is open, showing papers in disorder and hanging from
     the compartments. Hanging upon the walls, variously, are suits
     of old overalls and men's coats and, hats. The chairs stand
     irregularly about the large table; a couple of old soft hats
     are on the water filter. The former posters have been replaced
     by two new ones. One shows a brawny workman with whiskers,
     paper cap, and large sledge hammer leaning upon an upright
     piano. Rubrics: "The Freedom and Fraternity Coöperative
     Upright." "The Piano You Ought to Support." The other poster
     shows a workman with a banner upon which is printed: "No
     Capital! The Freedom and Fraternity Coöperative Upright The
     Only Piano Produced by Toilers Not Ground by Capital. Buy One
     to Help the Cause!"_

     NORA _is busily engaged at_ GIBSON'S _desk. Her hat and jacket
     hang on the wall._

     CARTER _enters, smoking a pipe; he wears overalls and jumper.
     He carries a heavy roll of typewritten sheets. Tosses this upon
     the table, glances at_ NORA, _who does not notice him, divests
     himself of overalls and jumper, and puts on the black frock
     coat which he wore in Act II. He looks at his watch and at the
     clock on the wall._

CARTER [_straightening out his coat_]: I thought it might look better to
get on my Sunday clothes for the meeting, as you might say, Miss
Gorodna. Being as I'm chairman it might look more dignified; kind o'
help give a kind of authority, maybe.

NORA [_absently, not looking up_]: Yes.

CARTER [_looking at his watch and at the clock again_]: It ought to be
wound up for meetings. [_He steps upon a chair; moves the hands of
clock._] There, doggone it, the key's lost! I believe Mrs. Simpson took
that key for their own clock. [_He goes to the table; sits, unrolls the
typewritten sheets, puts on his spectacles, and studies the sheets in a
kind of misery, roughing his hair badly and making sounds of moaning._]
Miss Gorodna, can you make this figure out here for me? Does that mean
profits--or what?

NORA: Oh, no; that's only an amount carried over.

CARTER: They's so many little puzzlin' things in this bookkeeper's
report. I don't believe he understands it himself. I don't see how he
expects me to read that to the meeting. Some parts I can't make head or
tail of. Others it looks like he's got the words jest changed round.

NORA: Oh, we'll work it all out at the meeting, Mr. Carter!

CARTER: My, we got a lot to work out at this meeting.

NORA: We'll do it, comrade!

CARTER [_cheering up_]: Sure! Sure we will! It's wonderful what a
meeting does; I'm always forgettin' all we got to do is vote and then
the trouble's over.

     [_Instantly upon this a loud squabbling and women's voices are
     heard outside, in the factory._]

NORA [_troubled_]: I was afraid this would happen. Of course after Mrs.
Simpson came other wives were bound to.

CARTER [_uneasily moving toward the door to the street_]: Well, I guess
I better--

     [_The door into the factory is flung open by_ MRS. SIMPSON,
     _in a state of fury. Another woman's voice is heard for a
     moment, shouting: "Old Cat! Old She-Cat! Wants to be a
     Tom-Cat!"_]

MRS. SIMPSON: See here, Carter, if you still pretend to be chairman you
come out here and keep order!

CARTER: Now, Mrs. Simpson, you better go on home!

MRS. SIMPSON [_raging_]: _Me!_ My place is right here, but I'm not going
to stand this Commiskey woman's insults! She come down here this morning
with her husband and started right in to _run_ this factory. My heavens!
Ain't she got five children at home? As long as you still pretend to be
chairman I demand you come out and tell this woman to go about her
business.

SHREWISH VOICE: It _is_ my business!

MRS. SIMPSON: I'll show you! I was here first; everything was going all
right. Carter, are you going to come out here and do your duty like I
said?

CARTER [_attempting sternness and failing_]: You shut that door! I got
to get this report in order before the meeting. I'm not comin'.

MRS. SIMPSON: Then I won't be responsible for what happens! She ain't
the only one. Mrs. Shomberg is out here messin' things up, too. If you
won't do your duty there'll be direct action took here! [_She goes out
violently._]

CARTER: That's got to come up in meeting. It certainly has. These here
wives! For example, my wife's an awful quiet woman, but you s'pose she's
goin' to stand it when she hears about all these others? I'd like to
keep her at home.

NORA: I just wonder--

CARTER: What was you wondering, Miss Gorodna?

NORA: Well, if that's something the meeting can settle?

CARTER [_doggedly_]: Well, it's got to vote on it.

NORA: We did vote on Mrs. Simpson last meeting.

CARTER: Well, we got to vote on her and all the rest of 'em this time.

NORA: It didn't seem to settle Mrs. Simpson, did it?

CARTER: Well, it hadn't got so bad then. Now it's got to be settled! We
got to git everything fixed up now.

     [_A frightful dispute is heard in numerous male voices; some
     speaking Italian, some Yiddish, and some broken English. This
     grows louder as_ FRANKEL _rushes in, throwing the door shut
     behind him and leaning against it, wiping his forehead._]

FRANKEL: Life ain't worth livin'! Life ain't worth livin'!

CARTER: Serves you right, Frankel!

     [_At the filter_ FRANKEL _pours water from the glass upon a
     dirty handkerchief and passes the handkerchief over his
     forehead._]

FRANKEL: I got to git some peace! I got to collect myself.

CARTER: That shows you ain't got no rights like you claimed. You can't
control your labour element.

FRANKEL [_bitterly_]: I'll control 'em all right! I'll show 'em who's
their master!

     [_A man's head with shaggy hair and ragged whiskers is thrust
     in at the factory door. This is_ POLENSKI.]

POLENSKI [_ferociously_]: Are you goin' to come out here like a man?

FRANKEL: You _bet_ I'm comin' out there, Polenski! I'll show you who's
the man here! You Hunnyacks try to browbeat me!

     [_As he goes out, babbling fiercely, the howls of a Roman mob
     are heard greeting him._]

CARTER: I don't feel no sympathy with him.

NORA: No; I should think not!

     [_A more distant outbreak of the mob is heard, brief but
     fierce, and just a moment before it ceases_ MIFFLIN _enters,
     beaming. He is dressed as usual, with his umbrella and the same
     old magazines and newspapers under his arm._]

MIFFLIN: Everything is lovely! How do you do, Miss Gorodna! Carter, old
fellow! It's a great morning, a great morning! Mr. Gibson drove me down
in his car. It's wonderful to feel the inspiration it's going to be for
an ex-capitalist to see this place and its harmony. My phrase for it is
"harmonized industry." It will mark an epoch for him.

     [GIBSON _comes in._ MIFFLIN _greets him._]

MIFFLIN: Ah, Mr. Gibson! You'll see a difference! You'll see a
difference!

GIBSON: Yes, I do. Good morning, Miss Gorodna!

NORA [_just barely looking round_]: Good morning, Mr. Gibson.

MIFFLIN: I was just saying what an inspiration it's going to be for you
to see what we're doing down here. [_Pats_ CARTER'S _shoulder._] These
noble fellows are teaching us intellectuals a lesson. I keep going among
them; what they're doing here keeps flowing into me. You'll get it, Mr.
Gibson. You'll get it, too!

     [_Beamingly he goes out into the factory._]

CARTER [_cordially_]: Take a chair, Mr. Gibson. Make yourself right at
home!

GIBSON: Thanks!

     [_He makes a grave tour of inspection of the place, his
     expression noncommittal; goes about casually without making a
     point of it; he writes his initials in the dust on a filing
     case. He turns and looks at_ NORA _thoughtfully; she has not
     seemed to notice him._]

Do you think I will, Miss Gorodna?

NORA [_not looking up_]: Do I think you will what?

GIBSON: That I'll get what Mifflin meant? That it will be an inspiration
to me to see this meeting?

NORA: I don't know what will be an inspiration to you.

GIBSON: I know one thing that is--a brave woman!

     [_The only sign she gives is that her head bends over her work
     just a little more._]

Carter, do you think this meeting is going to be an inspiration to me?

CARTER: Well, Mr. Gibson, since the time you give up our rights to us,
as Mr. Mifflin says, we're an inspiration to the whole world. All the
time! Yes, sir; and we _would_ be, too, if we could jest git these
dog-goned inequalities straightened out. We got this Frankel trouble on
our hands, and them wives, and one thing and another, though they ain't
botherin' me so much as my own rights. But they're goin' to git brought
up in the meeting. You'll see!

GIBSON: Is the safe usually kept open?

CARTER [_heartily_]: Why, yes, sir; open to each and all alike.

GIBSON: Oh, yes, of course! Seems to be some business mail left over
here.

CARTER: Oh, yes. But you'll find every one of 'em's been opened; we
never miss opening a letter. You see they's checks in some of 'em.

GIBSON: I see. Then everything is running right along, is it, Carter?

CARTER: Oh, sure! Right along, right along!

     [_The uproar breaks out again._ FRANKEL _bursts in, wiping his
     forehead as before. He hurries to the water filter for more
     water._]

FRANKEL: By golly! The bloodsuckers! They want my life! They don't get
it! Hello, Mr. Gibson! Well, I am pleased to see you! Say, Mr. Gibson,
lemme say something to you. Look here a minute. [_He draws_ GIBSON
_aside._]

GIBSON: What is it, Frankel?

FRANKEL [_hastily, in a low voice_]: Mr. Gibson, keep it under your hat,
but I got a pretty good interest in this factory right now. What date
I'm goin' to own it I won't say. But what I want to put up to you: How
much would you ask me to manage it for me?

GIBSON: What?

FRANKEL: I wouldn't be no piker; when it comes to your salary you could
pretty near set it yourself.

GIBSON: I'm afraid I've already had an offer that would keep me from
accepting, Frankel.

FRANKEL: When the time comes I'll git a manager somewhere; no place like
this can't run itself; I seen that much.

GIBSON: Even if I didn't have an offer, Frankel, I doubt if I'd accept
yours. You know I used to have some little trouble here.

FRANKEL: You got my sympathy now! I got troubles myself here. [_Hastily
drinks another glass of water._] Well, where's that meeting? They're
late, ain't they?

CARTER: If they are it's your fault. Them wops of yours won't hardly let
a body git by out yonder.

     [SALVATORE _and_ SHOMBERG _come in from the factory_, SALVATORE
     _pausing in the doorway to shout in the direction of an audible
     disturbance in the distance._]

SALVATORE: Oh, shut up; you'll git your pay!

[_Following_ SALVATORE _come_ SIMPSON _and his wife and_ RILEY. _They
all speak rather casually but not uncordially to_ GIBSON. MIFFLIN _is
with them, his hand on_ SIMPSON'S _shoulder. The outbreak outside
subsides in favour of a speech of extreme violence in a foreign
language. Italian, Yiddish, or whatever it is, it seems most passionate,
and by a good orator. It continues to be heard as the members of the
committee take their seats at the big table._ MIFFLIN _beams and nods
at_ GIBSON; _and takes his seat with the committee._]

SHOMBERG [_hotly, to_ MRS. SIMPSON]: Here, you ain't a member of this
committee! Git her chair away from her there, Salvatore! She's got no
right here!

MRS. SIMPSON: Oh, I haven't?

SHOMBERG: Already twice this morning I got hell from my own wife the way
this woman treats her tryin' to chase her out the factory. You think
you're on this committee?

MRS. SIMPSON [_taking a chair triumphantly_]: My husband is. I was here
last time, and I'm goin' to keep on.

CARTER [_referring to the speech in the factory_]: My goodness! We can't
do no work.

RILEY: Frankel, that's your business to shut 'em up.

FRANKEL: Talkin' ain't doin' no harm. Let 'em talk.

RILEY: Yes, I will! [_Goes to the door, and roars_]: Cut that out! I
mean business! [_Shuts the door and returns angrily to his seat._]

CARTER [_rapping on the table with a ruler_]: The meeting will now come
to order! Minutes of the last meeting will now be read by the secretary.

MIFFLIN [_to_ GIBSON, _beaming_]: You see?

NORA [_rising, minute book in hand_]: The meeting was called to order by
Chairman Carter, Monday, the--

SALVATORE: Aw, say!

FRANKEL: I object!

SIMPSON: What's the use readin' all that? It's only about what we done
at the last meeting.

SALVATORE: We know that ourselves, don't we?

SHOMBERG: What'd be the use? What'd be the use?

RILEY: All we done was divide up the money.

SALVATORE: Cut it out, cut it out! Let's get to that!

CARTER: All right, then. I move--

MRS. SIMPSON [_shrilly_]: You can't move. The chairman can't move.