Produced by David Garcia, Stacy Brown and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Kentuckiana Digital Library)


[Illustration]


An Arkansas Planter

BY

OPIE READ,


    AUTHOR OF

    "A Yankee from the West,"
    "The Waters of Caney Fork,"
    "Mrs. Annie Green,"
    "Up Terrapin River."


    CHICAGO AND NEW YORK:
    RAND, McNALLY & COMPANY,
    PUBLISHERS.


AN ARKANSAS PLANTER.


CHAPTER I.


Lying along the Arkansas River, a few miles below Little Rock, there is
a broad strip of country that was once the domain of a lordly race of
men. They were not lordly in the sense of conquest; no rusting armor
hung upon their walls; no ancient blood-stains blotched their
stairways--there were no skeletons in dungeons deep beneath the banquet
hall. But in their own opinion they were just as great as if they had
possessed these gracious marks of medieval distinction. Their country
was comparatively new, but their fathers came mostly from Virginia and
their whisky came wholly from Kentucky. Their cotton brought a high
price in the Liverpool market, their daughters were celebrated for
beauty, and their sons could hold their own with the poker players that
traveled up and down the Mississippi River. The slave trade had been
abolished, and, therefore, what remained of slavery was right; and in
proof of it the pulpit contributed its argument. Negro preachers with
wives scattered throughout the community urged their fellow bondsmen to
drop upon their knees and thank God for the privilege of following a
mule in a Christian land. The merciless work of driving the negroes to
their tasks was performed by men from the North. Many a son of New
England, who, with emotion, had listened to Phillips and to Garrison,
had afterward hired his harsh energies to the slave owner. And it was
this hard driving that taught the negro vaguely to despise the
abolitionist. But as a class the slaves were not unhappy. They were
ignorant, but the happiest song is sometimes sung by ignorance. They
believed the Bible as read to them by the preachers, and the Bible told
them that God had made them slaves; so, at evening, they twanged rude
strings and danced the "buck" under the boughs of the cottonwood tree.

On the vine-shaded veranda the typical old planter was wont to sit,
looking up and down the road, watching for a friend or a stranger--any
one worthy to drink a gentleman's liquor, sir. His library was stocked
with romances. He knew English history as handed down to him by the
sentimentalist. He hated the name of king, but revered an aristocracy.
No business was transacted under his roof; the affairs of his estate
were administered in a small office, situated at the corner of the yard.
His wife and daughters, arrayed in imported finery, drove about in a
carriage. New Orleans was his social center, and he had been known to
pay as much as a thousand dollars for a family ticket to a ball at the
St. Charles hotel. His hospitality was known everywhere. He was slow to
anger, except when his honor was touched upon, and then he demanded an
apology or forced a fight. He was humorous, and yet the consciousness of
his own dignity often restrained his enjoyment of the ludicrous. When
the cotton was in bloom his possessions were beautiful. On a knoll he
could stand and imagine that the world was a sea of purple.

That was the Arkansas planter years ago, before the great sentimental
storm swept down upon him, before an evening's tea-table talk in
Massachusetts became a tornado of iron in Virginia. When ragged and
heart-sore he returned from the army, from as brave a fight as man ever
engaged in, he sat down to dream over his vanished greatness. But his
dream was short. He went to work, not to re-establish his former
condition of ease--for that hope was beyond him--but to make a living
for his family.

On a knoll overlooking the Arkansas River stood the Cranceford
homestead. The site was settled in 1832, by Captain Luke Cranceford, who
had distinguished himself in an Indian war. And here, not long
afterward, was born John Cranceford, who years later won applause as
commander of one of the most stubborn batteries of the Confederate
Army. The house was originally built of cypress logs, but as time passed
additions of boards and brick were made, resulting in a formless but
comfortable habitation, with broad passage ways and odd lolling places
set to entrap cool breezes. The plantation comprised about one thousand
acres. The land for the most part was level, but here and there a hill
arose, like a sudden jolt. From right to left the tract was divided by a
bayou, slow and dark. The land was so valuable that most of it had been
cleared years ago, but in the wooded stretches the timber was thick, and
in places the tops of the trees were laced together with wild grape
vines. Far away was a range of pine-covered hills, blue cones in the
distance. And here lived the poorer class of people, farmers who could
not hope to look to the production of cotton, but who for a mere
existence raised thin hogs and nubbins of corn. In the lowlands the
plantations were so large and the residences so far apart that the
country would have appeared thinly settled but for the negro quarters
here and there, log villages along the bayous.

In this neighborhood Major John Cranceford was the most prominent
figure. The county was named in honor of his family. He was called a
progressive man. He accepted the yoke of reconstruction and wore it with
a laugh, until it pinched, and then he said nothing, except to tell his
neighbors that a better time was coming. And it came. The years passed,
and a man who had been prominent in the Confederate council became
Attorney-General of the American Nation, and men who had led desperate
charges against the Federal forces made speeches in the old capitol at
Washington. And thus the world was taught a lesson of forgiveness--of
the true greatness of man.

In New Orleans the Major was known as a character, and his nerve was not
merely a matter of conjecture. Courage is supposed to hold a solemn
aspect, but the Major was the embodiment of heartiness. His laugh was
catching; even the negroes had it, slow, loud and long. Sometimes at
morning when a change of season had influenced him, he would slowly
stride up and down the porch, seeming to shake with joviality as he
walked. Years ago he had served as captain of a large steamboat, and
this at times gave him an air of bluff authority. He was a successful
river man, and was therefore noted for the vigor and newness of his
profanity. His wife was deeply religious, and year after year she
besought him to join the church, pleaded with him at evening when the
two children were kissed good night--and at last he stood the rector's
cross-examination and had his name placed upon the register. It was a
hard struggle, but he weeded out his oaths until but one was left--a
bold "by the blood." He said that he would part even with this safety
valve but that it would require time; and it did. The Major believed in
the gradual moral improvement of mankind, but he swore that the world
intellectually was going to the devil. And for this conviction he had a
graded proof. "Listen to me a minute," he was wont to say. "I'll make it
clear to you. My grandfather was graduated with great honors from
Harvard, my father was graduated with honor, I got through all right,
but my son Tom failed."


CHAPTER II.


One hot afternoon the Major sat in his library. The doors were open and
a cool breeze, making the circuitous route of the passage ways, swept
through the room, bulging a newspaper which he held opened out in front
of him. He was scanning the headlines to catch the impulsive moods of
the world. The parlor was not far away, down the hall, and voices
reached him. And then there came the distressing hack, hack, of a hollow
cough. He put down the newspaper, got up, and slowly strode about the
room, not shaking with joviality as he walked. In the parlor the voices
were hushed, there was a long silence, and then came the hollow cough.
He sat down and again took up the newspaper, but the cough, hack, hack,
smote him like the recurrence of a distressing thought, and he crumpled
the paper and threw it upon the floor. Out in the yard a negro woman was
singing; far down the stream a steamboat whistled. And again came the
hollow cough. There was another long silence, and then he heard light
footsteps in the hall. A young woman halted at the door and stood
looking at him. Her face was pale and appeared thin, so eager was her
expression. She was slight and nervous.

"Well," he said. She smiled at him and said, "Well." Then she slowly
entered the room, and with a sigh took a seat near him. The cough from
the parlor was more distressful, and she looked at him, and in her eyes
was a beseeching sadness.

"Louise."

"Yes, sir."

"What did I tell you?"

"I don't know, sir."

"Don't say that, for you do know."

"You've told me so many things--"

"Yes, I know. But what did I tell you about Carl Pennington?"

"I don't know, sir."

"Yes you do. I told you that I didn't want him to come here. Didn't I?"

"Yes, sir."

"Then why is he here?"

"I met him and invited him to come."

"Ah, ha. But I don't want him here; don't want you to see him."

She sat looking at him as if she would study every line of his face. He
shoved his hands deep into his pockets and looked down. The cough came
again, and he looked at the girl. "You know the reason I don't want you
to see him. Don't you?"

"Yes, sir, and I know the reason why I do want to see him."

"The devil--pardon me," he quickly added, withdrawing his hands from his
pockets and bowing to her. She slightly inclined her head and smiled
sadly. He looked hard at her, striving to read her thoughts; and she was
so frail, her face was so thin and her eyes so wistful that she smote
him with pity. He reached over and took one of her hands, and
affectionately she gave him the other one. She tried to laugh. The cough
came again, and she took her hands away. He reached for them, but she
put them behind her. "No, not until I have told you," she said, and he
saw her lip tremble. "He was afraid to come in here to see you," she
went on, speaking with timid slowness. "He is so weak and sick that he
can't stand to be scolded, so I have come to--" She hesitated. He shoved
himself back and looked hard at her, and his eyebrows stuck out
fiercely.

"To ask me what?" His voice was dry and rasping. "What can you ask me?
To let him come here to see you? No, daughter. I can't permit that. And
I don't intend to be cruel when I say this. I am sorry for him, God
knows I deeply sympathize with him, but he must not hope to--"

"I was not going to ask you to let him come," she broke in. "I am going
to ask you to let me go--go with him."

"By the blood!" the Major exclaimed, jumping to his feet. "What do you
mean? Marry him?"

"Yes, sir," she quietly answered. He looked at her, frowning, his face
puffed, his brows jagged. And then appearing to master himself he sat
down and strove to take her hand, but she held it behind her. "My
daughter, I want to talk to you, not in anger, but with common sense. It
actually horrifies me to think of your marriage--I can't do it, that's
all. Why, the poor fellow can't live three months; he is dead on his
feet now. Listen at that cough. Louise, how can you think of marrying
him? Haven't you any judgment at all? Is it possible that you have
lost--but I won't scold you; I must reason with you. There is time
enough for you to marry, and the sympathetic fancy that you have for
that poor fellow will soon pass away. It must. You've got plenty of
chances. Jim Taylor--"

"Why do you speak of him, father?"

"I speak of him because he loves you--because he is as fine a young
fellow as walks the face of the earth."

"But, father, he is so big and strong that he doesn't need any one to
love him."

At this the Major appeared not to know whether to laugh or to frown.
But he did neither; he sat for a time with his hands on his knees,
looking wonderingly, almost stupidly at her; and then he said:
"Nonsense. Where did you pick up that preposterous idea? So strong that
he doesn't need love! Why, strength demands love, and to a big man the
love of a little woman--" She drew back from him as he leaned toward her
and he did not complete the sentence. Her impatience made him frown.
"Won't you let me reason with you?" he asked. "Won't you help me to
suppress all appearance of displeasure?"

"It is of no use," she replied.

"What is of no use? Reason?"

"Argument."

"What! Do you mean--"

"I mean that I am going to marry him."

In her eyes there was no appeal, no pleading, for the look that she gave
him was hard and determined. Harsh words flew to the Major's mind, and
he shook with the repression of them; but he was silent. He shoved his
hands into his pockets and she heard his keys rattling. He arose with a
deep sigh, and now, with his hands behind him, walked up and down the
room. Suddenly he faced about and stood looking down upon her, at the
rose in her hair.

"Louise, one night on a steamboat there was a rollicking dance. It was a
moonlight excursion. There was a splash and a cry that a woman had
fallen overboard. I leaped into the river, grasped her, held her head
above the stream, fighting the current. A boat was put out and we were
taken on board, and then by the light of a lantern I found that I had
saved the life of my own daughter. So, upon you, I have more than a
father's claim--the claim of gallantry, and this you cannot disregard,
and upon it I base my plea."

She looked up straight at him; her lips were half open, but she said
nothing.

"You don't seem to understand," he added, seeming to stiffen his
shoulders in resentment at the calmness with which she regarded him. "I
tell you that I waive the authority of a father and appeal to your
gratitude; I remind you that I saved your life--leaped into the cold
water and seized you, not knowing whose life I was striving to save at
the risk of losing my own. Isn't that worth some sort of return? Isn't
it worth even the sacrifice of a whim? Louise, don't look at me that
way. Is it possible that you don't grasp--" He hesitated and turned his
face toward the parlor whence came again the cough, hollow and
distressing. The sound died away, echoing down the hall, and a hen
clucked on the porch and a passage door slammed.

"Louise," he said, looking at her.

"Yes, sir."

"Do you catch--"

"I catch everything, father. It was noble of you to jump into the river
when you didn't know but that you might be drowned, and recognizing that
you risked your life, and feeling a deep gratitude, it is hard to repay
you with disobedience. Wait a moment, please. You must listen to me. It
is hard to repay you with disobedience, but it cannot be helped. You say
that Mr. Pennington is dying and I know that you speak the truth. He
knows that he is dying, and he appeals to me not to let him die
alone--not alone in words," she quickly added, "but with something
stronger than words, his helplessness, his despair. Other people have
appeared to shun him because he is dying, but--"

"Hold on," he broke in. "I deny that. No one has shunned him because he
is dying. Everybody is sorry for him, and you know that I would do
anything for him."

"Would you? Then let him die under this roof as my husband. Oh, look how
poor and thin he is, so helpless, and dying day by day, with no
relatives near him, with nothing in prospect but long nights of
suffering. Please don't tell me that I shan't take care of him, for I
feel that it is the strongest duty that will ever come to me. Listen how
he coughs. Doesn't it appeal to you? How can you refuse--how can you
remind me of the gratitude I owe you?"

Tears were streaming down her face. He bent over her, placed his hands
upon her cheeks and kissed her, but instantly he drew back with his
resentful stiffening of the shoulders.

"Louise, it can't be. No argument and no appeal can bring it about. It
makes me shudder to think of it. Really I can't understand it. The
situation to me is most unnatural. But I won't be harsh with you. But I
must say that I don't know where you get your stubbornness. No, I won't
be harsh. Let me tell you what I will agree to do. He may come to this
house and stay here until--may stay here and the best of care shall be
taken of him, and you may nurse him, but you must not bear his name.
Will you agree to this?"

She shook her head. She had wiped away her tears and her eyes were
strong and determined. "After conceding so much I don't see why you
should refuse the vital point," she said.

"I can tell you why, and I am afraid that I must."

"Don't be afraid; simply tell me."

"But, daughter, it would seem cruel."

"Not if I demand it."

"Then you do demand it? Well, you shall know. His father served a term
in the Louisiana penitentiary for forgery. And now you may ask why I
ever let him come into this house. I will tell you. He had been teaching
school here some time and I said nothing. One day during a rainstorm he
stopped at the gate. He was sick and I invited him to come in. After
that I could not find enough firmness to tell him not to come, he was so
pale and weak. I see now that it was a false sympathy. Do you understand
me? His father was a convict."

"Yes, I understand. He told me."

"By the blood on the Cross! Do you mean to say--Louise," he broke off,
gazing upon her, "your mind is unsettled. Yes, you are crazy, and, of
course, all your self-respect is gone. You needn't say a word, you are
crazy. You are--I don't know what you are, but I know what I am, and
now, after the uselessness of my appeal to your gratitude, I will assert
the authority of a father. You shall not marry him."

"And would you kill a dying man?" she quietly asked.

The question jolted him, and he shouted out: "What do you mean by such
nonsense? You know I wouldn't."

"Then I will marry him."

For a moment the Major's anger choked him. With many a dry rasp he
strove to speak, and just as he had made smoother a channel for his
words, he heard the hollow cough drawing nearer. He motioned toward a
door that opened in an opposite direction, and the girl, after
hesitating a moment, quickly stepped out upon a veranda that overlooked
the river. The Major turned his eyes toward the other door, and there
Pennington stood with a handkerchief tightly pressed to his mouth. For a
time they were silent, one strong and severe, the other tremulous and
almost spectral in the softened light.

"There is a chair, sir," said the Major, pointing.

"I thank you, sir; I don't care to sit down. I--I am very sorry that you
are compelled to look upon me as--as you do, sir. And it is all my
fault, I assure you, and I can't defend myself."

He dropped his handkerchief and looked down as if he were afraid to
stoop to pick it up. The Major stepped forward, caught up the
handkerchief, handed it to him and stepped back.

"Thank you, sir," Pennington said, bowing, and then, after a short
pause, he added: "I don't know what to say in explanation of--of myself.
But I should think, sir, that the strength of a man's love is a
sufficient defense of any weakness he may possess--I mean a sufficient
defense of any indiscretion that his love has led him to commit. This
situation stole upon me, and I was scarcely aware of its coming until it
was here. I didn't know how serious--" He coughed his words, and when he
became calmer, repeated his plea that love ought to excuse any weakness
in man. "Your daughter is an angel of mercy," he said. "When I found
myself dying as young as I was and as hopeful as I had been my soul
filled up with a bitter resentment against nature and God, but she drew
out the bitterness and instilled a sweetness and a prayer. And now to
take her from me would be to snatch away the prospect of that peaceful
life that lies beyond the grave. Sir, I heard you tell her that she was
crazy. If so, then may God bless all such insanity."

He pressed the handkerchief to his mouth, racking, struggling; and when
the convulsive agony had passed he smiled, and there in the shadow by
the door the light that crossed his face was ghastly, like a dim smear
of phosphorus. And now the Major's shoulders were not stiffened with
resentment; they were drooping with a pity that he could not conceal,
but his face was hard set, the expression of the mercy of one man for
another, but also the determination to protect a daughter and the good
name of an honored household.

"Mr. Pennington, I was never so sorry for any human being as I am for
you at this moment, but, sir, the real blessings of this life come
through justice and not through impulsive mercy. In thoughtless sympathy
a great wrong may lie, and out of a marriage with disease may arise a
generation of misery. We are largely responsible for the ailments of
those who are to follow us. The wise man looks to the future; the weak
man hugs the present. You say that my daughter is an angel of mercy. She
has ever been a sort of sister of charity. I confess that I have never
been able wholly to understand her. At times she has even puzzled her
mother, and a daughter is odd, indeed, when a mother cannot comprehend
her. I am striving to be gentle with you, but I must tell you that you
cannot marry her. I don't want to tell you to go, and yet it is better
that this interview should come to a close."

He bowed to Pennington and turned toward the veranda that overlooked the
river, but a supplicating voice called him back. "I wish to say," said
the consumptive, "that from your point of view you are right. But that
does not alter my position. You speak of the misery that arises from a
marriage with disease. That was very well put, but let me say, sir, that
I believe that I am growing stronger. Sometimes I have thought that I
had consumption, but in my saner moments I know that I have not. I can
see an improvement from day to day. Several days ago I couldn't help
coughing, but now at times I can suppress it. I am growing stronger."

"Sir," exclaimed the Major, "if you were as strong as a lion you should
not marry her. Good day."


CHAPTER III.


Slowly and heavily the Major walked out upon the veranda. He stood upon
the steps leading down into the yard, and he saw Louise afar off
standing upon the river's yellow edge. She had thrown her hat upon the
sand, and she stood with her hands clasped upon her brown head. A wind
blew down the stream, and the water lapped at her feet. The Major looked
back into the library, at the door wherein Pennington had stood, and
sighed with relief upon finding that he was gone. He looked back toward
the river. The girl was walking along the shore, meditatively swinging
her hat. He stepped to the corner of the house, and, gazing down the
road, saw Pennington on a horse, now sitting straight, now bending low
over the horn of the saddle. The old gentleman had a habit of making a
sideward motion with his hand as if he would put all unpleasant thoughts
behind him, and now he made the motion not only once, but many times.
And it seemed that his thoughts would not obey him, for he became more
imperative in his pantomimic demand.

At one corner of the large yard, where the smooth ground broke off into
a steep slope to the river, there stood a small office built of brick.
It was the Major's executive chamber, and thither he directed his steps.
Inside this place his laugh was never heard; at the door his smile
always faded. In this commercial sanctuary were enforced the exactions
that made the plantation thrive. Outside, in the yard, in the "big
house," elsewhere under the sky, a plea of distress might moisten his
eyes and soften his heart to his own financial disadvantage, but under
the moss-grown shingles of the office all was business, hard,
uncompromising. It was told in the neighborhood that once, in this
inquisition of affairs, he demanded the last cent possessed by a widowed
woman, but that, while she was on her way home, he overtook her,
graciously returned the money and magnanimously tore to pieces a
mortgage that he held against her small estate.

Just as he entered the office there came across the yard a loud and
impatient voice. "Here, Bill, confound you, come and take this horse.
Don't you hear me, you idiot? You infernal niggers are getting to be so
no-account that the last one of you ought to be driven off the place.
Trot, confound you. Here, take this horse to the stable and feed him.
Where is the Major? In the office? The devil he is."

Toward the office slowly strode old Gideon Batts, fanning himself with
his white slouch hat. He was short, fat, and bald; he was bowlegged
with a comical squat; his eyes stuck out like the eyes of a swamp frog;
his nose was enormous, shapeless, and red. To the Major's family he
traced the dimmest line of kinship. During twenty years he had operated
a small plantation that belonged to the Major, and he was always at
least six years behind with his rent. He had married the widow Martin,
and afterward swore that he had been disgracefully deceived by her, that
he had expected much but had found her moneyless; and after this he had
but small faith in woman. His wife died and he went into contented
mourning, and out of gratitude to his satisfied melancholy, swore that
he would pay his rent, but failed. Upon the Major he held a strong hold,
and this was a puzzle to the neighbors. Their characters stood at
fantastic and whimsical variance; one never in debt, the other never out
of debt; one clamped by honor, the other feeling not its restraining
pinch. But together they would ride abroad, laughing along the road. To
Mrs. Cranceford old Gid was a pest. With the shrewd digs of a woman, the
blood-letting side stabs of her sex, she had often shown her disapproval
of the strong favor in which the Major held him; she vowed that her
husband had gathered many an oath from Gid's swollen store of execration
(when, in truth, Gid had been an apt pupil under the Major), and she
had hoped that the Major's attachment to the church would of necessity
free him from the humiliating association with the old sinner, but it
did not, for they continued to ride abroad, laughing along the road.

Like a skittish horse old Gid shied at the office door. Once he had
crossed that threshold and it had cost him a crop of cotton.

"How are you, John?" was Gid's salutation as he edged off, still fanning
himself.

"How are you, sir?" was the Major's stiff recognition of the fact that
Gid was on earth.

"Getting hotter, I believe, John."

"I presume it is, sir." The Major sat with his elbow resting on a desk,
and about him were stacked threatening bundles of papers; and old Gid
knew that in those commercial romances he himself was a familiar
character.

"Are you busy, John?"

"Yes, but you may come in."

"No, I thank you. Don't believe I've got time."

"Then take time. I want to talk to you. Come in."

"No, not to-day, John. Fact is I'm not feeling very well. Head's all
stopped up with a cold, and these summer colds are awful, I tell you. It
was a summer cold that took my father off."

"How's your cotton in that low strip along the bayou?"

"Tolerable, John; tolerable."

"Come in. I want to talk to you about it."

"Don't believe I can stand the air in there, John. Head all stopped up.
Don't believe I'm going to live very long."

"Nonsense. You are as strong as a buck."

"You may think so, John, but I'm not. I thought father was strong, too,
but a summer cold got him. I am getting along in years, John, and I find
that I have to take care of myself. But if you really want to talk to me
about that piece of cotton, come out under the trees where it's cool."

The Major shoved back his papers and arose, but hesitated; and Gid stood
looking on, fanning himself. The Major stepped out and Gid's face was
split asunder with a broad smile.

"I gad. I've been up town and had a set-to with old Baucum and the rest
of them. Pulled up fifty winner at poker and jumped. Devilish glad to
see you; miss you every minute of the time I'm away. Let's go over there
and sit down on that bench."

They walked toward a bench under a live-oak tree, and upon Gid's
shoulder the Major's hand affectionately rested. They halted to laugh,
and old Gid shoved the Major away from him, then seized him and drew him
back. They sat down, still laughing, but suddenly the Major became
serious.

"Gid, I'm in trouble," he said.

"Nonsense, my boy, there is no such thing as trouble. Throw it off. Look
at me. I've had enough of what the world calls trouble to kill a dozen
ordinary men, but just look at me--getting stronger every day. Throw it
off. What is it, anyway?"

"Louise declares that she is going to marry Pennington!"

"What!" old Gid exclaimed, turning with a bouncing flounce and looking
straight at the Major. "Marry Pennington! Why, she shan't, John. That's
all there is of it. We object and that settles it. Why, what the deuce
can she be thinking about?"

"Thinking about him," the Major answered.

"Yes, but she must quit it. Why, it's outrageous for as sensible a girl
as she is to think of marrying that fellow. You leave it to me; hear
what I said? Leave it to me."

This suggested shift of responsibility did not remove the shadow of
sadness that had fallen across the Major's countenance.

"You leave it to me and I'll give her a talk she'll not forget. I'll
make her understand that she's a queen, and a woman is pretty devilish
skittish about marrying anybody when you convince her that she's a
queen. What does your wife say about it?"

"She hasn't said anything. She's out visiting and I haven't seen her
since Louise told me of her determination to marry him."

"Don't say determination, John. Say foolish notion. But it's all right."

"No, it's not all right."

"What, have you failed to trust me? Is it possible that you have lost
faith in me? Don't do that, John, for if you do it will be a never
failing source of regret. You don't seem to remember what my powers of
persuasion have accomplished in the past. When I was in the legislature,
chairman of the Committee on County and County Lines, what did my
protest do? It kept them from cutting off a ten-foot strip of this
county and adding it to Jefferson. You must remember those things, John,
for in the factors of persuasion lie the shaping of human life. I've
been riding in the hot sun and I think that a mint julep would hit me
now just about where I live. Say, there, Bill, bring us some mint, sugar
and whisky. And cold water, mind you. Oh, everything will come out all
right. By the way, do you remember that Catholic priest that came here
with a letter of introduction to you?"

"Yes, his name is Brennon."

"Yes, that's it. But how did he happen to bring a letter to you?"

"He came from Maryland with a letter given him by a relative of mine."

"Yes, and he has gone to work, I tell you. Do you know what he's doing?
Reaching out quietly and gathering the negroes into his church. And
there are some pretty wise men behind him. They didn't send an Irishman
or a Dutchman or an Italian, but an American from an old family. The
late Count Gurowski came to this country from France in November,
1849, and resided at first in New York.

He made his appearance at Boston, I think, in the latter part of 1850,
and, being well introduced by letters from men of note in Paris,
was received with attention in the highest circles of society. Among
his friends at this period were Prescott, Ticknor, Longfellow, Lowell,
Parker, Sumner, Felton, and Everett,--the last named of whom was then
President of Harvard University.

The eccentric appearance and character of the Count, of course, excited
curiosity and gave rise to many idle rumors, the most popular of which
declared him to be a Russian spy, though what there was to spy in this
country, where everything is published in the newspapers, or what the
Czar expected to learn from such an agent, nobody undertook to
explain. The phrase was a convenient one, and, like many others equally
senseless, was currently adopted because it seemed to explain the
incomprehensible; and certainly, to the multitude, no man was ever less
intelligible than Gurowski.

To those, however, who cared for precise information, the French and
German periodicals of the day, in which his name frequently figured,
furnished sufficient to determine his social and historical status.

From authentic sources it was soon learned that he was the head of a
distinguished noble family of Poland; that he was born in 1805, and had
taken part in the great insurrection of 1831 against the Russians, for
which he had been condemned to death, while his estates were confiscated
and assigned to a younger brother, who had remained loyal to the
Czar.

It was known also that at Paris, where he had found refuge, he had been
a special favorite of Lafayette and of the leading republicans,
and an active member of the Polish Revolutionary Committee, till,
in 1835, he published _La Vérité sur la Russie_, in which work he
maintained that the interests of Poland and of all the other Slavic
countries would be promoted by absorption into the Russian Empire
and union under the Russian Czar.

This book drew upon him the indignant denunciation of his countrymen,
who regarded it as a betrayal of their cause, and led to the
revocation of his sentence of death, and to an invitation to enter
the service of Nicholas.

He accordingly went to St. Petersburg in 1836, where his sister had long
resided, personally attached to the Empress and in high favor at the
imperial court. He was employed at first in the private chancery of the
Emperor, and afterwards in the Department of Public Instruction, in which
he suggested and introduced various measures tending to Russianize
Poland by means of schools and other public institutions.

He seems for some years to have been in favor, and on the high road
to power and distinction.

In 1844, however, he fled from St.

Petersburg secretly, and took refuge at the court of Berlin.

He was pursued, and his extradition demanded of the Prussian
government.

What his offence was I have never learned, but can readily suppose
that it was only a too free use of his tongue, which was at all
times uncontrollable, and was always involving him in difficulties
wherever he resided.

He was quite as likely to contradict and snub the Czar as readily as he
would the meanest peasant, and, for that matter, even more readily.
His flight from Russia caused a good deal of discussion in the
Continental newspapers, and it is certain that for some reason or
other strong and pertinacious efforts were made by the Russian
government to have him delivered up.

The Czar had at that time great influence over the court of Berlin; and
Gurowski was at length privately requested by the Prussian government,
in a friendly way, to relieve them of embarrassment by withdrawing
from the kingdom. He accordingly went to Heidelberg and afterwards
to Munich, and for two years subsequently was a Lecturer on Political
Economy at the University of Berne, in Switzerland. At a later period
he visited Italy, and for a year previous to his arrival in this country
had resided in Paris.

Besides his first work on Panslavism, already mentioned, he had published
several others in French and German, which had attracted considerable
attention by the force and boldness of their ideas, and the wide range
of erudition displayed in them.

Finally, it became known to those who cared to inquire, that one
of his brothers, Ignatius Gurowski, was married to an infanta of Spain,
whom I believe he had persuaded to elope with him; that Gurowski
himself was a widower, with a son in the Russian navy and a
daughter married in Switzerland; and that some compromise had been
made about his confiscated estates by which his "loyal" brother had
agreed to pay him a slender annual allowance, which was not always
punctually remitted.

Such was the substance of what was known, or at least of what I knew and
can now recall, of Gurowski, soon after his arrival in Boston, sixteen
years ago. He came to Massachusetts, I think, with some expectation of
becoming connected with Harvard University as a lecturer or professor,
and took up his residence in Cambridge in lodgings in a house on
Main Street, nearly opposite the College Library.

In January, 1851, he gave, at President Everett's house, a course
of lectures upon Roman jurisprudence, of which I have preserved the
following syllabus, printed by him in explanation of his purpose

.

* * * * *
"COUNT DE GUROWSKI proposes to give Six Lectures upon the Roman
Jurisprudence, or the Civil Law according to the following syllabus:--

"As the history of the Roman Law is likewise the history of the principle
of the _Right_ (_das Recht_) as it exists in the consciousness of
men, and of its outward manifestation as a law in an organized
society; a philosophical outline of this principle and of its
manifestations will precede.

"The philosophical and historical progress of the notion or conception
of the _Right_, through the various moments or data of jurisprudential
formation by the Romans. Explanation of the principal elements and facts,
out of which was framed successively the Roman law.

"Such are, for instance, the Ramnian, the Sabinian, or Quiritian; their
influence on the character of the legislation and jurisprudence.

"The peculiarity and the legal meaning of the _jus quiritium_. Explanation
of some of its legal rites, as those concerning matrimony, _jus
mancipi, in jure cessio_, etc.

"The primitive _jus civile_ derived from _the jus quiritium_. Point out
the principal social element on which, and through which, the _jus
privatum_, connected with the _jus civile_, was developed.

"The primitive difference between both these two kinds of
_jus_.

"Other elements of the Roman Civil Law. The _jus gentium_, its nature and
origin. How it was conceived by the Romans, and how it acted on
the Roman community.

Its agency, enlightening and softening influence on the Roman character,
and on the severity of the primitive _jus civile_.

"The nature, the agency of the prætorian or _edictorial_ right and
jurisprudence.

"A condensed sketch of the Roman civil process.

The principal formalities and rules according to the _jus quiritium,
jus civile_, and the _edicta prætorum_.

Difference between the magistrate and the judge.

"The scientific development of the above-mentioned data in the formation
of the Roman Law, or the period between Augustus and Alex. Severus.
Epoch of the imperial jurisconsults; its character.

"Decline. The codification of the Roman Law, or the formation of the
Justinian Code. Sketch of it during the mediæval and modern
periods.

"Count Gurowski is authorized to refer to Hon.

Edward Everett, Prof. Parsons, Prof.

Parker, Wm. H. Prescott, Esq., Hon. T. G. Gary, Charles Sumner, Esq.,
Hon.

G. S. Hillard, Prof. Felton.

"CAMBRIDGE, January 24, 1851."
The lectures were not successful, being attended by only twenty or
thirty persons, who did not find them very interesting. The truth is,
that few Americans care anything for the Roman law, or for the history
of the principle of the _Right_ (_das Recht_); nor for the Ramnian,
Sabinian, or Quiritian jurisprudence; nor whether the _jus civile_
was derived from the _jus quiritium_, or the _jus quiritium_ from
the _jus civile_,--nor do I see why they should care.

But even if the subject had been interesting in itself, Gurowski's
imperfect pronunciation of our language at that time would have
insured his failure as a lecturer.

He had a copious stock of English words at command; but as he had
learned the language almost wholly from books, his accent was so
strongly foreign that few persons could understand him at first,
except those of quick apprehension and some knowledge of the French
and German idioms which he habitually used.

The favor with which Gurowski had been received in the high circles
of Boston society soon evaporated, as his faults of temper and of
manner, and his rough criticisms on men and affairs, began to be
felt.

Massachusetts was then in the midst of the great conservative and
proslavery reaction of 1850, and Gurowski's dogmatic radicalism was
not calculated to recommend him to the ruling influences in politics,
literature, or society.

He denounced with vehemence, and without stint or qualification,
slavery and its Northern supporters.

Nothing could silence him, nobody could put him down.

It was in vain to appeal to Mr.

Webster, then at the height of his reputation as a Union-saver and
great constitutional expounder. "What do I care for Mr. Webster," he
said on some occasion when the Fugitive Slave Law was under discussion
in the high circles of Beacon Street, and the dictum of the great
expounder had been triumphantly appealed to.

"I can read the Constitution as well as Mr. Webster." "But surely,
Count, you would not presume to dispute Mr.
Webster's opinion on a question of constitutional law?" "And
why not?"

replied Gurowski, in high wrath, and in his loudest tones.

"I tell you I can read the Constitution as well as Mr.

Webster, and I say that the Fugitive Slave Law is unconstitutional,--is
an outrage and an imposition of which you will all soon be ashamed.

It is a disgrace to humanity and to your republicanism, and Mr. Webster
should be hung for advocating it.
He is a humbug or an ass," continued the Count, his wrath growing
fiercer as he poured it out,--"an ass if he believes such an infamous
law to be constitutional; and if he does not believe it, he is a
humbug and a scoundrel for advocating it."

Beacon Street, of course, was aghast at this outburst of blasphemy; and
the high circles thereof were speedily closed against the plain-spoken
radical who dared to question Mr. Webster's infallibility, and who
made, indeed, but small account of the other idols worshipped in
that locality.

It was at this time, in the spring of 1851, that I became acquainted
with Gurowski. I was standing one day at the door of the reading-room
in Lyceum Hall in Cambridge, of which city I was then a resident, when I
saw approaching through Harvard Square a strange figure which I knew
must be the Count, who had often been described to me, but whom
till then I had never chanced to see.

He was at the time about forty-five years of age, of middle size,
with a large head and big belly, and was partly wrapped in a huge
and queerly-cut cloak of German material and make.

On his head he wore a high, bell-shaped, broad-brimmed hat, from
which depended a long, sky-blue veil, which he used to protect his
eyes from the sunshine.

His waistcoat was of bright red flannel, and as it reached to his hips
and covered nearly the whole of his capacious front, it formed a
startlingly conspicuous portion of his attire.

In addition to the veil, his eyes were protected by enormous blue goggles,
with glasses on the sides as well as in front. These extraordinary
precautions for the defence of his sight were made necessary by the
fact that he had lost an eye, not in a duel, as has been commonly
reported, but by falling on an open penknife when he was a boy of
ten years old.

The wounded eye was totally ruined and wasted away, and had been
the seat of long and intense pain, in which, as is usual in such
cases, the other eye had participated.

During the first year or two of his residence in this country he was
much troubled by the intense sunshine; but afterwards becoming used to
it, he left off his veil, and in other respects conformed his
costume to that of the people.

There were several gentlemen in the reading-room whom we both knew,
one of whom introduced me to Gurowski, who received me very cordially,
and immediately began to talk with much animation about Kossuth and
Hungary, concerning which I had recently published something.

He was exceedingly voluble, and seemed to have, even then, a remarkably
copious stock of English words at command; but his pronunciation,
as before remarked, was very imperfect, and until I grew accustomed
to his accent I found it difficult to comprehend him.

This, however, made little difference to Gurowski.

He would talk to any one who would listen, without caring much whether
he was understood or not.

On this occasion he soon became engaged in a discussion with one of
the gentlemen present, a Professor in the University, who demurred
to some of his statements about Hungary; and in a short time Gurowski
was foaming with rage, and formally challenged the Professor to
settle the dispute with swords or pistols.

This ingenious mode of deciding an historical controversy being
blandly declined, Gurowski, apparently dumfounded at the idea of
any gentleman's refusing so reasonable a proposition, abruptly
retreated, asking me to go with him, as he said he wished to consult
me; to which request I assented very willingly, for my curiosity
was a good deal excited by his strange appearance and evidently
peculiar character.

He walked along in silence, and we soon reached his lodgings, which
were convenient and comfortable enough.

He had a parlor and bedroom on the second floor, well furnished, though
in dire confusion, littered with books, papers, clothing, and other
articles, tossed about at random.

He gave me a cigar, and, sitting down, began to talk quite calmly and
rationally about the affair at the reading-room. His excitement had
entirely subsided, and he seemed to be sorry for his rudeness to
the Professor, for whom he had a high regard, and who had been
invariably kind to him.

I spoke to him pretty roundly on the impropriety of his conduct, and
the folly of which he had been guilty in offering a challenge,--a
proceeding peculiarly repugnant to American, or at least to New
England notions, and which only made him ridiculous.

There was something so frank and childlike in his character, that, though
I had known him but an hour, we seemed already intimate, and from that
time to the day of his death I never had any hesitation in speaking to
him about anything as freely as if he were my brother.

He took my scolding in good part, and was evidently ashamed of his
conduct, though too proud to say so. He wanted to know, however, what
he had best do about the matter.

I advised him to do nothing, but to let the affair drop, and never make
any allusion to it; and I believe he followed my advice. At all events,
he was soon again on good terms with the gentleman he had challenged.

I spent several hours with Gurowski on this occasion, and, as we
both at that time had ample leisure, we soon grew intimate, and
fell into the habit of passing a large part of the day together.

For a long period I was accustomed to visit him every day at his
lodgings, generally in the morning, while he came almost every
afternoon to my house.

He had a good deal of wit, but little humor, and did not relish badinage.
His chief delight was in serious discussions on questions of politics,
history, or theology, on which he would talk all day with immense
erudition and a wonderful flow of "the best broken English that
ever was spoken."

He was well read in Egyptology and in mediæval history, and had a
wide general knowledge of the sciences, without special familiarity
with any except jurisprudence.

He disdained the details of the natural sciences, and despised their
professors, whose pursuits seemed to him frivolous. He was jealous of
Agassiz, and of the fame and influence he had attained in this
country, and was in the habit of spitefully asserting that the
Professor spoke bad French, and was a mere icthyologist, who would
not dare in Europe to set up as an authority in so many sciences
as he did here.

Even the amiable Professor Guyot, the most unassuming man in the
world, who then lived in Cambridge, was also an object of this paltry
jealousy.

"How finely Guyot humbugs you Americans with his slops," Gurowski
said to me one day.

I replied that "slops" was a very unworthy and offensive word to
apply to the productions of a man like Guyot, who certainly was of
very respectable standing in his department of physical geography.

"O bah! bah!

you do not understand," exclaimed Gurowski. "I do not mean the slops of
the kitchen, but the slops of the continent,--the slops and
indentations which he talks so much about."

_Slopes_ was, of course, the word he meant to use; and the incident
may serve as a good illustration of the curious infelicities of
English with which his conversation teemed.

But the truth is that Gurowski spared nobody, or scarcely anybody, in his
personal criticisms. Of all his vast range of acquaintance in New
England, Felton, Longfellow, and Lowell were the only persons of note
of whom he spoke with uniform respect. It was really painful to see how
utterly his vast knowledge and his great powers of mind were
rendered worthless by a childishness of temper and a habit of
contradiction which made it almost impossible for him to speak of
anybody with moderation and justice.

He had also a sort of infernal delight in detecting the weak points of
his acquaintances, which he did with fearful quickness and
penetration.

The slightest hint was sufficient.

He saw at a glance the frail spot, and directed his spear against it.

Failings the most secret, peculiarities the most subtle, which had,
perhaps, been hidden from the acquaintances of years, seemed to
reveal themselves at the first glance of his single eye.

He was very fond of controversy, and would prolong a discussion
from day to day with apparently unabated interest.

I remember once we had a discussion about some point of mediæval
history of which I knew little, but about which I feigned to be
very positive, in order to draw out the stores of his knowledge,
which was really immense in that direction.

After a hot dispute of several hours we parted, leaving the question
as unsettled as ever.

The next day I called at his lodgings early in the afternoon. I knocked
at the door of his room. He shouted, "Come in"; but as I opened the
door I heard him retreating into his adjacent bedroom.

He thrust his head out, and, seeing who it was, came back into the
parlor, absolutely in a state of nature.

He had not even his spectacles on. In his hand he held a pair of drawers,
which he had apparently been about to assume when I arrived.

Shaking this garment vehemently with one hand, while with the other
he gave me a cigar, he broke out at once in a torrent of argument
on the topic of the preceding day.

I made no reply; but at the first pause suggested that he had better
dress himself.

To this he paid no attention, but stamped round the room, continuing
his argument with his usual vehemence and volubility.

Half an hour had elapsed, when some one knocked. Gurowski roared, "Come
in!" A maid-servant opened the door, and of course instantly retreated.
I turned the key, and again entreated the Count to put on his clothes.
He did not comply, but kept on with his argument. Presently some one
else rapped. "It is Desor," said the Count; "I know his knock; let
him in."

Desor was a Swiss, a scientific man, who lodged in the adjacent
house.

Gurowski apparently was involved in a dispute with him also, which he
immediately took up, on some question of natural history.

The Swiss, however, did not seem to care to contest the point,
whatever it was, and soon went away.

On his departure Gurowski again began his mediæval argument; but I
positively refused to stay unless he put on his clothes.

He reluctantly complied, and went into his bedroom, while I took
up a book.

Every now and then, however, he would sally out to argue some fresh
point which had suggested itself to him; and his toilet was not
fairly completed till, at the end of the third hour, the announcement
of dinner put an end to the discussion.

Disappointed in his hopes of getting employment as a lecturer or
teacher, on which he had relied for subsistence, Gurowski felt
himself growing poorer and poorer as the little stock of money he
had brought from Europe wasted away.

The discomforts of poverty did not tend to sweeten his temper nor to
abate his savage independence.

He grew prouder and fiercer as he grew poorer.

He was very economical, and indulged in no luxuries except cigars, of
which, however, he was not a great consumer, seldom smoking more
than three or four a day.

But with all his care, his money was at length exhausted, his last
dollar gone.

He had expected remittances from Poland, which did not come; and he now
learned that, from some cause which I have forgotten, nothing would be
sent him for that year at least.

He used to tell me from day to day of the progress of his "decline
and fall," as he called it, remarking occasionally that, when the
worst came to the worst, he could turn himself into an Irishman and
work for his living.

I paid little attention to this talk, for really the idea of Gurowski and
manual labor was so ridiculously incongruous that I could not form any
definite conception of it. But he was more in earnest than I supposed.

Going one day at my usual hour to his lodgings, I found him absent. I
called again in the course of the day, but he was still not at home,
and the people of the house informed me that he had been absent since
early morning. The next day it was the same. On the third day I lay
in wait for him at evening at his lodgings, to which he came about
dark, in a most forlorn condition, with his hands blistered, his clothes
dusty, and exhibiting himself every mark of extreme fatigue. He was
cheerful, however, and very cordial, and gave me an animated account of
his adventures in his "Irish life," as he called it.
"Thomas," said his mother, "I wish you wouldn't be so rough. There,
daughter, that will do. Just coil it. That's it; thank you. Major, I do
wish you wouldn't laugh at the brusqueness of your son; you encourage
him."

Tom took his mother by the shoulders and turned her face toward the
door. He was a clean-looking, blondish fellow, younger than his
sister--an athlete, a boxer, with far more restlessness of muscle than
absorption of mind. He had failed at Harvard, where his
great-grandfather had distinguished himself; he had, with the influence
of a Congressman, secured a West Point cadetship, and there had fallen
under the rapid fire of a battery of mathematics, and had come home
scouting at the humiliation which he had put upon his parents, and was
now ready to submit himself to any other test that might present
itself--was ready to borrow, to lend, or to fight. He picked negro tunes
on a banjo, and had been heard hoarsely to sing a love song under a
cypress tree. He had now just returned from the capital of the state,
where he had spent two days watching the flank movements of a military
drill.

"You people seem to be mighty solemn," was Tom's observation as they sat
down to supper, glancing from one to another, and finally directing a
questioning look at his father. "What's the trouble? What's happened? Is
it possible that old Gideon has paid his rent?"

Louise laughed, a wrinkle crept across Mrs. Cranceford's brow and the
Major sprawled back with a loud "haw." Gid's rent was a standing joke;
and nothing is more sacredly entitled to instant recognition than a joke
that for years has been established in a Southern household.

"I notice that he never goes into the Major's office," Mrs. Cranceford
remarked; and Tom quickly replied: "And I don't blame him for that. I
went in there about a month ago and haven't had a dollar since."

The Major did not laugh at this. The reputed exaction of his executive
chamber was a sore spot to him. "How you robbers, young and old, would
like to fleece me," he said. "And if I didn't turn to defensive stone
once in a while you'd pull out my eye teeth."

"Don't see how anybody could get hold of your eye teeth, dad," Tom
replied. "You are always busy cutting them when I come round. Oh, by
the way," he added with sudden seriousness, "you remember that fellow
Mayo, the one that ran for County Clerk down here some time ago?"

"The scoundrel who swore he was elected?"

"That's the man. He disappeared, you know, after his trouble down here,
then he went on from one community to another, a Democrat one season and
a Republican the next, and now he has returned as a labor leader. I met
him yesterday in Little Rock, and I never have seen a more insolent
ruffian. He makes no secret of his plans, and he says that blood is
bound to flow. I asked him if he had any to spare, and he cocked his eye
at me and replied that he didn't know but he had."

The Major was silent, abstractedly balancing his knife on the rim of his
plate. Mayo, an adventurer, a scoundrel with a brutish force that passed
for frankness, had at one time almost brought about an uprising among
the negroes of Cranceford County, and eager ears in the North, not the
ears of the old soldier, but of the politician, shutting out the
suggestions of justice, heard only the clamor of a political outrage;
and again arose the loud cry that the South had robbed the inoffensive
negro of his suffrage. But the story, once so full of alarm, was
beginning to be a feeble reminiscence; Northern men with business
interests in the South had begun to realize that the white man, though
often in the wrong, could sometimes be in the right. But now a
problem--graver than the over-thrashed straw of political rights, was
about to be presented.

"I was in hopes that somebody had killed that fellow," said the Major,
and his wife looked up with gentle reproof. "Don't say that, dear. The
Lord will take him in His own good time."

The old gentleman winked at Tom. "I don't know about that," he replied.
"I am afraid that the Lord in His management of the universe has
forgotten him."

"John, please don't talk that way." When she was very serious she called
him John. "When you speak so lightly you make me afraid that your
relationship with the church is not very sacred to you."

"It's serious at any rate, Margaret."

"What do you mean by that, John?"

"Why," Tom cried, "it means that you dragged him into the pow-wow."

"Thomas"--and this time her reproof was not very gentle--"I won't stand
that from you. And daughter," she added, speaking to Louise, "it is not
a laughing matter. It all comes from so close an association with that
good-for-nothing old Gideon. I know it does, and you needn't say a word.
Nothing is sacred to him; he has no respect for God and cares nothing
for man except to the extent that he can use him."

The Major strove to wink at Tom, but there was a hitch in his eye. "My
dear, you don't understand the old fellow," said he. "And therefore you
misjudge him. I know that he is weak, but I also know that he is strong,
and he is quite as necessary to me as I am to him. He rests me, and rest
is as essential as work. Sometimes the perfect gentleman is a bore;
sometimes the perfect lady is tiresome. In man there is a sort of
innocent evil, a liking for the half depraved and an occasional feeding
of this appetite heightens his respect for the truly virtuous."

"I don't believe it, John."

"Of course you don't. You are the truly virtuous, and--" he spread
himself back with a loud "haw," and sat there shaking under her cool
gaze. "There, Margaret," he said, wiping his eyes, "don't take it to
heart. I am doing the best I can and that is all the excuse I have to
offer. I'm getting old; do you realize that? The things that used to
amuse me are flat now and I can't afford to kill an amusement when one
does happen to come along. Don't you worry about Gid. Why, Margaret, he
has stood by me when other men turned their backs. The river was
dangerous during my day, and the pop of a pistol was as natural as the
bark of a dog. But old Gid was there by me."

"Oh, I don't doubt that he has some good qualities," she admitted. "But
why doesn't he mend his ways?"

"Oh, he hasn't time for that, Margaret. He's too busy with other
matters. There, now, we won't talk about him. But I promise you, my
dear, that he shall not unduly influence me. I don't exactly know what I
mean by that, either. I mean that you need have no fear of my permitting
him to weaken my respect for the church. Yes, I think that's about what
I mean. But the fact is he has never tried to do that. But what's the
use of this talk. I can sum up the whole situation by reminding you that
I am the master. There, now, don't sigh--don't look so worried."

"But, John, it grieves me to hear you say that you need him."

"Had to step back to pick that up, didn't you? Tom, after you're married
you'll find that your wife will look with coldness or contempt upon your
most intimate friend. It's the absurdest jealousy in woman's nature."

"Thomas," said his mother, "you will find nothing of the sort; but I'll
tell you what you may expect from the right sort of a wife--contempt for
a coarse, low-bred fellow, should you insist upon holding him as your
closest companion."

"Mother," Louise spoke up, "I think you are too severe. Mr. Batts is
hemmed in with faults, but he has many good points. And I can
understand why he is necessary to father. I am fond of him, and I am
almost ready to declare that at times he is almost necessary to me. No,
I won't make it as strong as that, but I must say that at times it is a
keen pleasure to jower with him."

"To do what?" Mrs. Cranceford asked. "Jower with him? Where did you get
that word?"

"It's one of his, picked up from among the negroes, I think, and it
means more than dispute or wrangle. We jower at times--quarrel a little
more than half in earnest."

"Well," said the mother, "perhaps I ought not to say anything, but I
can't help it when I am so often hurt by that man's influence. Why, last
Sunday afternoon your father left the rector sitting here and went away
with that old sinner, and we heard them haw-hawing over in the woods.
But I won't say any more."

"You never do, Margaret," the Major replied, winking at Louise. "But let
us drop him. So you saw Mayo, eh?" he added, turning to Tom.

"Yes, sir, and I understand that he is coming back down here to prove to
the negroes that we are cheating them out of their earnings."

The Major tossed a cigar to Tom, lighted one, and had begun to talk with
a rhetorical and sententious balancing of periods--which, to his mind,
full of the oratory of Prentiss, was the essence of impressiveness--when
a negro woman entered the room. And hereupon he changed the subject.

When bedtime came the old gentleman stood on a rug in front of a large
fire-place, meditatively winding his watch. His wife sat on a
straight-back chair, glancing over the harmless advertisements in a
religious newspaper. In the parlor they had spent an agreeable evening,
with music and with never an allusion to an unpleasant subject, but
there was something finer than an allusion, and it had passed from
husband to wife and back again--a look at each other and a glance toward
Louise. But they had laughed at the girl's imitation of a cakewalk, and
yet in the minds of the father and the mother was the low echo of a
hollow cough. Affectionately she had kissed them good night, and had
started off down the hall in mimicry of a negro belle's walk, but they
had heard her door shut with a quick slam as if she were at last
impelled to be truthful with herself, to close herself in with her own
meditations.

The Major hung his watch on a nail above the mantel-piece. From a
far-off nook of the sprawling old house came the pling-plang of the
boy's banjo.

"Margaret?"

"Yes, dear."

"What did you say to her?"

She began to fold the newspaper. "I didn't say anything. She wouldn't
permit me."

"What do you think?"

"That she will do as she pleases."

"Consoling, by the--consoling, I must say. But I tell you she won't. I
will shame her out of it."


CHAPTER VI.


The top of the cotton stalk glimmered with a purple bloom, but down
between the rows, among the dying leaves, the first bolls were opening.
The air was still hot, for at noontime the glare in the sandy road was
fierce, but the evening was cool, and from out in the gleaming dew came
a sweetly, lonesome chirrup, an alarm in the grass, the picket of the
insect army, crying the approach of frost. In the atmosphere was felt
the influence of a reviving activity; new cotton pens were built along
the borders of the fields, and the sounds of hammer and saw were heard
in the neighborhood of the gin-house. With the dusk of Saturday evening
"new" negroes came. In the city they had idled the summer away,
gambling, and had now come with nimble fingers to pick cotton during the
day and with tricky hands to throw dice at night. Gaunt, long-legged
birds flew from the North and awkwardly capered on a sand-bar. Afar off
there appeared to hover over the landscape a pall of thin, pale smoke;
but, like the end of the rainbow, it stole back from closer view, was
always afar off, lying low to the earth. The autumn rains had not yet
set in, and the water in the bayou was low and yellow. The summer
grapes were ripe, and in the cool, shaded coves at the base of the hills
the muscadine was growing purple. The mules, so over-worked during
plow-time, now stumbled down the lane, biting at one another. The
stiffening wind, fore-whistle of the season's change of tune, was shrill
amid the rushes at the edge of the swamp.

It was a time to work, but also to muse and dream while working. In the
air was something that invited, almost demanded reverie. Upon the fields
there might lie many a mortgage, but who at such a time could worry over
the harsh exactions of debt?

Nearly three weeks had passed, and not again in the Major's household
had Pennington's name been mentioned. But once, alone with his wife, the
Major was leading up to it when she held up her hands and besought him
to stop. "I can't bear to think of it," she said. "It stuns and
stupefies me. But it is of no use to say anything to her. She is of age
and she is head-strong."

There was a dry rasp in the Major's throat. "Don't you think that to say
she is a crank would be hitting nearer the mark?"

"No, I don't," his wife answered. "She is not a crank. She is a
remarkably bright woman."

"Yes, she shows it. When a man does a fool thing he is weak, off, as
they say; but when a woman jumps out of the enclosure of common sense
we must say that she is bright."

"I thought you were going to shame her out of it?"

"I will, but she hasn't given me a chance. But we'll let it go. I
believe she has repented of her folly and is too much humiliated to make
a confession."

His wife smiled sadly. "Don't you think so?" he asked.

"No, I don't."

"Well, I must say that you are very calm over the situation."

"Didn't I tell you that I was stunned and stupefied by it?"

"Yes, that's all right, and there's no use in worrying with it. Common
sense says that when you can't help a thing the best plan is to let it
go until a new phase is presented."

And so they ceased to discuss the subject, but like a heavy weight it
lay upon them, and under it they may have sighed their worry, but they
spoke it not. From Tom this sentimental flurry had remained securely
hidden. Sometimes the grave tone of his father's words, overheard at
night, and his mother's distressful air, during the day, struck him with
a vague apprehension, but his mind was not keen enough to cut into the
cause of what he might have supposed to be a trouble; and so, he gave it
none of his time, so taken up with his banjo, his dogs, his sporting
newspaper, and his own sly love affair. In Louise's manner no change was
observed.

One afternoon the Major, old Gid, and an Englishman named Anthony Low
were sitting on the porch overlooking the river when the Catholic priest
from Maryland, Father Brennon, stopped to get a drink of water. And he
was slowly making his way across the yard to the well when the Major
called him, urging him to come upon the porch and rest himself. "Wait,"
the Major added, "and I'll have some water drawn for you."

"I thank you," the priest replied, bowing, "but I prefer to draw it."
When he had drunk out of the bucket, he took a seat on the porch. He was
a man of middle age, grave, and sturdy. His eyes were thoughtful and his
smile was benevolent; his brow was high and broad, his nose large and
strong, and a determined conviction seemed to have molded the shape of
his mouth. His speech was slow, resonant, dignified; his accent of
common words was Southern, but in some of his phrases was a slight burr,
the subdued echo of a foreign tongue.

The Englishman was a stocky young fellow, with light hair and reddish
side whiskers, a man of the world, doggedly careful in his use of
superlatives, but with a habit of saying, "most extraordinary." He had
rented an old plantation and lived alone in a dilapidated log house,
with his briar pipe, Scotch whisky, sole leather hatbox, and tin
bathtub. He had thought that it would be a sort of lark to grow a crop
of cotton, and had hired three sets of negroes, discharging them in turn
upon finding that they laughed at his ways and took advantage of his
inexperience. The Italians say freely they cannot trust their women as
northern women are trusted; and some Italian women frankly confess
that their sex would be worse if it were trusted more.

But the truth does not appear in this shallow suspicion and this
shallow self-conviction; and one who cares to have a just estimate of
this matter must by no means believe all the evil he hears. There may
be much corruption in society, but there is infinitely more wrong in the
habits of idle gossip and guilty scandal, which eat all sense of shame
and pity out of the heart of Venice. There is no parallel to the prying,
tattling, backbiting littleness of the place elsewhere in the
world. A small country village in America or England has its meddlesomeness,
but not its worldly, wicked sharpness. Figure the meanness of a
chimney-corner gossip, added to the bitter shrewdness and witty
penetration of a gifted roué, and you have some idea of Venetian
scandal.

In that city, where all the nobler organs of expression are closed by
political conditions, the viler channels run continual filth and
poison, and the people, shut out from public and free discussion of
religious and political themes, occupy themselves with private slander,
and rend each other in their abject desperation.

As it is part of the existing political demonstration to avoid the
opera and theatre, the Venetians are deprived of these harmless
distractions; balls and evening parties, at which people, in other
countries, do nothing worse than bore each other, are almost unknown,
for the same reason; and when persons meet in society, it is too
often to retail personalities, or Italian politics made as
unintelligible and as like local gossip as possible.

The talk which is small and noxious in private circles is the same
thing at the caffè, when the dread of spies does not reduce the
talkers to a dreary silence.

Not permitted to feel the currents of literature and the great
world's thought in religion freshly and directly, they seldom speak
of these things, except in that tone of obsolete superiority which
Italians are still prone to affect, as the monopolists of culture.

As to Art, the Venetians are insensible to it and ignorant of it, here
in the very atmosphere of Art, to a degree absolutely amusing.

I would as soon think of asking a fish's opinion of water as of
asking a Venetian's notion of architecture or painting, unless he
were himself a professed artist or critic.

Admitting, however, that a great part of the corruption of society
is imputed, there still remains, no doubt, a great deal of real immorality
to be accounted for.

This, I think, is often to be attributed to the bad system of female
education, and the habits of idleness in which women are bred.

Indeed, to Americans, the whole system of Italian education seems calculated
to reduce women to a state of imbecile captivity before marriage; and I
have no fault to find with the Italians that they are jealous in guarding
those whom they have unfitted to protect themselves, but have
rather to blame them that, after marriage, their women are thrown
at once upon society, when worse than helpless against its
temptations.

Except with those people who attempt to maintain a certain appearance in
public upon insufficient means (and there are too many of these
in Venice as everywhere else), and who spare in every other way
that they may spend on dress, it does not often happen that Venetian
ladies are housekeepers.

Servants are cheap and numerous, as they are uncleanly and untrustworthy,
and the Venetians prefer to keep them [Footnote: A clerk or employé
with a salary of fifty cents a day keeps a maid-servant, that his
wife may fulfill to society the important duty of doing nothing.]
rather than take part in housewifely duties; and, since they must
lavish upon dress and show, to suffer from cold and hunger in their
fireless houses and at their meagre boards.

In this way the young girls, kept imprisoned from the world, instead of
learning cookery and other domestic arts, have the grievous burden of
idleness added to that of their solitary confinement, not only
among the rich and noble, but among that large class which is
neither and wishes to appear both.

[Footnote: The poet Gray, genteelly making the grand tour in 1740, wrote
to his father from Florence: "The only thing the Italians shine in is
their reception of strangers. At such times every thing is
magnificence: the more remarkable as in their ordinary course of life
they are parsimonious to a degree of nastiness.

I saw in one of the vastest palaces of Rome (that of the Prince
Pamfilio), the apartment which he himself inhabited, a bed that most
servants in England would disdain to lie in, and furniture much
like that of a soph at Cambridge.

This man is worth 30,000_l_. a year." Italian nature has changed so little
in a century, that all this would hold admirably true of Italian life
at this time.

The goodly outside in religion, in morals, in every thing is too much
the ambition of Italy; this achieved, she is content to endure any
pang of self-denial, and sell what little comfort she knows--it is
mostly imported, like the word, from England--to strangers at
fabulous prices.

In Italy the luxuries of life are cheap, and the conveniences unknown
or excessively dear.]

Their idle thoughts, not drilled by study nor occupied with work,
run upon the freedom which marriage shall bring them, and form a
distorted image of the world, of which they know as little as of
their own undisciplined selves.

Denied the just and wholesome amusements of society during their
girlhood, it is scarcely a matter of surprise that they should throw
themselves into the giddiest whirl of its excitement when marriage
sets them free to do so.

I have said I do not think Venetians who give each other bad names
are always to be credited, and I have no doubt that many a reputation in
Venice is stained while the victim remains without guilt. A questioned
reputation is, however, no great social calamity. It forms no bar to
society, and few people are so cruel as to blame it, though all discuss
it. And it is here that the harshness of American and English society
toward the erring woman (harshness which is not injustice, but half-
justice only) contrasts visibly to our advantage over the bad naïveté
and lenity of the Italians. The carefully secluded Italian girl is
accustomed to hear of things and speak of things which, with us,
parents strive in every way to keep from their daughters' knowledge;
and while her sense of delicacy is thus early blunted, while she
is thus used to know good and evil, she hears her father and mother comment
on the sinful errors of a friend or neighbor, who visits them and
meets them every day in society.
How can the impunity of the guilt which she believes to exist around her
but sometimes have its effect, and ripen, with opportunity, into wrong?

Nay, if the girl reveres her parents at all, how can she think the sin,
which they caress in the sinner, is so very bad? If, however, she
escape all these early influences of depravation; if her idleness, and
solitude and precocious knowledge leave her unvitiated, if, when she
goes into society, it is by marriage with a man who is neither a dotard
nor a fortune-seeker, and who remains constant and does not tempt her,
by neglect, to forbode offense and to inflict anticipative reprisals--yet
her purity goes uncredited, as her guilt would go unpunished; scandal
makes haste to blacken her name to the prevailing hue; and whether she
has sin or not, those with sin will cast, not the stone that breaks and
kills, but the filth that sticks and stinks. The wife must continue
the long social exile of her girlhood if she would not be the prey of
scandal. The _cavaliere servente_ no longer exists, but gossip now
attributes often more than one lover in his place, and society has the
cruel clemency to wink at the license. Nothing is in worse taste than
jealousy, and, consequently, though intrigue sometimes causes
stabbing, and the like, among low people, it is rarely noticed by
persons of good breeding.

It seems to me that in Venetian society the reform must begin, not with
dissolute life, but with the social toleration of the impure, and with
the wanton habits of scandal, which make all other life incredible,
and deny to virtue the triumph of fair fame.

I confess that what I saw of the innocent amusements of this society was
not enough to convince me of their brilliancy and attractiveness; but I
doubt if a foreigner can be a trustworthy judge of these things, and
perhaps a sketch drawn by an alien hand, in the best faith, might have
an air of caricature. I would not, therefore, like to trust my own
impression of social diversions. They were, very probably, much more
lively and brilliant than I thought them. But Italians assembled anywhere,
except at the theatre or the caffè, have a certain stiffness, all the
more surprising, because tradition has always led one to expect
exactly the reverse of them. I have seen nothing equal to the formality
of this people, who deride colder nations for inflexible manners; and
I have certainly never seen society in any small town in America so
ill at ease as I have seen society in Venice, writhing under self-imposed
restraints.
At a musical soirée, attended by the class of people who at home
would have been chatty and sociable, given to making acquaintance
and to keeping up acquaintance,--the young men harmlessly talking and
walking with the young ladies, and the old people listening together,
while constant movement and intercourse kept life in the assembly,
and there was some real pleasure felt amidst a good deal of unavoidable
suffering,--I say, I found such a soirée in Venice to be a spectacle of
ladies planted in formal rows of low-necks and white dresses around the
four sides of one room, and of gentlemen restively imprisoned in
dress-coats and white gloves in another. During the music all these
devoted people listened attentively, and at the end, the ladies lapsed
back into their chairs and fanned themselves, while the gentlemen
walked up and down the floor of their cell, and stopped, two by
two, at the door of the ladies' room, glanced mournfully athwart the
moral barrier which divided them, and sadly and dejectedly turned away.
Amazed at this singular species of social enjoyment, I inquired
afterward, of a Venetian lady, if evening parties in Venice were usually
such ordeals, and was discouraged to learn that what I had seen was
scarcely an exaggeration of prevailing torments. Commonly people do not
know each other, and it is difficult for the younger to procure
introductions; and when there is previous acquaintance, the presence of
some commanding spirit is necessary to break the ice of propriety,
and substitute enjoyment for correctness of behavior.

Even at dancing parties, where it would seem that the poetry of motion
might do something to soften the rigid bosom of Venetian deportment,
the poor young people separate after each dance, and take each sex its
appointed prison, till the next quadrille offers them a temporary
liberation.

For my own part, I cannot wonder that young men fly these virtuous scenes,
and throng the rooms of those pleasant women of the _demi-monde_, who
only exact from them that they shall be natural and agreeable; I
cannot wonder that their fair partners in wretchedness seize the
first opportunity to revenge themselves upon the propriety which
has so cruelly used them.

It is said that the assemblies of the Jews, while quite as
unexceptionable in character, are far more sociable and lively than
those of the Christians.

The young Hebrews are frequently intelligent, well-bred, and witty,
with a _savoir faire_ which their Christian brethren lack.

But, indeed, the young Venetian is, at that age when all men are owlish,
ignorant, and vapid, the most owlish, ignorant, and vapid man in the
world. He talks, not milk-and-water, but warm water alone, a little
sweetened; and, until he has grown wicked, has very little good in
him.

Most ladies of fashion receive calls on a certain day of each week, when
it is made a matter of pride to receive as many calls as possible. The
number sometimes reaches three hundred, when nobody sits down, and few
exchange more than a word with the hostess. In winter, the stove is
heated on these reception days, and little cups of black coffee are
passed round to the company; in summer lemonade is substituted for
the coffee; but in all seasons a thin, waferish slice of toasted
rusk (the Venetian _baicolo_) is offered to each guest with the
drink.

At receptions where the sparsity of the company permits the lady
of the house to be seen, she is commonly visible on a sofa, surrounded
by visitors in a half- circle. Nobody stays more than ten or fifteen
minutes, and I have sometimes found even this brief time of much greater
apparent length, and apt to produce a low state of nerves, from which
one seldom recovers before dinner. Gentlemen, however, do not much
frequent these receptions; and I assert again the diffidence I should
feel in offering this glance at Venetian social enjoyment as conveying a
just and full idea of it. There is no doubt that the Venetians find
delight in their assemblies, where a stranger seeks it in vain.

I dare say they would not think our own reunions brilliant, and that,
looking obliquely (as a foreigner must) on the most sensible faces at
one of our evening parties, they might mistake the look of pathetic
dejection, visible in them, as the expression of people rather bored
by their pleasure than otherwise.

The conversazioni are of all sorts, from the conversazioni of the rigid
proprietarians, where people sit down to a kind of hopeless whist, at a
soldo the point, and say nothing, to the conversazioni of the
_demi- monde_ where they say any thing.

There are persons in Venice, as well as everywhere else, of
new-fashioned modes of thinking, and these strive to give a greater
life and ease to their assemblies, by attracting as many young men
as possible; and in their families, gentlemen are welcome to visit,
and to talk with the young ladies in the presence of their mothers.

But though such people are no more accused of impropriety than the
straitest of the old-fashioned, they are not regarded with the
greatest esteem, and their daughters do not so readily find husbands.

The Italians are fickle, the women say; they get soon tired of their
wives after marriage, and when they see much of ladies before
marriage, they get tired of them then, and never make them their
wives.

So it is much better to see nothing of a possible husband till you
actually have him.

I do not think conversazioni of any kind are popular with young
men, however; they like better to go to the caffè, and the people
you meet at private houses are none the less interesting for being
old, or middle-aged.

A great many of the best families, at present, receive no company
at all, and see their friends only in the most private manner;
though there are still cultivated circles to which proper introduction
gives the stranger (who has no Austrian acquaintance) access.

But unless he have thorough knowledge of Italian politics localized to
apply to Venice, an interest in the affairs, fortunes, and misfortunes
of his neighbors, and an acquaintance with the Venetian dialect, I
doubt if he will be able to enjoy himself in the places so cautiously
opened to him. Even in the most cultivated society, the dialect is
habitually spoken; and if Italian is used, it is only in compliment to
some foreigner present, for whose sake, also, topics of general interest
are sometimes chosen.

The best society is now composed of the families of professional men, such
as the advocates, the physicians, and the richer sort of merchants. The
shopkeepers, master-artisans, and others, whom industry and thrift
distinguish from the populace, seem not to have any social life, in the
American sense. They are wholly devoted to affairs, and partly from
choice, and partly from necessity, are sordid and grasping. It is their
class which has to fight hardest for life in Europe, and they give
no quarter to those above or below them.

The shop is their sole thought and interest, and they never, never sink
it.

But, since they have habits of diligence, and, as far as they are
permitted, of enterprise, they seem to be in great part the stuff
from which a prosperous State is to be rebuilt in Venice, if ever
the fallen edifice rise again.

They have sometimes a certain independence of character, which a
better condition of things, and further education, would perhaps
lift into honesty; though as yet they seem not to scruple to take
any unfair advantage, and not to know that commercial success can
never rest permanently on a system of bad faith.

Below this class is the populace, between which and the patrician
order a relation something like Roman clientage existed, contributing
greatly to the maintenance of exclusively aristocratic power in the
State.

The greatest conspiracy (that of Marin Falier) which the commons
ever moved against the oligarchy was revealed to one of the nobility
by his plebeian creature, or client; and the government rewarded
by every species of indulgence a class in which it had extinguished
even the desire of popular liberty.

The heirs of the servile baseness which such a system as this must create
are not yet extinct.

And thus they talked until the sun was sinking into the tops of the
trees, far down below the bend in the river.


CHAPTER VII.


At the Major's house the argument was still warm and vigorous. But the
evening was come, and the bell-cow, home from her browsing, was ringing
for admittance at the barn-yard gate. The priest arose to go. At that
moment there was a heavy step at the end of the porch, the slow and
ponderous tread of Jim Taylor. He strode in the shadow and in the
gathering dusk recognition of him would not have been easy, but by his
bulk and height they knew him. But he appeared to have lost a part of
his great strength, and he drooped as he walked.

"Where is the Major?" he asked, and his voice was hoarse.

"Here, my boy. Why, what's the trouble?"

"Let me see you a moment," he said, halting.

The Major arose, and the giant, with one stride forward, caught him by
the arm and led him away amid the black shadows under the trees. Mrs.
Cranceford came out upon the porch and stood looking with cool
disapproval upon the priest. At a window she had sat and heard him
enunciate his views. Out in the yard Jim Taylor said something in a
broken voice, and the Major, madly bellowing, came bounding toward the
house.

"Margaret," he cried, "Louise is married!"

The woman started, uttered not a sound, but hastening to meet him, took
him by the hand. Jim Taylor came ponderously walking from amid the black
shadows. The Englishman and old Gid stole away. The priest stood calmly
looking upon the old man and his wife.

"John, come and sit down," she said. "Raving won't do any good. We must
be seemly, whatever we are." She felt the eye of the priest. "Who told
you, Mr. Taylor?"

"The justice of the peace. They were married about an hour ago, less
than half a mile from here."

She led the Major to a chair, and he sat down heavily. "She shall never
darken my door again," he declared, striving to stiffen his shoulders,
but they drooped under his effort.

"Don't say that, dear; don't say that. It is so cold and cruel."

"But I do say it--ungrateful little wretch. It rises up within me and I
can't keep from saying it."

The priest stepped forward and raised his hand. "May the blessings of
our Heavenly Father rest upon this household," he said. The woman looked
a defiance at him. He bowed and was gone. Jim Taylor stood with his
head hung low. Slowly he began to speak. "Major, you and your wife are
humiliated, but I am heart-broken. You are afflicted with a sorrow, but
I am struck down with grief. But I beg of you not to say that she shan't
come home again. Her marriage doesn't alter the fact that she is your
daughter. Her relationship toward you may not be so much changed, but to
me she is lost. I beg you not to say she shan't come home again."

Mrs. Cranceford tenderly placed her hand on the giant's arm. He shook
under her touch.

"I will say it and I mean it. She has put her feet on our love and has
thrown herself away, and I don't want to see her again. I do think she
is the completest fool I ever saw in my life. Yes, and we loved her so.
And Tom--it will break his heart."

In the dusk the wife's white hand was gleaming--putting back the gray
hair from her husband's eyes. "And we still love her so, dear," she
said.

"What!" he cried, and now his shoulders stiffened. "What! do you uphold
her?"

"Oh, no, but I am sorry for her, and I am not going to turn against her
simply because she has made a mistake. She has acted unwisely, but she
has not disgraced herself."

"Yes, she has disgraced herself and the rest of us along with her. She
has married the dying son of a convict. I didn't want to tell you
this--I told her----"

This was like a slap in the face, and for a moment she was bereft of the
cool dignity that had been so pronounced a characteristic of her quiet
life.

"If you didn't tell me before why do you tell me now?" was her reply.
She stood back from him, regathering her scattered reserve, striving to
be calm. "But it can't be helped now, John." Her gentle dignity
reasserted itself. "Let time and the something that brightens hopes and
softens fears gradually soothe our affliction."

She had taken up the Major's manner of speech. "Mr. Taylor, I have never
intimated such a thing to you before," she added, "but it was my hope
that she might become your wife. There, my dear man, don't let it tear
you so."

The giant was shaken, appearing to be gnarled and twisted by her words,
like a tree in a fierce wind. "I talked to her about you," she
continued, "and it was my hope--but now let us be kind to her memory, if
indeed we are to regard her simply as a memory."

"Margaret," said the Major, getting up and throwing back his leonine
head, "you are enough to inspire me with strength--you always have. But
while you may teach me to bear a trouble, you can't influence me to
turn counter to the demands of a just resentment. She shan't put her
foot in this house again. Jim, you can find a more suitable woman, sir.
Did you hear what became of them after that scoundrel married them? Who
performed the ceremony? Morris? He must never put his foot in my yard
again. I'll set the dogs on him. What became of them, Jim?"

"I didn't hear, but I think that they must have driven to town in a
buggy."

"Well, it really makes no difference what became of them. Are you going,
Jim?"

"Yes, sir."

"Won't you stay with us to-night?"

"No, I thank you. It's better for me to be alone." He hesitated. "If you
want me to I'll find out to-night where they've gone."

"Oh, no, do nothing of the sort, for I assure you that it makes no
difference. Let them go to the devil."

"John, don't say that, please," his wife pleaded.

"But I have said it. Well, if you are determined to go, good-night."

"Good-night." Jim strode off into the darkness, but halted and turned
about. "Major, if I can forgive her you ought to," he said. "You've got
common sense to help you, but common sense was never known to help a man
that's in my fix."

They heard the gate open, heard the latch click behind him as he passed
out into the road. Toward his lonely home he trod his heavy way, in the
sand, in the rank weeds, picking not his course, stumbling, falling once
to his knees. The air was full of the pungent scent of the walnut,
turning yellow, and in it was a memory of Louise. Often had he seen her
with her apron full of nuts that had fallen from the trees under which
he now was passing. He halted and looked about him. The moon was rising
and he saw some one sitting on a fence close by the road side. "Is that
you, Jim?" a voice called.

"Yes. Oh, it's you, is it, Mr. Batts?"

"Yep, just about. Hopped up here to smell the walnuts. Takes me away
back. They took it pretty hard, didn't they?"

"Yes, particularly the Major. His wife has more control over herself."

"Or may be less affection," Gid replied. "They say she's strong, but I
call her cold. Hold on and I'll walk with you." He got down off the
fence and walked beside the giant. "She's a mighty strange woman to me,"
the old man said when they had walked for a time in silence. "But
there's no question of the fact that she's strong, that is, as some
people understand strength. To me, I gad, there is more force in
affection than in restraint. She loves her children--no doubt about
that--and of course she thinks the world of the Major, but somehow she
misjudges people. She doesn't understand me at all. But I reckon the
majority of men are too deep for a woman. I didn't want to see them in
the throes of their trouble, and I says to the Englishman, 'it's time to
git,' and we got. He wanted me to go over to his house and get some
Scotch whisky. I told him that the last rain must have left some water
in a hollow stump near my house, and that I preferred it to his
out-landish drink. And hanged if he didn't think I was in earnest. Yes,
sir, I knew that girl would marry him; and let me tell you, if I was a
youngster I would rather have her love than the love of any woman I ever
saw. There's something about her I never saw in any other woman--I gad,
she's got character; understand me? She ain't beautiful, hardly
handsome, but there's something about her, hanged if I know what it is.
But it's something; and I've always found that the strongest charm about
a woman is a something that you can't exactly catch--something that is
constantly on the dodge. And you bet I've had lots of experience. The
Major could tell you many a story on me. Yes, sir. Say, Jim, I know how
you feel over this affair, and I want you to understand that I'm your
friend, first, last and all the time. I've been trying to talk up to the
right place, but now I don't exactly know what to say."

"Don't say anything, Uncle Gideon."

"I reckon that would be about the wisest plan. Just wanted to let you
know where to find me. Strange things happen even in this quiet
community, don't they? But I'm woefully sorry that this special thing
has happened. I gad, the Major snorted so loud that my horse broke loose
from the post, and that's the reason I'm stepping around here like a
blind dog in a meat house. Begin pickin' to-morrow, I reckon?"

"I don't know. I had made all my arrangements, but now after what's
happened I don't care whether there's a boll picked or not. I'm let
down."

"Don't feel that way, old fellow. You'll be all right in a day or two."

"Mr. Batts, if I didn't know that you were trying to soothe me I would
take that remark as an insult. If I thought I wasn't any more steadfast
than to be all right in a day or two--if I really believed my character
that light, I swear I'd go this minute and drown myself."

"Why, my dear boy, you know I didn't mean to infer that your heart had
no more memory than that. What I meant was that your sense of
resignation would demand a hearing, so to speak. Let me tell you
something. I understand that girl better than her father or mother
does--I have made her a special study, and I want to tell you that when
I take the trouble to throw my mind on a woman a mystery has to be
cleared right then and there. And this is what I want to say: She has
married that fellow out of pity. I don't believe she loves him. Always
was ruled by pity. Recollect hearing the Major tell of a sudden streak
of misfortune that overtook his family when he was a child. His father
had to sell several of his slaves, and his old black mammy stood on the
block with him in her arms while they were auctioning her off. Well,
sir, Louise cried about that fit to kill herself. We told her how long
ago it had happened, and impressed on her the fact that the old woman
was soon bought back, but she kept on crying over the cruelty of the
thing. Yes, sir. Well, I turn off here. Good night."

In the dark the Major walked about the yard mournfully calling Tom. A
negro woman said that she had seen him going down the road, and the old
gentleman returned to the porch and sat down. In the sitting room a lamp
was burning, and a patch of light fell about his chair. He wanted to
tell the young man of the trouble that had fallen upon the household,
and yet he dreaded to hear his footstep. Tom was so proud of his sister,
had always looked up to her, had regarded her whims as an intellectual
diversion; and now what a disappointment. How sadly would his heart be
wrung. From a distant room came the pling-plang of a banjo.

"There's Tom, Margaret. Will you please tell him to come here? I don't
want to see him in the light."

Mrs. Cranceford hastened to obey, and the Major sat listening. He pushed
his chair back out of the patch of light. The banjo hushed its twanging,
and then he heard Tom coming. The young man stepped out upon the porch.
His mother halted in the doorway.

"Tom," said the Major, "I have a desperate piece of news, and I wish I
could break it to you gently, but there is no way to lead up to it. Your
sister has married Carl Pennington."

"Yes, so Jim Taylor told me. Met him in the road a while ago. I didn't
know that there was anything of the sort on hand. Must have kept it
mighty quiet. I suppose----"

"What, you suppose! What the deuce can you suppose! Stand there
supposing when I tell you that she has married a dying man." The old
gentleman flounced in his chair. "She has thrown herself away and I tell
you of it and you want to suppose. What's the matter with you? Have you
lost all your pride and your sense? She has married a dying man, I tell
you."

The young fellow began awkwardly to twist himself about. He looked at
his mother, standing in the door with the light pouring about her, but
her eyes were turned from him, gazing far away into the deepening
night. "I know they might think he's dying," he said, "but they might be
mistaken. Sometimes they believe a man's dying and he keeps on living.
Wash Sanders----"

"Go back to your banjo, you idiot!" the Major shouted. "I'll swear this
beats any family on the face of the earth." He got up, knocking over his
chair. "Go on. Don't stand there trying to splutter an explanation of
your lack of sense! No wonder you have always failed to pass an
examination. Not a word, Margaret. I know what you are going to say:
Beats any family on the face of the earth."


CHAPTER VIII.


On the morrow there was a song and a chant in the cotton fields. Aged
fingers and youthful hands were eager with grabbing the cool,
dew-dampened fleece of the fields. The women wore bandana handkerchiefs,
and picturesquely down the rows their red heads were bobbing. Whence
came their tunes, so quaintly weird, so boisterous and yet so full of
melancholy? The composer has sought to catch them, has touched them with
his refining art and has spoiled them. The playwright has striven to
transfer from the field to the stage a cotton-picking scene and has made
a travesty of it. To transfer the passions of man and to music-riddle
them is an art with stiff-jointed rules, but the charm of a
cotton-picking scene is an essence, and is breathed but cannot be
caught. Here seems to lie a sentiment that no other labor invites, and
though old with a thousand endearments, it is ever an opera rehearsed
for the first time. But this is the view that may be taken only by the
sentimentalist, the poet loitering along the lane. To him it is a
picture painted to delight the eye, to soothe the nerves, to inspire a
pastoral ode. There is, however, another side. At the edge of the field
where the cotton is weighed, stands the planter watching the scales. His
commercial instincts might have been put to dreamy sleep by the
appearance of the purple bloom, but it is keenly aroused by the opening
boll. He is influenced by no song, by no color fantastically bobbing
between the rows. He is alert, determined not to be cheated. Too much
music might cover a rascally trick, might put a clod in the cotton to be
weighed. Sentiment is well enough, and he can get it by turning to
Walter Scott.

None of the planters was shrewder than the Major. In his community he
was the business as well as the social model. He was known to be brave
and was therefore expected to be generous. His good humor was regarded
as an echo of his prosperity, and a lucky negro, winning at dice, would
strive to imitate his manner. At planting, at plowing and at gathering,
no detail was too small or too illusive to escape his eye. His interests
were under a microscopic view and all plans that were drawn in the
little brick office at the corner of the yard, were rigorously carried
out in the fields. In the one place he was all business; in the other
there was in him an admixture of good humor and executive thoroughness.
He knew how many pounds of cotton a certain man or woman was likely to
pick within the working hours of a day, and he marked the clean and the
trashy pickers; and the play of his two-colored temperament was seen in
his jovial banter of the one and his harsh reprimand of the other. But
to-day a hired man stood at the scales to see the cotton weighed. The
Major walked abroad throughout the fields. As he drew near, the negroes
hushed their songs and their swaggering talk. They bowed respectfully to
him and to one another whispered his affliction. At noon, when he
returned home, the housekeeper told him that his wife was away. He sat
down in the library to wait for her. Looking out he saw Sallie Pruitt
carrying a jug across the yard. A few moments later he asked for Tom and
was told that he had just left the house. He tried to read, but nothing
interested him. There was nothing but dullness in the newspaper and even
Ivanhoe had lost his charm. It was nearly three o'clock when Mrs.
Cranceford returned. He did not ask whither she had gone; he waited to
be told. She sat down, taking off her gloves.

"Did you see Mr. Perdue?" she asked.

"No, I have seen no one. Don't care much to see any one."

"I didn't know but you might have met him. He was here this morning.
Told me about Louise."

"What does he know about her?"

"He told me where she had gone to live--in that old log house at the
far end of the Anthony place."

"Well, go on, I'm listening."

"I didn't know that you cared to hear."

"Then why did you begin to tell me?"

She did not answer this question. She waited for him to say more. "Of
course I'd like to know what has become of her."

"I went over to see her," said Mrs. Cranceford.

"The deuce you did."

"John, don't talk that way."

"I won't. You went to see her."

"Yes, and in that miserable house, all open, she is nursing her dying
husband."

The Major got up and began to walk about the room. "Don't, Margaret, I'd
rather not hear about it."

"But you must hear. No place could be more desolate. The wind was
moaning in the old plum thicket. The gate was down and hogs were rooting
in the yard. Louise did not hear me as I drove up, the wind was moaning
so distressfully among the dead plum bushes--she did not know that I was
on the place until I entered the room where she sat at the bedside of
her husband. She jumped up with a cry and----"

"Margaret, please don't."

"I must tell you, John. I will tell you. She jumped up with a cry and
ran to me, and started to take off my cloak, but remembering that there
was no fire in the damp room, she let it stay on. She tried to speak,
but couldn't. Her husband held out his waxen hand, and when I took it I
shuddered with the cold chill it sent through me."

"Margaret, I am going out," said the Major, turning toward the door.

"If you do, John, I will go with you and tell you as we walk along.
Please sit down."

He sat down with an air of helplessness. He fumbled with his fingers,
which seemed to have grown thicker; he moved his foot as if it were a
heavy weight. His wife continued: "In the room there was scarcely any
furniture, nothing to soften the appearance of bleakness. I asked why no
fire had been made, and Louise said that she had engaged a negro to cut
some wood, but that he had gone away. She had paid him in advance. She
would herself have kindled a fire, but there was no axe on the place,
and she was afraid to leave her husband long enough to go to the woods
to gather sticks. I went out and found the negro dozing in the sun. He
was impudent when I spoke to him, but when I told him my name and
threatened him with you, he scuffled to his feet and sauntered off, and
I thought that we should see no more of him, but soon we heard the lazy
strokes of his axe. And shortly afterward we had a fire. Louise was in
one of her silent moods, but Pennington talked as much as his cough
would permit him. He said that it was all his fault. 'I told her,' said
he, 'that unless she married me I would die blaspheming the name of God,
and that if she would save me from hell she must be my wife. I know that
it was selfish and mean, but I couldn't help it. And so she has married
me to save my soul.' He grew excited and I tried to calm him. I told him
that you were angry at first, but that now you were in a better humor
toward him."

"Margaret----"

"This appeared to help him, but I saw that Louise did not believe me.
However, I commanded her to come home and bring her husband with her.
But she shook her head and declared that she would never again enter
your house until she could in some way discharge the debt of gratitude
with which you reproached her, which she says you flaunted in her face
at a time when she was greatly distressed."

"What! I don't exactly understand."

"Yes, you do, dear. You reminded her that you had saved her life, and
told her that you based your plea for obedience upon your own
gallantry."

"Oh, that was a piece of mere nonsense, a theatrical trick. Of course I
don't deserve any credit for having saved the life of my own child."

"It may have been a theatrical trick with you, but it wasn't with her.
She keenly feels your reproach."

"Confound it, you are both making a monster of me."

"No, dear, that is not our design."

"Our design! Have you too, set yourself against me? Let me go to old
Gideon. He's the only friend I've got."

"John, you mustn't say that. And why, at this time, should you refer to
that old sinner? But let me go on. While I was there the doctor came,
and shortly afterward we heard a heavy tread on the flapping boards of
the passageway that divides the two sections of the old house."

"Jim Taylor," said the Major.

"Yes, Jim Taylor. Louise jumped up in a flutter. He didn't take any
notice of her excitement. 'I heard that you were living here,' he said,
'and knowing what sort of an old place it is, I've come to see if I can
be of any use to you.' Here he looked about at the cracks in the walls
and the holes in the roof. 'And you'll pardon me,' he went on, 'but I
took the liberty to bring a carpenter along to patch up things a little.
That's him out there at work on the gate.' Louise began to cry. He
pretended not to notice her. 'It won't take long to make this a very
comfortable place,' he went on, 'and I hope you won't feel offended, but
I have brought some young chickens and a squirrel or two--in a basket
out there in the kitchen. I always was a sort of a neighborly fellow you
know.' 'You are the best man in the world,' Louise broke out. 'No, not
in the world, but I reckon I can stand flat-footed and lift with the
most of them,' he replied, assuming that he thought she referred to his
strength. 'Yes,' he continued, 'and the boys will be here pretty soon
with the wagon to haul you some wood. And I hope you'll pardon me again,
but nothing would do old Aunt Nan but she must come over to cook for you
and help you take care of Mr. Pennington until he gets about again.
She's the best cook in the whole country. You know the governor of the
state once said that she could beat anybody frying a chicken, and----'"

"Confound his impudence!" exclaimed the Major, grinding the floor as he
wheeled about, "he's performing the offices that belong to me. And I
won't stand it."

"The offices that did belong to you, dear, but you have washed your
hands of them."

"Have I? Well, we'll see about that. I'll send over there and have
everything put to rights. No, I'll send the carriage and have them
brought home. I'll be--I say I won't be made a scape-goat of in this
way. Why, confound----"

"John."

"Yes, I understand, but I won't put up with it any longer. I'll send
Tom over there--I'll send the law over there and bring them home under
arrest."

She shook her head. "No, it will be of no use to send for them. Louise
will not come, and you know she won't. Besides, we can make her just as
comfortable there as here. It will not be for long, so let her have her
own way."

"By the blood, she has had it!"

"John, have you forgotten that you are a member of the church?"

"That's all right. But do you mean by member of the church that I am to
draw in my head like a high-land terrapin every time anything is said to
me? Am I to be brow-beaten by everybody just because I belong to the
church? Oh, it's a happy day for a woman when she can squash her husband
with the church. I gad, it seems that all a married woman wants with a
church is to hit her husband on the head with it."

"John, now you are the echo of old Gid."

"I'm not and you know it, but there are times when a man would be
excusable for being the echo of the devil. But for gracious sake don't
cry. Enough to make a man butt his head against the wall. Just as a man
thinks a woman is stronger than a lion she tunes up and cries. There,
Margaret, let it all go. There." He put his arm about her. "Everything
will come out all right. I am wrong and I confess it. I am bull-headed
and as mean as a dog."

"No, you are not," she protested, wiping her eyes.

"Yes, I am and I see it now. You are always right. And you may manage
this affair just as you see fit. Poor little girl. But never mind, it
will all come right. Let us walk down the lane. It is beautiful down
there. The frost has painted things up for you; the sumac bushes are
flaming and the running briars on the fences are streams of fire. Come
on." He took her by the hand and led her away.


CHAPTER IX.


Within a few days a great change was wrought in the appearance of the
old log house. The roof, which had been humped in the middle like the
back of a lean, acorn-hunting hog, was straightened and reshingled; the
yard was enclosed with a neat fence; and the stack chimney which had
leaned off from the house as if it would fall, was shoved back and held
in place with strong iron bands. And the interior was transformed. Soft
carpets were spread, easy chairs provided, the rough walls were papered
and the windows were curtained. The fire-light fell upon pictures, and a
cat had come to take her place at the corner of the hearth; but in the
dead of night, when all the birds were hushed, when the wind moaned in
the plum thicket, the hollow and distressing cough echoed throughout the
house. At evening sorrowful-looking cows would come down the lane, and
standing at the gate would low mournfully, an attention which they ever
seek to pay a dismal place, but Jim Taylor entered a complaint,
threatened violence and finally compelled their owners to have them
driven home before the arrival of their time for lonesome lowing. It was
Jim's custom to call at morning and at evening. Sometimes, after
looking about the place, he would merely come to the door and ask after
Mr. Pennington and then go away.

One morning when Louise answered his tap at the door, she told him that
the sufferer was much better and that she believed he was going to get
well.

"I'm mighty glad to hear it," he replied. "The doctors can't always
tell."

"Won't you come in?"

"No, I might worry him."

"Oh, not in the least. He's asleep anyway, and I'm lonesome. Come in,
please."

He followed her into the house, trying to lessen his weight as if he
were walking on thin ice; and the old house cracked its knuckles, but
his foot-fall made not a sound. She placed a chair for him and sat down
with her hands in her lap, and how expressive they were, small and thin,
but shapely. She was pale and neat in a black gown. To him she had never
looked so frail, and her eyes had never appeared so deeply blue, but her
hands--he could not keep his eyes off them--one holding pity and the
other full of appeal.

"Don't you need a little more wood on?" he asked.

"No, it's not cold enough for much fire."

"Where did you get that cat?"

"She came crying around the other day and I let her in, and she has made
herself at home."

"The negroes say it's good luck for a cat to come to the house." She
sighed. "I don't believe in luck."

"I do. I believe in bad luck, for it's generally with me. Does your
mother come every day?"

"Yes, although I beg her not to."

"I reckon she'll do about what she wants to. Has the Major----"

She held up her hand and he sat looking at her with his mouth half open.
But at the risk of offending her, he added: "I didn't know but he might
have come over."

"He would, but I won't let him."

"And do you think it's exactly right not to let him?"

"I think it is exactly right to do as a something within me dictates,"
she answered. "He placed me in a certain position----"

"But he is more than willing to take you out of it," Taylor broke in.
"He doesn't want you to remain in that position."

"No, he can't take me out of it. He charged me with ingratitude, and I
would rather he had driven me off the place. Nothing can be much crueler
than to remind one of ingratitude; it is like shooting from behind a
rock; it is having one completely at your mercy."

Now she sat leaning forward with her hands clasped over her knees.
Pennington coughed slightly in his sleep and she looked toward the bed.
She straightened up and put the hair back out of her eyes and Taylor
followed the motion of her hand.

"Did he eat the squirrel?"

"Yes, and enjoyed it."

The cat got up, stretched, and rubbing against the tongs, knocked them
down with a clatter. Pennington awoke. Louise was beside him in a
moment. "Ah, it's you, Mr. Taylor," he said.

"Yes, but it wasn't me that made the noise."

"Oh, it didn't disturb me, I assure you. I was just about waking up
anyway. That will do, thank you." Louise had begun to arrange the
pillows. "I'll sit up. See how strong I am. Give me a pipe. I believe I
can smoke a little."

She went to fill a pipe for him, and turning to Taylor, he said: "I'm
getting stronger now every day; good appetite, sleep first-rate. And
I'll be able to walk about pretty soon. Oh, they had me dead, you know,
but I knew better all the time."

Louise placed a coal upon his pipe and handed it to him. She said that
she was afraid it might make him cough, but it did not.

"I have always maintained that there was nothing the matter with my
lungs," he said, contentedly blowing rings of smoke. "Why, I hadn't a
symptom of consumption except the cough, and that's about gone. And my
prospects were never better than they are this minute. Received a letter
yesterday from over in Alabama--want me to take a professorship in a
college. The first thing you know I shall have charge of the entire
institution. And when I get up in the world I want it understood, Mr.
Taylor, that I shall never forget you. Your kindness----"

"Don't speak of it," Taylor put in, holding up his hand in imitation of
Louise. "I've known this little lady, sir, all her life, and I'd be a
brute to forget her in time of trouble."

"Yon are a true-hearted man, Mr. Taylor, and I shall never forget you,
sir." And after a short silence, he added: "All I desire is a chance,
for with it, I can make Louise happy. I need but little money, I should
not know how to disport a large fortune, but I do desire a comfortable
home with pictures and books. And I thank the Lord that I appreciate the
refinements of this life." In silence he smoked, looking up at the
rings. "Ah, but it was dark for me a short time ago, Mr. Taylor. They
made me believe that I was going to die. We hear a great deal of
resignation, of men who welcome the approach of death, but I was in
despair. And looking upon a strong man, a man whose strength was thrown
upon him, a man who had never thought to take even the slightest care
of himself, I was torn with blasphemous rage. It wasn't right. But thank
God, I lived through that dark period, and am now getting well. Don't
you think so?"

"Why, yes, I can see it. And I'll tell you what we'll do: I'll bring
over the dogs pretty soon and we'll go hunting. How does that strike
you?"

Pennington propped himself higher in the bed and put his pipe on a
chair. "It has been a long time since I went hunting," he said,
musingly. "It seems a long time since I have done anything, except to
brood over my failing health. But I will have no more of that. Yes, I
will go hunting with you." He shoved up the sleeve of his shirt and
called his wife's attention. "Don't you think I'm getting more flesh on
my arm? Look here. No dying man has this much muscle. Louise, I'm going
to get up. There is really no use of my lying here."

He threw off the covers and the giant arose and stood looking upon him,
smiling sadly. He asked for his clothes, and when Louise had brought
them he picked at a worn spot and said: "I must get some clothes with
the first money I earn. I didn't know that this coat was so far gone.
Why, look, it is almost threadbare; and the trousers are not much
better. Let a man get sick and he feels that the world is against him;
let him get well and wear poor clothes, and he will find that the world
doesn't think enough of him to set itself against him--find that the
world does not know him at all."

Taylor ventured upon the raveled platitude that clothes do not make the
man. Pennington shook his head, still examining his trousers. "That will
do in a copy-book, but not in life," said he. And then looking up as
Taylor moved toward the door, he asked: "Are you going?"

"Yes, I must get back to see how things are getting along. Be over again
to-morrow."

Louise went with him out into the passage. He halted at the log step and
stood there, looking at her. "Mr. Taylor, I can never forget your
kindness," she said.

"All right, but I hope you won't remember to mention it again."

He looked at her hands, looked into her eyes; and frankly she returned
his gaze, for it was a gaze long and questioning.

"Your friendship----" he held up his hand to stop her. "Won't you let me
speak of that, either?"

"You may speak of it, but you must know that it does not exist," he
answered, leaning against a corner of the house, still looking at her.

"But you don't mean that you are not my friend?"

"I mean what I told you some time ago--that there can be no friendship
between a big man and a little woman."

"Oh, I had forgotten that."

"No, you hadn't; you thought of it just then as you spoke."

"Why, Mr. Taylor, how can you say that?"

"I can say it because it is true. No, there can be no friendship between
us."

"You surely don't mean that there can be anything else." She had drawn
back from him and was stiffly erect with her arms folded, her head high;
and so narrow was the hard look she gave him that her eyes appeared
smaller. Her lips were so tightly compressed that dimples showed in her
cheeks; and thus with nature's soft relics of babyhood, she denied her
own resentment.

"On your part I don't presume that there can be anything else," he
answered, speaking the words slowly, as if he would weigh them one at a
time on the tip of his tongue. "You may think of me as you please, as
circumstances now compel you to think, and I will think of you not as I
please, but as I must."

"Please don't talk that way. Don't reproach me when I am in such need
of--of friendship. One of these days you may know me better, but now you
can regard me only as a freak. Yes, I am a freak."

"You are an angel."

"Mr. Taylor!" Again her head was high, and in her eyes was the same
suggestion of a sharp squint.

"You didn't tell me that I shouldn't think of you as I please."

"But I didn't tell you to speak what you might be pleased to think.
There, Carl is calling me. Good-bye."


CHAPTER X.


Jim Taylor, too humane to impose the burden of his weight upon a horse,
always made his visits on foot, and this day while trudging homeward, he
met Mrs. Cranceford. She had of late conceived so marked a sympathy for
him, that her manner toward him was warmly gentle.

Taylor stepped to the road-side and halted there as she drove up alone
in a buggy. With a sorrowful reverence he took off his hat, and she
smiled sympathetically; and the lazy old horse, appearing to understand
it all, stopped of his own accord.

"Good morning, Jim. Have you been over to the house?"

"Yes, ma'm, just left there."

"How is he?"

"So much better that I believe he's going to get well."

"You don't say so! Why, I am----" she was about to say that she was
delighted to hear it, but on the giant's face she thought she saw a
deeper shadow lying, heard in his voice a softer note of sorrow; and
considerately she checked her intended utterance. Then they looked at
each other and were ashamed.

"He was up dressing himself when I left."

"You surprise me."

"And he has surprised us all, ma'm. I don't believe he's got
consumption; his cough has left him. Why, he's thinking of taking a
place in a college over in Alabama."

"He is? But I hope he won't take Louise so far from home."

He shifted his position and sunk his hands deep into his pockets. "I
guess he thinks she can't be so very far from home as long as she is
with him."

"But it makes no difference what he thinks." Mrs. Cranceford persisted.
"He must not take her over there. Why, I should think he could find
employment here." Jim looked far away, and she added: "Is your cotton
turning out well?"

"First-rate, and I want to sell it as soon as I can. I've got to go
away."

"Go away!" she repeated. "You don't mean it?"

"Yes, ma'm, I do. If he gets well they won't have any more use for me
and I might as well go off somewhere and take a fresh start; and
besides, I can't keep from showing that I love her, and no matter how
cool she might be toward me it couldn't help but pain him. And there are
people in this neighborhood mean enough to talk about it: No longer ago
than yesterday that strapping Alf Joyner threw out a hint of this sort,
and although he meant it in fun, maybe, I snatched him off the fence
where he was sitting, and walloped him in the road. No, I can't keep
from showing how much I think of her; there is so much of me," he added,
with a smile, "that I can't be a hypercrite all over at once."

At this she smiled, but her countenance grew serious and she said:

"I am sorry you have been compelled to resent an insinuation." She
gathered up the lines. "But perhaps you imagine more than is intended.
It is easy, and also natural that you should."

Jim made no reply. She bowed to him, shook the lines, and the old horse
moved on. Just before reaching a bend in the road, she looked back at
him. How powerful was his bearing, how strong his stride; and with all
his bigness he was not ungraceful.

Everywhere, in the fields, along the fences, lay October's wasteful
ripeness, but the season was about to turn, for the bleak corner of
November was in sight. A sharp wind blew out of a cloud that hung low
over the river, and far away against the darkening sky was a gray
triangle traced, the flight of wild geese from the north. With the
stiffening and the lagging of the breeze came lower and then louder the
puffing of a cotton gin.

Under a persimmon tree Jim Taylor halted, and with his arms resting on a
fence he stood dreamily looking across a field. Afar off the cotton
pickers were bobbing between the rows. The scene was more dull than
bright; to a stranger it would have been dreary, the dead level, the
lone buzzard away over yonder, sailing above the tops of the ragged
trees; but for this man the view was overspread with a memory of
childhood. He was meditating upon leaving his home; he felt that his
departure was demanded. And yet he knew that not elsewhere could he find
contentment. Amid such scenes he had been born and reared. He was like
the deer--would rather feed upon the rough oak foliage of a native
forest than to feast upon the rich grasses of a strange land. But he had
made up his mind to go. He had heard of the charm of the hills, the
valleys and the streams in the northern part of the state, and once he
had gone thither to acquaint himself with that paradise, but in
disappointment he had come back, bringing the opinion that the people
were cold and unconcerned in the comfort and the welfare of a stranger.
So, with this experience fresh in his mind, he was resolved not to
re-settle in his own commonwealth, but to go to a city, though feeling
his unfitness for urban life. But he thought, as so many men and women
have been forced to think, that life in a crowd would invite
forgetfulness, that his slow broodings would find a swift flow into the
tide that swallows the sad thoughts of men.

A sudden noise in the road broke the web of his musing, and looking
about, he recognized Low, the Englishman. Between his teeth the Briton
held his straight-stem pipe, and on his shoulder he carried his bath
tub.

"Moving?" Taylor asked.

"Ah, good morning. No--not moving. An outrage has been committed. During
the night someone punched a hole in the bottom of my bath. Don't know
who could have done it; most extraordinary, I assure you. One of those
ungrateful blacks, I warrant. Going this way? I shall be glad of your
company. Ah, do you happen to know of a tinker?" he asked, as together
they walked along the road.

"A what?"

"A tinker to mend my bath?"

"Haven't any such thing about here, but I guess the blacksmith can mend
your tub. Here, let me carry it for you a ways. You must be tired of it
by this time."

He protested, but Taylor took the tub. "Thank you. You are very kind,
I'm sure. I would have sent it, but these rascals are so untrustworthy.
Ah, how long do you conjecture it would take one to make his fortune in
this community?"

"It depends more upon the man than the community," Taylor answered. "I
know one that never could."

"And by Jove, I fancy I have a very intimate acquaintance with another.
But I rather like it here, you know. I have plenty of room and no one is
much disposed to interfere with me except those rascally blacks, and
upon my honor I believe they tried to ruin my bath. Don't you think
you'd better let me take it now?"

"No; I'll carry it. Wouldn't have known I had it if you hadn't reminded
me."

"You are very kind, I'm sure. Ah, by the way, a very singular man called
on me yesterday. Mayo, I believe, is his name."

"Yes, we know him down here. Came very near getting a dose of rope once.
He tries to be a Moses among the negroes, but instead of leading them
out of the wilderness he's going to lead them into trouble."

"I dare say as much, if they listen to him. But he avers that he doesn't
want an office--wants only to see that the blacks get what they are
entitled to."

"And about the first thing that will be done for him after he gets what
he's entitled to," Jim replied, "will be the sending of his measure to a
coffin maker."

"I surmise as much, I assure you. I didn't encourage him to prolong his
visit; indeed, I told him that I preferred to be alone."

They turned out of the lane into a wood, crossed a bayou, and pursuing
their way a short distance further, Taylor halted, and handing the
Englishman his tub, pointed to a path that crossed the road. "That will
take you to the blacksmith shop," he said.

"Ah, you are very kind," Low replied, shouldering his treasure. He
turned down the path, but after going a short distance stopped and faced
about. "I say, there!" he cried. "Oh, Taylor. Just a moment. I wouldn't
mind having you over any evening, you know. You are a devilish decent
fellow."

"All right; you may look for me most any time. Take you out 'possum
hunting some night."

Low was now humping himself down the path, and Taylor turned to pursue
his way homeward, when once more the Englishman faced about and shouted:
"You are very kind, I'm sure. I shall be delighted."

Jim Taylor was master of a small plantation and sole inhabiter of the
house wherein he was born. In the garden, under a weeping-willow tree,
were the graves of his parents and of his sister, a little girl,
recalled with emotion--at night when a high wind was blowing, for she
had ever been afraid of a storm; and she died on a day when a fierce
gale up the river blew down a cottonwood tree in the yard. She and
Louise were as sisters. At her grave the giant often sat, for she was a
timid little creature, afraid to be alone; and sometimes at night when
the wind was hard, when a cutting sleet was driving, he would get out of
his bed and stand under the tree to be near her. It was so foolishly
sentimental of so strong a man that he would not have dared to tell
anyone, but to the child in the grave he told his troubles. So, on this
morning, when the wind was gathering its forces as it swept the fields,
as the clouds were thickening far away among the whitish tops of the
dead cypress trees, he went straightway to the weeping-willow, passed
the grave of his father, his mother, and sat down beside the stone that
bore the name and the age of the little one.


CHAPTER XI.


When Mrs. Cranceford returned home early in the afternoon, she told the
Major, whom she found pacing up and down the long porch, that Pennington
was up and walking about the house. She told him, also, that he was
resolved upon taking Louise to Alabama, and added that she herself would
oppose this determination up to the very moment of departure.

The Major grunted. "What right have you to do that?" he asked. "Why
should you meddle with the affairs of a man that is seeking to make a
living for his wife?"

"John, you are laughing at me and I know it. Here lately you make light
of everything I say."

The season was changing, he felt its influence, and he shook with good
humor as he walked.

"John, you are so tickled that you can't answer me."

"Why, I could answer you very easily if I only knew what you want me to
say."

This broke her whimsical resentment of his droll playfulness; she
laughed with him, and taking his arm, walked up and down the porch. They
talked of many things--of Louise's persistent stubbornness, and of a
growing change in the conduct of Tom--his abstraction and his
gentleness. He had left uncut the leaves of a sporting review, had taken
to romances, and in his room had been found, sprawled on foolscap, an
ill-rhymed screed in rapturous praise of soulful eyes and flaxen hair.
Mrs. Cranceford knew that he must be in love; so did the Major, but he
could not conjecture the object of so fervid a passion. But his wife had
settled upon the object and was worried, though of her distress she had
not spoken to Tom, so recent had been the discovery of the tell-tale
blotch of ink. But she would as soon as an opportunity offered.

"It will soon pass," said the Major. "I don't think he intends to marry
her."

"Marry her!" his wife exclaimed. "I would rather see him dead than
married into a family of white trash. She may be a most amiable young
person and all that, but he shan't marry her. It would break my heart,
and I vow she shall never come here. Why, she came from the pine woods
and is a cracker."

"But the cracker may have a most gallant and well-born origin, my dear,"
the Major replied. "The victim of a king's displeasure is not
insignificant; he must have been a force."

"What! Do you approve of it?" she demanded, pulling away from him. "Is
it possible that you would not oppose his marriage into such a family
as hers must be?"

"I don't think, my dear, that her father was in the penitentiary."

"John, that is unworthy of you. I was grieved at Louise's marriage, and
you know it."

In prankishness he sought a refuge; he laughed, but she did not follow
him. For a moment her black eyes were hard, then came a look of
distress--and tears. He put his arm about her. "Why, my dear, I didn't
mean to hurt your feelings; bless your life, I didn't. Why, of course,
he shan't marry her. The baby is in there with her."
It has been a cheerful funeral, and yet we are not in great spirits as
we go back to the city.

For my part, I do not think the cry of sea-gulls on a gloomy day is a
joyous sound; and the sight of those theatrical angels, with their
shameless, unfinished backs, flying off the top of the rococo façade of
the church of the Jesuits, has always been a spectacle to fill me
with despondency and foreboding.

CHAPTER XX.

VENETIAN TRAITS AND CHARACTERS.

On a small canal, not far from the railroad station, the gondoliers
show you a house, by no means notable (except for the noble statue
of a knight, occupying a niche in one corner), as the house of
Othello.

It was once the palace of the patrician family Moro, a name well known in
the annals of the Republic, and one which, it has been suggested,
misled Shakespeare into the invention of a Moor of Venice.

Whether this is possibly the fact, or whether there is any tradition
of a tragic incident in the history of the Moro family similar to that
upon which the play is founded, I do not know; but it is certain that
the story of Othello, very nearly as Shakespeare tells it, is popularly
known in Venice; and the gondoliers have fixed upon the Casa Moro in
question as the edifice best calculated to give satisfaction to
strangers in search of the True and the Memorable.
The statue is happily darkened by time, and thus serves admirably to
represent Othello's complexion, and to place beyond the shadow of a
doubt the fact of his residence in the house. Indeed, what can you say
to the gondolier, who, in answer to your cavils, points to the knight,
with the convincing argument, "There is his statue!"
One day I was taken to see this house, in company with some friends,
and when it had been victoriously pointed out, as usual, we asked
meekly, "Who was Othello?"
"Othello, Signori," answered the gondolier, "was a general of the Republic,
in the old times. He was an African, and black; but nevertheless the
State valued him, and he beat the Turks in many battles. Well, Signori,
this general Othello had a very young and beautiful wife, and his wife's
cousin (_sic!_), Cassio was his major-domo, or, as some say, his
lieutenant.

But after a while happens along (_capita_) another soldier of Othello,
who wants Cassio's employment, and so accuses him to the general
of corrupting his wife.

Very well, Signori! Without thinking an instant, Othello, being made
so, flew into a passion (_si riscaldò là
tèsta_), and killed his wife; and then when her innocence came out,
he killed himself and that liar; and the State confiscated his
goods, he being a very rich man.

There has been a tragedy written about all this, you know."
"But how is it called? Who wrote it?"
"Oh!

in regard to that, then, I don't know. Some Englishman."
"Shakespeare?"
"I don't know, Signori.

But if you doubt what I tell you, go to any bookseller, and say, 'Favor
me with the tragedy of "Othello."' He will give it you, and there you
will find it all written out just as I tell it."

This gondolier confirmed the authenticity of his story, by showing us the
house of Cassio near the Rialto Bridge, and I have no doubt he
would also have pointed out that of Iago if we had wished it.

But as a general thing, the lore of the gondoliers is not rich nor very
great. They are a loquacious and a gossiping race, but they love better
to have a quiet chat at the tops of their voices, as they loaf
idly at the ferries, or to scream repartees across the Grand Canal,
than to tell stories.

In all history that relates to localities they are sufficiently versed
to find the notable places for strangers, but beyond this they trouble
themselves as little with the past as with the future.

Three tragic legends, however, they know, and will tell with the
most amusing effect, namely: Biasio, _luganegher_; the Innocent Baker-Boy,
and Veneranda Porta.

The first of these legends is that of a sausage-maker who flourished
in Venice some centuries ago, and who improved the quality of the
broth which the _luganegheri_ make of their scraps and sell to the
gondoliers, by cutting up into it now and then a child of some
neighbor.

He was finally detected by a gondolier who discovered a little finger
in his broth, and being brought to justice, was dragged through
the city at the heels of a wild horse.

This most uncomfortable character appears to be the first hero in the
romance of the gondoliers, and he certainly deserves to rank with
that long line of imaginary personages who have made childhood so
wretched and tractable.

The second is the Innocent Baker-Boy already named, who was put to death
on suspicion of having murdered a noble, because in the dead man's heart
was found a dagger fitting a sheath which the baker had picked up in
the street, on the morning of the murder, and kept in his possession.

Many years afterwards, a malefactor who died in Padua confessed the
murder, and thereupon two lamps were lighted before a shrine in
the southern façade of St.

Mark's Church,--one for the murdered nobleman's soul, and the other for
that of the innocent boy.

Such is the gondoliers' story, and the lamps still burn every night
before the shrine from dark till dawn, in witness of its truth.

The fact of the murder and its guiltless expiation is an incident of
Venetian history, and it is said that the Council of the Ten never
pronounced a sentence of death thereafter, till they had been
solemnly warned by one of their number with _"Ricordatevi del povero
Fornaretto!"

_ (Remember the poor Baker-Boy!) The poet Dall 'Ongaro has woven the
story into a beautiful and touching tragedy; but I believe the poet
is still to be born who shall take from the gondoliers their Veneranda
Porta, and place her historic figure in dramatic literature. Veneranda
Porta was a lady of the days of the Republic, between whom and her
husband existed an incompatibility. This was increased by the course
of Signora Porta in taking a lover, and it at last led to the assassination
of the husband by the paramours.

The head of the murdered man was found in one of the canals, and being
exposed, as the old custom was, upon the granite pedestal at the
corner of St.

Mark's Church, it was recognized by his brother who found among the
papers on which the long hair was curled fragments of a letter he had
written to the deceased. The crime was traced to the paramours, and being
brought before the Ten, they were both condemned to be hanged between
the columns of the Piazzetta. The gondoliers relate that when the sentence
was pronounced, Veneranda said to the Chief of the Ten, "But as for
me this sentence will never be carried out.

You cannot hang a woman. Consider the impropriety!" The Venetian rulers
were wise men in their generation, and far from being balked by this
question of delicacy, the Chief replied, solving it, "My dear, you
shall be hanged in my breeches."
It is very coarse salt which keeps one of these stories; another is
remembered because it concerns one of the people; and another for its
abomination and horror.

The incidents of Venetian history which take the fancy and touch the
sensibility of the world seem hardly known to the gondoliers, the
most intelligent and quick-witted of the populace, and themselves
the very stuff that some romantic dreams of Venice are made of.

However sad the fact, it is undeniable that the stories of the sausage-
maker whose broth was flavored with murder, and the baker-boy who
suffered guiltlessly, and that savage jest at the expense of the murderess,
interest these people more than the high-well-born sorrows of the Foscari,
the tragic fate of Carmagnola, or the story of Falier,--which
last they know partly, however, because of the scandal about
Falier's wife.

Yet after all, though the gondoliers are not the gondoliers of
imaginative literature, they have qualities which recommended them
to my liking, and I look back upon my acquaintance with two or three of
them in a very friendly spirit. Compared with the truculent hackmen,
who prey upon the traveling public in all other cities of the civilized
world, they are eminently intelligent and amiable. Rogues they are, of
course, for small dishonesties are the breath in the nostrils of common
carriers by land or water, everywhere; but the trickery of the
gondoliers is so good-natured and simple that it can hardly offend. A
very ordinary jocular sagacity defeats their profoundest purposes of
swindling, and no one enjoys their exposure half so much as themselves,
while a faint prospect of future employment purifies them of every
trait of dishonesty.

I had only one troublesome experience with them, and that was in
the case of the old gondolier who taught me to row.

He, when I had no longer need of his services, plunged into
drunkenness, and came and dismissed me one day with every mark of
ignominy.

But he afterwards forgave me, and saluted me kindly when we met.

The immediate goal of every gondolier's ambition is to serve, no
matter for how short a time, an Inglese, by which generic title
nearly all foreigners except Germans are known to him.

The Inglese, whether he be English or American, is apt to make the
tour of the whole city in a gondola, and to give handsome drink money at
the end, whereas your Tedesco frugally walks to every place accessible
by land, or when, in a party of six or eight, he takes a gondola,
plants himself upon the letter of the tariff, and will give no more
than the rate fixed by law.

The gondolier is therefore flowingly polite to the Inglese, and
he is even civil to the Tedesco; but he is not at all bound in courtesy
to that provincial Italian who comes from the country to Venice, bargains
furiously for his boat, and commonly pays under the tariff. The Venetian
who does not himself keep a gondola seldom hires one, and even on
this rare occasion makes no lavish demand such as "How much do you
want for taking me to the rail-way station?"

Lest the fervid imagination of the gondolier rise to zwanzigers and
florins, and a tedious dispute ensue, he asks: "How many centissimi
do you want?"

and the contract is made, for a number of soldi.

The number of private gondolas owned in Venice is not very great. The
custom is rather to hire a gondolier with his boat. The exclusive use
of the gondola is thus secured, and the gondolier gives his services
as a domestic when off his special duty. He waits at table, goes marketing,
takes the children to school, and serves the ladies as footman, for five
francs a day, himself paying the proprietor of the gondola about a
franc daily for the boat. In former times, when Venice was rich and
prosperous, many noble families kept six or seven gondolas; and what with
this service, and the numerous gala-days of the Republic, when the
whole city took boat for the Lido, or the Giudecca, or Murano, and the
gondoliers were allowed to exact any pay they could, they were
a numerous and prosperous class. But these times have passed from
Venice forever, and though the gondoliers are still, counting the
boatmen of the Giudecca and Lido, some thousands in number, there are
comparatively few young men among them, and their gains are meagre.

In the little city of Venice, where the dialect spoken at Canareggio or
Castello is a different tongue from that heard under the Procuratie of
St.
Mark's Place, the boatmen of the several quarters of the city of
course vary greatly in character and appearance; and the gondolier
who lounges at the base of the columns of the Piazzetta, and airily
invites the Inglesi to tours of the Grand Canal, is of quite a different
type from the weather-beaten _barcaiuolo_, who croaks _"Barca!"_
at the promenaders on the Zattere. But all, as I say, are simple and
harmless enough, and however loudly they quarrel among themselves,
they never pass from the defamation of their female relatives to blows.
As for the game of knives, as it is said to be played at Naples, and
as About describes it at Rome, I doubt if it is much known to the
populace of Venice. Only the doctors let blood there--though from their
lancets it flows pretty freely and constantly.

It is true that the gondolier loves best of everything a clamorous quarrel,
carried on with the canal between him and his antagonist; but next to
this, he loves to spend his leisure at the ferry in talking of
eating and of money, and he does not differ from many of his fellow-
citizens in choice of topics.

I have seldom caught a casual expression from passers in the streets of
Venice which did not relate in some way to gold Napoleons, zwanzigers,
florins, or soldi, or else to wine and polenta.

I note this trait in the Venetians, which Goldoni observed in the Milanese
a hundred years ago, and which I incline to believe is common to
all Italians.

The gondoliers talk a great deal in figure and hyperbole, and their
jocose chaff is quite inscrutable even to some classes of Venetians.

With foreigners, to whom the silence and easy progress of the gondola
gives them the opportunity to talk, they are fond of using a word
or two of French.

They are quick at repartee, and have a clever answer ready for most
occasions. I was one day bargaining for a boat to the Lido, whither
I refused to be taken in a shabby gondola, or at a rate higher
than seventy-five soldi for the trip.

At last the patience of the gondoliers was exhausted, and one of
them called out, "Somebody fetch the Bucintoro, and take this
gentleman to the Lido for seventy-five soldi!"

(The Bucintoro being the magnificent barge in which the Doge went to wed
the Adriatic.)
The skill with which the gondoliers manage their graceful craft is
always admired by strangers, and is certainly remarkable.

The gondola is very long and slender, and rises high from the water
at either end.

Both bow and stern are sharp, the former being ornamented with that
deeply serrated blade of steel, which it is the pride of the gondolier
to keep bright is silver, and the poop having a small platform, not
far behind the cabin, on which he stands when he rows.

The danger of collision has always obliged Venetian boatmen to face
the bow, and the stroke with the oar (for the gondolier uses only
a single oar) is made by pushing, and not by pulling.

No small degree of art (as I learnt from experience) is thus required
to keep the gondola's head straight,--all the strokes being made
on one side,--and the sculling return of the oar-blade, preparatory
for each new stroke, is extremely difficult to effect.

Under the hands of the gondolier, however, the gondola seems a living
thing, full of grace and winning movement. The wood-work of the little
cabin is elaborately carved, and it is usually furnished with
mirrors and seats luxuriously cushioned.

The sensation of the gondola's progress, felt by the occupant of the
cabin, as he falls back upon these cushions, may be described, to the
female apprehension at least, as "_too_ divine." The cabin is removable
at pleasure, and is generally taken off and replaced by awnings
in summer.

But in the evening, when the fair Venetians go out in their gondolas
to take the air, even this awning is dispensed with, and the long
slender boat glides darkly down the Grand Canal, bearing its dazzling
freight of white _tulle_, pale-faced, black-eyed beauty, and flashing
jewels, in full view.

As for the singing of the gondoliers, they are the only class of
Venetians who have not good voices, and I am scarcely inclined to
regret the silence which long ago fell upon them.

I am quite satisfied with the peculiar note of warning which they
utter as they approach the corner of a canal, and which meaning
simply, "To the Right," or "To the Left," is the most pathetic and
melancholy sound in the world.

If, putting aside my own comfort, I have sometimes wished for the
sake of a dear, sentimental old friend at home, who loves such idle
illusions with an ardor unbecoming his years, that I might hear the
voice
"of Adria's gondolier, By distance mellowed, o'er the waters sweep,"

I must still confess that I never did hear it under similar
circumstances, except in conversation across half a mile of lagoon,
when, as usual, the burden of the lay was polenta or soldi.

A recent Venetian writer, describing the character of the lower
classes of Venice, says: "No one can deny that our populace is
loquacious and quickwitted; but, on the other hand, no one can deny
that it is regardless of improvement.

Venice, a city exceptional in its construction, its customs, and
its habits, has also an exceptional populace.

It still feels, although sixty-eight years have passed, the influence
of the system of the fallen Republic, of that oligarchic government,
which, affording almost every day some amusement to the people,
left them no time to think of their offended rights....

Since 1859 Venice has resembled a sepulchre of the living,--squalor and
beggary gaining ground with each day, and commerce, with few exceptions,
converted into monopoly; yet the populace remains attached to its old
habits, and will have its pleasure. If the earnings are little, what then?
Must one die of ennui? The caffè is depopulated: not so the drinking-house.
The last day before the drawing of the lottery, the offices are
thronged with fathers and mothers of families, who stint their children
of bread to buy dearly a few hours of golden illusion....

At the worst, there is the Monte di Pietà, as a last resort."

It is true, as this writer says, that the pleasure-loving populace
still looks back fondly to the old Republican times of feasting and
holidays; but there is certainly no truth any more in the old idea
that any part of Italy is a place where people may be "idle with
impunity," or make amusement the serious business of life.

I can remember that the book from which I received my first impressions
of geography was illuminated with a picture professing to represent
Italian customs.

The spirit of inquiry had long before caused me to doubt the exact
fidelity of this representation; but it cost me a pang to learn
that the picture was utterly delusive.

It has been no part of my experience in Venice to see an Italian
sitting upon the ground, and strumming the guitar, while two gayly
dressed peasants danced to the music.

Indeed, the indolence of Venetians is listless and silent, not playful
or joyous; and as I learned to know their life more intimately, I
came to understand that in many cases they are idle from despair
of finding work, and that indolence is as much their fate as their
fault.

Any diligence of theirs is surprising to us of northern and free
lands, because their climate subdues and enervates us, and because we
can see before them no career open to intelligent industry. With the
poorest, work is necessarily a hand-to-hand struggle against hunger;
with those who would not absolutely starve without it, work is an
inexplicable passion.

Partly because the ways of these people are so childlike and simple
in many things, and partly from one's own swindling tendency to
take one's self in (a tendency really fatal to all sincerity of
judgment, and incalculably mischievous to such downfallen peoples
as have felt the baleful effects of the world's sentimental, impotent
sympathy), there is something pathetic in the patient content with
which Italians work.

"Don't say that, John."

"Why not? It's a fact."

"It is not a fact. I am not afraid of a daughter of mine disgracing
herself. It's only bad blood that disgraces itself."

"I am not so sure about that when women throughout the entire country
are striving to be unnatural. By the blood----"

"John."

He wheeled about and looked at her. "But I ask you if it isn't enough to
make a saint pull out his hair? Simply opposed her marriage, used
legitimate argument, and afterward begged like a dog. Isn't it enough to
make me spurn the restraints of the church and take up the language of
the mud-clerk?"

"No, dear; nothing should prompt you to do that. You have a soul to be
saved."

"But is it necessary that my life should be tortured out of me in order
that my soul may be saved? I don't care to pay such a price. Is it put
down that I must be a second Job? Is a boil the sign of salvation?"

"For goodness' sake don't talk that way," she pleaded, but she had to
turn her face away to hide her smile from him.

"But I've got to talk some way. Just reflect on her treatment of me and
how I have humbled myself and whined at her feet. And I ask what may we
not expect of such a creature? Is it that she wants to be different from
anyone else? Let me tell you one thing: The woman who seeks to be
strongly individualized may attain her aim, but it leads to a sacrifice
of her modesty. I say she is in danger of disgracing herself."

Mrs. Cranceford shook her head. "You wait and we shall see. No member of
my family was ever disgraced. I may be distressed at her peculiarities,
at times, but I shall never be afraid for her conduct."

Early the next morning a negro brought a letter from Louise. Mrs.
Cranceford hastened to the office to read it to the Major. It appeared
to have been written with care and thus was it worded:

"My Dear Mother:--I am thankful that I am not to look upon the surprise
and sorrow you must feel in reading this letter. I hardly know how to
rake together and assort what I desire to say, but I will do the best I
can, and if you fail to understand me, do not charge it against
yourself, but list it with my other faults. What I have recently gone
through with is quite enough to unstring the nerves of a stronger woman
than I am, and what must be my condition? Worn out and weary of any life
that I could conceive of here--don't you see how I am floundering about?
But give me time and in all honesty you shall know the true state of my
mind. Many a time father has said that he did not understand me, and
more than once you have charged me with being strange. But I am sure
that I have never tried to be mysterious. I have had thoughts that would
not have appeared sane, had I written them, but I have never been
foolishly romantic, although my education has been far from practical.
The first thing I remember was a disappointment, and that was not being
a boy. It may be a vanity, but at that early age I seemed to recognize
the little privileges given to a boy and denied a girl. But as I grew
older I was shocked by the roughness and cruelty of boys, and then I was
pleased to reflect that I was of gentler mold. At some time of life I
suppose we are all enigmas unto ourselves; the mystery of being, the
ability to move, and the marvelous something we call emotion, startles
us and drives us into a moody and speculative silence. I give this in
explanation of my earlier strangeness. I could always talk readily, but
never, not even to you, could I tell completely what I thought. Most
young people are warned against the trash that finds its way--no one
appears to know how--into the library of the home, but I remember to
have been taken to task for reading mannish books. And in some measure I
heeded the lecture thus delivered, but it is to mannish books that I owe
my semblance of common sense."

"What is she trying to get at?" the Major broke in. "Have you read it?
If you have, tell me what she says."

"I am reading it now," his wife replied; and thus she continued:

"The strongest emotion of my life has been pity, and you know that I
never could keep a doll nor a trinket if a strong appeal was made for
it. I grew up to know that this was a weakness rather than a virtue, but
never has my judgment been strong enough to prevail against it. And this
leads me to speak of my marriage. That was the result of pity and fear.
Let me see if I can make you understand me. That poor man's condition
smote my heart as never before had it been smitten. And when he made his
appeal to me, hollowed-eyed and coughing, I trembled, for I knew that
my nature would prompt me to yield, although I might fully estimate the
injustice to myself. So my judgment fought with my sense of pity, and in
the end, perhaps, might have conquered it, but for the element of fear
which was then introduced. The question of his soul was brought forward,
and he swore that I would send it to heaven or to hell. In the light of
what I have read, and in the recollection of what I have often heard
father say in his arguments with preachers, perhaps I should have been
strong enough to scout the idea of a literal torment, but I could not.
You remember old Aunt Betsy Taylor, Jim's black mammy. When I was very
young she was still living on the place, and was to me a curiosity, the
last of her race, I was told. I did not know what this meant, but it
gave her words great weight. Once she pictured hell for me, the roaring
furnace, the writhing of the damned, and no reason and no reading has
ever served to clear my mind of her awful painting. With her as the
advocate I could hear the groans of lost souls; and in my childish way I
believed that the old woman was inspired to spread the terrors of
perdition; nor has education and the little I have seen of society,
wholly changed this belief. So when Mr. Pennington swore to me that if I
refused to marry him he would die blaspheming the name of God, my
judgment tottered and fell. I sit here now, looking at the bed whereon
he died. You saw him breathe his last, saw his smile of peace and hope.
That smile was my reward. For it I had wrung the heart of my father and
wiped my feet upon his pride. But I had sent a soul above. I have set
myself to the task of perfect frankness, and I must tell you that in my
heart there was not the semblance of love for him, love as you know it;
there was only pity and I can say that pity is not akin to love. Yes. I
sold myself, not as many a woman has, not as I would have been praised
and flattered for doing--not for money, but to save a soul. This is
written at night, with a still clock above me, the hands recording the
hour and the minute of his death, and the light of the sun may fade my
words and make them ghastly, but I am revealing, to my mother, my inner
self."

Mrs. Cranceford paused to wipe her eyes, and the Major, who had been
walking up and down the room, now stood looking through the window at
the sweep of yellow river, far away.

"But does she say when she is coming home?" he asked without turning his
head. "Read on, please."

The sheets were disarranged and it was some time before she obeyed.
"Read on, please," he repeated, and he moved from the window and stood
with his hands resting on the back of a chair. Mrs. Cranceford read on:

"There is one misfortune of mine that has always been apparent to you
and that is my painful sensitiveness. It was, however, not looked upon
as a misfortune, but rather as a fault which at will I might correct,
but I could no more have obviated it than I could have changed my entire
nature. When father charged me with ingratitude I realized the justice
of the rebuke (from his point of view), while feeling on my side the
injustice of the imputation, for I was not ungrateful, but simply in a
desperate state of mind. I am afraid that I am not making myself clear.
But let me affirm that I do not lose sight of the debt I owe him, the
debt of gallantry. I had always admired him for his bravery, and
hundreds of times have I foolishly day-dreamed of performing a
life-saving office for him. But the manner--and pardon me for saying
it--the arrogance which he assumed over me, wounded me, and the wound is
still slowly bleeding. But in time it will heal, and when it does I will
go to him, but now I cannot."

"But she must come to me or let me go to her!" the Major broke in. "I
confess that I didn't understand her. Why, there is heroism in her
composition. Go ahead, Margaret. She's got more sense than all of us. Go
ahead."

Mrs. Cranceford continued: "I can conceive of nothing more useless than
my life at home would be. The truth is, I must do something, see
something, feel the throb rather than the continuous pressure of life.
Thousands of women are making their way in the world. Why should not I?
And it is not that I mean wholly to desert you or to love you less, but
I must go away, and before this letter reaches you I shall be on my
journey----"

Mrs. Cranceford's trembling hands let the paper fall. The Major grabbed
it up, fumbled with it, put it upon the desk and sat down. In silence
they looked at each other, and their vision was not clear. "Read on," he
said. "We can stand anything now."

She wiped her eyes and obeyed him: "Shall be on my journey. I have in
mind a certain place, but what place it is I must not tell you. If I
succeed I shall let you know, and if I fail--but I will base nothing
upon the probability of failure. I know that you will look upon this
almost as an act of insanity, and carrying out my resolve to be frank, I
must say that I do not know but that it is. It is, though, the only
course that promises relief and therefore I must take it. You must not
charge me with a lack of love for you and never must you lose faith in
me. It is singular that after all these years, after all our
confidences, I should choose a pen wherewith to make myself known to
you, and you may call me a most unnatural daughter, but you must charge
my unnaturalness to nature, and nothing that nature does should appear
unnatural when once we have come to understand it. I have money enough
to last me until I can secure employment. I hope that I know what sort
of employment it may be, but as there is in my hope a fear of failure, I
will not tell you. My training has not been systematic enough to enable
me to be a school teacher, for I know a little of many things, but am
thorough in nothing. But in some other line the mannish books may help
me. In reading this over I realize that I am vain and affected. But put
it down as another frankness. God bless you and good-bye."

"I told you she would disgrace herself," the Major exclaimed, slapping
his hand upon the desk.

"She has done nothing of the sort," his wife replied, stepping out and
closing the door.


CHAPTER XIV.


The neighbors were curious to know why Louise had left home and whither
she was gone. Day and night they came to ask questions, and though told
that she was visiting relatives in Kentucky, they departed suspecting
that something must be wrong. The gossips were more or less busy, and
Jim Taylor snatched another idler off the fence and trounced him in the
sand.

Weeks passed and no letter came from Louise. The Major worried over her
until at last he forbade the mention of her name. During the day Mrs.
Cranceford was calm and brave, but many a time in the night the Major
heard her crying. Every Sunday afternoon Jim Taylor's tread was heard on
the porch. To the Major he talked of various things, of the cotton which
was nearly all picked, of the weakening or strengthening tendency of the
market, but when alone with Mrs. Cranceford his talk began and ended
with Louise. But in this he observed the necessity for great care, lest
the Major might hear him, and he chose occasions when the old gentleman
was in his office or when with Gid he strolled down into the woods. In
the broad parlor, in the log part of the house, Jim and Mrs. Cranceford
would sit, hours at a time; and never did she show an impatience of his
long lapses of silence nor of his monotonous professions of faith in the
run-away. And upon taking his leave he would never fail to say: "I
believe we'll hear from her to-morrow; I am quite sure of it."

In the midst of the worry that followed the young woman's departure,
there had been but one mention of the young man's affair with the niece
of Wash Sanders. Mrs. Cranceford had spoken to him, not directly, but
with gentle allusion, and he had replied with an angry denunciation of
such meddlesomeness. "I'm not going to marry a dying woman," he
declared; "and I'm not going to take up any faded ninny that you and
father may pick out. I'm going to please myself, and when you decide
that I mustn't, just say the word and I'll hull out. And I don't want to
hear anything about crackers or white trash, either. That's me."

His mother must have agreed that it was, for the weeks went by and not
again did she drop a hint of her anxiety.

One rainy afternoon the Major and old Gid were sitting on a tool-box
under the barn shed, when Father Brennon came riding down the road.

"As they say over the creek, light and look at your saddle!" the Major
shouted.

With a nod and a smile the priest rode through the gate, dismounted,
gave his horse over to a negro who, in answer to a shout, had come
forward from some mysterious precinct of the barn-yard, shook hands with
the Major and Gid, and gracefully declining a seat on the tool-box,
rolled a barrel from against the wall and upon it seated himself.

"More in accordance with the life of a priest," he said, tapping the
barrel with his knuckles. "It is rolling."

"Ah," replied the Major, "and a barrel may also typify the reckless
layman. It is often full."

The priest gave to this remark the approval of a courteous laugh. Even
though he might stand in a slippery place, how well he knew his ground.
To call forth a weak joke and then to commend it with his merriment--how
delightful a piece of flattery. And it can, in truth, be said that in
his heart he was sincere. To be pleasing was to him an art, and this art
was his second nature.

"Mr. Brennon," said the Major (and under no compulsion would he have
said father), "I have thought a great deal of the argument we had some
time ago; and I have wondered, sir, that in coming to this community to
proselyte the negro, you did not observe the secrecy with which the
affairs of your church are usually conducted. But understand, please,
that I do not mean to reflect upon the methods of your creed, but
simply wonder that you have not followed a recognized precedent."

The priest had taken hold of the chine at each end of the barrel and was
slowly rolling himself backward and forward. "I fail to see why any
secrecy should be observed in my work," he replied. "The Catholic church
has never made a secret of doing good--for we believe in the potency of
example. If we elevate the moral condition of one man, it is well that
another man should know it. The Methodist holds his revival and implores
the sinner to come forward and kneel at the altar. And as it were, I am
holding a revival--I am persuading the negro and the white man as well
to kneel under the cross. Should there be any secrecy in such a work?"

"Well, no, not when you put it that way. But you know that we look upon
the Catholic religion as a foreign religion. It does not somehow seem
native to this soil. It is red with the pomp of monarchy, it has the
ceremonious restraint of the king's court; it hasn't the free noise of a
republic. I will not question its sincerity or the fact that it has in
view the betterment of man, but to us it will always seem an
importation."

"It was here first," the priest replied, gravely smiling. "It discovered
this country."

"We must grant that," the Major rejoined, "but still I insist that the
native born American regards it as a foreign institution, foreign to his
nature, to his sense of liberty, if not to his soul."

"My dear Major, Christ is foreign to no soil. The earth is His Father's
foot-stool. The soul of man is the abiding place of the love of the
Saviour, and no heart is out-landish. What you may call liberty is an
education, but the soul as God's province is not made so by training,
but came with the first twinkling of light, of reason, the dawn of
time."

"That's about as straight as any man can give it," old Gid joined in.
"But what puzzles me is why God is more at home in one man's heart than
in another. He fills some hearts with love and denies it to others; and
the heart that has been denied is cursed, through no fault of its
own--simply because it has not received--while the other heart is
blessed. I reckon the safest plan is to conclude that we don't know
anything about it. I don't, and that settles it so far as I'm concerned.
I can't accept man's opinion, for man doesn't know any more about it
than I do; so I say to myself, 'Gideon Batts, eat, drink and be merry,
for the first thing you know they will come along and lay you out where
the worm is whetting his appetite.' You have raked up quite a passle of
negroes, haven't you, colonel?"

The priest looked at him, but not resentfully. "My work has not been
without a fair measure of success," he answered, now sitting upright and
motionless. "You must have noticed that we are building quite a large
church."

"So I see," said the Major. "And you still believe that you are going to
preserve the negro's body as well as save his soul."

"We are going to save his soul, and a soul that is to be saved serves to
protect its habitation."

"But you foresee a race war?"

"I foresee racial troubles, which in time may result in a war of
extermination."

"I agree with you, Mr. Brennon," the Major replied. "As time passes it
will become more and more clear that the whites and the negroes cannot
live together. Their interests may be identical, but they are of a
different order and can never agree. And now let us face the truth. What
sowed the seeds of this coming strife? Emancipation? No,
enfranchisement. The other day Mr. Low gave me a copy of the London
Spectator, calling my attention to a thoughtful paper on this very
subject. It deeply impressed me, so much so that I read parts of it a
number of times. Let me see if I can recall one observation that struck
me. Yes, and it is this: 'We want a principle on which republicans can
work and we believe that the one which would be the most fruitful is
that the black people should be declared to be foreign immigrants,
guests of the state, entitled to the benefit of every law and every
privilege, education, for example, but debarred from political power and
from sitting on juries, which latter, indeed, in mixed cases, ought to
be superseded by properly qualified magistrates and judges.' The paper
goes on to show that this would not be oppressive, and that the blacks
would be in the position of a majority of Englishmen prior to 1832, a
position compatible with much happiness. But the trouble is we have gone
too far to retrace our steps. It was easy enough to grant suffrage to
the negro, but to take it away would be a difficult matter. So what are
we to do? To let the negro exercise the full and unrestrained measure of
his suffrage, would, in some communities, reduce the white man to the
position of political nonentity. And no law, no cry about the rights of
a down-trodden race, no sentiment expressed abroad, could force the
white man to submit quietly to this degradation. Upon the negro's head
the poetry of New England has placed a wreath of sentiment. No poet has
placed a wreath upon the brow of the California Chinaman, nor upon the
head of any foreign element in any of the northern states. Then why this
partiality? Is the negro so gentle that he must always be defended, and
is the white man of the south so hard of heart that he must always be
condemned?"

"What you say is perfectly clear to me," the priest replied, "and it is
natural that you should defend your position."

"It is the only position and the only course left to a thinking and a
self-respecting white man," the Major rejoined.

"Yes, I will agree to that, too."

"Ah, and that's the trouble, Mr. Brennon. You agree while you oppose."

"My dear Major, I am not here to oppose, nor to destroy, but to save
fragments when the hour of destruction shall have come."

"But if your church believes that it can save fragments why doesn't it
exert itself to save the whole?"

"Major, salvation comes of persuasion and persuasion is slow."

"Yes, and let me tell you that your form of religion will never become
popular among the negroes. The negro is emotional, and to make a display
of his religious agitation is too great a luxury to be given up. It
likes best the sanguinary local spectacular drama; it cheers and cheers
again every allusion to Venice; and when the curtain rises on some well-
known Venetian scene, it has out the scene-painter by name three times--
which is all the police permits. The auditors wear their hats in the pit,
but deny that privilege to the people in the boxes, and raise stormy
and wrathful cries of _cappello!_ till these uncover. Between acts, they
indulge in excesses of water flavored with anise, and even go to
the extent of candied nuts and fruits, which are hawked about the
theatre, and sold for two soldi the stick,--with the tooth-pick on
which they are spitted thrown into the bargain.

The Malibran Theatre is well attended on Sunday night, but the one
entertainment which never fails of drawing and delighting full houses is
the theatre of the puppets, or the Marionette, and thither I like best
to go. The Marionette prevail with me, for I find in the performances of
these puppets, no new condition demanded of the spectator, but rather a
frank admission of unreality that makes every shadow of verisimilitude
delightful, and gives a marvelous relish to the immemorial effects and
traditionary tricks of the stage.

The little theatre of the puppets is at the corner of a narrow street
opening from the Calle del Ridotto, and is of the tiniest dimensions
and simplest appointments. There are no boxes--the whole theatre is
scarcely larger than a stage-box--and you pay ten soldi to go into the
pit, where you are much more comfortable than the aristocrats who
have paid fifteen for places in the dress-circle above. The stage is very
small, and the scenery a kind of coarse miniature painting. But it is
very complete, and every thing is contrived to give relief to the
puppets and to produce an illusion of magnitude in their figures. They
are very artlessly introduced, and are maneuvered, according
to the exigencies of the scene, by means of cords running from their
heads, arms, and legs to the top of the stage. To the management
of the cords they owe all the vehemence of their passions and the grace
of their oratory, not to mention a certain gliding, ungradual locomotion,
altogether spectral.

The drama of the Marionette is of a more elevated and ambitious tone
than that of the Burattini, which exhibit their vulgar loves and
coarse assassinations in little punch-shows on the Riva, and in the
larger squares; but the standard characters are nearly the same
with both, and are all descended from the _commedia a braccio_
[Footnote: Comedy by the yard.] which flourished on the Italian
stage before the time of Goldoni.

And I am very far from disparaging the Burattini, which have great
and peculiar merits, not the least of which is the art of drawing
the most delighted, dirty, and picturesque audiences.

Like most of the Marionette, they converse vicariously in the
Venetian dialect, and have such a rapidity of utterance that it is
difficult to follow them.

I only remember to have made out one of their comedies,--a play in which
an ingenious lover procured his rich and successful rival to be arrested
for lunacy, and married the disputed young person while the other was
raging in the mad-house. This play is performed to enthusiastic audiences;
but for the most part the favorite drama of the Burattini appears to be
a sardonic farce, in which the chief character--a puppet ten inches
high, with a fixed and staring expression of Mephistophelean
good-nature and wickedness--deludes other and weak-minded puppets
into trusting him, and then beats them with a club upon the back
of the head until they die.

The murders of this infamous creature, which are always executed
in a spirit of jocose _sang-froid_, and accompanied by humorous
remarks, are received with the keenest relish by the spectators
and, indeed, the action is every way worthy of applause.

The dramatic spirit of the Italian race seems to communicate itself to
the puppets, and they perform their parts with a fidelity to theatrical
unnaturalness which is wonderful. I have witnessed death agonies on these
little stages which the great American tragedian himself (whoever
he may happen to be) could not surpass in degree of energy. And then
the Burattini deserve the greater credit because they are agitated by
the legs from below the scene, and not managed by cords from above, as
at the Marionette Theatre. Their audiences, as I said, are always
interesting, and comprise: first, boys ragged and dirty in inverse
ratio to their size; then weak little girls, supporting immense weight
of babies; then Austrian soldiers, with long coats and short pipes;
lumbering Dalmat sailors; a transient Greek or Turk; Venetian loafers,
pale-faced, statuesque, with the drapery of their cloaks thrown over
their shoulders; young women, with bare heads of thick black hair; old
women, all fluff and fangs; wooden-shod peasants, with hooded cloaks
of coarse brown; then boys--and boys. They all enjoy the spectacle
with approval, and take the drama _au grand sérieux_, uttering none
of the gibes which sometimes attend efforts to please in our own
country.

Even when the hat, or other instrument of extortion, is passed round, and
they give nothing, and when the manager, in an excess of fury and
disappointment, calls out, "Ah!

sons of dogs! I play no more to you!" and closes the theatre, they quietly
and unresentfully disperse.

Though, indeed, _fioi de cani_ means no great reproach in Venetian
parlance; and parents of the lower classes caressingly address their
children in these terms.

Whereas to call one Figure of a Pig, is to wreak upon him the deadliest
insult which can be put into words.

In the _commedia a braccio_, before mentioned as the inheritance
of the Marionette, the dramatist furnished merely the plot, and the
outline of the action; the players filled in the character and dialogue.
With any people less quick-witted than the Italians, this sort of comedy
must have been insufferable, but it formed the delight of that people
till the middle of the last century, and even after Goldoni went
to Paris he furnished his Italian players with the _commedia a
braccio_.

I have heard some very passable _gags_ at the Marionette, but
the real _commedia a braccio_ no longer exists, and its familiar
and invariable characters perform written plays.

Facanapa is a modern addition to the old stock of _dramatis personae_,
and he is now without doubt the popular favorite in Venice.

He is always, like Pantalon, a Venetian; but whereas the latter is always
a merchant, Facanapa is any thing that the exigency of the play
demands.

He is a dwarf, even among puppets, and his dress invariably consists
of black knee-breeches and white stockings, a very long, full-skirted
black coat, and a three-cornered hat.

His individual traits are displayed in all his characters, and he
is ever a coward, a boaster, and a liar; a glutton and avaricious,
but withal of an agreeable bonhomie that wins the heart.

To tell the truth, I care little for the plays in which he has no
part and I have learned to think a certain trick of his--lifting his
leg rigidly to a horizontal line, by way of emphasis, and saying, "Capisse
la?"

or "Sa la?" (You understand? You know?)--one of the finest things in
the world.

In nearly all of Goldoni's Venetian comedies, and in many which he
wrote in Italian, appear the standard associates of Facanapa,--Arlecchino,
il Dottore. Pantalon dei Bisognosi, and Brighella. The reader is at
first puzzled by their constant recurrence, but never weary of Goldoni's
witty management of them. They are the chief persons of the obsolete
_commedia a braccio_, and have their nationality and peculiarities
marked by immemorial attribution. Pantalon is a Venetian merchant, rich,
and commonly the indulgent father of a wilful daughter or dissolute
son, figuring also sometimes as the childless uncle of large fortune.
The second old man is il Dottore, who is a Bolognese, and a doctor of
the University. Brighella and Arlecchino are both of Bergamo.

The one is a sharp and roguish servant, busy-body, and rascal; the other
is dull and foolish, and always masked and dressed in motley--a gibe at
the poverty of the Bergamasks among whom, moreover, the extremes
of stupidity and cunning are most usually found, according to the
popular notion in Italy.

The plays of the Marionette are written expressly for them, and are
much shorter than the standard drama as it is known to us. They embrace,
however, a wide range of subjects, from lofty melodrama to broad farce,
as you may see by looking at the advertisements in the Venetian Gazettes
for any week past, where perhaps you shall find the plays performed
to have been: The Ninety-nine Misfortunes of Facanapa; Arlecchino,
the Sleeping King; Facanapa as Soldier in Catalonia; The Capture
of Smyrna, with Facanapa and Arlecchino Slaves in Smyrna (this play
being repeated several nights); and, Arlecchino and Facanapa Hunting
an Ass.

If you can fancy people going night after night to this puppet-drama, and
enjoying it with the keenest appetite, you will not only do something
toward realizing to yourself the easily-pleased Italian nature, but
you will also suppose great excellence in the theatrical management.

For my own part, I find few things in life equal to the Marionette. I
am never tired of their bewitching absurdity, their inevitable
defects, their irresistible touches of verisimilitude.

At their theatre I have seen the relenting parent (Pantalon) twitchingly
embrace his erring son, while Arlecchino, as the large-hearted
cobbler who has paid the house-rent of the erring son when the
prodigal was about to be cast into the street, looked on and rubbed
his hands with amiable satisfaction and the conventional delight
in benefaction which we all know.

I have witnessed the base terrors of Facanapa at an apparition, and
I have beheld the keen spiritual agonies of the Emperor Nicholas
on hearing of the fall of Sebastopol.

Not many passages of real life have affected me as deeply as the atrocious
behavior of the brutal baronial brother-in-law, when he responds to the
expostulations of his friend the Knight of Malta,--a puppet of shaky and
vacillating presence, but a soul of steel and rock:
"Why, O baron, detain this unhappy lady in thy dungeons?

Remember, she is thy brother's wife. Remember thine own honor. Think on
the sacred name of virtue." (Wrigglingly, and with a set countenance
and gesticulations toward the pit.)
To which the ferocious baron makes answer with a sneering laugh,
"Honor?-- I know it not! Virtue?--I detest it!" and attempting to pass
the knight, in order to inflict fresh indignities upon his sister-in-law,
he yields to the natural infirmities of rags and pasteboard, and topples
against him.

Facanapa, also, in his great scene of the Haunted Poet, is tremendous.

You discover him in bed, too much visited by the Muse to sleep, and
reading his manuscripts aloud to himself, after the manner of poets
when they cannot find other listeners.

He is alarmed by various ghostly noises in the house, and is often
obliged to get up and examine the dark corners of the room, and to
look under the bed.

When at last the spectral head appears at the foot-board, Facanapa vanishes
with a miserable cry under the bed-clothes, and the scene closes.
Intrinsically the scene is not much, but this great actor throws
into it a life, a spirit, a drollery wholly irresistible.

The ballet at the Marionette is a triumph of choreographic art, and
is extremely funny.

The _prima ballerina_ has all the difficult grace and far-fetched arts
of the _prima ballerina_ of flesh and blood; and when the enthusiastic
audience calls her back after the scene, she is humanly delighted,
and acknowledges the compliment with lifelike _empressement_.

I have no doubt the _corps de ballet_ have their private jealousies
and bickerings, when quietly laid away in boxes, and deprived of
all positive power by the removal of the cords which agitate their
arms and legs.

The puppets are great in _pirouette_ and _pas seul_; but I think
the strictly dramatic part of such spectacular ballets, as The
Fall of Carthage, is their strong point.

The people who witness their performances are of all ages and
conditions-- I remember to have once seen a Russian princess and
some German countesses in the pit--but the greater number of
spectators are young men of the middle classes, pretty shop-girls,
and artisans and their wives and children.

The little theatre is a kind of trysting-place for lovers in humble life,
and there is a great deal of amusing drama going on between the acts,
in which the invariable Beppo and Nina of the Venetian populace
take the place of the invariable Arlecchino and Facanapa of the
stage.

I one day discovered a letter at the bottom of the Canal of the
Giudecca, to which watery resting-place some recreant, addressed
as "Caro Antonio," had consigned it; and from this letter I came
to know certainly of at least one love affair at the Marionette.

"Caro Antonio" was humbly besought, "if his heart still felt the
force of love," to meet the writer (who softly reproached him with
neglect) at the Marionette the night of date, at six o'clock; and
I would not like to believe he could resist so tender a prayer,
though perhaps it fell out so.

I fished up through the lucent water this despairing little epistle,--it
was full of womanly sweetness and bad spelling,--and dried away its
briny tears on the blade of my oar.
If ever I thought to keep it, with some vague purpose of offering it
to any particularly anxious-looking Nina at the Marionette as to the
probable writer--its unaccountable loss spared me the delicate office.
Still, however, when I go to see the puppets, it is with an interest
divided between the drolleries of Facanapa, and the sad presence
of expectation somewhere among the groups of dark-eyed girls there,
who wear such immense hoops under such greasy dresses, who part
their hair at one side, and call each other "Ciò!"

Where art thou, O fickle and cruel, yet ever dear Antonio? All
unconscious, I think,--gallantly posed against the wall, thy slouch
hat brought forward to the point of thy long cigar, the arms of thy
velvet jacket folded on thy breast, and thy ear-rings softly twinkling
in the light.

CHAPTER VI.

VENETIAN DINNERS AND DINERS.

When I first came to Venice, I accepted the fate appointed to young
men on the Continent. I took lodgings, and I began dining drearily
at the restaurants.

Worse prandial fortunes may befall one, but it is hard to conceive
of the continuance of so great unhappiness elsewhere; while the
restaurant life is an established and permanent thing in Italy, for
every bachelor and for many forlorn families.

It is not because the restaurants are very dirty--if you wipe your
plate and glass carefully before using them, they need not stomach you;
it is not because the rooms are cold--if you sit near the great vase
of smoldering embers in the centre of each room you may suffocate in
comparative comfort; it is not because the prices are great--they are
really very reasonable; it is not for any very tangible fault that I
object to life at the restaurants, and yet I cannot think of its
hopeless homelessness without rebellion against the whole system it
implies, as something unnatural and insufferable.

But before we come to look closely at this aspect of Italian
civilization, it is better to look first at a very noticeable trait
of Italian character,--temperance in eating and drinking.

As to the poorer classes, one observes without great surprise how slenderly
they fare, and how with a great habit of talking of meat and drink,
the verb _mangiare_ remains in fact for the most part inactive
with them.

But it is only just to say that this virtue of abstinence seems to be
not wholly the result of necessity, for it prevails with other
classes which could well afford the opposite vice.

Meat and drink do not form the substance of conviviality with Venetians,
as with the Germans and the English, and in degree with ourselves;
and I have often noticed on the Mondays-at-the-Gardens, and other
social festivals of the people, how the crowd amused itself with
any thing--music, dancing, walking, talking--any thing but the great
northern pastime of gluttony.

Knowing the life of the place, I make quite sure that Venetian gayety
is on few occasions connected with repletion; and I am ashamed to confess
that I have not always been able to repress a feeling of stupid
scorn for the empty stomachs everywhere, which do not even ask to be
filled, or, at least, do not insist upon it. The truth is, the North
has a gloomy pride in gastronomic excess, which unfits her
children to appreciate the cheerful prudence of the South.

Venetians eat but one meal a day, which is dinner. They breakfast on
a piece of bread with coffee and milk; supper is a little cup of black
coffee, or an ice, taken at a caffè. The coffee, however, is repeated
frequently throughout the day, and in the summertime fruit is eaten,
but eaten sparingly, like everything else.

As to the nature of the dinner, it of course varies somewhat according
to the nature of the diner; but in most families of the middle
class a dinner at home consists of a piece of boiled beef, a
_minestra_ (a soup thickened with vegetables, tripe, and rice), a
vegetable dish of some kind, and the wine of the country.

The failings of the repast among all classes lean to the side of
simplicity, and the abstemious character of the Venetian finds sufficient
comment in his familiar invitation to dinner: "_Venga a mangiar quattro
risi con me_." (Come eat four grains of rice with me.)

But invitations to dinner have never formed a prime element of
hospitality in Venice. Goldoni notices this fact in his memoirs, and
speaking of the city in the early half of the last century, he says
that the number and excellence of the eating-houses in the city
made invitations to dinner at private houses rare, and superfluous
among the courtesies offered to strangers.

The Venetian does not, like the Spaniard, place his house at your
disposition, and, having extended this splendid invitation, consider
the duties of hospitality fulfilled; he does not appear to think
you want to make use of his house for social purposes, preferring
himself the caffè, and finding home and comfort there, rather than
under his own roof.

"What caffè do you frequent? Ah! so do I.

We shall meet often there." This is frequently your new acquaintance's
promise of friendship. And one may even learn to like the social footing
on which people meet at the caffè, as well as that of the parlor or
drawing-room.
I have laughed at you while you
were cheating me; I have placed a premium upon your worthlessness and
rascality. There is no good in you. Get off that place just as soon as
you can."

"John----"

"Don't call me John. You are a hypocrite and a deadbeat. Yes, you have
sung like a cricket and I have paid dearly for your music. Don't say a
word to me; don't open your lying mouth, but get out of this yard as
soon as your wretched legs can carry you, and get off that place at
once."

The Major turned his back upon him, and the old fellow tottered to the
gate. With an effort he scrambled upon his horse and was gone. He looked
back as if he expected to see a hand upraised, commanding him to stop;
he listened for a voice inviting him to return; but he saw no hand,
heard no voice, and onward down the road he went. In the highway he met
a man and the man spoke to him, but he replied not, neither did he lift
his heavy eyes, but rode onward, drooping over the horse's neck. He
passed the house of Wash Sanders, and from the porch the invalid hailed
him, but he paid no heed.

Upon reaching home, or the cypress log house which for him had so long
been a free and easy asylum, he feebly called a negro to take his horse.
Into the house he went, into the only habitable room. It was at best a
desolate abode; the walls were bare, the floor was rotting, but about
him he cast a look of helpless affection, at the bed, at a shelf whereon
a few books were piled. He opened a closet and took therefrom a faded
carpet-bag and into it he put Rousseau's Confessions, then an old book
on logic, and then he hesitated and looked up at the shelf. All were
dear to him, these thumbed and dingy books; many a time at midnight had
they supped with him beside the fire of muttering white-oak coals, and
out into the wild bluster of a storm had they driven care and
loneliness. But he could not take them all. Painfully he made his
selections, nearly filled his bag, leaving barely room for an old satin
waistcoat and two shirts; and these he stuffed in hastily. He put the
bag upon the bed, when with fumbling he had fastened it, and stood
looking about the room. Yes, that was all, all except a hickory walking
cane standing in a corner.

Onward again he went with his cane on his shoulder and his bag on his
back. At the bars down the lane a dog ran up to him. "Go to the house,
Jack," he said, and the dog understood him and trotted away, but in the
old man's voice he heard a suspicious note and he turned before reaching
the house and followed slowly and cautiously, stopping whenever the old
fellow turned to look back. At the corner of a field Gid halted and put
down his bag, and the dog turned about, pretending to be on his way
home. In the field was a pecan tree, tall and graceful. Year after year
had the old man tended it, and to him it was more than a tree, it was a
friend. Upon the fence he climbed, sitting for a moment on the top rail
to look about him; to the tree he went, and putting his arms about it,
pressed his wrinkled cheek against its bark. He turned away, climbed the
fence, took up his bag and resumed his journey toward the steamboat
landing. Far behind, on a rise in the road, the dog sat, watching him.
The old man turned a bend in the road, and the dog, running until his
master was again in sight, sat down to gaze after him. Far ahead was the
charred skeleton of a gin house, burned by marauders many years ago, and
here he was to turn into the road that led to the landing. He looked up
as he drew near and saw a horse standing beside the road; and then from
behind the black ruin stepped a man--the Major.

"Gid," he said, coming forward, "I believe we're going to have more
rain."

The old man dropped his bag, and the dog far down the road turned back.
"Wind's from the northwest, Gid." He put his hand on the old fellow's
shoulder.

"Don't touch me, John; let me go."

"Why, I can't let you go. Look here, old man, you have stood by me more
than once--you stood when other men ran away--and you are more to me
than money is."

"Let me go, John. I am an old liar and an old hypercrite. My pocket was
not picked--I lost the money gambling. Let me go; I am a scoundrel."

He stooped to take up his bag, but the Major seized it. "I'll carry it
for you," he said. "Too heavy for as old a man as you are. Come on back
and raise another crop."

"I haven't a thing to go on, John. Can't even get feed for the mules.
Give me the satchel."

"You shall have all the feed you want."

"But your wife----"

"I will tell her that the debt is paid."

"John, your gospel would take the taint out of a thief on a cross. And I
was never so much of a man as you now make me, and, I gad, I'm going to
be worthy of your friendship. Let me remind you of something: That old
uncle of mine in Kentucky will leave me his money. It's cold-blooded to
say it, but I understand that he can't live but a short time. I am his
only relative, and have a hold on him that he can't very well shake off.
He'll beat me out of my own as long as he can, but old Miz Nature's got
her eye on him. Yes, I'll try it again and next year I'll let you sell
the crop. But say, John, at one time I had them fellows on the hip, and
if I had cashed in at the right time I would have hit 'em big. Get your
horse and we'll hook the satchel over the horn of the saddle."

Along the road they walked toward home, the Major leading the horse. For
a time they were silent, and then the Major said: "As I came along I was
thinking of that bully from Natchez. He would have killed me with his
Derringer if you hadn't broken his arm with your cane."

"Oh, yes; that red-headed fellow. It has been a long time since I
thought of him. How the pleasant acquaintances of our younger days do
slip away from us."

"Yes," the Major laughed, "and our friends fall back as we grow old.
Friendship is more a matter of temperament than----"

"Of the honesty of the other party," Gid suggested.

"Yes, you are right. Honesty doesn't always inspire friendship, for we
must be interested in a man before we can become his friend; and mere
honesty is often a bore."

When they reached the gate that opened into Gid's yard, the Major shook
hands with the old fellow and told him to resume his authority as if
nothing had happened to interrupt it.

"I will, John; but something has happened to interrupt it, and that
interruption has been my second birth, so to speak. I passed away at
twelve o'clock and was born again just now. I won't try to express my
feelings, I am still so young; for any profession of gratitude would be
idle in comparison with what I am going to do. I've got your friendship
and I'm going to have your respect. Come in and sit awhile, won't you?"

"Not now, but I'll come over to-night."

"Good. And remember this, John; I'm going to have your respect."


CHAPTER XVII.


With a generous and perhaps weak falsehood the Major sought to assure
his wife that Gid had paid a part of his debt, and that a complete
settlement was not far off, but with a cool smile she looked at him and
replied: "John, please don't tax your conscience any further. It's too
great a strain on you. Let the matter drop. I won't even say I told you
so."

"And as much as you might want the subject to be dropped you can't let
it fall without reminding me--but we will let it drop; we'll throw it
down. But you have your rights, Margaret, and they shall be respected. I
will tell him that out of respect to you he must stay away from here."

"That is very thoughtful, dear; but does it occur to you that your
continued intimacy with him, whether he comes here or not, will show a
want of respect for me?"

"You don't give a snap whether he pays his debts or not. You simply
don't want me to associate with him. No, it has not occurred to me that
I am not showing you proper respect and neither is it true. Margaret, do
you know what is the most absurd and insupportable tyranny that woman
can put upon man? It is to choose a companion for her husband."

"With me, dear, it is not tyranny; it is judgment."

"Oh, yes; or rather, it is the wonderful intuition which we are taught
to believe that woman possesses. I admit that she is quick to see evil
in a man, but she shuts her eyes to the good quality that stands
opposite to offset it."

"Oh, I know that I haven't shrewdness enough to discover a good trait; I
can recognize only the bad, for they are always clearly in view. It is a
wonder that you can respect so stupid a creature as I am, and I know
that you have ceased to have a deeper feeling for me."

"Now, Margaret, for gracious sake don't talk that way. Oh, of course
you've got me now, and I have to flop or be a brute. Yes, you've got me.
You know I respect your good sense and love you, so what's the use of
this wrangle. There, now, it's all right. I'll promise not to go near
him if you say so. And I have made up my mind to attend church with more
regularity. I acknowledge that I can go wrong oftener than almost any
man. Respect for you!" he suddenly broke out. "Why, you are the smartest
woman in this state, and everybody knows it. Come on out to the office
and sit with me."

Sometimes the Major, with a pretense of having business to call him away
at night, would go over to old Gid's house, and together they would
chuckle by the fire or nod over roasting potatoes. They talked of their
days on the river, and of their nights at Natchez under the hill. To be
wholly respectable, a man must give up many an enjoyment, but when at
last he has become virtuous, he fondly recounts the escapades of former
years; and thus the memory of hot blood quickens the feeble pulse of
age.

Sometimes old Gid would meet the Major at the gin house and joke with
him amid the dust and lint, but he always came and departed in a
roundabout way, so that Mrs. Cranceford, sitting at the window, might
not be offended by his horse and his figure in the road. A time came
when there was an interval of a week, and the old fellow had not shown
himself at the gin house, and one night the Major went to the cypress
log home to invade his retirement, but the place was dark. He pushed
open the door and lighted the lamp. The fireplace was cheerless with
cold ashes. He went to a cabin and made inquiry of a negro, and was told
that Mr. Batts had been gone more than a week, and that he had left no
word as to when he intended to return. Greatly worried, the Major went
home; wide awake he pondered during long hours in bed, but no light fell
upon the mystery of the old man's absence; nor in the night nor at
breakfast did the Major speak of it to his wife, but silently he took
his worry with him to his office. One morning while the planter was at
his desk, there came a storming at the dogs in the yard.

"Get down, boys. Don't put your muddy paws on me. Hi, there, Bill, you
seven years' itch of a scoundrel, take my horse to the stable."

The Major threw open the door. "Don't come out, John!" Gid shouted,
coming forward among the prancing dogs. "Don't come out, for I want to
see you in there."

He appeared to have gained flesh; his cheeks were ruddy, and his grasp
was strong as he seized the Major's hand. "How are you, John?"

"Why, old man, where on earth have you been?"

"I have been in the swamp for many years, but now I touch the ground
only in high places."

He boldly stepped into the office, and as he sat down the sweep of his
coat-tails brushed chattel mortgages and bills of sale from the desk.
"Only in high places do my feet touch the ground, John. I have just
returned from Kentucky. And I bring the news that my old uncle is no
more to this life, but is more to me than ever."

"And you were summoned to his bedside," said the Major, striving to be
serious, but smiling upon him.

"Not exactly. You might say that I was summoned by a lawyer to his
chest-side. He left me no word of affection, but his money is mine, and
on many a half-dollar of it I warrant you there is the print of his
tooth. Give me your check-book, John."

"Wait a while, Gid. Let us accustom ourselves to the situation."

"No; let us get down to business. I am impatient to pay a mildewed debt.
God's love was slow, John, but it came. How much do I owe?"

"I don't believe I'd pay it all at once, Gid. Leave a part to be met by
the next crop."

"All right; but it's yours at any time. The only way I can use money is
to get rid of it as soon as possible. Make out a check for two-thirds of
the amount and I'll put my strong hand to it. But you haven't
congratulated me."

"No," the Major replied, with a drawl, "for I felt that it would have
too much the appearance of my own greed. I have hounded you--" The old
fellow seized him, and stopped his utterance. "Don't say that, John. You
have kept me out of hell and you ought to complete my heaven with a
congratulation."

They shook hands, looking not into each other's eyes, but downward; the
Major pretended to laugh, and old Gid, dropping his hand, blustered
about the room, whistled and stormed at a dog that poked his head in at
the door. Then he sat down, crossed his legs; but finding this
uncomfortable, sprawled himself into an easier position and began to
moralize upon the life and character of his uncle. "He always called me
a fool with an uproarious fancy, an idiot with wit, and a wise man
lacking in sense. He denied himself everything, and it strikes me that
he must have been the fool. I wish he had gathered spoil enough to make
me rich, but I reckon he did the best he could, and I forgive him. We
must respect the dead, and sometimes the sooner they are dead the sooner
we respect them. Let me sign that thing. Oh, he hasn't left me so much,
but I won't quarrel with him now. What was it the moralist said?" he
asked, pressing a blotting pad upon his name. "Said something about we
must educate or we must perish. That's all right, but I say we must have
money. Without money you may be honest," he went on, handing the check
to the Major, "but your honesty doesn't show to advantage. Money makes a
man appear honorable whether he is or not. It gives him courage, and
nothing is more honorable than courage. The fact that a man pays a debt
doesn't always argue that he's honest--it more often argues that he's
got money. Accident may make a man honest just as it may make him a
thief."

"Your log fire and your old books haven't done you any harm, Gid."

"They have saved my life, John. And let me tell you, that a man who
grows gray without loving some old book is worse than a fool. The
quaint thought of an old thinker is a cordial to aged men who come after
him. I used to regret that I had not been better educated, but now I'm
glad that my learning is not broader--it might give me too many
loves--might make me a book polygamist. I have wondered why any
university man can't sit down and write a thing to startle the world;
but the old world herself is learned, and what she demands is
originality. We may learn how to express thought, John, but after all,
thought itself must be born in us. There, I have discharged an
obligation and delivered a moral lecture, and I want to tell you that
you are the best man I ever saw."

"Now you are talking nonsense, Gid. Why, you have been just as necessary
to me as I have to you. In a manner you have been the completion of
myself."

"Ah," Gid cried, scuffling to his feet and bowing, "I have the pleasure
of saluting Mrs. Cranceford. Some time has passed since I saw you,
ma'am, and I hope you will pardon my absence."

The Major sprawled himself back with a laugh. Mrs. Cranceford, standing
on the door sill, gave Gid a cool stare.

"Won't you please come in?" he asked, courteously waving his hand over
the chair which he had just quitted.

"No, I thank you."

"Ah, I see you are surprised to see me in here. There was a time when it
would have strained my boldness, but now it is a pleasure. I am here on
business. To me business is a sweet morsel, and I delight myself with
rolling it under my tongue. Ma'am, I have just signed a check. My dear
old uncle, one of the most humane and charming of men, has been cruelly
snatched from this life; and as he found it impossible to take his money
with him, he left it to me."

"I hope you will make good use of it," she replied, with never a
softening toward him.

"I am beginning well," he rejoined, surprised that she did not give him
a kindlier look. "I am discharging my obligations, and before night I'll
call on the rector and give him a check."

She smiled, but whether in doubt as to his sincerity or in commendation
of his purpose he could not determine. But he took encouragement. "Yes,
ma'am, and as I have now become a man of some importance, I am going to
act accordingly. I am free to confess that my first endeavor shall be to
gain your good opinion."

"And I'll freely give it, Mr. Batts, when I believe you merit it."

"To desire it, ma'am, is of itself a merit."

She laughed at this, and the Major laughed, too, for he saw that no
longer should he be compelled to defend his fondness for the old
fellow.

"I am more than willing to confess my mountain of faults," Gid went on,
smiling, and his smile was not disagreeable. "I am more than willing to
do this, and when I have--and which I now do--your Christian heart must
forgive me."

She laughed and held out her hand, and with a gallantry that would have
been reminiscent, even in old Virginia, he touched it with his lips.

"Come here, Margaret," said the Major, and when she turned toward him,
smiling, he put his arms about her, pressed her to his breast and fondly
kissed her.


CHAPTER XVIII.


Mrs. Cranceford's surrender was not as complete as Gid's fancy had
fore-pictured it; he had expected to see her bundle of prejudices thrown
down like Christian's load; and therefore the dignity with which she
looked upon the establishment of his honor was a disappointment to him,
but she invited him to stay for dinner, and this argued that her reserve
could not much longer maintain itself. With pleasure he recalled that
she had given him her hand, but in this he feared that there was more of
haughtiness than of generosity. And at the table, and later in the
library, he was made to feel that after all she had accepted him merely
on probation; still, her treatment of him was so different from what it
had been, that he took the courage to build up a hope that he might at
last subdue her. To what was passing the Major was humorously alive,
and, too keenly tickled to sit still, he walked up and down the room,
slyly shaking himself. Mrs. Cranceford asked Gid if he had read the book
which she had loaned him, the "Prince of the House of David," and he
answered that when at last he had fallen asleep the night before, the
precious volume had dropped beside his pillow. There were some books
which he read while sitting by the fire, and some whose stirring
qualities moved him to walk about as he gulped their contents; but with
a godly book he must lay himself down so that he might be more receptive
of its soothing influence. Then he reviewed the book in question, and
did it shrewdly. With the Jewish maiden and the Roman centurion going to
see the strange man perform the novel rite of baptism in the river of
Jordan, he looked back upon the city of Jerusalem; and further along he
pointed out Judas, plodding the dusty road--squat, sullen, and with a
sneer at the marvel he was destined to see.

"I believe you have read it," the Major spoke up, still slyly shaking
himself.

"Read it! Why, John, I have eaten it. I gad, sir--Pardon me, ma'am."
With a nod she pronounced her forgiveness. The slip was but a pretense,
foisted to change the talk to suit his purpose. "Ah," said he, "I have
not yet weeded out all my idle words, and it grieves me when I am
surprised by the recurrence of one which must be detestable; but, ma'am,
I try hard, and there is always merit in a sincere trial."

"Yes, in a sincere trial," she agreed.

"Yes, ma'am; and--now there's John laughing at me fit to kill himself;
and bless me, ma'am, you are laughing, too. Am I never to be taken
seriously? Are you thus to titter true reformation out of countenance?
But I like it. But we are never tired of a man so long as we can laugh
at him; we may cry ourselves to sleep, but who laughs himself to
slumber? Ma'am, are you going to leave us?" he asked, seeing that Mrs.
Cranceford was on her feet. "But of course you have duties to look
after, even though you might not be glad to escape an old man's gabble.
I _call_ it gabble, but I know it to be wisdom. But I beg pardon for
seeming vanity."

A dignified smile was the only reply she made, but in the smile was
legible the progress his efforts were making.

"John," he said, when she was gone, "that sort of a woman would have
made a man of me."

"But perhaps that sort of a woman wouldn't have undertaken the job," the
Major replied.

"Slow, John; but I guess you're right."

"I think so. Women may be persistent, but they are generally quick to
recognize the impossible."

"Easy. But again I guess you're right. I gad, when the teachings of a
man's mother leave him unfinished there isn't a great deal of
encouragement for the wife. A man looks upon his wife as a part of
himself, and a man will lie even to himself, John."

"By the way," the Major asked, sitting down, "have you seen that fellow
Mayo since he came back?"

"Yes; I met him in the road once, but had no words with him."

"It would hardly do for me to have words with him," the Major replied;
and after a moment of musing he added: "I understand that he's
organizing the negroes, and that's the first step toward trouble. The
negro has learned to withdraw his faith from the politician, but labor
organization is a new thing to him, and he will believe in it until the
bubble bursts. That fellow is a shrewd scoundrel and there's no telling
what harm he may not project."

"Then why not hang him before he has time to launch his trouble? There's
always a way to keep the cat from scratching you. Shoot the cat."

"No," said the Major, "that won't do. It would put us at a
disadvantage."

"Yes; but I gad, our disadvantage wouldn't be as great as his. Nobody
would be willing to swap places with a man that's hanged."

"That's all very well, but we would be the aggressors, and distant eyes
would look upon him as a martyr."

"Yes, I know; but isn't it better to have one man looked on as a martyr
than to have a whole community bathed in blood?"

"It might be better for us, but not for our children. A blood-bath may
be forgotten, but martyrdom lives in the minds of succeeding
generations."

"John, there spoke the man of business. You are always looking out for
the future. I have agreed with myself to make the most of the present,
and so far as the future is concerned, it will have to look out for
itself--it always has. Was there ever a future that was not prepared to
take care of itself? And is there a past that can be helped? Then let us
fasten our minds to the present. Let me see. I wonder if we couldn't
train a steer to gore that fellow to death. And I gad, that would do
away with all possibility of martyrdom. What do you say?"

"Nothing more on that subject; but I can say something concerning
another matter, and it will interest you more than the martyrdom of all
history."

"Then out with it. I demand to be interested. But don't trifle with me,
John. Remember that an old man's hide is thin."

"I'll not trifle with you; I'll startle you. Sixty years ago, the
grandfather of Admiral Semmes made whisky in the Tennessee Mountains."

"But, John, that was a long time ago, and the old man is dead, and here
we are alive. But he made whisky sixty years ago. What about it?"

"The brother of the admiral lives in Memphis," the Major continued,
"and the other day he sent me a bottle of that whisky, run through a log
before you were born."

Gid's mouth flew open and his eyes stuck out. "John," he said, and the
restraint he put upon his voice rippled it, "John, don't tamper with the
affections of an old and infirm man. Drive me off the bayou plantation,
compel me to acknowledge and to feel that I am a hypercrite and a liar,
but don't whet a sentiment and then cut my throat with it. Be merciful
unto a sinner who worships the past."

He sat there looking upward, a figure of distress, fearing the arrival
of despair. The Major laughed at him. "Don't knock me down with a stick
of spice-wood, John."

The Major went to a sideboard, took therefrom a quaint bottle and two
thin glasses, and placing them upon a round table, bowed to the bottle
and said: "Dew of an ancient mountain, your servant, sir." And old Gid,
with his mouth solemnly set, but with his eyes still bulging, arose,
folded his arms, bowed with deep reverence, and thus paid his respects:
"Sunshine, gathered from the slopes of long ago, your slave."

Mrs. Cranceford stepped in to look for something, and the play
improvised by these two old boys was broken short off. The Major sat
down, but Gid edged up nearer the table as if preparing to snatch the
bottle. Upon the odd-shaped flask she cast a look of passing interest,
and speaking to the Major she said:

"Oh, that's the whisky you got from Memphis. Don't drink it all, please.
I want to fill up the camphor bottle----"

Gid sat down with a jolt that jarred the windows, and she looked at him
in alarm, fearing at the instant that death must have aimed a blow at
him. "Camphor bottle!" he gasped. "Merciful heavens, ma'am,' fill up
your camphor bottle with my heart's blood!"

At this distress the Major laughed, though more in sympathy than in
mirth; and Mrs. Cranceford simply smiled as if with loathness she
recognized that there was cause for merriment, but when she had quitted
the room and gone to her own apartment, she sat down, and with the
picture in her mind, laughed in mischievous delight.

"Help yourself," said the Major. Gid had spread his hands over the
whisky as if to warm them in this liquidized soul of the past.

"Pour it out for me, John. And I will turn my back so as not to see how
much you pour."

"Go ahead," the Major insisted.

"But I am shaken with that suggested profanation, that camphor bottle,
and I'm afraid that I might spill a drop. But wait. I am also bold and
will attempt it. Gods, look at that--a shredded sunbeam."

"Don't be afraid of it."

"I was waiting for you to say that, John. But it is reverence, and not
fear. That I should have lived to see this day is a miracle. Shall I
pour yours? There you are."

They stood facing each other. With one hand Gid held high his glass, and
with the other hand he pressed his heart. Their glasses clinked, and
then they touched the liquor with their lips, sipped it, and Gid
stretched his neck like a chicken. To have spoken, to have smacked his
mouth, would have been profane. There is true reverence in nothing save
silence, and in silence they stood. Gid was the first to speak, not that
he had less reverence, but that he had more to say and felt, therefore,
that he must begin earlier. "Like the old man of Israel, I am now ready
to die," he said, as he put down his glass.

"Not until you have had another drink," suggested the Major.

"A further evidence, John, of your cool judgment. You are a remarkable
man. Most anyone can support a sorrow, but you can restrain a joy, and
in that is shown man's completest victory over self. No, I am not quite
ready to die. But I believe that if a drop of this liquor, this
saint-essence, had been poured into a camphor bottle, I should have
dropped dead, that's all, and Peter himself would have complimented me
upon the exquisite sensitiveness of my organization. Pour me just about
two fingers--or three. That's it. If the commander of the Alabama had
taken a few drinks of his grandfather's nectar, the Confederacy would
have wanted a blockade runner."

"You don't mean to say that it would have softened his nerve, do you?"

"Oh, no; but his heart, attuned to sweet melody, would have turned from
frowning guns to a beautiful nook in some river's bend, there to sing
among flowers dripping with honey-dew. I gad, this would make an old man
young before it could make him drunk."

The Major brought two pipes and an earthen jar of tobacco; and with the
smoke came musings and with the liquor came fanciful conceits. To them
it was a pride that they could drink without drunkenness; in moderation
was a continuous pleasure. When Gid arose to go, he took an oath that
never had he passed so delightful a time. The Major pressed him to stay
to supper. "Oh, no, John," he replied; "supper would spoil my spiritual
flow. And besides, I am expecting visitors to-night."

He hummed a tune as he cantered down the road; and the Major in his
library hummed the same tune as he stretched out his feet to the fire.

As Gid was passing the house of Wash Sanders, the endless invalid came
out upon the porch and called him:

"Won't you 'light?"

"No, don't believe I've got time," Gid answered, slacking the pace of
his horse. "How are you getting along?"

"Not at all. Got no relish for victuals. Don't eat enough to keep a
chicken alive. Can't stand it much longer."

"Want to bet on it?" Gid cried.

"What's that?"

"I say I'm sorry to hear it."

"Glad to know that somebody sympathizes with me. Well, drop in some time
and we'll take a chaw of tobacco and spit the fire out."

Nothing could have been more expressive of a welcome to Wash's house. To
invite a man to sit until the fire was extinguished with the overflow of
the quid was with him the topknot of courtesy.

"All right," Gid shouted back; and then to himself he said: "If I was
sure that a drink of that old whisky would thrill him to death I'd steal
it for him, but I'd have to be sure; I'd take no chances."

A horse came galloping up behind him. Dusk was falling and the old man
did not at once recognize Mayo, the labor organizer of the negroes. But
he knew the voice when the fellow spoke: "What's the weather about to
do?"

"About to quit, I reckon," Gid answered.

"Quit what?"

"Quit whatever it's doing."

"Pretty smart as you go along, ain't you?"

"Yes, and when I stop, too."

"Strains you to answer a civil question, I see."

The old man turned in his saddle and jogged along facing the fellow, and
some distance was covered before either of them spoke. "Are you trying
to raise a row with me?" Gid asked. "I want to know for if you are I can
save you a good deal of time and trouble."

"Sort of a time-saver," said Mayo.

"Yes, when I'm not a recruiter for eternity."

"I don't believe I follow you."

"Wish you would, or ride on ahead. Now look here," he added, "I just
about know you when I see you, and as I don't make friends half as fast
as I do enemies--in other words, as I am able to grasp a man's bad
points quicker than I can catch his good ones--I would advise you not to
experiment with me. You haven't come back here for the benefit of the
community, and if we were not the most easy-going people in the world,
we'd hang you and then speculate leisurely as to what might have been
your aim in coming here."

Mayo grunted. He was a tall, big, stoop-shouldered fellow. He rode with
his knees drawn up. He had a sort of "ducking" head, and his chin was
long and pointed. He grunted and replied: "I guess this is a free
country or at least it ought to be."

"Yes," Gid rejoined, still facing him, "but it won't be altogether free
for such as you until the penitentiaries are abolished."

"Oh, I understand you, Mr. Batts. You are trying to work up a chance to
kill me."

"Good guess; and you are trying to help me along."

"But I want to tell you that if you were to kill me you wouldn't live to
tell the tale. I don't want any trouble with you. I'm not here to have
trouble unless it's shoved on me. I am going to do one thing, however,
trouble or no trouble; I am going to demand that the colored people
shall have their rights."

"And at the same time I suppose you are going to demand that the white
man shall not have his."

"No, won't demand that he shan't have his rights, but that he shan't
have his way."

"Not have his way with his own affairs? Good. And now let me tell you
something. Want to hear it?"

"I'm not aching to hear it."

"Well, I'll give it to you anyway. It's this: The first thing you know a
committee of gentlemen will call on you and offer you the opportunity to
make a few remarks, and after you have made them you will thereafter
decline all invitations to speak. At the end of a rope the most
talkative man finds a thousand years of silence. Long time for a man to
hush, eh? Well, our roads split here."

"How do you know?"

"Because I turn to the right."

"But may be my business calls me over that way."

"Don't know about that, but I'm going to turn into this lane and I don't
want you to come with me. Do you hear?"

Mayo did not answer. Gid turned into a road leading to the right, and
looking back he saw that Mayo was riding straight ahead. "At any rate he
ain't afraid to say what he thinks," the old man mused. "Got more nerve
than I thought he had, and although it may make him more dangerous, yet
it entitles him to more respect."

His horse's hoof struck into a patch of leaves, heaped beneath a
cottonwood, and from the rustling his ears, warmed by the old liquor,
caught the first bars of a tune he had known in his youth; and lifting
high his voice he sang it over and over again. He passed a negro cabin
whence often had proceeded at night the penetrating cry of a fiddle, and
it was night now but no fiddle sent forth its whine. A dog shoved open
the door, and by the fire light within the old man saw a negro sitting
with a gun across his lap, and beside him stood two boys, looking with
rapture upon their father's weapon. Throughout the neighborhood had
spread a report that the negroes were meeting at night to drill, and
this glance through a door gave life to what had been a shadow.

He rode on, and his horse's hoof struck into another patch of leaves,
but no tune arose from the rustle. The old man was thinking. In a field
of furrowed clouds the moon was struggling, and down the sandy road fell
light and darkness in alternating patches. Far away he saw a figure
stepping from light into darkness and back again into light. Into the
deep shadow of a vine-entangled tree he turned his horse, and here he
waited until he heard footsteps crunching in the sand, until he saw a
man in the light that lay for a moment in the road, and then he cried:

"Hello, there, Jim Taylor!"

"Is that you, Uncle Gideon?"

"Yes, Gideon's band of one. Come over here a moment."

"I will as soon as I can find you. What are you doing hiding out in the
dark? The grand jury ain't in session."

"No, I gad, but something else is," he replied.

Jim came forward and put his hand on the horn of the old man's saddle,
which as an expert he did in spite of the shying of the horse; and then
he asked: "Well, what is it, Uncle Gideon?"

"You've heard the rumor that the negroes are drilling at night."

"Yes, what of it?"

"It's a fact, that's what there is of it. Just now I rode quite a ways
with Mayo and he was inclined to be pretty sassy; and right back there I
looked into Gabe Little's cabin and saw him with a gun across his lap."

"Well, what of that? Haven't the negroes had guns ever since the war,
and hasn't a man got the right to sit with his gun across his lap? Uncle
Gideon, I'm afraid you've been putting too much new wine into an old
bottle."

"Soft, Jimmie; it was old liquor, sixty years at least. But I gad, it
strikes me that you are pretty glib to-night. You must have heard
something."

"No, not since Mrs. Cranceford got the letter, but that was enough to
last me a good while."

"Didn't hear about my bereavement, did you?"

"What, you bereaved, Uncle Gideon? How did it happen?"

"At the imperious beck and call of nature, Jimmie. My uncle died and
inflicted on me money enough to make a pretense of paying my debts, and
I've made such a stagger that even Mrs. Cranceford has admitted me into
the out-lying districts of her good opinion. But that's got nothing to
do with the business in hand. Let's go back yonder and find out why
that negro sits there suckling his gun to sleep."

"But if he suckles it to sleep there's no harm in it, Uncle Gideon."

"Ah, clod-head, but it may have bad dreams and wake up with a cry. Let's
go back there."

"Are you in earnest?"

"As earnest as a last will and testament."

"Then let me tell you that I'll do nothing of the sort. You don't catch
me prowling about a man's house at night, and you wouldn't think of such
a thing if you were strictly sober."

"Jimmie, you never saw me drunk."

"No, but I've seen you soberer that you are now."

"An unworthy insinuation, Jimmie. But having great respect for your
plodding judgment, I will not go to the negro's cabin, but will proceed
rather to my own shanty. And I want you to come with me. Tom Cranceford
and Sallie Pruitt will be there and in the shine of the fire we'll cut
many a scollop. What do you say?"

"Uncle Gideon, don't you know how strongly opposed Mrs. Cranceford is to
Tom's----"

"Bah, law-abiding calf. They are going to marry anyway, so what's the
difference? Jimmie, the most useless man in the world is the fellow that
keeps just within the law. But perhaps it isn't your law-abiding spirit
so much as it is your fear. In blind and stupid obedience there is a
certain sort of gallantry, and in trotting to Mrs. Cranceford's cluck
you may be wise."

"It's not that I'm afraid of offending her," the giant said. "The girl
is too good for Tom any day, or for any of us when it comes to that, but
the distress of his mother haunts me, and I don't want that girl's
affection for Tom to haunt me too. I don't want to see them together if
I can help it. One haunt at a time is enough. But I tell you this, if it
should come to a question I would decide in favor of the girl."

"Jimmie, you are improving. Yes, I am doing you great good. I found your
mind an insipid dish and I have sprinkled it with salt and pepper. You
are right. Always decide in favor of the young, for the old have already
had their disappointments. Well, I'll go. Lift your paw. My horse can't
move out from under its weight."

"All right," said the giant, laughing and stepping back. "By the way,"
he added, "tell Tom to be sure and meet me at the landing at two o'clock
to-morrow. We are going down to New Orleans."

"What, alone? I ought to go along to take care of you. I could steer you
away from all the bad places and by this means you would naturally
stumble on the good ones. I'll see you when you get back."

At home the old man had lighted his fire and was listening to its
cheerful crackle when his visitors came, laughing. With a boisterous
shout Tom kicked the door open, and when the girl remonstrated with him,
he grabbed her and kissed her.

"That's all right," old Gid cried. "One of these days the penitentiary
doors will open for you without being kicked in. Ah, delightful to see
you, my dear," he said, bowing to the girl; "refreshing to see you,
although you come with a scamp. Sit down over there. I gad, you are a
bit of sunshine that has lost its way in the night."

About her head she had wound a scarf of red yarn, and as she stood
taking it off, with the fire-light dancing among the kinks of her
flax-like hair, the old man stepped forward to help her.

"Hands off," said Tom. "Don't touch her."

"Wolfish protector of a lamb," the old man replied, "I ought to throw
you out; but it is not my mission to cast out devils."

The girl sat down on a bench and Tom took a seat beside her; and with
many a giggle and a "quit that, now," they picked at each other. Old
Gid, in his splint-bottomed chair, leaned back against the wall and
feasted his eyes upon their antics. "Kittens," said he, "I will get you
a string and a button. Ah, Lord, I was once a delicious idiot."

"And you've simply lost your deliciousness," Tom replied.

"Ah, and in its place took up age. But with it came wisdom, Thomas."

"But didn't it come too late?"

"The wise utterance of a foolish youth," said the old man. "Yes, Thomas,
it came too late. Wisdom is not of much use to an old codger. He can't
profit by it himself and nobody wants his advice. Did I ever tell you
about the girl I loved? Ah, she was glorious. June was in her mouth and
October fell out of her hair."

"And you didn't marry her because she was poor, eh?"

"No, but because she was rich, Jimmie. She wanted me not; and she
married a wealthy fool and the imbecile made her happy. I could almost
forgive her for not loving me, for I was a mate on a steamboat, but to
let that fool make her happy--it was too much and I cast her out of my
mind. But when is your wedding to take place? In the sweet light of a
distant moon or within the sunshine of a few days?"

"Hanged if I know."

"Tom!" cried the girl, putting her hands over his mouth, "that's no way
to talk."

"I said it to make you do that," he replied, his voice latticed by her
fingers and sounding afar off. He took her hands and pressed them to his
cheek.

"A pretty picture, and I'll long remember you as you now sit on that
bench," said the old man. "Sallie, how old are you?" he asked.

"I don't know, sir. Pap and mother couldn't put it down 'cause they
didn't know how to figger, and when I got so I could figger a little
they had dun forgot the year and the day of the month. Most of the time
when I'm by myself I feel old enough, but sometimes Uncle Wash calls me
foolish and then I'm awful young. But Aunt Martha never calls me foolish
'cause I help her in the kitchen."

There came a scratching at the threshold. The old man got out of his
tilted chair and opened the door, and a dog, prancing in, lay down in
front of the fire, with his nose between his outstretched paws.

"What a pretty dog," said the girl, and with a look out of one eye and
with a slight wag of the tail the dog acknowledged the compliment.

"Oh, he's gallant," Gid replied, sitting down. "And he knows when a
truth has been told about him."

"No good at hunting, is he?" Tom asked.

"He is not a sportsman," Gid answered. "He pays his keep with
companionship. I sit here and read him to sleep nearly every night. He
tries to keep awake, but he can't. But as long as I read a lively book
he'll lie there and look up at me as if he enjoys it, and I believe he
does, but 'Benton's Thirty Years in the American Senate' will knock him
most any time. And old Whateley's logic makes him mighty drowsy. I
reckon you cubs have been to supper. If you haven't you may make
yourselves at home and cook something. Old Aunt Liza cooks for me, out
there in the other room, but she's generally away in the service of her
church and then I have to shift for myself."

"We've been to supper," the girl spoke up, "but if you want something to
eat I'll cook it."

"Bless your life, not a bite," the old man protested. "To eat now would
canker a memory. I took sacrament over at the Major's. Now, I'm going to
lean back here and I may talk or I may drop off to sleep, and in either
event just let me go. But if I doze off don't wake me, not even when you
get ready to leave. Just pull the door to and that's all."

"Ain't you afraid to sleep here all by yourself?" the girl asked. "I'd
be afraid somebody'd slip in and grab me."

"I could scarcely blame any one for grabbing you, my dear," the old man
replied, smiling upon her, "but as for myself, the grabber would get the
worst of it."

A long time they sat and talked of neighborhood happenings, the death of
a burly man who it was never supposed could die before Wash Sanders was
laid away; they talked of the growing dissatisfaction among the negroes,
of the church built by Father Brennon, of the trip to be taken to New
Orleans by Jim and Tom. The fire-light died down. A chunk fell and the
dog jumped up with a sniff and a sneeze. Old Gideon took no notice, for
leaning back against the wall he was softly snoring.

"Let us leave him just as he is," said Tom.

"But it looks cruel," the girl replied.

"He suffers from sleeplessness; to wake him would be more cruel. Let's
do as he told us."

The girl put the bench out of the way, that he might not fall over it in
the dark; and out of the room they tip-toed and silently they closed the
door. By the hand he led her to the road, and with a coo and a song they
strolled homeward. The clouds were scattered and acres of light lay on
the cleared land; but the woods were dark and the shadows were black,
and he walked with his arm about her. They heard the galloping of a
horse and stepped aside to let the rider pass, and when he had passed,
with his head in the moonlight and his horse in the dark, the young man
said: "I know that fellow."

"Why didn't you speak to him?" she asked.

"Because it wouldn't do for me to have any words with him. He's the man
that's trying to organize the negroes."

He left her at Wash Sanders' gate; he heard her feet upon the steps, and
looking back he caught the kiss she threw at him.


CHAPTER XIX.


A steamboat ride to New Orleans will never lose its novelty. Romance
lies along the lower river. The land falls away and we look down upon
fields bounded by distant mist, and beyond that dim line one's fancy
gallops riotously. Not alone the passenger, but the seasoned captain of
the boat stands musing and motionless, gazing upon the scene. In his
mind he could carry the form and the rugged grandeur of a mountain; upon
a crag he could hang his recollection, but this flat endlessness is ever
an unencompassed mystery.

The wind from the gulf was soft, and the two friends stood on the
hurricane-deck, charmed with a familiar view.

"It is just as new to me now as it was when I was a boy, coming along
here with my father," said the giant. "And yet I don't see what makes it
interesting, no woods, nothing but a house here and there."

It is, of course, the Committee's business to keep the world informed of
public feeling in Venice, and of each new act of Austrian severity. Its
members are inflexible men, whose ability has been as frequently
manifested as their patriotism.

The Venetians are now, therefore, a nation in mourning, and have,
as I said, disused all their former pleasures and merry-makings.

Every class, except a small part of the resident _titled_ nobility
(a great part of the nobility is in either forced or voluntary
exile), seems to be comprehended by this feeling of despondency and
suspense.

The poor of the city formerly found their respite and diversion in
the numerous holidays which fell in different parts of the year,
and which, though religious in their general character, were still
inseparably bound up in their origin with ideas of patriotism and
national glory.

Such of these holidays as related to the victories and pride of the
Republic naturally ended with her fall.

Many others, however, survived this event in all their splendor,
but there is not one celebrated now as in other days.

It is true that the churches still parade their pomps in the Piazza
on the day of Corpus Christi; it is true that the bridges of boats are
still built across the Canalazzo to the church of Our Lady of
Salvation, and across the Canal of the Giudecca to the temple of
the Redeemer, on the respective festivals of these churches; but
the concourse is always meagre, and the mirth is forced and ghastly.

The Italianissimi have so far imbued the people with their own ideas
and feelings, that the recurrence of the famous holidays now merely
awakens them to lamentations over the past and vague longings for
the future.

As for the carnival, which once lasted six months of the year, charming
hither all the idlers of the world by its peculiar splendor and variety
of pleasure, it does not, as I said, any longer exist.

It is dead, and its shabby, wretched ghost is a party of beggars,
hideously dressed out with masks and horns and women's habits, who
go from shop to shop droning forth a stupid song, and levying tribute
upon the shopkeepers.

The crowd through which these melancholy jesters pass, regards them
with a pensive scorn, and goes about its business untempted by the
delights of carnival.

All other social amusements have shared in greater or less degree the fate
of the carnival. At some houses conversazioni are still held, and
it is impossible that balls and parties should not now and then be given.
But the greater number of the nobles and the richer of the professional
classes lead for the most part a life of listless seclusion, and
attempts to lighten the general gloom and heaviness in any way are
not looked upon with favor.

By no sort of chance are Austrians, or Austriacanti ever invited to
participate in the pleasures of Venetian society.

As the social life of Italy, and especially of Venice, was in great
part to be once enjoyed at the theatres, at the caffè, and at the
other places of public resort, so is its absence now to be chiefly
noted in those places.

No lady of perfect standing among her people goes to the opera, and the
men never go in the boxes, but if they frequent the theatre at all, they
take places in the pit, in order that the house may wear as empty and
dispirited a look as possible. Occasionally a bomb is exploded in the
theatre, as a note of reminder, and as means of keeping away such of the
nobles as are not enemies of the government.

As it is less easy for the Austrians to participate in the diversion of
comedy, it is a less offence to attend the comedy, though even
this is not good Italianissimism.

In regard to the caffè there is a perfectly understood system by
which the Austrians go to one, and the Italians to another; and
Florian's, in the Piazza, seems to be the only common ground in the
city on which the hostile forces consent to meet.

This is because it is thronged with foreigners of all nations, and
to go there is not thought a demonstration of any kind.

But the other caffè in the Piazza do not enjoy Florian's cosmopolitan
immunity, and nothing would create more wonder in Venice than to
see an Austrian officer at the Specchi, unless, indeed, it were the
presence of a good Italian at the Quadri.

It is in the Piazza that the tacit demonstration of hatred and
discontent chiefly takes place.

Here, thrice a week, in winter and summer, the military band plays
that exquisite music for which the Austrians are famous.

The selections are usually from Italian operas, and the attraction is
the hardest of all others for the music-loving Italian to resist.
But he does resist it. There are some noble ladies who have not
entered the Piazza while the band was playing there, since the fall of
the Republic of 1849; and none of good standing for patriotism has
attended the concerts since the treaty of Villafranca in '59.

Until very lately, the promenaders in the Piazza were exclusively foreigners,
or else the families of such government officials as were obliged to
show themselves there.

Last summer, however, before the Franco-Italian convention for the
evacuation of Rome revived the drooping hopes of the Venetians,
they had begun visibly to falter in their long endurance.

But this was, after all, only a slight and transient weakness.

As a general thing, now, they pass from the Piazza when the music
begins, and walk upon the long quay at the sea-side of the Ducal
Palace; or if they remain in the Piazza they pace up and down under
the arcades on either side; for Venetian patriotism makes a delicate
distinction between listening to the Austrian band in the Piazza
and hearing it under the Procuratie, forbidding the first and
permitting the last.

As soon as the music ceases the Austrians disappear, and the Italians
return to the Piazza.

But since the catalogue of demonstrations cannot be made full, it
need not be made any longer.

The political feeling in Venice affects her prosperity in a far greater
degree than may appear to those who do not understand how large
an income the city formerly derived from making merry. The poor have
to lament not merely the loss of their holidays, but also of the fat
employments and bountiful largess which these occasions threw into
their hands.

With the exile or the seclusion of the richer families, and the
reluctance of foreigners to make a residence of the gloomy and
dejected city, the trade of the shopkeepers has fallen off; the
larger commerce of the place has also languished and dwindled year
by year; while the cost of living has constantly increased, and
heavier burdens of taxation have been laid upon the impoverished
and despondent people.

And in all this, Venice is but a type of the whole province of Venetia.

The alien life to be found in the city is scarcely worth noting. The
Austrians have a _casino_, and they give balls and parties, and
now and then make some public manifestation of gayety.

But they detest Venice as a place of residence, being naturally averse to
living in the midst of a people who shun them like a pestilence.

Other foreigners, as I said, are obliged to take sides for or against
the Venetians, and it is amusing enough to find the few English
residents divided into Austriacanti and Italianissimi. [Footnote:
Austriacanti are people of Austrian politics, though not of Austrian
birth. Italianissimi are those who favor union with Italy at any
cost.]

Even the consuls of the different nations, who are in every way bound to
neutrality and indifference, are popularly reputed to be of one party
or the other, and my predecessor, whose unhappy knowledge of German threw
him on his arrival among people of that race, was always regarded as
the enemy of Venetian freedom, though I believe his principles
were of the most vivid republican tint in the United States.

The present situation has now endured five years, with only slight
modifications by time, and only faint murmurs from some of the more
impatient, that _bisogna, una volta o l'altra, romper il chiodo_,
(sooner or later the nail must be broken.)

As the Venetians are a people of indomitable perseverance, long schooled
to obstinacy by oppression, I suppose they will hold out till their
union with the kingdom of Italy.

They can do nothing of themselves, but they seem content to wait forever
in their present gloom.

How deeply their attitude affects their national character I shall
inquire hereafter, when I come to look somewhat more closely at the spirit
of their demonstration.

For the present, it is certain that the discontent of the people
has its peculiar effect upon the city as the stranger sees its life,
casting a glamour over it all, making it more and more ghostly and
sad, and giving it a pathetic charm which I would fain transfer to my
pages; but failing that, would pray the reader to remember as a fact
to which I must be faithful in all my descriptions of Venice.

CHAPTER II.

ARRIVAL AND FIRST DAYS IN VENICE.

I think it does not matter just when I first came to Venice. Yesterday and
to-day are the same here. I arrived one winter morning about five
o'clock, and was not so full of Soul as I might have been in warmer
weather. Yet I was resolved not to go to my hotel in the omnibus (the
large, many-seated boat so called), but to have a gondola solely for
myself and my luggage.
The porter who seized my valise in the station, inferred from some very
polyglottic Italian of mine the nature of my wish, and ran out and
threw that slender piece of luggage into a gondola. I followed, lighted
to my seat by a beggar in picturesque and desultory costume. He was
one of a class of mendicants whom I came, for my sins, to know
better in Venice, and whom I dare say every traveler recollects,--the
merciless tribe who hold your gondola to shore, and affect to do
you a service and not a displeasure, and pretend not to be abandoned
swindlers.

The Venetians call them _gransieri_, or crab-catchers; but as yet I did
not know the name or the purpose of this _poverino_ [Footnote: _Poverino_
is the compassionate generic for all unhappy persons who work for
a living in Venice, as well as many who decline to do so.] at the
station, but merely saw that he had the Venetian eye for color: in
the distribution and arrangement of his fragments of dress he had
produced some miraculous effects of red, and he was altogether as
infamous a figure as any friend of brigands would like to meet in
a lonely place.

He did not offer to stab me and sink my body in the Grand Canal,
as, in all Venetian keeping, I felt that he ought to have done; but
he implored an alms, and I hardly know now whether to exult or
regret that I did not understand him, and left him empty-handed.

I suppose that he withdrew again the blessings which he had advanced
me, as we pushed out into the canal; but I heard nothing, for the
wonder of the city was already upon me.

All my nether- spirit, so to speak, was dulled and jaded by the long,
cold, railway journey from Vienna, while every surface-sense was taken
and tangled in the bewildering brilliancy and novelty of Venice. For I
think there can be nothing else in the world so full of glittering
and exquisite surprise, as that first glimpse of Venice which the
traveler catches as he issues from the railway station by night,
and looks upon her peerless strangeness.

There is something in the blessed breath of Italy (how quickly,
coming south, you know it, and how bland it is, after the harsh,
transalpine air!) which prepares you for your nocturnal advent into
the place; and O you! whoever you are, that journey toward this enchanted
city for the first time, let me tell you how happy I count you! There
lies before you for your pleasure, the spectacle of such singular beauty
as no picture can ever show you nor book tell you,--beauty which you shall
feel perfectly but once, and regret forever.

For my own part, as the gondola slipped away from the blaze and bustle
of the station down the gloom and silence of the broad canal, I forgot
that I had been freezing two days and nights; that I was at that moment
very cold and a little homesick. I could at first feel nothing but that
beautiful silence, broken only by the star-silvered dip of the oars.
Then on either hand I saw stately palaces rise gray and lofty
from the dark waters, holding here and there a lamp against their
faces, which brought balconies, and columns, and carven arches into
momentary relief, and threw long streams of crimson into the canal.

I could see by that uncertain glimmer how fair was all, but not how
sad and old; and so, unhaunted by any pang for the decay that
afterward saddened me amid the forlorn beauty of Venice, I glided on.

I have no doubt it was a proper time to think all the fantastic
things in the world, and I thought them; but they passed vaguely
through my mind, without at all interrupting the sensations of sight
and sound.

Indeed, the past and present mixed there, and the moral and material
were blent in the sentiment of utter novelty and surprise.
The quick boat slid through old troubles of mine, and unlooked-for events
gave it the impulse that carried it beyond, and safely around sharp
corners of life.

And all the while I knew that this was a progress through narrow
and crooked canals, and past marble angles of palaces.

But I did not know then that this fine confusion of sense and spirit
was the first faint impression of the charm of life in Venice.

Dark, funereal barges like my own had flitted by, and the gondoliers
had warned each other at every turning with hoarse, lugubrious
cries; the lines of balconied palaces had never ended;--here and
there at their doors larger craft were moored, with dim figures of
men moving uncertainly about on them.

At last we had passed abruptly out of the Grand Canal into one of
the smaller channels, and from comparative light into a darkness
only remotely affected by some far-streaming corner lamp.

But always the pallid, stately palaces; always the dark heaven with
its trembling stars above, and the dark water with its trembling
stars below; but now innumerable bridges, and an utter lonesomeness,
and ceaseless sudden turns and windings.

One could not resist a vague feeling of anxiety, in these strait and
solitary passages, which was part of the strange enjoyment of the time,
and which was referable to the novelty, the hush, the darkness, and
the piratical appearance and unaccountable pauses of the gondoliers.
Was not this Venice, and is not Venice forever associated with bravoes
and unexpected dagger-thrusts?

That valise of mine might represent fabulous wealth to the uncultivated
imagination. Who, if I made an outcry, could understand the Facts of the
Situation--(as we say in the journals)? To move on was relief; to
pause was regret for past transgressions mingled with good resolutions
for the future.

But I felt the liveliest mixture of all these emotions, when, slipping
from the cover of a bridge, the gondola suddenly rested at the foot of
a stairway before a closely-barred door.

The gondoliers rang and rang again, while their passenger
"Divided the swift mind,"
in the wonder whether a door so grimly bolted and austerely barred
could possibly open into a hotel, with cheerful overcharges for
candles and service.

But as soon as the door opened, and he beheld the honest swindling
countenance of a hotel _portier_, he felt secure against every thing
but imposture, and all wild absurdities of doubt and conjecture at
once faded from his thought, when the _portier_ suffered the
gondoliers to make him pay a florin too much.

So, I had arrived in Venice, and I had felt the influence of that
complex spell which she lays upon the stranger.

I had caught the most alluring glimpses of the beauty which cannot
wholly perish while any fragment of her sculptured walls nods to
its shadow in the canal; I had been penetrated by a deep sense of
the mystery of the place, and I had been touched already by the
anomaly of modern life amid scenes where its presence offers,
according to the humor in which it is studied, constant occasion
for annoyance or delight, enthusiasm or sadness.

I fancy that the ignorant impressions of the earlier days after my arrival
need scarcely be set down even in this perishable record; but I would
not wholly forget how, though isolated from all acquaintance and alien
to the place, I yet felt curiously at home in Venice from the first.
I believe it was because I had, after my own fashion, loved the beautiful
that I here found the beautiful, where it is supreme, full of
society and friendship, speaking a language which, even in its
unfamiliar forms, I could partly understand, and at once making me
citizen of that Venice from which I shall never be exiled.

It was not in the presence of the great and famous monuments of art
alone that I felt at home--indeed, I could as yet understand their
excellence and grandeur only very imperfectly--but wherever I
wandered through the quaint and marvelous city, I found the good
company of 
"The fair, the old;"
and to tell the truth, I think it is the best society in Venice,
and I learned to turn to it later from other companionship with a
kind of relief.

My first rambles, moreover, had a peculiar charm which knowledge of
locality has since taken away. They began commonly with some purpose
or destination, and ended by losing me in the intricacies of the
narrowest, crookedest, and most inconsequent little streets in the
world, or left me cast-away upon the unfamiliar waters of some canal
as far as possible from the point aimed at.

Dark and secret little courts lay in wait for my blundering steps, and
I was incessantly surprised and brought to surrender by paths that
beguiled me up to dead walls, or the sudden brinks of canals.

The wide and open squares before the innumerable churches of the city
were equally victorious, and continually took me prisoner. But all
places had something rare and worthy to be seen: if not loveliness
of sculpture or architecture, at least interesting squalor and
picturesque wretchedness: and I believe I had less delight in proper
Objects of Interest than in the dirty neighborhoods that reeked
with unwholesome winter damps below, and peered curiously out with
frowzy heads and beautiful eyes from the high, heavy-shuttered
casements above.

Every court had its carven well to show me, in the noisy keeping of the
water-carriers and the slatternly, statuesque gossips of the place.

The remote and noisome canals were pathetic with empty old palaces peopled
by herds of poor, that decorated the sculptured balconies with the
tatters of epicene linen, and patched the lofty windows with obsolete
hats.

I found the night as full of beauty as the day, when caprice led me from
the brilliancy of St.

Mark's and the glittering streets of shops that branch away from the Piazza,
and lost me in the quaint recesses of the courts, or the tangles
of the distant alleys, where the dull little oil- lamps vied with
the tapers burning before the street-corner shrines of the Virgin,
[Footnote: In the early times these tapers were the sole means of
street illumination in Venice.] in making the way obscure, and
deepening the shadows about the doorways and under the frequent
arches.

I remember distinctly among the beautiful nights of that time, the soft
night of late winter which first showed me the scene you may behold
from the Public Gardens at the end of the long concave line of the Riva
degli Schiavoni.

Lounging there upon the southern parapet of the Gardens, I turned
from the dim bell-towers of the evanescent islands in the east (a
solitary gondola gliding across the calm of the water, and striking
its moonlight silver into multitudinous ripples), and glanced athwart
the vague shipping in the basin of St.

Mark, and saw all the lights from the Piazzetta to the Giudecca, making
a crescent of flame in the air, and casting deep into the water under
them a crimson glory that sank also down and down in my own heart, and
illumined all its memories of beauty and delight. Behind these lamps
rose the shadowy masses of church and palace; the moon stood bright and
full in the heavens; the gondola drifted away to the northward;
the islands of the lagoons seemed to rise and sink with the light
palpitations of the waves like pictures on the undulating fields
of banners; the stark rigging of a ship showed black against the
sky, the Lido sank from sight upon the east, as if the shore had
composed itself to sleep by the side of its beloved sea to the music
of the surge that gently beat its sands; the yet leafless boughs
of the trees above me stirred themselves together, and out of one
of those trembling towers in the lagoons, one rich, full sob burst
from the heart of a bell, too deeply stricken with the glory of the
scene, and suffused the languid night with the murmur of luxurious,
ineffable sadness.

But there is a perfect democracy in the realm of the beautiful, and
whatsoever pleases is equal to any other thing there, no matter
how low its origin or humble its composition; and the magnificence
of that moonlight scene gave me no deeper joy than I won from the
fine spectacle of an old man whom I saw burning coffee one night
in the little court behind my lodgings, and whom I recollect now
as one of the most interesting people I saw in my first days at
Venice.

All day long the air of that neighbourhood had reeked with the odors of
the fragrant berry, and all day long this patient old man--sage,
let me call him--had turned the sheet-iron cylinder in which it was
roasting over an open fire after the picturesque fashion of roasting
coffee in Venice.

Now that the night had fallen, and the stars shone down upon him, and
the red of the flame luridly illumined him, he showed more grand and
venerable than ever.

Simple, abstract humanity, has its own grandeur in Italy; and it is not
hard here for the artist to find the primitive types with which
genius loves best to deal.

As for this old man, he had the beard of a saint, and the dignity of a
senator, harmonized with the squalor of a beggar, superior to which
shone his abstract, unconscious grandeur of humanity. A vast and calm
melancholy, which had nothing to do with burning coffee, dwelt in
his aspect and attitude; and if he had been some dread supernatural
agency, turning the wheel of fortune, and doing men, instead of
coffee, brown, he could not have looked more sadly and weirdly
impressive.

When, presently, he rose from his seat, and lifted the cylinder
from its place, and the clinging flames leaped after it, and he
shook it, and a volume of luminous smoke enveloped him and glorified
him-- then I felt with secret anguish that he was beyond art, and
turned sadly from the spectacle of that sublime and hopeless magnificence.

He whistled and strode away, with the dog trotting at his heels; and by
the time he gained the road the occurrence had almost wholly passed out
of his mind, so fondly did his heart leap at the thought of the letter
in his bosom.

Upon reaching a gate that opened into his meadow, he looked about and
whistled for the dog, but the setter was gone. "You were howling for
your master," the giant said, "and the greatest service I could do you
was to let you go to him. All right, old fellow, we are both happier for
having met."

He went into the house, lighted his lamp, sat down, read the letter; he
went out and stood under the weeping-willow. "If I am foolish," he said,
"it is delicious to be a fool, and God pity the wise. But I don't know
what to do with myself. Yes, I do; I'll go over and see old Gideon."

He considered not the increasing rain, the dreariness of the road, the
moanful wind in the tops of the trees; he felt that to be alone was to
suppress a part of his happiness, that his light and talkative heart
must seek a hearing for the babbling of its joy. So off he strode, and
as he climbed over a fence, he laughingly jolted himself upon the top
rail to see whether it would break. It did not, and he laughed to find a
stick of old timber strong enough to support his weight. He called
himself a lumbering fool and laughed again, sitting there with the rain
beating upon him.

A short distance down the road was a wagon-maker's shop, and against the
outside wall a ladder was leaned. He thought of the ladder as he bore
to the edge of the road to avoid the deep ruts cut by the cotton-wagons,
and fearful that he might pass under it and thus invite ill luck, he
crossed to the other side. He smiled at this weakness, instilled by the
negroes, but he did not recross the road until he had passed far beyond
the shop. The old black mammy was lovable and affectionate, but she
intimidated man with many a superstition.


CHAPTER XXII.


In old Gid's house a light was burning, and as the giant drew near, he
caught a fragment of a flat-boatman's song. He made no noise, but a dog
inside scented his approach and announced it with a whimsical bark. Gid
opened the door.

"Why, here's Jim Taylor, as wet as a drowned bear. Come in."

Sitting by the fire was the Major, with his coat off and his shirt
collar unbuttoned.

"Why, James," said he, "you are making the rounds to-night. Sit down
here and dry yourself. And look at you, mud up to your knees. Why do you
tramp about this way? Why don't you ride?"

"Too heavy," the giant answered.

"Then, I gad," Gid replied, dragging his bench from against the wall and
sitting down upon it, "I know I'd ride. Do men ride for their own
comfort or for the horse's? And what difference do a few extra pounds
make to a horse? Why, if you were a horse somebody would ride you. You
are not fat, Jim; you are just big. And a horse doesn't mind a
well-proportioned fellow; it's the wabbling fat man that riles him. I
owned a horse once that would have been willing to go without corn a
whole week for a chance to kick a fat man; and I put it down as an
unreasonable cruelty until I found out that he had once belonged to a
fellow that weighed three hundred pounds."

"And you afterward owned him," said the Major, winking at Jim.

"That's what I said, John."

"Now, Gid, I don't want to appear captious, but are you sure you ever
owned a horse?"

"I bought that horse, John. I confess that it was with borrowed money,
but under the law he was mine. Ah, Lord," he sighed, "self-imposed
frankness will be gone when I am taken from you. And yet I get no
credit."

"No credit!" cried the Major. "Credit has kept you from starving."

"Tip-toe, John; my nerves are tight-strung. Would have starved! A
befitting reproach thrown at genius. Look up there!" he shouted, waving
his hand at the shelf whereon were piled his dingy books. "They never
owned a horse and they lived on credit, but they kept the world from
starving to death. And this reminds me that those sweet potatoes must be
about done. Your name is among the coals, Jim; we've got enough for all
hands. Wish we had some milk, but I couldn't get any. Dogs couldn't
catch the cow. You hear of cows giving milk. Mine don't--I gad, I have
to grab her and take it away from her; and whenever you see milk in my
house you may know it's the record of a fight and that the cow got the
worst of it."

Jim sat striving to think of something to say. The presence of the Major
had imposed a change in his forecast. His meeting of Mayo and the negro
suddenly recurred to him, and quietly he related the adventure. But the
Major and Gid were not quiet with hearing it.

"You ought to have cut his throat!" Gid exclaimed. "To-morrow get your
gun and shoot him down--both of them, like dogs. Who ever heard of such
a thing, saying to a gentleman, 'now you may go!' I gad, I'll go with
you, and we'll shoot 'em down."

"No," said the Major, and now with his hands behind him he was slowly
pacing the floor. "That won't do."

"Why won't it do?" Gid cried. "Has the time come when a white man must
stand all sorts of abuse simply because he is white? Must he stand
flat-footed and swallow every insult that a scoundrel is pleased to
stuff into his mouth?"

The Major sat down. "Let me remind you of something," he said. "For the
average man, under ordinary circumstances, it is enough to have simple
justice on his side, but on our side we must have more than justice. No
people in the world were ever situated as we now are, for even by our
brothers we shall be deemed wrong, no matter which way we turn."

"Ah," Gid cried, "then what's the use of calculating our turn? If we are
to be condemned anyway, what's the----"

"Hold on a moment," the Major struck in, "and I will tell you. Sentiment
is against us; literature, with its roots running back into the harsh
soil of politics, is against us; and----"

"No measured oratory, John. Get down on the ground."

"Wait, I tell you!" the Major demanded. "I must get to it in my own way.
If your advice were followed, we should never be able to elect another
president. The bloody shirt would wave from every window in the North,
and from the northern point of view, justly so; and reviewed even by the
disinterested onlooker, we have not been wholly in the right."

"The deuce we haven't!" Gid shouted, his eyes bulging.

"No, not wholly; we couldn't be," the Major continued. "As
self-respecting men, as Anglo-Saxons, we could not submit to the
domination of former slaves. It was asking too much. We had ruled the
nation, and though we were finally overpowered, we could not accept the
negro as a ruler."

"John, I know all that as well as you do; we have talked it many a
time, but what I want to get at is this: Has a man the right to resent
an insult? I was never cruel to a negro. I like him in his place, like
him better than I do the average white man, to tell the plain truth, for
between him and me there is the tie of irresponsibility, of
shiftlessness; but I don't want him to insult me; don't want to stand
any more from him than I would from a white man. You spoke of not being
able to elect another president. Why should we put up with so much
merely to say that a democrat is president? It doesn't make much
difference who's president, foreign nations keep on insulting us just
the same. I'd like to see a chief magistrate with nerve enough to say to
the South, 'Boys, go over and grab off Mexico.' That's me."

The Major laughed. "That's me, too," he replied.

"We ought to sweeten this country with Cuba," said Jim, with his mind on
the letter in his bosom.

"Yes," Gid replied, raising his hand, "that's what we ought to do,
and----" His hand fell, and he wheeled about and seized a poker. "I'll
bet a thousand dollars the potatoes are burned up," he said. "Just look
there," he added, raking out the charred remains of what was to be a
feast. "That's the way it goes. The devil titters when men argue. Well,
it can't be helped," he went on. "I did my part. If we had settled
upon killing that fellow Mayo, everything would have been all right. He
has not only insulted us but has robbed us as well."

"To tell you the truth," said the Major, "I'm glad I'm relieved of the
trouble of eating."

"John, don't say that, for when a Southern man loses his appetite for
roasted sweet potatoes, he's a degenerate."

The Major was about to say something, but looking at his watch he jumped
up. "Gracious, Gid, you not only kill your own time but murder mine.
It's nearly two o'clock."

"Sit down, John. Don't be snatched."

"Snatched! Wind-bag, you counsel me to blow my life away. Hold your lamp
out here so that I can see to get on my horse."

When Gid returned from the passage wherein he had stood to shelter the
light, he found Jim on the bench, with no apparent intention of taking
his leave; and this he construed to mean that the giant had something on
his mind.

"Out with it, Jimmie," he said, as he put the lamp upon the
mantel-piece. "I'll sit down here as if it was only early
candle-lighting, and let you tell me all about it."

"How do you know I've got anything to say, Uncle Gideon?"

"How do I know when a dog itches? I see him scratch. You have been
sitting there in an itching silence and now you begin to scratch. You
are more patient than a dog, for you don't scratch until you have itched
for some time. Let the fur fly, Jimmie."

Jim laughed, raised his leg and clasped his hands over his knee. "Uncle
Gideon, I reckon I'm the happiest man in Cranceford County."

The old man sat leaning back against the wall. His coat was off and
under his suspenders he had hooked his thumbs. "Go on, Jimmie; I'm
listening."

"She has written another letter--Did Tom tell you anything?" he broke
off.

"Did Tom ever tell me anything? Did Tom ever tell anybody anything? Did
he ever know anything to tell?"

"She has written another letter and in it she confesses--I don't know
how to say it, Uncle Gideon."

"Well, tell me and I'll say it for you. Confesses that she can be happy
with no one but you. Go on."

"Who told you? Did Mrs. Cranceford?"

"My dear boy, did Mrs. Cranceford ever tell me anything except to keep
off the grass? Nobody has told me anything. Confesses that you are the
only man that can make her happy. Now shoot your dye-stuff."

"But that's all there is. She says that her heart will never have a home
until my love builds a mansion for it."

"Jimmie, if the highest market price for a fool was one hundred dollars,
you'd fetch two hundred."

"Why? Because I believe her when she talks that way--when she gives me
to understand that she loves me?"

"No; but because you didn't believe all along that she loved you."

"How could I when she refused to marry me and married another man?"

"That marriage is explained. You've seen the letter she wrote the night
before she went away, haven't you?"

"Yes, her mother showed it to me."

"I didn't read it," said Gid, "but the Major gave me the points, and I
know that she married that fellow believing that she was saving his
soul."

"Yes, I read that," said Jim, "but I didn't know whether she meant it or
not. I reckon I was afraid to believe it."

"Well, I know it to be a fact--know it because I know her nature. She's
just crank enough----"

"Don't say that," Jim protested, unclasping his hands from his knee and
straightening up. "Don't call her a crank when she's an angel."

"That's all right, my dear boy, but heaven is full of the right sort of
cranks. Who serves God deeper than the religious crank, and if he's not
to be rewarded, who is? By crank I don't mean a weak-minded person; I
come nearer meaning a genius."

"I reckon you mean all right," the giant agreed; and after pondering in
silence he asked: "Do you reckon she would marry me?"

"I know it. And why not? You are a gentleman and a devilish good-looking
fellow. Why, any woman interested in a fine stock show would be proud of
you."

At this the giant rubbed his hands together and softly chuckled; but
sobering, he said that he could never hope to equal her in thought and
quickness of expression, though by reading he would make an effort to
attain that end.

"Don't worry about that, Jimmie; and don't you fool yourself that books
are everything. They smooth knots, but they don't make timber. Oh, you
are smart enough--for a woman."

"I'm not an idiot," said the giant. "Sometimes I can talk without any
trouble, and then again I can't say a thing. It's different with you."

The old man's egotism awoke--it never more than dozed. "Jimmie," said
he, "it is violating no compact to tell you that I'm no common man.
Other men have a similar opinion of themselves and are afraid to spit it
out, but I'm bold as well as wise. I know that my opinion doesn't go for
much, for I'm too good-humored, too approachable. The blitheness of my
nature invites familiarity. You go to a house and make too much of the
children, and the first thing you know they'll want to wallow on you all
the time. Well, I have made too much of the children of the world, and
they wallow on me. But I pinch them sometimes and laugh to hear them
squeal. There's only one person that I'm afraid of--Mrs. Cranceford. She
chills me and keeps me on the frozen dodge. I always feel that she is
reading me, and that makes me more of a rascal--trying to give her
something that she can't read. Look here, if we expect to get any sleep
we'd better be at it."

"You go to bed, Uncle Gideon; I'm going to sit up."

"All right; sit there as long as you please." The old fellow got up, and
walking stiffly went to the window, drew aside the red calico curtain
and looked out. "Don't see much promise of a clear-up," he said. "Not a
star in sight. I always dread the rainy season; it makes people look
sad, and I want to see them bright--I am most agreeable to them when
they're bright. Still, I understand that nothing is more tiresome than
eternal sunshine. I wonder if I locked the smokehouse," he went on,
turning from the window. "But, come to think, I don't believe I've
locked it since about a week ago, when some rascal slipped in and stole
nearly all my hams and a bushel of meal. I gad, my old joints work like
rusty hinges. Well, I'll lie down now. Good night, Jimmie. Don't slip
off before breakfast."

The giant did not hear him. He sat leaning forward, gazing at the
cliffs, the mountains, the valleys in the fire. The rain had ceased, but
now and then came a dashing shower, like a scouting party, a guerrilla
band sweeping through the dark. To the muser there was no time; time had
dribbled out and reverie had taken its place. The fire was dying. He saw
the red cliffs grow gray along the edges, age creeping over the rocks;
he saw a mountain fall into a whitening valley, and he looked up. It was
daylight. He went to the door and looked out, and far across the river
the brilliant morning sun was rising from a bath of steam.

"You here yet, Jimmie?" The bed loudly creaked, and the giant, looking
about, found old Gid sitting on the edge of his couch, rubbing his eyes.
"Don't go, for we'll have breakfast now in a minute. I am always glad to
look up and find a picture of manliness and strength. It takes me back
to my own early days, when I didn't know the meaning of weakness. But I
know now--I can feel it all over me. I do think I can dream more foolish
things during three to half a dozen winks of sleep than any man that
ever lived. Now, what could have put it into my mind to dream that I
was born with one leg and was trying at a county fair to swap it off for
two? Well, I hear the old woman setting the table out there. Wait till I
jump into my clothes and I'll pour a gourd of water for you to wash your
face and hands. Had a wash-basin round here somewhere, but don't know
what became of it. Had intended to get another, but have been so busy.
But I'll tell you there's nothing like a good wash under a pouring
gourd. How's your appetite this morning?"

"I don't know."

"Well, you may find it when you sniff old Liza's corn cakes. Now what
the deuce became of that other suspender? We used to call them galluses
in my day. And now where is that infernal gallus? Beats anything I ever
saw in my life. Ah, there it is, over by the window. But how it could
have jumped off I don't know. Now let me shove into my old shoes and
I'll be with you."

Out in the yard, in a fabulous net of gilded mist they stood, to bathe
under the spouting gourd, the mingling of a new day's poetry and the
shiftlessness of an old man. "Stream of silver in the gold of a
resurrected sun," he said, bareheaded and blinking. "Who'd want a
wash-pan? I gad, Jimmie, folks are forgetting how to live. They are
putting too much weight on what they can buy for money, unmindful of the
fact that the best things of this life are free. Look at that gourd,
old, with a sewed-up crack in it, and yet to my mind it serves its
purpose better than a china basin. Well, let's go in now and eat a bite.
I'm always hungry of a morning. An old fellow is nearer a boy when he
first gets up, you know; but he grows old mighty fast after he's had
breakfast."

The giant, saying never a word, followed him, the loose boards of the
passageway between the two sections of the house creaking and groaning
as he trod upon them; and coming to the door he had to stoop, so low had
it been cut.

"That's right, Jimmie, duck or you'll lay yourself out. I gad, the
world's full of traps set for big fellows. Now sit down there and fall
to. Don't feel very brash this morning, do you?"

"I feel first-rate," Jim answered, sitting down.

"Youth and love mixed," said the old man, placing himself at the head of
the board. "And ah, Lord, when we grow out of one and forget the other,
there's not much left to live for. I'd rather be a young fellow in love
than to be an emperor. Help yourself to a slab of that fried ham. She'll
bring the coffee pretty soon. Here she comes now. Waiting for you, Aunt
Liza. Have some hoe-cake, Jimmie. Yes, sir; youth and love constitute
the world, and all that follows is a mere makeshift. Thought may come,
but thought, after all, is but a dull compromise, Jimmie, a cold potato
instead of a hot roll. Love is noon, and wisdom at its best is only
evening. There are some quince preserves in that jar. Help yourself.
Thought about her all night, didn't you?"

"I think about her all the time, Uncle Gideon."

"And Jimmie, it wouldn't surprise me if the world should think about her
after a while. That woman's a genius."

"I hope not," the giant replied, looking up, and in his voice was a note
of distress, and in his eyes lay the shadow of a fear.

"And why not, Jimmie?"

"Because if she should turn out to be a genius she won't marry me."

"That's where your perception is broken off at the end, Jimmie. In the
matter of marriage genius is mighty skittish of genius--it seeks the
constancy of the sturdy and commonplace. I'll try a dip of those
preserves. Now let me see. After breakfast you'd better lie down on my
bed and take a nap."

"No, I must go. The Major is going over to Brantly to-day and I want him
to bring me a box of cartridges. I forgot to tell him last night."

"Oh, you're thinking about Mayo, eh?"

"Well, I don't know but he did cross my mind. It occurred to me that he
might waylay me some night, and I don't want to stand out in the road
and dance while he's shooting at me."

"That's right," said the old man. "A fellow cuts a mighty sorry figure
dancing under such circumstances. I've tried it."

He shoved his chair back from the table and Jim got up to take his
leave. "Look out for the door, Jimmie. Duck as you go under or it will
lay you out. Traps set all through life for fellows of your size."

Jim was not oppressed with weariness as he strode along the highway, for
in the crisp air a tonic was borne, but loss of sleep had made his
senses dreamy, and all things about him were touched with the spirit of
unreality--the dead leaves fluttering on the underbrush, the purple mist
rising from the fields, the water-mirrors flashing in the road; and so
surrendered was he to a listless brooding, forgetful even that he moved
along, that he did not notice, up the road, a man leap aside into the
woods. The man hid behind a tree, with his eye on the giant and with the
barrel of a pistol pressed hard against the bark. Jim passed on, with
his hands in his pockets, looking down; and when a clump of bushes, red
with frost-dyed leaves, hid him from view, Mayo came out from behind the
tree and resumed his journey down the road.

The Major had mounted his horse at the gate and was on the point of
riding forth when Jim came up. "Why, good-morning, James," the old
gentleman heartily greeted him. "Have you just crawled out of that old
man's kennel? I see that the old owl must have kept you up all night.
Why, sir, if I were to listen to him I'd never get another wink of
sleep."

"I kept myself up," said the giant; and then he added: "I wanted to see
you this morning, not very bad, but just to ask you to get me a box of
forty-fours when you go to Brantly to-day."

"I'm glad to find you so thoughtful," said the Major. "And I want to
tell you right now that you've got to look out for yourself. But staying
up all night is no way to begin. Go on into Tom's room and take a nap."

The Major whistled as he rode along, not for want of serious reflection,
for he could easily have reached out and drawn in trouble, but because
the sharp air stirred his spirits. Nowhere was there a cloud--a
speckless day in the middle of a week that had threatened to keep the
sky besmirched. Roving bands of negro boys were hunting rabbits in the
fields, with dogs that leaped high in low places where dead weeds stood
brittle. The pop-eyed hare was startled from his bed among brambly
vines, and fierce shouts arose like the remembered yell of a Confederate
troop. The holidays were near, the crops were gathered, the winter's
wood was up, the hunting season open, but no negro fired a gun. At this
time of the year steamboatmen and tavern-keepers in the villages were
wont to look to Titus, Eli, Pompey, Sam, Caesar and Bill for their game,
and it was not an unusual sight to see them come loaded down with
rabbits and quails caught in traps, but now they sat sullen over the
fire by day, but were often met prowling about at night. This crossed
the Major's mind and drove away his cheerful whistling; and he was
deeply thinking when someone riding in haste reined in a horse abreast
of him. Looking up he recognized the priest.

"Why, good morning, Mr. Brennon; how are you?"

"Well, I thank you. How far do you go?"

"To Brantly."

"That's fortunate," said the priest, "for I am selfish enough to let you
shorten the journey for me."

"I can't do that," the Major laughed, "but we can divide it. I remember
overtaking a man one miserable day out in the Indian Territory. He was
ignorant, but he was quaint; he couldn't argue, but he could amuse, and
he did until he called me a liar, and there our roads split. Don't
think, from my telling you this, that I am in the least doubt as to the
desirability of your company on the road to Brantly. Been some time
since I've seen you, Mr. Brennon."

"Yes; I have been very busy."

"And successfully so, I suppose."

"I am not in a position to complain," said the priest.

"By the way, will you answer a few questions?"

"Gladly, if they're answerable."

"I think they are. Now, the negroes that come into your communion tell
you many things, drop idle gossip that may mean much. Did any of them
ever drop a hint of preparations which their brethren may or may not be
making to demand some unreasonable concession from the white people of
this community?"

"What I have seen I am free to relate to you," the priest answered, "but
as to what has been told--well, that is quite another matter. I have
seen no preparations, but you doubtless remember a conversation we had
some time ago, and on that occasion I think we agreed that we might have
trouble sooner or later."

"Yes, we were agreed upon that point," the Major replied, "but neither
of us professed to see trouble close at hand. For some time I have heard
it rumored that the negroes are meeting at night to drill, but I have
paid but little attention, giving them credit for more sense than to
believe that their uprising could be more than a short, and, to
themselves, a disastrous, struggle; but there is one aspect that
impresses me, the fact that they are taking no notice of the coming of
Christmas; for when this is the case you must know that the negro's
nature must have undergone a complete change. I don't quite understand
it. Why, sir, at present they can find no possible excuse for revolt.
The crops are gathered and they can make no demand for higher wages; no
election is near and they can't claim a political cause for
disaffection. If they want better pay for their labor, why didn't they
strike in the midst of the cotton-picking? That would have been their
time for trouble, if that's what they want."

"Perhaps they hadn't money enough to buy equipment, guns and
ammunition," the priest suggested. "Perhaps they needed the money that
the gathering of the crops would bring them."

The Major looked at him. "I hadn't thought of that," he said. "But
surely the negroes have sense enough to know that the whites would
exterminate them within a week."

It was some time before Father Brennon replied. His deliberation led the
Major to believe that he would speak from his abundant resources; and
the planter listened eagerly with his head turned to one side and with
his hand behind his ear. "It is possible," the priest began, "that the
negro had been harangued to the conviction that he is to begin a
general revolt against capital, that labor organizations everywhere will
rise up when they hear that he has been bold enough to fire his gun."

The Major's shoulders stiffened. "Sir, if you have known this, why
haven't you as a white man and a Southern gentleman told us of it? Why
haven't you warned us?"

The priest smiled. "Your resentment is just," said he. "But the truth
is, it was not formulated as an opinion until late last night. I called
at your house this morning and was told that you had set out for the
county-seat. And I have overtaken you."

The Major reined up his horse. Both horses stopped. "Mr. Brennon, you
are a gentleman, sir. My hand."

They shook hands and rode on. The Major was deep in thought. "It has all
been brought about by that scoundrel Mayo," he said at last. "He has
instilled a most deadly poison into the minds of those people. I will
telegraph the governor and request him to send the state militia into
this community. The presence of the soldiers will dissolve this
threatened outbreak; and by the blood, sir, Mayo shall be convicted of
treason against the state and hanged on the public square in Brantly.
And that will be an end of it."

The priest said nothing, and after a time the Major asked: "How are you
getting on with your work?"

"I am greatly encouraged, and I wish I had more time."

"What do you mean by that?"

"I have told you that the church can save the negro. Do you know a negro
named Bob Hackett?"

"Yes; he was a worthless politician, but they tell me that he has
withdrawn from active politics and gone to work. What about him?"

"He is now a communicant of the church," the priest answered. "He
acknowledges a moral authority; and I make bold to say that should
trouble come, he will take no part in it. And I make still bolder to say
that the church, the foster mother of the soul of man, can in time
smooth all differences and establish peace and brotherly regard between
the white man and the negro. The Ethiopian cannot change his skin, but
true religion whitens his soul and makes him our brother."

"Your sentiment is good," replied the Major, "but religion must
recognize an impossibility. The white man and the negro can never hold
each other in brotherly regard. Never."

"Don't say never, Major. Men pass from fixed prejudices; the church is
eternal in its purpose. Don't say never."

In fine, the winter climate of north Italy is really very harsh, and
though the season is not so severe in Venice as in Milan, or even
Florence, it is still so sharp as to make foreigners regret the
generous fires and warmly- built houses of the north.

There was snow but once during my first Venetian winter, 1861-62; the
second there was none at all; but the third, which was last winter,
it fell repeatedly to considerable depth, and lay unmelted for
many weeks in the shade.

The lagoons were frozen for miles in every direction; and under our
windows on the Grand Canal, great sheets of ice went up and down with
the rising and the falling tide for nearly a whole month.

In the center of the town was the public square, and about
it were ranged the business houses, and in the midst of it stood the
court house with its paint blistered and its boards warping. It was
square, with a hall and offices below. Above was the court room, and
herein was still heard the dying echo of true oratory. On the top of
this building, once the pride of the county, was a frail tower, and in
it was a clock, always slow. It was never known to record an hour until
that hour had long since been due. Sometimes it would save up its
strokes upon the bell until fifty or more were accumulated, and then, in
the midst of an intense jury trial, it would slowly turn them loose. A
mathematician, a man who kept the dates of late and early frosts, had it
in his record that the hammer struck the bell sixty-eight times on the
afternoon when John Maffy was sentenced to be hanged, and that the
judge had to withhold his awful words until this flood of gathered time
was poured out. Once or twice the county court had appropriated money to
have the clock brought back within the bounds of reason, but a more
pressing need had always served to swallow up the sum thus set aside.

A stone planted at one corner of the public square marked the site of a
bit of bloody history. Away back in the fifties a man named Antrem, from
New England, came to Brantly and, standing where the stone now stands,
made an abolition speech. It was so bold an impudence that the citizens
stood agape, scarcely able to believe their ears. At last the passive
astonishment was broken by a slave-owner named Peel. He drew two
pistols, handed one to the speaker, stepped off and told him to defend
himself. The New Englander had nerve. He did defend himself, and with
deadly effect. Both men were buried on the public square.

A railway had skipped Brantly by ten long and sandy miles, and a new
town springing up about a station on the line--an up-start of yesterday,
four-fifths of it being a mere paper town, and the other fifth
consisting of cheap and hastily built stores, saloons, boarding houses,
a livery stable, a blacksmith shop, and a few roughly constructed
dwellings--clamored for the county seat; and until this question was
finally settled old Brantly could not look with confidence toward any
improvement. Indeed, some of her business men stood ready to desert her
in the event that she should be beaten by the new town, and while all
were bravely willing to continue the fight against the up-start, every
one was slow to hazard his money to improve his home or his place of
business. Whenever a young man left Brantly it was predicted that he
would come to no good, and always there came a report that he was
gambling, or drinking himself to death. The mere fact that he desired to
leave the old town was fit proof of his general unworthiness to succeed
in life.

The Major rode into town, nodding at the loungers whom he saw on the
corners of the streets, and tying his horse to the rack on the square,
went straightway to the shop of the only hardware dealer and asked for
cartridges.

"My stock is running pretty low," said the dealer, wrapping up the
paste-board box. "I've sold more lately than I ever sold in any one
season before, and yet there's no game in the market."

The Major whistled. "Who has been buying them?" he asked.

"Come to think of it I have sold the most to a Frenchman named
Larnage--lives over on the Potter place, I believe. And that reminds me
that I'll have a new lot in to-day, ordered for him."

"Do you know anything about that fellow?" the Major asked.

"Not very much."

"Well, don't let him have another cartridge. Keep all you get. We'll
need them to protect life and property."

"What! I don't understand."

"I haven't time to explain now, for I'm reminded that I must go at once
to the telegraph office. Come over to the court-house."

The Major sent a dispatch to the governor and then went to the county
clerk's office where he found the hardware dealer and a number of men
waiting for him. The report that he was charged with serious news was
already spread about; and when he entered, the clerk of the county
court, an old fellow with an ink-blot on his bald head, came forward
with an inquiry as to what had been meant when the Major spoke of the
cartridges. The Major explained his cause for alarm. Then followed a
brief silence, and then the old fellow who kept the records of the
frosts and the clock, spoke up with the assertion that for some time he
had expected it. "Billy," he said, speaking to the clerk, "I told you
the other day that we were going to have trouble mighty soon. Don't you
recollect?"

"Don't believe I do, Uncle Parker."

"But I said so as sure as you are standing there this minute. Let me try
a little of your tobacco." The clerk handed him a plug, and biting off a
chew, the old man continued: "Yes, sir, I've had it in mind for a long
time."

"Everybody has talked more or less about it," said the clerk.

"Oh, I know they have, Billy, but not p'intedly, as I have. Yes, sir,
bound to come."

"The thing to do is to over-awe them," said the Major. "I have just
telegraphed the governor to send the militia down here. And by the way,
that fellow Mayo ought to be arrested without delay. Billy, is the
sheriff in his office?"

"No, Major, he's gone down to Sassafras to break up a gang of negro
toughs that have opened a gambling den. He'll be back this evening and
I'll have the warrant ready for him by the time he gets back. Any of us
can swear it out--reckon all our names better go to it."

"Yes," the Major agreed, "we'd better observe the formalities of the
law. The militia will undo all that has been done, and as for the fellow
that brought about the inquietude, we'll see him hanged in front of this
door."

Old man Parker, who kept the records, nudged his neighbor and said:
"Inquietude is the word. I told my wife last night, says I, 'Nancy,
whenever you want the right word, go to John Cranceford.' That's what I
said. Major; and I might have said go to your father if he was alive,
for he stood 'way up among the pictures, I tell you; and I reckon I
knowd him as well as any man in the county. I ricollect his duel with
Dabney."

"He was to have fought a man named Anderson Green," replied the Major,
"but a compromise was effected."

"Yes," said Parker, "Green's the man I was tryin' to think of. It was
Shelton that fought Dabney."

"Shelton fought Whitesides," said the Major.

The men began to titter, "Well, then, who was it fought Dabney?"

"Never heard of Dabney," the Major answered.

"Well, I have, and somebody fought him, but it makes no difference. So,
in your father's case a compromise was effected. The right word again;
and that's what makes me say to my wife, 'Nancy, whenever you want the
right word go to John Cranceford;' and, as I said a while ago, your
father either, for I knowd him as well as any man, and was present at
the time he bought a flat-boat nigger named Pratt Boyce."

"My father was once forced to sell, but he never bought a negro," the
Major replied.

"That so? Well, now, who was it bought Pratt Boyce? You fellers shut up
your snortin'. I reckon I know what I'm talkin' about."

The county judge and several other men came in and the talk concerning
the threatened negro outbreak was again taken up. "It seems rather
singular," said the Judge, "that we should worry through a storm of
politics and escape any very serious bloodshed and reach a climax after
all these years. Of course when two races of people, wholly at variance
in morals and social standing, inhabit the same community, there is
always more or less danger, still I don't think that the negroes have so
little sense----"

"Ah, the point I made," the Major broke in. "But you see a labor plank
has been added to their platform of grievance."

Parker nudged his neighbor. "I says, says I, 'Nancy, John Cranceford for
the right word.'"

"There's something in that," the Judge replied. "Nothing can be madder
than misled labor. We have been singularly free from that sort of
disturbances, but I suppose our time must come sooner or later. But I
think the militia will have a good effect so far as the negroes
themselves are concerned. But of course if the soldiers come and the
trouble blows over without any demonstration whatever, there will be
considerable dissatisfaction among the people as to why such a step
should have been taken. Uncle Parker," he added, turning to the
record-keeper, "think we'll have much cold weather this winter?"

Parker did not answer at once. He knew that glibness would argue against
due meditation. "I see a good many signs," he slowly answered. "Hornets
hung their nests on the low limbs of the trees, and there are other
indications, still it largely depends on the condition of the wind.
Sometimes a change of wind knocks out all calculations, still, I feel
assured in saying that we are goin' to have a good deal of frost first
and last; but if the militia don't get here in time we are mighty apt to
have it hotter before we have it colder. Last night while I sat at home
by the fire a smokin' of my pipe, and Nancy a-settin' there a-nittin' a
pair of socks for a preacher, I looks up and I says, 'there's goin' to
be trouble in this community before many changes of the moon,' I says,
and I want at all surprised to-day when the Major here come a-ridin' in
with his news. Don't reckon any of you ricollect the time we come mighty
nigh havin' a nigger uprisin' before the war. But we nipped it in the
bud; and I know they hung a yaller feller that cost me fifteen hundred
dollars in gold."

The old man was so pleased to find himself listened to by so large a
company that he squared himself for a longer discourse upon happenings
antedating the memory of any one present, but attention split off and
left him talking to a neighbor, who long ago was weary of the sage's
recollections. Wisdom lends its conceit to the aged, and Parker was
very old; and when his neighbor gave him but a tired ear, he turned from
him and boldly demanded the Major's attention, but at this moment the
telegraph operator came in with a dispatch. And now all interests were
centered. The Major tore open the envelope and read aloud the following
from the governor:

"Troops are at competitive drill in Mississippi. Have ordered them
home."

The Major stood leaning with his elbow on the top of the clerk's tall
desk. He looked again at the dispatch, reading it to himself, and about
him was the sound of shuffling feet.

"Well, it won't take them more than twenty-four hours to get home," he
said, "and that will be time enough. But Billy, we'd better not swear
out that warrant till they come."

"That's wise," said the Judge, a cautious man. "His followers would not
stand to see him taken in by the civil authorities; it's not showy
enough."

And Parker, speaking up, declared the Judge was right. "I ricollect the
militia come down here once durin' the days of the carpet-baggers,
and----"

"But let no one speak of the dispatch having been sent to the governor,"
said the Judge. "Billy, when the sheriff comes back you'd better tell
him to appoint forthwith at least a hundred deputies."

"In fact," the Major replied, "every law-abiding man in the county might
be declared a deputy."

Old Parker found his neighbor and nudged him. "I says to my wife,
'Nancy,' says I, 'whenever you want the right idee, go to John
Cranceford and you'll get it.'"

"That's all right, Uncle Parker," the irritated man replied. "I don't
give a continental and you needn't keep on coming to me with it."

"You don't? Then what sort of a man are you?"

"You boys quit your mowling over there," the county clerk commanded.

"Major," said the Judge, "the troops will doubtless come by boat and
land near your place. Don't you think it would be a good idea for you to
come over with them? The truth is you know our people are always more or
less prejudiced against militia, and it is therefore best to have a
well-known citizen come along with them."

"I don't know but that you are right," said the Major. "Yes, I will come
with them."

He bade the men good day and turned to go, and out into the hall the
Judge came following him. "By the way, Major," said he, "you are of
course willing to take all responsibility; and I'd a little rather you
wouldn't mention my name in connection with the militia's coming down
here, for the ordering out of troops is always looked upon as a sort of
snap judgment."

"I thought you said that you were not going to run for office again,"
the Major bluntly replied.

The Judge stammered and though the hall was but dimly lighted, the Major
saw that his face was growing red.

"I have reconsidered that," confessed the politician, "and next season I
shall be a candidate for re-election."

"And I will oppose you, sir."

"Oppose me? And why so?"

"Because you've got no nerve. I believe, sir, that in your smooth way
you once took occasion to say that Gideon Batts was a loud-mouth and
most imprudent man. But, sir, there is more merit in the loud bark of a
dog than in the soft tread of a cat. I will oppose you when the time
comes, but I will shoulder the responsibility of martial law in this
community. Good day, sir."

"Major----"

"I said good day, sir."

The old gentleman strode hotly out to the rack where his horse was tied,
and thereabout was gathered a number of boys, discussing the coming
danger which in their shrewdness they had keenly sniffed. Among them he
distributed pieces of money, wherewith to buy picture books, he said,
but they replied that they were going to buy powder and he smiled upon
them as he mounted his horse to ride away.

In the road not far distant from the town he met Larnage, the Frenchman.
The day before he would have passed him merely with a nod, as he
scarcely knew him by sight and had forgotten his name; but the hardware
dealer had recalled it and upon it had put an emphasis; so, reining up
his horse, he motioned the man to stop.

"How long have you been in this neighborhood?" the Major asked. At this
abruptness the Frenchman was astonished.

"I do not understand," he replied.

"Yes you do. How long have you been here?"

"Oh, I understand that, but I do not understand why you should ask."

"But can't you tell me?"

"I can be so obliging. I have lived here two years."

"And how long in the United States?"

"Ten years. And now will you have the goodness to tell me why you wish
to know? Will you be so kind as I have been?"

"Well, to be frank, I don't hear a very good report of you."

"But who is appointed to make a report of me? I attend to my own
business, and is this a bad report to make of a citizen of the country?
If you will have the goodness to pardon me I will ride on."

"Wait a moment. Why are you buying so many cartridges?"

The Frenchman shrugged his shoulders. "Has not the citizen of the
country a right to spend his money? I have heard that the Major is
polite. He must not be well to-day. Shall I ride on now? Ah, I thank
you."

Onward the Frenchman rode, and gazing back at him the Major mused: "The
frog-eater gave me the worst of it. But I believe he's a scoundrel all
the same. I didn't get at him in the right way. Sorry I said anything to
him."


CHAPTER XXIV.


Upon reaching home shortly after nightfall the Major found visitors
waiting for him in the library--Wash Sanders, old Gid, Jim Taylor, Low,
and a red bewhiskered neighbor named Perdue. A bright fire was crackling
in the great fire-place; and with stories of early steamboat days upon
the Mississippi, Gid was regaling the company when the hero of the yarn
opened the door and looked in. Getting to their feet with a scuffle and
a clatter of shovel and tongs (which some one knocked down) they cried
him a welcome to his own house.

"Gentlemen," said the Major, "just wait till I eat a bite and I'll be
with you. Have you all been to supper?"

"We have all been stuffed," Gid took the liberty to answer, "all but
Wash Sanders and he----"

"Don't eat enough to keep a chicken alive," Sanders struck in. "Wish I
could eat with you, Major, but I ain't got no relish for vidults. But
I'm glad to know that other folks ain't that bad off. Jest go on and
take your time like we want here waitin' for you."

While the Major was in the dining-room, Gid came out and told him that
the priest had said to him and to others that it might be well to call
at the Major's house immediately upon his return from Brantly.

"He's all right," said the Major, getting up and taking the lead toward
the library. And when he had sat down in his chair, bottomed with
sheep-skin, he told his friends of his fears of a negro insurrection, of
the dispatch and of the answer from the governor; and he related his
talk with the Frenchman, whereupon Low, the Englishman, spoke up:

"I know that chap. It wouldn't surprise me to learn that he put some
rascally black up to the trick of punching that hole in my bath. For a
time he came about my place quite a bit, you know, but I gave him to
understand one day that I vastly preferred to choose my own associates.
And you may rest with the assurance that he will be against the whites.
Ah, with a Frenchman it is never a question as to which side he shall
take. By jove, he always finds out which side the Englishman is on and
then takes the other. I have brought with me a bit of Scotch whisky and
I shall be pleased to have you gentlemen join me."

"Wait a minute," said the Major. "I have some liquor that was distilled
sixty years ago by the grandfather of the commander of the Alabama.
We'll try that first."

"Good!" cried the Briton. "I can't deny the Alabama claim, you know."
And then he added: "Most extraordinary, I assure you."

"Just wait till you smack your mouth on it," said Gid. "Why, sir,
there's the smile of a goddess in each drop and a 'Paradise Regained' in
a swallow. Sit down, Wash Sanders--a swig of it would shoot you into the
air like a rocket."

"But really, Mr. Gid, I think a little of it would help my appetite,"
Sanders replied, looking anxiously toward the Major.

"Appetite!" Gid cried. "You can eat the hind leg of a rhinoceros right
now."

"Do you mean to insult me, sir?" Sanders retorted, weakly bristling up;
and the Major turning from the sideboard, with the odd-shaped bottle and
several glasses in his hands, looked at Batts and said: "Don't, Gid."

"All right, but I was joking," the old rascal declared. "Wash and I
always prank with each other. You can take a joke, can't you, Wash?"

"With the best of them," Sanders answered. "Yes, sir, and before the
doctors proved to me that I couldn't get well I was joking all the
time." He raised his hand and with his long finger nail scratched his
chin. "But they showed me that I couldn't get well and if that ain't
enough to sadden a man's life I don't know what is."

"Now, gentlemen," said the Major, "I want you to help yourselves, and
not be afraid, for the glasses are shallow and the bottle is deep."

The red bewhiskered man Perdue, who had said nothing, took out his quid
of tobacco and with a loud "spat," threw it against the chimney-back.
"I'll join you," he said, grinning. "Never saw any liquor too old for
me."

They stood and touched glasses. Gid walled his eyes like a steer, and
with a rub of his breast and an "ah-hah," he nodded at Low. "What do you
think of that?" he cried. "Isn't it a miracle?"

"Ah, it is very smooth," Low answered, sipping. "Most uncommon I should
think."

"Smooth," said Gid. "Did you say smooth? It is as silk woven in the loom
of a dream. Wash, how does it strike you?"

"I think it will help me," Sanders answered.

"Help you!" And under his breath Gid added: "Ought to kill you."

"What did you say?" Sanders asked.

"Said it wouldn't kill you."

"Oh, I think not. Really, after a while I might be tempted to go out and
eat something. How are you gettin' along, Perdue?"

"Shakin' hands with my grandfather in the speret," Perdue declared, and
running his fingers through his fiery whiskers he laughed with a hack
that cut like the bleat of a sheep.

"Jim," said the Major, turning to Taylor, who had not left his seat,
"you'd better try a little. It won't hurt you."

"No, thank you, Major, I'm afraid of it."

"Let him alone," Gid spoke. "One drink of this and he'd carry off the
gate, posts and all and leave them on the hill. Don't tempt him."

"Gentlemen," said Perdue, "I have always made it a rule never to repeat
anything that my children say, for I know how such a thing bores folks,
but I will tell you what my son Ab said the other night. His mother was
gettin' him ready for bed--just a little more, Major. There, that's a
plenty. Mother was gettin' him ready for bed and he looked up----"

"I feel the blood of youth mounting from the feet of the past to the
head of the present," Gid broke in. "I can jump a ten rail fence, staked
and ridered."

The Giant Sea-wall, built there by the Republic in her decline, is a
work of Roman grandeur, which impresses you more deeply than any
other monument of the past with a sense of her former industrial
and commercial greatness.

Strips of village border the narrow Littorale all the way to
Chioggia, and on the right lie the islands of the lagoon. Chioggia itself
is hardly more than a village, --a Venice in miniature, like Murano,
with canals and boats and bridges.
But here the character of life is more amphibious than in brine-bound
Venice; and though there is no horse to be seen in the central
streets of Chioggia, peasants' teams penetrate her borders by means
of a long bridge from the main-land.

Of course Chioggia has passed through the customary vicissitudes of Italian
towns, and has been depopulated at divers times by pestilence, famine,
and war.

It suffered cruelly in the war with the Genoese in 1380, when it
was taken by those enemies of St.

Mark; and its people were so wasted by the struggle that the
Venetians, on regaining it, were obliged to invite immigration to
repopulate its emptiness.

I do not know how great comfort the Chiozzotti of that unhappy day
took in the fact that some of the earliest experiments with cannon
were made in the contest that destroyed them, but I can hardly offer
them less tribute than to mention it here.

At present the place is peopled almost entirely by sailors and fishermen,
whose wives are more famous for their beauty than their amiability.
Goldoni's "Baruffe Chiozzotte" is an amusing and vivid picture of the
daily battles which the high-spirited ladies of the city fought in
the dramatist's [Footnote: Goldoni's family went from Venice to
Chioggia when the dramatist was very young. The description of his life
there form some of the most interesting chapters of his Memoirs.]
time, and which are said to be of frequent occurrence at this day.

The Chiozzotte are the only women of this part of Italy who still
preserve a semblance of national costume; and this remnant of more
picturesque times consists merely of a skirt of white, which, being
open in front, is drawn from the waist over the head and gathered
in the hand under the chin, giving to the flashing black eyes and
swarthy features of the youthful wearer a look of very dangerous
slyness and cunning.

The dialect of the Chiozzotti is said to be that of the early Venetians,
with an admixture of Greek, and it is infinitely more sweet and musical
than the dialect now spoken in Venice.
"Whether derived," says the author of the "Fiore di Venezia," alluding
to the speech of these peculiar people, "from those who first settled
these shores, or resulting from other physical and moral causes,
it is certain that the tone of the voice is here more varied and
powerful: the mouth is thrown wide open in speaking; a passion, a
lament mingles with laughter itself, and there is a continual
_ritornello_ of words previously spoken.

     But this speech is full of energy; whoever would study brief and
     strong modes of expression should come here."
     Chioggia was once the residence of noble and distinguished
     persons, among whom was the painter Rosalba Carrera, famed
     throughout Europe for her crayon miniatures; and the place
     produced in the sixteenth century the great maestro Giuseppe
     Zarlino, "who passes," says Cantù, "for the restorer of modern music,"
     and "whose 'Orfeo' heralded the invention of the musical drama."
     This composer claimed for his birthplace the doubtful honor of the
     institution of the order of the Capuchins, which he declared
     to have been founded by Fra Paolo (Giovanni Sambi) of Chioggia.
     There is not much now to see in poor little Chioggia except its
     common people, who, after a few minutes' contemplation, can hardly
     interest any one but the artist. There are no dwellings in the town
     which approach palatial grandeur, and nothing in the Renaissance
     churches to claim attention, unless it be an attributive Bellini in
     one of them. Yet if you have the courage to climb the bell-tower of
     the cathedral, you get from its summit the loveliest imaginable
     view of many-purpled lagoon and silver-flashing sea; and if you are
     sufficiently acquainted with Italy and Italians to observe a curious
     fact, and care to study the subject, you may note the great difference
     between the inhabitants of Chioggia and those of Palestrina,--an
     island divided from Chioggia by a half mile of lagoon, and by quite
different costume, type of face, and accent.

     Just between Chioggia and the sea lies the lazy town of Sottomarina,
and I should say that the population of Sottomarina chiefly spent
its time in lounging up and down the Sea-wall; while that of Chioggia,
when not professionally engaged with the net, gave its leisure to
playing _mora_ [Footnote: Mora is the game which the Italians play
with their fingers, one throwing out two, three, or four fingers,
as the case may be, and calling the number at the same instant.

     If (so I understood the game) the player mistakes the number of
fingers he throws out, he loses; if he hits the number with both
voice and fingers he wins.

It is played with tempestuous interest, and is altogether fiendish in
appearance.] in the shade, or pitilessly pursuing strangers, and
offering them boats. For my own part, I refused the subtlest
advances of this kind which were made me in Chiozzotto, but fell
a helpless prey to a boatman who addressed me in some words of
wonderful English, and then rowed me to the Sea-wall at about thrice
the usual fare.

These primitive people are bent, in their out-of-the-world, remote
way, upon fleecing the passing stranger quite as earnestly as other
Italians, and they naïvely improve every occasion for plunder.

As we passed up the shady side of their wide street, we came upon a plump
little blond boy, lying asleep on the stones, with his head upon his
arm; and as no one was near, the artist of our party stopped to sketch
the sleeper. Atmospheric knowledge of the fact spread rapidly, and in
a few minutes we were the centre of a general assembly of the
people of Chioggia, who discussed us, and the artist's treatment
of her subject, in open congress.

They handed round the airy chaff as usual, but were very orderly and
respectful, nevertheless,--one father of the place quelling every tendency
to tumult by kicking his next neighbor, who passed on the penalty
till, by this simple and ingenious process, the guilty cause of the
trouble was infallibly reached and kicked at last.

I placed a number of soldi in the boy's hand, to the visible sensation
of the crowd, and then we moved away and left him, heading, as we went,
a procession of Chiozzotti, who could not make up their minds to
relinquish us till we took refuge in a church.
When we came out the procession had disappeared, but all round the
church door, and picturesquely scattered upon the pavement in every
direction, lay boys asleep, with their heads upon their arms.

As we passed laughing through the midst of these slumberers, they
rose and followed us with cries of "_Mi tiri zu!

Mi tiri zu!_" (Take me down! Take me down!)

They ran ahead, and fell asleep again in our path, and round every corner
we came upon a sleeping boy; and, indeed, we never got out of that
atmosphere of slumber till we returned to the steamer for Venice, when
Chioggia shook off her drowsy stupor, and began to tempt us to
throw soldi into the water, to be dived for by her awakened
children.

CHAPTER XIII.

THE ARMENIANS.

Among the pleasantest friends we made in Venice were the monks of the
Armenian Convent, whose cloistral buildings rise from the glassy
lagoon, upon the south of the city, near a mile away.

This bulk
"Of mellow brick-work on an isle of bowers"
is walled in with solid masonry from the sea, and encloses a
garden-court, filled with all beautiful flowers, and with the
memorable trees of the East; while another garden encompasses the
monastery itself, and yields those honest fruits and vegetables
which supply the wants of the well- cared-for mortal part of the
good brothers.

The island is called San Lazzaro, and the convent was established
in 1717 by a learned and devoted Armenian priest named Mechithar, from
whom the present order of monks is called Mechitharist. He was the
first who formed the idea of educating a class of priests to act as
missionaries among the Armenian nation in the East, and infuse into its
civil and religious decay the life of European piety and learning.

He founded at Sebaste, therefore, a religious order of which the
seat was presently removed to Constantinople, where the friars met
with so much persecution from Armenian heterodoxy that it was again
transferred, and fixed at Modone in Morea.

That territory falling into the hands of the Turks, the Mechitharists
fled with their leader to Venice, where the Republic bestowed upon
them a waste and desolate island, which had formerly been used as
a place of refuge for lepers; and the monks made it the loveliest
spot in all the lagoons.

The little island has such a celebrity in travel and romance, that I feel
my pen catching in the tatters of a threadbare theme. And yet I love
the place and its people so well, that I could scarcely pass it without
mention.

Every tourist who spends a week in Venice goes to see the convent,
and every one is charmed with it and the courteous welcome of the
fathers.

Its best interest is the intrinsic interest attaching to it as a seat
of Armenian culture; but persons who relish the cheap sentimentalism
of Byron's life, find the convent all the more entertaining from
the fact that he did the Armenian language the favor to study it
there, a little.

The monks show his autograph, together with those of other distinguished
persons, and the Armenian Bible which he used to read.

I understood from one of the friars, Padre Giacomo Issaverdanz, that the
brothers knew little or nothing of Byron's celebrity as a poet
while he studied with them, and that his proficiency as an Armenian
scholar was not such as to win high regard from them.

I think most readers who have visited the convent will recall the
pleasant face and manners of the young father mentioned, who shows
the place to English-speaking travelers, and will care to know that
Padre Giacomo was born at Smyrna, and dwelt there in the family of
an English lady, till he came to Venice, and entered on his monastic
life at San Lazzaro.

He came one morning to breakfast with us, bringing with him Padre
Alessio, a teacher in the Armenian College in the city.

As for the latter, it was not without a certain shock that I heard
Mesopotamia mentioned as his birthplace, having somehow in childhood
learned to regard that formidable name as little better than a kind
of profane swearing.

But I soon came to know Padre Alessio apart from his birthplace, and
to find him very interesting as a scholar and an artist.

He threw a little grace of poetry around our simple feast, by repeating
some Armenian verses,--grace all the more ethereal from our entire
ignorance of what the verses meant.

Our breakfast-table talk wrought to friendship the acquaintance
made some time before, and the next morning we received the photograph
of Padre Giacomo, and the compliments of the Orient, in a heaped
basket of ripe and luscious figs from the garden of the Convent San
Lazzaro.

When, in turn, we went to visit him at the convent, we had experience of
a more curious oriental hospitality. Refreshments were offered to us
as to friends, and we lunched fairily upon little dishes of rose leaves,
delicately preserved, with all their fragrance, in a "lucent sirup." It
seemed that this was a common conserve in the East; but we could
hardly divest ourselves of the notion of sacrilege, as we thus fed
upon the very most luxurious sweetness and perfume of the soul of
summer.

Pleasant talk accompanied the dainty repast,--Padre Giacomo recounting
for us some of his adventures with the people whom he had to show
about the convent, and of whom many were disappointed at not finding
a gallery or museum, and went away in extreme disgust; and relating
with a sly, sarcastic relish that blent curiously with his sweetness
and gentleness of spirit, how some English people once came with
the notion that Lord Byron was an Armenian; how an unhappy French
gentleman, who had been robbed in Southern Italy, would not be
parted a moment from a huge bludgeon which he carried in his hand,
and (probably disordered by his troubles) could hardly be persuaded
from attacking the mummy which is in one of the halls; how a sharp,
bustling, go-ahead Yankee rushed in one morning, rubbing his hands,
and demanding, "Show me all you can in five minutes."

As a seat of learning, San Lazzaro is famed throughout the Armenian world,
and gathers under its roof the best scholars and poets of that nation.
In the printing-office of the convent books are printed in some thirty
different languages; and a number of the fathers employ themselves
constantly in works of translation. The most distinguished of the
Armenian literati now living at San Lazzaro is the Reverend Father
Gomidas Pakraduni, who has published an Armenian version of "Paradise
Lost," and whose great labor the translation of Homer, has been recently
issued from the convent press. He was born at Constantinople of an
ancient and illustrious family, and took religious orders at San Lazzaro,
where he was educated, and where for twenty-five years after his consecration
he held the professorship of his native tongue. He devoted himself
especially to the culture of the ancient Armenian, and developed it for
the expression of modern ideas, he made exhaustive study of the vast
collection of old manuscripts at San Lazzaro, and then went to Paris
in pursuance of his purpose, and acquainted himself with all the
treasures of Armenian learning in the Bibliothèque Royale.

He became the first scholar of the age in his national language, and
acquired at the same time a profound knowledge of Latin and Greek.

Returning to Constantinople, Father Pakraduni, whose fame had preceded
him, took up his residence in the family of a noble Armenian, high in
the service of the Turkish government; and while assuming the care
of educating his friend's children, began those labors of translation
which have since so largely employed him.

He made an Armenian version of Pindar, and wrote a work on Rhetoric,
both of which were destroyed by fire while yet in the manuscript.

He labored, meanwhile, on his translation of the Iliad,--a youthful
purpose which he did not see fulfilled till the year 1860, when he
had already touched the Psalmist's limit of life. In this translation
he revived with admirable success an ancient species of Armenian verse,
which bears, in flexibility and strength, comparison with the original
Greek. Another of his great labors was the production of an Armenian
Grammar, in which he reduced to rule and order the numerous forms of
his native tongue, never before presented by one work in all its
eastern variety.

Padre Giacomo, to whose great kindness I am indebted for a biographic and
critical notice in writing of Father Pakraduni, considers the epic
poem by that scholar a far greater work than any of his philological
treatises, profound and thorough as they are. When nearly completed,
this poem perished in the same conflagration which consumed the Pindar
and the Rhetoric; but the poet patiently began his work anew, and after
eight years gave his epic of twenty books and twenty-two thousand verses
to the press. The hero of the poem is Haïk, the first Armenian patriarch
after the flood, and the founder of a kingly dynasty. Nimrod, the great
hunter, drunk with his victories, declares himself a god, and
ordains his own worship throughout the Orient.

Haïk refuses to obey the commands of the tyrant, takes up arms against
him, and finally kills him in battle. "In the style of this poem,"
writes Padre Giacomo, "it is hard to tell whether to admire most its
richness, its energy, its sweetness, its melancholy, its freedom,
its dignity, or its harmony, for it has all these virtues in turn.

The descriptive parts are depicted with the faithfulest pencil:
the battle scenes can only be matched in the Iliad."
Father Pakraduni returned, after twenty-five years' sojourn at
Constantinople, to publish his epic at San Lazzaro, where he still lives,
a tranquil, gentle old man, with a patriarchal beauty and goodness
of face. In 1861 he printed his translation of Milton, with a dedication
to Queen Victoria.

His other works bear witness to the genuineness of his inspiration
and piety, and the diligence of his study: they are poems, poetic
translations from the Italian, religious essays, and grammatical
treatises.

Indeed, the existence of all the friars at San Lazzaro is one of
close and earnest study; and life grows so fond of these quiet monks
that it will hardly part with them at last.

One of them is ninety-five years old, and, until 1863, there was a
lay-brother among them whose years numbered a hundred and eight,
and who died of old age, on the 17th of September, after passing
fifty-eight years at San Lazzaro.

From biographic memoranda furnished me by Padre Giacomo, I learn
that the name of this patriarch was George Karabagiak, and that he
was a native of Kutaieh in Asia Minor.

He was for a long time the disciple of Dèdè Vartabied, a renowned preacher
of the Armenian faith, and he afterward taught the doctrines of his
master in the Armenian schools. Failing in his desire to enter upon the
sacerdotal life at Constantinople, he procured his admission as lay-brother
at San Lazzaro, where all his remaining days were spent. He was but
little learned; but he had great passion for poetry, and he was
the author of some thirty small works on different subjects.

He dismounted, struck his
horse with his hat to drive him out of danger and ran into the
court-house. The Major met him. "They will be here in no time," the man
said. "But how they got so close without my seeing them is a mystery to
me. But of course I expected to see them in the road and didn't look for
them in the fields. And that ain't all. They've got a cannon."

"What!" the Major exclaimed, and the men at the loop-holes looked back
at him.

"Yes," the scout went on, "and I know all about it. Just before the war
ended an enormous gun was spiked, dismantled and thrown into a well way
down on the Dinkler place. It was got out a good while afterward and the
spike drilled out, and since then it has been used for a Christmas gun.
Well, they've got that thing on an ox wagon, but they've got no way to
fire it for----"

The guns to the right and left of the square blurted out, then came a
roar and a yell, and in an instant the opposite side of the square was
black with negroes pouring out from behind the low brick building. With
a howl and a rush they came, but from three sides volley after volley
was poured into them, the white men using their shot guns. The effect
was terrible, and soon the square was cleared of all but the dead and
the wounded. A cessation fell, and Mayo's voice could be heard,
shouting at his men. He saw that to attempt to take the house by storm
was certain death, so to comparative safety behind the house and into a
deep-cut road a little farther back he withdrew his men. He had not
expected so early to find such opposition, and his aim was to crush with
the senseless weight of force, but the shot-guns were too deadly. Now he
was cool and cautious. The fire from the whites was straggling. Suddenly
out from behind the brick building rushed three black giants, torches in
hand, making desperately for the court-house. It was indeed a forlorn
hope, for one by one they fell, the last, so death-defying was he, that
he fell upon the steps and his torch flew from his hand into the hallway
and crackled on the floor. A man reached out to grasp it, but a
shattered arm was drawn back. "Not you, Major!" cried old Parker.
Outward he leaned, grabbing at the torch, but Mayo's guns swept the
hall. And when they drew the old man back, he brought the snapping pine,
but left his life. They laid him out upon the floor, stood for a moment
sadly to view him; and through a hole a bullet zipped and beside him
fell a neighbor.

"Back to your places!" the Major commanded. Now the guns on the opposite
side of the square were silent. "They are lying low and our men can't
reach them," said the Major. "What are they up to now? Preparing for
another charge?"

"Worse than that," said the man who had seen them in the fields. "They
have hoisted that cannon up into the brick building and are going to
poke it through the window. See there! See that big log up-ended? That's
to brace it. From where I lay I saw them just now breaking up an old
stove out in the lot and they are going to load with the fragments. I
killed two of them, but they got the stove away. Listen, don't you hear
them pounding it up?"

"And this house will afford no more protection that so much paper," said
the Major, speaking low. "We have badly planned our defense. We are ill
protected from bullets, and a cannon will blow us into the air." And
then, moving from one to another, he looked through the loop-holes.
"Train every gun on that window," he commanded, "and shoot if a finger
is seen." Up the stairs he bounded. Old Gid was walking up and down the
room, softly whistling. "Pretty peppery, Major," he said, pointing to
three bodies stretched upon the floor.

"Yes," the Major replied, "and it will be worse. We are doomed."

"How so? Keep on rushing till they wear us out? I reckon not. It would
take five thousand men. God, but look at them lying out there. They were
desperate, but they are toned down."

"They've got a cannon loaded with the fragments of a stove and will
fire it from that window," said the Major.

Gid whistled and resumed his walk. The firing about the square was slow
and steady. From across the way there came no gun shot. "Got a cannon,
eh?" old Gid mused. "I wondered why they were so still," and then to the
Major he said: "They'll shell us out and mow us down at their leisure.
Who built this infernal court-house?"

"I don't remember," the Major answered, "but he ought to be in here now.
Train your guns on that window."

The Major went below. Just as he reached the bottom of the stairway he
leaped forward with a cry. He saw Jim Taylor jump from a window out upon
the square. The Major ran to a loop-hole, pushed a man aside and looked
out. And now there was a belching of guns on the other side. Jim Taylor
caught up a child in his arms, and with bullets pecking up the dirt
about him and zipping against the wall, he dodged behind a corner of the
house. Then he ran across the protected side of the square. Near by, in
the door of a warehouse, a woman stood, shrieking. When she saw the
giant with her little boy in his arms she ran out to meet him, breaking
loose from the hands that strove to hold her, and snatching the little
fellow, she cried: "God bless you for this. I have so many little ones
to see to that he got out and went to look for his grandpa Parker. God
bless you, sir."

The giant had seen old Parker lying dead on the floor, but he said
nothing; he turned about, and entering the court-house from the
protected side, was soon at his post. The Major stormed at him. "You've
lost all your sense," he cried. "You are a bull-calf, sir. Now see that
you don't leave your post again. Did they hit you?" he anxiously asked.

"Don't believe they did," the giant grimly answered.

"Well, they will in a minute. Look there!"

The mouth of the cannon showed above the window, shoved through and now
rested on the ledge; and behind it arose an enormous log. From the
loop-holes in the court-house the gun was raked with buck-shot, but all
the work was done from below and no one stood exposed. Once a hand, like
a black bat, was seen upon the gun, but instantly it flew away, leaving
a blotch of blood. And now the old bell, so quiet all the morning, began
to strike--one, two, ten, thirty--slowly, with dread and solemn pauses.

"Look!" the Major cried. A red-hot poker glowed above the cannon.
Buckshot hailed from a hundred guns, and the poker fell, but soon it
came again and this time flat upon the gun. The hand that held it was
nervous and fumbling. Suddenly the breech of the gun slipped lower down
the upright log. Up went the muzzle, and then came a deafening boom.
There was a crash over-head. The cupola of the court-house was
shattered, and down came the bell upon the roof, and off it rolled and
fell upon the ground with a clang. Out surged Mayo's men, but a fearful
volley met them, and amid loud cries and with stumbling over the dead
and the dying, torn and bleeding, they were driven back. But they set up
a yell when they saw the damage their gun had wrought. They could
foresee the havoc of a better managed fire. Now the yells were hushed.
The Major's men could hear a black Vulcan hammering his iron; then a
lesser noise--they were driving the scraps into the gun.

"It will be worse this time," said the Major. "They have cut a deeper
niche in the log to hold the breech and there'll be no chance of its
slipping. These walls will be shattered like an eggshell. Steady, they
are at it."

Again the gun lay across the window ledge. The red-hot poker bobbed up,
glowing in the dim light, but there was a crash and a rain of shot and
it flew back out of sight; and it must have been hurled through the rear
opening of the wall, for they were a long time in getting it. But it
came again, this time sparkling with white heat. The guns about the
square kept up an incessant fire, but over the powder the poker bobbed,
and then--the whole town shook with the terrific jar, and windows
showered their glass upon the street, and through the smoke a thrilling
sight was seen--the roof of the brick building was blown into splinters
and in the air flew boots, hats and the fragments of men--the gun had
exploded.

"Out and charge!" the Major shouted. "Forward, Captain Batts!" he cried
at the foot of the stairs, and the men came leaping down. The cry was
taken up, and from every building about the square the men were pouring.
Mayo had no time to rally his force; indeed, it was beyond his power,
for his men were panic-smitten. Into the fields and toward the woods
they ran for their lives. It was now a chase. Bang, to right and the
left, and in the fields the fleeing blacks were falling, one by one.
Once or twice they strove to make a stand, but hell snorted in their
faces--and death barked at their heels. In their terror they were swift,
but from afar the rifles sucked their blood. The woods were gained and
now they were better protected in their flight, dodging from tree to
tree; some of them faced about and white men fell, and thus was caution
forced upon the pursuers. So much time was gained that Mayo rallied the
most of his men, but not to stand and fight. He had another plan. In a
small open space, once a cotton patch, stood a large church, built of
logs, and thither he hastened his men, and therein they found a
fortress. The Major called in his scattered forces. They gathered in the
woods about the church.

"Are you going to charge them?" old Gideon asked.

"No, sir, that would be certain death to many of us. Hemmed in as they
now are they'll be deadly desperate. We'll have to manage it some other
way." A shower of buck-shot flew from the church.

"I gad, Major, they've got buck-shot," said Gid. "And they could mow us
down before we could cross that place. They still outnumber us two to
one--packed in there like sardines. Don't you think we'd better scatter
about and peck at 'em when they show an eye? I'd like to know who built
that church. Confound him, he cut out too many windows to suit me."

"Dodge down, men!" cried the Major. "Mr. Low, get back there, sir!"

"Be so kind as to oblige me with the time," said Low. "The rascals have
smashed my watch. Punch a hole in my bath and then ruin my watch, you
know. Most extraordinary impudence, I assure you."

"It is half-past three," said the Major. "And what a day it has been and
it is not done yet."

Jim Taylor came forward. "Look out," said the Major. "They'll get you
the first thing you know. Why don't you pick up a few grains of sense
as you go along?"

"Why don't some one scatter a few grains?"

"Hush, sir. I want no back talk from you."

"But I've got an idea," said the giant, with a broad grin.

"Out with it."

"Why, right over yonder is the Nelson plantation store-house," said Jim,
"and at the front end is the biggest door I ever saw, double oak and so
thickly studded with wrought-iron nails that their broad heads touch.
And my idea is this: Take that door, cut a round hole in the center with
a cold-chisel, cut down a good-sized cypress tree, round off one end,
fit it in the hole, with about five feet sticking through; let a lot of
us strong fellows gather up the tree and, protected by the door, use it
for a battering ram and punch that house down. Then we can work them
freely, as the fellow says."

"Jim," the Major cried, "you are learning something. This day has
developed you. I believe that can be done. At least it is worth trying.
But, men, if it should be effective, let there be as little unnecessary
slaughter as possible. We are compelled to kill--well, we can't help it.
However, take Mayo alive if you possibly can. I want to see him hanged
on the public square. Now get the door. Here, Tom, you and Low cut down
a cypress tree. Here, Lacy, you help. Low doesn't know how to handle an
ax. We'd better begin operations over there on the left. There are fewer
windows on that side. We can batter down the door. No, there is a high
window above the door and they could shoot down upon us. That won't do.
We'll take the left side. See, there are but two windows, both close
together near the end. Look out, boys. Keep behind the trees. I wonder
how solid those logs are. When was that church built, Captain Batts?"

"Don't remember the exact time, but not so very long ago. I recollect
that there was talk of a probable extension, the time that new
revivalist was having the house built, and that must account for the few
windows toward this end on the left. They've got a first-rate place to
shoot from, but what astonishes me is that Mayo should want to make a
stand when he must know that we'll get him sooner or later."

"That's easily explained," said the scout who had dashed upon the public
square. "They are looking for a large body of reinforcements from the
south, and Mayo knows what to expect if he should run, panic-stricken,
into them. His only hope was in making a stand."

"Where is Perdue?" the Major asked, looking about, from one tree to
another.

"He fell back yonder in the field," old Gid answered. "I ran to him,
but he must have been dead by the time he hit the ground."

The Major said nothing. He stood leaning against a tree looking toward
Jim and four other men coming with the heavy door.

"And old Billy," said Gid, "is----"

The Major turned about. "Well," he broke in.

"You know," said Gid, "we used to say that he always had a blot of ink
on his head. But now he's lying back yonder with a spot of blood where
the ink was."

The Major called to Jim: "Put it down there." And then speaking to Gid
he added: "That scoundrel must pay for this. Don't shoot him--don't even
break his legs--I want to see them dangle in front of the court-house
door."

With a chisel and a hammer the giant worked, on his knees, and it was
almost like cutting through solid iron. The echo of his heavy blows
rumbled afar off throughout the timber-land.

The detail of men came with the log, the body of a cypress tree, one end
smoothly rounded. Jim took his measurements and proceeded with his work.
Once he had to drag the door to a better-sheltered spot. Bullets from
the church were pecking up the dirt about him. Three times the piece of
timber was tried, to find that the hole in the door was not quite large
enough, but at last it went through and the giant smiled at the neatness
of the work. And now the ram was ready. The firing from the church had
fallen and all was silent.

After an exchange of diplomatic courtesies, the commissary took
my statement of the affair down in writing, pertinent to which were
my father's name, place, and business, with a full and satisfactory
personal history of myself down to the period of the attempted
burglary.

This, I said, occurred one morning about daylight, when I saw the head
of the burglar peering above the window-sill, and the hand of the
burglar extended to prey upon my wardrobe.

"Excuse me, Signor Console," interrupted the commissary, "how could you
see him?"
"Why, there was nothing in the world to prevent me.

The window was open."

"The window was open!" gasped the commissary.

"Do you mean that you sleep with your windows open?"
"Most certainly!"
"Pardon!"

said the commissary, suspiciously.

"Do _all_ Americans sleep with their windows open?"
"I may venture to say that they all do, in summer," I answered; "at
least, it's the general custom."

Such a thing as this indulgence in fresh air seemed altogether foreign
to the commissary's experience; and but for my official dignity,
I am sure that I should have been effectually browbeaten by him. As
it was, he threw himself back in his armchair and stared at me fixedly
for some moments.
Then he recovered himself with another "Per-doni!" and, turning to his
clerk, said, "Write down that, _according to the American custom_,
they were sleeping with their windows open."
Without a mishap the ram was lowered into the field. And now forward it
went, slowly at first, but faster and faster, the men on a run, the
lower edge of the door sweeping the old cotton stalks. Faster, with a
yell, and the men about the field stood ready to charge. Shot-guns
blazed from the windows, and shot like sharp sleet rattled off the heavy
nail-heads in the door. Faster, and with a stunning _bim_ the ram was
driven against the house. But the logs lay firm. Back again, thirty
feet, another run and a ram, but the logs were firm. From the windows,
almost directly in front, the buck-shot poured, and glancing about,
plucked up the dirt like raindrops in a dusty road. Once more, back
still further, and again they drove with head-long force. The house
shook, the roof trembled, but the logs were sound and stubbornly lay in
place. Back again, but this time not to stop. "To the fence," Jim
ordered. A shout came from the church. The Major stamped the ground.
"Keep your places and wait for me," said Jim to his men. He leaped the
stable wall. "Here, young fellow," he called, "run over to that
store-house and bring a can of coal-oil. I was a fool not to think of
this before. When Whitsuntide is drawing near, a general meeting of the
club is convened, for the purpose of considering the subject of
properties.

A grand demonstration, with a procession of the members, is
resolved upon:
it is to come off upon Whit-Monday.He split his kindling fine, whittled
off shavings with his knife, and gathering up his faggots waited for the
oil. The young fellow returned, running. Jim snatched the can and sprang
over the fence. The Englishman smiled when he took his place. "Really
you have quite an odd fancy, you know," he said.

"Once more and easy," Jim commanded. "And may the Lord have mercy on
them. But it has to be done."

Onward they went, leaning inward, treading slowly, and shot was sleeted
at them from the windows. But there was no quickening step as the house
was neared--it was a dead march. At a corner of the church they halted,
and Jim, putting down his oil can, close to the wall, piled his faggots
about it, and then, striking a match, set fire to the shavings.

"Back!" he commanded.

They reached the stable wall and stood there. The guns were silent.
Eagerly every one was gazing. Was the fire dying down? One long minute,
and then a dull explosion. A column of flame shot high into the air, a
rain of fire spattered down upon the church, and the roof was ablaze.
The white men, ready with their guns, heard a trampling and the
smothered cries of horror; and then the church door flew open and out
poured Mayo and his men. Three times they charged an opening in the line
about the fence, but unseen foes sprang up and mowed them down. There
is nothing. And every thing is so dear. In Venetia you spend
much and gain little. Perhaps there is work at Ancona.

By this time the horses are watered; the Mouse regains his seat,
and we almost forget him, till he jumps from his place, just before
we reach the hotel in Rovigo, and disappears--down the first hole
in the side of a house, perhaps.

He might have done much worse, and spent the night at the hotel,
as we did.

The next morning at four o'clock, when we start, he is on the box
again, nibbling bread and cheese, and glancing furtively back at us
to say good morning. He has little twinkling black eyes, just like a
mouse, and a sharp moustache, and sharp tuft on his chin--as like Victor
Emanuel's as a mouse's tuft can be.

The cold morning air seems to shrivel him, and he crouches into a
little gelid ball on the seat beside the driver, while we wind along
the Po on the smooth gray road; while the twilight lifts slowly
from the distances of field and vineyard; while the black boats of
the Po, with their gaunt white sails, show spectrally through the
mists; while the trees and the bushes break into innumerable voice,
and the birds are glad of another day in Italy; while the peasant
drives his mellow-eyed, dun oxen afield; while his wife comes in
her scarlet bodice to the door, and the children's faces peer out
from behind her skirts; while the air freshens, the east flushes,
and the great miracle is wrought anew.

Once again, before we reach the ferry of the Po, the Mouse leaps down and
disappears as mysteriously as at Rovigo. We see him no more till we
meet in the station on the other side of the river, where we hear him
bargaining long and earnestly with the ticket-seller for a third-class
passage to Bologna.

He fails to get it, I think, at less than the usual rate, for he
retires from the contest more shrunken and forlorn than ever, and
walks up and down the station, startled at a word, shocked at any
sudden noise.

To this frail
structure he set fire. The dry timbers soon fell into the pit, and he
stood there as if to warm himself. Night was his time for real work and
he would wait. The sun was almost down. He turned away, and looking
along the road that wound through the woods, he saw old Gideon coming.
Quickly he hastened to the road-side and stood behind a tree, with a
knife in his hand. Gid came slowly along. And just as he came abreast
of the tree, his pop-eyes saw the fellow. He threw up his arm and caught
the knife on the barrel of his gun; then leaping, with the gun clubbed,
he struck at the Frenchman, but the fellow was too quick for him. "Oh,
if I only had a cartridge!" the old man said with a groan, running after
him. "I'd rather have a load of shot right now than a mortgage on
Jerusalem. But I'll follow you--I'll get you."

Larnage was running, looking back, expecting to be shot; and stubbing
his toe he fell--head-long into the potato-cellar, into the pit of
red-hot coals. Ashes and a black smoke arose, and with frightful cries
he scrambled out, and with his charred clothes falling off him, he ran
to the bayou and plunged headforemost into the water. Gid saw him sink
and rise; saw him sink again; and long he waited, but the man did not
rise again.

       *       *       *       *       *

Down along the bayou where negro cabins were thickly set, fires were
springing up; and there, running from place to place, following white
men who bore torches, was Father Brennon.

"Don't burn this house!" he cried. "It belongs to the church."

"Damn the church!" a man replied.

"But this house belongs to an innocent man--he would not seek to kill
the whites--he's gone to the hills."

"I reckon you are right," said the man, and onward he ran, waving his
torch, the priest keeping close behind him.

       *       *       *       *       *

From the woods the men were coming, and as Gid drew near to the
Cranceford house he saw Jim Taylor passing through the gate; and a few
moments later, turning a corner of the porch, he found the giant
standing there with his arm about--Louise.

"Ho, the young rabbit!" the old man cried.

"Frog," she laughed, running forward and giving him both her hands.

"Why, how did you get here?" he asked.

"I heard that the militia had been ordered home and I got here as soon
as I could. I have been home about two hours and mother and I--but where
is father?"

"Hasn't he come yet? Why, I thought he was here. We've all been
scattered since the last stand."

"I will go and look for him," said the giant, taking up his gun from
against the wall.

"I'm going with you," Louise declared. "Go on in the house, Uncle
Gideon, and don't tell mother where I'm gone. Now, you needn't say a
word--I'm going."

Down the road they went, and out into the woods. Far away they saw the
cabins blazing, on the banks of the bayou, and occasionally a gun was
heard, a dull bark, deep in the woods.

"You'd better go back," said Jim.

"No, I'm going with you. Oh, but this must have been an awful day--but
let us not talk about it now." And after a time she said: "And you
didn't suspect that I was doing newspaper work. They tell me that I did
it well, too."

"I read a story in a newspaper that reminded me of you," he said. "It
was called 'The Wing of a Bird.' It was beautiful."

"I didn't think so," she replied.

"Probably you didn't read it carefully," said he.

It was all of no avail. The half-dozen grooms who joined in feeble chorus
did not pay the expense of the gas; and he found the Free-and-easy,
without abettors, the most difficult thing in the world.

So he gave it up, and fell into a brown study, which engrossed him for
a month. He had visions of Whitecross Street before his eyes; and poor
Mrs Bowley sighed again, and sighed in vain, after the remembrance of
Sir Plumberry's kitchen, and its vanished joys.
Just in front of them they saw the dying glow of a cabin in coals. A
long clump of bushes hid the spot from view. They passed the bushes,
looking to the left, and suddenly the girl screamed. Not more than
twenty yards away stood the Major, with his back against a
tree--gripping the bent barrel of a gun; and ten feet from him stood
Mayo, slowly raising a pistol. The treasurer handed them a cheque for the
amount; and then, apprising them that there was now, with claims daily
increasing, less than two hundred pounds in hand, which must of
necessity be soon exhausted, demanded their advice.Two white men sprang out in from of him, and the Major shouted:
"Don't kill him--he is to be hanged on the public square. I was trying
to take him alive--and had to knock down two of his men. Tie him."

He held out his arms to Louise, and with her head on his breast and with
mischief in her eyes, she looked up and said: "I have more than a
daughter's claim on you. I have the claim of gallantry and upon this I
base my plea."

He rebuked her with a hug and a kiss, saying not a word; but big Jim,
standing there, turned about, laughing.

"What are you snorting at, Goliath? Has a David at last sunk a joke into
your head? Come, let us go to the house."

"Father," said Louise, "I am going to show you how much I love you. And
oh, how I longed to rest in your arms the time you held them out to me,
in that desolate hall, the night of death; but I knew that if I yielded
I would go back to the nest with my wings untried. I had to go away. I
will tell you all about it, and I know that you will not be ashamed of
me."

Silently they took their way homeward, choosing a shorter route; and
coming upon an oozy place in the woods, Jim said to Louise: "I'm going
to carry you in my arms." He did not wait for her to protest, but
gathered her in his arms, and her head lay upon his shoulder.

"Do you want my love to build a mansion for your heart?" he whispered.

So when the Doge made his visit on the day of the Virgin's Purification,
he was given a hat of gilded straw, a bottle of wine, and loaves
of bread.

On this occasion the State bestowed dowers upon twelve young girls
among the fairest and best of Venice (chosen two from each of the six
sections of the city), who marched in procession to the church of Santa
Maria Formosa.

But as time passed, the custom lost its simplicity and purity:
pretty girls were said to make eyes at handsome youths in the crowd,
and scandals occurred in public.

Twelve wooden figures were then substituted, but the procession in which
they were carried was followed by a disgusted and hooting populace,
and assailed with a shower of turnips.

Across a low
rail fence his body lay, his hands drooping to the ground, and in front
of him lay a gun that had fallen from his grasp; and a short distance
away the Major found a mulatto, lying dead beside the road.

At the Major's house the women were preparing supper. The hungry men,
some of them bleeding, had assembled in the yard. Darkness had fallen.

"Father," said Tom, coming forward, leading Sallie Pruitt by the hand,
"mother says that this girl shall live with us."

"Yes," said the old man, putting his hands on Sallie's cheeks and
kissing her. "Yes, my dear, you shall live with us." And turning to Low,
he said: "You are a brave man. My hand, sir." And Low, grasping the old
man's hand, replied: "I am an Englishman, and my father is a gentleman."

"Gid," said the Major, "my name is John, God bless you."

A salutation with Venetian friends, and the title by which Venetian
servants always designate their employers.] with the bashful pride
proper to the time and place.

Giovanna glowed welcome, and said, with adventurous politeness, she
was very glad of it."God only knows," the Major replied.




THE END.