Molly was not angry, only disappointed. The very habit of a life of
reserve must have brought some sense of disappointment in the result.
She did not mind being told that she must lie in the dust; the
abnegation was not abhorrent; she knew that love in itself sometimes
demanded humiliation. But she felt sad and discouraged. She had seemed
to have conquered a kingdom. Without exactly being proud of them, she
had felt her religious experiences to be very remarkable, and now she
saw that they only pointed to a very long road, hard to walk on. She got
up quickly and was near the door before he was.

"Will you come and see me?" she said, and she gave him her card. "If you
can, send me a postcard beforehand that I may not miss you. Good-bye."

He opened the front door for her and her carriage was waiting.


"The third time you have been late for dinner this week," observed the
Father Rector. "Have some mutton?"

"Thanks," said the young man; "I wish I could learn the gentle art of
sending people away without offending them."

"They didn't include that in the curriculum at Oxford?" The tone was not
quite kind; neither was the snort with which the remark was concluded.
It was no sauce to the lumpy, greasy mutton that Mark was struggling to
eat. Suddenly he caught the eye of the second curate, Father Marny, who
had conceived a great affection for him, and he smiled merrily with a
school-boy's sense of mischief.


CHAPTER XVII

THE BLIND CANON


In a small room in a small house in a small street in Chelsea, Father
Molyneux was sitting with a friend. There were a few beautiful things in
the room, and a few well-bound books; but they had a dusty, uncared for
look about them. It teased the young priest to see a medicine bottle and
a half-washed medicine glass standing on a bracket with an exquisite
statuette of the Madonna. The present occupier of these lodgings had had
very true artistic perceptions before he had become blind.

Mark Molyneux had just been reading to him for an hour, and he now put
down the book. The old man smacked his lips with enjoyment. The author
was new to him, but he had won his admiration at the first reading.

"What people call his paradoxes," he said, "is his almost despairing
attempt at making people pay attention; he has to shout to men who are
too hurried to stop. The danger is that, as time goes on, he will only
be able to think in contrasts and to pursue contradictions."

The speaker paused, and then, his white fingers groped a little as if he
were feeling after something. His voice was rich and low. Then he kept
still, and waited with a curious look of acquired patience. At last,
the younger man began.

"I want to ask your advice, or rather, I want to tell you something I
have decided on."

"And you only want me to agree," laughed Canon Nicholls, and the blind
face seemed full of perception.

"Well, I think you will." The boyish voice was bright and keen. "I've
come to tell you that I want to be a monk."

"Tut, tut," said Canon Nicholls, and then they both laughed together.
"Since when?" he asked a moment later.

"It has been coming by degrees," said Mark, in a low voice. "I want to
be altogether for God."

"And why can't you be that now?"

"It's too confusing," he said; "half the day I am amused or worried or
tired. I've got next to no spiritual life."

Canon Nicholls did not help him to say more.

"I can't be regular in anything, and now there's the preaching."

"What's the matter with that?"

"Who was it who said that a popular preacher could not save his soul?
Father Rector says that it's very bad for me that I crowd up the church.
He is evidently anxious about me."

"How kind!"

"Then, since I've been preaching, such odd people come to see me."

"I know," said the Canon, "there's a fringe of the semi-insane round all
churches; they used to lie in wait for me once."

"Then I simply love society. I've been to hear such interesting people
talk at several houses lately. I go a good deal to Miss Dexter."

"Miss Molly Dexter."

"Yes."

"I wouldn't do that; she's a minx. She is the girl who stayed with that
kind little woman, Mrs. Delaport Green, who sometimes comes to see me."

"You see," Mark went on eagerly, "I'm doing no good like this. So I have
made up my mind to try and be a Carthusian."

His face lit up now with the same intense delight. "It's such a splendid
life! Fancy! No more humbug, and flattery, and insincerity. 'Vous ne
jouerez plus la comédie,' an old monk said to me. Wouldn't it be
splendid? Think of the stillness, and then the singing of the Office
while the world is asleep, like the little birds at dawn. It would be
simply and entirely to live for God!"

"I do believe in a personal devil," muttered Canon Nicholls to himself,
and Mark stared at him. "Now listen," he said. "There is a young man who
has a vocation to the priesthood, and he comes under obedience to work
in London. That is, to live in the thick of sin, of suffering, of folly
and madness. If it were acknowledged that the place was full of cholera
or smallpox it would be simple enough. But the place is thick with
disguises. The worst cases don't seem in the least ill; the stench of
the plague is a sweet smell, and the confusion is thicker because there
are angels and demons in the same clothes, living in the same houses,
doing the same actions, saying almost the same things. In every Babylon
there have been these things, but this is about the biggest. And the
most harmless of the sounds, the hum of daily work, is loud and
continuous enough to dull and wear the senses. So confused and perplexed
is the young man that he doesn't know when he has done good or done
harm; being young, compliments appeal to him very seriously; being
young, he takes too many people's opinions; and, being young, he
generalises and if, for instance, I tell him not to go often to the
house of a capricious woman of uncertain temper, he probably resolves at
once never to lunch in an agreeable house again. Meanwhile, above this
muddle, this tragicomedy, he sees the distant hills glowing with light;
so, without waiting for orders, he leaves the people crying to him for
help and turns tail and runs away! And what only the skill of a personal
devil could achieve, he thinks in his heart that he is choosing a harder
fight, a more self-denying life."

"But I could help those people more by my prayers."

"Granted, if it were God's will that you should lead the life of
contemplation, but I don't believe it is. I don't see what right you've
got to believe it is. As to not living altogether for God here, that's
His affair. Mind you, I don't undervalue the difficulties, and it's
uncommon hard to human nature. Don't think too much of other people's
opinions; I know you feel a bit out of it with the priests about you.
They are rough to young men like you--it's jealousy, if they only knew
it. Jealousy is the fault of the best men, because they never suspect
themselves of it. If they saw it, they would fight it. Face facts. You
have some gifts; you will be much humbler if you thank God for them
instead of trying to think you haven't got them. And be quite
particularly nice to the growler sort of priest; he's had a hard time
and, lived a hard life; much harder than the life of a monk. Mind you
respect his scars."

He talked on, partly to give Mark time; he saw he had given him a shock.

"Mind," he said, "there is sometimes an acute personal temptation, but
you've not got that now. You've got a sort of perception of what it
might be. It won't be unbearable." He crossed his legs and put the long,
white fingers into each other. "But I'm old now, and it's my experience
that the mischief for all priests is to let society be their fun. It
ought to be a duty, and a very tiresome duty too. Take your amusements
in any other way, and go out to lunch in the same state of mind as you
visit a hospital. Do you think the best women, whether Protestant or
Catholic, think society their fun? They may like it or not, but it is a
serious duty to them."

Mark sprang up suddenly. "I can't stand this!" he said. "You go on
talking, and I want to be a Carthusian, and I will be one." He laughed;
his voice was troubled and the clear joy of his face was clouded.

Canon Nicholls felt in his pocket for a snuff-box, and brought it out.
"Go along, if you can't stand it. And don't come back till you've seen
through the devil's trick. I don't mind what I bet that you won't run
away."

Left alone, Canon Nicholls covered his blind eyes with his hands and
heaved a deep sigh.

The man who had just left him was the object of his keenest affection,
the apple of those blind eyes that craved to look upon his face. But his
love was not blind, and he felt the danger there lay in the seeming
perfectness of the young man. Mark's nature was gloriously sweet and
abounding in the higher gifts; his love of God had the awe of a little
child, and his love of men had the tenderness of a shepherd towards his
lost sheep. Mark had loved life and learning, had revelled in Oxford,
and would, in one sense, be an undergraduate all his days. He had known
dreams of ambition, and visions of success in working for his country.
Then gently--not with any shock--had come the vocation to the
priesthood, and so tenderly had the tendrils that attached him to a
man's life in the world been loosened, that the process hardly seemed to
have hurt any of the sensitive sympathies and interests he had always
enjoyed. Even in the matter of giving up great possessions, all had come
so gradually as to seem most natural and least strained.

Long before the Groombridges could be brought to believe that the
brilliant and favourite young cousin had rejected all that they could
leave him, it had become a matter of course to the rest of the family
and their friends that Mark Molyneux would be a priest, and give up the
property to the younger brother.

When the outer world took up the matter, Father Molyneux always made
people feel as if allusions to his renunciation of Groombridge were
simply quite out of taste, and nothing out of taste seemed in keeping
with anything connected with him. It was all so simple to Mark, and so
perfect to Canon Nicholls, that the latter almost dreaded this very
perfection as unlikely, and unbefitting the "second-rate" planet in
which it was his lot to live. And to confirm this almost superstitious
feeling of a man who had lived to know where the jolts and jars of life
cause the acutest suffering to the idealist, had come this fresh
aspiration of Mark's after a life more completely perfect in itself.
Strong instincts were entirely in accord with the older man's sober
judgment of the situation. And yet he wished it could be otherwise. He
had no opinion of the world that Mark wanted to give up. He would most
willingly have shut any cloister door between that world and his
cherished son in the spirit. It was with no light heart that he wanted
him to face all the roughness of human goodness, all the blinding
confusion of its infirmities, all the cruelty of its vices. The old
man's own service in his last years was but to stand and wait, but, even
so, he was too often oppressed by the small things that fill up empty
hours, small uncharitablenesses, small vanities, small irritations. Was
it not a comfort at such moments to believe that in another world we
should know human nature in others and in ourselves without any cause
for repugnance and without any ground for fear?


CHAPTER XVIII

MADAME DANTERRE'S ANSWER


At last there came a letter to Molly from her mother.

     "CARISSIMA,--

     "I thank you for your most kind intentions. I too have at times
     thought of seeing you. But I am now far too ill, and I have no
     attention to spare from my unceasing efforts to keep well. I can
     assure you that two doctors and two nurses spend their time and
     skill on the struggle. I may, they tell me, live many years yet if
     I am not troubled and disturbed. I had, by nature, strong maternal
     instincts; it was your father's knowledge of that side of my
     character which made his conduct in taking you from me almost
     criminal in its cruelty. You must have had a most tiresome
     childhood with his sister, and probably you gave her a great deal
     of trouble. Your letter affected me with several moments of
     suffocation, and the doctors and nurses are of opinion that I must
     not risk any more maternal emotions. My poor wants are now very
     expensive. I am obliged to have everything that is out of season,
     and one _chef_ for my vegetables alone. Have you ever turned your
     attention to vegetable diet? Doctor Larrone, whom I thoroughly
     confide in, sees no reason why life should not be indefinitely
     prolonged if the right--absolutely the right--food is always given.
     I am sending you a little brochure he has written on the subject.

     "I hope that your allowance is sufficient for your comfort. I
     should like you to have asparagus at every meal, and I trust, my
     dear child, that you will never become a _dévote_. It is an
     extraordinary waste of the tissues.

     "As we are not likely to correspond again, I should like you to
     know that I have made a will bequeathing to you the fortune which
     was left me, as an act of reparation, by Sir David Bright.

     "I wonder why an Englishman, Sir Edmund Grosse, has made so many
     attempts at seeing me? Do you know anything of him? I risk much in
     the effort to write this letter to assure you of my love.

                                  "YOUR DEVOTED MOTHER.

     "P.S.--There is no need to answer the question as to Sir Edmund
     Grosse."

Molly was so intensely disgusted with the miserable old woman's letter
that her first inclination was to burn it at once. She was kneeling
before the fire with that intention when Sir Edmund Grosse was
announced. She thrust the paper into her pocket, and realised in a flash
how astonishing it was that Sir Edmund should have tried to see Madame
Danterre. The only explanation that occurred to her at the moment was
that he had tried to see her mother because of his interest in herself.
She did not know that he had not been in Florence since he had known
her. But what could have started him in the notion that Miss Dexter was
Madame Danterre's child? And did he know it for certain now? That was
what she would like to find out.

Molly had on a pale green tea-gown, which fell into a succession of
almost classic folds with each rapid characteristic movement. The charm
of her face was enormously increased by its greater softness of
expression. Although she could not help wishing to please him, even in a
moment full of other emotion, she did not know how much there was to
make her successful to-day. She did not realise her own physical and
moral development during the past months.

Edmund's manner was unconsciously caressing. He had come, he told
himself--and it was the third time he had called at the flat,--simply
because he wanted to keep in touch, to get any information he could. And
he had heard rumours from Florence that Madame Danterre was becoming
steadily weaker and more unable to make any effort.

"A man told me the other day that this was the best-furnished flat in
London, and, by Jove! I rather think he was right."

"I never believe in the man who told you things, he is far too apposite;
I think his name is Harris."

Edmund smiled at the fire.

"Who was the attractive little priest I met here the other day?" he
asked.

"Little! He is as tall as you are."

"Still, one thinks of him as _un bon petit prêtre_, doesn't one? But who
is he?"

"Father Molyneux."

"Not Groombridge's cousin?"

"Yes, the same."

"I wonder if he repents of his folly now? I didn't think he looked
particularly cheerful!"

"Didn't you?" said Molly. "Well, I think he is the happiest person I
know! But we never do agree about people, do we?"

"About a few we do, but it's much more amusing to talk about ourselves,
isn't it?"

"Much more. What do you want me to tell you about myself this time?"

Edmund looked at her with sleepy eyes and perceived that something had
changed. "I should like to know what you think about me?" he said
gently.

"No, you wouldn't," said Molly, and she gave a tiny sigh. "No, for some
reason or other you want to know something which I have settled to tell
you."

Her manner alarmed and excited him. As a matter of honourable dealing he
felt that he ought to give her pause. "Are you sure you are wise?" he
said.

"I'm not sure, but that's my own affair, and it will be a relief. I
would rather you knew what you want to know, though why you want to
know"--her eyes were searching him--"I can't tell."

Sir Edmund Grosse almost told her that he did not want to know.

"You want to know for certain that my mother is living in Florence under
the name of Madame Danterre--the Madame Danterre you have tried to see
there. And further, you want to know how much I have ever seen of her."

"Oh, please!" cried Edmund, "I don't indeed wish you to tell me all
this."

"You do, and so I shall answer the questions. I have never seen her in
my life. But these last few weeks I have thought I ought to try, so I
wrote and offered to go to her, and I have this evening had the first
letter she has ever written to me. In this letter"--she drew it half out
of her pocket--"she declines to see me, and she exhorts me to a
vegetable diet."

There was a moment in which her face looked the embodiment of sarcasm,
then something gentler came athwart it. He had never come so near to
liking her before. He could no longer think of her as all the more
dangerous on account of her attractions; she was a suffering,
cruelly-treated woman. It is dangerous to see too much of one's enemies:
Edmund was growing much softer.

"But why," she went on with quiet dignity, "did you try so hard to break
through her seclusion?"

It was a dreadful question--a question impossible to answer. He was
silent; then he said--

"Dear lady, I told you I did not want you to satisfy what you supposed
to be my wish for knowledge, and I am very sorry that now, at least, I
cannot tell you why I wished to see Madame Danterre."

Naturally, it never struck him for a moment that Molly might think it
was for her sake that he had tried to see her mother, as he had not
known of her existence when he was in Florence. But his reticence made
her incline much more to that idea. She almost blushed in the firelight.
Edmund was feeling baffled and sorry. If there were another will--and he
still maintained that there was another--certainly Miss Dexter knew
nothing about it. He had wronged her; and after all what reasonable
grounds had there been for his suspicions as to her guilt?

"I suppose," he thought, "Rose is right, and will-hunting is
demoralising, or 'not healthy,' as she calls it."

But he had been too long silent.

"It is very hard on you to get such a letter," he said, with a ring of
true sympathy in his voice and more expression than usual in his face.
"I wish I had not come in and disturbed you; I wish you had a woman
friend here instead."

"I don't," said Molly quickly. "Don't go yet. I can say as little as I
like with you, and then I'm going to church to hear the _bon petit
prêtre_ preach."

"He will lure you to Rome."

"Perhaps."

"Well, I think there's a good deal to be said for Rome."

"Don't you mind people joining it?" she asked, a little eagerly.

"No, I like it better than Ritualism."

"But Lady Rose is a Ritualist."

"I believe you will find angels few and far between in any religion."

"It must be nice to be an angel," mused Molly.

He had risen to go; he thought he might still find Rose at home and he
wanted to speak to her, yet he was in no hurry to be gone.

"Don't give me an excuse for compliments; I warn you, you will repent it
if you do," he said warmly; and then, after a little hesitation which
might well have been mistaken for an effort at self-command in a moment
of emotion, he added in a low voice--

"May I come and see you again very soon?"

As Molly gave him her hand he looked at her with wistful apology for
having wronged her in his thoughts, for having intruded into her
secrets. There was more pity in his eyes than he knew at the moment. He
bent his head after that, and with the foreign fashion he sometimes fell
into, and which Molly had known before, gently kissed her hand. The
quick kindly action was the expression of his wish to make amends.

Molly stood quite still after he had gone away, as motionless as a
living figure could stand, her grey eyes dilated and full of light.
Would he could have seen her! But if he had, would he have understood
what love meant in a heart that had never before been opened by any
great human affection? No love of father, mother, sister, or brother had
ever laid a claim on Molly. The whole kingdom of her affections had been
standing empty and ready, and now the hour of fulfilment was near.

"He will come again very soon," she whispered to herself. And then she
put her hand to her lips and kissed it where it had been kissed a moment
before, but with a devotion and reverence and gentleness that made the
last kiss a tragic contrast.

Presently, happier than she had ever been in her life before, Molly went
out to hear Mark Molyneux preach on sanctifying our common actions.

"No position is so hard" he said in his peroration, "no circumstances
are so difficult, no duties so conflicting, no temptations so mighty, as
not to be the means to lead us to God if we seek to do His will."

But the words seemed in no way appropriate to Molly's mind, which was
wholly occupied in a wordless song of thanksgiving.


CHAPTER XIX

LADY ROSE'S SCRUPLE


As Edmund Grosse was shown up-stairs to Lady Rose Bright, he passed a
young clergyman coming down. He found Rose standing with a worried look
in the middle of the room.

"Edmund! how nice," she said gently.

"What has that fellow been worrying you about?"

"It isn't his fault, poor man," said Rose, "only it's so sad. He has had
at last to close his little orphanage. You see, we used to give him £100
a year, and after David died I had to write and tell him that I couldn't
go on, and it has been a hard struggle for him since that. I don't think
he meant it, but when he came and saw this house"--she waved her hands
round the very striking furniture of the room--"I think he wondered, or
perhaps it was my fancy. You see, Edmund, I don't know how it is, but
I've overdrawn again. What do you think it can be? The housekeeping
comes to so little; I have only four servants, and----"

She paused, and there were tears in her eyes. She was wondering where
the orphans would go to. It was not like Rose to give way like this and
to have out her troubles at once. The fact was that she was finding how
much harder it is to help in good works without money than with. If she
had started without money it would have been different, but to try to
work with people who used to find her large subscriptions a very great
help and now had to do without them, was depressing. She had to make
constant efforts to believe that they were all just the same to her as
they had been in the past.

"How much did you give that youth instead of the £100?"

"Only ten, Edmund." There was a note of pleading in her voice.

"And you will have dinner up here on a tray as there is no fire in the
dining-room?"

"Well, what does it matter?"

"And how much will there be to eat on the tray?"

"Oh! much more than I can possibly eat."

"Because it will be some nasty warmed-up stuff washed down by tea. It's
of no use trying to deceive me: I've heard that the cook is seventeen,
and an orphan herself."

"But what will those other orphans have for dinner?"

"Now, Rose, will you listen to common sense. How many orphans has that
sandy-faced cleric on his hands?"

"There were only four left."

"Then I'll get those four disposed of somehow, if you will do something
I want you to do."

"What is it? But, Edmund, you know you have done too much for my poor
works already; I can't let you."

"Never mind, if you will do what I want."

"What is it?"

"Come right away in the yacht, you and your mother, and we'll go
wherever you like."

Joy sprang into her face, but then he saw doubt, and he knew with a deep
pang what the doubt meant. He wished to move, oh! so carefully now, or
he would lose all the ground he had lately gained.

"What scruples have you now?" he asked laughing. "What a genius you have
for them! Look here, Rose, it's common sense; you want a change, you can
let the house up to Easter. Besides, you know what it would do for your
mother; see what she thinks."

"It's all so quick," gasped Rose, laughing.

"Well, then, don't settle at once if you like; but not one penny for
those poor dear little orphans if you don't come. And now, I want to say
something else quick, because the tray with the chops and the cheese and
the tea will all be getting greasy if I don't get out of the way. Do you
know I think I was very hard on that Miss Dexter. I remember I solemnly
warned you not to have to do with her. You were quite right: it is not
healthy to think so much of that will; it poisons the mind. I am quite
sure that poor thing is not to blame."

His tone was curiously eager, it seemed to Rose; and then he began
discussing Miss Dexter, and said he thought that at moments she was
beautiful. Presently he remembered the tray that was coming, and saw
that the hour was half-past seven, and hurried away. She fancied that
she missed in his "Good-night" the sort of gentle affectionateness he
had shown her so freely of late.

She went up to her room to prepare for the meal he had disparaged so
much, looking tired. She smiled rather sadly when she had to own to
herself that the tray of supper was almost exactly what Edmund had
foretold. She dismissed it as soon as she could, and then drew a chair
up to the fire and took up a book. But it soon dropped on to her knee.
She had been trying not to give way to depression all that day. But it
was very difficult. There seemed to be so little object in life. She
felt as if everything had got into a fog; there was no one at home to
whom her going and coming mattered any more than the meals mattered.
And, meanwhile, she was being sucked into a world of committees and
sub-committees. She had thought that, as she could no longer give money,
she would give her time and her work; so, when asked, she had joined
many things just because she was asked, and she was a little hazy as to
the objects of some of them. Having been afraid that she would not have
enough to do, she found now that she had already more than she could
manage. And everything seemed so difficult. During the past week she had
twice taken the wrong bus, and come home very wet and tired. Another day
she had taken the wrong train when coming back from South London, and
had found herself at Baker Street instead of Sloane Square. These things
tried her beyond reason with the sense of loneliness, of incapacity, of
uncertainty. Then she had thought that, with very quiet black clothes,
she could go anywhere, but her mother had discovered that she sometimes
came back from the Girls' Club in Bermondsey as late as ten o'clock at
night, and there had been a fuss. Rose had forgotten the fact that she
was very fair and very good to look at; she found, half-consciously,
that her beauty had its drawbacks. There did not seem to be any reason
why she should spare her strength in any way. So, a little wan and
tremulous, she appeared at the early morning service, and then, after
walking back in any weather, there was a dull little breakfast, and soon
after that she got to work. Every post brought begging letters in
crowds, and these hurt her dreadfully. It was her wish to live for God
and the poor, and every day she had to write: "Lady Rose Bright much
regrets that she is quite unable," etc., etc. Then, after those, she
would begin another trial--begging letters to her rich friends to help
her poor ones, or letters trying to get interest and influence. The
difficulties and the confusion of life in the modern Babylon weighed on
Rose in something of the same way that they tried Mark Molyneux. It
seemed to her that it must be safe and right to be doing so many
disagreeable things and to be very tired, too tired to enjoy pleasures
when they came her way. Constantly, one person was trying to throw
pleasures in her way; one person reminded old friends that Rose was in
town; one person suggested that Rose Bright, although she did not go to
parties, might come in to hear some great musician at a friend's house;
one person wanted to know her opinion on the last book; one person tried
to find out when he could take her anywhere in his motor. And this very
morning Rose had asked herself if this one friend ought to be allowed to
do all these things? Was she sure that she was quite fair to Edmund
Grosse?

It had been a day of fears and scruples. She had been unnerved when the
clergyman had called just to let her realise that the withdrawal of her
subscription had, in the end, meant the collapse of his little
orphanage; and when she was breaking down under this, Edmund had come
in, and how soothed and comforted she had felt by his presence! And
then the joy of his proposal as to the yacht! Her pulses beat with
delight; she felt a positive hunger for blue skies, blue water, blue
shores; a longing to get away from cares and muddles and badly-done jobs
and being misunderstood. Was it not horribly selfish, horribly cowardly?
Was it not the longing to stifle the sounds of pain, to shut her eyes to
the gloom of the misery about her, to shut her mind to the effort to
understand what was of practical good, and what was merely quack in the
remedies offered? Still, she realised to-night that she must get some
sort of rest; that part of all this gloom was physical. She would
understand and feel things more rightly if she went away for a bit.

But could she, ought she, to go away on Edmund's yacht?

Could Rose honestly feel quite sure that all his kindness meant nothing
more? She had never since she was eighteen, and wearing her first long
skirt, heard from him any word that need mean more than cousinly
affection. He had contrived after that Easter visit to Groombridge to
make her feel that she had been foolish and self-conscious in trying not
to be alone with him. For many months now she had felt absolutely at her
ease in his company. It seemed to be only to-day that this thought had
come back to trouble her. She did not want to be disturbed with such
notions; they would spoil their friendship. And he could not be feeling
like that; he was always so cool, so untroubled. Why to-night, just as
he was waiting to know if she would come on the yacht or not, he had
talked much more warmly of Miss Dexter than seemed quite natural!
Faintly she felt that it might be good for him if they went on the
yacht, she and her mother. They would be better for Edmund than some of
the people he might otherwise ask; he was not always wise as to his lady
friends. And it would be so good for Lady Charlton, and so good, too,
for those four orphans. And where should they go? It did not matter much
where they went if they only gained light and colour and rest. The
artist was strong in Rose at that moment. She looked at one or two old
guide-books till it was bed-time. Then, the last thing at night, a
strange gust of thought came upon her just after her prayers.

Could she, would she, ever marry again? She knelt on at the _priedieu_
with her fair head bowed, and then there came over her a strong sense of
the impossibility of it. The shock she had had was too great, too
lasting in its effects. She did not know it was that, she did not tell
herself that once humiliated, once misled, she could not trust again.
She did not say that the past married life which she had made so full of
duty, so full of reverence as almost to deceive herself while she lived
it, had been desecrated, polluted and had made her shrink unutterably
from another married life.

A young widow, sometimes, when drawing near to a second marriage,
suddenly realises it to be impossible because the past asserts its
tyrannous claim upon her heart. What had appeared to be a dead past is
found to be both alive and powerful. But with Rose it was not simply her
heart; it was her nature as a woman that refused. That nature had been
hurt to the very quick, humbled and brought low once. Surely it was
enough!


CHAPTER XX

THE HEIRESS OF MADAME DANTERRE


For about a week after the evening on which she had received her
mother's letter and Edmund Grosse had been to see her, Molly Dexter
stayed at home from four o'clock till seven o'clock and wore beautiful
tea-gowns. She had a very small list of people to whom she was always at
home written on a slate, but one by one they had been reduced in number.
Now there were five--Father Molyneux, who never came except by
appointment; Sir Edmund Grosse; and three ladies who happened to be
abroad for the winter.

The week was from a Friday to a Thursday, and on the Thursday several
things happened to Molly. It was a brilliant day, and although those
evenings from four till seven when nobody came were sorely trying, she
was in very good spirits. A friend coming out of church the day before
had told her that she had met Sir Edmund Grosse at a country house.

"He said such pretty things about you," purred the speaker, a nice newly
"come out" girl who admired Molly very much.

But the main point to Molly had been the fact that Edmund had been away
from London. Surely he would come directly now! She seemed to hear,
constantly ringing in her ears, the voice in which he had asked if he
might "come again very soon."

Thursday had been a good day altogether, for Molly had skated at
Prince's and come home with a beautiful complexion to be "At Home" to
the privileged from four till seven. She got out of her motor, and was
walking to the lift when it came whizzing down from above, and the
little friend who had said the nice things yesterday stepped out of it,
looking very bright.

"Oh, Miss Dexter," she said, "may I come up again and tell you my good
news?" Molly took her kindly by the arm and drew her into the lift
again, and they went up. But she hoped the girl would not stay. She
wanted to be quite alone, so that if anybody came who mattered very much
they would not be disturbed.

"Well, what's the good news?"

Molly looked brilliant as she stood smiling in the middle of the room.

"Well, it isn't a bit settled yet, but I met Sir Edmund Grosse at
luncheon, and he asked me if mother would let me go on his yacht to
Cairo. Lady Rose Bright is going and Lady Charlton, and he said they all
wanted something very young indeed to go with them, so they thought I'd
better come, and his nephew Jimmy, too. Wasn't it _awfully_ kind of
him?"

Molly turned and poked the fire.

"When do they go?" she asked.

"Sir Edmund starts to-morrow, but Lady Rose and Lady Charlton will
follow in about ten days. They will join the yacht at Marseilles, and I
should go with them. Do you think mother will let me go, Miss Dexter?"

Miss Dexter looked down.

"Why should your mother object?" she said.

"But it's so sudden."

"Yes, it's very sudden," said Molly, in a low voice.

"I can hardly keep quiet; I don't know how to get through the time till
six o'clock, and mother can't be at home till then."

Molly turned back into the room; her face was very white. There were
white dents in her nostrils, and there was a bitter smile on her lips.
Whatever she might have said was stopped in the utterance. The
parlourmaid had come into the room, and now, coming up to Molly, said in
a low voice:

"There is a gentleman asking if Miss Dexter will see him on important
business; he says he is a doctor, and that he has come from Italy."

Molly frowned.

"What is his name?"

"It sounded like Laccaroni, ma'am."

"Show him up."

"Well, I'm off," said the young visitor, and, still entirely absorbed in
her own affairs, she took Molly's limp hand and left the room.

A spare man with a pale face and rather good eyes was announced as "Dr.
Laccaroni." "Larrone," he corrected gently. He carried a small old tin
despatch box, and looked extremely dusty.

"I am the bearer of sad tidings," he said in English, with a fair
accent, in a dry staccato voice. "It was better not to telegraph, as I
was to come at once."

"You attended my mother?"

"Yes, until two nights ago. That was the end."

"Did she suffer?"

"For a few hours, yes; and there was also some brain
excitement--delirium. In an interval that appeared to be lucid (but I
was not quite sure) she told me to come to you, mademoiselle, quite as
soon as she was dead, and she gave me money and this little box to bring
to you. She said more than once, 'It shall be her own affair.' The key
is in this sealed envelope. Afterwards twice she spoke to me: 'Don't
forget,' and then the rest was raving. But the last two hours were
peace."

"And where is my mother to be buried?"

"Madame will be cremated, and her ashes placed in an urn in the garden,
mademoiselle, in a fine mausoleum, with just her name, 'Justine,' and
the dates--no more. Madame told me that these were her wishes."

"Do you know what is in this box?"

"Not at all, and I incline to think there may be nothing: the mind was
quite confused. And yet I could only calm her by promising to come at
once, and so I came, and if mademoiselle will permit I should like to
retire to my hotel."

"Can I be of any use to you?"

"Not at all: the money for the journey was more than enough."

Molly was left alone, and she gave orders that no one, without
exception, was to be admitted. Then she walked up and down the room in a
condition of semi-conscious pain.

At first it seemed as if Dr. Larrone's intelligence had not reached her
brain at all. The only clear thing in her mind at that moment was the
thought that Edmund was going away at once with Lady Rose Bright. The
disappointment was in proportion to the wild hopes of the last week,
only Molly had not quite owned to herself how intensely she had looked
forward to his next coming. It was true he might still come and see her
before he started, but if he came it could not be what she had meant it
to be. If he had meant what Molly dreamed of, could he have gone off
suddenly on this yachting expedition? She knew the yachting was not
thought of when she had seen him, for he told her then that he meant to
stay in London for some weeks. But as her thoughts grew clearer, what
was most horrible to Molly was a gradual dawning of common daylight into
the romance she had been living in for months. For, looking back now,
she could not feel sure that any of her views of Edmund's feelings
towards herself had been true. It was a tearing at her heart's most
precious feelings to be forced to common sense, to see the past in the
matter-of-fact way in which it might appear to other people. And yet,
Adela Delaport Green had expected him to propose even in the season, but
then, what might not the Adela Delaport Greens of life suspect and
expect without the slightest foundation? Could Molly herself say firmly
and without delusion that Edmund had treated her badly? How she wished
she could! She would rather think that he had been charmed away by
hostile influence, or even that he had deliberately played with her than
feel it all to have been her own vain fancy! It was agony to her to feel
that she had without any excuse, set up an idol in her sacred places,
and woven about him all the dreams and loves of her youth. It must be
remembered not only that it was the first time that Molly had loved in
the ordinary sense of the word, but it was absolutely the first time
that she had ever felt any deep affection for any human being whatever.
And now a great sense of abandonment was on her; the old feeling of
isolation, of being cast out, that she had had all her life, was
frightfully strong. Edmund had left her; he had deceived her, played
with her, she told herself, deluded her; and now her mother's death
brought home all the horror, the disgrace, which that mother's life had
been for Molly. An outcast whom no one cared for, no one loved, no one
wanted. The new gentleness of the past weeks, the new softness, all the
high and sacred thoughts that had seemed to have taken possession of her
inner life, were gone at this moment. Her feeling now was that, if she
were made to suffer, she could at least make others suffer too.

She had thrown off her furs in walking up and down, and they had fallen
on to the box which Dr. Larrone had brought. Presently they slipped to
the floor, and showed the small, black tin despatch box.

Molly broke the seal of the envelope, took out the key, and opened the
box, half mechanically and half as seeking a distraction.

Inside she found two or three packets of old yellow letters, a few faded
photographs, and a tiny gold watch and chain; and underneath these
things a large registered envelope addressed to Madame Danterre.

Molly was not acutely excited about this box. She knew that her mother's
will would be at the lawyer's. She had no anxiety on this point, but
there is always a strange thrill in touching such things as the dead
have kept secret. Even if they have bid us do it, it seems too bold.

Molly shrank from what that box might contain, what history of the past
it might have to tell, but she did not think it would touch her own
life. Therefore, thinking more of her own sorrow than anything else,
Molly drew two papers out of the registered envelope, and then shrank
back helplessly in her chair. She had just seen that the larger of the
two enclosures was a long letter beginning: "Dearest Rose." She
hesitated, but only for a moment, and then went on reading.

"I trust and hope that if I die in to-morrow's battle this will reach
you safely. I have really no fear whatever of the battle, and after it
is over I shall have a good opportunity of putting this paper into a
lawyer's hands at Capetown."

Then she hastily dropped the letter and took up a small paper that had
been in the same envelope. A glance at this showed that it was the "last
will and testament of Sir David Bright."

It was evidently not drawn up by a lawyer, but it seemed complete and
had the two signatures of witnesses; Lord Groombridge and Sir Edmund
Grosse were named as executors. It was dated on board ship only a few
weeks before Sir David Bright died.

At first Molly was simply bewildered. She read, as if stupefied, the
perfectly simple language in which Sir David had bequeathed all and
everything he possessed to his wife, Lady Rose Bright, subject to an
annual allowance of £1000 to Madame Danterre during her life-time. It
was so brief and simple that, if Molly had not known how simple a will
could be, she might have half doubted its legality. As it was she was
not aware of the special facilities in the matter of will-making that
are allowed to soldiers and sailors when on active service. The
absolutely amazing thing was that the paper should have been in Madame
Danterre's possession.

Molly turned to the letter, and read it with absorbed attention.

The General wrote on the eve of the battle, without the least anxiety as
to the next day. But he already surmised the vast proportions that the
war might assume, and he intended to send the enclosed will with this
letter to the care of a lawyer in Capetown for fear of eventualities.
Then, next day, as Molly knew, he had been killed.

But Molly did not know that to the brother officer who had been with him
in his last moments Sir David had confided two plain envelopes, and had
told him to send the first--a blue one--to his wife, and the second--a
white one--to Madame Danterre, faintly murmuring the names and addresses
in his dying voice. The same officer was himself killed a week later. If
he had lived and had learned the disposal of Sir David's fortune, it
might possibly have occurred to him that he had put the addresses on the
wrong letters. But he was sure at the time that Sir David's last words
had been: "Remember, the white one for my wife." And perhaps he was
right, for it is not uncommon for a man even in the full possession of
all his faculties (which Sir David was not) to make a mistake just
because of his intense anxiety to avoid making it. As it was, knowing
nothing whatever of the circumstances, the will and the letter seemed to
Molly to come out of a mysterious void.

To any one with an unbiassed mind who was able to study it as a human
document, the letter would have been pathetic enough. It was the
revelation, the outpouring of what a man had suffered in silence for
many long years. It seemed at moments hardly rational. The sort of
unreasonable nervous terror in it was extraordinary. Molly read most of
the real story in the letter, but not quite all. There had been a
terrible sense of a spoilt life and of a horrible weakness always coming
between him and happiness. The shadow of Madame Danterre had darkened
his youth; a time of folly--and so little pleasure in that folly, he
moaned--had been succeeded by an actual tyranny. The claim that she was
his wife had begun early after her divorce from Mr. Dexter, and it
seemed extraordinary that he had not denied it at once. David Bright had
been taken ill with acute fever in Mrs. Dexter's house almost
immediately after that event. Mrs. Dexter declared that he had gone
through the form of marriage with her before witnesses, and she declared
also that she had in her possession the certificate of marriage. The
date she gave for the marriage was during the days when he had been down
with the fever, and he never could remember what had happened.

"God knows," he wrote, "how I searched my memory hour by hour, day by
day, but the blank was absolute. I don't to this hour know what passed
during those days."

While still feeble from illness he had given her all the money he could
spare, and for years the blackmail had continued. Then, at last, after
he had been a year in England, the worm had turned.

"I dared her to do her worst. I declared, what I am absolutely convinced
to have been the case, that the marriage certificate she had shown me
was a forgery, and I concluded that if she proved the marriage by
forgery and perjury, I should institute proceedings for divorce on the
grounds of her subsequent life. I got no answer, and for three years
there was total silence. Then came a letter from a friend saying that
Madame Danterre, who had taken her maiden name, was dying and wished me
to know that she forgave me." With this note had been sent to him a
diamond ring he had given her in the first days of her influence over
him. He sent it back, but months later he got it again, returned by the
Post Office authorities, as no one of the name he had written to could
be found.

Then came a solemn declaration that he had never doubted of Madame
Danterre's death.

"I thought that to have spoilt my youth was enough; but she was yet to
destroy my best years. Ah! Rose," he wrote, "if I had loved you less it
would have been more bearable. I met you; I worshipped you; won you.
Then, after a brief dream of joy, the cloud came down, and my evil
genius was upon me. I don't think you were in love with me, my beloved,
but it would have come even after you had found out what a commonplace
fellow it was whom you thought a hero; it would have come. You must have
loved me out of the full flow of your own nature if I had not been
driven to cowardice and deception."

Evidently Madame Danterre had had a kind of almost uncanny power of
terrifying the soldier. He had been a good man when she first met him,
and he had been a good man after that short time of mad infatuation. He
was by nature and training almost passionately respectable; he was at
length happily married; but this horror of an evil incident in the past
had got such a hold on his nerves that when he met Madame Danterre (whom
he had believed to be dead) coming out of a theatre in London, the hero
of the Victoria Cross, of three other campaigns, perhaps the bravest
man in England, fainted when he saw her. Without doubt it was the
publication of Mr. John Steele's will leaving his enormous fortune to
Sir David Bright that had resuscitated Madame Danterre.

From the moment of that shock David Bright had probably never been
entirely sane on the subject. The resurrection of Madame Danterre had
seemed to him preternatural and fateful. The woman had become to him
something more or something less than human, something impervious to
attack that could not be dealt with in any ordinary way.

From that time there had grown up an invisible barrier between him and
his wife. He found himself making silly excuses for being out at quite
natural times. He found himself getting afraid of her, and building up
defences, growing reserved and absurdly dignified, trying to cling to
the pedestal of the elderly soldier as he could not be a companion.

Madame Danterre had gone back to Florence, fat with blackmail, and then
had begun a steady course of persecution.

Step by step he had sunk lower down, knowing that he was weakening his
own case most miserably if it should ever become public. Nothing
satisfied her, although she received two thousand a year regularly,
until the will was drawn up, which left everything to her except an
allowance of £800 a year to Rose.

Once a year for three years Madame Danterre had visited London, and had
generally contrived that Sir David should be conscious of the look in
her astonishing eyes, which Sir Edmund had likened to extinct volcanoes,
at some theatre, or in the park, once at least every season. Evidently
that look had never failed. It touched the exposed nerve in his
mind--exposed ever since the time of illness and strain when he was
young and helpless in India. It was evident that he had felt that any
agony was bearable to shield Rose from the suffering of a public
scandal. If he could only have brought himself to consult one of the
Murrays something might have been done. As it was, he had recourse to
subterfuge. He assured Madame Danterre annually, in answer to her
insisting on the point, that no other will had ever been signed by him,
but he always carried a will with him ready to be signed. There was much
of self-pity perhaps in the letter, there was the plaint of a wrecked
life, but there was still more of real delicate feeling for Rose, of
intense anxiety to shield her, of poignant regret for "what might have
been" in their home life. The man had been of a wholesome nature; his
great physical courage was part of a good fellow's construction. But he
had been taught to worship a good name, an unsullied reputation, and to
love things of good repute too much, perhaps, for the sake of their
repute, as he could not venture to risk the shadow for the reality. The
effect of reading Sir David's last letter to Rose on an unbiassed reader
of a humane turn of mind would have been an intensity of pity, and a
sigh at the sadness of life on this planet.

Molly was passionately biassed, and as much of Sir David's story as
reached her through the letter was to her simply a sickening revelation
from a cowardly traitor of his own treason through life, and even up to
the hour of death. Her mother had been basely deceived; for his sake she
had been divorced, and he had denied the marriage that followed. Of
course, it was a marriage, or he would never have been so frightened.
Then her mother, thus deserted, young and weak, had gone astray, and he
had defended himself by threatening divorce if she proclaimed herself
his wife. Every word of the history was interpreted on the same lines.
And then, last of all, this will was sent to her mother. Was it a tardy
repentance? Had he, perhaps when too weak for more, asked some one to
send it to Madame Danterre that she might destroy it? If so, why had she
not destroyed it? Why, if it might honourably have been destroyed, send
to Molly now a will that, if proved, would make her an absolute pauper?
In plain figures Molly's fortune could not be less than £20,000 a year
if that paper did not exist, and would be under £80 a year if it were
valid.

Molly next seized on one of the old packets of letters in trembling hope
of some further light being thrown on the situation, but in them was
evidence impossible to deny that her mother had invented the whole story
of the marriage. Why Madame Danterre had not destroyed these letters was
a further mystery, except that, time after time, it has been proved that
people have carefully preserved evidence of their own crimes. Fighting
against it, almost crying out in agonised protest, Molly was forced to
realise the slow persevering cunning and unflinching cruelty with which
her mother had pursued her victim. It was an ugly story for any girl to
read if the woman had had no connection with her. It seemed to cut away
from Molly all shreds of self-respect as she read it. She felt that the
daughter of such a woman must have a heritage of evil in her nature.

The packet of old letters finished, there was yet something more to
find. Next came a packet of prescriptions and some receipts from shops.
Under these were the faded photographs of several men and women of whom
she knew nothing. Lastly, there was half a letter written to Molly dated
in August and left unfinished and without a signature:

     "CARISSIMA:

     "I am far from well, but I believe Dr. Larrone has found out the
     cause and will soon put things right again. If you ever hear
     anything about me from Dr. Larrone you can put entire confidence in
     him. I have found out now why Sir Edmund Grosse has tried to see
     me. He is possessed with the absurd idea that I have no right to
     Sir David Bright's fortune, although he does not venture to call in
     question the validity of the will which left that fortune to me.
     Dr. Larrone has certain proof that Grosse employs a detective here
     to watch this house. I have also heard that he is in love with poor
     David's widow, and hence I suppose this _trop de zèle_ on her
     behalf. As he cannot get at me he is likely to try to become
     intimate with you, so I warn you to avoid him now and in future."

That was all.

Molly sat staring vacantly in front of her, almost unconscious of her
surroundings from the intensity of pain. Each item in the horror of the
situation told on her separately, but in no sequence--with no coherence.
Shame, "hopes early blighted, love scorned," kindness proved treason,
the prospect of complete and dishonourable poverty, a poverty which
would enrich her foes. And all this was mixed in her mind with the
dreadful words from the old letters that seemed to be shouted at her.

Miss Carew, coming in at dinner-time, was horror-struck by what she saw.
Molly was sitting on the floor surrounded by letters and papers, moaning
and biting her hand. The gong sounded, the parlourmaid announced dinner,
and Molly gathered up her papers, locked them in the box, fastened the
key on to her chain--all in complete silence--and got up from the floor.
She then walked straight into the dining-room in her large hat and
outdoor clothes without speaking.

And without a word the terrified Miss Carew went with her, and tried to
eat her dinner.

Molly ate a very little of each thing that was offered to her, taking a
few mouthfuls voraciously, and then quite suddenly, as she was offered a
dish of forced asparagus, she went into peal after peal of ringing,
resounding laughter. "I should like you to have asparagus at every
meal," she said, and then again came peal after peal--each a quite
distinct sound. It was dreadful to hear, and Miss Carew and the servant
were terrified. It was the laughter, not of a maniac, not of pure
unreasoning hysteria, not quite of a lost soul. It suggested these
elements, perhaps, but it was chiefly a nervous convulsion at an
overpowering perception of the irony in the heart of things.

The hysterical fit lasted long enough for Miss Carew to insist on a
doctor, and Molly did not resist. When he came she implored him to give
her a strong sleeping-draught. She kept Miss Carew and the maid fussing
about her, in a terror of being alone, until the draught was at last
sent in by a dilatory chemist. She then hurried them away, drank the
medicine, and set herself to go to sleep. The draught acted soon, as
Miss Carew learnt by listening at the door and hearing the deep, regular
breathing. But the effects passed off, and Molly sat up absolutely
awake at one o'clock in the morning. She lay down again and tried to
force herself to sleep by sheer will power, but she soon realised the
awful impotence of desire in forcing sleep.

At last, horror of her own intensely alert faculties, blinded by
darkness, made her turn up the light. Instantly the sight of the
familiar room seemed unbearable, and she turned it down again. But again
the darkness was quite intolerable, and seemed to have a hideous life of
its own which held in it presences of evil. At one moment she breathed
in the air of the winter's night, shivering with cold; at the next she
was stifled for want of breath. So the light by the bed was turned on
again, and to get a little further from it Molly got up and slowly and
carefully put on her stockings and fur slippers, then opened a cupboard
and took out a magnificent fur cloak and wrapped herself in it. Then
suddenly one aspect of the position became concrete to her imagination.
She knew that the cloak was bought with ill-gotten money. Her enormous
allowance after she came of age, even the expenses of her
education--Miss Carew's salary among other things--had been won by
fraud. And now, oh! why, why had not her miserable mother spoken the
truth when she got the will, or why had she not destroyed it? Why had
she left it to Molly to put right all this long, long imposture, and to
reveal to the world the story of her mother's crime? It seemed to Molly
as if she were looking on at some other girl's life, and as if she were
considering it from an external point of view. The sleeping-draught had,
no doubt, excited still further the terrible agitation of her nerves,
and ideas came to her as if they had no connection with her own
personality.

Wicked old woman, dying in Florence! How cruel those words were: "Let it
be her own affair"! Her last act to send those papers to the poor girl
she had deserted as a baby, and refused even to see as a woman. "Let it
be her own affair." Her own affair to choose actual poverty and a
terrible publicity as to the past instead of a great fortune and silence
as to her mother's guilt. "Let it be her own affair" to enrich her
enemies, to give a fortune to the woman who would scorn her! Would the
man who had pretended to be her friend, and who had been pursuing her
mother with detectives all the time, would he some day talk pityingly of
her with his wife, and say she "had really behaved very well, poor
thing"?

Suddenly Molly stopped, full of horror at a new thought. Oh! she must
make things safe and sure, or--good God!--what might not her mother's
daughter be tempted to do? A deep blush spread over her face and neck.
She moved hastily to the door, and in a moment she was in Miss Carew's
room.

"I want to speak to you; I want to tell you something," said Molly,
turning up the electric light as she spoke.

Miss Carew was startled out of a sweet sleep, and her first thought was
the one which haunted her whenever she was awakened at an untimely hour.
Her carefully-curled fringe was lying in the dressing-table drawer, and
Molly had never seen her without it!

"Yes, yes; in one moment," she answered fussily. "I will come to your
room in one minute."

Molly felt checked, and there had been something strange and unfamiliar
in Miss Carew's face. Suddenly she felt what it would be to tell Miss
Carew the truth--Miss Carew, who was now her dependent, receiving from
her £100 a year, would be shocked and startled out of her senses, and
might not take these horrible revelations at all kindly. It would,
anyhow, be such a reversal of their mutual positions as Molly could not
face. And by the time the chestnut hair tinged with grey had been pinned
a little crooked on Miss Carew's head, and she had knocked timidly at
Molly's door, she was startled and offended by the impatient,
overbearing tone of the voice that asked her to "go back to bed and not
to bother; it was nothing that mattered."

The night had got on further than Molly knew by that time, and she was
relieved to hear it strike four o'clock. She was astonished at noticing
that, while she had been walking up and down, up and down her room, she
had never heard the clock strike two or three. The fact of having spoken
to Miss Carew had brought her for the moment out of the inferno of the
last few hours, and the time from four o'clock to six was less utterly
miserable because worse had gone before it.

At six she called the housemaid, and kept her fussing about the room,
lighting the fire, and getting tea, so as not to be alone again. At
eight o'clock she sent for coffee and eggs, and the coffee had to be
made twice before she was satisfied with it. Then she suddenly said she
felt much better, and, having dressed much more quickly than usual, she
went out.

Molly had determined to confide the position to Father Molyneux. When
she got to the church in Kensington it was only to find that Father
Molyneux had gone away for some days.

That evening the doctor was again summoned, and told Miss Carew that he
had now no doubt that Miss Dexter was suffering from influenza, with
acute cerebral excitement, and the case was decidedly anxious.

"He might have found out that it was influenza last night," said Miss
Carew indignantly, "and I even told him the housemaid had just had
influenza! Molly simply caught it from her, as I always thought she
would."


BOOK III


CHAPTER XXI

AN INTERLUDE OF HAPPINESS


An interlude of happiness, six weeks of almost uninterrupted enjoyment,
followed for Rose after she went on board Sir Edmund's yacht.

Edmund Grosse had most distinctly made up his mind that during those
weeks he would not betray any ulterior motive whatever. They were all to
be amused and to be happy. There is no knowing when an interlude of
happiness will come in life; it is not enough to make out perfect plans,
the best fail us. But sometimes, quite unforeseen, when all the weather
signs are contrary, there come intervals of sunshine in our hearts, in
spite of any circumstances and the most uninteresting surroundings.
Harmony is proclaimed for a little while, and we wonder why things were
black before, and have to remember that they will be black again. But
when such a truce to pain falls in the happiest setting, and the most
glorious scenery, then rejoice and be glad, it is a real truce of God.
So did Rose night by night rejoice without trembling. It wanted much
skill on Edmund's part to ward off any scruples, any moments of
consciousness. He showed great self-command, surprising self-discipline
in carrying out his tactics. There were moments when their talk had
slid into great intimacy, when they were close together in heart and in
mind, and he slipped back into the commonplace only just in time. There
were moments, especially on the return journey, when he could hardly
hide his sense of how gracious and delicious was her presence, how acute
her instincts, how quaintly and attractively simple her mind, how big
her spiritual outlook. But before she could have more than a suspicion
of his thoughts Edmund would make any consciousness seem absurd by a
comment on the doings of the very young people on board.

"The child does look happy," he said in his laziest voice one evening
when he knew his look had been bent for a rashly long moment on Rose.
"Happy and pretty," he murmured to himself, and he watched his youngest
guest with earnestness. Then he sat down near Rose on a low deck-chair,
and put away the glasses he held in his pocket. "I'm not sure I don't
get as much pleasure out of the hazy world I see about me as you
long-sighted people do; the colours are marvellous." Rose looked at him
in surprise.

"But Edmund, don't you see more than haze?"

"Oh, yes, I can see a foreground, and then the rest melts away. I don't
know what is meant by a middle distance--that's why I can't shoot."

Rose sat up with an eager look on her face. "I never knew that; I only
thought you did not care for shooting."

There was a silence of several minutes, and neither looked at the other.
At last Edmund rose and went to the side of the boat and looked over at
the water, and then, turning half-way towards her, said: "Why does it
startle you so much?"

"Oh, I don't know."

"But you do know perfectly well."

"Indeed, Edmund." Her face was flushed and her voice a little tremulous.

"You shall tell me." He spoke more imperiously than he knew.

"I can't, indeed I can't."

"No," he said; "it would be a difficult thing to say, I admit."

"Couldn't we read something?" said Rose.

"No, no use at all. I am going to tell you why you are so glad I am
short-sighted."

"But I am not glad."

"I repeat that you are, and this is the reason why."

"You shall not say it," said Rose, now more and more distressed and
embarrassed.

"It's because you never knew before why I did not volunteer for the war,
that is why you are so glad." "Yes," he thought in anger, "she has had
this thing against me all the time; it is one of the defences she has
set up." But he was hurt all the same--hurt and angry; he wanted to
punish her. "So all the time you have thought this of me?"

"No, indeed, indeed, Edmund, it wasn't that. I never meant that; I knew
you were never that, do believe me."

"Well, if I do believe you so far, what did you think?"

Rose let her book lie on her knee and leant over it with her hands
clasped. "I thought that perhaps," she faltered, "you had been too long
in the habit of doing nothing much, and that you had grown a little
lazy--at least, I didn't really think so, but that idea has struck me."

She came and stood by him. "Oh, Edmund, why do you make me say things
when I don't want to, when I hate saying them, when they are not really
true at all." She was deeply moved, and he felt that in one sense she
was in his power. He gave a bitter sigh.

"Can I make you say whatever I like?" Her face flushed and a different
look, one of fear he thought, came into her troubled eyes. "Then say
after me, 'I am very sorry I did not understand by intuition that you
were too blind to shoot the Boers, and that I was so silly as to think
for a moment that you had ever wasted your time or been the least little
bit lazy.'"

"No, I won't say anything at all"--she held out both hands to
him--"except what the children say, 'let us just go on with the game and
pretend that that part never happened.'"

And though Rose was still embarrassed, still inclined to fear she had
hurt him, what might have been a little cloud was pierced by sunshine.
"How ridiculously glad she is that I'm not a coward!" He, too, in spite
of annoyance, felt more hopeful than he had been for a long time.

At Genoa they got long delayed letters and papers. In one of these a
short paragraph announced the death of Madame Danterre. "It is
believed," were the concluding words, "that she has left her large
fortune to her daughter, Miss Mary Dexter." That was the first reminder
to Rose that the interlude of mere enjoyment was almost over. She was
not going to repine; it had been very good. Coming on board after
reading this with a quiet patient look, a look habitual to her during
the last two years, but which had faded under the sunshine of happy
days, Rose saw Edmund Grosse standing alone in the stern of the boat
with a number of letters in his left hand pressed against his leg,
looking fixedly at the water. The yacht was already standing out to sea,
but Edmund had not glanced a farewell at beautiful and yet prosperous
Genoa, a city that no modern materialism can degrade. Like a young bride
of the sea, she is decked by things old and things new, and her marble
palaces do not appear to be insulted by the jostling of modern commerce.
All things are kept fresh and pure on that wonderful coast. Something
had happened, of that Rose was sure; but what?

Edmund did not look puzzled; he was deciding no knotty question at this
moment. Nor did he look simply unhappy: she knew his expression when in
sorrow and when in physical pain or mere disgust. He looked intensely
preoccupied and very firm. Perhaps, she fancied, he too had a deep sense
of that passing of life, of something akin in the swift movement of the
water passing the yacht and the swift movement of life passing by the
individual man. Was he, perhaps, feeling how life was going for him and
for Rose, and by the simple fact of its passing on while they were
standing passive their lives would be fixed apart?--passing, apart from
what might have been of joy, of peace, of company along the road? There
are moments when, even without the stimulus of passion, human beings
have a sort of guess at the possibilities of helping one another, of
giving strength, and gaining sweetness, that are slipping by. There are
many degrees of regret, between that of ships that pass in the night,
and that of those who have voyaged long together. There are passages of
pleasure sympathy, and passages of sympathy in fight, and passages of
mutual succour, and passages of intercourse when incapacity to help has
in itself revealed the intensity of good-will in the watcher. But
whenever the heart has been fuller than its words, and the will has been
deeper than its actions, there is this beauty of regret. There has been
a wealth of love greater than could be given or received--not the love
of passion, but the love of the little children of the human race for
one another. This regret is too grave to belong to comedy, and too happy
to belong to tragedy. Rose's heart was full with this sorrow, if it be a
real sorrow. These are the sorrows of hearts that are too great for the
occasions of life, whereas the pain is far more common of the hearts
that are not big enough for what life gives them of opportunity.

Rose was oppressed by feelings she could not analyse, a sense of
possibilities of what might have been after these perfect weeks
together. But her feelings were dreamy; she had no sense of concrete
alternative; she did not now--he had been too skilful--expect Edmund to
ask her, nor did she wish him to ask her, to draw quite close to him.
She only felt at the end of this interlude they had spent together a
suspicion of the infinite reach of the soul, and the soul not rebelling
against its bonds, but conscious of them while awaiting freedom.

     "Only I discern infinite passion and the pain
     Of finite hearts that yearn."

Such were the moments when a man might be pardoned if he called Rose's
beauty angelic--angelic of the type of Perugino's pictured angels, a
figure just treading on the earth enough to keep up appearances, but
whose very skirts float buoyantly in the fresh atmosphere of eternity.
They stood a few paces apart, Rose with her look bent vaguely towards
the shore, Edmund, still reading his letters, apparently unaware of her
presence. He was thus able to take a long exposure sun-picture of the
white figure on a sensitive memory that would prove but too retentive of
the impression.

But he had to speak at last. "Is it you?"

Edmund thought he spoke as usual, but there was a depth of pain and of
tenderness revealed in the face that usually betrayed so little. He held
out his hand unconsciously and then drew it back half closed, and looked
again at the flowing water. It was a moment of temptation, when love was
fighting against itself. Then, with the same half movement of the hand
towards her:

"I have had a bolt from the blue, Rose. That man, Hewitt, whom I trusted
as I would myself, has absconded. It is thought he has been playing
wildly with my money, and that this crisis in South America has been the
last blow. I shan't know yet if I am ruined completely or not."

"Oh, Edmund, how dreadful!"

"Don't pity me, dear, it's not worth while. It only means that one of
the unemployed will get to work at last. That is, if he can find a job.
But I must hurry home at once and leave you to follow. If I put back
into Genoa now I can leave by the night express. And you and your mother
had better go on to Marseilles in the yacht after you have dropped me."


CHAPTER XXII

SOMETHING LIKE EVIDENCE


Mr. Murray Junior's step sounded heavy, and his head was a little more
bent than usual, as he passed down the passage into his sanctum. The
snow, turning to rain and then reasserting itself and insisting that it
would be snow, was dreary enough already when the fog set in firmly and
without compromise. There was a good fire in the sanctum; the electric
light was on, and the clean sheet of blotting-paper, fresh every
morning, lay on the table.

But Mr. Murray, Junior, was struggling for a few moments to realize
where he was, for his mind was in such different surroundings. In his
thoughts it was June--not June sweltering in London, but June gone mad
with roses in a tiny Surrey garden; and with true realism his memory
chose just one rose-tree out of them all, which best implied the glory
of the others. And one branch of this tree was bent down by a girl's
hand; her arm, from which a cotton sleeve had fallen back, was
wonderfully white, and the roses wonderfully red.

And the office boy, slowly pulling off one damp, well-made boot and then
the other over the gouty toes, was the only person who noticed that "the
governor" was awfully down in the mouth.

But no one knew that in Mr. Murray Junior's pocket was a letter from a
great specialist, who had seen Mr. Murray Junior's wife the day
before,--and what that letter said has nothing to do with this story.

Sir Edmund called about mid-day, and noticed nothing unusual in the
heavy face; only it struck him that Murray was looking old, and he
wondered on which side of seventy the lawyer might be.

Grosse's visit was the first real distraction the older man had that
day. It was impossible for the solicitor not to be interested in the
probability that Edmund Grosse had lost a great fortune. The affair
teemed with professional interest, and then he liked the man himself. He
had a taste for the type, for the man who knows how to cut a figure in
the great world without being vulgar or ostentatious. He liked Edmund's
manner, his tact, his gift for putting people at their ease. Rumour said
that the baronet had shown pluck since the news had come, and had
behaved handsomely to underlings. Most men become agitated, irritable,
and even cruel when driven into such a position.

It never entered into Murray's imagination to appear to know that Edmund
had any cause for care: he was not his solicitor, and he knew that his
visitor had not come about his own affairs. But he could not conceal an
added degree of respect, and liking even, under the impenetrable manner
which hid his own aching sense of close personal suffering. Grosse
answered the firm hand-grip with a kindly smile.

"I only heard of Madame Danterre's death when I got to Genoa on our
return journey."

"And she died just before you left London," said Murray.

"Yes; I must have overlooked the paper in which it was announced,
although I thought I read up all arrears of news whenever we went into
port. I wonder no one mentioned it in Cairo; there were several people
there who seemed posted up in Lady Rose's affairs. What do you know
about Madame Danterre's will?"

"Very little but rumour; nothing is published. Miss Dexter was too ill
to attend to business until about two weeks ago; she only saw her lawyer
at the end of January. Anyhow, Madame Danterre having died abroad makes
delays in this sort of business. But I have been wanting to see you," he
said.

Something in his manner made Grosse ask him if he had news.

"Nothing very definite, but things are moving in your direction; and
something small, but solid, is the fact that old Akers's son, and the
other private, Stock, who witnessed some deed or other for Sir David,
are coming home. The regiment is on its way back in the _Jumna_."

Edmund, watching the strong, heavy face, could see that this interested
him less than something else as yet unexpressed.

Murray leant back in the round office chair, and crossed his legs in the
well of the massive table before him. Edmund bent forward, his face
sunburnt and healthy after the weeks on the yacht, but the eyes seemed
tired.

"I don't know that it comes to much," Murray went on slowly, "but three
days after Madame Danterre's death a foreigner asked to see me who
refused to give his name to my clerk. I had him shown in, and thought
him a superior man--not, perhaps, a gentleman, but a man with brains.
He asked in rather queer English whether I would object to giving him
all the information I could, without betraying confidence, as to Sir
David Bright and his wife. I thought for a moment that he was your
Florentine detective, but then I reflected that the detective would have
no object in disguising himself from me as he knew that you trusted me
entirely. I told my visitor that he might ask me any questions he liked,
and I can assure you he placed his shots with great skill. He wanted
first to know if there had been any scandal connected with their married
life, in order, of course, to find out why Sir David had not left his
money to Lady Rose; and whether no one had been disposed to dispute the
will. I let him see that the affair had been a nine days' wonder here,
and I gave him some notion of my own opinion of Madame Danterre. He did
not give himself away, and I thought he had some honest reason for
anxiety in the matter. Well! he left without letting me know his name or
address, but there is no doubt that he is Dr. Larrone. I wrote at once
to your detective, Pietrino, in Florence, and a letter from him crossed
mine saying that Dr. Larrone had left Florence within a few hours of
Madame Danterre's death, and that, by her desire, he had taken a small
box to Miss Dexter. There was evidently a certain sense of mystery and
excitement among the nurses and servants as to the box and the sudden
journey. It seems that Madame Larrone was angry at his taking this
sudden journey, and said to a friend that she only 'hoped he wouldn't
get his fingers burnt by meddling in other people's affairs.'

"Then Pietrino, in answering my letter, said that my description was
certainly the description of Larrone. He says the doctor is exceedingly
upright and sensitive as to his professional honour, and has been known
to refuse a legacy from a patient because he thought it ought not to
have been left out of the family. Since that, Pietrino has written that
Larrone is taking a long holiday, and that people are wondering if he
will have any scruples as to the large legacy that is said to have been
left to him by Madame Danterre. So it is pretty clear who my reticent
visitor was. Now, I don't know that we gain much from that so far, but I
think it may mean that Larrone could, if he would, tell some interesting
details. I will give you all Pietrino's letters, but I should just like
to run on with my own impressions from them first. It seems that, since
Madame Danterre's death, there has been a good deal of wild talk against
her in Florence, which was kept down by self-interest as long as she was
living and an excellent paying-machine. You will see, when you read the
gossip, that very little is to the point. But, on the other hand,
Pietrino has valuable information from one of the nurses. She is a young
woman who is disappointed, as she has had no legacy; evidently Madame
Danterre intended to add her name in the last codicil, but somehow
failed to do so. This woman is sure that Madame Danterre had an evil
conscience as to her wealth. She also said that she was always morbidly
anxious as to a small box. Once, when the nurse had reassured her by
showing her the box, which was kept in a little bureau by the bed, she
said, with an odd smile: 'If I believed in the devil I should be very
glad that I can pay him back all he lent me when I don't want it any
more.' At another time she asked for the box and took out some papers,
and told the nurse to light a candle close to her as she was going to
burn some old letters. Then she began to read a long, long letter, and
as she read, she became more and more angry until she had a sudden
attack of the heart. The nurse swept the papers into the box and locked
it up, knowing that she could do nothing to soothe the patient while
they were lying about. That night the doctors thought Madame Danterre
would die, but she rallied. She did not speak of the papers again until
some days later. The nurse described how, one evening, when she thought
her sleeping, she was surprised to find her great eyes fixed on the
candle in a sconce near the bed. 'The candle was burnt half way down,
but the paper was not burnt at all,' the nurse heard her whisper; 'I
shall not do it now. I cannot be expected to settle such questions while
I am ill. After all, I have always given her a full share; she can
destroy it herself if she likes, or she can give it all up to that
woman--it shall be her own affair.'

"She did not seem to know that she had been speaking aloud, and she
muttered a little more to herself and then slept.

"The nurse heard no further allusion to the box for weeks. She said the
old woman was using all her fine vitality and her iron will in fighting
death. Then came the last change, and her torpid calm turned into
violent excitement. While she thought herself alone with Dr. Larrone she
implored him to take the box to England the moment she died, and put it
into her daughter's hands. 'No one knows it matters,' she said more than
once. But when she found that he did not wish to go, and said it was
impossible for him to go at once, her entreaties were terrible. 'She had
always had her own way, and she had it to the end,' was the nurse's
comment.

"Dr Larrone, coming out of the room, realised that the nurse must have
known what passed, and told her he was glad she was there. He put a box
on a table with a little bang of impatience.

"'It's delirium, delusion, madness!' he said, 'but I've given my word. I
never hated a job more; she wouldn't have the morphia till I had taken
my oath I would go as soon as she was dead.'"

Grosse was absorbed by the pictures feebly conveyed through the nurse's
words, through the detective's letters, through the English lawyer's
translation and summary. He could supply what was missing. He had seen
Madame Danterre. He could so well imagine the frightful force of the
woman, a tyrant to the very last moment. He could guess, too, at the
reaction of those about her when once she was dead, and they were quite
out of her reach. There is always a reaction when feebler personalities
have to fill the space left by a tyrant. He could realise the buzz of
gossip, and the sense of courage with which servants and tradesmen would
make wild, impossible stories of her wicked life. He came back from
these thoughts with a certain shock when he found Murray saying:

"I can't say there is anything approaching to proof. But supposing, just
for the sake of supposing, that you were right in your wild guess as to
the will, then we should next go on to suppose that the real will was in
the box conveyed by Dr. Larrone to Miss Dexter."

Edmund's face was very dark, but he did not speak for some moments.

"No," he said, "she is incapable of such a crime. She would have given
it up at once."

"At once?" Murray said. "Miss Dexter was too ill to do anything at once.
She was down with influenza, of which she very nearly died, but she
pulled through, and then went away for a month. She only got back to
London two weeks ago. Her affairs are in the hands of a very respectable
firm. We know them, and they began this business with her a very short
time before she came up. Now Sir Edmund, think it well over. You may be
right in your opinion of this young lady, but just fancy the position.
There is a fortune of at least £20,000 a year on the one hand, and on
the other, absolute poverty. For do you suppose that, if it were in the
last will which Akers and Stock witnessed on board ship, and there were
any provision in it for Madame Danterre, Sir David Bright would have
left capital absolutely in her possession? No: the probability is--I am,
of course, always supposing your original notion to be true--that the
girl has this choice of immense wealth practically unquestioned by the
world which has settled down to the fact that Sir David left his money
to Madame Danterre; or, on the other hand, extreme poverty (she
inherited some £2,000 from her father) and public disgrace. Mind you,
she would have to announce that her mother was a criminal, and she
would, in this just and high-minded world of ours, pass under a cloud
herself. A few, only a very few, would in the least appreciate her
conduct."

Sir Edmund was miserably uncomfortable, intensely averse to the results
of what he had done. In drawing his mesh of righteous intrigue round the
mother he had never realised this situation. For the moment he wished
himself well out of it all.

"There is one other point," he said. "Are we quite sure that Dr. Larrone
did not know what was in the box? Is it not just possible that something
was taken out of it before it was given to Miss Dexter? He must have
known there was a large legacy to himself; it was against his interests
that Madame Danterre's will should be set aside. Also, it would not be a
very comfortable situation for him if it turned out that he had been the
intimate friend and highly-paid physician of a criminal."

"That last motive fits the character of the man, according to Pietrino,
better than the first," said Mr. Murray. "Well, we must see; we must
wait and see whether he accepts his legacy. But before that must come
the publication of Madame Danterre's will."

Edmund drove back from the city absorbed in the thought of Molly, in
comparing his different impressions of her at different stages of their
acquaintance. He had spoken so firmly and undoubtingly to Murray. His
first thought had been one of simple indignation, and yet--But no! he
remembered her simplicity in speaking of her mother's letter; he could
see her now with the gentle, pathetic look on her face as she told him
of her offering to go out to the wicked old woman, and how her poor
little advance had been rejected.

Edmund had thought it one of the advantages of the expedition on the
yacht that it would make it impossible for many weeks to call again at
Molly's flat. He had often before felt uncomfortable and annoyed with
himself when he had been too friendly with Molly. Not that he felt her
attraction to be a temptation to disloyalty to Rose. He knew he was
incurable in his devotion to his love. But he did feel it mean to enjoy
this pleasant, philosopher-and-guide attitude, towards the daughter of
Madame Danterre. That Molly could hold any delusion about his feelings
had never dawned on his imagination as a possibility until the night
when she confided in him her forlorn attempt at doing a daughter's duty.
He had never liked her so well; never so entirely dissociated her from
her mother, and from all possibilities of evil.

And now the situation was changed; now there was this hazy mass of
suspicion revealed in Florence, and this most detestable story of
Larrone and the box.

How differently things looked when it was a question of suspecting of a
crime the woman he had seen in the Florentine garden, and of that same
suspicion regarding poor little graceful, original, Molly Dexter!

Within two or three days Edmund became still more immersed in business.
He began to realise his own ignorance as to his own affairs, and he went
through the slow torture of understanding how blindly he had left
everything in his solicitor's hands. He was beginning to face actual
poverty as inevitable, when he heard from Mr. Murray that Madame
Danterre's will was proved in London, and that her daughter was her sole
heir.

"The income cannot be less than £20,000 a year, and the whole fortune is
entirely at Miss Dexter's disposal," wrote Mr. Murray without any
comment whatever.

Edmund was not sorry that Rose and her mother were staying on in Paris.
They would escape the first outburst of gossip as to the further
history of Sir David Bright's fortune. Nor was he sorry that they should
also miss the growing rumours as to the disappearance of the fortune of
Sir Edmund Grosse. Of Rose herself he dared not let himself think; but
every evil conclusion which he had to face as to his own future, every
undoubted loss that was discovered in the inquiry which was being
carried on, seemed as a heavy door shut between him and the hopes of
those last days on the yacht.


CHAPTER XXIII

THE USES OF DELIRIUM


"Don't you think I might get up and sit by the window and look at the
sea, Carey?"

Miss Carew hesitated, and then summoned the nurse.

"Miss Dexter was to have one whole day in bed after the journey."

The nurse, looking into Molly's eager eyes, compromised for one half
hour, in which Miss Dexter might lie on the sofa in a fur cloak.

It was a big sofa befitting the largest bedroom in the hotel, and Molly
lay back on its cushions with the peculiar physical satisfaction of
weakness, resting after very slight efforts. Yesterday she had been too
exhausted for enjoyment, but this afternoon her sensations were
delightful.

The short afternoon light was ruddy on the glorious brown sails of the
fishing-boats, and drew out all their magnificent contrast to the blue
water. But the sun still sparkled garishly on the crest of the waves,
and the milder glow of the sunset had not begun.

Weakness was sheltered and at rest within, while without was the immense
movement of wind and water, and the passing smile of the sun on the
great, unshackled forces of winter. Molly's rest was like a child's
security in the arms of a kindly giant. Her mind had been absorbed by
illness--an illness that had had her completely in grip, the first
serious illness she had ever known. There had been a struggle in the
depths of her life's forces such as she had never imagined; but now life
had conquered, and she was at rest. In that time there had been awful
delirium: horrible things, guilty and hideous, had clung about her, all
round her. One wicked presence especially had taken a strange form, a
face without a body, and yet it had hands--it must have had hands
because the horror of it was that it constantly opened the doors of the
different cupboards, but most often the door of the big wardrobe, and
looked out, and that although Molly had had the wardrobe locked and the
key put under her pillow. And this face was very like Molly's, and the
question she had to settle was whether this face was her mother's or her
own. At times she reasoned--and the logical process was so deadly
tiring--that it must be her mother, for she could not be Molly herself
being so unkind to herself; whereas, if the face had had any pity for
her it might have been herself looking at herself. But was that not
nonsense? There was surely a touch of hysteria in that. Did the face
really come out of her own brain? And if so, from what part of her
brain? She felt sure there was a sort of empty attic, a large one, in
the top part of her right brain, it felt hollow, quite terribly hollow.
Probably the face came out of that. But then, how did it get inside the
wardrobe? and once inside the wardrobe, how did it get out again when
Molly really had the key?

She longed to speak to Miss Carew about this, but Miss Carew never
could follow a chain of reasoning. The nurse was more sensible, but she
thought that reasoning was too tiring for Molly--so silly! If only she
could be allowed to explain it all quietly and reasonably! And oh! why
did they leave her alone? She hated to be left alone, and she was sure
she told them so; and yet they went away. And then she began to work her
brain again as soon as the was alone, and she would be happy for a few
minutes with a new plan for shutting the face into the large empty attic
in her right brain and locking the door, when quite suddenly the face
opened the door of the wardrobe with its loose hands and looked out
again and jeered at her.

Even now, lying resting, and looking at the sun, Molly was glad that
there was no hanging wardrobe in the room; only one full of shelves. She
would certainly not use the same room when she went back to London. She
would only be in that flat for a short time, as she must now take a big
house.

As her eyes rested on the sails and the water, and were filled with the
joy of colour, she had a sort of delicious idea of her new house. It
should be very beautiful, most exquisite, quite unlike anybody else's
house; it should be Molly's own special triumph. It must have the
glamour of an old London house, its dignity, its sense of a past. It
should have for decoration gloriously subdued gilding and colour, and
old pictures, which Molly could afford to buy.

"And"--she smiled to herself--"as long as it is a house in the air it
shall have a great outlook on the sea and the sunset." The fancy that
had been so cruel in her sickness was a sycophant now that life was
victorious; it flattered and caressed and soothed her now.

Within a few days two theories were growing in the background of her
consciousness, not acknowledged or questioned while they took
possession. They took turns to make themselves gradually, very
gradually, and imperceptibly familiar to her. The first was founded on
the idea that she had been very ill a little sooner than was supposed,
and that she had imagined a great deal that was torturing and absurd as
to her mother's papers. She had been delirious that evening, and, what
was still more important, she was actually very hazy now as to what she
had seen and read of the contents of that box.

"I can't remember if that's true," she could honestly say to herself
when some fact of the horrible story came forward and claimed attention.
Once she caught herself thinking how very common it was for people to
forget entirely what had happened just before or during an illness. For
instance, Sir David Bright had never been able to remember what happened
on the day on which Madame Danterre declared he had married her. But how
did Molly know that? And suddenly she said to herself that she could not
remember; perhaps she had fancied that, too.

At another time she began almost to think that she had imagined the
black box altogether. Was it square or oblong? and how shallow was it?
Sometimes while she was ill she had seen a black box as big as a house;
sometimes it was a little tiny cash box.

Meanwhile, under cover of so many uncertainties, the other theory was
getting a firm footing. It was simply that the fact of the will being
sent to her mother was undoubted proof of Sir David's having repented of
having made it. If Sir David had not sent her this will, who had? It was
absurd and romantic to suppose that her mother had carried on an
intrigue in South Africa in order to get possession of this will. That
might have done in a chapter of Dumas, or have been imagined in
delirium, but it was not possible in real life. The only puzzle was--and
the theory must be able to meet all the facts of the case--why had he
not destroyed the will himself? The probability was that he had not been
able to do so at the last moment. When dying he must have repented of
the last will just too late to destroy it. She could quite imagine his
asking a friend, almost with his last words, to send Madame Danterre the
papers. It would look more natural than his asking the friend to destroy
them. And then the officer would have addressed the papers, of course
not reading them. And thus the theory comfortably wrapped up another
fact, namely, that the registered envelope had not been addressed by the
hand that had written its contents. Finally, all that the theory did for
the will, it did also for the letter to Rose, for the two things
evidently stood or fell together. So the theories grew and prospered
without interfering with each other as Molly's health and strength
returned, except that the delirium theory insisted at times on the other
theory being purely hypothetical; as, for instance, it had to be "Even
supposing I was not delirious, and the will had been there, it is still
evident that----"

Molly's recovery did not get on without a drawback, and the day on which
the lawyer came down to see her she was genuinely very unwell. She
seemed hardly able to understand business. She was ready to leave all
responsibility to him in a way that certainly saved much trouble, but he
hardly liked to see her quite so passive.

After he left, Miss Carew found her looking faint and ill.

"He must think me a fool," she said, in a weak voice. "I have left
everything on his shoulders, poor man. I'm afraid if he is asked about
me, as he's a Scotchman he will say I am 'just an innocent'! I really
ought not to have seen him to-day."

But in a few days she was better, and the house agent found her quite
business-like. The said house agent had come down with one secret object
in his heart. It was now nine months since the bankruptcy of a too
well-known nobleman had thrown a splendid old house on the market. It
had been in the hands of all the chief agents in London, and they had
hardly had a bite for it. Even millionaires were shy of it so far, the
fact being that the house was more beautiful than comfortable, the
bedrooms having been thought of less importance than the effectiveness
of the first floor. Then, perhaps, it was a little gloomy, though
artists maintained that its share of gloom only enhanced its charm.

After mentioning several uninteresting mansions, the agent observed
that, of course, there was Westmoreland House still going, and Molly's
eyes flashed. She had been at the great sale at Westmoreland House; she
had been absolutely fascinated by the great well staircase and by the
music-room, by the square reception-rooms, and above all by the gallery
with its perfection of light moulding, a room of glass and gold, but so
spiritualised, so subdued and reticent and dignified, that ghosts might
live there undisturbed.

Molly trembled with eagerness as she asked the vital questions of cost,
of repairs, of rates and taxes. Yes, it was possible--undoubtedly
possible. There was a very large sum of money in a bank in Florence
which possibly Madame Danterre had accumulated there with a view to a
sudden emergency. Molly's lawyer had not been certain of the amount, but
he had mentioned a sum larger than the price of Westmoreland House.

By the time Molly was fit to go back to London, and while the theories
just described were still in possession of her mind, Westmoreland House
was bought. Molly said it was a great relief to get it settled.

"One feels more settled altogether," she said to Miss Carew, "when a big
question like that is done with."

She strolled with Miss Carew on the smooth sand by the water's edge on
the last evening before leaving, and looked up at the white cliffs
growing bright in the light of the sunset.

"It has been very restful," she said. "I am almost sorry to go."

"Then why not stay a little longer, my dear?"

"Oh, no, Carey! it would soon become quite intolerable; it isn't real
life, only a pause; and now, Carey, I am going to live!"

The sun presently set lower and more grey than they had expected; the
wind felt sharper, and Molly shivered. Nature was unbearable without its
gilding.


CHAPTER XXIV

MRS. DELAPORT GREEN IN THE ASCENDANT


Mrs. Delaport Green had been to Egypt for the winter, and came back,
refreshed as a giant, for life in London. She was really glad to see
Tim, who was unfeignedly pleased to see her, and they spent quite an
hour in the pleasantest chat. Of course he had not much news to give of
his wife's acquaintances as he did not live among them, but one item of
information interested her extremely.

"Miss Dexter has bought Westmoreland House in Park Lane!"

Mrs. Delaport Green's eyes sparkled with excitement and the green light
of envy, and she determined to call on Molly at once. Happily there had
been no open quarrel, which only showed how wise it was to forget
injuries, for certainly the girl had been most disgracefully rude.

Molly's new abode stood back from the street, and had usually an
immensely dignified air of quiet, but there was a good deal of noise and
bustle going on when Adela reached the door. Several large pieces of
furniture, a picture, and a heavy clock, might have been obstacles
enough to keep out most visitors, but Adela persevered, and the dusty
and worried porter said that Molly was at home before he had a moment
for reflection.

Adela advanced with outstretched hands to greet her "dear friend" as she
was shown into a large drawing-room on the first floor.

Molly was standing in the middle of the room with an immense hat on, and
a long cloak that woke instant enthusiasm in the soul of her visitor.
There was perhaps, even to Adela something too emphatic, too striking,
too splendid altogether in the total effect of the tall, slim figure.
She had never thought that Molly would turn out half so handsome, but
she saw now that she had only needed a little making-up. While thinking
these things she was chattering eagerly.

"How are you? I was so sorry to hear you had been ill, but now you look
simply splendid! I have had a wonderful winter. I feel as if I had laid
in quite a stock of calm and rest from the desert, as if no little thing
could worry me after my long draught--of the desert, you know! Well! one
must get into harness again." She gave a little sigh. "But to think of
your having Westmoreland House! How everybody wondered last season what
was to become of it! and what furniture, oh! what an exquisite cabinet!
You certainly have wonderful taste." Molly did not interrupt her visitor
to explain that the said cabinet had belonged to Madame Danterre. "I
adore that style; I do so wish Tim would give me a cabinet like that for
my birthday. I really think he might."

She was so accustomed to Molly's silences that it was some time before
she realised that this one was ominous. She might have seen that that
young lady was looking over her head, or out of the window, or anywhere
but at her. Suddenly it struck her that not a sound interrupted her own
voice, and she began to perceive the absurd airs that Molly was giving
herself. Prompted by the devil she, therefore, instantly proceeded to
say:

"When we were at Cairo Sir Edmund Grosse came for a few days with Lady
Rose Bright."

"From the yacht?" said Molly, speaking for the first time.

"Yes; they said in Cairo that the engagement would be announced as soon
as they got back to England. And really my dear, everyone agreed that
without grudging you her money, one can't help being glad that that dear
woman should be rich again!"

It was about as sharp a two-edged thrust as could have been delivered,
and Molly's _distrait_ air and undue magnificence melted under it.

"No one could be more glad than I am," she said, with a quiet reserve of
manner; and after that she was quite friendly, and took Adela all over
the house, and pressed her to stay to tea, and that little lady felt
instinctively that Molly was afraid of her, and smacked her rosy lips
with the foretaste of the amusements she intended to enjoy in this
magnificent house.

While they were having tea, Molly, leaning back, said quietly:

"I see from what you said before we went over the house that you have
not heard that Sir Edmund Grosse is ruined?"

Mrs. Delaport Green gave a little shriek of excitement.

"He trusted all his affairs to a scoundrel, and this is the result."
Molly's tone was still negative.

"Well, that does seem a shame!"

"I don't know; if a man will neglect his affairs he must take the
consequence."

"Oh! but I do think it is hard; he used his money so well."

"Did he?" Molly raised her eyebrows.

"Well, he was a perfect host, and was so awfully good-natured, don't you
know?"

In the real interest in the news, Adela had, for the moment, forgotten
that Molly might be especially interested in anything concerning Edmund
Grosse. She was reminded by the low, thundery voice in which Molly began
to speak quite suddenly, as if her patience had been tried too far.

"You are just like all the others! It's enough to make one a radical to
listen to it. After all, what good has Sir Edmund Grosse done with his
money? He gave dinners that ruined people's livers--I suppose that was
good for the doctors! He gave diamonds to actresses, and I suppose that
was for the good of art. He has never done a stroke of work; he has
wallowed in luxury, and now his friends almost cry out against
Providence because he will have to earn his bread. Probably several
hundreds a year will be left, and many men would be thankful for that.
Then other people say it is such a pity that now he cannot marry Lady
Rose Bright. They have the effrontery to say that to me, as if £800 a
year were not enough for them to marry on if they cared for each other!"

All this tirade seemed to Adela the very natural outpouring of jealousy,
and, as she fully intended to be an intimate friend of Molly's she
sympathised and agreed, and agreed and sympathised till she fairly,
roused Molly's sense of the ludicrous.

"I don't mean," Molly said, half angry and half amused, "that I shall
spend my money so very much better;--I quite mean to have my fling. Only
I do so hate all this cant."

At last Adela departed, crying out that she had promised to be in Hoxton
an hour ago, and Molly was left alone. It was too late to go to the
shops, she reflected, and she sank back into a deep chair with a frown
on her white forehead.

What did it matter to her if they were engaged or not? It made no sort
of difference. She was not going to allow her peace of mind to be upset
on their account; she had done with that sentimental nonsense long ago.
Her illness had made a great space between her present self and the
Molly who had been so foolishly upset by the discovery of Edmund
Grosse's treachery. Curiously enough Molly had never doubted of that
treachery, although it was one of the horrors that had come out of the
doubtful, and probably mythical, tin box.

By the way, there was a little pile of tin boxes in a small unfurnished
room upstairs, next to Molly's bedroom, of which she kept the key. She
had had no time to look at them yet. Some of them came from Florence,
and two or three from her own flat. They were of all shapes and sizes,
and piled one on another. But from the moment when Molly turned that
very ordinary key in the lock of the unfurnished dressing-room she never
let her thoughts dwell for long on the possible delusions of delirium.
Her mind had entered into another phase in which it was of supreme
importance to think only of the details of each day as they came before
her.


CHAPTER XXV

MOLLY AT COURT


If any of us, going to dress quietly in an ordinary bedroom, were told:
"It is the last time you will have just that amount of comfort, that
degree of luxury, to which you have been accustomed; it is the last time
you will have your evening clothes put out for you; the last time your
things will be brushed; the last time hot water will be brought to your
room; the last time that your dressing-gown will have come out of the
cupboard without your taking it out"--we might have an odd mixture of
sensations. We might be very sad--ridiculously sad--and yet have a sense
of being braced, a whiff of open air in the mental atmosphere.

Edmund Grosse did not expect in future to draw his own hot water, or put
out his own dressing-gown, but he did know that he had come to the last
night of having a valet of his own, the last night in which the perfect
Dawkins, who had been with him ten years, would do him perfect bodily
service. Everything to-night was done in the most punctilious manner,
and it seemed appropriate that this last night should be a full-dress
affair.

Sir Edmund was going to Court (the first Court held in May), and his
deputy lieutenant's uniform was laid on the bed. Edmund might not have
taken the trouble to go, but a kindly message from a very high place as
to his troubles had made him feel it a more gracious response to do so.
The valet was a trifle distant, if any shade of manner could have been
detected in his deferential attitude towards his master. Dawkins was not
pleased with Sir Edmund; he felt that his ten years of service had been
based on a delusion; he had not intended to be valet to a ruined man.
Happily he had been careful. He had not trusted blindly to Providence,
and, with a rich result from enormous wages and perquisites, and an
excellent character, he could face the world with his head high, whereas
Sir Edmund--well, Sir Edmund's position was very different. Sir Edmund
had let himself be deceived outrageously, and what was the result?

Edmund was as particular as usual about every detail of his appearance.
It would have been an education to a young valet to have seen the ruined
man dressed that evening.

Next day Dawkins was to leave, and the day after that the flat was to be
the scene of a small sale. The chief valuables, a few good pictures, and
some very rare china, had already gone to Christie's. The delicate
_pâte_ of his beloved vases had seemed to respond to the lingering
farewell touch of the connoisseur's fingers. Edmund was trying to secure
for some of them homes where he might sometimes visit them, and one or
two of his lady friends were persuading their husbands that these things
ought to be bought for love of poor Edmund Grosse. Edmund was quite
ready to press a little on friendship of this sort, being fully
conscious of its quality and its duration. For the next few weeks he
would be welcomed with enthusiasm--and next year?

But all the same there was that subconscious sense of bracing
air--something like the sense of climax in reaching a Northern station
on a very hot day. We may be very hot, perhaps, at Carlisle or
Edinburgh, but it is not the climate of Surrey.

Edmund mounted the stairs at Buckingham Palace with a certain
unconscious dignity which melted into genial amusement at the sight of a
pretty woman near him evidently whispering advice to a fair _débutante_.
The girl was not eighteen, and her whole figure expressed acute
discomfort.

"Keep your veil out of the way," her mother warned her.

"I've had two dreadful pulls already; I'm sure my feathers are quite
crooked. Oh! mother, there's Sir Edmund Grosse; he will tell me whether
they are crooked. You never know."

"I could see if you would let me get in front of you," murmured her
mother.

"But you can't possibly in this crowd. Oh! how d'ye do, Sir Edmund; have
I kept my veil straight?"

"Charming," said Edmund, with a low bow. The child really looked very
pretty, though rather like a little dairymaid dressed up for fun, and
her long gloves slipped far enough from the shoulders to show some
splendidly red arms.

"Charming," he said again in a half-teasing voice. "Only I don't approve
of such late hours for children."

It amused him that this was one of the presentations that would be most
noted in the papers, and this funny, jolly little girl would probably
gain a good deal of knowledge and lose a great deal more of charm in
the next three months.

Walking by the mother and daughter, he had come close to the open doors
of a long gallery, and stood for a moment to take in the picture. It was
not new to him, but perhaps he felt inclined to the attitude of an
onlooker to-night, and there was something in this attitude slightly
aloof and independent. Brilliant was the one word for the scene; a
little hard, perhaps, in colouring, and the women in their plumes and
veils were too uniform to be artistic. There was too much gold, too much
red silk, too many women in the long rows waiting with more or less
impatience or nervousness to get through with it. The scene had an
almost crude simplicity of insistence on fine feathers and gilding the
obvious pride of life. Yet he saw the little fair country girl near him
look awe-struck, and he understood it. For a fresh imagination, or for
one that has, for some reason, a fresh sensitiveness of perception, the
great gallery, the wealth of fair women, the scattered men in uniform,
the solemn waiting for entrance into the royal presence, were enough.
And there really is a certain force in the too gaudy setting. It blares
like a trumpet. It crushes the quiet and the repose of life. It shines
in the eye defiantly and suddenly, and at last it captures the mind and
makes the breath come quickly, for, like no other and more perfect
setting to life, it makes us think of death. It is too bald an assertion
of the world and all its works and all its pomps, not to challenge a
rebuke from the grisly tyrant.

Edmund had not analysed these impressions, but he was still under their
power when he turned to let others pass, for the crowd was thickening.
And as he did so, a little space was opened by three or four ladies
turning round to secure places for some friends on the long seats
against the walls.

Across this space he saw a woman, whom, for a moment only, he did not
recognise. It was a tall figure in white satin with a train of cloth of
silver thrown over her arm. There was nothing of the nervous _débutante_
in the attitude, nor was there the half-truculent self-assertion of the
modern girl. When people talked afterwards of her gown and her jewels,
Edmund only remembered the splendour of her pearls, and when he
mentioned them, a woman added that the train had been lined with lace of
untold value. What he felt at the time was the enormous triumph of the
eyes. Grey eyes, full of light, full of pride. He did not ask himself
what was the excuse for this "haughty bearing," and the old phrase,
which has now sunk from court manners into penny novelettes, was the
only phrase that seemed quite a true one.

Why did she stand so completely alone? It made no difference to this
sense of loneliness that she received warm greetings in the crowd, or
that Lady Dawning was fidgeting and maternal. Evidently (and he was
amused at the combination) she was going to present her cousin, John
Dexter's daughter. Did she remember now how she had advised Mrs.
Carteret to hide Molly from the public eye?

But Molly's figure was always to remain in his mind thus triumphant
without absurdity, and thus alone in a crowd. The blackness of her hair
had a strange force from the white transparent veil flowing over it, and
a flush of deep colour was in the dark skin. Edmund had several moments
in which to look at her and to realise that Molly was walking in a dream
of greatness. The little country girl he had seen just now had been
brought up to hear kindly jokes about Courts and their ways; not so
Molly. To her it was all intensely serious and intensely exciting. Could
he have known the chief cause of the intense emotion that filled Molly's
slight figure with a feverish vitality would he have believed that she
was happy? And yet she was, for no pirate king running his brig under
the very nose of a man-of-war ever had more of the quintessence of the
sense of adventure than Molly had, as Lady Dawning led her, the heiress
of the year, into the long gallery.

For one moment she saw Edmund Grosse, and she looked him full in the
face very gravely. She did not pretend not to know him; she let him see
the entirely genuine contempt she felt for him, and she meant him to
understand that she would never know him again.


CHAPTER XXVI

EDMUND IS NO LONGER BORED


As the season went on Edmund Grosse did not understand himself.
Everything had gone against him, his fortune had melted, his easy-going
luxurious life was at an end. He had no delusions; he knew perfectly
well the value of money in his world. His position in that world was
gone in fact, if not quite in seeming. The sort of conversation that
went on about him in his own circles had the sympathy, but would soon
have also the finality, of a funeral oration. There would soon be a tone
of reminiscence in those who spoke of him. It would be as if they said
gently: "Oh, yes! dear old Grosse, we knew him well at one time, don't
you know; it's a sad story." He could have told you not only the words,
but even the inflection of the voices of his friends in discussing his
affairs. He did not mean that there were no kindly faithful hearts among
them. Several might emerge as kind, as friendly as ever. But the monster
of human society would behave as it always does in self-defence. It
would shake itself, dislodge Edmund from its back, and then say quite
kindly that it was a sad pity that he had fallen off. Every organism
must reject what it can no longer assimilate, and a rich society by the
law of its being rejects a poor man.

And yet the idea that poor Grosse must be half crushed, horribly cut up
and done for, was not in the least true. This was what he did not
understand himself. It is well known that some people bear great trials
almost lightly who take small ones very heavily. Grosse certainly rose
to the occasion. But that a great trial had aroused great courage was
not the whole explanation by any means. Curiously enough ill-fortune
with drastic severity had done for him what he had impotently wished to
do for himself. It had made impossible the life which, in his heart, he
had despised; it absolutely forced him to use powers of which he was
perfectly conscious, and which had been rusting simply for want of
employment. It is doubtful whether he could have roused himself for any
other motive whatever. Certainly love of Rose had been unable to do it.
The will might seem to will what he wished to do, but the effort to will
strongly enough was absent. Now all the soft, padded things between him
and the depths of life had been struck away at one rude blow; he _must_
swim or sink. And so he began to swim, and the exercise restored his
circulation and braced his whole being.

It was not, perhaps, heroic exertion that he was roused into making. But
it wanted courage in a man of Edmund's age to begin to work for six
hours or more a day at journalism. He also produced two articles on
foreign politics for the reviews, which made a considerable impression.
It was important now that Edmund had read and watched, and, even more
important, listened very attentively to what busier men than himself had
to say during twenty years of life spent in the world. Years afterwards,
when Grosse had in the second half of his life done as much work as
many men would think a good record for their whole lives, people were
surprised to read his age in the obituary notices. They had rightly
dated the beginning of his career from his first appearance as an
authority on foreign politics, but they had not realised that Grosse had
begun to work only in the midstream of life. Many brilliant springs are
delusive in their promise, but rarely is there such achievement after an
unprofitable youth.

Love is not the whole life of a man, but, in spite of new activities, in
spite of a renewed sense of self-respect, Edmund had time and space
enough for much pain in his heart.

Rose was still in Paris taking care of her mother, who was very unwell.
Edmund had hinted at the possibility of going over to see them at
Easter, but the suggestion had met with no encouragement. He had felt
rebuffed, and was in no mood to be smoothed or melted by Rose's written
sympathy. He was, no doubt, harder as well as stronger than before his
financial troubles. He let Rose see that he could stand on his feet, and
was not disposed to whine. Meanwhile Molly had provoked him to single
combat. The decided cut she gave him at the Court was not to be
permitted; he was too old a hand to allow anything so crude. He meant to
be at her parties; he meant to keep in touch; indeed he meant to see
this thing out.


"Sir Edmund, will you take Miss Dexter in to dinner?"

Edmund looked fairly surprised and very respectful as Mrs. Delaport
Green spoke to him. Molly's bearing was, he could see, defiant, but she
was clearly quite conscious of having to submit and anxious to do
nothing absurd.

They ate their soup in silence, for Molly's other neighbour had shown an
unflattering eagerness to be absorbed by the lady he had taken down.
Edmund turned to her with exactly his old shade of manner, very
paternal, intimate and gentle.

"And you are not bored yet?"

Molly could have sworn deep and long had it been possible.

"No; why should I be?"

She stared at him for a moment indifferently, as at a stranger, but he
could see the nervous movement of her fingers as she crumbed her bread.

"It is more likely," he answered, "that I should remember what I allude
to than that you should. We once had a talk about being bored. I said I
had never been bored while I was poor. Now I am poor again, so I
naturally remember, and, as you are trying the experience of being very
rich, I should really like to know if you are bored yet."

Molly might have kept silent, but she did not want Adela, who was
certainly watching them, to think her embarrassed.

"I suppose every one has moments of being bored."

Edmund leant back and turned round so as to allow of his looking fully
at her. He muttered to himself: "Young, beautiful, wealthy beyond the
dreams of avarice--and bored! What flattering unction that is to the
soul of a ruined man."

In spite of her anger, her indignation, her hurt pride, Molly was
softened. She writhed under the caress of his voice; it had power
still.

"Are you not bored any more?" She spoke unwillingly.

"No," he said, "suffering does not bore; discomfort does not bore;
knowledge of your fellow-creatures does not bore. But, of course, I am
tasting the pleasures of novelty. And I have not disappeared yet. I
think a boarding-house in Bloomsbury may prove boring. How prettily our
hostess will pity me, then. But I don't think I shall meet you here at
dinner, and have the comfort of seeing for myself that you, too, are
bored."

Molly felt that he was putting her hopelessly in the wrong. She was the
one bitterly aggrieved and deeply injured. But he made her feel as if
coldness on her part would be just the conduct of any rich heartless
woman to a ruined man.

"I calculate," he said, "on about fifty more good dinners which I shall
not pay for, and then, of course, I shall think myself well fed at my
own expense in an Italian café somewhere. I think Italian, don't you?
Dinner at two shillings! There is an air of _spagghetti_ and onions that
conceals the nature or age of the meat; and the coffee is amazingly
good. One might be able to find one with a clean cloth."

Most of these remarks were made almost to himself.

"You know it isn't true," Molly said angrily; "you know you will get a
good post. Men like you are always given things."

Edmund helped himself very carefully to exactly the right amount of
melted butter. "Don't you eat asparagus?" he interjected, and, without
waiting for an answer, went on:

"I thought so too, but I can't hear of a job. There are too many of the
unemployed just now. However, no doubt, as you say, I shall soon be
made absolute ruler of some province twice the size of England."

He laughed and smoothed his moustache with one hand.

"Down with dull care, Miss Dexter; let us make a pact never to be
bored--in Bloomsbury, or West Africa, or Park Lane. I suppose you found
a great deal to do to that dear old house?"

After that their other neighbours claimed them both; but during dessert
Molly, against her will, lost hold of the talk on her right, and had to
listen to Edmund again.

"I hear that you have got the old Florentine looking-glasses from my
sale."

"I don't think they were from your sale," said Molly hastily.

"Well, Perks told me so."

"Perks never told me," muttered Molly.

"I should think they must suit the house to perfection. Where have you
put them?"

"In the small dining-room."

"Yes; they must do admirably there. I should like to see them again." He
looked at her with a faintly sarcastic smile. She knew what he intended
her to say, and, against her will, she said hastily:

"Won't you come and see them?"

"With great pleasure."

Molly saw that Adela had risen, and sprang up and turned away in one
sudden movement. She was very angry with him for forcing her to say
that, and she could not conceive what had made her yield.

"'The teeth that bite; the claws that scratch,'" he thought to himself,
"but safely chained up--and the movements are beautiful." He stood
looking after her.

"I did as you told me," said the hostess, pausing for a moment as she
followed her guests to the door. "If Molly blames me, shall I say that
you asked to take her in?"

"Say just what you like; I trust you entirely." He did not attempt to
speak to Molly after dinner, or when they met again at a ball that same
night. All her burning wish to snub him could not be gratified. He
seemed not to know shat she was still in the room. But she knew
instinctively that he watched her, and she was not sorry he should see
her in the crowd, and be witness, however unwillingly, to her position
in the world he knew so well. It added to the sense of intoxication that
often possessed her now. "Be drunken," says Baudelaire, "be drunken with
wine, with poetry, with virtue, with what you will, only be drunken."
And that Molly could be drunken with flattery, with luxury, with
movement, with music, with a sense of danger that gave a strong and
subtle flavour to her pleasures, was the explanation (and the only one)
of how she bore the hours of reaction, of the nausea experienced by that
spiritual nature of hers which she had been so surprised to discover. It
was not the half-shrinking, half-defiant Molly Edmund had talked to in
the woods of Groombridge, whom he watched now. That Molly was gone, and
he regretted her.


CHAPTER XXVII

MOLLY'S APPEAL


Edmund, it seemed, was in no hurry to see his Florentine looking-glasses
again. Ten days passed before he called on Molly, and on the eleventh
day Mr. Murray, Junior, wrote to say that he had some fresh and
important intelligence to give him, and asked if Sir Edmund would call,
not at his office, but at his own house.

Edmund flung the letter down impatiently. The situation was really a
very trying one. He did not believe--he could not and would not
believe--that Molly was carrying on a gigantic fraud. Murray was a
lawyer, and did not know Miss Dexter; his suspicions were inhuman and
absurd. From the day on which she had spoken to him about her mother's
reply to her offer to go to Florence, Edmund had in his masculine way
ranged her once for all among good and nice women. He had felt touched
and guilty at a suspicion that he had been to blame in playing his
paternal _rôle_ too zealously. Until then he had at times had hard
thoughts of her; after that time he was a little ashamed of himself, and
he believed in her simplicity and goodness. He was sorry and
disappointed now that she was making quite so much effect in this London
world. There was something disquieting in Molly's success, and he could
appraise better than any one what a remarkable success it was. But he
felt that she was going the pace, and he would not have liked his
daughter to go the pace, unmarried and at twenty-two. She needed
friendship and advice. But the pinch came from the fact that the wealth
he could have advised her to use wisely ought to be Rose's, and that he
was resolved, in the depths of his soul, to regain that wealth for his
cousin--for that "_belle dame sans merci_" who wrote him such pretty
letters about his troubles.

Edmund put Murray's letter in his pocket, and immediately went out. He
was living in a small, but clean, lodging in Fulham, kept by a former
housemaid and a former footman of his own, now Mr. and Mrs. Tart, kindly
souls who were proud to receive him. He gave no trouble, and the
preparation of his coffee and boiled egg was all the cooking he had done
for him. Mrs. Tart would have felt strangely upset had she known that
the said coffee and egg were, on some days, his only food till tea-time;
she was under the impression that he lunched at his club when not
engaged to friends. Both she and Mr. Tart took immense pains with his
clothes, and he would rather have been well valeted than eat luxurious
luncheons every day.

He went out at once after getting Murray's letter, because he wanted to
call on Molly before he heard any more of the important intelligence.

Molly was alone when he was announced. She had told the butler she was
"not at home," but somehow the man decided to show Sir Edmund up because
he saw that he wished to be shown up. Edmund had always had an odd
influence below stairs, partly because he never forgot a servant's
face.

Molly coloured deeply when she saw her visitor. She was annoyed to think
that he would make her talk against her will--and they would not be
interrupted. She could have used strong language to the butler, but she
did not dare tell him that she would now see visitors. It would look to
Edmund as if she were afraid of a _tête-à-tête_.

Almost as soon as he was in the room she had an impression that he was
quite at home, curiously at his ease.

"I am glad the house is so little changed. I came to my first dance
here. You have done wonderfully well, and all on the old lines. A friend
told me it was the hugest success."

A remembrance of past jokes as to Edmund's second-hand compliments and
his friend "Mr. Harris" came into Molly's mind, but she only felt angry
at the remembrance.

He talked on about the pictures and the furniture until she became more
natural. It was impossible not to be interested in her work, and the
decoration and furnishing of the whole house was her own doing, not that
of any hireling adviser. Then, too, he knew its history, and she became
keenly interested. She had at times a strong feeling of the past life
still in possession of the house, into which her own strangely fated
life had intruded. She wanted, half-consciously, to know if her guilty
secret was a desecration or only a continuance of something that had
gone before.

Suddenly she leant forward with the crude simplicity he was glad to see
again.

"Have there been any wicked people here?" Her voice was low and young.

"'All houses in which men have lived and died are haunted houses,'" he
quoted. "It's not very cynical to suppose that there has been sin and
sorrow here before now."

"I think," said Molly quickly, "there was a wicked woman who used the
little dining-room; perhaps she was only a guest. I don't think she went
upstairs often."

"Perhaps she came in with my looking-glasses," suggested Edmund. "I have
often wished I could see what they have seen."

Molly was now quite off her guard.

Edmund rose and examined some china on a table near him.

"Why are you so displeased with me?" he said, without any change of
voice.

Molly sprang to her feet, careless whether her unguarded vehemence might
betray her to his observation.

"I shall not answer that question," she said; but he knew that she would
answer it.

"You cut me at the Court; you were displeased at having to sit by me at
dinner; you have pretended not to see me at least four times since then,
and your butler showed me up by mistake."

Molly had moved away from him to the window. She knew she must speak or
her conduct would look too like wounded love--a thing quite unbearable.
She knew, too, that his influence would make her speak, and, besides
that, something in her cried for the relief of speech. She needed a
fight although she did not know it; an open fight with an enemy she
could see would distract her from the incessant fight with an enemy she
did not see.

"You are a strange man!" she cried, holding the curtain behind her
lightly as she turned towards him. "You could make friends with me so
that all the world might see you, and meanwhile, at the very same time,
you were paying a low Italian scoundrel to produce lies against my sick
and lonely mother! You could watch me and get out of me all you wanted
to know because I was ignorant of the world. You could use the horrible
influence you had gained over me by your experience of many women, to
manage me as you liked. You told me not to marry Edgar Tonmore for some
reason of your own; you told me to go and stay with my aunt; you came to
see me one night in London, and wormed out of me my relations with my
unfortunate mother. With all your knowledge of the world, with all your
experience, did you never think I might come to find you out?"

Molly paused for a moment. She held herself erect, her white gown
crushed against the rich, dark curtain, her great eyes searching the
trees in the park below as if she sought there for the soul of her
enemy. She did not know that she pulled hard at the curtain behind her
with both hands; it could not have held out much longer, strong though
it was.

"No; you knew life too well not to know that you might be found out, but
the truth was that you did not care. It was so little a thing to you
that, when you saw that I knew the truth, you could go on just the same,
quite unabashed. You could force yourself on me by playing on your
poverty; you, who had tried to ruin my mother! Well, she is out of your
reach, and perhaps you have shifted your foul suspicions on to me.
Perhaps it is from me you hope to get the fortune that you mean to
share. You drive me mad! I say things I don't want to say; you force me
to lower myself, but----" She turned now and faced Edmund, who watched
her, himself absolutely motionless. "Now that you have forced yourself
on me again you shall answer me. Do you believe that I, Molly Dexter,
have concealed or abetted in concealing or destroying any will in favour
of Lady Rose Bright?"

There is a moment when passion is astonishingly inventive. Molly had had
no intention of saying anything of the kind, but the heat of passion had
produced a stroke of policy that no colder moment could have produced.
She was suddenly dumb with astonishment at her own words, and she dimly
recognised that this represented a distinct crisis in her own mind.
Passion and excitement had dissipated the last mists of self-deception.

Edmund waited till there could be no faint suspicion of his trying to
interrupt her, and then said from his heart, in a voice she had never
heard from him before:

"No, I swear to you I don't."

Molly had been deeply flushed. At these words she turned very white, and
her hands let go the curtains. She put them out before her and seemed to
grope her way to a stiff, high-backed chair near to her. She sat down in
it and clasped her hands to her forehead.

"Now you must hear me," said Edmund. "I don't say I am blameless: in
part of this I have done wrong, but not as wrong as you think. I must
tell you my story; although perhaps it may seem blacker as I tell it,
even to myself."

He sat down and bent forward a little.

"When I was young I fell in love with my cousin. She has been and always
will be the one woman in the world to me. She did not, does not, never
will, return my feelings. She married, and before very long I was
convinced she was not happy, although she only half realised it herself.
She is capable of stifling her powers of perception. Then David Bright
died and left her in poverty. His will was a scandal, and the horror did
not only smirch his good name, it reached to hers. I can't and won't try
to tell you what I suffered, or how I determined to fight this hideous
wrong. I went to Florence; I tried to see Madame Danterre; I engaged the
detective--all before I knew of your existence. I came back to London
and discovered that your father, John Dexter, had divorced his wife on
account of David Bright. Still I did not know anything of you. Then,
through Lady Dawning I found you out, and I made friends with Mrs.
Delaport Green in order to see more of you. Was there anything wrong in
that? You did not know your mother; you did not, presumably, care very
deeply about her. It was doubtful if you knew of her existence. Soon the
detective in Florence faded in my mind; he discovered nothing, but I
retained him in case of any change. Was I obliged, because I liked you,
to give up the cause? I never found out, I never tried to find out from
you anything that bore on the case. You must remember that I stopped you
once in the wood at Groombridge when you wanted to tell me more about
yourself, and that I again warned you when you wished to tell me about
your mother's letter to you. As to Edgar Tonmore, I knew that he was
penniless, and I thought it quite possible that you might, in the end,
be penniless too. It was for your own sake I wished you to make a richer
marriage. For I believed--I still believe--that David Bright made a last
will when going out to Africa; I believed, and still believe, that by an
accident that will was not sent to Lady Rose. I thought then that your
mother had, in some way, become possessed of the will, and I thought it
more than likely that, when dying, she would make reparation by leaving
the money where it ought to be. I meant--may I say so?--to prove myself
your friend, then, if you should allow it. I know I kept in touch with
you partly from curiosity as well as from natural attraction. But, if I
acted for the sake of another, I acted for you also. Would it have been
better or worse for you to have been friends with us if my suspicions of
your mother's conduct had proved true? But believe me, Miss Dexter, I
never for one moment could have thought of you with any taint of
suspicion. It is horrible to me to have it suggested."

He rose as he finished speaking, and came nearer to her.

"That you, with your youth and your innocence and your candour!--child,
the very idea is impossible. I have known men and women too well to fall
into such an absurdity. Send me away, if you like; I won't intrude my
friendship upon you, but look up now and let me see that you do not
think this gross thing of me."

Molly raised a white face and looked into his--looked into eyes that had
not at all times and in all places been sincere, but were sincere now. A
great rush of warm feeling came over her; a great sore seemed healed,
and then she looked at him with hungry entreaty, as if a soul, shorn of
all beauty, hungry, ragged, filthy, were asking help from another. But
the moment of danger, the moment of salvation passed away.

We confess our sins to God because He knows them already, and we ask for
forgiveness where we know we shall be forgiven.

Indeed, Molly knew almost at once that she had gained another motive for
silence. She could not risk the loss of Edmund's good thought of her;
she cared for him too much--he had defended himself too well.

Edmund saw that she could not speak. He left her, let himself out of the
house, and, forgetful of the fact that he could not possibly afford a
hansom, jumped into one and drove to Mr. Murray's house.

He had recovered his usual calmness by the time he had to speak.

"I have your note," he said, "and I came in consequence."

"Yes," said the lawyer; "I wanted to tell you----"

"Wait a moment. Do you think you need tell me? You see, my share in the
thing really came to an end when I could not finance it. I have several
reasons now why I should like to let it alone."

Murray was astonished. It was Sir Edmund who had started the whole
thing, whose wild guess at the outset was becoming more and more likely
to be proved true. It was he who had spent a quantity of money over the
investigation for years past. The man of business knew how to provoke
speech by silence, and so he remained silent.

"Does further action depend in any way on me?" asked Edmund at last,
without, however, offering the explanation the other wanted.

"No," said Murray quite civilly, but his manner was dry. "I don't see
that it does. I think we can get on for the present."

As he spoke the door opened, and the parlourmaid showed in a tall,
handsome woman in a nurse's dress.

Murray looked from her to Sir Edmund.

"I had wanted you to hear what Nurse Edith had to tell us, but after
what you have said----"

"Yes," said Edmund; "I will leave you and I will write to you
to-night."


CHAPTER XXVIII

DINNER AT TWO SHILLINGS


Edmund Grosse was in great moral and great physical discomfort that
evening. He dined, actually for the first time, in just such an Italian
café as he had described to Molly. After climbing up a very narrow,
dirty staircase, the hot air heavy with smells, he had emerged into a
small back and front room holding some half-dozen tables, at each of
which four people could be seated. Through the open windows the noises
of the street below came into collision with the clatter of plates and
knives and forks. The heat was intense, the cloths were not clean,
neither were the hands of the two waiters who rushed about with a
certain litheness and facility of motion unlike any Englishman.

Edmund sat down wearily at a table as near the window as possible, and
at which several people had been dining, perhaps well, but certainly not
tidily.

"Hunger alone," he thought, "could make this possible," when, looking
up, he caught the face of a young man at a further table, full of
enjoyment, ordering "spargetty" and half a bottle of "grayves," with a
cockney twang, and an unutterable air of latter-day culture.

"Mutton chops, cheese, and ale fed your forefathers," reflected Grosse.

"What will you have, sir?" in a foreign accent.

"Oh! anything; just what comes for the two shilling dinner--no, not
_hors d'oeuvres_; yes, soup."

Edmund had turned with ill-restrained disgust from the sardines,
tomatoes, and other oily horrors. But there was no denying the qualities
of the soup: the most experienced and cultivated palate and stomach must
be soothed by it, and in a moment of greater cheerfulness Edmund turned
his attention to three young men close to him who were talking French.
Their hands were clean and their collars, but poverty was writ large on
their spare faces and well-brushed clothes. One was olive-complexioned,
one quite fair, but with olive tints in the shadows round the eyes, and
the third grey, old, and purple-cheeked from shaving. They ate little,
but they talked much. The talked of literature and art with fierce
dogmatism, and they seemed frequently on the verge of a quarrel, but the
storm each time sank quite suddenly without the least consciousness of
the danger passed. They looked at the food as critics, and acknowledged
it to be eatable, with the faint air of an exile's sadness.

Edmund wished to think that he was amused by their talk, but the
distraction did not last. His thoughts would have their way, and he was
soon trying to defend his defence of himself to Molly. All he said had
seemed so obviously true as the words poured out, but there had been
fatal reservations. He had spoken as if all suspicions, all proceedings
as to discovering the will were past. He had felt he had no right to
give away secrets that were not his own. But had he not produced a false
impression? What would Molly have thought of him as he passionately
rejected the notion of suspecting her if she had seen the letter from
Murray in his pocket? It was true that he no longer financed any of the
proceedings against her, but they had all been set on foot by him. He
was in the plot that was thickening, and he had won the confidence of
the victim! He had no doubt that Molly was innocent, and he was ashamed
of the pitiful confidence he had read in her eyes when he left her. But
he still believed that her mother had been guilty, and that Molly's
wealth was the result of that guilt. It was true that he wanted to be
her friend, but it was also true that he would rejoice if Rose came into
her own and the gross injustice were righted. But, after all, what
absolute evidence had they got, as yet, as to the contents of this last
will, or what proof even of its existence? He felt almost glad for the
fraction of a moment that Molly might remain the gorgeous mistress of
the old house in Park Lane uninjured by anything he had done against
her. "How absurd," he thought, "how drivelling! The fact is that girl
impressed me enough to-day, to make me see myself from her point of
view, or what would be her point of view if she knew all!"

He refused coffee--the cab fare had prevented that. He quite emptied his
pocket, gave the waiter sixpence, and, rising, strolled across the floor
of the small room exactly the same man to the outward eye he had been
for years past. But before he reached the door he caught the glance of a
little, round, elderly woman at a table close to him, and he stopped.
She had a faded, showy bonnet, and she carried her worn clothes with an
air. He recognised the companion and friend of a famous prima donna
whom he had not seen for years.

"You've forgotten me, but I've not forgotten you."

It was a cherry, Irish voice.

"I get coffee and a roll, and you have the _diner à prix fixe_. And you
have given me a champagne supper in your day! Well! and how are you?"

"Nicely, thank you, Miss O'Meara; you see I have not forgotten!" Then in
a lower voice, "But I thought the Signora left you money?"

"She did, bless her; but it was here one day and gone the next!
Good-night, and good luck to you," she laughed.

The little duenna of a dead genius evidently did not want him to stay,
and he felt his way down the pitch dark stairs, and emerged on the
street. A very small, brown hand was held out for a penny, and for the
first time in his life he refused a street beggar with real regret.

"'Here one moment, and gone the next,'" he muttered, looking down the
brilliantly lighted street to where the motors, carriages, and cabs
crowded round the doors of a great theatre. "It's the history of the
whole show in a nutshell."


If Sir Edmund was troubled at the thought that Molly believed in him,
Molly was infinitely more troubled at his belief in her.

After he left her she went to her room. She had to dine out and she must
get some rest first. As in most of the late eighteenth century houses in
London, the bedrooms had been sacrificed to the rooms below. But Molly
had the one very large room that looked over the park. She threw
herself down on a wide sofa close to the silk-curtained bed. The sun
glinted still on the silver backs of the brushes and teased her eyes,
and she got up and drew down the blinds. The dressing-table was large
and its glass top was covered with a great weight of old gilt bottles
and boxes.

Miss Carew had once been amused by the comment of a young manicurist
who, after expressing enthusiastic admiration of the table, had
concluded with the words:

"But what I often say to myself is that it's only so much more to leave
in the end."

But Molly had not laughed when the words were repeated; they gave
expression to a feeling with which she sometimes looked at many things
besides her dressing-table--they might all prove only so much more to
leave in the end!

She sank exhausted again onto the sofa. Why had he come? Why could he
not leave her alone? Did she want his friendship, his pity, his
confidence? Why look at her so kindly when he must know how he hurt her?
She had felt such joy when she saw that he believed in her. The idea
that she was still innocent and unblemished in his eyes was just for the
moment an unutterable relief. An unutterable relief, too, it had felt at
the moment, to be able to accept his defence of himself. That he was
still lovable, and that he had no dark thoughts of her, had been such
joy, but only a passing joy. Had he not told her in horribly plain
speech that he loved Lady Rose, and would love her to the end? All this,
which was so vital to Molly, was but an episode in a friendship that was
a detail in his life!

But now, alone, trying to see clearly through the confusion, how
unbearable it had been to hear him say, "That you with your youth and
your innocence and your candour...." He had thought it too horrible to
suspect her, and by that confidence he made her load of guilt almost
unendurable.

She could not go on like this, could not live like this. The silence was
far more unbearable now that a human voice had broken into it, a voice
she loved repudiating with indignant scorn the possibility of suspecting
her! She must go somewhere, she must speak to some one. But at this
moment it was also evident that she must dress for dinner.


CHAPTER XXIX

THE RELIEF OF SPEECH


There is quite commonly a peculiar glow of sunshine just before a storm,
a brightness so obviously unreliable that we are torn between enjoyment
and anxiety. I have known no greater revelation of Nature's glories,
even in a sunset hour, than in one of these moments of glow before the
darkness of storm. And in a man's life there is sometimes an episode so
bright, so full of promise, that we feel its perfection to be the
measure of its instability.

Such a moment had come to Mark Molyneux. The time of depression and
trial, the time when a vague sense of danger and a vague sense of
aspiration had made him turn his eyes towards the cloister, had ended in
his taking his work more and more earnestly and becoming surprisingly
successful in his dealings with both rich and poor.

It seemed during the past winter that Mark would carry all before him;
he had come into close contact with the poor, and in the circle in which
his personal influence could be felt there was a real movement of
religious earnestness and moral reform. There was a noticeable glow of
zeal in the other curates and in the parish workers, who, with one or
two exceptions, were enthusiastic in their devotion to him personally
and to his notions of work. Even after Easter several of the
recently-cured drunkards were persevering, and other notoriously bad
characters seemed determined to show that the first shoots of their
awakened moral life were not merely what gardeners call "flowering
shoots," but steady growths giving promise of sound wood.

Mark's sermons were becoming more and more the rage, and people were
heard to say that he was the only Catholic preacher in London, excepting
perhaps one or two Jesuit Fathers; while he had also the tribute of
attention from the press, which he particularly disliked.

Meanwhile, the old rector was still gruff and still proffered snubs
which were gratefully received, for Mark was genuinely anxious not to be
misled by the atmosphere of praise and affection in which he was living.

Nothing warned him of impending danger (to use a phrase of old-fashioned
romance) when he was told that Miss Dexter was asking to see him. He had
not seen her for a long time, and was quite glad that she should come.

He looked young, eager, and happy as he came quickly into the parlour,
but after a few minutes the simple warmth of his manner changed into a
more negative politeness. There was something so gorgeous in Molly's
appearance, and so very strange in her face, that even a man who had
seen less of the world than is obtained in a year on the mission in
London, could not fail to be somewhat puzzled.

Molly hardly spoke for some moments, and silence was apparently
inevitable. Then she burst out, without preparation, in a wild,
incoherent way, with her whole life's story. The story of a child
deserted by her mother, neglected by her father, taken from the ayah who
was the only person who had ever loved her, and sent like a parcel to
the care of a hard and selfish aunt who was ashamed of her. It might
have been horribly pathetic only that it was impossible that so much
egotism and bitterness should not choke the sympathy of the listener.
But as the story came to Molly's twenty-first year, the strange, bitter
self-defence (she had not yet explained why she should defend herself at
all to Father Molyneux), all the unpleasing moral side of the story
became merged in the sense of its dramatic qualities.

Molly had never told it to anyone before now, and, indeed, she had not
realised several features of the case until quite lately. She told well
the disillusion as to her mother, her own single-handed fight with life,
the double sense of shame as to her mother's past, and her own ambiguous
position. She told him how she felt at first meeting Rose Bright, of her
own sense of sailing under false colours, and she actually explained, in
her strange pleading for a favourable judgment, how everything that
happened had naturally hardened her heart and made her feel as if she
had been born an outcast. Lastly, she told how Sir Edmund Grosse had
pursued her mother with detectives, and, as she had for a time believed,
had pursued herself with the hypocritical appearance of friendship. She
had been wrong, it seemed now, in judging him so harshly, but it had
hurt terribly at the time.

Through all this Mark was struggling against the repulsion that
threatened to drown the sympathy he wanted to give her. But he had,
naturally, not the faintest suspicion as to what was coming or that
Molly was confiding in him a story of her own wrong-doing. He was
absolutely confounded when she went on, still in the tone of passionate
self-defence, to tell how she had found the will leaving the whole of
Sir David's fortune to Lady Rose. He simply stared at Molly when she
said:

"Who could suppose for a single moment that I should be obliged, on
account of a scrap of paper which was evidently sent to my mother for
her to dispose of as she liked, to become a pauper and to give a fortune
to Lady Rose Bright?"

But although he was too astounded for speech, and his face showed
strange, stern lines, it was now that there awoke in his heart the
passionate longing to help her; he saw now her whole story in the most
pathetic light, from the little child deserted by her mother, to the
woman scorned and suffering, left by the same mother in such a gruesome
temptation. The greatness of the sin provoked the passionate longing to
save her. The man who had given up Groombridge Castle and all it
entailed had not one harsh thought for the woman who had fallen into
crime to avoid the poverty he had chosen for his own portion.

"It's a hard, hard case," he murmured, to Molly's surprise.

She had been so occupied in her own outpouring that she had hardly
thought of him at first, except as a human outlet for her story made
safe by the fact that he was a priest. But when he had betrayed his
silent but most eloquent amazement, she had suddenly realised what the
effect of her confidences might be on such a man, and half expected
anathemas to thunder over her head.

Then he tried to find out whether there was any kind of hope that the
will had, in fact, been sent to her mother to be at her disposal. But
suddenly Molly, who had herself suggested this idea, rent it to pieces
and brought out the whole case against her mother (and, consequently,
against herself) with a fierce logic of attack.

This was more like the Molly whom he had known before, and Mark felt the
atmosphere a little clearer. Having left not the faintest shadow of a
defence for her own action, she suddenly became silent. After some
moments she leant forward.

"Do you know," she said, in a tone so low that he only just caught the
words, "I see now what must have happened. It is strange that I never
thought of it before. I see it now quite clearly. Of course the will and
the letter were wrongly addressed, and probably some letter to my mother
was sent to Lady Rose."

"That does not follow," said Father Molyneux.

"But it's not unlikely," argued Molly. "It is more probable that the two
letters should be put into the wrong envelopes than that one should be
addressed to the wrong person. It's a mistake that is made every day,
only the results are usually of less consequence. It must have been
curious reading for my mother--that letter about herself to Lady Rose
Bright."

"It is so difficult," said Mark, feeling his way cautiously, "to be sure
of not acting on fancied facts when there are so few to go upon. Do you
suppose that the detective in Florence had any definite plan of action
given to him by his employer? For just supposing that your guess is
right, they may have got some clue to what happened in the letter that
was sent by mistake to Lady Rose. Have you no notion at all whether
they may not now have got some evidence to prove that there was another
will?"

Molly shook her head.

"Do you think," she said, "they would have been quiet all this time if
there had been any real evidence at all? It is three years since Sir
David died, and six months since my mother died."

She did not notice how Mark started at this information. Had Miss
Dexter, then, been in possession of this letter to Lady Rose and the
last will for six months?

"You were not sent these papers at once?" he ventured to ask.

"Yes; Dr. Larrone, who attended my mother, brought them to me. He left
Florence two hours after she died."

Another silence followed.

"It seems to me that a great deal might be done by a private
arrangement. Probably their case is not strong enough, or likely to be
strong enough, for them to push it through. It should be arranged that
you should receive the £1000 a year that Sir David intended to give your
mother."

Molly laughed scornfully.

"I'd rather beg my bread than be their pensioner. No, no; you entirely
mistake the situation. I shall have no dealings with them at all--no
nonsense about arbitration or private arrangements. I won't give them
any opportunity of feeling generous. It must"--she spoke very slowly and
looked at him fiercely--"with me it must be all or nothing, and"--she
got up suddenly and began smoothing her gloves over her wrists--"and as
I don't choose to starve it must be all. But if I can't go through with
it (which is quite possible) I shall throw up the sponge and get out of
this world as quickly as possible."

"If you have made up your mind," said Mark sternly, "to defy God, in
Whom I know that you believe, to defy the laws of man, whose punishment
_may_ come, whereas His punishment must come, why have you told me all
this?"

"I had to tell some one; I was suffocating. You don't know"--she stood
looking out of the window a strange expression of hunger and loneliness
succeeding the fierceness of a few moments before--"you don't know what
it is to have in your own mind a long, long story about yourself that
has never been told. To have been lonely and hardly treated and deceived
and spurned, and never to have put your own case to any one human being!
To have cried from childhood till twenty-two, knowing that nobody really
cared! There comes a time when you would rather say the worst of
yourself than keep silence. To accuse yourself is the natural thing;
silence is the unnatural thing."

"Good God!" said Mark, rising, "don't stop there. If you must accuse
yourself, pass judgment also. Class yourself where you have chosen with
your eyes open to stand. Would you allow any amount of provocation and
unhappiness to excuse a systematic fraud? Do you think that the thief
brought up to sin has less or more excuse than you have? Are you the
only person who has known a lonely childhood? Can you tell me here in
this room that God never showed you what love really is? He has never
left you alone, and you wish in vain now that He would leave you alone.
For your present life is so unbearable that you feel that you may
choose death rather than go on with it."

"I shall pay heavily for the relief of speech if I am to have a sermon
preached all to myself," said Molly insolently. "I was speaking of the
need of human love; I was speaking of all I had suffered, and it is easy
for you to retort upon me that I might have had Divine Love only that I
chose to reject it. Tell me, were you brought up without a mother's
love?"

"No; I had--I have a mother who loves me almost too much."

"Have you known real loneliness?"

"I believe every man and woman has known that the soul is alone."

Molly shook her head.

"That is a mood; mine was a permanent state. Have you ever known what it
is to see God's will on one side, and all possibilities of human
happiness, glory, success, and pleasure, opposed to it?"

The young man blushed deeply.

"Yes, I have."

Molly was checked.

"I forgot," she answered; "but still you don't understand. You were an
intimate friend of God when He asked you for the sacrifice, whereas I--I
had only an inkling, a suspicion of that Love. Besides, you were not
asked to give all your possessions to your enemies! No; too much has
been asked of me."

"Can too much be asked where all has been given?" asked Father Molyneux.

"That is an old point for a sermon," said Molly wearily. "You don't
understand; you are of no use to me. Good-bye! I don't think I shall
come again."


CHAPTER XXX

THE BIRTH OF A SLANDER


After that visit to Father Molyneux the devil seems to have entered into
Molly. It was a devil of fear and, consequently, of cruelty. What she
did to harm him was at first unpremeditated, and it must be allowed that
she had not at the moment the means of knowing how fearful a harm such
words as hers could do. She said them too when terror had driven her to
any distraction, and when wine had further excited her imagination.
Still it would not be surprising to find that many who might have
forgiven her for a long, protracted fraud, would blot her out of their
own private book of life for the mean cruelty of one sentence.

Not many hours had passed after the visit before Molly was furious with
herself for her consummate folly in giving herself away to the young
priest, who might even think it a duty to reveal what she said.

She had once told Mark that she might soon come to hate him, as hatred
came most easily to her. There was now quite cause enough for this
hatred to come into being. Molly had two chief reasons for it. First,
she was in his power to a dangerous extent and he might ruin her if he
chose; secondly, she was afraid of his influence--chiefly of the
influence of his prayers--and she dreaded still more that he should
persuade her to ruin herself.

One evening Molly had been with Mrs. Delaport Green and two young men to
a play. It was a play that represented a kind of female "Raffles"--a
thief in the highest ranks of society, and the lady Raffles had black
hair. The lady stole diamonds, and fascinated detectives, and even
beguiled the ruffianly burglar who had wanted the diamonds for himself.
It was a far-fetched comparison indeed, but it worried and excited Molly
to the last degree. They went back to supper at Miss Dexter's house, and
there one more lady and another man joined them. They sat at a gorgeous
little supper at a round table in the small dining-room, Mrs. Delaport
Green opposite Molly, and Lady Sophia Snaggs, a spirited, cheery
Irishwoman, separated from the hostess by Billy, with whom the latter
had always, in the past weeks, been ready to discuss the poverty and the
failings of Sir Edmund Grosse. Of the other two men, one was elderly,
bald, greedy, fat and witty, and the other was a soldier, spare, red and
rather silent but extremely popular for some happy combination of
qualities and excellent manners. It would seem hardly worth while to say
even this little about them, only that it proved of some importance that
the few people who heard Molly's words that night, and certainly
repeated them afterwards, had unfortunately rather different and rather
wide opportunities of making them known.

The Florentine looking-glasses that once belonged to Sir Edmund Grosse,
with their wondrous wreaths of painted flowers, looked down from three
sides of the room and reflected the pretty women and their gowns, the
old silver, the rare glass, and the flowers. They were probably
refreshed by the exquisite taste of the little banquet that might recall
the first reflection of their youth. Morally there was a rift within the
lute among the guests, for Molly betrayed that Adela had got on her
nerves. Lady Sophia Snaggs poured easy conversation on the troubled
waters, but at last the catastrophe could not be averted.

At a moment when the others were silent Adela was talking.

"Yes; I went to hear him preach, and it is so beautiful, you know.
Crowds; the church was packed, and many people cried. You _should_ go.
And then one feels how real it is for him to preach against the world,
because he gave up so much."

Molly drained her glass of champagne and leant across.

"Whom are you talking about?"

"Father Molyneux."

"I thought so."

"Have you heard him preach?" asked Lady Sophy.

"I used to, but I never go now." She again leant forward and spoke this
time with unconcealed irritation. "Adela, I don't go now because I know
too much about him."

There was immediate sensation.

Molly slowly lit a cigarette. Even then she did not know what she was
going to say, but she had determined on the spur of the moment, and
chiefly from sheer terror, to put Mark out of court if she possibly
could.

"He is a humbug," she proclaimed in her low, incisive tone.

"Oh! come now," said Billy. "A man who gave up
Groombridge--extraordinary silly thing to do, but he is not a humbug!"

Molly turned on him.

"Yes, he is. He knows he made a great mistake and he would undo it if he
could."

"Molly, it can't be true!" cried Adela almost tearfully. "If you had
only heard him preach last Sunday you couldn't say such hasty, unkind,
horrid things!"

"It is true," said Molly.

"Our hostess is pleased to be mysterious," said the fat man, and "you
know," turning to Mrs. Delaport Green, "it's very likely that he is
sorry he made such a sacrifice, but I don't think that prevents its
having been a noble action at the time."

"Or makes him a humbug now," said the soldier. "I believe he is an
uncommonly nice fellow."

"Oh! she means something else," said Lady Sophia, looking at Molly with
curiosity. "What is it you have against him?"

Molly felt the table to be against her, and it added to her nervous
irritability. She was not in any sense drunk, and the drugs she took
were in safe doses at present; yet she was to a certain degree
influenced both by the champagne she had just taken, and the injection
she had given herself when she came in from the theatre.

"You will none of you repeat what I am going to say?"

"I probably shall," said the big guest, "unless it is excessively
interesting; otherwise I never remember what is a secret and what
isn't."

But Molly did not heed him.

"Well," she said, "it is a fact that Father Molyneux would give up the
Roman Church to-morrow if a very intimate friend of mine, who could
give him as much wealth as he has lost, would agree to marry him after
he ceased to be a priest!"

"Oh! how dreadfully disappointing!" cried Adela.

"Why shouldn't he?" said Billy.

"It seems a come-down," said the fat man; and the soldier said nothing.

"Stuff and nonsense," said Lady Sophia firmly. "Somebody has been
humbugging you, Molly."

But being a lady who liked peace better than warfare, she now went on to
say that she had had no notion how late it was until this moment, and
that she really must be off. Her farewell was quite friendly, but
Molly's was cold.

The departure of Lady Sophia made a welcome break, and, in spite of the
hostess being silent and out of temper, the men managed to divert the
conversation into less serious topics. But they were not likely to
forget what Molly had impressed upon their minds by the strange
vehemence with which she had emphasised her accusations.

"She meant herself, I suppose?" asked Billy, when leaving the house with
his stout fellow guest. "Do you believe it?"

"It was very curious, very curious indeed. Do you know I rather doubt if
she wholly and entirely believed it herself."

Billy was puzzled for a moment, thinking that some difficult mental
problem had been offered for his digestion.

"Oh, I see," he said, as he opened his own door with his latch-key. "He
only meant that she was telling a lie; I suspect he is right too."


CHAPTER XXXI

THE NURSING OF A SLANDER


Meanwhile, in shadowy corners of Westmoreland House, Miss Carew lived a
monotonous but anxious life. For days together she hardly saw Molly, and
then perhaps she would be called into the big bed-room for a long talk,
or rather, to listen to a long monologue in which Molly gave vent to
views and feelings on men and things.

Molly's cynicism was increasing constantly, and she now hardly ever
allowed that anybody did anything for a good motive. She had moods in
which she poured scandal into Miss Carew's half excited and curious
mind, piling on her account of the wickedness and the baseness of the
people she knew intimately, of the sharks who pursued her money, and,
most of all, she showered her scorn on the men who wanted to marry her.

Listening to her Miss Carew almost believed that all the men Molly met
were _divorcés_, or notoriously lived bad lives, and hardly veiled their
intention to continue to do the same after obtaining her hand and her
money.

Molly would lie on a sofa, in a gorgeous kind of _déshabille_ which cost
almost as much as Miss Carew spent on her clothes in the whole year, and
apparently take delight in scaring her by these hideous revelations.
She was so strange in her wild kind of eloquence, and it was so
impossible to believe all she said, that the doubt more than once
occurred to Miss Carew whether it might be a case of the use of drugs.
The extraordinary personal indulgence of luxury was unlike anything the
older woman had ever come across. Then there was no system, nothing
business-like about Molly as there often is in women of the modern
world. Miss Carew dimly suspected that any society of human beings
expects some self-discipline, and some sacrifice to ordinary rules. As
it was she wondered how long Molly's neglect of small duties and her
frequent insolence would be condoned.

All this, which had been coming on gradually, was positively nauseous to
the middle-aged Englishwoman whose nerves were suffering from the
strain, and she came to feel that it would be impossible to endure it
much longer. It would be easier to drudge and trudge with girls in the
schoolroom for a smaller salary than to endure life with Molly if she
were to develop further this kind of temper.

For months now Miss Carew had lived under a great strain. From the
evening when she had found Molly sitting on the floor with the tin box
open before her, and old, yellow letters lying on the ground about it,
she had been almost constantly uneasy. She could not forget the sight of
Molly crouching like a tramp in the midst of the warm, comfortable room,
biting her right hand in a horrible physical convulsion. It was of no
use to try to think that Molly's condition that night was entirely the
result of illness, or that the loss of her unknown mother had upset her
to that degree or at all in that way. The character of Molly's mental
state was quite, quite different from the qualities that come of grief
or sickness. Then had followed the very anxious nursing, during which
all other thoughts had been swallowed up in immediate anxiety and
responsibility.

During Molly's convalescence, in the quiet days by the sea-side, Miss
Carew began to reflect on a kind of coherent unity in the delirious talk
she had listened to during the worst days of the illness. And she also
noticed that Molly, by furtive little jokes and sudden, irrelevant
questions, was trying to find out what Miss Carew had heard her say.
Then it became evident that Molly attributed all the excitement of that
night to her subsequent illness--only once, and that very calmly,
alluding to the fact of her mother's death.

Miss Carew had no wish to penetrate the mystery of the black box and the
faded letters. She had a sort of instinctive horror of the subject, but
she could not but watch the fate of the box when they came back to the
flat. Molly paid no attention to it whatever, and said in a natural
tone:

"I shall send my father's dispatch box and sword-case and my own
dispatch boxes in a cab. Would you mind taking them and having them put
in the little room next to my bed-room?"

But in the end Molly had taken them herself, as she thought Miss Carew
had a slight cold. Miss Carew always had a certain dislike to the door
of the little room next to Molly's, which had evidently been once used
for a powder closet. She did not even know if the door were locked or
not, and she never touched the handle. She had an uncanny horror of
passing the door, at least so she said afterwards; probably in
retrospect she came to exaggerate her feelings as to these things.

She was puzzled and confused: her health was not good, and her faculties
were dimmed. It was probably the strain of living with Molly whom she
could no longer control or guide, and who was so evidently in dire need
of some one to do both. She felt dreadfully burdened with
responsibility, both as to the things she did understand and the things
she did not understand. What she could not understand was a sense of
moral darkness, like a great, looming grey cloud, sometimes simply dark
and heavy, and at other times a cloud electric with coming danger. She
felt as if burdened with a secret which she longed to impart, only that
she did not know what it was. At times it was as if she carried some
monstrous thing on her back, whilst she could only see its dark,
shapeless shadow. Her self-confidence was going, and her culture was so
useless. What good was it to her now to know really well the writings of
Burke, or Macaulay--nay, of Racine and Pascal? She had never been
religious since her childhood, but in these long, solitary days in the
great house that grew more and more gloomy as she passed about it when
Molly was out, she began to feel new needs and to seek for old helps.

Molly was sometimes struck by the change in her companion. Miss Carew
seemed to have grown so futile, so incoherent and funny, unlike the Miss
Carew who had been her finishing governess not many years ago.

The sight of Carey's troubled, mottled face began to irritate Molly to
an unbearable degree.

"Why not have a treatment for eczema and have done with it? You used to
have quite a clear skin," she cried, in brutal irritation one morning.

"Oh! it's nerves--merely nerves," said poor Miss Carew apologetically.

"Then have a treatment for nerves," cried Molly furiously. "It is too
ridiculous to have blotches on your face because I have a bad temper!"

It was the night after the little supper party at which the slander was
born that Molly said this rude thing, and then abruptly left the
drawing-room to join a hairdresser who was waiting upstairs. Almost
immediately afterwards Adela Delaport Green was standing over the stiff
chair on which Miss Carew was sitting, very limp in figure, and holding
a damp handkerchief to her face.

"How d'ye do? They told me Molly was here," she said in a disappointed
voice, and her eyes ranged round the room with the alertness of a
sportswoman.

Adela had come with a purpose; she had come there to right the wrong and
to force Molly to tell the truth.

"She was here a moment ago. She has just gone up to the hairdresser,"
said Miss Carew as she got up, quickly restoring the damp handkerchief
to her pocket and composing her countenance, not without a certain
dignity. She liked Adela, who was always friendly and civil whenever
they met.

That little lady threw herself pettishly into a deep chair.

"So tiresome when I haven't a minute to spare, and I suppose he will
keep her nearly an hour?"

"Can I take a message?"

"Oh! no, thanks, dear Miss Carew, don't go up all those horrid steep
steps. Do rest and entertain me a little. I am sure you feel these hot
days terribly."

"I find it very cool and quiet here," said Miss Carew, a little sadly.

"I'm afraid it's lonely," cried Adela.

"Well! I oughtn't to grumble about that."

"No, you never do grumble, I know; but I feel sometimes that you must be
tired and anxious, placed, as you are, as the only thing instead of a
mother to poor, dear Molly!"

The fierce, quick envy betrayed in that "poor, dear Molly" did not reach
Miss Carew's brain, and a little sympathy was very soothing.

"Now, could any fortune stand this sort of thing?" asked Adela.

The companion shook her head sadly, but would not speak.

"You know that she has bought Sir Edmund Grosse's old yacht? And that
she is taking one of the best deer forests in the Highlands? And is it
true that she is thinking of buying Portlands?"

"Oh, yes!" sighed Miss Carew. "There is some new scheme every day."

"She has everything the world can give," said Adela sharply. "But, you
know," she went on, "people won't go on standing her manners as they do
now, even if she can pay her amazing way! Do you know that her cousin,
Lady Dawning, declares she won't have anything more to do with her? Not
that that matters very much; old Lady Dawning hardly counts, now that
Molly has really great people as her friends, only little leaks let in
the water by degrees."

A pause, and then suddenly:

"Do you know Father Molyneux?"

"Yes," said Miss Carew, who was glad to change the subject. "He is very
charming."

"I didn't know he was a friend of Molly's."

"Oh! didn't you? She took a great fancy to him last autumn; he used to
come to luncheon."

"Did he come often?"

"Oh! I think so, but I don't remember exactly."

"And has he been coming here lately?"

"I really don't know. I have my meals by myself now; the hours were so
irregular, and I am too old and dull for Molly's friends. I know she
went to see him a few days ago, and she came back looking agitated. I
was rather glad--I thought it would be good for her, but I fear it was
not. She has been more excited, I think, these two or three days. Her
nerves are really quite overwrought; she allows herself no quiet. Yes;
she was very much excited after seeing Father Molyneux."

Miss Carew was talking more to herself than to Adela.

"I thought perhaps he had pressed her to become a Roman Catholic;
certainly he upset her in some way."

Adela's small eyes were like sharp points as she looked at the older
woman.

Then was it really true? Oh! no; surely not. But then, what else could
he have said to upset Molly?

At that moment Molly's maid came into the room.

"Miss Dexter has only just heard that you were here, madam. She is very
sorry you have been waiting. She wished me to say that she is obliged to
go immediately to a sale at Christie's, and would you be able to go with
her?"

Adela declined, perceiving that Molly was in no mind for a private talk,
and having parted affectionately from Miss Carew, went her way to have
a chat with Lady Dawning.

In the afternoon she met several of her Roman Catholic acquaintances at
a charity performance in a well-known garden, and she pumped all those
she could decoy in turn into a _tête-à-tête_ as to Father Molyneux. She
was in reality devoured with the wish to know the truth. She had her own
thin but genuine share of ideality, and she had been more impressed by
Mark's renouncement of Groombridge Castle than by anything she had met
with before.

But gradually, as she hunted the story, she gave him up, not because of
any evidence of any kind, but because she did not find him regarded as
anything very wonderful. She had need of the enthusiasms of others to
make an atmosphere for her own ideals, and almost by chance she had not
met anyone much interested in the young preacher. Then she had dim
backwaters of anti-Popery in her mind, and they helped the reaction. She
had come out, lance in rest, to defend the victim of calumny; in a very
few days she had thrown him over, and was explaining pathetically to
anybody who would listen that she had had a shock to her faith in
humanity. And the story, starting by describing her own state of mind
and being almost entirely subjective, ended in bringing home to her
listeners with peculiar force the objective facts as asserted by Molly.
Catholics, she found, when she came to this advanced state of
propagation, were aghast at her story. They did not believe it, but they
were excessively annoyed, and were, for the most part, inclined to think
that Mark could not have been entirely prudent. But non-Catholics were,
naturally, more credulous.

A calumny is a quick and gross feeder. It has a thousand different ways
of assimilating things "light as air," or things dull from the ennui
which produced them, or things prickly with envy, or slushy, green
things born of unconscious jealousy, or unpleasant things born of false
pieties, or hard views born of tired experience, or worldly products of
incredulity, or directly evil suggestions, or the repulsions of satiated
sensuality, or the bitter fruits of melancholia, or the foreshadowings
of insanity, or the mere dislike of the lower moralities for the higher,
or the uneasiness felt by the ordinary in the presence of the rare, or
the revolt felt by the conventional against holier bonds, or the prattle
of curiosity, or the roughness of mere vitality, or the fusion of minds
at a low level.

This particular calumny was well watered and manured with all these
by-products of human life, and it grew to full size and height with a
rapidity that could not have been attained under less favourable
conditions.


BOOK IV


CHAPTER XXXII

ROSE SUMMONED TO LONDON


Rose was back in London the second week in July, summoned back rather
imperiously by Mr. Murray, Junior. The house had been shut up since the
departure of her tenants at Whitsuntide, and she had hoped not to reopen
it until the autumn. She had intended to go directly to her mother's
home in the country as soon as they could leave Paris. It was becoming a
question whether it would be a greater risk for Lady Charlton to endure
the heat in Paris or the fatigues of the long journey. Mr. Murray's
letter decided them to move. Rose must go, and her mother would not stay
behind alone. Lady Charlton decided to pay a month's visit to her
youngest daughter in Scotland, as Rose might be kept in London.

It was a disappointment. The house in London would be nearly as stuffy
as Paris. Rose disliked the season and was in no mood for the stale
echoes of its dying excitements. She would not tell her friends that she
was back; she would keep as quiet as she had been in Paris.

The first morning, after early service and breakfast, she went to the
library to wait for the lawyer's visit. It was the only room in which
to receive him; the dining-room, and drawing-room, and the little
boudoir upstairs, were not opened. Rose was inclined to leave them as
they were, with the furniture in brown wrappers, for the present; but
she would rather have seen Mr. Murray in any room but the library.

The morning sun was full on the windows that opened to the rather dreary
garden at the back. She wondered why Mr. Murray had written so urgently,
and why Edmund Grosse had not written for several weeks. Up to now they
had done all this horrid business between them, and she had only had
occasional reports from her cousin. Now she must face the subject with
the lawyer himself. She was puzzled to account for the change in the
situation.

At the exact moment he had mentioned, Mr. Murray's tall person with its
heavy, bent head appeared in the library. As they greeted they were both
conscious that it was in this same room, seated at the wide
writing-table still in the same place, and still bearing the large
photograph of Sir David Bright, where he had first told her of the
strange dispositions of her husband's will. He remembered vividly her
look then--undaunted and confident--as she had gently but firmly
asserted that there must be another will. But had she not also said it
would never be found?

But the present occupied the lawyer much more than the past. He was
eager and a little triumphant in his story of the progress of the case,
and did not notice that the sweet face opposite to him became more and
more white as he went on. He told her all he had told Sir Edmund when he
first got back from the yacht; he told of the mysterious visit he had
received from Dr. Larrone, and how he could prove from the letters of
the Florentine detective that Madame Danterre had sent the doctor to
England to take a certain small, black box to Miss Dexter.

Then he paused.

"I told Sir Edmund how our Florentine detective, Pietrino, had made
friends with one of the nurses, and that she described Madame Danterre
ordering the box to be opened and having a seizure--a heart
attack--while the letters were spread out on her bed. Nurse Edith said
then that she had put them back in a hurry and locked the box, and that
it had not been reopened by Madame Danterre. Some weeks later when she
was near her end, Madame Danterre had a scene with Dr. Larrone which
ended in his consenting to take the box to London as soon as she was
dead, but the nurse was sure that the doctor was told nothing as to the
contents of the box. That was as much as we knew up to Easter, and while
waiting for the arrival of Akers, and Stock, the other private who had
witnessed the signature. They got here in Easter week, and I saw them
with Sir Edmund, and we both cross-questioned them closely. Akers's
evidence is beyond suspicion, and is perfectly supported by that of
Stock. He described all that happened at the witnessing of the General's
signature most circumstantially, but, of course, he knew nothing of the
contents of the paper. But now I have more important evidence than any
we have had so far, and the extraordinary thing is that Sir Edmund does
not wish to hear it. I cannot understand why!"

Rose remained silent. She was looking fixedly at a paper-knife which she
held in her hand.

It suddenly struck the lawyer as a flash of most embarrassing light
that possibly there was some complication of a dangerous and tender kind
between Sir Edmund and his cousin. He could not dwell on such a notion
now--it might be absolute nonsense, but it made him go on hastily:

"I have had a visit from Nurse Edith, and as Pietrino suspected, she
knows much more than she would allow to him. I think she was waiting to
see if money would be offered for her information, but Pietrino would
not fall into the risk of buying evidence. He waited; she was watched
until she came to London, and she had not been here twenty-four hours
before she came to me. She declares now that, as she was gathering up
the papers, she had seen that the long letter Madame Danterre had been
reading when she had the attack of faintness was written to some one
called Rose. She knew it was that letter which had done the mischief.
She slipped it into her pocket when she put the rest away. I believe it
was naughty curiosity, but she wishes us to think that she knew the
whole scandal about the General's will, and did what she did from a
sense of justice. When off duty she took the paper to her room, and when
she opened it she found the will inside it. In her excitement she called
the housemaid, an Englishwoman with whom she had made friends, and she
copied the will while they were together, and the names of Akers and
Stock--of whom she could not possibly have heard--are in her copy. I
have seen that copy, Lady Rose, and----" He paused and glanced at her
for a moment, and then his eyes sought the trees in the garden even as
they had done when he had made that other and awful announcement on the
day of the memorial service to Sir David. Rose flushed a little, and
her breathing came quickly, but she made no sign of impatience.

"Sir David left the whole of his fortune to you subject to an annual
payment of a thousand a-year to Madame Danterre during her lifetime."

Complete silence followed. Lady Rose either could not or would not
speak. Out of the pale, distinguished slightly worn face the eyes looked
at Mr. Murray with no surprise. Had she not always said that she did not
believe the iniquitous will Mr. Murray had brought her to be the true
one, but had she not also maintained that the true will would never be
found? She did not say so to Mr. Murray, but in fact she shrank from
making too sure of Nurse Edith's evidence. She had so long forbidden
herself to believe in the return of worldly fortune or to wish for it.

Mr. Murray coughed. No words of congratulation seemed available. At last
he went on:

"Nurse Edith says she did not read the letter which was with the will.
Directly she went on duty in the morning, and while Madame Danterre was
asleep she put the papers back in the black box and the key of the box
in its usual place in a little bag on a table standing close by the head
of the bed. It was, as I have said, this same box which was put into Dr.
Larrone's care before he started on his mysterious journey to see Miss
Dexter. Now our position is very strong. We have evidence of the
witnessing of a paper by two men. We have the copy of the will made by
the nurse and witnessed by the housemaid, and it bears the signatures of
those two men. Then you must remember that, in a case of this kind, the
court is much more likely to set aside a will leaving property away from
the family than if the will in dispute had been an ordinary one in
favour of his relations."

"Oh! it is horrible--too horrible!" cried Rose. "There must be some
mistake. That young girl I met at Groombridge! Even if the poor mother
were really wicked, that girl cannot have carried it on!"

Rose had leant her elbows on the table, and clasped her white hands
tightly and then covered her face with them for a moment.

"I can't believe it. I feel there is some terrible mistake, and we might
ruin this girl's life. It would be ill-gotten, unblest wealth."

The lawyer noted with surprise that these two--Sir Edmund and Lady
Rose--were not more anxious for wealth, rather less so, since both had
known comparative poverty.

"I don't believe anyone is the better for living on fraud, Lady Rose,
and I don't believe you have any right to drop the case. You have to
think of Sir David's good name and of his wishes. The will you are
suffering from was a portentous wrong."

Rose trembled. Had she not felt it the most awful, the most portentous
wrong? Had it not burnt deep miserable wounds in her soul? The whole
horror of the desecration of her married life had been revealed to her
in this room by this man. Did she need that he should tell her what that
misery had been? The words he had used then were as well known to her as
the words he had used to-day.

Rose said after a longer pause, and with slight hesitation:

"And Sir Edmund does not know what Nurse Edith told you? He has not seen
the copy of the will?"

"No; I wanted him to, but he refused to hear any more on the subject. I
cannot understand it at all." He spoke with considerable irritation, his
big forehead contracted with a deep frown. "Sir Edmund, after making the
guess on which the whole thing has turned, after discovering Akers and
Stock, after spending large sums in the necessary work----"

"Has he spent much money?" Rose flushed deeply.

But Mr. Murray, who usually had more tact, was now too full of his
grievance to pause.

"He spent money as long as he could, and now takes no more interest in
the matter on the ground that he can no longer be of any use. Why, it
was his judgment we wanted, his perceptions; no one could be of more use
than Sir Edmund!"

"And who is paying the expenses now?"

"Ah! that is the reason why I wished to see you as soon as possible. I
felt that I could not, without your approval, continue as we are now.
The last cheque from Sir Edmund covered all expenses to the end of the
year. I have advanced what has been necessary since then, and if you
really wish the thing dropped, that is entirely my own affair. But I do
most earnestly hope that you will not do anything so wrong. I feel very
strongly my responsibility towards Sir David's memory in this matter."

"I feel," said Rose, but her manner was irresolute, "that the scandal
has been forgotten by now; things come and go so fast. He will be
remembered only as a great soldier who died for his country."

"It may be forgotten," said Mr. Murray in a stern voice she had never
heard before. "It may be forgotten in a society which is always needing
some new sensation and is always well supplied. But there is a less
fluctuating public opinion. We men of business keep a clearer view of
character, and we know better how through all classes there is a verdict
passed on men that does not pass away in a season. Do you think, madam,
that when men treasure a good name it is the gossip of a London season
they regard? No; it is the thoughts of other good men in which they wish
to live. It is the sympathy of the good that a good man has a right to.
I believe in a future life, but I don't imagine I know whether in
another world they rejoice or suffer pain by anything that affects their
good name here. But I do know, Lady Rose, that deep in our nature is the
sense of duty to their memory, and I cannot believe that such an
instinct is without meaning or without some actual bearing on departed
souls. I don't expect Sir David to visit me in dreams, but I do expect
to feel a deep and reasonable self-reproach if I do not try to clear his
name."

The heavy features of the solicitor had worked with a good deal of
emotion. The thought, the words "departed souls," were no mere words to
him in these summer days while Mrs. Murray, Junior, was supposed to be
doing well after an operation in a nursing home, and the doctors were
inclined to speak of next month's progress and on that of the month
after that, and to be silent as to any dates far ahead. In his
professional hours he did not dwell on these things, but it was the
actual spiritual conditions of the life he and his wife were leading
that gave a strange force to his words.

"She never loved him," thought Mr. Murray as he looked out of the
window. He was on the same side of the writing-table that he had been on
when he had first told her of the deep insult offered to her by Sir
David. He did not realise now the intensity of the contempt he had felt
then for the departed General as he looked at his photograph. It was
intolerable, he had thought then, that a man should have those large,
full eyes, that straight, manly look and bearing, who had gone to his
grave having deliberately planned that his dead hand should so deeply
wound a defenceless woman, and that woman his sweet, young wife.
Murray's mind was so full now of relief at the idea that Sir David had
done his best at the last, that in his relief he almost forgot that, in
a woman's mind the main fact might still be that there had been a Madame
Danterre in the case!

But Rose now, as when he had first told her of Madame Danterre's
existence, was seeking with a single eye to find the truth. It had
seemed to her then a moral impossibility to believe that her husband had
meant to leave this horrible insult to their married life. David had
been incapable of anything so monstrous; he had not in his character
even the courage of such a crime.

But now the key to the situation, according to Mr. Murray, was Molly;
and Rose again brought to bear all that she had of perception, of
experience, of instinct, to see her way clearly. She was silent; then at
last she looked up.

"Mr. Murray, Miss Dexter could not commit such a crime. Why, I know her;
I spent some days in a country house with her. I know her quite well,
and I don't like her very much, but she really can't have done anything
of the kind, and therefore, the case won't be proved. I am sure it
won't. And if it fails only harm will be done to David's memory, not
good."

"That is what Sir Edmund said, but believe me, Lady Rose, you have
neither of you anything to go upon. You think it impossible, but you
don't either of you see the immense force of the temptation. Some crimes
may need a villainous nature. This, if you could see it truly, only
needs one that is human under temptation, ignorant of danger, and
ambitious."

"But then, was that why Edmund would have nothing more to do with the
case?" thought Rose.

The look of clear, earnest, searching in Rose's eyes was clouded by a
frown.

The clock struck twelve. Mr. Murray rose.

"I am half an hour late for an appointment. Lady Rose, forgive me; I am
an old man, and maybe I take a harsh view of what passes before me. But
there is nothing, let me tell you, that alarms me more in the present
day than the way in which men and women lose their sense of duty in
their sense of sentimental sympathy."


CHAPTER XXXIII

BROWN HOLLAND COVERS


That afternoon Rose was standing by the window in the drawing-room when
she became conscious that her gown was quite hot in the burning sun,
and, undoubtedly, its soft, grey tone would fade. She drew back and
pulled down the blinds.

It was not the first time she had put off her black, for, in the Paris
heat, it had become intolerable, and she had certainly enjoyed her visit
to an inexpensive but excellent dressmaker, who had produced this grey
gown with all its determined simplicity.

Rose looked round at the drawing-room now. The furniture in holland
covers was stacked in the middle of the room; the pictures were wrapped
in brown paper with large and rather unnecessary white labels printed
with "Glass" in red letters. The fire-irons were dressed in something
that looked like Jaeger and the tassels of the blinds hung in yellow
cambric bags. Rose smiled a little as she recalled how strange and
strong an impression a room in such a state had made on her in her
childhood. The drawing-room in her London home had seemed incomparably
more attractive then than at any other time. Lady Charlton had once
brought Rose up to see a dentist on a bright, autumn day. She had not
been much hurt, but it was a great comfort when the visit was over. She
and her mother had dinner on two large mutton chops, and some apricot
tartlets from a pastry-cook, things ordered by Lady Charlton with a view
to giving as little trouble as possible to two able-bodied women who
were living on board wages, and both of whom were, in private life,
excellent cooks. Lady Charlton was anxious, too, not to give trouble by
sending messages, having quite forgotten that there was also a boy who
lived in the house. So, after lunch, she had gone out to find a cab for
herself, and had left Rose to rest with a book on the big morocco sofa
in the dining-room.

Rose had found her way to the drawing-room, and she could see now the
half-open shutter and the rich light of the autumn sun turning all the
dust of the air to gold in one big shaft of light. The child had never
seen the house when the family was away before, and with awestruck,
mysterious joy, she had lifted corners of covers and peered under chairs
and recognised legs of tables and footstools. Then she had stood up and
taken a comprehensive view of the whole of this world of mountains and
valleys, precipices and familiar little home corners, all covered in
brown holland, like sand instead of grass, all golden lights and soft
shadows.

What had there been so very exciting in it--an excitement she could
still recall as keenly now? Was it the greatness of the revolution, or
surprise at the new order of things? It was such a startling
interruption of all the usual relations between the furniture of the
house and its human beings. A great London house wrapped up in the old
way spoke more of the old order its influence, its importance, than did
the house when inhabited, and out of its curl papers. Nothing could
speak more of law and order and care, and the "proper" condition of
things, and the self-respect of housemaids, the passing effectiveness of
sweeps, and the unobtrusive attentiveness of carpenters! But to the
child there had been a glorious sense of loneliness and licence as she
danced up and down the broad vacant spaces and jumped over the rolls of
Turkey carpets.

Rose envied that child now, with an envy that she hoped was not bitter.
It is not because we knew no sorrows in our childhood that we would fain
recall it. It is because we now so seldom know one whole hour of its
licensed freedom, its absolute liberty in spite of bonds.

A loud door-bell, as it seemed to Rose, sounded through the house as she
closed the shutter she had opened when she came in. She knew whose ring
it must be, and came quietly downstairs with a little frown.

Edmund Grosse had been shown into the library. The room looked east, and
was now deliciously cool after the street. The dark blinds were half-way
down, and a little pretence at a breeze was coming in over the burnt
turf of the back garden.

Edmund's manner as he met her was as usual, but tinged perhaps with a
little irony--very little, but just a flavour of it mingled with the
immense friendliness and the wish to serve and help her.

Rose was, to his surprise, almost shy as she came into the room, but in
another moment she was herself.

"Mamma has borne the journey splendidly. I've had an excellent account
in a long telegram this morning."

But while she told him of their journey and of their life in Paris, a
rather piteous look came into the blue eyes. Was she not to hear any of
Edmund's own news? Was she not to be allowed to show any sympathy? She
might not say how she had been thinking of him, dreaming of how nobly he
had met his troubles, praying for him in Notre Dame des Victories. She
saw at once that she must not; there was something changed. It was too
odd, but she was afraid of him. She shook herself and determined not to
be silly. She would venture to say what she wished.

"Are things----" she began, but her voice trembled a little as, raising
her head, she saw that he was watching her. "Are things as bad as you
feared?"

He at once looked out of the window.

"Quite as bad as possible. I am just holding out till I can get some
work. Long ago, soon after I left the Foreign Office, I was asked to do
some informal work in Egypt; they wanted a semi-official go-between for
a time. I wish I had not refused then; I have been an ass throughout. If
I had even done occasional jobs they would have had some excuses for
putting me in somewhere now on the ground of my having had experience. I
have just written two articles on an Indian question, for I know that
part of the world as well as anybody over here, and they may lead to
something. Meanwhile, I am very well, so don't waste sympathy on me, I
am lodging with the Tarts, where everything is in apple-pie order."

"Oh, I am glad you are with those nice Tarts!" cried Rose, with genuine
womanly relief, that in another class of life would have found form and
expression in some such remark as that she knew Mary Tart would keep
things clean and comfortable, and would do the airing thoroughly.

Edmund's voice alone had made sympathy impossible, but he was a little
annoyed at the cheerful tone of Rose's words about the Tarts. It was
unlikely that she could have satisfied him in any way by speech or by
silence as to his own affairs. But why was she so very well dressed? He
had got so accustomed to her in soft, shabby black that he was not sure
if he liked this Paris frock; the simplicity of it was too clever.

There was silence, and Rose rearranged a bowl of roses her sister had
sent her from the country. She chose out a copper-coloured bud and held
it towards him, and a certain pleading would creep into her manner as
she did so.

Edmund smiled. She was really always the same quite hopeless mixture of
soft and hard elements.

"Have you seen Mr. Murray, Junior?" he asked.

"Yes; he came this morning, and I can't conceive what to do. At last I
got so dazed with thinking that this afternoon I have tried to forget
all about it."

"That will hardly get things settled," said Edmund, rather drily.

Tears came into her eyes, and were forced back by an effort of will.
Then she told him quite quietly of Nurse Edith's evidence.

"You mean," he explained, "that there is a copy of the real will leaving
everything to you. I can hardly believe it. In fact, I find it harder to
believe than when I first guessed at the truth. I suppose it is an
effect on the nerves, but now that we are actually proved right I am
simply bewildered. It seems almost too good to be true."

Rose was also, it seemed, more dazed than triumphant. He felt it very
strange that she had not told him the great news as soon as he came
into the room.

"What made you say that you could not conceive what to do? There can be
no doubt now." He spoke quickly and incisively.

"I cannot see," she said at last, "what is right. Mr. Murray is very
positive, and absolutely insists that it is my duty to allow the thing
to go on."

"Of course," Edmund interjected.

"But then, if he is mistaken! He really believes that Miss Dexter
received the will from Dr. Larrone and has suppressed it."

Edmund got up suddenly, and looked down on her with what she felt to be
a stern attention.

"And that," she concluded, looking bravely into the grave eyes bent on
her, "I absolutely decline to believe!"

"Of course," said Grosse abruptly, "it's out of the question. It's just
like a solicitor--fits his puzzle neatly together and is quite satisfied
without seeing the gross absurdity of supposing that such a girl could
carry on a huge fraud. A perfectly innocent, fresh, candid girl, brought
up in a respectable English country house--the thing is ridiculous!"

He spoke with great feeling; he was more moved than she had seen him for
a long time past, perhaps that was why she felt her own enthusiasm for
Molly's innocence just a little damped. He sat down again as abruptly as
he had risen.

"But it would be madness to drop the whole affair. This evidence of
Nurse Edith's is really conclusive; and the only thing I can see to be
said on the other side would be that David might have sent the will to
Madame Danterre to give her the option of destroying it. But there is
just another possibility, which Murray won't even consider, that Larrone
destroyed the will on the journey."

"Do you know," said Rose, with a smile, "I believe it's conceivable that
it is in the box, but that she has never opened the box at all! I
believe a girl might shrink so much from reading that woman's papers
that she might not even open the box."

"No one but a woman would have thought of such a possibility, but I
daresay you are right."

He looked at her more gently, with more pleasure, and she instantly felt
brighter.

"Then don't you think it would be possible to get at some plan, some
arrangement with her? It seems to me," she went on earnestly, "that we
ought to try to do it privately. Perhaps we might offer her the
allowance that would have been made to her mother. If she could be
convinced herself that the fortune is not really hers she might give it
up without all the horrid shame and publicity of a trial."

"Yes, but the scandal was public, and you have to think of David's good
name."

"Yes; but then you see, Edmund, the true will would be proved publicly,
and the explanation of the delay would be that it had not been found
before."

"She would have to expose her wretched mother."

"Not more than the trial would expose her; whether we won the case or
lost it, Madame Danterre must be exposed. But if I am right how could it
be done?"

"I think I had better do it myself," said Edmund. "I could see Miss
Dexter. I really think I could do it, feeling my way, of course."

Rose did not answer. She locked her fingers tightly together as
something inarticulate and shapeless struggled in her mind and in her
heart. She had no right, no claim, she thought earnestly, trying to keep
calm and at peace in her innermost soul. But she did not then or
afterwards allow to herself what she meant by "right" or by "claim."

She looked up a moment later with a bright smile.

"Yes," she said, "you would be the best--far the best. Miss Dexter would
feel more at her ease with you than with me or anyone I can think of."

"Of course, I must consult Murray first," said Edmund, absorbed in the
thought of the proposed interview. "I ought to go now; I have an
appointment at the Foreign Office--probably as futile as any of my
efforts hitherto when looking for work."

He spoke the last words rather to himself than to his cousin, and then
left her alone. He did not question as he walked through the streets
across the park whether he had been as full of sympathy to Rose as he
had ever been; he was far too much accustomed to his own constancy to
question it now. But somehow his consciousness of Rose's presence had
not been as apparent as usual. No half ironic, half tender comments on
her attitude at this crisis had escaped him. He had been more
business-like than usual, and, man-like, he did not know it.


CHAPTER XXXIV

THE WRATH OF A FRIEND


Canon Nicholls had had a hard fight with a naturally hot temper, and his
servant would have given him a very fair character on that point if he
had been applied to. But there came a stifling July morning when nothing
could please him. He had been out to dinner the night before, and it was
the man's opinion that he had "eaten something too good for him." He had
been to church early, and had come back without the light in his face he
usually brought with him, as if the radiance from the sanctuary lamp
loved to linger on the blind face. He was difficult all the rest of the
morning, and the kind, patient woman who read aloud to him and wrote his
letters became nervous and diffident, thinking it was her own fault.

In the afternoon he usually took a stroll with his servant for guide,
and then had a doze, after which he went to Benediction at a
neighbouring convent. But to-day he settled into his arm-chair, and said
he meant to stay there, and that he wanted nothing, and (with more
emphasis) nobody.

He was, in truth, greatly disturbed in his mind. He had heard things he
did not like to hear of Mark Molyneux. He had been quite prepared for
some jealousy and some criticism of the young man he loved. Nobody
charms everybody, and if anybody charms many bodies, then the rest of
the bodies, who are not charmed, become surprised and critical, if not
hostile. It is so among all sets of human beings: the Canon was no acrid
critic of religious persons, only he had always found them to be quite
human.

The immediate cause of the acute trouble the Canon was going through
to-day had been a visit of the day before from Mrs. Delaport Green.
Adela, who, as he had once told Mark, sometimes looked in for a few
minutes, was under the impression that she very often called on the old
blind priest, and often mentioned her little attempts to cheer him up
with great complacence, especially to her Roman Catholic friends, as if
she were a constant ray of light in his darkness. She had not seen him
since her return from Cairo, but her first words were:

"I was so sorry not to be able to come last week," spoken with the air
of a weekly visitor.

But the Canon thought it so kind of her to come at all that he was no
critic of details in her regard.

She had cantered with a light hand over all sorts of
subjects,--Westminster Cathedral, the reunion of Churches, her own
Catholic tendencies, her charities, the newest play (which she described
well), and her anxiety because her husband ate too much. Then, at last,
she lighted on Mark's sermons.

Canon Nicholls spoke with reserve of Mark; he was shy of betraying his
own affection for him.

"Yes; it is young eloquence, fresh and quite genuine," he said in
response to Adela's enthusiasm.

"It sounds so very real," said Adela, with a sigh. "One couldn't
imagine, you know, that he could have any doubts, or that he could be
sorry, or disappointed, or anything of that sort--and yet----"

"And yet, what?" asked the Canon.

"And yet--well, I know I am foolish, and I do idealise people and make
up heroes--I know I do! It is such a pleasure to admire people, isn't
it? And after he gave up being heir to Groombridge Castle! I was staying
there when poor, dear Lord Groombridge got the news of his ordination,
and it was all so sad and so beautiful, and now I can't bear to think
that Father Molyneux is sorry already that he gave it all up."

"Sorry that he gave it up--!"

Adela gave a little jump in her chair. It made her so nervous to see a
blind man excited. But curiosity was strong within her.

"I am afraid it is quite true; a friend of mine who knows him quite
well, told me."

"Told you _what_?"

"That he was unhappy, and has doubts or troubles of some kind. I didn't
understand what exactly, but she knows that he will give it all up--the
vows and all that, I mean--if----"

"If what?"

Adela was not really wanting in courage.

"If a certain very rich woman would marry him. It seems such a
come-down, so very dull and dreadful, doesn't it?"

"You know all that's a lie!"

"Well, it was all told to me."

"But you knew there was not a word of truth in it, only you wanted to
see how I would take it. And I thought you were a kind-hearted woman!
How blind I am!"

Adela was galled to the quick. A quarrel, a scolding, would have been
tolerable, and perhaps exciting, but this naïve disappointment in
herself, this judgment from the man to whom she had been so good, was
too much!

"I thought it was much more kind to let you know what everybody is
saying, that you might help him. I am very sorry I have made a mistake,
and that I must be going now. It is much later than I thought."

"Must you?" There was the faintest sarcasm in the very polite tone of
the Canon's voice.

Nor had this conversation been all; for out at dinner that night the
Canon had been worried with much the same story from a totally different
quarter. It was after the ladies had left the dining-room, and the
gossip had been rougher.

He gave all his thoughts to brooding over the matter next day. Mark
could not have managed well--must have done or said something stupid,
and made enemies, he reflected gloomily.

Canon Nicholls had been young once, and almost as popular a preacher as
Mark, and he did not underrate the difficulties. But it was his firm
persuasion that, with tact and common-sense they were by no means
insurmountable. What really distressed the old man was that perhaps Mark
had been right in thinking that he personally could not surmount them.
And it was Canon Nicholls's doing that he was not by this time a novice
in a Carthusian Monastery! Therefore the Canon's soul was heavy with
anxiety as to whether he had made a great mistake.

"He must be a fool, or else it's just possible that he has got an
uncommonly clever enemy." The last thought revived the old man a
little, and he received his tea without any of the demonstrations of
disgust he had shown on drinking his coffee at breakfast.

Presently the subject of his thoughts came upon the scene, and the
visitor saw at once that his old friend was unlike himself. The Canon
was exceedingly alert from the moment Mark came into the room, trying to
catch up the faintest indication, in his voice or movements, as to
whether he were in good or low spirits; he almost thought he heard a
quick sigh as Mark sat down. He could not see that Mark was undeniably
thinner and paler than he had been only a few weeks ago, and that his
eyes looked even more bright and keen in consequence.

"Take some tea," said the Canon; and then, when he had given him time to
drink his tea, he turned on him abruptly.

"I've heard some lies about you, and I'm going to tell you what they
are."

"Perhaps it's better to be ignorant."

"No, it's not, now why did you incite young men to Socialism in South
London?"

"Good heavens!" said Mark. "Well, you shall catch it for that. I will
read you every word of that paper; not a line of anything else shall you
hear till you've been obliged to give your 'nihil obstat' to 'True and
False Socialism,' by your humble servant."

"But that's not the worst that's said of you."

"Oh, no! I know that."

Perhaps if Canon Nicholls could have seen the strained look on the young
face he could have understood. As it was, he believed him to be taking
the matter too lightly.

"When I was young," he said, "I thought it my own fault if I made
enemies, and you know where there is a great deal of smoke there has
generally been some fire."

"Then you mean to say," answered Mark, in a voice that was hard from the
effort at self-control, "that you think it is my fault that lies are
told against me, although you _do_ call them lies?"

