All that is in the man in the larger sense, what we call impression
as well as what we call intuition, so far as my argument looks, we
must accept.  It is not wrong to desire food, or exercise, or
beautiful surroundings, or the love of sex, or interest which is
the food of the mind.  All these are craved; all these should be
craved; to none of these in itself does the soul demur; where there
comes an undeniable want, we recognise a demand of nature.  Yet we
know that these natural demands may be superseded; for the demands
which are common to mankind make but a shadowy consideration in
comparison to the demands of the individual soul.  Food is almost
the first prerequisite; and yet a high character will go without
food to the ruin and death of the body rather than gain it in a
manner which the spirit disavows.  Pascal laid aside mathematics;
Origen doctored his body with a knife; every day some one is thus
mortifying his dearest interests and desires, and, in Christ's
words, entering maim into the Kingdom of Heaven.  This is to
supersede the lesser and less harmonious affections by
renunciation; and though by this ascetic path we may get to heaven,
we cannot get thither a whole and perfect man.  But there is
another way, to supersede them by reconciliation, in which the soul
and all the faculties and senses pursue a common route and share in
one desire.  Thus, man is tormented by a very imperious physical
desire; it spoils his rest, it is not to be denied; the doctors
will tell you, not I, how it is a physical need, like the want of
food or slumber.  In the satisfaction of this desire, as it first
appears, the soul sparingly takes part; nay, it oft unsparingly
regrets and disapproves the satisfaction.  But let the man learn to
love a woman as far as he is capable of love; and for this random
affection of the body there is substituted a steady determination,
a consent of all his powers and faculties, which supersedes,
adopts, and commands the other.  The desire survives, strengthened,
perhaps, but taught obedience and changed in scope and character.
Life is no longer a tale of betrayals and regrets; for the man now
lives as a whole; his consciousness now moves on uninterrupted like
a river; through all the extremes and ups and downs of passion, he
remains approvingly conscious of himself.

Now to me, this seems a type of that rightness which the soul
demands.  It demands that we shall not live alternately with our
opposing tendencies in continual see-saw of passion and disgust,
but seek some path on which the tendencies shall no longer oppose,
but serve each other to a common end.  It demands that we shall not
pursue broken ends, but great and comprehensive purposes, in which
soul and body may unite like notes in a harmonious chord.  That
were indeed a way of peace and pleasure, that were indeed a heaven
upon earth.  It does not demand, however, or, to speak in measure,
it does not demand of me, that I should starve my appetites for no
purpose under heaven but as a purpose in itself; or, in a weak
despair, pluck out the eye that I have not yet learned to guide and
enjoy with wisdom.  The soul demands unity of purpose, not the
dismemberment of man; it seeks to roll up all his strength and
sweetness, all his passion and wisdom, into one, and make of him a
perfect man exulting in perfection.  To conclude ascetically is to
give up, and not to solve, the problem.  The ascetic and the
creeping hog, although they are at different poles, have equally
failed in life.  The one has sacrificed his crew; the other brings
back his seamen in a cock-boat, and has lost the ship.  I believe
there are not many sea-captains who would plume themselves on
either result as a success.

But if it is righteousness thus to fuse together our divisive
impulses and march with one mind through life, there is plainly one
thing more unrighteous than all others, and one declension which is
irretrievable and draws on the rest.  And this is to lose
consciousness of oneself.  In the best of times, it is but by
flashes, when our whole nature is clear, strong and conscious, and
events conspire to leave us free, that we enjoy communion with our
soul.  At the worst, we are so fallen and passive that we may say
shortly we have none.  An arctic torpor seizes upon men.  Although
built of nerves, and set adrift in a stimulating world, they
develop a tendency to go bodily to sleep; consciousness becomes
engrossed among the reflex and mechanical parts of life; and soon
loses both the will and power to look higher considerations in the
face.  This is ruin; this is the last failure in life; this is
temporal damnation, damnation on the spot and without the form of
judgment.  'What shall it profit a man if he gain the whole world
and LOSE HIMSELF?'

It is to keep a man awake, to keep him alive to his own soul and
its fixed design of righteousness, that the better part of moral
and religious education is directed; not only that of words and
doctors, but the sharp ferule of calamity under which we are all
God's scholars till we die.  If, as teachers, we are to say
anything to the purpose, we must say what will remind the pupil of
his soul; we must speak that soul's dialect; we must talk of life
and conduct as his soul would have him think of them.  If, from
some conformity between us and the pupil, or perhaps among all men,
we do in truth speak in such a dialect and express such views,
beyond question we shall touch in him a spring; beyond question he
will recognise the dialect as one that he himself has spoken in his
better hours; beyond question he will cry, 'I had forgotten, but
now I remember; I too have eyes, and I had forgot to use them!  I
too have a soul of my own, arrogantly upright, and to that I will
listen and conform.'  In short, say to him anything that he has
once thought, or been upon the point of thinking, or show him any
view of life that he has once clearly seen, or been upon the point
of clearly seeing; and you have done your part and may leave him to
complete the education for himself.

Now, the view taught at the present time seems to me to want
greatness; and the dialect in which alone it can be intelligibly
uttered is not the dialect of my soul.  It is a sort of
postponement of life; nothing quite is, but something different is
to be; we are to keep our eyes upon the indirect from the cradle to
the grave.  We are to regulate our conduct not by desire, but by a
politic eye upon the future; and to value acts as they will bring
us money or good opinion; as they will bring us, in one word,
PROFIT.  We must be what is called respectable, and offend no one
by our carriage; it will not do to make oneself conspicuous--who
knows? even in virtue? says the Christian parent!  And we must be
what is called prudent and make money; not only because it is
pleasant to have money, but because that also is a part of
respectability, and we cannot hope to be received in society
without decent possessions.  Received in society! as if that were
the kingdom of heaven!  There is dear Mr. So-and-so;--look at him!-
-so much respected--so much looked up to--quite the Christian
merchant!  And we must cut our conduct as strictly as possible
after the pattern of Mr. So-and-so; and lay our whole lives to make
money and be strictly decent.  Besides these holy injunctions,
which form by far the greater part of a youth's training in our
Christian homes, there are at least two other doctrines.  We are to
live just now as well as we can, but scrape at last into heaven,
where we shall be good.  We are to worry through the week in a lay,
disreputable way, but, to make matters square, live a different
life on Sunday.

The train of thought we have been following gives us a key to all
these positions, without stepping aside to justify them on their
own ground.  It is because we have been disgusted fifty times with
physical squalls, and fifty times torn between conflicting
impulses, that we teach people this indirect and tactical procedure
in life, and to judge by remote consequences instead of the
immediate face of things.  The very desire to act as our own souls
would have us, coupled with a pathetic disbelief in ourselves,
moves us to follow the example of others; perhaps, who knows? they
may be on the right track; and the more our patterns are in number,
the better seems the chance; until, if we be acting in concert with
a whole civilised nation, there are surely a majority of chances
that we must be acting right.  And again, how true it is that we
can never behave as we wish in this tormented sphere, and can only
aspire to different and more favourable circumstances, in order to
stand out and be ourselves wholly and rightly!  And yet once more,
if in the hurry and pressure of affairs and passions you tend to
nod and become drowsy, here are twenty-four hours of Sunday set
apart for you to hold counsel with your soul and look around you on
the possibilities of life.

This is not, of course, all that is to be, or even should be, said
for these doctrines.  Only, in the course of this chapter, the
reader and I have agreed upon a few catchwords, and been looking at
morals on a certain system; it was a pity to lose an opportunity of
testing the catchwords, and seeing whether, by this system as well
as by others, current doctrines could show any probable
justification.  If the doctrines had come too badly out of the
trial, it would have condemned the system.  Our sight of the world
is very narrow; the mind but a pedestrian instrument; there's
nothing new under the sun, as Solomon says, except the man himself;
and though that changes the aspect of everything else, yet he must
see the same things as other people, only from a different side.

And now, having admitted so much, let us turn to criticism.

If you teach a man to keep his eyes upon what others think of him,
unthinkingly to lead the life and hold the principles of the
majority of his contemporaries, you must discredit in his eyes the
one authoritative voice of his own soul.  He may be a docile
citizen; he will never be a man.  It is ours, on the other hand, to
disregard this babble and chattering of other men better and worse
than we are, and to walk straight before us by what light we have.
They may be right; but so, before heaven, are we.  They may know;
but we know also, and by that knowledge we must stand or fall.
There is such a thing as loyalty to a man's own better self; and
from those who have not that, God help me, how am I to look for
loyalty to others?  The most dull, the most imbecile, at a certain
moment turn round, at a certain point will hear no further
argument, but stand unflinching by their own dumb, irrational sense
of right.  It is not only by steel or fire, but through contempt
and blame, that the martyr fulfils the calling of his dear soul.
Be glad if you are not tried by such extremities.  But although all
the world ranged themselves in one line to tell you 'This is
wrong,' be you your own faithful vassal and the ambassador of God--
throw down the glove and answer 'This is right.'  Do you think you
are only declaring yourself?  Perhaps in some dim way, like a child
who delivers a message not fully understood, you are opening wider
the straits of prejudice and preparing mankind for some truer and
more spiritual grasp of truth; perhaps, as you stand forth for your
own judgment, you are covering a thousand weak ones with your body;
perhaps, by this declaration alone, you have avoided the guilt of
false witness against humanity and the little ones unborn.  It is
good, I believe, to be respectable, but much nobler to respect
oneself and utter the voice of God.  God, if there be any God,
speaks daily in a new language by the tongues of men; the thoughts
and habits of each fresh generation and each new-coined spirit
throw another light upon the universe and contain another
commentary on the printed Bibles; every scruple, every true
dissent, every glimpse of something new, is a letter of God's
alphabet; and though there is a grave responsibility for all who
speak, is there none for those who unrighteously keep silence and
conform?  Is not that also to conceal and cloak God's counsel?  And
how should we regard the man of science who suppressed all facts
that would not tally with the orthodoxy of the hour?

Wrong?  You are as surely wrong as the sun rose this morning round
the revolving shoulder of the world.  Not truth, but truthfulness,
is the good of your endeavour.  For when will men receive that
first part and prerequisite of truth, that, by the order of things,
by the greatness of the universe, by the darkness and partiality of
man's experience, by the inviolate secrecy of God, kept close in
His most open revelations, every man is, and to the end of the ages
must be, wrong?  Wrong to the universe; wrong to mankind; wrong to
God.  And yet in another sense, and that plainer and nearer, every
man of men, who wishes truly, must be right.  He is right to
himself, and in the measure of his sagacity and candour.  That let
him do in all sincerity and zeal, not sparing a thought for
contrary opinions; that, for what it is worth, let him proclaim.
Be not afraid; although he be wrong, so also is the dead, stuffed
Dagon he insults.  For the voice of God, whatever it is, is not
that stammering, inept tradition which the people holds.  These
truths survive in travesty, swamped in a world of spiritual
darkness and confusion; and what a few comprehend and faithfully
hold, the many, in their dead jargon, repeat, degrade, and
misinterpret.

So far of Respectability; what the Covenanters used to call 'rank
conformity':  the deadliest gag and wet blanket that can be laid on
men.  And now of Profit.  And this doctrine is perhaps the more
redoubtable, because it harms all sorts of men; not only the heroic
and self-reliant, but the obedient, cowlike squadrons.  A man, by
this doctrine, looks to consequences at the second, or third, or
fiftieth turn.  He chooses his end, and for that, with wily turns
and through a great sea of tedium, steers this mortal bark.  There
may be political wisdom in such a view; but I am persuaded there
can spring no great moral zeal.  To look thus obliquely upon life
is the very recipe for moral slumber.  Our intention and endeavour
should be directed, not on some vague end of money or applause,
which shall come to us by a ricochet in a month or a year, or
twenty years, but on the act itself; not on the approval of others,
but on the rightness of that act.  At every instant, at every step
in life, the point has to be decided, our soul has to be saved,
heaven has to be gained or lost.  At every step our spirits must
applaud, at every step we must set down the foot and sound the
trumpet.  'This have I done,' we must say; 'right or wrong, this
have I done, in unfeigned honour of intention, as to myself and
God.'  The profit of every act should be this, that it was right
for us to do it.  Any other profit than that, if it involved a
kingdom or the woman I love, ought, if I were God's upright
soldier, to leave me untempted.

It is the mark of what we call a righteous decision, that it is
made directly and for its own sake.  The whole man, mind and body,
having come to an agreement, tyrannically dictates conduct.  There
are two dispositions eternally opposed:  that in which we recognise
that one thing is wrong and another right, and that in which, not
seeing any clear distinction, we fall back on the consideration of
consequences.  The truth is, by the scope of our present teaching,
nothing is thought very wrong and nothing very right, except a few
actions which have the disadvantage of being disrespectable when
found out; the more serious part of men inclining to think all
things RATHER WRONG, the more jovial to suppose them RIGHT ENOUGH
FOR PRACTICAL PURPOSES.  I will engage my head, they do not find
that view in their own hearts; they have taken it up in a dark
despair; they are but troubled sleepers talking in their sleep.
The soul, or my soul at least, thinks very distinctly upon many
points of right and wrong, and often differs flatly with what is
held out as the thought of corporate humanity in the code of
society or the code of law.  Am I to suppose myself a monster?  I
have only to read books, the Christian Gospels for example, to
think myself a monster no longer; and instead I think the mass of
people are merely speaking in their sleep.

It is a commonplace, enshrined, if I mistake not, even in school
copy-books, that honour is to be sought and not fame.  I ask no
other admission; we are to seek honour, upright walking with our
own conscience every hour of the day, and not fame, the
consequence, the far-off reverberation of our footsteps.  The walk,
not the rumour of the walk, is what concerns righteousness.  Better
disrespectable honour than dishonourable fame.  Better useless or
seemingly hurtful honour, than dishonour ruling empires and filling
the mouths of thousands.  For the man must walk by what he sees,
and leave the issue with God who made him and taught him by the
fortune of his life.  You would not dishonour yourself for money;
which is at least tangible; would you do it, then, for a doubtful
forecast in politics, or another person's theory in morals?

So intricate is the scheme of our affairs, that no man can
calculate the bearing of his own behaviour even on those
immediately around him, how much less upon the world at large or on
succeeding generations!  To walk by external prudence and the rule
of consequences would require, not a man, but God.  All that we
know to guide us in this changing labyrinth is our soul with its
fixed design of righteousness, and a few old precepts which commend
themselves to that.  The precepts are vague when we endeavour to
apply them; consequences are more entangled than a wisp of string,
and their confusion is unrestingly in change; we must hold to what
we know and walk by it.  We must walk by faith, indeed, and not by
knowledge.

You do not love another because he is wealthy or wise or eminently
respectable:  you love him because you love him; that is love, and
any other only a derision and grimace.  It should be the same with
all our actions.  If we were to conceive a perfect man, it should
be one who was never torn between conflicting impulses, but who, on
the absolute consent of all his parts and faculties, submitted in
every action of his life to a self-dictation as absolute and
unreasoned as that which bids him love one woman and be true to her
till death.  But we should not conceive him as sagacious,
ascetical, playing off his appetites against each other, turning
the wing of public respectable immorality instead of riding it
directly down, or advancing toward his end through a thousand
sinister compromises and considerations.  The one man might be
wily, might be adroit, might be wise, might be respectable, might
be gloriously useful; it is the other man who would be good.

The soul asks honour and not fame; to be upright, not to be
successful; to be good, not prosperous; to be essentially, not
outwardly, respectable.  Does your soul ask profit?  Does it ask
money?  Does it ask the approval of the indifferent herd?  I
believe not.  For my own part, I want but little money, I hope; and
I do not want to be decent at all, but to be good.


CHAPTER IV


We have spoken of that supreme self-dictation which keeps varying
from hour to hour in its dictates with the variation of events and
circumstances.  Now, for us, that is ultimate.  It may be founded
on some reasonable process, but it is not a process which we can
follow or comprehend.  And moreover the dictation is not
continuous, or not continuous except in very lively and well-living
natures; and between-whiles we must brush along without it.
Practice is a more intricate and desperate business than the
toughest theorising; life is an affair of cavalry, where rapid
judgment and prompt action are alone possible and right.  As a
matter of fact, there is no one so upright but he is influenced by
the world's chatter; and no one so headlong but he requires to
consider consequences and to keep an eye on profit.  For the soul
adopts all affections and appetites without exception, and cares
only to combine them for some common purpose which shall interest
all.  Now, respect for the opinion of others, the study of
consequences, and the desire of power and comfort, are all
undeniably factors in the nature of man; and the more undeniably
since we find that, in our current doctrines, they have swallowed
up the others and are thought to conclude in themselves all the
worthy parts of man.  These, then, must also be suffered to affect
conduct in the practical domain, much or little according as they
are forcibly or feebly present to the mind of each.

Now, a man's view of the universe is mostly a view of the civilised
society in which he lives.  Other men and women are so much more
grossly and so much more intimately palpable to his perceptions,
that they stand between him and all the rest; they are larger to
his eye than the sun, he hears them more plainly than thunder, with
them, by them, and for them, he must live and die.  And hence the
laws that affect his intercourse with his fellow-men, although
merely customary and the creatures of a generation, are more
clearly and continually before his mind than those which bind him
into the eternal system of things, support him in his upright
progress on this whirling ball, or keep up the fire of his bodily
life.  And hence it is that money stands in the first rank of
considerations and so powerfully affects the choice.  For our
society is built with money for mortar; money is present in every
joint of circumstance; it might be named the social atmosphere,
since, in society, it is by that alone that men continue to live,
and only through that or chance that they can reach or affect one
another.  Money gives us food, shelter, and privacy; it permits us
to be clean in person, opens for us the doors of the theatre, gains
us books for study or pleasure, enables us to help the distresses
of others, and puts us above necessity so that we can choose the
best in life.  If we love, it enables us to meet and live with the
loved one, or even to prolong her health and life; if we have
scruples, it gives us an opportunity to be honest; if we have any
bright designs, here is what will smooth the way to their
accomplishment.  Penury is the worst slavery, and will soon lead to
death.

But money is only a means; it presupposes a man to use it.  The
rich can go where he pleases, but perhaps please himself nowhere.
He can buy a library or visit the whole world, but perhaps has
neither patience to read nor intelligence to see.  The table may be
loaded and the appetite wanting; the purse may be full, and the
heart empty.  He may have gained the world and lost himself; and
with all his wealth around him, in a great house and spacious and
beautiful demesne, he may live as blank a life as any tattered
ditcher.  Without an appetite, without an aspiration, void of
appreciation, bankrupt of desire and hope, there, in his great
house, let him sit and look upon his fingers.  It is perhaps a more
fortunate destiny to have a taste for collecting shells than to be
born a millionaire.  Although neither is to be despised, it is
always better policy to learn an interest than to make a thousand
pounds; for the money will soon be spent, or perhaps you may feel
no joy in spending it; but the interest remains imperishable and
ever new.  To become a botanist, a geologist, a social philosopher,
an antiquary, or an artist, is to enlarge one's possessions in the
universe by an incalculably higher degree, and by a far surer sort
of property, than to purchase a farm of many acres.  You had
perhaps two thousand a year before the transaction; perhaps you
have two thousand five hundred after it.  That represents your gain
in the one case.  But in the other, you have thrown down a barrier
which concealed significance and beauty.  The blind man has learned
to see.  The prisoner has opened up a window in his cell and
beholds enchanting prospects; he will never again be a prisoner as
he was; he can watch clouds and changing seasons, ships on the
river, travellers on the road, and the stars at night; happy
prisoner! his eyes have broken jail!  And again he who has learned
to love an art or science has wisely laid up riches against the day
of riches; if prosperity come, he will not enter poor into his
inheritance; he will not slumber and forget himself in the lap of
money, or spend his hours in counting idle treasures, but be up and
briskly doing; he will have the true alchemic touch, which is not
that of Midas, but which transmutes dead money into living delight
and satisfaction.  Etre et pas avoir--to be, not to possess--that
is the problem of life.  To be wealthy, a rich nature is the first
requisite and money but the second.  To be of a quick and healthy
blood, to share in all honourable curiosities, to be rich in
admiration and free from envy, to rejoice greatly in the good of
others, to love with such generosity of heart that your love is
still a dear possession in absence or unkindness--these are the
gifts of fortune which money cannot buy and without which money can
buy nothing.  For what can a man possess, or what can he enjoy,
except himself?  If he enlarge his nature, it is then that he
enlarges his estates.  If his nature be happy and valiant, he will
enjoy the universe as if it were his park and orchard.

But money is not only to be spent; it has also to be earned.  It is
not merely a convenience or a necessary in social life; but it is
the coin in which mankind pays his wages to the individual man.
And from this side, the question of money has a very different
scope and application.  For no man can be honest who does not work.
Service for service.  If the farmer buys corn, and the labourer
ploughs and reaps, and the baker sweats in his hot bakery, plainly
you who eat must do something in your turn.  It is not enough to
take off your hat, or to thank God upon your knees for the
admirable constitution of society and your own convenient situation
in its upper and more ornamental stories.  Neither is it enough to
buy the loaf with a sixpence; for then you are only changing the
point of the inquiry; and you must first have BOUGHT THE SIXPENCE.
Service for service:  how have you bought your sixpences?  A man of
spirit desires certainty in a thing of such a nature; he must see
to it that there is some reciprocity between him and mankind; that
he pays his expenditure in service; that he has not a lion's share
in profit and a drone's in labour; and is not a sleeping partner
and mere costly incubus on the great mercantile concern of mankind.

Services differ so widely with different gifts, and some are so
inappreciable to external tests, that this is not only a matter for
the private conscience, but one which even there must be leniently
and trustfully considered.  For remember how many serve mankind who
do no more than meditate; and how many are precious to their
friends for no more than a sweet and joyous temper.  To perform the
function of a man of letters it is not necessary to write; nay, it
is perhaps better to be a living book.  So long as we love we
serve; so long as we are loved by others, I would almost say that
we are indispensable; and no man is useless while he has a friend.
The true services of life are inestimable in money, and are never
paid.  Kind words and caresses, high and wise thoughts, humane
designs, tender behaviour to the weak and suffering, and all the
charities of man's existence, are neither bought nor sold.

Yet the dearest and readiest, if not the most just, criterion of a
man's services, is the wage that mankind pays him or, briefly, what
he earns.  There at least there can be no ambiguity.  St. Paul is
fully and freely entitled to his earnings as a tentmaker, and
Socrates fully and freely entitled to his earnings as a sculptor,
although the true business of each was not only something
different, but something which remained unpaid.  A man cannot
forget that he is not superintended, and serves mankind on parole.
He would like, when challenged by his own conscience, to reply:  'I
have done so much work, and no less, with my own hands and brain,
and taken so much profit, and no more, for my own personal
delight.'  And though St. Paul, if he had possessed a private
fortune, would probably have scorned to waste his time in making
tents, yet of all sacrifices to public opinion none can be more
easily pardoned than that by which a man, already spiritually
useful to the world, should restrict the field of his chief
usefulness to perform services more apparent, and possess a
livelihood that neither stupidity nor malice could call in
question.  Like all sacrifices to public opinion and mere external
decency, this would certainly be wrong; for the soul should rest
contented with its own approval and indissuadably pursue its own
calling.  Yet, so grave and delicate is the question, that a man
may well hesitate before he decides it for himself; he may well
fear that he sets too high a valuation on his own endeavours after
good; he may well condescend upon a humbler duty, where others than
himself shall judge the service and proportion the wage.

And yet it is to this very responsibility that the rich are born.
They can shuffle off the duty on no other; they are their own
paymasters on parole; and must pay themselves fair wages and no
more.  For I suppose that in the course of ages, and through reform
and civil war and invasion, mankind was pursuing some other and
more general design than to set one or two Englishmen of the
nineteenth century beyond the reach of needs and duties.  Society
was scarce put together, and defended with so much eloquence and
blood, for the convenience of two or three millionaires and a few
hundred other persons of wealth and position.  It is plain that if
mankind thus acted and suffered during all these generations, they
hoped some benefit, some ease, some wellbeing, for themselves and
their descendants; that if they supported law and order, it was to
secure fair-play for all; that if they denied themselves in the
present, they must have had some designs upon the future.  Now, a
great hereditary fortune is a miracle of man's wisdom and mankind's
forbearance; it has not only been amassed and handed down, it has
been suffered to be amassed and handed down; and surely in such a
consideration as this, its possessor should find only a new spur to
activity and honour, that with all this power of service he should
not prove unserviceable, and that this mass of treasure should
return in benefits upon the race.  If he had twenty, or thirty, or
a hundred thousand at his banker's, or if all Yorkshire or all
California were his to manage or to sell, he would still be morally
penniless, and have the world to begin like Whittington, until he
had found some way of serving mankind.  His wage is physically in
his own hand; but, in honour, that wage must still be earned.  He
is only steward on parole of what is called his fortune.  He must
honourably perform his stewardship.  He must estimate his own
services and allow himself a salary in proportion, for that will be
one among his functions.  And while he will then be free to spend
that salary, great or little, on his own private pleasures, the
rest of his fortune he but holds and disposes under trust for
mankind; it is not his, because he has not earned it; it cannot be
his, because his services have already been paid; but year by year
it is his to distribute, whether to help individuals whose
birthright and outfit have been swallowed up in his, or to further
public works and institutions.

At this rate, short of inspiration, it seems hardly possible to be
both rich and honest; and the millionaire is under a far more
continuous temptation to thieve than the labourer who gets his
shilling daily for despicable toils.  Are you surprised?  It is
even so.  And you repeat it every Sunday in your churches.  'It is
easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle than for a
rich man to enter the kingdom of God.'  I have heard this and
similar texts ingeniously explained away and brushed from the path
of the aspiring Christian by the tender Great-heart of the parish.
One excellent clergyman told us that the 'eye of a needle' meant a
low, Oriental postern through which camels could not pass till they
were unloaded--which is very likely just; and then went on, bravely
confounding the 'kingdom of God' with heaven, the future paradise,
to show that of course no rich person could expect to carry his
riches beyond the grave--which, of course, he could not and never
did.  Various greedy sinners of the congregation drank in the
comfortable doctrine with relief.  It was worth the while having
come to church that Sunday morning!  All was plain.  The Bible, as
usual, meant nothing in particular; it was merely an obscure and
figurative school-copybook; and if a man were only respectable, he
was a man after God's own heart.

Alas! I fear not.  And though this matter of a man's services is
one for his own conscience, there are some cases in which it is
difficult to restrain the mind from judging.  Thus I shall be very
easily persuaded that a man has earned his daily bread; and if he
has but a friend or two to whom his company is delightful at heart,
I am more than persuaded at once.  But it will be very hard to
persuade me that any one has earned an income of a hundred
thousand.  What he is to his friends, he still would be if he were
made penniless to-morrow; for as to the courtiers of luxury and
power, I will neither consider them friends, nor indeed consider
them at all.  What he does for mankind there are most likely
hundreds who would do the same, as effectually for the race and as
pleasurably to themselves, for the merest fraction of this
monstrous wage.  Why it is paid, I am, therefore, unable to
conceive, and as the man pays it himself, out of funds in his
detention, I have a certain backwardness to think him honest.

At least, we have gained a very obvious point:  that WHAT A MAN
SPENDS UPON HIMSELF, HE SHALL HAVE EARNED BY SERVICES TO THE RACE.
Thence flows a principle for the outset of life, which is a little
different from that taught in the present day.  I am addressing the
middle and the upper classes; those who have already been fostered
and prepared for life at some expense; those who have some choice
before them, and can pick professions; and above all, those who are
what is called independent, and need do nothing unless pushed by
honour or ambition.  In this particular the poor are happy; among
them, when a lad comes to his strength, he must take the work that
offers, and can take it with an easy conscience.  But in the richer
classes the question is complicated by the number of opportunities
and a variety of considerations.  Here, then, this principle of
ours comes in helpfully.  The young man has to seek, not a road to
wealth, but an opportunity of service; not money, but honest work.
If he has some strong propensity, some calling of nature, some
over-weening interest in any special field of industry, inquiry, or
art, he will do right to obey the impulse; and that for two
reasons:  the first external, because there he will render the best
services; the second personal, because a demand of his own nature
is to him without appeal whenever it can be satisfied with the
consent of his other faculties and appetites.  If he has no such
elective taste, by the very principle on which he chooses any
pursuit at all he must choose the most honest and serviceable, and
not the most highly remunerated.  We have here an external problem,
not from or to ourself, but flowing from the constitution of
society; and we have our own soul with its fixed design of
righteousness.  All that can be done is to present the problem in
proper terms, and leave it to the soul of the individual.  Now, the
problem to the poor is one of necessity:  to earn wherewithal to
live, they must find remunerative labour.  But the problem to the
rich is one of honour:  having the wherewithal, they must find
serviceable labour.  Each has to earn his daily bread:  the one,
because he has not yet got it to eat; the other, who has already
eaten it, because he has not yet earned it.

Of course, what is true of bread is true of luxuries and comforts,
whether for the body or the mind.  But the consideration of
luxuries leads us to a new aspect of the whole question, and to a
second proposition no less true, and maybe no less startling, than
the last.

At the present day, we, of the easier classes, are in a state of
surfeit and disgrace after meat.  Plethora has filled us with
indifference; and we are covered from head to foot with the
callosities of habitual opulence.  Born into what is called a
certain rank, we live, as the saying is, up to our station.  We
squander without enjoyment, because our fathers squandered.  We eat
of the best, not from delicacy, but from brazen habit.  We do not
keenly enjoy or eagerly desire the presence of a luxury; we are
unaccustomed to its absence.  And not only do we squander money
from habit, but still more pitifully waste it in ostentation.  I
can think of no more melancholy disgrace for a creature who
professes either reason or pleasure for his guide, than to spend
the smallest fraction of his income upon that which he does not
desire; and to keep a carriage in which you do not wish to drive,
or a butler of whom you are afraid, is a pathetic kind of folly.
Money, being a means of happiness, should make both parties happy
when it changes hands; rightly disposed, it should be twice blessed
in its employment; and buyer and seller should alike have their
twenty shillings worth of profit out of every pound.  Benjamin
Franklin went through life an altered man, because he once paid too
dearly for a penny whistle.  My concern springs usually from a
deeper source, to wit, from having bought a whistle when I did not
want one.  I find I regret this, or would regret it if I gave
myself the time, not only on personal but on moral and
philanthropical considerations.  For, first, in a world where money
is wanting to buy books for eager students and food and medicine
for pining children, and where a large majority are starved in
their most immediate desires, it is surely base, stupid, and cruel
to squander money when I am pushed by no appetite and enjoy no
return of genuine satisfaction.  My philanthropy is wide enough in
scope to include myself; and when I have made myself happy, I have
at least one good argument that I have acted rightly; but where
that is not so, and I have bought and not enjoyed, my mouth is
closed, and I conceive that I have robbed the poor.  And, second,
anything I buy or use which I do not sincerely want or cannot
vividly enjoy, disturbs the balance of supply and demand, and
contributes to remove industrious hands from the production of what
is useful or pleasurable and to keep them busy upon ropes of sand
and things that are a weariness to the flesh.  That extravagance is
truly sinful, and a very silly sin to boot, in which we impoverish
mankind and ourselves.  It is another question for each man's
heart.  He knows if he can enjoy what he buys and uses; if he
cannot, he is a dog in the manger; nay, it he cannot, I contend he
is a thief, for nothing really belongs to a man which he cannot
use.  Proprietor is connected with propriety; and that only is the
man's which is proper to his wants and faculties.

A youth, in choosing a career, must not be alarmed by poverty.
Want is a sore thing, but poverty does not imply want.  It remains
to be seen whether with half his present income, or a third, he
cannot, in the most generous sense, live as fully as at present.
He is a fool who objects to luxuries; but he is also a fool who
does not protest against the waste of luxuries on those who do not
desire and cannot enjoy them.  It remains to be seen, by each man
who would live a true life to himself and not a merely specious
life to society, how many luxuries he truly wants and to how many
he merely submits as to a social propriety; and all these last he
will immediately forswear.  Let him do this, and he will be
surprised to find how little money it requires to keep him in
complete contentment and activity of mind and senses.  Life at any
level among the easy classes is conceived upon a principle of
rivalry, where each man and each household must ape the tastes and
emulate the display of others.  One is delicate in eating, another
in wine, a third in furniture or works of art or dress; and I, who
care nothing for any of these refinements, who am perhaps a plain
athletic creature and love exercise, beef, beer, flannel shirts and
a camp bed, am yet called upon to assimilate all these other tastes
and make these foreign occasions of expenditure my own.  It may be
cynical:  I am sure I shall be told it is selfish; but I will spend
my money as I please and for my own intimate personal
gratification, and should count myself a nincompoop indeed to lay
out the colour of a halfpenny on any fancied social decency or
duty.  I shall not wear gloves unless my hands are cold, or unless
I am born with a delight in them.  Dress is my own affair, and that
of one other in the world; that, in fact and for an obvious reason,
of any woman who shall chance to be in love with me.  I shall lodge
where I have a mind.  If I do not ask society to live with me, they
must be silent; and even if I do, they have no further right but to
refuse the invitation!  There is a kind of idea abroad that a man
must live up to his station, that his house, his table, and his
toilette, shall be in a ratio of equivalence, and equally imposing
to the world.  If this is in the Bible, the passage has eluded my
inquiries.  If it is not in the Bible, it is nowhere but in the
heart of the fool.  Throw aside this fancy.  See what you want, and
spend upon that; distinguish what you do not care about, and spend
nothing upon that.  There are not many people who can differentiate
wines above a certain and that not at all a high price.  Are you
sure you are one of these?  Are you sure you prefer cigars at
sixpence each to pipes at some fraction of a farthing?  Are you
sure you wish to keep a gig?  Do you care about where you sleep, or
are you not as much at your ease in a cheap lodging as in an
Elizabethan manor-house?  Do you enjoy fine clothes?  It is not
possible to answer these questions without a trial; and there is
nothing more obvious to my mind, than that a man who has not
experienced some ups and downs, and been forced to live more
cheaply than in his father's house, has still his education to
begin.  Let the experiment be made, and he will find to his
surprise that he has been eating beyond his appetite up to that
hour; that the cheap lodging, the cheap tobacco, the rough country
clothes, the plain table, have not only no power to damp his
spirits, but perhaps give him as keen pleasure in the using as the
dainties that he took, betwixt sleep and waking, in his former
callous and somnambulous submission to wealth.

The true Bohemian, a creature lost to view under the imaginary
Bohemians of literature, is exactly described by such a principle
of life.  The Bohemian of the novel, who drinks more than is good
for him and prefers anything to work, and wears strange clothes, is
for the most part a respectable Bohemian, respectable in
disrespectability, living for the outside, and an adventurer.  But
the man I mean lives wholly to himself, does what he wishes, and
not what is thought proper, buys what he wants for himself, and not
what is thought proper, works at what he believes he can do well
and not what will bring him in money or favour.  You may be the
most respectable of men, and yet a true Bohemian.  And the test is
this:  a Bohemian, for as poor as he may be, is always open-handed
to his friends; he knows what he can do with money and how he can
do without it, a far rarer and more useful knowledge; he has had
less, and continued to live in some contentment; and hence he cares
not to keep more, and shares his sovereign or his shilling with a
friend.  The poor, if they are generous, are Bohemian in virtue of
their birth.  Do you know where beggars go?  Not to the great
houses where people sit dazed among their thousands, but to the
doors of poor men who have seen the world; and it was the widow who
had only two mites, who cast half her fortune into the treasury.

But a young man who elects to save on dress or on lodging, or who
in any way falls out of the level of expenditure which is common to
his level in society, falls out of society altogether.  I suppose
the young man to have chosen his career on honourable principles;
he finds his talents and instincts can be best contented in a
certain pursuit; in a certain industry, he is sure that he is
serving mankind with a healthy and becoming service; and he is not
sure that he would be doing so, or doing so equally well, in any
other industry within his reach.  Then that is his true sphere in
life; not the one in which he was born to his father, but the one
which is proper to his talents and instincts.  And suppose he does
fall out of society, is that a cause of sorrow?  Is your heart so
dead that you prefer the recognition of many to the love of a few?
Do you think society loves you?  Put it to the proof.  Decline in
material expenditure, and you will find they care no more for you
than for the Khan of Tartary.  You will lose no friends.  If you
had any, you will keep them.  Only those who were friends to your
coat and equipage will disappear; the smiling faces will disappear
as by enchantment; but the kind hearts will remain steadfastly
kind.  Are you so lost, are you so dead, are you so little sure of
your own soul and your own footing upon solid fact, that you prefer
before goodness and happiness the countenance of sundry diners-out,
who will flee from you at a report of ruin, who will drop you with
insult at a shadow of disgrace, who do not know you and do not care
to know you but by sight, and whom you in your turn neither know
nor care to know in a more human manner?  Is it not the principle
of society, openly avowed, that friendship must not interfere with
business; which being paraphrased, means simply that a
consideration of money goes before any consideration of affection
known to this cold-blooded gang, that they have not even the honour
of thieves, and will rook their nearest and dearest as readily as a
stranger?  I hope I would go as far as most to serve a friend; but
I declare openly I would not put on my hat to do a pleasure to
society.  I may starve my appetites and control my temper for the
sake of those I love; but society shall take me as I choose to be,
or go without me.  Neither they nor I will lose; for where there is
no love, it is both laborious and unprofitable to associate.

But it is obvious that if it is only right for a man to spend money
on that which he can truly and thoroughly enjoy, the doctrine
applies with equal force to the rich and to the poor, to the man
who has amassed many thousands as well as to the youth precariously
beginning life.  And it may be asked, Is not this merely preparing
misers, who are not the best of company?  But the principle was
this:  that which a man has not fairly earned, and, further, that
which he cannot fully enjoy, does not belong to him, but is a part
of mankind's treasure which he holds as steward on parole.  To
mankind, then, it must be made profitable; and how this should be
done is, once more, a problem which each man must solve for
himself, and about which none has a right to judge him.  Yet there
are a few considerations which are very obvious and may here be
stated.  Mankind is not only the whole in general, but every one in
particular.  Every man or woman is one of mankind's dear
possessions; to his or her just brain, and kind heart, and active
hands, mankind intrusts some of its hopes for the future; he or she
is a possible well-spring of good acts and source of blessings to
the race.  This money which you do not need, which, in a rigid
sense, you do not want, may therefore be returned not only in
public benefactions to the race, but in private kindnesses.  Your
wife, your children, your friends stand nearest to you, and should
be helped the first.  There at least there can be little imposture,
for you know their necessities of your own knowledge.  And
consider, if all the world did as you did, and according to their
means extended help in the circle of their affections, there would
be no more crying want in times of plenty and no more cold,
mechanical charity given with a doubt and received with confusion.
Would not this simple rule make a new world out of the old and
cruel one which we inhabit?


[After two more sentences the fragment breaks off.]


FATHER DAMIEN
AN OPEN LETTER TO THE REVEREND
DR. HYDE OF HONOLULU


SYDNEY,
February 25, 1890.


Sir,--It may probably occur to you that we have met, and visited,
and conversed; on my side, with interest.  You may remember that
you have done me several courtesies, for which I was prepared to be
grateful.  But there are duties which come before gratitude, and
offences which justly divide friends, far more acquaintances.  Your
letter to the Reverend H. B. Gage is a document which, in my sight,
if you had filled me with bread when I was starving, if you had sat
up to nurse my father when he lay a-dying, would yet absolve me
from the bonds of gratitude.  You know enough, doubtless, of the
process of canonisation to be aware that, a hundred years after the
death of Damien, there will appear a man charged with the painful
office of the DEVIL'S ADVOCATE.  After that noble brother of mine,
and of all frail clay, shall have lain a century at rest, one shall
accuse, one defend him.  The circumstance is unusual that the
devil's advocate should be a volunteer, should be a member of a
sect immediately rival, and should make haste to take upon himself
his ugly office ere the bones are cold; unusual, and of a taste
which I shall leave my readers free to qualify; unusual, and to me
inspiring.  If I have at all learned the trade of using words to
convey truth and to arouse emotion, you have at last furnished me
with a subject.  For it is in the interest of all mankind, and the
cause of public decency in every quarter of the world, not only
that Damien should be righted, but that you and your letter should
be displayed at length, in their true colours, to the public eye.

To do this properly, I must begin by quoting you at large:  I shall
then proceed to criticise your utterance from several points of
view, divine and human, in the course of which I shall attempt to
draw again, and with more specification, the character of the dead
saint whom it has pleased you to vilify:  so much being done, I
shall say farewell to you for ever.


'HONOLULU,
'August 2, 1889.


'Rev. H. B. GAGE.

'Dear Brother,--In answer to your inquiries about Father Damien, I
can only reply that we who knew the man are surprised at the
extravagant newspaper laudations, as if he was a most saintly
philanthropist.  The simple truth is, he was a coarse, dirty man,
head-strong and bigoted.  He was not sent to Molokai, but went
there without orders; did not stay at the leper settlement (before
he became one himself), but circulated freely over the whole island
(less than half the island is devoted to the lepers), and he came
often to Honolulu.  He had no hand in the reforms and improvements
inaugurated, which were the work of our Board of Health, as
occasion required and means were provided.  He was not a pure man
in his relations with women, and the leprosy of which he died
should be attributed to his vices and carelessness.  Others have
done much for the lepers, our own ministers, the government
physicians, and so forth, but never with the Catholic idea of
meriting eternal life.--Yours, etc.,

'C. M. HYDE.' {1}


To deal fitly with a letter so extraordinary, I must draw at the
outset on my private knowledge of the signatory and his sect.  It
may offend others; scarcely you, who have been so busy to collect,
so bold to publish, gossip on your rivals.  And this is perhaps the
moment when I may best explain to you the character of what you are
to read:  I conceive you as a man quite beyond and below the
reticences of civility:  with what measure you mete, with that
shall it be measured you again; with you, at last, I rejoice to
feel the button off the foil and to plunge home.  And if in aught
that I shall say I should offend others, your colleagues, whom I
respect and remember with affection, I can but offer them my
regret; I am not free, I am inspired by the consideration of
interests far more large; and such pain as can be inflicted by
anything from me must be indeed trifling when compared with the
pain with which they read your letter.  It is not the hangman, but
the criminal, that brings dishonour on the house.

You belong, sir, to a sect--I believe my sect, and that in which my
ancestors laboured--which has enjoyed, and partly failed to
utilise, an exceptional advantage in the islands of Hawaii.  The
first missionaries came; they found the land already self-purged of
its old and bloody faith; they were embraced, almost on their
arrival, with enthusiasm; what troubles they supported came far
more from whites than from Hawaiians; and to these last they stood
(in a rough figure) in the shoes of God.  This is not the place to
enter into the degree or causes of their failure, such as it is.
One element alone is pertinent, and must here be plainly dealt
with.  In the course of their evangelical calling, they--or too
many of them--grew rich.  It may be news to you that the houses of
missionaries are a cause of mocking on the streets of Honolulu.  It
will at least be news to you, that when I returned your civil
visit, the driver of my cab commented on the size, the taste, and
the comfort of your home.  It would have been news certainly to
myself, had any one told me that afternoon that I should live to
drag such matter into print.  But you see, sir, how you degrade
better men to your own level; and it is needful that those who are
to judge betwixt you and me, betwixt Damien and the devil's
advocate, should understand your letter to have been penned in a
house which could raise, and that very justly, the envy and the
comments of the passers-by.  I think (to employ a phrase of yours
which I admire) it 'should be attributed' to you that you have
never visited the scene of Damien's life and death.  If you had,
and had recalled it, and looked about your pleasant rooms, even
your pen perhaps would have been stayed.

Your sect (and remember, as far as any sect avows me, it is mine)
has not done ill in a worldly sense in the Hawaiian Kingdom.  When
calamity befell their innocent parishioners, when leprosy descended
and took root in the Eight Islands, a quid pro quo was to be looked
for.  To that prosperous mission, and to you, as one of its
adornments, God had sent at last an opportunity.  I know I am
touching here upon a nerve acutely sensitive.  I know that others
of your colleagues look back on the inertia of your Church, and the
intrusive and decisive heroism of Damien, with something almost to
be called remorse.  I am sure it is so with yourself; I am
persuaded your letter was inspired by a certain envy, not
essentially ignoble, and the one human trait to be espied in that
performance.  You were thinking of the lost chance, the past day;
of that which should have been conceived and was not; of the
service due and not rendered.  Time was, said the voice in your
ear, in your pleasant room, as you sat raging and writing; and if
the words written were base beyond parallel, the rage, I am happy
to repeat--it is the only compliment I shall pay you--the rage was
almost virtuous.  But, sir, when we have failed, and another has
succeeded; when we have stood by, and another has stepped in; when
we sit and grow bulky in our charming mansions, and a plain,
uncouth peasant steps into the battle, under the eyes of God, and
succours the afflicted, and consoles the dying, and is himself
afflicted in his turn, and dies upon the field of honour--the
battle cannot be retrieved as your unhappy irritation has
suggested.  It is a lost battle, and lost for ever.  One thing
remained to you in your defeat--some rags of common honour; and
these you have made haste to cast away.

Common honour; not the honour of having done anything right, but
the honour of not having done aught conspicuously foul; the honour
of the inert:  that was what remained to you.  We are not all
expected to be Damiens; a man may conceive his duty more narrowly,
he may love his comforts better; and none will cast a stone at him
for that.  But will a gentleman of your reverend profession allow
me an example from the fields of gallantry?  When two gentlemen
compete for the favour of a lady, and the one succeeds and the
other is rejected, and (as will sometimes happen) matter damaging
to the successful rival's credit reaches the ear of the defeated,
it is held by plain men of no pretensions that his mouth is, in the
circumstance, almost necessarily closed.  Your Church and Damien's
were in Hawaii upon a rivalry to do well:  to help, to edify, to
set divine examples.  You having (in one huge instance) failed, and
Damien succeeded, I marvel it should not have occurred to you that
you were doomed to silence; that when you had been outstripped in
that high rivalry, and sat inglorious in the midst of your
wellbeing, in your pleasant room--and Damien, crowned with glories
and horrors, toiled and rotted in that pigsty of his under the
cliffs of Kalawao--you, the elect who would not, were the last man
on earth to collect and propagate gossip on the volunteer who would
and did.

I think I see you--for I try to see you in the flesh as I write
these sentences--I think I see you leap at the word pigsty, a
hyperbolical expression at the best.  'He had no hand in the
reforms,' he was 'a coarse, dirty man'; these were your own words;
and you may think it possible that I am come to support you with
fresh evidence.  In a sense, it is even so.  Damien has been too
much depicted with a conventional halo and conventional features;
so drawn by men who perhaps had not the eye to remark or the pen to
express the individual; or who perhaps were only blinded and
silenced by generous admiration, such as I partly envy for myself--
such as you, if your soul were enlightened, would envy on your
bended knees.  It is the least defect of such a method of
portraiture that it makes the path easy for the devil's advocate,
and leaves for the misuse of the slanderer a considerable field of
truth.  For the truth that is suppressed by friends is the readiest
weapon of the enemy.  The world, in your despite, may perhaps owe
you something, if your letter be the means of substituting once for
all a credible likeness for a wax abstraction.  For, if that world
at all remember you, on the day when Damien of Molokai shall be
named Saint, it will be in virtue of one work:  your letter to the
Reverend H. B. Gage.

You may ask on what authority I speak.  It was my inclement destiny
to become acquainted, not with Damien, but with Dr. Hyde.  When I
visited the lazaretto, Damien was already in his resting grave.
But such information as I have, I gathered on the spot in
conversation with those who knew him well and long:  some indeed
who revered his memory; but others who had sparred and wrangled
with him, who beheld him with no halo, who perhaps regarded him
with small respect, and through whose unprepared and scarcely
partial communications the plain, human features of the man shone
on me convincingly.  These gave me what knowledge I possess; and I
learnt it in that scene where it could be most completely and
sensitively understood--Kalawao, which you have never visited,
about which you have never so much as endeavoured to inform
yourself; for, brief as your letter is, you have found the means to
stumble into that confession.  'LESS THAN ONE-HALF of the island,'
you say, 'is devoted to the lepers.'  Molokai--'Molokai ahina,' the
'grey,' lofty, and most desolate island--along all its northern
side plunges a front of precipice into a sea of unusual profundity.
This range of cliff is, from east to west, the true end and
frontier of the island.  Only in one spot there projects into the
ocean a certain triangular and rugged down, grassy, stony, windy,
and rising in the midst into a hill with a dead crater:  the whole
bearing to the cliff that overhangs it somewhat the same relation
as a bracket to a wall.  With this hint you will now be able to
pick out the leper station on a map; you will be able to judge how
much of Molokai is thus cut off between the surf and precipice,
whether less than a half, or less than a quarter, or a fifth, or a
tenth--or, say, a twentieth; and the next time you burst into print
you will be in a position to share with us the issue of your
calculations.

I imagine you to be one of those persons who talk with cheerfulness
of that place which oxen and wain-ropes could not drag you to
behold.  You, who do not even know its situation on the map,
probably denounce sensational descriptions, stretching your limbs
the while in your pleasant parlour on Beretania Street.  When I was
pulled ashore there one early morning, there sat with me in the
boat two sisters, bidding farewell (in humble imitation of Damien)
to the lights and joys of human life.  One of these wept silently;
I could not withhold myself from joining her.  Had you been there,
it is my belief that nature would have triumphed even in you; and
as the boat drew but a little nearer, and you beheld the stairs
crowded with abominable deformations of our common manhood, and saw
yourself landing in the midst of such a population as only now and
then surrounds us in the horror of a nightmare--what a haggard eye
you would have rolled over your reluctant shoulder towards the
house on Beretania Street!  Had you gone on; had you found every
fourth face a blot upon the landscape; had you visited the hospital
and seen the butt-ends of human beings lying there almost
unrecognisable, but still breathing, still thinking, still
remembering; you would have understood that life in the lazaretto
is an ordeal from which the nerves of a man's spirit shrink, even
as his eye quails under the brightness of the sun; you would have
felt it was (even to-day) a pitiful place to visit and a hell to
dwell in.  It is not the fear of possible infection.  That seems a
little thing when compared with the pain, the pity, and the disgust
of the visitor's surroundings, and the atmosphere of affliction,
disease, and physical disgrace in which he breathes.  I do not
think I am a man more than usually timid; but I never recall the
days and nights I spent upon that island promontory (eight days and
seven nights), without heartfelt thankfulness that I am somewhere
else.  I find in my diary that I speak of my stay as a 'grinding
experience':  I have once jotted in the margin, 'HARROWING is the
word'; and when the Mokolii bore me at last towards the outer
world, I kept repeating to myself, with a new conception of their
pregnancy, those simple words of the song -


''Tis the most distressful country that ever yet was seen.'


And observe:  that which I saw and suffered from was a settlement
purged, bettered, beautified; the new village built, the hospital
and the Bishop-Home excellently arranged; the sisters, the doctor,
and the missionaries, all indefatigable in their noble tasks.  It
was a different place when Damien came there and made his great
renunciation, and slept that first night under a tree amidst his
rotting brethren:  alone with pestilence; and looking forward (with
what courage, with what pitiful sinkings of dread, God only knows)
to a lifetime of dressing sores and stumps.

You will say, perhaps, I am too sensitive, that sights as painful
abound in cancer hospitals and are confronted daily by doctors and
nurses.  I have long learned to admire and envy the doctors and the
nurses.  But there is no cancer hospital so large and populous as
Kalawao and Kalaupapa; and in such a matter every fresh case, like
every inch of length in the pipe of an organ, deepens the note of
the impression; for what daunts the onlooker is that monstrous sum
of human suffering by which he stands surrounded.  Lastly, no
doctor or nurse is called upon to enter once for all the doors of
that gehenna; they do not say farewell, they need not abandon hope,
on its sad threshold; they but go for a time to their high calling,
and can look forward as they go to relief, to recreation, and to
rest.  But Damien shut-to with his own hand the doors of his own
sepulchre.

I shall now extract three passages from my diary at Kalawao.

A.  'Damien is dead and already somewhat ungratefully remembered in
the field of his labours and sufferings.  "He was a good man, but
very officious," says one.  Another tells me he had fallen (as
other priests so easily do) into something of the ways and habits
of thought of a Kanaka; but he had the wit to recognise the fact,
and the good sense to laugh at' [over] 'it.  A plain man it seems
he was; I cannot find he was a popular.'

B.  'After Ragsdale's death' [Ragsdale was a famous Luna, or
overseer, of the unruly settlement] 'there followed a brief term of
office by Father Damien which served only to publish the weakness
of that noble man.  He was rough in his ways, and he had no
control.  Authority was relaxed; Damien's life was threatened, and
he was soon eager to resign.'

C.  'Of Damien I begin to have an idea.  He seems to have been a
man of the peasant class, certainly of the peasant type:  shrewd,
ignorant and bigoted, yet with an open mind, and capable of
receiving and digesting a reproof if it were bluntly administered;
superbly generous in the least thing as well as in the greatest,
and as ready to give his last shirt (although not without human
grumbling) as he had been to sacrifice his life; essentially
indiscreet and officious, which made him a troublesome colleague;
domineering in all his ways, which made him incurably unpopular
with the Kanakas, but yet destitute of real authority, so that his
boys laughed at him and he must carry out his wishes by the means
of bribes.  He learned to have a mania for doctoring; and set up
the Kanakas against the remedies of his regular rivals:  perhaps
(if anything matter at all in the treatment of such a disease) the
worst thing that he did, and certainly the easiest.  The best and
worst of the man appear very plainly in his dealings with Mr.
Chapman's money; he had originally laid it out' [intended to lay it
out] 'entirely for the benefit of Catholics, and even so not
wisely; but after a long, plain talk, he admitted his error fully
and revised the list.  The sad state of the boys' home is in part
the result of his lack of control; in part, of his own slovenly
ways and false ideas of hygiene.  Brother officials used to call it
"Damien's Chinatown."  "Well," they would say, "your China-town
keeps growing."  And he would laugh with perfect good-nature, and
adhere to his errors with perfect obstinacy.  So much I have
gathered of truth about this plain, noble human brother and father
of ours; his imperfections are the traits of his face, by which we
know him for our fellow; his martyrdom and his example nothing can
lessen or annul; and only a person here on the spot can properly
appreciate their greatness.'

I have set down these private passages, as you perceive, without
correction; thanks to you, the public has them in their bluntness.
They are almost a list of the man's faults, for it is rather these
that I was seeking:  with his virtues, with the heroic profile of
his life, I and the world were already sufficiently acquainted.  I
was besides a little suspicious of Catholic testimony; in no ill
sense, but merely because Damien's admirers and disciples were the
least likely to be critical.  I know you will be more suspicious
still; and the facts set down above were one and all collected from
the lips of Protestants who had opposed the father in his life.
Yet I am strangely deceived, or they build up the image of a man,
with all his weaknesses, essentially heroic, and alive with rugged
honesty, generosity, and mirth.

Take it for what it is, rough private jottings of the worst sides
of Damien's character, collected from the lips of those who had
laboured with and (in your own phrase) 'knew the man';--though I
question whether Damien would have said that he knew you.  Take it,
and observe with wonder how well you were served by your gossips,
how ill by your intelligence and sympathy; in how many points of
fact we are at one, and how widely our appreciations vary.  There
is something wrong here; either with you or me.  It is possible,
for instance, that you, who seem to have so many ears in Kalawao,
had heard of the affair of Mr. Chapman's money, and were singly
struck by Damien's intended wrong-doing.  I was struck with that
also, and set it fairly down; but I was struck much more by the
fact that he had the honesty of mind to be convinced.  I may here
tell you that it was a long business; that one of his colleagues
sat with him late into the night, multiplying arguments and
accusations; that the father listened as usual with 'perfect good-
nature and perfect obstinacy'; but at the last, when he was
persuaded--'Yes,' said he, 'I am very much obliged to you; you have
done me a service; it would have been a theft.'  There are many
(not Catholics merely) who require their heroes and saints to be
infallible; to these the story will be painful; not to the true
lovers, patrons, and servants of mankind.

And I take it, this is a type of our division; that you are one of
those who have an eye for faults and failures; that you take a
pleasure to find and publish them; and that, having found them, you
make haste to forget the overvailing virtues and the real success
which had alone introduced them to your knowledge.  It is a
dangerous frame of mind.  That you may understand how dangerous,
and into what a situation it has already brought you, we will (if
you please) go hand-in-hand through the different phrases of your
letter, and candidly examine each from the point of view of its
truth, its appositeness, and its charity.

Damien was COARSE.

It is very possible.  You make us sorry for the lepers, who had
only a coarse old peasant for their friend and father.  But you,
who were so refined, why were you not there, to cheer them with the
lights of culture?  Or may I remind you that we have some reason to
doubt if John the Baptist were genteel; and in the case of Peter,
on whose career you doubtless dwell approvingly in the pulpit, no
doubt at all he was a 'coarse, headstrong' fisherman!  Yet even in
our Protestant Bibles Peter is called Saint.

Damien was DIRTY.

He was.  Think of the poor lepers annoyed with this dirty comrade!
But the clean Dr. Hyde was at his food in a fine house.

Damien was HEADSTRONG.

I believe you are right again; and I thank God for his strong head
and heart.

Damien was BIGOTED.

I am not fond of bigots myself, because they are not fond of me.
But what is meant by bigotry, that we should regard it as a blemish
in a priest?  Damien believed his own religion with the simplicity
of a peasant or a child; as I would I could suppose that you do.
For this, I wonder at him some way off; and had that been his only
character, should have avoided him in life.  But the point of
interest in Damien, which has caused him to be so much talked about
and made him at last the subject of your pen and mine, was that, in
him, his bigotry, his intense and narrow faith, wrought potently
for good, and strengthened him to be one of the world's heroes and
exemplars.

Damien WAS NOT SENT TO MOLOKAI, BUT WENT THERE WITHOUT ORDERS.

Is this a misreading? or do you really mean the words for blame?  I
have heard Christ, in the pulpits of our Church, held up for
imitation on the ground that His sacrifice was voluntary.  Does Dr.
Hyde think otherwise?

Damien DID NOT STAY AT THE SETTLEMENT, ETC.

It is true he was allowed many indulgences.  Am I to understand
that you blame the father for profiting by these, or the officers
for granting them?  In either case, it is a mighty Spartan standard
to issue from the house on Beretania Street; and I am convinced you
will find yourself with few supporters.

Damien HAD NO HAND IN THE REFORMS, ETC.

I think even you will admit that I have already been frank in my
description of the man I am defending; but before I take you up
upon this head, I will be franker still, and tell you that perhaps
nowhere in the world can a man taste a more pleasurable sense of
contrast than when he passes from Damien's 'Chinatown' at Kalawao
to the beautiful Bishop-Home at Kalaupapa.  At this point, in my
desire to make all fair for you, I will break my rule and adduce
Catholic testimony.  Here is a passage from my diary about my visit
to the Chinatown, from which you will see how it is (even now)
regarded by its own officials:  'We went round all the dormitories,
refectories, etc.--dark and dingy enough, with a superficial
cleanliness, which he' [Mr. Dutton, the lay-brother] 'did not seek
to defend.  "It is almost decent," said he; "the sisters will make
that all right when we get them here."'  And yet I gathered it was
already better since Damien was dead, and far better than when he
was there alone and had his own (not always excellent) way.  The king
was much enraged at the astrologer, and had his head instantly cut
off. A hundred and fifty astrologers, physicians, and magicians,
came on this account, who all underwent the same fate; and their
heads were set upon poles on every gate of the city.

The princess of China's nurse had a son whose name was Marzavan,
who had been foster-brother to the princess, and brought up with
her, The friendship was so great during their childhood, and all the
time they had been together, that as they grew up, even some time
after their separation, they treated each other as brother
and sister.

Marzavan, among other studies, had from his youth been much
addicted to judicial astrology, geomancy, and the like secret arts,
wherein he became exceedingly skilful. Not satisfied with what
he had learned from masters, he travelled, and there was hardly
any person of note in any science or art, but he sought him in the
most remote cities, to obtain information, so great was his thirst
after knowledge.

After several years' absence in foreign parts, he returned to the
capital of his native country, where, seeing so many heads on the
gate by which he entered, he was exceedingly surprised, and demanded
for what reason they had been placed there; but he more particularly
inquired after the princess his foster-sister.

As he could not receive an answer to one inquiry without the other,
he heard at length a general account of what had happened, and
waited for further particulars till he could see his mother, the
princess's nurse.

Although the nurse, the mother of Marzavan, was much employed about
the princess, yet she no sooner heard her son was returned,
than she found time to come out, embrace him, and converse with
him a little. Having told him, with tears in her eyes, the unhappy
condition of the princess, and for what reason the king her father
had confined her; her son desired to know if she could not procure
him a private view of her royal mistress, without the king's
knowledge.

After some pause, she told him she could give him no answer for the
present; but if he would meet her the next day at the same hour,
she would inform him.

The nurse knowing none could approach the princess but herself;
without leave of the eunuch, who commanded the guard at the gate,
addressed: herself to him, and said, "You know I have brought up
and suckled the princess, and you may likewise have heard that
I had a daughter whom I brought up along with her. This
daughter has been since married, yet the princess still does her
the honour to love her, and wishes to see her, without any
person's observing her enter or depart."
The nurse was proceeding, but the eunuch interrupted her and
exclaimed, "Say no more, I will with pleasure do any thing to
oblige the princess; go and fetch your daughter, or send for her
about midnight,and the gate shall be open for you."
As soon as it was dark, the nurse went to Marzavan, and having
dressed him so well in women's clothes, that nobody could suspect
he was a man, carried him along with her; and the eunuch believing
it was her daughter, admitted them.

The nurse, before she presented Marzavan, went to the princess, and
said, "Madam, this is not a woman I have brought to you, it is
my son Marzavan in disguise, newly arrived from his travels; having
a great desire to kiss your hand, I hope your highness will
vouchsafe him that honour."
"What! my brother Marzavan," exclaimed the princess, with great
joy; "approach, and take off that veil; for it is not unreasonable
that a brother and a sister should see each other without covering
their faces."
Marzavan saluted her with profound respect, while, without giving
him time to speak, she continued, "I rejoice to see you returned in
good health, after so many years' absence, and without sending
any account of your welfare, even to your good mother."
"Madam," replied Marzavan, "I am infinitely obliged to your
goodness. I hoped to have heard a better account of your health
than has been given me, and which I lament to find confirmed by
your appearance.

It gives me pleasure, however, to have come so seasonably to bring
your highness that remedy which your situation requires. Should I
reap no other benefit from my studies and travels, I should think
myself amply recompensed."
Having thus spoken, Marzavan drew out of his pocket a book and
some other things, which from the account he had had from his
mother of the princess's distemper, he thought he might want. The
princess, observing these preparations, exclaimed, "What!
brother, are you one of those who believe me mad? Undeceive yourself,
and hear me."
The princess then related to Marzavan all the particulars of her
story, without omitting the least circumstance, even to the ring
which was exchanged for hers, and which she shewed him.

"I have not concealed the least incident from you," continued she;
"there is something in this business which I cannot comprehend, and
which has given occasion for some persons to think me mad. But no
one will attend to the rest, which is literally as I have
stated."
After the princess had concluded, Marzavan, filled with wonder and
astonishment, remained for some time with his eyes fixed on the
ground, without speaking a word; but at length he lifted up his
head, and said, "If it be as your highness says, and which I do
not in the least doubt, I do not despair of being able to procure
you the gratification of your wishes. But I must first entreat
your highness to arm yourself with patience, till I have travelled
over kingdoms which I have not yet visited, and when you hear of
my return, be assured the object of your desire is not far distant."

Having thus spoken,
Marzavan took leave
of the princess, and set out the next morning on his intended
travels.

He journeyed from city to city,
from province to province, and from
island to island; and in every place he visited, he could hear of
nothing but the princess Badoura (which was the princess of China's
name) and her history.

About four months after, our traveller arrived at Torf, a sea- port
town, large and populous, where the theme was changed; he no more
heard of the princess Badoura, but all the talk was of prince Kummir
al Zummaun, who was sick, and whose history greatly resembled hers.

Marzavan was extremely delighted on hearing this,
and informed himself where the prince was to be
found. There were two ways to it; one, by
land and sea; the other, by sea only, which was the shortest.

Marzavan chose the latter; and embarking on board a merchant ship,
arrived safely in sight of Shaw Zummaun's capital; but just
before it entered the port, the ship struck upon a rock, by the
unskilfulness of the pilot, and foundered: it went down in sight
of the castle, where at that time were the king and his grand
vizier.

Marzavan, who could swim well, immediately upon the ship's
sinking cast himself into the sea, and got safe on shore under the
castle, where he was soon relieved by the grand vizier's order. After
he had changed his clothes, and been well treated, he was
introduced to the grand vizier, who lead sent for him.

Marzavan being a young man of good address, the minister
received him with great politeness; and was induced, from the just
and pertinent answers he returned to the questions put to him, to
regard him with great esteem. Finding by degrees that he possessed
great variety and extent of information, he said to him, "From
what I can understand, I perceive you are no common man; you have
travelled much: would to God you had discovered some remedy for
a malady which has been long a source of great affliction at
this court."
Marzavan replied, if he knew what malady it was, he might perhaps
find a remedy applicable to it.

The grand vizier then related to him the story of prince Kummir
al Zummaun. He concealed nothing relating to his birth, which had
been so earnestly desired, his education, the wish of the king
his father to see him early married, his resistance and
extraordinary aversion from marriage, his disobeying his father
in full council, his imprisonment, his extravagancies in prison,
which were afterwards changed into a violent passion for some unknown
lady, who, he pretended, had exchanged a ring with him, though, for
his part, he verily believed there was no such person in the world.

Marzavan gave great attention to all the grand vizier said, and
was infinitely rejoiced to find that, by means of his shipwreck,
he had so fortunately lighted on the person he was seeking. He saw
no reason to doubt that the prince was the man whom the princess
of China so ardently loved, and that this princess was equally
the object of his passion. Without explaining himself farther to
the vizier, he desired to see the prince, that he might be better
able to judge of his disorder and its cure.
"Follow me," said the grand vizier, "and you will find the king
with him, who has already desired I should introduce you."

On entering the prince's chamber, the first thing Marzavan
observed was the prince upon his bed languishing, and with his
eyes shut. Notwithstanding his condition, and regardless of the
presence of the king his father, who was sitting by him, he could
not avoid exclaiming, "Heavens! was there ever a greater resemblance?"
He meant to the princess of China; for it seems the princess and
the prince were much alike.

This exclamation of Marzavan excited the prince's
curiosity; he opened his eyes and looked at him. Marzavan, who had
a ready wit, seized that opportunity, and made his compliment
in extempore verse; but in such a disguised manner, that
neither the king nor the grand vizier under stood his meaning.
He represented so exactly what had happened to him with the
princess of China, that the prince had no reason to doubt he knew
her, and could give him tidings of her. His countenance immediately
brightened up with joy.

After Marzavan had finished his compliment in verse, which surprised
Kummir al Zummaun so agreeably, the prince took the liberty of
making a sign to the king his father, to give his place to Marzavan,
and allow him to sit by him.

The king, overjoyed at this alteration, which inspired him with
hopes of his son's speedy recovery, quitted his place, and taking
Marzavan by the hand, led him to it, obliging him to sit.
He then demanded of him who he was, and whence he had come? And
upon Marzavan's answering he was a subject of China, and came from
that kingdom, the king exclaimed, "Heaven grant you may be able
to recover my son from this profound melancholy; I shall be eternally
obliged to you, and all the world shall see how handsomely I will
reward you." Having said thus, he left the prince to converse at
full liberty with the stranger, whilst he went and rejoiced with
the grand vizier on this happy incident.

Marzavan leaning down to the prince, addressed him in a low voice:
"Prince, it is time you should cease to grieve. The lady, for
whom you suffer, is the princess Badoura, daughter of Gaiour, king
of China.

This I can assure your highness from what she has told me of her
adventure, and what I have learned of yours.

She has suffered
no less on your
account than you
have on hers." Here
he related all that
he knew of the princess's story, from the night of their extraordinary
interview.

He omitted not
to acquaint him
how the king had
treated those
who had failed in
their endeavours to cure the princess of her indisposition.

"But your highness is the only person," added he, "that can cure
her effectually, and you may present yourself without fear.

However, before you undertake so long a voyage, I would have you
perfectly recovered, and then we will take what measures may
be necessary. Think then immediately of the recovery of your
health."
This account had a marvellous effect on the prince. The hopes of
speedily fulfilling his desires so much relieved him, that he
felt he had strength sufficient to rise, and begged permission
of his father to dress himself, with such an air as gave him
incredible pleasure.

Shaw Zummaun, without inquiring into the means he had used to
produce this wonderful effect, could not refrain from embracing
Marzavan, and soon after went out of the prince's chamber with the
grand vizier, to publish the agreeable tidings. He ordered public
rejoicings for several days together, gave great largesses to his
officers and the people, and alms to the poor, and caused the prisoners
to be set at liberty throughout his kingdom The joy was soon general
in the capital, and in every part of his dominions.

Kummir al Zummaun, though extremely weakened by almost continual
privation of sleep and long abstinence, soon recovered his health.
When he found himself in a condition to undertake the voyage,
he took Marzavan aside, and said, "Dear Marzavan, it is now
time to perform the promise you have made me. My impatience to
behold the charming princess, and to relieve her of the torments
she is now suffering on my account, is such, that if we do not
shortly depart, I shall relapse into my former indisposition.

One thing still afflicts me," continued he, "and that is the difficulty
I shall find, from his tender affection for me, to obtain my
father's permission to travel into a distant country. You observe
he scarcely allows me to be a moment out of his sight."
At these words the prince wept. Marzavan then replied, "I
foresaw this difficulty, and I will take care it shall not obstruct
us.
My principal design in this voyage was to cure the princess of China
of her malady, and this on account of the mutual affection which
we have borne to each other from our birth, as well as from
the zeal and affection I otherwise owe her. I should therefore
be wanting in my duty to her, if I did not use my best endeavours
to effect her cure and yours. This is then the mode I have
devised to obtain the king your father's consent.

You have not stirred abroad for some time, therefore request
his permission to go upon a hunting party with me. He will no doubt
comply. When you have obtained his leave, obtain two fleet coursers
for each of us to be got ready, one to mount, the other to change,
and leave the rest to me."
The following day the prince did as he had been instructed. He
acquainted the king he was desirous of taking the air, and,
if he pleased, would go and hunt for two or three days with
Marzavan.
The king gave his consent, but wished him not to be absent more
than one night, since too much exercise at first might impair his
health and a longer absence would make him uneasy.

He then ordered him to choose the best horses in the royal stable,
and took particular care that nothing should be wanting for his
accommodation. When all was ready, he embraced the prince, and
having recommended to Marzavan to be careful of him, he let
him go. Kummir al Zummaun and Marzavan were soon mounted, when,
to amuse the two grooms who led the spare horses, they made as if
they were going to hunt, and under this pretence got as far from
the city and out of the high road as was possible.

When night began to approach, they alighted at a caravanserai or
inn, where they supped, and slept till about midnight; when Marzavan
awakened the prince, and desired his highness to let him have his
dress, and to take another for himself, which was brought in his
baggage.

Thus equipped, they mounted the fresh horses, and after Marzavan
had taken one of the grooms' horses by the bridle, they left the
caravanserai.

They robbed Master
Chalmers, the Episcopalian minister of Dumfries, of his horse,
drank the King's health at the market cross, and then left
Dumfries. {3c}


CHAPTER III--THE MARCH OF THE REBELS


'Stay, passenger, take notice what thou reads,
At Edinburgh lie our bodies, here our heads;
Our right hands stood at Lanark, these we want,
Because with them we signed the Covenant.'
Epitaph on a Tombstone at Hamilton. {4a}


On Friday the 16th, Bailie Irvine of Dumfries came to the Council
at Edinburgh, and gave information concerning this 'horrid
rebellion.'  In the absence of Rothes, Sharpe presided--much to the
wrath of some members; and as he imagined his own safety
endangered, his measures were most energetic.  Dalzell was ordered
away to the West, the guards round the city were doubled, officers
and soldiers were forced to take the oath of allegiance, and all
lodgers were commanded to give in their names.  Sharpe, surrounded
with all these guards and precautions, trembled--trembled as he
trembled when the avengers of blood drew him from his chariot on
Magus Muir,--for he knew how he had sold his trust, how he had
betrayed his charge, and he felt that against him must their
chiefest hatred be directed, against him their direst thunder-bolts
be forged.  But even in his fear the apostate Presbyterian was
unrelenting, unpityingly harsh; he published in his manifesto no
promise of pardon, no inducement to submission.  He said, 'If you
submit not you must die,' but never added, 'If you submit you may
live!' {4b}

Meantime the insurgents proceeded on their way.  At Carsphairn they
were deserted by Captain Gray, who, doubtless in a fit of oblivion,
neglected to leave behind him the coffer containing Sir James's
money.  Who he was is a mystery, unsolved by any historian; his
papers were evidently forgeries--that, and his final flight, appear
to indicate that he was an agent of the Royalists, for either the
King or the Duke of York was heard to say, 'That, if he might have
his wish, he would have them all turn rebels and go to arms.' {4c}

Upon the 18th day of the month they left Carsphairn and marched
onwards.

Turner was always lodged by his captors at a good inn, frequently
at the best of which their halting-place could boast.  Here many
visits were paid to him by the ministers and officers of the
insurgent force.  In his description of these interviews he
displays a vein of satiric severity, admitting any kindness that
was done to him with some qualifying souvenir of former harshness,
and gloating over any injury, mistake, or folly, which it was his
chance to suffer or to hear.  He appears, notwithstanding all this,
to have been on pretty good terms with his cruel 'phanaticks,' as
the following extract sufficiently proves:

'Most of the foot were lodged about the church or churchyard, and
order given to ring bells next morning for a sermon to be preached
by Mr. Welch.  Maxwell of Morith, and Major M'Cullough invited me
to heare "that phanatick sermon" (for soe they merrilie called it).
They said that preaching might prove an effectual meane to turne
me, which they heartilie wished.  I answered to them that I was
under guards, and that if they intended to heare that sermon, it
was probable I might likewise, for it was not like my guards wold
goe to church and leave me alone at my lodgeings.  Bot to what they
said of my conversion, I said it wold be hard to turne a Turner.
Bot because I founde them in a merrie humour, I said, if I did not
come to heare Mr. Welch preach, then they might fine me in fortie
shillings Scots, which was double the suome of what I had exacted
from the phanatics.' {4d}

This took place at Ochiltree, on the 22nd day of the month.  The
following is recounted by this personage with malicious glee, and
certainly, if authentic, it is a sad proof of how chaff is mixed
with wheat, and how ignorant, almost impious, persons were engaged
in this movement; nevertheless we give it, for we wish to present
with impartiality all the alleged facts to the reader:

'Towards the evening Mr. Robinsone and Mr. Crukshank gaue me a
visite; I called for some ale purposelie to heare one of them
blesse it.  It fell Mr. Robinsone to seeke the blessing, who said
one of the most bombastick graces that ever I heard in my life.  He
summoned God Allmightie very imperiouslie to be their secondarie
(for that was his language).  "And if," said he, "thou wilt not be
our Secondarie, we will not fight for thee at all, for it is not
our cause bot thy cause; and if thou wilt not fight for our cause
and thy oune cause, then we are not obliged to fight for it.  They
say," said he, "that Dukes, Earles, and Lords are coming with the
King's General against us, bot they shall be nothing bot a
threshing to us."  This grace did more fullie satisfie me of the
folly and injustice of their cause, then the ale did quench my
thirst.' {4e}

Frequently the rebels made a halt near some roadside alehouse, or
in some convenient park, where Colonel Wallace, who had now taken
the command, would review the horse and foot, during which time
Turner was sent either into the alehouse or round the shoulder of
the hill, to prevent him from seeing the disorders which were
likely to arise.  He was, at last, on the 25th day of the month,
between Douglas and Lanark, permitted to behold their evolutions.
'I found their horse did consist of four hundreth and fortie, and
the foot of five hundreth and upwards. . . . The horsemen were
armed for most part with suord and pistoll, some onlie with suord.
The foot with musket, pike, sith (scythe), forke, and suord; and
some with suords great and long.'  He admired much the proficiency
of their cavalry, and marvelled how they had attained to it in so
short a time. {4f}

At Douglas, which they had just left on the morning of this great
wapinshaw, they were charged--awful picture of depravity!--with the
theft of a silver spoon and a nightgown.  Could it be expected that
while the whole country swarmed with robbers of every description,
such a rare opportunity for plunder should be lost by rogues--that
among a thousand men, even though fighting for religion, there
should not be one Achan in the camp?  At Lanark a declaration was
drawn up and signed by the chief rebels.  In it occurs the
following:

'The just sense whereof '--the sufferings of the country--'made us
choose, rather to betake ourselves to the fields for self-defence,
than to stay at home, burdened daily with the calamities of others,
and tortured with the fears of our own approaching misery.' {4g}

The whole body, too, swore the Covenant, to which ceremony the
epitaph at the head of this chapter seems to refer.

A report that Dalzell was approaching drove them from Lanark to
Bathgate, where, on the evening of Monday the 26th, the wearied
army stopped.  But at twelve o'clock the cry, which served them for
a trumpet, of 'Horse! horse!' and 'Mount the prisoner!' resounded
through the night-shrouded town, and called the peasants from their
well-earned rest to toil onwards in their march.  The wind howled
fiercely over the moorland; a close, thick, wetting rain descended.
Chilled to the bone, worn out with long fatigue, sinking to the
knees in mire, onward they marched to destruction.  One by one the
weary peasants fell off from their ranks to sleep, and die in the
rain-soaked moor, or to seek some house by the wayside wherein to
hide till daybreak.  One by one at first, then in gradually
increasing numbers, at every shelter that was seen, whole troops
left the waning squadrons, and rushed to hide themselves from the
ferocity of the tempest.  To right and left nought could be
descried but the broad expanse of the moor, and the figures of
their fellow-rebels, seen dimly through the murky night, plodding
onwards through the sinking moss.  Those who kept together--a
miserable few--often halted to rest themselves, and to allow their
lagging comrades to overtake them.  Then onward they went again,
still hoping for assistance, reinforcement, and supplies; onward
again, through the wind, and the rain, and the darkness--onward to
their defeat at Pentland, and their scaffold at Edinburgh.  It was
calculated that they lost one half of their army on that disastrous
night-march.

Next night they reached the village of Colinton, four miles from
Edinburgh, where they halted for the last time. {4h}


CHAPTER IV--RULLION GREEN


'From Covenanters with uplifted hands,
From Remonstrators with associate bands,
Good Lord, deliver us!'
Royalist Rhyme, KIRKTON, p. 127.


Late on the fourth night of November, exactly twenty-four days
before Rullion Green, Richard and George Chaplain, merchants in
Haddington, beheld four men, clad like West-country Whigamores,
standing round some object on the ground.  It was at the two-mile
cross, and within that distance from their homes.  At last, to
their horror, they discovered that the recumbent figure was a livid
corpse, swathed in a blood-stained winding-sheet. {5a}  Many
thought that this apparition was a portent of the deaths connected
with the Pentland Rising.

On the morning of Wednesday, the 28th of November 1666, they left
Colinton and marched to Rullion Green.  There they arrived about
sunset.  The position was a strong one.  On the summit of a bare,
heathery spur of the Pentlands are two hillocks, and between them
lies a narrow band of flat marshy ground.  On the highest of the
two mounds--that nearest the Pentlands, and on the left hand of the
main body--was the greater part of the cavalry, under Major
Learmont; on the other Barscob and the Galloway gentlemen; and in
the centre Colonel Wallace and the weak, half-armed infantry.
Their position was further strengthened by the depth of the valley
below, and the deep chasm-like course of the Rullion Burn.

The sun, going down behind the Pentlands, cast golden lights and
blue shadows on their snow-clad summits, slanted obliquely into the
rich plain before them, bathing with rosy splendour the leafless,
snow-sprinkled trees, and fading gradually into shadow in the
distance.  To the south, too, they beheld a deep-shaded
amphitheatre of heather and bracken; the course of the Esk, near
Penicuik, winding about at the foot of its gorge; the broad, brown
expanse of Maw Moss; and, fading into blue indistinctness in the
south, the wild heath-clad Peeblesshire hills.  In sooth, that
scene was fair, and many a yearning glance was cast over that
peaceful evening scene from the spot where the rebels awaited their
defeat; and when the fight was over, many a noble fellow lifted his
head from the blood-stained heather to strive with darkening
eyeballs to behold that landscape, over which, as over his life and
his cause, the shadows of night and of gloom were falling and
thickening.

It was while waiting on this spot that the fear-inspiring cry was
raised:  'The enemy!  Here come the enemy!'

Unwilling to believe their own doom--for our insurgents still hoped
for success in some negotiations for peace which had been carried
on at Colinton--they called out, 'They are some of our own.'

'They are too blacke ' (i.e. numerous), 'fie! fie! for ground to
draw up on,' cried Wallace, fully realising the want of space for
his men, and proving that it was not till after this time that his
forces were finally arranged. {5b}

First of all the battle was commenced by fifty Royalist horse sent
obliquely across the hill to attack the left wing of the rebels.
An equal number of Learmont's men met them, and, after a struggle,
drove them back.  The course of the Rullion Burn prevented almost
all pursuit, and Wallace, on perceiving it, dispatched a body of
foot to occupy both the burn and some ruined sheep-walls on the
farther side.

Dalzell changed his position, and drew up his army at the foot of
the hill, on the top of which were his foes.  He then dispatched a
mingled body of infantry and cavalry to attack Wallace's outpost,
but they also were driven back.  A third charge produced a still
more disastrous effect, for Dalzell had to check the pursuit of his
men by a reinforcement.

These repeated checks bred a panic in the Lieutenant-General's
ranks, for several of his men flung down their arms.  Urged by such
fatal symptoms, and by the approaching night, he deployed his men,
and closed in overwhelming numbers on the centre and right flank of
the insurgent army.  In the increasing twilight the burning matches
of the firelocks, shimmering on barrel, halbert, and cuirass, lent
to the approaching army a picturesque effect, like a huge, many-
armed giant breathing flame into the darkness.

Placed on an overhanging hill, Welch and Semple cried aloud, 'The
God of Jacob! The God of Jacob!' and prayed with uplifted hands for
victory. {5c}

But still the Royalist troops closed in.

Captain John Paton was observed by Dalzell, who determined to
capture him with his own hands.  Accordingly he charged forward,
presenting his pistols.  Paton fired, but the balls hopped off
Dalzell's buff coat and fell into his boot.  With the superstition
peculiar to his age, the Nonconformist concluded that his adversary
was rendered bullet-proof by enchantment, and, pulling some small
silver coins from his pocket, charged his pistol therewith.
Dalzell, seeing this, and supposing, it is likely, that Paton was
putting in larger balls, hid behind his servant, who was killed.
{5d}

Meantime the outposts were forced, and the army of Wallace was
enveloped in the embrace of a hideous boa-constrictor--tightening,
closing, crushing every semblance of life from the victim enclosed
in his toils.  The flanking parties of horse were forced in upon
the centre, and though, as even Turner grants, they fought with
desperation, a general flight was the result.

But when they fell there was none to sing their coronach or wail
the death-wail over them.  Those who sacrificed themselves for the
peace, the liberty, and the religion of their fellow-countrymen,
lay bleaching in the field of death for long, and when at last they
were buried by charity, the peasants dug up their bodies,
desecrated their graves, and cast them once more upon the open
heath for the sorry value of their winding-sheets!


Inscription on stone at Rullion Green:


HERE
AND NEAR TO
THIS PLACE LYES THE
REVEREND MR JOHN CROOKSHANK
AND MR ANDREW MCCORMICK
MINISTERS OF THE GOSPEL AND
ABOUT FIFTY OTHER TRUE COVENANTED
PRESBYTERIANS WHO WERE
KILLED IN THIS PLACE IN THEIR OWN
INOCENT SELF DEFENCE AND DEFFENCE
OF THE COVENANTED WORK OF
REFORMATION BY THOMAS DALZEEL OF BINS
UPON THE 28 OF NOVEMBER
1666.  REV. 12. 11. ERECTED
SEPT. 28 1738.


Back of stone:


A Cloud of Witnesses lyes here,
Who for Christ's Interest did appear,
For to restore true Liberty,
O'erturned then by tyranny.
And by proud Prelats who did Rage
Against the Lord's Own heritage.
They sacrificed were for the laws
Of Christ their king, his noble cause.
These heroes fought with great renown;
By falling got the Martyr's crown. {5e}


CHAPTER V--A RECORD OF BLOOD


'They cut his hands ere he was dead,
And after that struck of his head.
His blood under the altar cries
For vengeance on Christ's enemies.'
Epitaph on Tomb at Longcross of Clermont. {6a}


Master Andrew Murray, an outed minister, residing in the Potterrow,
on the morning after the defeat, heard the sounds of cheering and
the march of many feet beneath his window.  He gazed out.  With
colours flying, and with music sounding, Dalzell, victorious,
entered Edinburgh.  But his banners were dyed in blood, and a band
of prisoners were marched within his ranks.  The old man knew it
all.  That martial and triumphant strain was the death-knell of his
friends and of their cause, the rust-hued spots upon the flags were
the tokens of their courage and their death, and the prisoners were
the miserable remnant spared from death in battle to die upon the
scaffold.  Poor old man! he had outlived all joy.  Had he lived
longer he would have seen increasing torment and increasing woe; he
would have seen the clouds, then but gathering in mist, cast a more
than midnight darkness over his native hills, and have fallen a
victim to those bloody persecutions which, later, sent their red
memorials to the sea by many a burn.  By a merciful Providence all
this was spared to him--he fell beneath the first blow; and ere
four days had passed since Rullion Green, the aged minister of God
was gathered to is fathers. {6b}

When Sharpe first heard of the rebellion, he applied to Sir
Alexander Ramsay, the Provost, for soldiers to guard his house.
Disliking their occupation, the soldiers gave him an ugly time of
it.  All the night through they kept up a continuous series of
'alarms and incursions,' 'cries of "Stand!" "Give fire!"' etc.,
which forced the prelate to flee to the Castle in the morning,
hoping there to find the rest which was denied him at home. {6c}
Now, however, when all danger to himself was past, Sharpe came out
in his true colours, and scant was the justice likely to be shown
to the foes of Scottish Episcopacy when the Primate was by.  The
prisoners were lodged in Haddo's Hole, a part of St. Giles'
Cathedral, where, by the kindness of Bishop Wishart, to his credit
be it spoken, they were amply supplied with food. {6d}

Some people urged, in the Council, that the promise of quarter
which had been given on the field of battle should protect the
lives of the miserable men.  Sir John Gilmoure, the greatest
lawyer, gave no opinion--certainly a suggestive circumstance--but
Lord Lee declared that this would not interfere with their legal
trial, 'so to bloody executions they went.' {6e}  To the number of
thirty they were condemned and executed; while two of them, Hugh
M'Kail, a young minister, and Neilson of Corsack, were tortured
with the boots.

The goods of those who perished were confiscated, and their bodies
were dismembered and distributed to different parts of the country;
'the heads of Major M'Culloch and the two Gordons,' it was
resolved, says Kirkton, 'should be pitched on the gate of
Kirkcudbright; the two Hamiltons and Strong's head should be
affixed at Hamilton, and Captain Arnot's sett on the Watter Gate at
Edinburgh.  The armes of all the ten, because they hade with
uplifted hands renewed the Covenant at Lanark, were sent to the
people of that town to expiate that crime, by placing these arms on
the top of the prison.' {6f}  Among these was John Neilson, the
Laird of Corsack, who saved Turner's life at Dumfries; in return
for which service Sir James attempted, though without success, to
get the poor man reprieved.  One of the condemned died of his
wounds between the day of condemnation and the day of execution.  '
None of them,' says Kirkton, 'would save their life by taking the
declaration and renouncing the Covenant, though it was offered to
them. . . . But never men died in Scotland so much lamented by the
people, not only spectators, but those in the country.  When
Knockbreck and his brother were turned over, they clasped each
other in their armes, and so endured the pangs of death.  When
Humphrey Colquhoun died, he spoke not like an ordinary citizen, but
like a heavenly minister, relating his comfortable Christian
experiences, and called for his Bible, and laid it on his wounded
arm, and read John iii. 8, and spoke upon it to the admiration of
all.  But most of all, when Mr. M'Kail died, there was such a
lamentation as was never known in Scotland before; not one dry
cheek upon all the street, or in all the numberless windows in the
mercate place.' {6g}

The following passage from this speech speaks for itself and its
author:

'Hereafter I will not talk with flesh and blood, nor think on the
world's consolations.  Farewell to all my friends, whose company
hath been refreshful to me in my pilgrimage.  I have done with the
light of the sun and the moon; welcome eternal light, eternal life,
everlasting love, everlasting praise, everlasting glory.  Praise to
Him that sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb for ever!  Bless the
Lord, O my soul, that hath pardoned all my iniquities in the blood
of His Son, and healed all my diseases.  Bless Him, O all ye His
angels that excel in strength, ye ministers of His that do His
pleasure.  Bless the Lord, O my soul!' {6h}

After having ascended the gallows ladder he again broke forth in
the following words of touching eloquence:  'And now I leave off to
speak any more to creatures, and begin my intercourse with God,
which shall never be broken off.  Farewell father and mother,
friends and relations!  Farewell the world and all delights!
Farewell meat and drink!  Farewell sun, moon, and stars!--Welcome
God and Father!  Welcome sweet Jesus Christ, the Mediator of the
new covenant!  Welcome blessed Spirit of grace and God of all
consolation!  Welcome glory!  Welcome eternal life!  Welcome
Death!' {6i}

At Glasgow, too, where some were executed, they caused the soldiers
to beat the drums and blow the trumpets on their closing ears.
Hideous refinement of revenge!  Even the last words which drop from
the lips of a dying man--words surely the most sincere and the most
unbiassed which mortal mouth can utter--even these were looked upon
as poisoned and as poisonous.  'Drown their last accents,' was the
cry, 'lest they should lead the crowd to take their part, or at the
least to mourn their doom!' {6j}  But, after all, perhaps it was
more merciful than one would think--unintentionally so, of course;
perhaps the storm of harsh and fiercely jubilant noises, the
clanging of trumpets, the rattling of drums, and the hootings and
jeerings of an unfeeling mob, which were the last they heard on
earth, might, when the mortal fight was over, when the river of
death was passed, add tenfold sweetness to the hymning of the
angels, tenfold peacefulness to the shores which they had reached.

Not content with the cruelty of these executions, some even of the
peasantry, though these were confined to the shire of Mid-Lothian,
pursued, captured, plundered, and murdered the miserable fugitives
who fell in their way.  One strange story have we of these times of
blood and persecution:  Kirkton the historian and popular tradition
tell us alike of a flame which often would arise from the grave, in
a moss near Carnwath, of some of those poor rebels:  of how it
crept along the ground; of how it covered the house of their
murderer; and of how it scared him with its lurid glare.

Hear Daniel Defoe:  {6k}

'If the poor people were by these insupportable violences made
desperate, and driven to all the extremities of a wild despair, who
can justly reflect on them when they read in the Word of God "That
oppression makes a wise man mad"?  And therefore were there no
other original of the insurrection known by the name of the Rising
of Pentland, it was nothing but what the intolerable oppressions of
those times might have justified to all the world, nature having
dictated to all people a right of defence when illegally and
arbitrarily attacked in a manner not justifiable either by laws of
nature, the laws of God, or the laws of the country.'

Bear this remonstrance of Defoe's in mind, and though it is the
fashion of the day to jeer and to mock, to execrate and to contemn,
the noble band of Covenanters--though the bitter laugh at their
old-world religious views, the curl of the lip at their merits, and
the chilling silence on their bravery and their determination, are
but too rife through all society--be charitable to what was evil
and honest to what was good about the Pentland insurgents, who
fought for life and liberty, for country and religion, on the 28th
of November 1666, now just two hundred years ago.


EDINBURGH, 28th November 1866.


THE DAY AFTER TO-MORROW


History is much decried; it is a tissue of errors, we are told, no
doubt correctly; and rival historians expose each other's blunders
with gratification.  Yet the worst historian has a clearer view of
the period he studies than the best of us can hope to form of that
in which we live.  The obscurest epoch is to-day; and that for a
thousand reasons of inchoate tendency, conflicting report, and
sheer mass and multiplicity of experience; but chiefly, perhaps, by
reason of an insidious shifting of landmarks.  Parties and ideas
continually move, but not by measurable marches on a stable course;
the political soil itself steals forth by imperceptible degrees,
like a travelling glacier, carrying on its bosom not only political
parties but their flag-posts and cantonments; so that what appears
to be an eternal city founded on hills is but a flying island of
Laputa.  It is for this reason in particular that we are all
becoming Socialists without knowing it; by which I would not in the
least refer to the acute case of Mr. Hyndman and his horn-blowing
supporters, sounding their trumps of a Sunday within the walls of
our individualist Jericho--but to the stealthy change that has come
over the spirit of Englishmen and English legislation.  A little
while ago, and we were still for liberty; 'crowd a few more
thousands on the bench of Government,' we seemed to cry; 'keep her
head direct on liberty, and we cannot help but come to port.'  This
is over; laisser faire declines in favour; our legislation grows
authoritative, grows philanthropical, bristles with new duties and
new penalties, and casts a spawn of inspectors, who now begin,
note-book in hand, to darken the face of England.  It may be right
or wrong, we are not trying that; but one thing it is beyond doubt:
it is Socialism in action, and the strange thing is that we
scarcely know it.

Liberty has served us a long while, and it may be time to seek new
altars.  Like all other principles, she has been proved to be self-
exclusive in the long run.  She has taken wages besides (like all
other virtues) and dutifully served Mammon; so that many things we
were accustomed to admire as the benefits of freedom and common to
all were truly benefits of wealth, and took their value from our
neighbours' poverty.  A few shocks of logic, a few disclosures (in
the journalistic phrase) of what the freedom of manufacturers,
landlords, or shipowners may imply for operatives, tenants, or
seamen, and we not unnaturally begin to turn to that other pole of
hope, beneficent tyranny.  Freedom, to be desirable, involves
kindness, wisdom, and all the virtues of the free; but the free man
as we have seen him in action has been, as of yore, only the master
of many helots; and the slaves are still ill-fed, ill-clad, ill-
taught, ill-housed, insolently treated, and driven to their mines
and workshops by the lash of famine.  So much, in other men's
affairs, we have begun to see clearly; we have begun to despair of
virtue in these other men, and from our seat in Parliament begin to
discharge upon them, thick as arrows, the host of our inspectors.
The landlord has long shaken his head over the manufacturer; those
who do business on land have lost all trust in the virtues of the
shipowner; the professions look askance upon the retail traders and
have even started their co-operative stores to ruin them; and from
out the smoke-wreaths of Birmingham a finger has begun to write
upon the wall the condemnation of the landlord.  Thus, piece by
piece, do we condemn each other, and yet not perceive the
conclusion, that our whole estate is somewhat damnable.  Thus,
piece by piece, each acting against his neighbour, each sawing away
the branch on which some other interest is seated, do we apply in
detail our Socialistic remedies, and yet not perceive that we are
all labouring together to bring in Socialism at large.  A tendency
so stupid and so selfish is like to prove invincible; and if
Socialism be at all a practicable rule of life, there is every
chance that our grand-children will see the day and taste the
pleasures of existence in something far liker an ant-heap than any
previous human polity.  And this not in the least because of the
voice of Mr. Hyndman or the horns of his followers; but by the mere
glacier movement of the political soil, bearing forward on its
bosom, apparently undisturbed, the proud camps of Whig and Tory.
If Mr. Hyndman were a man of keen humour, which is far from my
conception of his character, he might rest from his troubling and
look on:  the walls of Jericho begin already to crumble and
dissolve.  That great servile war, the Armageddon of money and
numbers, to which we looked forward when young, becomes more and
more unlikely; and we may rather look to see a peaceable and
blindfold evolution, the work of dull men immersed in political
tactics and dead to political results.

The principal scene of this comedy lies, of course, in the House of
Commons; it is there, besides, that the details of this new
evolution (if it proceed) will fall to be decided; so that the
state of Parliament is not only diagnostic of the present but
fatefully prophetic of the future.  Well, we all know what
Parliament is, and we are all ashamed of it.  We may pardon it some
faults, indeed, on the ground of Irish obstruction--a bitter trial,
which it supports with notable good humour.  But the excuse is
merely local; it cannot apply to similar bodies in America and
France; and what are we to say of these?  President Cleveland's
letter may serve as a picture of the one; a glance at almost any
paper will convince us of the weakness of the other.  Decay appears
to have seized on the organ of popular government in every land;
and this just at the moment when we begin to bring to it, as to an
oracle of justice, the whole skein of our private affairs to be
unravelled, and ask it, like a new Messiah, to take upon itself our
frailties and play for us the part that should be played by our own
virtues.  For that, in few words, is the case.  We cannot trust
ourselves to behave with decency; we cannot trust our consciences;
and the remedy proposed is to elect a round number of our
neighbours, pretty much at random, and say to these:  'Be ye our
conscience; make laws so wise, and continue from year to year to
administer them so wisely, that they shall save us from ourselves
and make us righteous and happy, world without end.  Amen.'  And
who can look twice at the British Parliament and then seriously
bring it such a task?  I am not advancing this as an argument
against Socialism:  once again, nothing is further from my mind.
There are great truths in Socialism, or no one, not even Mr.
Hyndman, would be found to hold it; and if it came, and did one-
tenth part of what it offers, I for one should make it welcome.
But if it is to come, we may as well have some notion of what it
will be like; and the first thing to grasp is that our new polity
will be designed and administered (to put it courteously) with
something short of inspiration.  It will be made, or will grow, in
a human parliament; and the one thing that will not very hugely
change is human nature.  The Anarchists think otherwise, from which
it is only plain that they have not carried to the study of history
the lamp of human sympathy.

Given, then, our new polity, with its new waggon-load of laws, what
headmarks must we look for in the life?  We chafe a good deal at
that excellent thing, the income-tax, because it brings into our
affairs the prying fingers, and exposes us to the tart words, of
the official.  The official, in all degrees, is already something
of a terror to many of us.  I would not willingly have to do with
even a police-constable in any other spirit than that of kindness.
I still remember in my dreams the eye-glass of a certain attache at
a certain embassy--an eyeglass that was a standing indignity to all
on whom it looked; and my next most disagreeable remembrance is of
a bracing, Republican postman in the city of San Francisco.  I
lived in that city among working folk, and what my neighbours
accepted at the postman's hands--nay, what I took from him myself--
it is still distasteful to recall.  The bourgeois, residing in the
upper parts of society, has but few opportunities of tasting this
peculiar bowl; but about the income-tax, as I have said, or perhaps
about a patent, or in the halls of an embassy at the hands of my
friend of the eye-glass, he occasionally sets his lips to it; and
he may thus imagine (if he has that faculty of imagination, without
which most faculties are void) how it tastes to his poorer
neighbours, who must drain it to the dregs.  In every contact with
authority, with their employer, with the police, with the School
Board officer, in the hospital, or in the workhouse, they have
equally the occasion to appreciate the light-hearted civility of
the man in office; and as an experimentalist in several out-of-the-
way provinces of life, I may say it has but to be felt to be
appreciated.  Well, this golden age of which we are speaking will
be the golden age of officials.  In all our concerns it will be
their beloved duty to meddle, with what tact, with what obliging
words, analogy will aid us to imagine.  It is likely these
gentlemen will be periodically elected; they will therefore have
their turn of being underneath, which does not always sweeten men's
conditions.  The laws they will have to administer will be no
clearer than those we know to-day, and the body which is to
regulate their administration no wiser than the British Parliament.
So that upon all hands we may look for a form of servitude most
galling to the blood--servitude to many and changing masters, and
for all the slights that accompany the rule of jack-in-office.  And
if the Socialistic programme be carried out with the least fulness,
we shall have lost a thing, in most respects not much to be
regretted, but as a moderator of oppression, a thing nearly
invaluable--the newspaper.  For the independent journal is a
creature of capital and competition; it stands and falls with
millionaires and railway bonds and all the abuses and glories of
to-day; and as soon as the State has fairly taken its bent to
authority and philanthropy, and laid the least touch on private
property, the days of the independent journal are numbered.  State
railways may be good things and so may State bakeries; but a State
newspaper will never be a very trenchant critic of the State
officials.

But again, these officials would have no sinecure.  Crime would
perhaps be less, for some of the motives of crime we may suppose
would pass away.  But if Socialism were carried out with any
fulness, there would be more contraventions.  We see already new
sins ringing up like mustard--School Board sins, factory sins,
Merchant Shipping Act sins--none of which I would be thought to
except against in particular, but all of which, taken together,
show us that Socialism can be a hard master even in the beginning.
If it go on to such heights as we hear proposed and lauded, if it
come actually to its ideal of the ant-heap, ruled with iron
justice, the number of new contraventions will be out of all
proportion multiplied.  Take the case of work alone.  Man is an
idle animal.  He is at least as intelligent as the ant; but
generations of advisers have in vain recommended him the ant's
example.  Of those who are found truly indefatigable in business,
some are misers; some are the practisers of delightful industries,
like gardening; some are students, artists, inventors, or
discoverers, men lured forward by successive hopes; and the rest
are those who live by games of skill or hazard--financiers,
billiard-players, gamblers, and the like.  But in unloved toils,
even under the prick of necessity, no man is continually sedulous.
Once eliminate the fear of starvation, once eliminate or bound the
hope of riches, and we shall see plenty of skulking and
malingering.  Society will then be something not wholly unlike a
cotton plantation in the old days; with cheerful, careless,
demoralised slaves, with elected overseers, and, instead of the
planter, a chaotic popular assembly.  If the blood be purposeful
and the soil strong, such a plantation may succeed, and be, indeed,
a busy ant-heap, with full granaries and long hours of leisure.
But even then I think the whip will be in the overseer's hands, and
not in vain.  For, when it comes to be a question of each man doing
his own share or the rest doing more, prettiness of sentiment will
be forgotten.  To dock the skulker's food is not enough; many will
rather eat haws and starve on petty pilferings than put their
shoulder to the wheel for one hour daily.  For such as these, then,
the whip will be in the overseer's hand; and his own sense of
justice and the superintendence of a chaotic popular assembly will
be the only checks on its employment.  Now, you may be an
industrious man and a good citizen, and yet not love, nor yet be
loved by, Dr. Fell the inspector.  It is admitted by private
soldiers that the disfavour of a sergeant is an evil not to be
combated; offend the sergeant, they say, and in a brief while you
will either be disgraced or have deserted.  And the sergeant can no
longer appeal to the lash.  But if these things go on, we shall
see, or our sons shall see, what it is to have offended an
inspector.

This for the unfortunate.  But with the fortunate also, even those
whom the inspector loves, it may not be altogether well.  It is
concluded that in such a state of society, supposing it to be
financially sound, the level of comfort will be high.  It does not
follow:  there are strange depths of idleness in man, a too-easily-
got sufficiency, as in the case of the sago-eaters, often quenching
the desire for all besides; and it is possible that the men of the
richest ant-heaps may sink even into squalor.  But suppose they do
not; suppose our tricksy instrument of human nature, when we play
upon it this new tune, should respond kindly; suppose no one to be
damped and none exasperated by the new conditions, the whole
enterprise to be financially sound--a vaulting supposition--and all
the inhabitants to dwell together in a golden mean of comfort:  we
have yet to ask ourselves if this be what man desire, or if it be
what man will even deign to accept for a continuance.  It is
certain that man loves to eat, it is not certain that he loves that
only or that best.  He is supposed to love comfort; it is not a
love, at least, that he is faithful to.  He is supposed to love
happiness; it is my contention that he rather loves excitement.
Danger, enterprise, hope, the novel, the aleatory, are dearer to
man than regular meals.  He does not think so when he is hungry,
but he thinks so again as soon as he is fed; and on the hypothesis
of a successful ant-heap, he would never go hungry.  It would be
always after dinner in that society, as, in the land of the Lotos-
eaters, it was always afternoon; and food, which, when we have it
not, seems all-important, drops in our esteem, as soon as we have
it, to a mere prerequisite of living.

That for which man lives is not the same thing for all individuals
nor in all ages; yet it has a common base; what he seeks and what
he must have is that which will seize and hold his attention.
Regular meals and weatherproof lodgings will not do this long.
Play in its wide sense, as the artificial induction of sensation,
including all games and all arts, will, indeed, go far to keep him
conscious of himself; but in the end he wearies for realities.
Study or experiment, to some rare natures, is the unbroken pastime
of a life.  These are enviable natures; people shut in the house by
sickness often bitterly envy them; but the commoner man cannot
continue to exist upon such altitudes:  his feet itch for physical
adventure; his blood boils for physical dangers, pleasures, and
triumphs; his fancy, the looker after new things, cannot continue
to look for them in books and crucibles, but must seek them on the
breathing stage of life.  Pinches, buffets, the glow of hope, the
shock of disappointment, furious contention with obstacles:  these
are the true elixir for all vital spirits, these are what they seek
alike in their romantic enterprises and their unromantic
dissipations.  When they are taken in some pinch closer than the
common, they cry, 'Catch me here again!' and sure enough you catch
them there again--perhaps before the week is out.  It is as old as
Robinson Crusoe; as old as man.  Our race has not been strained for
all these ages through that sieve of dangers that we call Natural
Selection, to sit down with patience in the tedium of safety; the
voices of its fathers call it forth.  Already in our society as it
exists, the bourgeois is too much cottoned about for any zest in
living; he sits in his parlour out of reach of any danger, often
out of reach of any vicissitude but one of health; and there he
yawns.  If the people in the next villa took pot-shots at him, he
might be killed indeed, but so long as he escaped he would find his
blood oxygenated and his views of the world brighter.  If Mr.
Mallock, on his way to the publishers, should have his skirts
pinned to a wall by a javelin, it would not occur to him--at least
for several hours--to ask if life were worth living; and if such
peril were a daily matter, he would ask it never more; he would
have other things to think about, he would be living indeed--not
lying in a box with cotton, safe, but immeasurably dull.  The
aleatory, whether it touch life, or fortune, or renown--whether we
explore Africa or only toss for halfpence--that is what I conceive
men to love best, and that is what we are seeking to exclude from
men's existences.  Of all forms of the aleatory, that which most
commonly attends our working men--the danger of misery from want of
work--is the least inspiriting:  it does not whip the blood, it
does not evoke the glory of contest; it is tragic, but it is
passive; and yet, in so far as it is aleatory, and a peril sensibly
touching them, it does truly season the men's lives.  Of those who
fail, I do not speak--despair should be sacred; but to those who
even modestly succeed, the changes of their life bring interest:  a
job found, a shilling saved, a dainty earned, all these are wells
of pleasure springing afresh for the successful poor; and it is not
from these but from the villa-dweller that we hear complaints of
the unworthiness of life.  Much, then, as the average of the
proletariat would gain in this new state of life, they would also
lose a certain something, which would not be missed in the
beginning, but would be missed progressively and progressively
lamented.  Soon there would be a looking back:  there would be
tales of the old world humming in young men's ears, tales of the
tramp and the pedlar, and the hopeful emigrant.  And in the stall-
fed life of the successful ant-heap--with its regular meals,
regular duties, regular pleasures, an even course of life, and fear
excluded--the vicissitudes, delights, and havens of to-day will
seem of epic breadth.  This may seem a shallow observation; but the
springs by which men are moved lie much on the surface.  Bread, I
believe, has always been considered first, but the circus comes
close upon its heels.  Bread we suppose to be given amply; the cry
for circuses will be the louder, and if the life of our descendants
be such as we have conceived, there are two beloved pleasures on
which they will be likely to fall back:  the pleasures of intrigue
and of sedition.

In all this I have supposed the ant-heap to be financially sound.
I am no economist, only a writer of fiction; but even as such, I
know one thing that bears on the economic question--I know the
imperfection of man's faculty for business.  The Anarchists, who
count some rugged elements of common sense among what seem to me
their tragic errors, have said upon this matter all that I could
wish to say, and condemned beforehand great economical polities.
So far it is obvious that they are right; they may be right also in
predicting a period of communal independence, and they may even be
right in thinking that desirable.  But the rise of communes is none
the less the end of economic equality, just when we were told it
was beginning.  Communes will not be all equal in extent, nor in
quality of soil, nor in growth of population; nor will the surplus
produce of all be equally marketable.  It will be the old story of
competing interests, only with a new unit; and, as it appears to
me, a new, inevitable danger.  For the merchant and the
manufacturer, in this new world, will be a sovereign commune; it is
a sovereign power that will see its crops undersold, and its
manufactures worsted in the market.  And all the more dangerous
that the sovereign power should be small.  Great powers are slow to
stir; national affronts, even with the aid of newspapers, filter
slowly into popular consciousness; national losses are so unequally
shared, that one part of the population will be counting its gains
while another sits by a cold hearth.  But in the sovereign commune
all will be centralised and sensitive.  When jealousy springs up,
when (let us say) the commune of Poole has overreached the commune
of Dorchester, irritation will run like quicksilver throughout the
body politic; each man in Dorchester will have to suffer directly
in his diet and his dress; even the secretary, who drafts the
official correspondence, will sit down to his task embittered, as a
man who has dined ill and may expect to dine worse; and thus a
business difference between communes will take on much the same
colour as a dispute between diggers in the lawless West, and will
lead as directly to the arbitrament of blows.  So that the
establishment of the communal system will not only reintroduce all
the injustices and heart-burnings of economic inequality, but will,
in all human likelihood, inaugurate a world of hedgerow warfare.
Dorchester will march on Poole, Sherborne on Dorchester, Wimborne
on both; the waggons will be fired on as they follow the highway,
the trains wrecked on the lines, the ploughman will go armed into
the field of tillage; and if we have not a return of ballad
literature, the local press at least will celebrate in a high vein
the victory of Cerne Abbas or the reverse of Toller Porcorum.  At
least this will not be dull; when I was younger, I could have
welcomed such a world with relief; but it is the New-Old with a
vengeance, and irresistibly suggests the growth of military powers
and the foundation of new empires.


COLLEGE PAPERS


CHAPTER I--EDINBURGH STUDENTS IN 1824


On the 2nd of January 1824 was issued the prospectus of the Lapsus
Linguae; or, the College Tatler; and on the 7th the first number
appeared.  On Friday the 2nd of April 'Mr. Tatler became
speechless.'  Its history was not all one success; for the editor
(who applies to himself the words of Iago, 'I am nothing if I am
not critical') overstepped the bounds of caution, and found himself
seriously embroiled with the powers that were.  There appeared in
No. XVI. a most bitter satire upon Sir John Leslie, in which he was
compared to Falstaff, charged with puffing himself, and very
prettily censured for publishing only the first volume of a class-
book, and making all purchasers pay for both.  Sir John Leslie took
up the matter angrily, visited Carfrae the publisher, and
threatened him with an action, till he was forced to turn the
hapless Lapsus out of doors.  The maltreated periodical found
shelter in the shop of Huie, Infirmary Street; and No. XVII. was
duly issued from the new office.  No. XVII. beheld Mr. Tatler's
humiliation, in which, with fulsome apology and not very credible
assurances of respect and admiration, he disclaims the article in
question, and advertises a new issue of No. XVI. with all
objectionable matter omitted.  This, with pleasing euphemism, he
terms in a later advertisement, 'a new and improved edition.'  This
was the only remarkable adventure of Mr. Tatler's brief existence;
unless we consider as such a silly Chaldee manuscript in imitation
of Blackwood, and a letter of reproof from a divinity student on
the impiety of the same dull effusion.  He laments the near
approach of his end in pathetic terms.  'How shall we summon up
sufficient courage,' says he, 'to look for the last time on our
beloved little devil and his inestimable proof-sheet?  How shall we
be able to pass No. 14 Infirmary Street and feel that all its
attractions are over?  How shall we bid farewell for ever to that
excellent man, with the long greatcoat, wooden leg and wooden
board, who acts as our representative at the gate of Alma Mater?'
But alas! he had no choice:  Mr. Tatler, whose career, he says
himself, had been successful, passed peacefully away, and has ever
since dumbly implored 'the bringing home of bell and burial.'

Alter et idem.  A very different affair was the Lapsus Linguae from
the Edinburgh University Magazine.  The two prospectuses alone,
laid side by side, would indicate the march of luxury and the
repeal of the paper duty.  The penny bi-weekly broadside of session
1828-4 was almost wholly dedicated to Momus.  Epigrams, pointless
letters, amorous verses, and University grievances are the
continual burthen of the song.  But Mr. Tatler was not without a
vein of hearty humour; and his pages afford what is much better:
to wit, a good picture of student life as it then was.  The
students of those polite days insisted on retaining their hats in
the class-room.  There was a cab-stance in front of the College;
and 'Carriage Entrance' was posted above the main arch, on what the
writer pleases to call 'coarse, unclassic boards.'  The benches of
the 'Speculative' then, as now, were red; but all other Societies
(the 'Dialectic' is the only survivor) met downstairs, in some
rooms of which it is pointedly said that 'nothing else could
conveniently be made of them.'  However horrible these dungeons may
have been, it is certain that they were paid for, and that far too
heavily for the taste of session 1823-4, which found enough calls
upon its purse for porter and toasted cheese at Ambrose's, or
cranberry tarts and ginger-wine at Doull's.  Duelling was still a
possibility; so much so that when two medicals fell to fisticuffs
in Adam Square, it was seriously hinted that single combat would be
the result.  Last and most wonderful of all, Gall and Spurzheim
were in every one's mouth; and the Law student, after having
exhausted Byron's poetry and Scott's novels, informed the ladies of
his belief in phrenology.  In the present day he would dilate on
'Red as a rose is she,' and then mention that he attends Old
Greyfriars', as a tacit claim to intellectual superiority.  I do
not know that the advance is much.

But Mr. Tatler's best performances were three short papers in which
he hit off pretty smartly the idiosyncrasies of the 'Divinity,' the
'Medical,' and the 'Law' of session 1823-4.  The fact that there
was no notice of the 'Arts' seems to suggest that they stood in the
same intermediate position as they do now--the epitome of student-
kind.  Mr. Tatler's satire is, on the whole, good-humoured, and has
not grown superannuated in ALL its limbs.  His descriptions may
limp at some points, but there are certain broad traits that apply
equally well to session 1870-1.  He shows us the DIVINITY of the
period--tall, pale, and slender--his collar greasy, and his coat
bare about the seams--'his white neckcloth serving four days, and
regularly turned the third'--'the rim of his hat deficient in
wool'--and 'a weighty volume of theology under his arm.'  He was
the man to buy cheap 'a snuff-box, or a dozen of pencils, or a six-
bladed knife, or a quarter of a hundred quills,' at any of the
public sale-rooms.  He was noted for cheap purchases, and for
exceeding the legal tender in halfpence.  He haunted 'the darkest
and remotest corner of the Theatre Gallery.'  He was to be seen
issuing from 'aerial lodging-houses.'  Withal, says mine author,
'there were many good points about him:  he paid his landlady's
bill, read his Bible, went twice to church on Sunday, seldom swore,
was not often tipsy, and bought the Lapsus Linguae.'

The MEDICAL, again, 'wore a white greatcoat, and consequently
talked loud'--(there is something very delicious in that
CONSEQUENTLY).  He wore his hat on one side.  He was active,
volatile, and went to the top of Arthur's Seat on the Sunday
forenoon.  He was as quiet in a debating society as he was loud in
the streets.  He was reckless and imprudent:  yesterday he insisted
on your sharing a bottle of claret with him (and claret was claret
then, before the cheap-and-nasty treaty), and to-morrow he asks you
for the loan of a penny to buy the last number of the Lapsus.

The student of LAW, again, was a learned man.  'He had turned over
the leaves of Justinian's Institutes, and knew that they were
written in Latin.  He was well acquainted with the title-page of
Blackstone's Commentaries, and argal (as the gravedigger in Hamlet
says) he was not a person to be laughed at.'  He attended the
Parliament House in the character of a critic, and could give you
stale sneers at all the celebrated speakers.  He was the terror of
essayists at the Speculative or the Forensic.  In social qualities
he seems to have stood unrivalled.  Even in the police-office we
find him shining with undiminished lustre.  'If a CHARLIE should
find him rather noisy at an untimely hour, and venture to take him
into custody, he appears next morning like a Daniel come to
judgment.  He opens his mouth to speak, and the divine precepts of
unchanging justice and Scots law flow from his tongue.  The
magistrate listens in amazement, and fines him only a couple of
guineas.'

Such then were our predecessors and their College Magazine.
Barclay, Ambrose, Young Amos, and Fergusson were to them what the
Cafe, the Rainbow, and Rutherford's are to us.  An hour's reading
in these old pages absolutely confuses us, there is so much that is
similar and so much that is different; the follies and amusements
are so like our own, and the manner of frolicking and enjoying are
so changed, that one pauses and looks about him in philosophic
judgment.  The muddy quadrangle is thick with living students; but
in our eyes it swarms also with the phantasmal white greatcoats and
tilted hats of 1824.  Two races meet:  races alike and diverse.
Two performances are played before our eyes; but the change seems
merely of impersonators, of scenery, of costume.  Plot and passion
are the same.  It is the fall of the spun shilling whether seventy-
one or twenty-four has the best of it.

In a future number we hope to give a glance at the individualities
of the present, and see whether the cast shall be head or tail--
whether we or the readers of the Lapsus stand higher in the
balance.


CHAPTER II--THE MODERN STUDENT CONSIDERED GENERALLY


We have now reached the difficult portion of our task.  Mr. Tatler,
for all that we care, may have been as virulent as he liked about
the students of a former; but for the iron to touch our sacred
selves, for a brother of the Guild to betray its most privy
infirmities, let such a Judas look to himself as he passes on his
way to the Scots Law or the Diagnostic, below the solitary lamp at
the corner of the dark quadrangle.  We confess that this idea
alarms us.  We enter a protest.  We bind ourselves over verbally to
keep the peace.  We hope, moreover, that having thus made you
secret to our misgivings, you will excuse us if we be dull, and set
that down to caution which you might before have charged to the
account of stupidity.

The natural tendency of civilisation is to obliterate those
distinctions which are the best salt of life.  All the fine old
professional flavour in language has evaporated.  Your very
gravedigger has forgotten his avocation in his electorship, and
would quibble on the Franchise over Ophelia's grave, instead of
more appropriately discussing the duration of bodies under ground.
From this tendency, from this gradual attrition of life, in which
everything pointed and characteristic is being rubbed down, till
the whole world begins to slip between our fingers in smooth
undistinguishable sands, from this, we say, it follows that we must
not attempt to join Mr. Taller in his simple division of students
into LAW, DIVINITY, and MEDICAL.  Nowadays the Faculties may shake
hands over their follies; and, like Mrs. Frail and Mrs. Foresight
(in Love for Love) they may stand in the doors of opposite class-
rooms, crying:  'Sister, Sister--Sister everyway!'  A few
restrictions, indeed, remain to influence the followers of
individual branches of study.  The Divinity, for example, must be
an avowed believer; and as this, in the present day, is unhappily
considered by many as a confession of weakness, he is fain to
choose one of two ways of gilding the distasteful orthodox bolus.
Some swallow it in a thin jelly of metaphysics; for it is even a
credit to believe in God on the evidence of some crack-jaw
philosopher, although it is a decided slur to believe in Him on His
own authority.  Others again (and this we think the worst method),
finding German grammar a somewhat dry morsel, run their own little
heresy as a proof of independence; and deny one of the cardinal
doctrines that they may hold the others without being laughed at.

Besides, however, such influences as these, there is little more
distinction between the faculties than the traditionary ideal,
handed down through a long sequence of students, and getting
rounder and more featureless at each successive session.  The
plague of uniformity has descended on the College.  Students (and
indeed all sorts and conditions of men) now require their faculty
and character hung round their neck on a placard, like the scenes
in Shakespeare's theatre.  And in the midst of all this weary
sameness, not the least common feature is the gravity of every
face.  No more does the merry medical run eagerly in the clear
winter morning up the rugged sides of Arthur's Seat, and hear the
church bells begin and thicken and die away below him among the
gathered smoke of the city.  He will not break Sunday to so little
purpose.  He no longer finds pleasure in the mere output of his
surplus energy.  He husbands his strength, and lays out walks, and
reading, and amusement with deep consideration, so that he may get
as much work and pleasure out of his body as he can, and waste none
of his energy on mere impulse, or such flat enjoyment as an
excursion in the country.

See the quadrangle in the interregnum of classes, in those two or
three minutes when it is full of passing students, and we think you
will admit that, if we have not made it 'an habitation of dragons,'
we have at least transformed it into 'a court for owls.'  Solemnity
broods heavily over the enclosure; and wherever you seek it, you
will find a dearth of merriment, an absence of real youthful
enjoyment.  You might as well try


'To move wild laughter in the throat of death'


as to excite any healthy stir among the bulk of this staid company.

The studious congregate about the doors of the different classes,
debating the matter of the lecture, or comparing note-books.  A
reserved rivalry sunders them.  Here are some deep in Greek
particles:  there, others are already inhabitants of that land


'Where entity and quiddity,
'Like ghosts of defunct bodies fly -
Where Truth in person does appear
Like words congealed in northern air.'


But none of them seem to find any relish for their studies--no
pedantic love of this subject or that lights up their eyes--science
and learning are only means for a livelihood, which they have
considerately embraced and which they solemnly pursue.  'Labour's
pale priests,' their lips seem incapable of laughter, except in the
way of polite recognition of professorial wit.  The stains of ink
are chronic on their meagre fingers.  They walk like Saul among the
asses.

The dandies are not less subdued.  In 1824 there was a noisy dapper
dandyism abroad.  Vulgar, as we should now think, but yet genial--a
matter of white greatcoats and loud voices--strangely different
from the stately frippery that is rife at present.  These men are
out of their element in the quadrangle.  Even the small remains of
boisterous humour, which still clings to any collection of young
men, jars painfully on their morbid sensibilities; and they beat a
hasty retreat to resume their perfunctory march along Princes
Street.  Flirtation is to them a great social duty, a painful
obligation, which they perform on every occasion in the same chill
official manner, and with the same commonplace advances, the same
dogged observance of traditional behaviour.  The shape of their
raiment is a burden almost greater than they can bear, and they
halt in their walk to preserve the due adjustment of their trouser-
knees, till one would fancy he had mixed in a procession of Jacobs.
We speak, of course, for ourselves; but we would as soon associate
with a herd of sprightly apes as with these gloomy modern beaux.
Alas, that our Mirabels, our Valentines, even our Brummels, should
have left their mantles upon nothing more amusing!

Nor are the fast men less constrained.  Solemnity, even in
dissipation, is the order of the day; and they go to the devil with
a perverse seriousness, a systematic rationalism of wickedness that
would have surprised the simpler sinners of old.  Some of these men
whom we see gravely conversing on the steps have but a slender
acquaintance with each other.  Their intercourse consists
principally of mutual bulletins of depravity; and, week after week,
as they meet they reckon up their items of transgression, and give
an abstract of their downward progress for approval and
encouragement.  These folk form a freemasonry of their own.  An
oath is the shibboleth of their sinister fellowship.  Once they
hear a man swear, it is wonderful how their tongues loosen and
their bashful spirits take enlargement, under the consciousness of
brotherhood.  There is no folly, no pardoning warmth of temper
about them; they are as steady-going and systematic in their own
way as the studious in theirs.

Not that we are without merry men.  No.  We shall not be ungrateful
to those, whose grimaces, whose ironical laughter, whose active
feet in the 'College Anthem' have beguiled so many weary hours and
added a pleasant variety to the strain of close attention.  But
even these are too evidently professional in their antics.  They go
about cogitating puns and inventing tricks.  It is their vocation,
Hal.  They are the gratuitous jesters of the class-room; and, like
the clown when he leaves the stage, their merriment too often sinks
as the bell rings the hour of liberty, and they pass forth by the
Post-Office, grave and sedate, and meditating fresh gambols for the
morrow.

This is the impression left on the mind of any observing student by
too many of his fellows.  They seem all frigid old men; and one
pauses to think how such an unnatural state of matters is produced.
We feel inclined to blame for it the unfortunate absence of
UNIVERSITY FEELING which is so marked a characteristic of our
Edinburgh students.  Academical interests are so few and far
between--students, as students, have so little in common, except a
peevish rivalry--there is such an entire want of broad college
sympathies and ordinary college friendships, that we fancy that no
University in the kingdom is in so poor a plight.  Our system is
full of anomalies.  A, who cut B whilst he was a shabby student,
curries sedulously up to him and cudgels his memory for anecdotes
about him when he becomes the great so-and-so.  Let there be an end
of this shy, proud reserve on the one hand, and this shuddering
fine ladyism on the other; and we think we shall find both
ourselves and the College bettered.  Let it be a sufficient reason
for intercourse that two men sit together on the same benches.  Let
the great A be held excused for nodding to the shabby B in Princes
Street, if he can say, 'That fellow is a student.'  Once this could
be brought about, we think you would find the whole heart of the
University beat faster.  We think you would find a fusion among the
students, a growth of common feelings, an increasing sympathy
between class and class, whose influence (in such a heterogeneous
company as ours) might be of incalculable value in all branches of
politics and social progress.  It would do more than this.  If we
could find some method of making the University a real mother to
her sons--something beyond a building of class-rooms, a Senatus and
a lottery of somewhat shabby prizes--we should strike a death-blow
at the constrained and unnatural attitude of our Society.  At
present we are not a united body, but a loose gathering of
individuals, whose inherent attraction is allowed to condense them
into little knots and coteries.  Our last snowball riot read us a
plain lesson on our condition.  There was no party spirit--no unity
of interests.  A few, who were mischievously inclined, marched off
to the College of Surgeons in a pretentious file; but even before
they reached their destination the feeble inspiration had died out
in many, and their numbers were sadly thinned.  Some followed
strange gods in the direction of Drummond Street, and others slunk
back to meek good-boyism at the feet of the Professors.  The same
is visible in better things.  As you send a man to an English
University that he may have his prejudices rubbed off, you might
send him to Edinburgh that he may have them ingrained--rendered
indelible--fostered by sympathy into living principles of his
spirit.  And the reason of it is quite plain.  From this absence of
University feeling it comes that a man's friendships are always the
direct and immediate results of these very prejudices.  A common
weakness is the best master of ceremonies in our quadrangle:  a
mutual vice is the readiest introduction.  The studious associate
with the studious alone--the dandies with the dandies.  There is
nothing to force them to rub shoulders with the others; and so they
grow day by day more wedded to their own original opinions and
affections.  They see through the same spectacles continually.  All
broad sentiments, all real catholic humanity expires; and the mind
gets gradually stiffened into one position--becomes so habituated
to a contracted atmosphere, that it shudders and withers under the
least draught of the free air that circulates in the general field
of mankind.

Specialism in Society then is, we think, one cause of our present
state.  Specialism in study is another.  We doubt whether this has
ever been a good thing since the world began; but we are sure it is
much worse now than it was.  Formerly, when a man became a
specialist, it was out of affection for his subject.  With a
somewhat grand devotion he left all the world of Science to follow
his true love; and he contrived to find that strange pedantic
interest which inspired the man who


'Settled Hoti's business--let it be -
Properly based Oun -
Gave us the doctrine of the enclitic De,
Dead from the waist down.'


Nowadays it is quite different.  Our pedantry wants even the saving
clause of Enthusiasm.  The election is now matter of necessity and
not of choice.  Knowledge is now too broad a field for your Jack-
of-all-Trades; and, from beautifully utilitarian reasons, he makes
his choice, draws his pen through a dozen branches of study, and
behold--John the Specialist.  That this is the way to be wealthy we
shall not deny; but we hold that it is NOT the way to be healthy or
wise.  The whole mind becomes narrowed and circumscribed to one
'punctual spot' of knowledge.  A rank unhealthy soil breeds a
harvest of prejudices.  Feeling himself above others in his one
little branch--in the classification of toadstools, or Carthaginian
history--he waxes great in his own eyes and looks down on others.
Having all his sympathies educated in one way, they die out in
every other; and he is apt to remain a peevish, narrow, and
intolerant bigot.  Dilettante is now a term of reproach; but there
is a certain form of dilettantism to which no one can object.  It
is this that we want among our students.  We wish them to abandon
no subject until they have seen and felt its merit--to act under a
general interest in all branches of knowledge, not a commercial
eagerness to excel in one.

In both these directions our sympathies are constipated.  We are
apostles of our own caste and our own subject of study, instead of
being, as we should, true men and LOVING students.  [Sidenote: Alias
Edgiua. _Wil. Malm._] Edgitha was maried to Charles king of France,
surnamed Simplex.
And Ethilda by helpe of hir brother Adelstan was bestowed vpon Hugh
sonne to Robert earle of Paris, for hir singular beautie most
highlie estéemed: sith nature in hir had shewed as it were hir
whole cunning, in perfecting hir with all gifts and properties of
a comelie personage.

Edgiua and Elgiua were sent by their brother Adelstan into Germanie,
vnto the emperor Henrie, who bestowed one of them vpon his sonne
Otho, that was after emperor, the first of that name; and the other
vpon a duke inhabiting about the Alpes: by his last wife named
Edgiua, he had also two sonnes, Edmund & Eldred, the which both
reigned after their brother Adestan successiuelie. Also he had by
hir two daughters, Edburge that was made a nun, and Edgiue a ladie
of excellent beautie, whom hir brother Adelstan gaue in mariage
vnto Lewes king of Aquitaine.

[Sidenote: _Ran. Higd._ _Wil. Malm._ _Matth.

West._] Whilest this land was in continuall trouble of warres against
the Danes, as before is touched, small regard was had to the state
of the church, in somuch that the whole countrie of the Westsaxons
by the space of seuen yéeres togither (in the daies of this king
Edward) remained without anie bishop, to take order in matters
apperteining to [Sidenote: England first accurssed.] the church.

Wherevpon the pope had accurssed the English people, bicause they
suffred the bishops sees to be vacant so long a time.
[Sidenote: Anno 903.] King Edward to auoid the cursse, assembled a
prouinciall councell, 905, in the which the archbishop of
Canturburie Pleimond was president. Wherein it was ordeined, that
whereas the prouince of Westsaxons in times past had but two
bishops, now it should be diuided into fiue diocesses, euerie of
them to haue a peculiar bishop.

When all things were ordered and concluded in this synod (as was
thought requisite) the archbishop was sent to Rome with rich presents,
to appease the popes displeasure. When the pope had heard what
order the king had taken, he was contented therewith. And
so the archbishop returned into his countrie, and in one day at
Canturburie ordeined [Sidenote: Winchester. Cornewall. Shireborne.
Welles. Kirton. Mercia.] seuen bishops, as fiue to the prouince of
Westsaxons, that is to say, Fridestane to the sée of Winchester,
Adelstan to S. German in Cornwall, Werstan to Shireborne, Adelme
to Welles, and Edulfe to Kirton.

Also to the prouince of Sussex he ordeined one Bernegus, and to
Dorchester for the prouince of Mercia one Cenulfus.

[Sidenote: _Wil. Malm._ saith that pope Formosus pronounced this
cursse.
904.] ¶ Heere ye must note, that where William Malme. Polychro. and
other doo affirme, that pope Formosus did accursse king Edward and
the English nation, for suffering the bishops sees to be vacant,
it can not stand with the agreement or the time, vnlesse that the
cursse pronounced by Formosus for this matter long afore was not
regarded, vntill Edward had respect thereto. For the same Formosus
began to gouerne the Romane see about the yéere of our Lord 892,
and liued in the papasie not past six yéeres, so that he was
dead before king [Sidenote: _Polydor_.] Edward came to
the crowne. But how so euer this matter maie fall out, this ye
haue to consider: although that Pleimond was sent vnto Rome to
aduertise the pope what the king had decréed & doone, in the
ordeining of bishops to their seuerall sées, as before ye haue
heard, yet (as maister Fox hath noted) the gouernance and direction
of the church depended chieflie vpon the kings of this land in
those daies, as it manifestlie appeereth, as well by the decrees
of king Alfred, as of this king Edward, whose authoritie in the
election of bishops (as before ye haue heard) seemed then alone to
be sufficient.

Moreouer, I thinke it good to aduertise you in this place, that
this Pleimond archbishop of Canturburie (of whome ye haue heard
before) was the 19 in number from Augustine the first archbishop
there: for after Brightwold that was the 8 in number, and first of
the English nation that gouerned the sée, succeeded Taduin, that
sat three yeeres, Notelin fiue yéeres, Cuthbert 18 yéeres, Brethwin
thrée yéeres, Lambert 27 yéeres, Adelard 13 yéeres, Wilfred 28
yéeres, Theologildus or Pleogildus 3 yéeres, Celuotus or Chelutus
10 yéeres.

Then succéeded Aldred, of whome king Edward receiued the crowne,
and he was [Sidenote: _Hen. Hunt._] predecessor to Pleimond.

A litle before the death of king Edward, Sithrike the king of
Northumberland killed his brother Nigellus, and then king Reinold
conquered the citie of Yorke.

* * * * *

_Adelstane succeedeth his father Edward in the kingdome, Alfred
practising by treason to keepe him from the gouernement, sanke
downe suddenlie as he was taking his oth for his purgation; the cause
why Alfred opposed himselfe against Adelstane, whose praise is
notable, what he did to satisfie the expectation of his people,
ladie Beatrice king Edwards daughter maried to Sithrike a Danish
gouernor of the Northumbers, by whose meanes Edwin king Edwards
brother was drowned, practises of treason, the ladie Beatrice
strangelie put to death by hir stepsons for being of counsell to
poison hir husband Sithrike, hir death reuenged vpon the tormentors
by hir father king Edward, and how chronographers varie in the
report of this historie._ 
THE XIX.

CHAPTER.

[Sidenote: ADELSTAN. _Matt. West._ _Will. Malmes._ 924.] Adelstane
the eldest sonne of king Edward began his reigne ouer the more
part of all England, the yéere of our Lord 924, which was in the
6 yere of the emperour Henrie the first, in the 31 yéere of
the reigne of Charles surnamed Simplex king of France, thrée
moneths after the burning of Pauie, & about the 22 or 23 yéere of
Constantine the third, king of Scotland. This Adelstane was
crowned and consecrated king at Kingstone vpon Thames, of Aldelme
the archbishop of Canturburie, who succéeded Pleimond.

He was the 24 king in number from Cerdicus or Cerdike the first
king of the Westsaxons. There were in the [Sidenote: Alfred striueth
in vaine to kéepe Adelstane from the gouernment. _Wil. Malm._
See more hereof in the acts and monuments set foorth by _M. Fox,_
vol. 1. leafe 195.] beginning some that set themselues against
him, as one Alfred a noble man, which practised by treason to
haue kept him from the gouernement:
but he was apprehended yer he could bring his purpose to
passe, and sent to Rome there to trie himselfe giltie or not
giltie. And as he tooke his oth for his purgation before the altar
of saint Peter, he suddenlie fell downe to the earth, so that his
seruants tooke him vp, and bare him into the English schoole
or hospitall, where the third night after he died.

Pope Iohn the tenth sent vnto king Adelstane, to know if he would
that his bodie should be laid in Christian buriall or not. The king
at the contemplation of Alfreds friends and kinsfolks,
signified to the pope that he was contented that his bodie
should be interred amongst other christians. His lands being forfeited
were giuen by the king vnto God and saint Peter. The cause that
mooued Alfred and other his complices against the king, was (as
some haue alledged) his bastardie. But whether that allegation were
true or but a slander, this is certeine, that except that steine
of his honor, there was nothing in this Adelstane worthie of
blame: so that he darkened all the glorious fame of his
predecessors, both in vertuous conditions and victorious triumphs.
Such difference is there to haue that in thy selfe wherein
to excell, rather than to stand vpon the woorthinesse of thine
ancestors, sith that can not rightlie be called a mans owne.

After that king Adelstane was established in the estate, he indeuored
himselfe to answer the expectation of his people; which hoped
for great wealth to insue by his noble and prudent gouernance.
First [Sidenote: _Anno 925_. _Simon Dun._ _Polydor_.] therfore
meaning to prouide for the suertie of his countrie, he concluded
a peace with Sithrike king of the Northumbers, vnto whome
(as ye haue heard) he gaue one of his sisters named Editha in
mariage.
Sithrike liued not past one yéere after he had so maried hir. And
then Adelstane brought the prouince of the Northumbers vnto his
subiection, expelling one Aldulph out of the same that rebelled
against him.
There be that write, that Godfrie and Aulafe the sonnes of Sithrike
succéeding their father in the gouernement of Northumberland, by
practising to mooue warre against king Adelstane, occasioned him
to inuade their countrie, and to chase them out of the same, so
that Aulafe fled into Ireland, & Godfrie into Scotland: but other
write, that Godfrie was the father of Reignold which wan Yorke,
after that [Sidenote: _H.

Hunt._] Sithrike had slaine his brother Nigellus, as before is
mentioned.

[Sidenote: _Hect. Boetius_. The Scotish writers varie from our English
authors.
Beatrice daughter to K. Edward as the Scotish writers say.
Edwin was not brother to K. Edward but son to him.] ¶ The
Scotish chronicles varie in report of these matters from the
English writers: whose chronicles affirme, that in the life time
of king Edward, his daughter Beatrice was giuen in mariage to
Sithrike, the gouernor of the Danes in Northumberland, with condition
that if anie male were procreated in that mariage, the same should
inherit the dominions of king Edward after his decease. King
Edward had a brother (as they say) named Edwin, a iolie gentleman,
and of great estimation amongst the Englishmen. He by Sithrikes
procurement was sent into Flanders in a ship that leaked, and
so was drowned, to the great reioising of all the Danes, least if
he had suruiued his brother, he would haue made some businesse
for the crowne.

[Sidenote: Adelstane flieth the realme.] About the same time Adelstane
a base sonne of K. Edward fled the realme, for doubt to be made
away by some like traitorous practise of the Danes. Shortlie after,
king Edward vnderstanding that Sithrike went about some mischiefe
toward him, persuaded his daughter to poison hir husband the said
Sithrike. Then Aulafe or Aualassus, and Godfrie the sonnes of Sithrike,
finding out by diligent examination, that Beatrice was of
counsell in poisoning hir husband, they caused hir to be apprehended
and put to death on this wise.

She was set naked [Sidenote: Beatrice put to death by hir stepsons.]
vpon a smithes cold anuill or stithie, and therewith hard rosted
egs being taken out of the hot imbers were put vnder hir armepits,
and hir armes fast bound to hir bodie with a cord, and so in that
state she remained till hir life passed from hir. King Edward in
reuenge of his daughters death mooued warre against the two brethren,
Aulafe and Godfrie, and in battell finallie vanquished them, but
was slaine in the same battell himselfe.

Thus haue the Scotish chronicles recorded of these matters, as an
induction to the warres which followed betwixt the Scots and Danes
as confederates against king Adelstane: but the truth thereof we
leaue to the readers owne iudgement. For in our English writers we
find no such matter, but that a daughter of king Edward named Edgitha
or Editha, after hir fathers deceasse was by hir brother king
Adelstane, about the first yéere of his reigne, giuen in mariage
(as before ye haue heard) vnto the foresaid Sithrike king of
Northumberland, that was descended of the Danish bloud, who
for the loue of the yoong ladie, renounced his heathenish
religion and became a christian; but shortlie after, forsaking
both his wife and the christian faith, he set vp againe the
worshipping of idols, and within a while after, as an apostata
miserablie ended his life. Whervpon the yoong ladie, hir [Sidenote:
Editha a virgine.] virginitie being preserued, and hir bodie
vndefiled (as they write) passed the residue of hir daies at
Polleswoorth in Warwikeshire, spending hir time (as the same
writers affirme) in fasting, watching, praieng, and dooing of
almesdéedes, and so at length departed out of this world. Thus
our writers differ from the Scotish historie, both in name
and maner of end as concerning the daughter of king Edward that
was coupled in mariage with Sithrike.

* * * * *

_Adelstane subdueth Constantine king of Scots, Howell king of Wales,
and Wulferth king of Northwales, the Scots possesse a great part
of the north countries, Adelstane conquereth the Scots for aiding
Godfrie his enimie; a miracle declaring that the Scots ought to
obey the king of England; king Adelstane banisheth his brother
Edwin, he is for a conspiracie drowned in the sea, Adelstane repenteth
him of his rigour (in respect of that misfortune) against his
brother; Aulafe sometimes king of Northumberland inuadeth England,
he disguiseth himselfe like a minstrell and surueieth the English
campe unsuspected, he is discouered after his departure, be assaileth
the English campe, Adelstane being comforted with a miracle
discomfiteth his enimies, he maketh them of Northwales his tributaries,
be subdueth the Cornishmen, his death; the description of his person,
his vertues, of what abbeis & monasteries he was founder, his
estimation in forren realmes, what pretious presents were sent him
from other princes, and how he bestowed them; a remembrance of Guy
the erle of Warwike._ 
THE XX.

CHAPTER.

After that king Adelstane had subdued them of Northumberland, he was
aduertised, that not onelie Constantine king of Scots, but
also [Sidenote: _Wil. Malm._] Huduale or Howell K. of Wales went
about a priuie conspiracie against him. Herevpon with all conuenient
spéed assembling his power, he went against them, and with like
good fortune subdued them both, and also Vimer or Wulferth K. of
Northwales, so that they were constreined to submit themselues
vnto him, who shortlie after moued with pitie in considering
their sudden fall, restored them all three [Sidenote: _Matth. West._
The noble saieng of king Adelstane. 926.] to their former estates,
but so as they should acknowledge themselues to gouerne vnder him,
pronouncing withall this notable saieng, that More honorable it was
to make a king, than to be a king.

Ye must vnderstand, that (as it appeareth in the Scotish
chronicles) the Scotishmen in time of wars that the Danes gaue the
English nation, got a part of Cumberland and other the north countries
into their possession, and so by reason of their néere adioining
vnto the confines of the English kings, there chanced occasions
of warre betwixt them, as well in the daies of king Edward, as of
this Adelstane his sonne, although in déed the Danes held the
more part of the north countries, till that this Adelstane
conquered the same out of their hands, and ioined it vnto other
of his dominions, [Sidenote: _Polydor_.] constreining as well
the Danes (of whome the more part of the inhabitants then consisted)
as also the Englishmen, to obey him as their king and gouernour.
Godfrie (as is said) being fled to the Scots, did so much
preuaile there by earnest sute made to king Constantine, that he
got a power of men, and entring with the same into Northumberland,
besiged the citie of Duresme, soliciting the citizens to receiue
him, which they would gladlie haue doone, if they had not perceiued
how he was not of power able to resist the puissance of king
Adelstane: and therefore doubting to be punished for their offenses
if they reuolted, they kept the enimies out.

King [Sidenote: 934.] Adelstane being sore moued against the king
of Scots, that thus aided his enimies, raised an armie, and went
northward, purposing to reuenge that iniurie.

[Sidenote: _Ran. Higd._] At his comming into Yorkshire, he turned
out of the way, to visit the place where saint Iohn of Beuerlie
was buried, and there offered his knife, promising that if he
returned with victorie, he would redéeme the same with a woorthie
price: and so proceeded and went [Sidenote: _Sim. Dun._] forwards
on his iournie, and entring Scotland, wasted the countrie by land
vnto Dunfoader and Wertermore, and his nauie by sea destroied
the coasts alongst the shore, euen to Catnesse, and so
he brought the [Sidenote: The Scots subdued.] king of Scots and
other his enimies to subiection at his pleasure, constreining the
same K. of Scots to deliuer him his son in hostage.

[Sidenote: A token shewed miraculouslie that the Scots ought to be
subiect to the kings of England.] It is said, that being in his
iournie néere vnto the towne of Dunbar, he praied vnto God, that
at the instance of saint Iohn of Beuerlie, it would please him to
grant, that he might shew some open token, whereby it should appeare
to all them that then liued, and should hereafter succéed,
that the Scots ought to be subiect vnto the kings of England.
Herewith, the king with his sword smote vpon a great stone
standing néere to the castle of Dunbar, and with the stroke, there
appeared a clift in the same stone to the length of an elme,
which remained to be shewed as a witnesse of that thing manie yeares
after. At his comming backe to Beuerlie, he redéemed his knife
with a large price, as before he had promised.

[Sidenote: _Wil. Malm._ _Matt. Westm._ 934.] After this was Edwin
the kings brother accused of some conspiracie by him begun against
the king, wherevpon he was banished the land, and sent out in an
old rotten vessell without rower or mariner, onelie accompanied
with one esquier, so that being lanched foorth from the shore,
through despaire Edwin leapt into the sea, and drowned himselfe,
but the esquier that was with him recouered his bodie, and brought
it to land at Withsand besides Canturburie.

But Iames Maier in the annales of Flanders saieth, that he was drowned
by fortune of the seas in a small vessell, and being cast vp into
a créeke on the coast of Picardie, was found by Adolfe earle of
Bullongne that was his coosin germane, and honorablie buried by the
same Adolfe in the church of Bertine.

In consideration of which déed of pietie and dutie of mindfull
consanguinitie, the king of England both hartilie thanked [Sidenote:
Repentance too late.] earle Adolfe, and bestowed great gifts vpon
the church where his brother was thus buried. For verelie king
Adelstane after his displeasure was asswaged, and hearing of
this miserable end of his brother, sore repented himselfe of his
rigour so extended towards him, in so much that he could neuer
abide the man that had giuen the information against him, which was
his cupbearer, so that on a time as the said cupbearer serued him
at the table, and came towards him with a cup of wine, one of his
féet chanced to slide, but he recouered himselfe with the helpe of
the other foot, saieng, "One brother yet hath holpen & succored the
other:" which words cost him his life. For the king remembring
that by his accusation he had lost his brother that might haue béene
an aid to him, caused this said cupbearer to be straight put
to death.

[Sidenote: _Wil. Malm._] In this meane while, Aulafe the sonne
of Sitherike, late king of Northumberland (who is also named by
writers to be king of the Irishmen, and of manie Ilands)
assembled a great power of Danes, Irishmen, Scots, and other people
of the out Iles, and imbarked them in 615 ships and craiers,
with the which he arriued in the mouth of [Sidenote: 937.] Humber,
and there comming on land, began to inuade the countrie.
This Aulafe had maried the daughter of Constantine king of Scots,
by whose procurement, notwithstanding his late submission, Aulafe
[Sidenote: _Simon Dun._] tooke in hand this iournie.

King Adelstane aduertised of his enimies arriuall, gathered his
people, and with all conuenient spéed hasted towards them, and
approching néerer vnto them, pitcht downe his [Sidenote: _Hen.
Hunt._ _Wil. Malm._] field at a place called by some Brimesburie,
by others Brimesford, and also Brunaubright, and by the Scotish
writers Browmingfield.

[Sidenote: _Matth. West._ _Hector Boet._ _Ran. Higd._ Aulafe disguised,
cometh to view the English camp.] When knowledge hereof was had in
the enimies campe, Aulafe enterprised a maruelous exploit, for taking
with him an harpe, he came into the English campe, offring
himselfe disguised as a minstrell, to shew some part of his
cunning in musicke vpon his instrument: and so being suffered to
passe from tent to tent, and admitted also to plaie afore the
king, surueied the whole state and order of the armie. This doone,
he returned, meaning by a cammisado to set vpon the kings tent.

But one that had serued as a souldier sometime vnder Aulafe, chanced
by marking his demeanour to know him, and after he was gone, vttered
to the king what he knew.
But it is time to draw to a close.  We could expatiate much longer
upon this topic, but want of space constrains us to leave
unfinished these few desultory remarks--slender contributions
towards a subject which has fallen sadly backward, and which, we
grieve to say, was better understood by the king of Siam in 1686
than by all the philosophers of to-day.  If, however, we have
awakened in any rational mind an interest in the symbolism of
umbrellas--in any generous heart a more complete sympathy with the
dumb companion of his daily walk--or in any grasping spirit a pure
notion of respectability strong enough to make him expend his six-
and-twenty shillings--we shall have deserved well of the world, to
say nothing of the many industrious persons employed in the
manufacture of the article.


CHAPTER V--THE PHILOSOPHY OF NOMENCLATURE


'How many Caesars and Pompeys, by mere inspirations of the names,
have been rendered worthy of them?  And how many are there, who
might have done exceeding well in the world, had not their
characters and spirits been totally depressed and Nicodemus'd into
nothing?'--Tristram Shandy, vol. I. chap xix.


Such were the views of the late Walter Shandy, Esq., Turkey
merchant.  To the best of my belief, Mr. Shandy is the first who
fairly pointed out the incalculable influence of nomenclature upon
the whole life--who seems first to have recognised the one child,
happy in an heroic appellation, soaring upwards on the wings of
fortune, and the other, like the dead sailor in his shotted
hammock, haled down by sheer weight of name into the abysses of
social failure.  Solomon possibly had his eye on some such theory
when he said that 'a good name is better than precious ointment';
and perhaps we may trace a similar spirit in the compilers of the
English Catechism, and the affectionate interest with which they
linger round the catechumen's name at the very threshold of their
work.  But, be these as they may, I think no one can censure me for
appending, in pursuance of the expressed wish of his son, the
Turkey merchant's name to his system, and pronouncing, without
further preface, a short epitome of the 'Shandean Philosophy of
Nomenclature.'

To begin, then:  the influence of our name makes itself felt from
the very cradle.  As a schoolboy I remember the pride with which I
hailed Robin Hood, Robert Bruce, and Robert le Diable as my name-
fellows; and the feeling of sore disappointment that fell on my
heart when I found a freebooter or a general who did not share with
me a single one of my numerous praenomina.  Look at the delight
with which two children find they have the same name.  They are
friends from that moment forth; they have a bond of union stronger
than exchange of nuts and sweetmeats.  This feeling, I own, wears
off in later life.  Our names lose their freshness and interest,
become trite and indifferent.  But this, dear reader, is merely one
of the sad effects of those 'shades of the prison-house' which come
gradually betwixt us and nature with advancing years; it affords no
weapon against the philosophy of names.

In after life, although we fail to trace its working, that name
which careless godfathers lightly applied to your unconscious
infancy will have been moulding your character, and influencing
with irresistible power the whole course of your earthly fortunes.
But the last name, overlooked by Mr. Shandy, is no whit less
important as a condition of success.  Family names, we must
recollect, are but inherited nicknames; and if the sobriquet were
applicable to the ancestor, it is most likely applicable to the
descendant also.  You would not expect to find Mr. M'Phun acting as
a mute, or Mr. M'Lumpha excelling as a professor of dancing.
Therefore, in what follows, we shall consider names, independent of
whether they are first or last.  And to begin with, look what a
pull Cromwell had over Pym--the one name full of a resonant
imperialism, the other, mean, pettifogging, and unheroic to a
degree.  Who would expect eloquence from Pym--who would read poems
by Pym--who would bow to the opinion of Pym?  He might have been a
dentist, but he should never have aspired to be a statesman.  I can
only wonder that he succeeded as he did.  Pym and Habakkuk stand
first upon the roll of men who have triumphed, by sheer force of
genius, over the most unfavourable appellations.  But even these
have suffered; and, had they been more fitly named, the one might
have been Lord Protector, and the other have shared the laurels
with Isaiah.  In this matter we must not forget that all our great
poets have borne great names.  Chaucer, Spenser, Shakespeare,
Milton, Pope, Wordsworth, Shelley--what a constellation of lordly
words!  Not a single common-place name among them--not a Brown, not
a Jones, not a Robinson; they are all names that one would stop and
look at on a door-plate.  Now, imagine if Pepys had tried to
clamber somehow into the enclosure of poetry, what a blot would
that word have made upon the list!  The thing was impossible.  In
the first place a certain natural consciousness that men would have
held him down to the level of his name, would have prevented him
from rising above the Pepsine standard, and so haply withheld him
altogether from attempting verse.  Next, the booksellers would
refuse to publish, and the world to read them, on the mere evidence
of the fatal appellation.  And now, before I close this section, I
must say one word as to PUNNABLE names, names that stand alone,
that have a significance and life apart from him that bears them.
These are the bitterest of all.  One friend of mine goes bowed and
humbled through life under the weight of this misfortune; for it is
an awful thing when a man's name is a joke, when he cannot be
mentioned without exciting merriment, and when even the intimation
of his death bids fair to carry laughter into many a home.

So much for people who are badly named.  Now for people who are TOO
well named, who go top-heavy from the font, who are baptized into a
false position, and find themselves beginning life eclipsed under
the fame of some of the great ones of the past.  A man, for
instance, called William Shakespeare could never dare to write
plays.  He is thrown into too humbling an apposition with the
author of Hamlet.  Its own name coming after is such an anti-
climax.  'The plays of William Shakespeare'? says the reader--'O
no!  The plays of William Shakespeare Cockerill,' and he throws the
book aside.  In wise pursuance of such views, Mr. John Milton
Hengler, who not long since delighted us in this favoured town, has
never attempted to write an epic, but has chosen a new path, and
has excelled upon the tight-rope.  A marked example of triumph over
this is the case of Mr. Dante Gabriel Rossetti.  On the face of the
matter, I should have advised him to imitate the pleasing modesty
of the last-named gentleman, and confine his ambition to the
sawdust.  But Mr. Rossetti has triumphed.  He has even dared to
translate from his mighty name-father; and the voice of fame
supports him in his boldness.

Dear readers, one might write a year upon this matter.  A lifetime
of comparison and research could scarce suffice for its
elucidation.  So here, if it please you, we shall let it rest.
Slight as these notes have been, I would that the great founder of
the system had been alive to see them.  How he had warmed and
brightened, how his persuasive eloquence would have fallen on the
ears of Toby; and what a letter of praise and sympathy would not
the editor have received before the month was out!  Alas, the thing
was not to be.  Walter Shandy died and was duly buried, while yet
his theory lay forgotten and neglected by his fellow-countrymen.
But, reader, the day will come, I hope, when a paternal government
will stamp out, as seeds of national weakness, all depressing
patronymics, and when godfathers and godmothers will soberly and
earnestly debate the interest of the nameless one, and not rush
blindfold to the christening.  In these days there shall be written
a 'Godfather's Assistant,' in shape of a dictionary of names, with
their concomitant virtues and vices; and this book shall be
scattered broadcast through the land, and shall be on the table of
every one eligible for godfathership, until such a thing as a
vicious or untoward appellation shall have ceased from off the face
of the earth.


CRITICISMS


CHAPTER I--LORD LYTTON'S 'FABLES IN SONG'


It seems as if Lord Lytton, in this new book of his, had found the
form most natural to his talent.  In some ways, indeed, it may be
held inferior to Chronicles and Characters; we look in vain for
anything like the terrible intensity of the night-scene in Irene,
or for any such passages of massive and memorable writing as
appeared, here and there, in the earlier work, and made it not
altogether unworthy of its model, Hugo's Legend of the Ages.  But
it becomes evident, on the most hasty retrospect, that this earlier
work was a step on the way towards the later.  It seems as if the
author had been feeling about for his definite medium, and was
already, in the language of the child's game, growing hot.  There
are many pieces in Chronicles and Characters that might be detached
from their original setting, and embodied, as they stand, among the
Fables in Song.

For the term Fable is not very easy to define rigorously.  In the
most typical form some moral precept is set forth by means of a
conception purely fantastic, and usually somewhat trivial into the
bargain; there is something playful about it, that will not support
a very exacting criticism, and the lesson must be apprehended by
the fancy at half a hint.  Such is the great mass of the old
stories of wise animals or foolish men that have amused our
childhood.  But we should expect the fable, in company with other
and more important literary forms, to be more and more loosely, or
at least largely, comprehended as time went on, and so to
degenerate in conception from this original type.  That depended
for much of its piquancy on the very fact that it was fantastic:
the point of the thing lay in a sort of humorous inappropriateness;
and it is natural enough that pleasantry of this description should
become less common, as men learn to suspect some serious analogy
underneath.  Thus a comical story of an ape touches us quite
differently after the proposition of Mr. Darwin's theory.
Moreover, there lay, perhaps, at the bottom of this primitive sort
of fable, a humanity, a tenderness of rough truths; so that at the
end of some story, in which vice or folly had met with its destined
punishment, the fabulist might be able to assure his auditors, as
we have often to assure tearful children on the like occasions,
that they may dry their eyes, for none of it was true.

But this benefit of fiction becomes lost with more sophisticated
hearers and authors:  a man is no longer the dupe of his own
artifice, and cannot deal playfully with truths that are a matter
of bitter concern to him in his life.  And hence, in the
progressive centralisation of modern thought, we should expect the
old form of fable to fall gradually into desuetude, and be
gradually succeeded by another, which is a fable in all points
except that it is not altogether fabulous.  And this new form, such
as we should expect, and such as we do indeed find, still presents
the essential character of brevity; as in any other fable also,
there is, underlying and animating the brief action, a moral idea;
and as in any other fable, the object is to bring this home to the
reader through the intellect rather than through the feelings; so
that, without being very deeply moved or interested by the
characters of the piece, we should recognise vividly the hinges on
which the little plot revolves.  But the fabulist now seeks
analogies where before he merely sought humorous situations.  There
will be now a logical nexus between the moral expressed and the
machinery employed to express it.  The machinery, in fact, as this
change is developed, becomes less and less fabulous.  We find
ourselves in presence of quite a serious, if quite a miniature
division of creative literature; and sometimes we have the lesson
embodied in a sober, everyday narration, as in the parables of the
New Testament, and sometimes merely the statement or, at most, the
collocation of significant facts in life, the reader being left to
resolve for himself the vague, troublesome, and not yet definitely
moral sentiment which has been thus created.  And step by step with
the development of this change, yet another is developed:  the
moral tends to become more indeterminate and large.  It ceases to
be possible to append it, in a tag, to the bottom of the piece, as
one might write the name below a caricature; and the fable begins
to take rank with all other forms of creative literature, as
something too ambitious, in spite of its miniature dimensions, to
be resumed in any succinct formula without the loss of all that is
deepest and most suggestive in it.

Now it is in this widest sense that Lord Lytton understands the
term; there are examples in his two pleasant volumes of all the
forms already mentioned, and even of another which can only be
admitted among fables by the utmost possible leniency of
construction.  'Composure,' 'Et Caetera,' and several more, are
merely similes poetically elaborated.  So, too, is the pathetic
story of the grandfather and grandchild:  the child, having
treasured away an icicle and forgotten it for ten minutes, comes
back to find it already nearly melted, and no longer beautiful:  at
the same time, the grandfather has just remembered and taken out a
bundle of love-letters, which he too had stored away in years gone
by, and then long neglected; and, behold! the letters are as faded
and sorrowfully disappointing as the icicle.  This is merely a
simile poetically worked out; and yet it is in such as these, and
some others, to be mentioned further on, that the author seems at
his best.  Wherever he has really written after the old model,
there is something to be deprecated:  in spite of all the spirit
and freshness, in spite of his happy assumption of that cheerful
acceptation of things as they are, which, rightly or wrongly, we
come to attribute to the ideal fabulist, there is ever a sense as
of something a little out of place.  A form of literature so very
innocent and primitive looks a little over-written in Lord Lytton's
conscious and highly-coloured style.  It may be bad taste, but
sometimes we should prefer a few sentences of plain prose
narration, and a little Bewick by way of tail-piece.  So that it is
not among those fables that conform most nearly to the old model,
but one had nearly said among those that most widely differ from
it, that we find the most satisfactory examples of the author's
manner.

In the mere matter of ingenuity, the metaphysical fables are the
most remarkable; such as that of the windmill who imagined that it
was he who raised the wind; or that of the grocer's balance
('Cogito ergo sum') who considered himself endowed with free-will,
reason, and an infallible practical judgment; until, one fine day,
the police made a descent upon the shop, and find the weights false
and the scales unequal; and the whole thing is broken up for old
iron.  Capital fables, also, in the same ironical spirit, are
'Prometheus Unbound,' the tale of the vainglorying of a champagne-
cork, and 'Teleology,' where a nettle justifies the ways of God to
nettles while all goes well with it, and, upon a change of luck,
promptly changes its divinity.

In all these there is still plenty of the fabulous if you will,
although, even here, there may be two opinions possible; but there
is another group, of an order of merit perhaps still higher, where
we look in vain for any such playful liberties with Nature.  Thus
we have 'Conservation of Force'; where a musician, thinking of a
certain picture, improvises in the twilight; a poet, hearing the
music, goes home inspired, and writes a poem; and then a painter,
under the influence of this poem, paints another picture, thus
lineally descended from the first.  This is fiction, but not what
we have been used to call fable.  We miss the incredible element,
the point of audacity with which the fabulist was wont to mock at
his readers.  And still more so is this the case with others.  'The
Horse and the Fly' states one of the unanswerable problems of life
in quite a realistic and straightforward way.  A fly startles a
cab-horse, the coach is overset; a newly-married pair within and
the driver, a man with a wife and family, are all killed.  The
horse continues to gallop off in the loose traces, and ends the
tragedy by running over an only child; and there is some little
pathetic detail here introduced in the telling, that makes the
reader's indignation very white-hot against some one.  It remains
to be seen who that some one is to be:  the fly?  Nay, but on
closer inspection, it appears that the fly, actuated by maternal
instinct, was only seeking a place for her eggs:  is maternal
instinct, then, 'sole author of these mischiefs all'?  'Who's in
the Right?' one of the best fables in the book, is somewhat in the
same vein.  After a battle has been won, a group of officers
assemble inside a battery, and debate together who should have the
honour of the success; the Prince, the general staff, the cavalry,
the engineer who posted the battery in which they then stand
talking, are successively named:  the sergeant, who pointed the
guns, sneers to himself at the mention of the engineer; and, close
by, the gunner, who had applied the match, passes away with a smile
of triumph, since it was through his hand that the victorious blow
had been dealt.  Meanwhile, the cannon claims the honour over the
gunner; the cannon-ball, who actually goes forth on the dread
mission, claims it over the cannon, who remains idly behind; the
powder reminds the cannon-ball that, but for him, it would still be
lying on the arsenal floor; and the match caps the discussion;
powder, cannon-ball, and cannon would be all equally vain and
ineffectual without fire.  Just then there comes on a shower of
rain, which wets the powder and puts out the match, and completes
this lesson of dependence, by indicating the negative conditions
which are as necessary for any effect, in their absence, as is the
presence of this great fraternity of positive conditions, not any
one of which can claim priority over any other.  But the fable does
not end here, as perhaps, in all logical strictness, it should.  It
wanders off into a discussion as to which is the truer greatness,
that of the vanquished fire or that of the victorious rain.  And
the speech of the rain is charming:


'Lo, with my little drops I bless again
And beautify the fields which thou didst blast!
Rend, wither, waste, and ruin, what thou wilt,
But call not Greatness what the Gods call Guilt.
Blossoms and grass from blood in battle spilt,
And poppied corn, I bring.
'Mid mouldering Babels, to oblivion built,
My violets spring.
Little by little my small drops have strength
To deck with green delights the grateful earth.'


And so forth, not quite germane (it seems to me) to the matter in
hand, but welcome for its own sake.

Best of all are the fables that deal more immediately with the
emotions.  There is, for instance, that of 'The Two Travellers,'
which is profoundly moving in conception, although by no means as
well written as some others.  In this, one of the two, fearfully
frost-bitten, saves his life out of the snow at the cost of all
that was comely in his body; just as, long before, the other, who
has now quietly resigned himself to death, had violently freed
himself from Love at the cost of all that was finest and fairest in
his character.  Very graceful and sweet is the fable (if so it
should be called) in which the author sings the praises of that
'kindly perspective,' which lets a wheat-stalk near the eye cover
twenty leagues of distant country, and makes the humble circle
about a man's hearth more to him than all the possibilities of the
external world.  The companion fable to this is also excellent.  It
tells us of a man who had, all his life through, entertained a
passion for certain blue hills on the far horizon, and had promised
himself to travel thither ere he died, and become familiar with
these distant friends.  At last, in some political trouble, he is
banished to the very place of his dreams.  He arrives there
overnight, and, when he rises and goes forth in the morning, there
sure enough are the blue hills, only now they have changed places
with him, and smile across to him, distant as ever, from the old
home whence he has come.  Such a story might have been very
cynically treated; but it is not so done, the whole tone is kindly
and consolatory, and the disenchanted man submissively takes the
lesson, and understands that things far away are to be loved for
their own sake, and that the unattainable is not truly
unattainable, when we can make the beauty of it our own.  Indeed,
throughout all these two volumes, though there is much practical
scepticism, and much irony on abstract questions, this kindly and
consolatory spirit is never absent.  There is much that is cheerful
and, after a sedate, fireside fashion, hopeful.  No one will be
discouraged by reading the book; but the ground of all this
hopefulness and cheerfulness remains to the end somewhat vague.  It
does not seem to arise from any practical belief in the future
either of the individual or the race, but rather from the profound
personal contentment of the writer.  This is, I suppose, all we
must look for in the case.  It is as much as we can expect, if the
fabulist shall prove a shrewd and cheerful fellow-wayfarer, one
with whom the world does not seem to have gone much amiss, but who
has yet laughingly learned something of its evil.  It will depend
much, of course, upon our own character and circumstances, whether
the encounter will be agreeable and bracing to the spirits, or
offend us as an ill-timed mockery.  But where, as here, there is a
little tincture of bitterness along with the good-nature, where it
is plainly not the humour of a man cheerfully ignorant, but of one
who looks on, tolerant and superior and smilingly attentive, upon
the good and bad of our existence, it will go hardly if we do not
catch some reflection of the same spirit to help us on our way.
There is here no impertinent and lying proclamation of peace--none
of the cheap optimism of the well-to-do; what we find here is a
view of life that would be even grievous, were it not enlivened
with this abiding cheerfulness, and ever and anon redeemed by a
stroke of pathos.

It is natural enough, I suppose, that we should find wanting in
this book some of the intenser qualities of the author's work; and
their absence is made up for by much happy description after a
quieter fashion.  The burst of jubilation over the departure of the
snow, which forms the prelude to 'The Thistle,' is full of spirit
and of pleasant images.  The speech of the forest in 'Sans Souci'
is inspired by a beautiful sentiment for nature of the modern sort,
and pleases us more, I think, as poetry should please us, than
anything in Chronicles and Characters.  There are some admirable
felicities of expression here and there; as that of the hill, whose
summit


   'Did print
The azure air with pines.'


Moreover, I do not recollect in the author's former work any
symptom of that sympathetic treatment of still life, which is
noticeable now and again in the fables; and perhaps most
noticeably, when he sketches the burned letters as they hover along
the gusty flue, 'Thin, sable veils, wherein a restless spark Yet
trembled.'  But the description is at its best when the subjects
are unpleasant, or even grisly.  There are a few capital lines in
this key on the last spasm of the battle before alluded to.  Surely
nothing could be better, in its own way, than the fish in 'The Last
Cruise of the Arrogant,' 'the shadowy, side-faced, silent things,'
that come butting and staring with lidless eyes at the sunken
steam-engine.  And although, in yet another, we are told,
pleasantly enough, how the water went down into the valleys, where
it set itself gaily to saw wood, and on into the plains, where it
would soberly carry grain to town; yet the real strength of the
fable is when it dealt with the shut pool in which certain
unfortunate raindrops are imprisoned among slugs and snails, and in
the company of an old toad.  The sodden contentment of the fallen
acorn is strangely significant; and it is astonishing how
unpleasantly we are startled by the appearance of her horrible
lover, the maggot.

And now for a last word, about the style.  This is not easy to
criticise.  It is impossible to deny to it rapidity, spirit, and a
full sound; the lines are never lame, and the sense is carried
forward with an uninterrupted, impetuous rush.  But it is not
equal.  After passages of really admirable versification, the
author falls back upon a sort of loose, cavalry manner, not unlike
the style of some of Mr. Browning's minor pieces, and almost
inseparable from wordiness, and an easy acceptation of somewhat
cheap finish.  There is nothing here of that compression which is
the note of a really sovereign style.  It is unfair, perhaps, to
set a not remarkable passage from Lord Lytton side by side with one
of the signal masterpieces of another, and a very perfect poet; and
yet it is interesting, when we see how the portraiture of a dog,
detailed through thirty odd lines, is frittered down and finally
almost lost in the mere laxity of the style, to compare it with the
clear, simple, vigorous delineation that Burns, in four couplets,
has given us of the ploughman's collie.  It is interesting, at
first, and then it becomes a little irritating; for when we think
of other passages so much more finished and adroit, we cannot help
feeling, that with a little more ardour after perfection of form,
criticism would have found nothing left for her to censure.  A
similar mark of precipitate work is the number of adjectives
tumultuously heaped together, sometimes to help out the sense, and
sometimes (as one cannot but suspect) to help out the sound of the
verses.  I do not believe, for instance, that Lord Lytton himself
would defend the lines in which we are told how Laocoon 'Revealed
to Roman crowds, now Christian grown, That Pagan anguish which, in
Parian stone, The Rhodian artist,' and so on.  It is not only that
this is bad in itself; but that it is unworthy of the company in
which it is found; that such verses should not have appeared with
the name of a good versifier like Lord Lytton.  We must take
exception, also, in conclusion, to the excess of alliteration.
Alliteration is so liable to be abused that we can scarcely be too
sparing of it; and yet it is a trick that seems to grow upon the
author with years.  It is a pity to see fine verses, such as some
in 'Demos,' absolutely spoiled by the recurrence of one wearisome
consonant.


CHAPTER II--SALVINI'S MACBETH


Salvini closed his short visit to Edinburgh by a performance of
Macbeth.  It was, perhaps, from a sentiment of local colour that he
chose to play the Scottish usurper for the first time before
Scotsmen; and the audience were not insensible of the privilege.
Few things, indeed, can move a stronger interest than to see a
great creation taking shape for the first time.  If it is not
purely artistic, the sentiment is surely human.  And the thought
that you are before all the world, and have the start of so many
others as eager as yourself, at least keeps you in a more
unbearable suspense before the curtain rises, if it does not
enhance the delight with which you follow the performance and see
the actor 'bend up each corporal agent' to realise a masterpiece of
a few hours' duration.  With a player so variable as Salvini, who
trusts to the feelings of the moment for so much detail, and who,
night after night, does the same thing differently but always well,
it can never be safe to pass judgment after a single hearing.  And
this is more particularly true of last week's Macbeth; for the
whole third act was marred by a grievously humorous misadventure.
Several minutes too soon the ghost of Banquo joined the party, and
after having sat helpless a while at a table, was ignominiously
withdrawn.  Twice was this ghostly Jack-in-the-box obtruded on the
stage before his time; twice removed again; and yet he showed so
little hurry when he was really wanted, that, after an awkward
pause, Macbeth had to begin his apostrophe to empty air.  The
arrival of the belated spectre in the middle, with a jerk that made
him nod all over, was the last accident in the chapter, and
worthily topped the whole.  It may be imagined how lamely matters
went throughout these cross purposes.

In spite of this, and some other hitches, Salvini's Macbeth had an
emphatic success.  The creation is worthy of a place beside the
same artist's Othello and Hamlet.  It is the simplest and most
unsympathetic of the three; but the absence of the finer lineaments
of Hamlet is redeemed by gusto, breadth, and a headlong unity.
Salvini sees nothing great in Macbeth beyond the royalty of muscle,
and that courage which comes of strong and copious circulation.
The moral smallness of the man is insisted on from the first, in
the shudder of uncontrollable jealousy with which he sees Duncan
embracing Banquo.  He may have some northern poetry of speech, but
he has not much logical understanding.  In his dealings with the
supernatural powers he is like a savage with his fetich, trusting
them beyond bounds while all goes well, and whenever he is crossed,
casting his belief aside and calling 'fate into the list.'  For his
wife, he is little more than an agent, a frame of bone and sinew
for her fiery spirit to command.  The nature of his feeling towards
her is rendered with a most precise and delicate touch.  He always
yields to the woman's fascination; and yet his caresses (and we
know how much meaning Salvini can give to a caress) are singularly
hard and unloving.  Sometimes he lays his hand on her as he might
take hold of any one who happened to be nearest to him at a moment
of excitement.  Love has fallen out of this marriage by the way,
and left a curious friendship.  Only once--at the very moment when
she is showing herself so little a woman and so much a high-
spirited man--only once is he very deeply stirred towards her; and
that finds expression in the strange and horrible transport of
admiration, doubly strange and horrible on Salvini's lips--'Bring
forth men-children only!'

The murder scene, as was to be expected, pleased the audience best.
Macbeth's voice, in the talk with his wife, was a thing not to be
forgotten; and when he spoke of his hangman's hands he seemed to
have blood in his utterance.  Never for a moment, even in the very
article of the murder, does he possess his own soul.  He is a man
on wires.  From first to last it is an exhibition of hideous
cowardice.  For, after all, it is not here, but in broad daylight,
with the exhilaration of conflict, where he can assure himself at
every blow he has the longest sword and the heaviest hand, that
this man's physical bravery can keep him up; he is an unwieldy
ship, and needs plenty of way on before he will steer.

In the banquet scene, while the first murderer gives account of
what he has done, there comes a flash of truculent joy at the
'twenty trenched gashes' on Banquo's head.  Thus Macbeth makes
welcome to his imagination those very details of physical horror
which are so soon to turn sour in him.  As he runs out to embrace
these cruel circumstances, as he seeks to realise to his mind's eye
the reassuring spectacle of his dead enemy, he is dressing out the
phantom to terrify himself; and his imagination, playing the part
of justice, is to 'commend to his own lips the ingredients of his
poisoned chalice.'  With the recollection of Hamlet and his
father's spirit still fresh upon him, and the holy awe with which
that good man encountered things not dreamt of in his philosophy,
it was not possible to avoid looking for resemblances between the
two apparitions and the two men haunted.  But there are none to be
found.  Macbeth has a purely physical dislike for Banquo's spirit
and the 'twenty trenched gashes.'  He is afraid of he knows not
what.  He is abject, and again blustering.  In the end he so far
forgets himself, his terror, and the nature of what is before him,
that he rushes upon it as he would upon a man.  When his wife tells
him he needs repose, there is something really childish in the way
he looks about the room, and, seeing nothing, with an expression of
almost sensual relief, plucks up heart enough to go to bed.  And
what is the upshot of the visitation?  It is written in
Shakespeare, but should be read with the commentary of Salvini's
voice and expression:- 'O! siam nell' opra ancor fanciulli'-- 'We
are yet but young in deed.'  Circle below circle.  He is looking
with horrible satisfaction into the mouth of hell.  There may still
be a prick to-day; but to-morrow conscience will be dead, and he
may move untroubled in this element of blood.

In the fifth act we see this lowest circle reached; and it is
Salvini's finest moment throughout the play.  From the first he was
admirably made up, and looked Macbeth to the full as perfectly as
ever he looked Othello.  From the first moment he steps upon the
stage you can see this character is a creation to the fullest
meaning of the phrase; for the man before you is a type you know
well already.  He arrives with Banquo on the heath, fair and red-
bearded, sparing of gesture, full of pride and the sense of animal
wellbeing, and satisfied after the battle like a beast who has
eaten his fill.  But in the fifth act there is a change.  This is
still the big, burly, fleshly, handsome-looking Thane; here is
still the same face which in the earlier acts could be
superficially good-humoured and sometimes royally courteous.  But
now the atmosphere of blood, which pervades the whole tragedy, has
entered into the man and subdued him to its own nature; and an
indescribable degradation, a slackness and puffiness, has overtaken
his features.  He has breathed the air of carnage, and supped full
of horrors.  Lady Macbeth complains of the smell of blood on her
hand:  Macbeth makes no complaint--he has ceased to notice it now;
but the same smell is in his nostrils.  A contained fury and
disgust possesses him.  He taunts the messenger and the doctor as
people would taunt their mortal enemies.  And, indeed, as he knows
right well, every one is his enemy now, except his wife.  About her
he questions the doctor with something like a last human anxiety;
and, in tones of grisly mystery, asks him if he can 'minister to a
mind diseased.'  When the news of her death is brought him, he is
staggered and falls into a seat; but somehow it is not anything we
can call grief that he displays.  There had been two of them
against God and man; and now, when there is only one, it makes
perhaps less difference than he had expected.  And so her death is
not only an affliction, but one more disillusion; and he redoubles
in bitterness.  The speech that follows, given with tragic cynicism
in every word, is a dirge, not so much for her as for himself.
From that time forth there is nothing human left in him, only 'the
fiend of Scotland,' Macduff's 'hell-hound,' whom, with a stern
glee, we see baited like a bear and hunted down like a wolf.  He is
inspired and set above fate by a demoniacal energy, a lust of
wounds and slaughter.  Even after he meets Macduff his courage does
not fail; but when he hears the Thane was not born of woman, all
virtue goes out of him; and though he speaks sounding words of
defiance, the last combat is little better than a suicide.

The whole performance is, as I said, so full of gusto and a
headlong unity; the personality of Macbeth is so sharp and
powerful; and within these somewhat narrow limits there is so much
play and saliency that, so far as concerns Salvini himself, a third
great success seems indubitable.  Unfortunately, however, a great
actor cannot fill more than a very small fraction of the boards;
and though Banquo's ghost will probably be more seasonable in his
future apparitions, there are some more inherent difficulties in
the piece.  The company at large did not distinguish themselves.
Macduff, to the huge delight of the gallery, out-Macduff'd the
average ranter.  The lady who filled the principal female part has
done better on other occasions, but I fear she has not metal for
what she tried last week.  Not to succeed in the sleep-walking
scene is to make a memorable failure.  As it was given, it
succeeded in being wrong in art without being true to nature.

And there is yet another difficulty, happily easy to reform, which
somewhat interfered with the success of the performance.  At the
end of the incantation scene the Italian translator has made
Macbeth fall insensible upon the stage.  This is a change of
questionable propriety from a psychological point of view; while in
point of view of effect it leaves the stage for some moments empty
of all business.  To remedy this, a bevy of green ballet-girls came
forth and pointed their toes about the prostrate king.  A dance of
High Church curates, or a hornpipe by Mr. T. P. Cooke, would not be
more out of the key; though the gravity of a Scots audience was not
to be overcome, and they merely expressed their disapprobation by a
round of moderate hisses, a similar irruption of Christmas fairies
would most likely convulse a London theatre from pit to gallery
with inextinguishable laughter.  It is, I am told, the Italian
tradition; but it is one more honoured in the breach than the
observance.  With the total disappearance of these damsels, with a
stronger Lady Macbeth, and, if possible, with some compression of
those scenes in which Salvini does not appear, and the spectator is
left at the mercy of Macduffs and Duncans, the play would go twice
as well, and we should be better able to follow and enjoy an
admirable work of dramatic art.


CHAPTER III--BAGSTER'S 'PILGRIM'S PROGRESS'


I have here before me an edition of the Pilgrim's Progress, bound
in green, without a date, and described as 'illustrated by nearly
three hundred engravings, and memoir of Bunyan.'  On the outside it
is lettered 'Bagster's Illustrated Edition,' and after the author's
apology, facing the first page of the tale, a folding pictorial
'Plan of the Road' is marked as 'drawn by the late Mr. T. Conder,'
and engraved by J. Basire.  No further information is anywhere
vouchsafed; perhaps the publishers had judged the work too
unimportant; and we are still left ignorant whether or not we owe
the woodcuts in the body of the volume to the same hand that drew
the plan.  It seems, however, more than probable.  The literal
particularity of mind which, in the map, laid down the flower-plots
in the devil's garden, and carefully introduced the court-house in
the town of Vanity, is closely paralleled in many of the cuts; and
in both, the architecture of the buildings and the disposition of
the gardens have a kindred and entirely English air.  Whoever he
was, the author of these wonderful little pictures may lay claim to
be the best illustrator of Bunyan.  They are not only good
illustrations, like so many others; but they are like so few, good
illustrations of Bunyan.  Their spirit, in defect and quality, is
still the same as his own.  The designer also has lain down and
dreamed a dream, as literal, as quaint, and almost as apposite as
Bunyan's; and text and pictures make but the two sides of the same
homespun yet impassioned story.  To do justice to the designs, it
will be necessary to say, for the hundredth time, a word or two
about the masterpiece which they adorn.

All allegories have a tendency to escape from the purpose of their
creators; and as the characters and incidents become more and more
interesting in themselves, the moral, which these were to show
forth, falls more and more into neglect.  An architect may command
a wreath of vine-leaves round the cornice of a monument; but if, as
each leaf came from the chisel, it took proper life and fluttered
freely on the wall, and if the vine grew, and the building were
hidden over with foliage and fruit, the architect would stand in
much the same situation as the writer of allegories.  The Faery
Queen was an allegory, I am willing to believe; but it survives as
an imaginative tale in incomparable verse.  The case of Bunyan is
widely different; and yet in this also Allegory, poor nymph,
although never quite forgotten, is sometimes rudely thrust against
the wall.  Bunyan was fervently in earnest; with 'his fingers in
his ears, he ran on,' straight for his mark.  He tells us himself,
in the conclusion to the first part, that he did not fear to raise
a laugh; indeed, he feared nothing, and said anything; and he was
greatly served in this by a certain rustic privilege of his style,
which, like the talk of strong uneducated men, when it does not
impress by its force, still charms by its simplicity.  The mere
story and the allegorical design enjoyed perhaps his equal favour.
He believed in both with an energy of faith that was capable of
moving mountains.  And we have to remark in him, not the parts
where inspiration fails and is supplied by cold and merely
decorative invention, but the parts where faith has grown to be
credulity, and his characters become so real to him that he forgets
the end of their creation.  We can follow him step by step into the
trap which he lays for himself by his own entire good faith and
triumphant literality of vision, till the trap closes and shuts him
in an inconsistency.  The allegories of the Interpreter and of the
Shepherds of the Delectable Mountains are all actually performed,
like stage-plays, before the pilgrims.  The son of Mr. Great-grace
visibly 'tumbles hills about with his words.'  Adam the First has
his condemnation written visibly on his forehead, so that Faithful
reads it.  At the very instant the net closes round the pilgrims,
'the white robe falls from the black man's body.'  Despair 'getteth
him a grievous crab-tree cudgel'; it was in 'sunshiny weather' that
he had his fits; and the birds in the grove about the House
Beautiful, 'our country birds,' only sing their little pious verses
'at the spring, when the flowers appear and the sun shines warm.'
'I often,' says Piety, 'go out to hear them; we also ofttimes keep
them tame on our house.'  The post between Beulah and the Celestial
City sounds his horn, as you may yet hear in country places.  Madam
Bubble, that 'tall, comely dame, something of a swarthy complexion,
in very pleasant attire, but old,' 'gives you a smile at the end of
each sentence'--a real woman she; we all know her.  Christiana
dying 'gave Mr. Stand-fast a ring,' for no possible reason in the
allegory, merely because the touch was human and affecting.  Look
at Great-heart, with his soldierly ways, garrison ways, as I had
almost called them; with his taste in weapons; his delight in any
that 'he found to be a man of his hands'; his chivalrous point of
honour, letting Giant Maul get up again when he was down, a thing
fairly flying in the teeth of the moral; above all, with his
language in the inimitable tale of Mr. Fearing:  'I thought I
should have lost my man'--'chicken-hearted'--'at last he came in,
and I will say that for my lord, he carried it wonderful lovingly
to him.'  This is no Independent minister; this is a stout, honest,
big-busted ancient, adjusting his shoulder-belts, twirling his long
moustaches as he speaks.  Last and most remarkable, 'My sword,'
says the dying Valiant-for-Truth, he in whom Great-heart delighted,
'my sword I give to him that shall succeed me in my pilgrimage, AND
MY COURAGE AND SKILL TO HIM THAT CAN GET IT.'  And after this
boast, more arrogantly unorthodox than was ever dreamed of by the
rejected Ignorance, we are told that 'all the trumpets sounded for
him on the other side.'

In every page the book is stamped with the same energy of vision
and the same energy of belief.  The quality is equally and
indifferently displayed in the spirit of the fighting, the
tenderness of the pathos, the startling vigour and strangeness of
the incidents, the natural strain of the conversations, and the
humanity and charm of the characters.  Trivial talk over a meal,
the dying words of heroes, the delights of Beulah or the Celestial
City, Apollyon and my Lord Hate-good, Great-heart, and Mr. Worldly-
Wiseman, all have been imagined with the same clearness, all
written of with equal gusto and precision, all created in the same
mixed element, of simplicity that is almost comical, and art that,
for its purpose, is faultless.

It was in much the same spirit that our artist sat down to his
drawings.  He is by nature a Bunyan of the pencil.  He, too, will
draw anything, from a butcher at work on a dead sheep, up to the
courts of Heaven.  'A Lamb for Supper' is the name of one of his
designs, 'Their Glorious Entry' of another.  He has the same
disregard for the ridiculous, and enjoys somewhat of the same
privilege of style, so that we are pleased even when we laugh the
most.  He is literal to the verge of folly.  If dust is to be
raised from the unswept parlour, you may be sure it will 'fly
abundantly' in the picture.  If Faithful is to lie 'as dead' before
Moses, dead he shall lie with a warrant--dead and stiff like
granite; nay (and here the artist must enhance upon the symbolism
of the author), it is with the identical stone tables of the law
that Moses fells the sinner.  Good and bad people, whom we at once
distinguish in the text by their names, Hopeful, Honest, and
Valiant-for-Truth, on the one hand, as against By-ends, Sir Having
Greedy, and the Lord Old-man on the other, are in these drawings as
simply distinguished by their costume.  Good people, when not armed
cap-a-pie, wear a speckled tunic girt about the waist, and low
hats, apparently of straw.  Bad people swagger in tail-coats and
chimney-pots, a few with knee-breeches, but the large majority in
trousers, and for all the world like guests at a garden-party.
Worldly-Wiseman alone, by some inexplicable quirk, stands before
Christian in laced hat, embroidered waistcoat, and trunk-hose.  But
above all examples of this artist's intrepidity, commend me to the
print entitled 'Christian Finds it Deep.'  'A great darkness and
horror,' says the text, have fallen on the pilgrim; it is the
comfortless deathbed with which Bunyan so strikingly concludes the
sorrows and conflicts of his hero.  How to represent this worthily
the artist knew not; and yet he was determined to represent it
somehow.  This was how he did:  Hopeful is still shown to his neck
above the water of death; but Christian has bodily disappeared, and
a blot of solid blackness indicates his place.

As you continue to look at these pictures, about an inch square for
the most part, sometimes printed three or more to the page, and
each having a printed legend of its own, however trivial the event
recorded, you will soon become aware of two things:  first, that
the man can draw, and, second, that he possesses the gift of an
imagination.  'Obstinate reviles,' says the legend; and you should
see Obstinate reviling.  'He warily retraces his steps'; and there
is Christian, posting through the plain, terror and speed in every
muscle.  'Mercy yearns to go' shows you a plain interior with
packing going forward, and, right in the middle, Mercy yearning to
go--every line of the girl's figure yearning.  In 'The Chamber
called Peace' we see a simple English room, bed with white
curtains, window valance and door, as may be found in many thousand
unpretentious houses; but far off, through the open window, we
behold the sun uprising out of a great plain, and Christian hails
it with his hand:


'Where am I now! is this the love and care
Of Jesus, for the men that pilgrims are!
Thus to provide!  That I should be forgiven!
And dwell already the next door to heaven!'


A page or two further, from the top of the House Beautiful, the
damsels point his gaze toward the Delectable Mountains:  'The
Prospect,' so the cut is ticketed--and I shall be surprised, if on
less than a square inch of paper you can show me one so wide and
fair.  Down a cross road on an English plain, a cathedral city
outlined on the horizon, a hazel shaw upon the left, comes Madam
Wanton dancing with her fair enchanted cup, and Faithful, book in
hand, half pauses.  The cut is perfect as a symbol; the giddy
movement of the sorceress, the uncertain poise of the man struck to
the heart by a temptation, the contrast of that even plain of life
whereon he journeys with the bold, ideal bearing of the wanton--the
artist who invented and portrayed this had not merely read Bunyan,
he had also thoughtfully lived.  The Delectable Mountains--I
continue skimming the first part--are not on the whole happily
rendered.  Once, and once only, the note is struck, when Christian
and Hopeful are seen coming, shoulder-high, through a thicket of
green shrubs--box, perhaps, or perfumed nutmeg; while behind them,
domed or pointed, the hills stand ranged against the sky.  A little
further, and we come to that masterpiece of Bunyan's insight into
life, the Enchanted Ground; where, in a few traits, he has set down
the latter end of such a number of the would-be good; where his
allegory goes so deep that, to people looking seriously on life, it
cuts like satire.  The true significance of this invention lies, of
course, far out of the way of drawing; only one feature, the great
tedium of the land, the growing weariness in well-doing, may be
somewhat represented in a symbol.  The pilgrims are near the end:
'Two Miles Yet,' says the legend.  The road goes ploughing up and
down over a rolling heath; the wayfarers, with outstretched arms,
are already sunk to the knees over the brow of the nearest hill;
they have just passed a milestone with the cipher two; from
overhead a great, piled, summer cumulus, as of a slumberous summer
afternoon, beshadows them:  two miles! it might be hundreds.  In
dealing with the Land of Beulah the artist lags, in both parts,
miserably behind the text, but in the distant prospect of the
Celestial City more than regains his own.  You will remember when
Christian and Hopeful 'with desire fell sick.'  'Effect of the
Sunbeams' is the artist's title.  Against the sky, upon a cliffy
mountain, the radiant temple beams upon them over deep, subjacent
woods; they, behind a mound, as if seeking shelter from the
splendour--one prostrate on his face, one kneeling, and with hands
ecstatically lifted--yearn with passion after that immortal city.
Turn the page, and we behold them walking by the very shores of
death; Heaven, from this nigher view, has risen half-way to the
zenith, and sheds a wider glory; and the two pilgrims, dark against
that brightness, walk and sing out of the fulness of their hearts.
No cut more thoroughly illustrates at once the merit and the
weakness of the artist.  Each pilgrim sings with a book in his
grasp--a family Bible at the least for bigness; tomes so recklessly
enormous that our second, impulse is to laughter.  And yet that is
not the first thought, nor perhaps the last.  Something in the
attitude of the manikins--faces they have none, they are too small
for that--something in the way they swing these monstrous volumes
to their singing, something perhaps borrowed from the text, some
subtle differentiation from the cut that went before and the cut
that follows after--something, at least, speaks clearly of a
fearful joy, of Heaven seen from the deathbed, of the horror of the
last passage no less than of the glorious coming home.  There is
that in the action of one of them which always reminds me, with a
difference, of that haunting last glimpse of Thomas Idle,
travelling to Tyburn in the cart.  Next come the Shining Ones,
wooden and trivial enough; the pilgrims pass into the river; the
blot already mentioned settles over and obliterates Christian.  In
two more cuts we behold them drawing nearer to the other shore; and
then, between two radiant angels, one of whom points upward, we see
them mounting in new weeds, their former lendings left behind them
on the inky river.  More angels meet them; Heaven is displayed, and
if no better, certainly no worse, than it has been shown by others-
-a place, at least, infinitely populous and glorious with light--a
place that haunts solemnly the hearts of children.  And then this
symbolic draughtsman once more strikes into his proper vein.  Three
cuts conclude the first part.  In the first the gates close, black
against the glory struggling from within.  The second shows us
Ignorance--alas! poor Arminian!--hailing, in a sad twilight, the
ferryman Vain-Hope; and in the third we behold him, bound hand and
foot, and black already with the hue of his eternal fate, carried
high over the mountain-tops of the world by two angels of the anger
of the Lord.  'Carried to Another Place,' the artist enigmatically
names his plate--a terrible design.

Wherever he touches on the black side of the supernatural his
pencil grows more daring and incisive.  He has many true inventions
in the perilous and diabolic; he has many startling nightmares
realised.  It is not easy to select the best; some may like one and
some another; the nude, depilated devil bounding and casting darts
against the Wicket Gate; the scroll of flying horrors that hang
over Christian by the Mouth of Hell; the horned shade that comes
behind him whispering blasphemies; the daylight breaking through
that rent cave-mouth of the mountains and falling chill adown the
haunted tunnel; Christian's further progress along the causeway,
between the two black pools, where, at every yard or two, a gin, a
pitfall, or a snare awaits the passer-by--loathsome white devilkins
harbouring close under the bank to work the springes, Christian
himself pausing and pricking with his sword's point at the nearest
noose, and pale discomfortable mountains rising on the farther
side; or yet again, the two ill-favoured ones that beset the first
of Christian's journey, with the frog-like structure of the skull,
the frog-like limberness of limbs--crafty, slippery, lustful-
looking devils, drawn always in outline as though possessed of a
dim, infernal luminosity.  Horrid fellows are they, one and all;
horrid fellows and horrific scenes.  In another spirit that Good-
Conscience 'to whom Mr. Honest had spoken in his lifetime,' a
cowled, grey, awful figure, one hand pointing to the heavenly
shore, realises, I will not say all, but some at least of the
strange impressiveness of Bunyan's words.  It is no easy nor
pleasant thing to speak in one's lifetime with Good-Conscience; he
is an austere, unearthly friend, whom maybe Torquemada knew; and
the folds of his raiment are not merely claustral, but have
something of the horror of the pall.  Be not afraid, however; with
the hand of that appearance Mr. Honest will get safe across.

Yet perhaps it is in sequences that this artist best displays
himself.  He loves to look at either side of a thing:  as, for
instance, when he shows us both sides of the wall--'Grace
Inextinguishable' on the one side, with the devil vainly pouring
buckets on the flame, and 'The Oil of Grace' on the other, where
the Holy Spirit, vessel in hand, still secretly supplies the fire.
He loves, also, to show us the same event twice over, and to repeat
his instantaneous photographs at the interval of but a moment.  So
we have, first, the whole troop of pilgrims coming up to Valiant,
and Great-heart to the front, spear in hand and parleying; and
next, the same cross-roads, from a more distant view, the convoy
now scattered and looking safely and curiously on, and Valiant
handing over for inspection his 'right Jerusalem blade.'  It is
true that this designer has no great care after consistency:
Apollyon's spear is laid by, his quiver of darts will disappear,
whenever they might hinder the designer's freedom; and the fiend's
tail is blobbed or forked at his good pleasure.  But this is not
unsuitable to the illustration of the fervent Bunyan, breathing
hurry and momentary inspiration.  He, with his hot purpose, hunting
sinners with a lasso, shall himself forget the things that he has
written yesterday.  He shall first slay Heedless in the Valley of
the Shadow, and then take leave of him talking in his sleep, as if
nothing had happened, in an arbour on the Enchanted Ground.  And
again, in his rhymed prologue, he shall assign some of the glory of
the siege of Doubting Castle to his favourite Valiant-for-the-
Truth, who did not meet with the besiegers till long after, at that
dangerous corner by Deadman's Lane.  And, with all inconsistencies
and freedoms, there is a power shown in these sequences of cuts:  a
power of joining on one action or one humour to another; a power of
following out the moods, even of the dismal subterhuman fiends
engendered by the artist's fancy; a power of sustained continuous
realisation, step by step, in nature's order, that can tell a
story, in all its ins and outs, its pauses and surprises, fully and
figuratively, like the art of words.

One such sequence is the fight of Christian and Apollyon--six cuts,
weird and fiery, like the text.  The pilgrim is throughout a pale
and stockish figure; but the devil covers a multitude of defects.
There is no better devil of the conventional order than our
artist's Apollyon, with his mane, his wings, his bestial legs, his
changing and terrifying expression, his infernal energy to slay.
In cut the first you see him afar off, still obscure in form, but
already formidable in suggestion.  Cut the second, 'The Fiend in
Discourse,' represents him, not reasoning, railing rather, shaking
his spear at the pilgrim, his shoulder advanced, his tail writhing
in the air, his foot ready for a spring, while Christian stands
back a little, timidly defensive.  The third illustrates these
magnificent words:  'Then Apollyon straddled quite over the whole
breadth of the way, and said, I am void of fear in this matter:
prepare thyself to die; for I swear by my infernal den that thou
shalt go no farther:  here will I spill thy soul!  And with that he
threw a flaming dart at his breast.'  In the cut he throws a dart
with either hand, belching pointed flames out of his mouth,
spreading his broad vans, and straddling the while across the path,
as only a fiend can straddle who has just sworn by his infernal
den.  The defence will not be long against such vice, such flames,
such red-hot nether energy.  And in the fourth cut, to be sure, he
has leaped bodily upon his victim, sped by foot and pinion, and
roaring as he leaps.  The fifth shows the climacteric of the
battle; Christian has reached nimbly out and got his sword, and
dealt that deadly home-thrust, the fiend still stretched upon him,
but 'giving back, as one that had received his mortal wound.'  The
raised head, the bellowing mouth, the paw clapped upon the sword,
the one wing relaxed in agony, all realise vividly these words of
the text.  In the sixth and last, the trivial armed figure of the
pilgrim is seen kneeling with clasped hands on the betrodden scene
of contest and among the shivers of the darts; while just at the
margin the hinder quarters and the tail of Apollyon are whisking
off, indignant and discounted.

In one point only do these pictures seem to be unworthy of the
text, and that point is one rather of the difference of arts than
the difference of artists.  Throughout his best and worst, in his
highest and most divine imaginations as in the narrowest sallies of
his sectarianism, the human-hearted piety of Bunyan touches and
ennobles, convinces, accuses the reader.  Through no art beside the
art of words can the kindness of a man's affections be expressed.
In the cuts you shall find faithfully parodied the quaintness and
the power, the triviality and the surprising freshness of the
author's fancy; there you shall find him out-stripped in ready
symbolism and the art of bringing things essentially invisible
before the eyes:  but to feel the contact of essential goodness, to
be made in love with piety, the book must be read and not the
prints examined.

Farewell should not be taken with a grudge; nor can I dismiss in
any other words than those of gratitude a series of pictures which
have, to one at least, been the visible embodiment of Bunyan from
childhood up, and shown him, through all his years, Great-heart
lungeing at Giant Maul, and Apollyon breathing fire at Christian,
and every turn and town along the road to the Celestial City, and
that bright place itself, seen as to a stave of music, shining afar
off upon the hill-top, the candle of the world.


SKETCHES


THE SATIRIST


My companion enjoyed a cheap reputation for wit and insight.  He
was by habit and repute a satirist.  If he did occasionally condemn
anything or anybody who richly deserved it, and whose demerits had
hitherto escaped, it was simply because he condemned everything and
everybody.  While I was with him he disposed of St. Paul with an
epigram, shook my reverence for Shakespeare in a neat antithesis,
and fell foul of the Almighty Himself, on the score of one or two
out of the ten commandments.  Nothing escaped his blighting
censure.  At every sentence he overthrew an idol, or lowered my
estimation of a friend.  I saw everything with new eyes, and could
only marvel at my former blindness.  How was it possible that I had
not before observed A's false hair, B's selfishness, or C's boorish
manners?  I and my companion, methought, walked the streets like a
couple of gods among a swarm of vermin; for every one we saw seemed
to bear openly upon his brow the mark of the apocalyptic beast.  I
half expected that these miserable beings, like the people of
Lystra, would recognise their betters and force us to the altar; in
which case, warned by the late of Paul and Barnabas, I do not know
that my modesty would have prevailed upon me to decline.  But there
was no need for such churlish virtue.  More blinded than the
Lycaonians, the people saw no divinity in our gait; and as our
temporary godhead lay more in the way of observing than healing
their infirmities, we were content to pass them by in scorn.

I could not leave my companion, not from regard or even from
interest, but from a very natural feeling, inseparable from the
case.  To understand it, let us take a simile.  Suppose yourself
walking down the street with a man who continues to sprinkle the
crowd out of a flask of vitriol.  You would be much diverted with
the grimaces and contortions of his victims; and at the same time
you would fear to leave his arm until his bottle was empty, knowing
that, when once among the crowd, you would run a good chance
yourself of baptism with his biting liquor.  Now my companion's
vitriol was inexhaustible.

It was perhaps the consciousness of this, the knowledge that I was
being anointed already out of the vials of his wrath, that made me
fall to criticising the critic, whenever we had parted.

After all, I thought, our satirist has just gone far enough into
his neighbours to find that the outside is false, without caring to
go farther and discover what is really true.  He is content to find
that things are not what they seem, and broadly generalises from it
that they do not exist at all.  He sees our virtues are not what
they pretend they are; and, on the strength of that, he denies us
the possession of virtue altogether.  He has learnt the first
lesson, that no man is wholly good; but he has not even suspected
that there is another equally true, to wit, that no man is wholly
bad.  Like the inmate of a coloured star, he has eyes for one
colour alone.  He has a keen scent after evil, but his nostrils are
plugged against all good, as people plugged their nostrils before
going about the streets of the plague-struck city.

Why does he do this?  It is most unreasonable to flee the knowledge
of good like the infection of a horrible disease, and batten and
grow fat in the real atmosphere of a lazar-house.  This was my
first thought; but my second was not like unto it, and I saw that
our satirist was wise, wise in his generation, like the unjust
steward.  He does not want light, because the darkness is more
pleasant.  He does not wish to see the good, because he is happier
without it.  I recollect that when I walked with him, I was in a
state of divine exaltation, such as Adam and Eve must have enjoyed
when the savour of the fruit was still unfaded between their lips;
and I recognise that this must be the man's habitual state.  He has
the forbidden fruit in his waist-coat pocket, and can make himself
a god as often and as long as he likes.  He has raised himself upon
a glorious pedestal above his fellows; he has touched the summit of
ambition; and he envies neither King nor Kaiser, Prophet nor
Priest, content in an elevation as high as theirs, and much more
easily attained.  Yes, certes, much more easily attained.  He has
not risen by climbing himself, but by pushing others down.  He has
grown great in his own estimation, not by blowing himself out, and
risking the fate of AEsop's frog, but simply by the habitual use of
a diminishing glass on everybody else.  And I think altogether that
his is a better, a safer, and a surer recipe than most others.

After all, however, looking back on what I have written, I detect a
spirit suspiciously like his own.  All through, I have been
comparing myself with our satirist, and all through, I have had the
best of the comparison.  Well, well, contagion is as often mental
as physical; and I do not think my readers, who have all been under
his lash, will blame me very much for giving the headsman a
mouthful of his own sawdust.


NUITS BLANCHES


If any one should know the pleasure and pain of a sleepless night,
it should be I.  Beyond the grass on either side blooms a profusion
of bless-my-soul-if-I-haven't-forgotten-agains and other quaintly
named old-world English flowers. On the left-hand strip of lawn,
looking gatewards, is the metal pin to which the captive golf-ball
is tied. On the right is the pear-tree, to which later on we have
to affix a captive pear.

"What I like about the garden," I said to Araminta when we first moved
in, "is the fact that it is in front, so that visitors, instead
of saying in a perfunctory way, 'Have you got a garden, too? How
delightful!' will be forced to murmur, 'How sweet the clover smelt
on your lawn as we came up the drive. What a perfectly entrancing
golf-ball.'It was a calm; or I know that I should have
heard in the roar and clatter of the storm, as I have not heard it
for so many years, the wild career of a horseman, always scouring
up from the distance and passing swiftly below the window; yet
always returning again from the place whence first he came, as
though, baffled by some higher power, he had retraced his steps to
gain impetus for another and another attempt.

As I lay there, there arose out of the utter stillness the rumbling
of a carriage a very great way off, that drew near, and passed
within a few streets of the house, and died away as gradually as it
had arisen.  This, too, was as a reminiscence.

I rose and lifted a corner of the blind.  Over the black belt of
the garden I saw the long line of Queen Street, with here and there
a lighted window.  How often before had my nurse lifted me out of
bed and pointed them out to me, while we wondered together if,
there also, there were children that could not sleep, and if these
lighted oblongs were signs of those that waited like us for the
morning.

I went out into the lobby, and looked down into the great deep well
of the staircase.  For what cause I know not, just as it used to be
in the old days that the feverish child might be the better served,
a peep of gas illuminated a narrow circle far below me.  But where
I was, all was darkness and silence, save the dry monotonous
ticking of the clock that came ceaselessly up to my ear.

The final crown of it all, however, the last touch of reproduction
on the pictures of my memory, was the arrival of that time for
which, all night through, I waited and longed of old.  It was my
custom, as the hours dragged on, to repeat the question, 'When will
the carts come in?' and repeat it again and again until at last
those sounds arose in the street that I have heard once more this
morning.  The road before our house is a great thoroughfare for
early carts.  I know not, and I never have known, what they carry,
whence they come, or whither they go.  But I know that, long ere
dawn, and for hours together, they stream continuously past, with
the same rolling and jerking of wheels and the same clink of
horses' feet.  It was not for nothing that they made the burthen of
my wishes all night through.  They are really the first throbbings
of life, the harbingers of day; and it pleases you as much to hear
them as it must please a shipwrecked seaman once again to grasp a
hand of flesh and blood after years of miserable solitude.  They
have the freshness of the daylight life about them.  God is above
all and in all. There are no other gods before Him. He is
supreme, manifested as Father, Son and Holy Spirit. We come at
once here to the Great Personal Power, beyond whom there is no
greater. We do not look upon Him as a cold abstraction or blind
force, but as a loving, kind Father. He desires to do more for
us than we can ask or think. No man prays to God in the right way
who does not first of all have a proper conception of God.
2. Right attitude of the heart.In the middle of it all I fell asleep, to be wakened by the
officious knocking at my door, and I find myself twelve years older
than I had dreamed myself all night.


THE WREATH OF IMMORTELLES


It is all very well to talk of death as 'a pleasant potion of
immortality', but the most of us, I suspect, are of 'queasy
stomachs,' and find it none of the sweetest. {9a}  The graveyard
may be cloak-room to Heaven; but we must admit that it is a very
ugly and offensive vestibule in itself, however fair may be the
life to which it leads.  And though Enoch and Elias went into the
temple through a gate which certainly may be called Beautiful, the
rest of us have to find our way to it through Ezekiel's low-bowed
door and the vault full of creeping things and all manner of
abominable beasts.  Nevertheless, there is a certain frame of mind
to which a cemetery is, if not an antidote, at least an
alleviation.  If you are in a fit of the blues, go nowhere else.
It was in obedience to this wise regulation that the other morning
found me lighting my pipe at the entrance to Old Greyfriars',
thoroughly sick of the town, the country, and myself.

Two of the men were talking at the gate, one of them carrying a
spade in hands still crusted with the soil of graves.  Their very
aspect was delightful to me; and I crept nearer to them, thinking
to pick up some snatch of sexton gossip, some 'talk fit for a
charnel,' {9b} something, in fine, worthy of that fastidious
logician, that adept in coroner's law, who has come down to us as
the patron of Yaughan's liquor, and the very prince of
gravediggers.  Scots people in general are so much wrapped up in
their profession that I had a good chance of overhearing such
conversation:  the talk of fish-mongers running usually on
stockfish and haddocks; while of the Scots sexton I could repeat
stories and speeches that positively smell of the graveyard.  But
on this occasion I was doomed to disappointment.  My two friends
were far into the region of generalities.  Their profession was
forgotten in their electorship.  Politics had engulfed the narrower
economy of grave-digging.  'Na, na,' said the one, 'ye're a'
wrang.'  'The English and Irish Churches,' answered the other, in a
tone as if he had made the remark before, and it had been called in
question--'The English and Irish Churches have IMPOVERISHED the
country.'

