So "preacher day," as Will always called it, became the torment of our
lives.

To tell the truth, Will always was teasing us, but if he crooked his
finger at us we would bawl. We bawled and squalled from morning till
night. Yet we fairly worshiped him, and cried harder when he went away
than when he was home.


CHAPTER VII. -- INDIAN ENCOUNTER AND SCHOOL-DAY INCIDENTS.

WILL was not long at home. The Mormons, who were settled in Utah,
rebelled when the government, objecting to the quality of justice meted
out by Brigham Young, sent a federal judge to the territory. Troops,
under the command of General Albert Sidney Johnston, were dispatched
to quell the insurrection, and Russell, Majors & Waddell contracted to
transport stores and beef cattle to the army massing against the Mormons
in the fall of 1857. The train was a large one, better prepared against
such an attack as routed the McCarthy brothers earlier in the summer;
yet its fate was the same.

Will was assigned to duty as "extra" under Lew Simpson, an experienced
wagon-master, and was subject to his orders only. There was the double
danger of Mormons and Indians, so the pay was good. Forty dollars a
month in gold looked like a large sum to an eleven-year-old.

Will's second departure was quite as tragic as the first. We girls,
as before, were loud in our wailings, and offered to forgive him the
depredations in the doll-house and all his teasings, if only he would
not go away and be scalped by the Indians. Mother said little, but
her anxious look, as she recalled the perils of the former trip, spoke
volumes. He carried with him the memory of the open-mouthed admiration
of little Charlie, to whom "Brother Will" was the greatest hero in the
world. Turk's grief at the parting was not a whit less than ours, and
the faithful old fellow seemed to realize that in Will's absence the
duty of the family protector devolved on him; so he made no attempt to
follow Will beyond the gate.

The train made good progress, and more than half the journey to Fort
Bridger was accomplished without a setback. When the Rockies were
reached, a noon halt was made near Green River, and here the men were
surrounded and overcome by a large force of Danites, the "Avenging
Angels" of the Mormon Church, who had "stolen the livery of the court of
heaven to serve the devil in." These were responsible for the atrocious
Mountain Meadow Massacre, in June of this same year, though the wily
"Saints" had planned to place the odium of an unprovoked murder of
innocent women and children upon the Indians, who had enough to answer
for, and in this instance were but the tools of the Mormon Church.
Brigham Young repudiated his accomplice, and allowed John D. Lee to
become the scapegoat. The dying statement of this man is as pathetic as
Cardinal Wolsey's arraignment of Henry VIII.

"A victim must be had," said he, "and I am that victim. For thirty years
I studied to make Brigham Young's will my law. See now what I have come
to this day. I have been sacrificed in a cowardly, dastardly manner. I
do not fear death. I cannot go to a worse place than I am now in."

John D. Lee deserved his fate, but Brigham Young was none the less a
coward.

The Danites spared the lives of the trainmen, but they made sad havoc
of the supplies. These they knew to be intended for the use of the army
opposed to Brigham Young. They carried off all the stores they could
handle, drove with them or stampeded the cattle, and burned the wagons.
The trainmen were permitted to retain one wagon and team, with just
enough supplies to last them to army headquarters.

It was a disheartened, discomfited band that reached Fort Bridger. The
information that two other trains had been destroyed added to their
discouragement, for that meant that they, in common with the other
trainmen and the soldiers at the fort, must subsist on short rations for
the winter. There were nearly four hundred of these trainmen, and it was
so late in the season that they had no choice but to remain where they
were until spring opened.

It was an irksome winter. The men at the fort hauled their firewood two
miles; as the provisions dwindled, one by one the oxen were slaughtered,
and when this food supply was exhausted, starvation reared its gaunt
form. Happily the freighters got word of the situation, and a relief
team reached the fort before the spring was fairly opened.

As soon as practicable the return journey was undertaken. At Fort
Laramie two large trains were put in charge of Lew Simpson, as brigade
wagon-master, and Will was installed as courier between the two
caravans, which traveled twenty miles apart--plenty of elbow room for
camping and foraging.

One morning, Simpson, George Woods, and Will, who were in the rear
train, set out for the forward one, mounted upon mules, and armed, as
the trainmen always were, with rifle, knife, and a brace of revolvers.
About half of the twenty miles had been told off when the trio saw a
band of Indians emerge from a clump of trees half a mile away and sweep
toward them. Flight with the mules was useless; resistance promised
hardly more success, as the Indians numbered a full half-hundred: but
surrender was death and mutilation.

"Shoot the mules, boys!" ordered Simpson, and five minutes later two men
and a boy looked grimly over a still palpitating barricade.

The defense was simple; rifles at range, revolvers for close quarters,
knives at the last. The chief, easily distinguished by his feathered
head-dress, was assigned to Will. Already his close shooting was the
pride of the frontiersmen. Simpson's coolness steadied the lad, who
realized that the situation was desperate.

The Indians came on with the rush and scream of the March wind. "Fire!"
said Simpson, and three ponies galloped riderless as the smoke curled
from three rifle barrels.

Dismayed by the fall of their chief, the redskins wheeled and rode out
of range. Will gave a sigh of relief.

"Load up again, Billy!" smiled Simpson. "They'll soon be back."

"They've only three or four rifles," said Woods. There had been little
lead in the cloud of arrows.

"Here they come!" warned Simpson, and the trio ran their rifles out over
the dead mules.

Three more riderless ponies; but the Indians kept on, supposing they
had drawn the total fire of the whites. A revolver fusillade undeceived
them, and the charging column wavered and broke for cover.

Simpson patted Will on the shoulder as they reloaded. "You're a game
one, Billy!" said he.

"You bet he is," echoed Woods, coolly drawing an arrow from his
shoulder. "How is that, Lew--poisoned?"

Will waited breathless for the decision, and his relief was as great as
Woods's when Simpson, after a critical scrutiny, answered "No."

The wound was hastily dressed, and the little company gave an undivided
attention to the foe, who were circling around their quarry, hanging to
the off sides of their ponies and firing under them. With a touch of
the grim humor that plain life breeds, Will declared that the mules were
veritable pincushions, so full of arrows were they stuck.

The besieged maintained a return fire, dropping pony after pony, and
occasionally a rider. This proved expensive sport to the Indians, and
the whole party finally withdrew from range.

There was a long breathing spell, which the trio improved by
strengthening their defense, digging up the dirt with their knives
and piling it upon the mules. It was tedious work, but preferable to
inactivity and cramped quarters.

Two hours went by, and the plan of the enemy was disclosed. A light
breeze arose, and the Indians fired the prairie. Luckily the grass
near the trail was short, and though the heat was intense and the smoke
stifling, the barricade held off the flame. Simpson had kept a close
watch, and presently gave the order to fire. A volley went through
the smoke and blaze, and the yell that followed proved that it was
not wasted. This last ruse failing, the Indians settled down to their
favorite game--waiting.

A thin line of them circled out of range; ponies were picketed and tents
pitched; night fell, and the stars shot out.

As Woods was wounded, he was excused from guard duty, Will and Simpson
keeping watch in turn. Will took the first vigil, and, tired though he
was, experienced no difficulty in keeping awake, but he went soundly to
sleep the moment he was relieved. He was wakened by a dream that Turk
was barking to him, and vaguely alarmed, he sat up to find Simpson
sleeping across his rifle.

The midnight hush was unbroken, and the darkness lay thick upon the
plain, but shapes blacker than night hovered near, and Will laid his
hand on Simpson's shoulder.

The latter was instantly alive, and Woods was wakened. A faint click
went away on the night breeze, and a moment later three jets of flame
carried warning to the up-creeping foe that the whites were both alive
and on the alert.

There was no more sleep within the barricade. The dawn grew into day,
and anxious eyes scanned the trail for reinforcements--coming surely,
but on what heavy and slow-turning wheels!

Noon came and passed. The anxious eyes questioned one another. Had the
rear train been overcome by a larger band of savages? But suddenly
half a dozen of the Indians were seen to spring up with gestures of
excitement, and spread the alarm around the circle.

"They hear the cracking of the bull-whips," said Simpson.

The Indians who had seen the first team pass, and had assumed that
Simpson and his companions were straggling members of it, did not
expect another train so soon. There was "mounting in hot haste," and the
Indians rode away in one bunch for the distant foothills, just as the
first ox-team broke into view.

And never was there fairer picture to more appreciative eyes than those
same lumbering, clumsy animals, and never sweeter music than the harsh
staccato of the bullwhips.

When hunger was appeased, and Woods's wound properly dressed, Will, for
the second time, found himself a hero among the plainsmen. His nerve and
coolness were dwelt upon by Simpson, and to the dream that waked him in
season was ascribed the continued life on earth of the little company.
Will, however, was disposed to allow Turk the full credit for the
service.

The remainder of the trip was devoid of special incident, and as Will
neared home he hurried on in advance of the train. His heart beat high
as he thought of the dear faces awaiting him, unconscious that he was so
near.

But the home toward which he was hastening with beating heart and winged
heels was shadowed by a great grief. Sister Martha's married life,
though brief, had amply justified her brother's estimate of the man into
whose hands she had given her life. She was taken suddenly ill, and it
was not until several months later that Will learned that the cause of
her sickness was the knowledge that had come to her of the faithless
nature of her husband. The revelation was made through the visit of one
of Mr. C----'s creditors, who, angered at a refusal to liquidate a debt,
accused Mr. C----of being a bigamist, and threatened to set the law upon
him. The blow was fatal to one of Martha's pure and affectionate
nature, already crushed by neglect and cruelty. All that night she
was delirious, and her one thought was "Willie," and the danger he was
in--not alone the physical danger, but the moral and spiritual peril
that she feared lay in association with rough and reckless men. She
moaned and tossed, and uttered incoherent cries; but as the morning
broke the storm went down, and the anxious watchers fancied that she
slept. Suddenly she sat up, the light of reason again shining in her
eyes, and with a joyous cry, "Tell mother Willie's saved! Willie's
saved!" she fell back on her pillow, and her spirit passed away. On her
face was the peace that the world can neither give nor take away. The
veil of the Unknown had been drawn aside for a space. She had "sent her
soul through the Invisible," and it had found the light that lit the
last weary steps through the Valley of the Shadow.

Mr. C---- had moved from Leavenworth to Johnson County, twenty-five
miles away, and as there were neither telegraph nor mail facilities,
he had the body sent home, himself accompanying it. Thus our first
knowledge of Martha's sickness came when her lifeless clay was borne
across our threshold, the threshold that, less than a year before, she
had crossed a bright and bonny bride. Dazed by the shock, we longed
for Will's return before we must lay his idolized sister forever in her
narrow cell.

All of the family, Mr. C---- included, were gathered in the
sitting-room, sad and silent, when Turk suddenly raised his head,
listened a second, and bounded out of doors.

"Will is coming!" cried mother, and we all ran to the door. Turk was
racing up the long hill, at the top of which was a moving speck that the
dog knew to be his master. His keen ears had caught the familiar whistle
half a mile away.

When Turk had manifested his joy at the meeting, he prepared Will for
the bereavement that awaited him; he put his head down and emitted a
long and repeated wail. Will's first thought was for mother, and he
fairly ran down the hill. The girls met him some distance from the
house, and sobbed out the sad news.

And when he had listened, the lad that had passed unflinching through
two Indian fights, broke down, and sobbed with the rest of us.

"Did that rascal, C----, have anything to do with her death?" he asked,
when the first passion of grief was over.

Julia, who knew no better at the time, replied that Mr. C----was the
kindest of husbands, and was crushed with sorrow at his loss; but spite
of the assurance, Will, when he reached the house, had neither look nor
word for him. He just put his arms about mother's neck, and mingled his
grief with her words of sympathy and love.

Martha was shortly after laid by father's side, and as we stood weeping
in that awful moment when the last spadeful of earth completes the
sepulture, Will, no longer master of himself, stepped up before Mr.
C----:

"Murderer," he said, "one day you shall answer to me for the death of
her who lies there!"

When Will next presented himself at Mr. Majors's office, he was told
that his services had been wholly satisfactory, and that he could have
work at any time he desired. This was gratifying, but a sweeter pleasure
was to lay his winter's wages in mother's lap. Through his help, and her
business ability, our pecuniary affairs were in good condition. We
were comfortably situated, and as Salt Creek Valley now boasted of a
schoolhouse, mother wished Will to enter school. He was so young when
he came West that his school-days had been few; nor was the prospect
of adding to their number alluring. After the excitement of life on the
plains, going to school was dull work; but Will realized that there was
a world beyond the prairie's horizon, and he entered school, determined
to do honest work.

Our first teacher was of the good, old-fashioned sort. He taught
because he had to live. He had no love for his work, and knew nothing of
children. The one motto he lived up to was, "Spare the rod and spoil the
child." As Will was a regular Tartar in the schoolroom, he, more than
all the other scholars, made him put his smarting theory into practice.
Almost every afternoon was attended with the dramatic attempt to switch
Will. The schoolroom was separated into two grand divisions, "the boys
on teacher's side," and those "on the Cody side." The teacher would send
his pets out to get switches, and part of our division--we girls, of
course--would begin to weep; while those who had spunk would spit on
their hands, clench their fists, and "dare 'em to bring them switches
in!" Those were hot times in old Salt Creek Valley!

One morning Turk, too, was seized with educational ambition, and
accompanied Will to school. We tried to drive him home, but he followed
at a distance, and as we entered the schoolhouse, he emerged from the
shrubbery by the roadside and crept under the building.

Alas for the scholars, and alas for the school! Another ambitious dog
reposed beneath the temple of learning.

Will, about that time, was having a bad quarter of an hour. An
examination into his knowledge, or lack of it, was under way, and he was
hard pressed. Had he been asked how to strike a trail, locate water,
or pitch a tent, his replies would have been full and accurate, but
the teacher's queries seemed as foolish as the "Reeling and Writhing,
Ambition, Distraction, Uglification, and Derision" of the Mock Turtle in
"Alice in Wonderland."

Turk effected an unexpected rescue. Snarls were heard beneath the
schoolhouse; then savage growls and yelps, while the floor resounded
with the whacks of the canine combatants. With a whoop that would not
have disgraced an Indian, Will was out of doors, shouting, "Eat him up,
Turk! Eat him up!"

The owner of the opposing dog was one Steve Gobel. 'Twixt him and Will
a good-sized feud existed. Steve was also on the scene, with a defiant,
"Sic 'em, Nigger!" and the rest of the school followed in his wake.

Of the twisting, yelping bundle of dog-flesh that rolled from under the
schoolhouse it was difficult to say which was Turk and which Nigger.
Eliza and I called to Turk, and wept because he would not hear. The
teacher ordered the children back to their studies, but they were
as deaf as Turk; whereat the enraged pedagogue hopped wildly about,
flourishing a stick and whacking every boy that strayed within reach of
it.

Nigger soon had enough of the fight, and striking his tail-colors, fled
yelping from the battle-ground. His master, Steve Gobel, a large youth
of nineteen or twenty years, pulled off his coat to avenge upon Will
the dog's defeat, but the teacher effected a Solomon-like compromise by
whipping both boys for bringing their dogs to school, after which the
interrupted session was resumed.

But Gobel nursed his wrath, and displayed his enmity in a thousand small
ways. Will paid no attention to him, but buckled down to his school
work. Will was a born "lady's man," and when Miss Mary Hyatt complicated
the feud 'twixt him and Steve, it hurried to its climax. Mary was older
than Will, but she plainly showed her preference for him over Master
Gobel. Steve had never distinguished himself in an Indian fight; he was
not a hero, but just a plain boy.

Now, indeed, was Will's life unendurable; "patience had had its perfect
work." He knew that a boy of twelve, however strong and sinewy, was
not a match for an almost full-grown man; so, to balance matters, he
secreted on his person an old bowie-knife. When next he met Steve,
the latter climaxed his bullying tactics by striking the object of his
resentment; but he was unprepared for the sudden leap that bore him
backward to the earth. Size and strength told swiftly in the struggle
that succeeded, but Will, with a dextrous thrust, put the point of the
bowie into the fleshy part of Steve's lower leg, a spot where he knew
the cut would not be serious.

The stricken bully shrieked that he was killed; the children gathered
round, and screamed loudly at the sight of blood. "Will Cody has killed
Steve Gobel!" was the wailing cry, and Will, though he knew Steve was
but pinked, began to realize that frontier styles of combat were not
esteemed in communities given up to the soberer pursuits of spelling,
arithmetic, and history. Steve, he knew, was more frightened than hurt;
but the picture of the prostrate, ensanguined youth, and the group of
awestricken children, bore in upon his mind the truth that his act was
an infraction of the civil code; that even in self-defense, he had no
right to use a knife unless his life was threatened.

The irate pedagogue was hastening to the scene, and after one glance at
him, Will incontinently fled. At the road he came upon a wagon train,
and with a shout of joy recognized in the "boss" John Willis, a
wagon-master employed by Russell, Majors & Waddell, and a great friend
of the "boy extra." Will climbed up behind Willis on his horse, and
related his escapade to a close and sympathetic listener.

"If you say so, Billy," was his comment, "I'll go over and lick the
whole outfit, and stampede the school."

"No, let the school alone," replied Will; "but I guess I'll graduate, if
you'll let me go along with you this trip."

Willis readily agreed, but insisted upon returning to the schoolhouse.
"I m not going," said he, "to let you be beaten by a bully of a boy, and
a Yankee school-teacher, with a little learning, but not a bit of sand."
His idea of equalizing forces was that he and "Little Billy" should
fight against the pedagogue and Steve.

Will consented, and they rode back to the schoolhouse, on the door
of which Willis pounded with his revolver butt, and when the door was
opened he invited Gobel and the "grammar man" to come forth and do
battle. But Steve had gone home, and the teacher, on seeing the two
gladiators, fled, while the scholars, dismissing themselves, ran home in
a fright.

That night mother received a note from the teacher.

He was not hired, he wrote, to teach desperadoes; therefore Will was
dismissed. But Will had already dismissed himself, and had rejoined the
larger school whose walls are the blue bowl called the sky. And long
after was his name used by the pedagogue to conjure up obedience in his
pupils; unless they kissed the rod, they, too, might go to the bad, and
follow in Will Cody's erring footsteps.

Willis and Will had gone but a piece on the road when horsemen were seen
approaching.

"Mr. Gobel and the officers are after me," said Will.

"Being after you and gittin' you are two different things," said the
wagon-master. "Lie low, and I'll settle the men."

Mr. Gobel and his party rode up with the information that they had come
to arrest Will; but they got no satisfaction from Willis. He would not
allow them to search the wagons, and they finally rode away. That
night, when the camp was pitched, the wagon-master gave Will a mule, and
accompanied him home. We were rejoiced to see him, especially mother,
who was much concerned over his escapade.

"Oh, Will, how could you do such a thing?" she said, sorrowfully. "It is
a dreadful act to use a knife on any one."

Will disavowed any homicidal intentions; but his explanations made
little headway against mother's disapproval and her disappointment over
the interruption of his school career. As it seemed the best thing to
do, she consented to his going with the wagon train under the care of
John Willis, and the remainder of the night was passed in preparations
for the journey.


CHAPTER VIII. -- DEATH AND BURIAL OF TURK.

THIS trip of Will's covered only two months, and was succeeded by
another expedition, to the new post at Fort Wallace, at Cheyenne Pass.

Meanwhile mother had decided to improve the opportunity afforded by
her geographical position, and under her supervision "The Valley Grove
House" was going up.

The hotel commanded a magnificent prospect. Below lay the beautiful
Salt Creek Valley. It derived its name from the saline properties of the
little stream that rushed along its pebbly bed to empty its clear waters
into the muddy Missouri. From the vantage-ground of our location Salt
Creek looked like a silver thread, winding its way through the rich
verdure of the valley. The region was dotted with fertile farms; from
east to west ran the government road, known as the Old Salt Lake Trail,
and back of us was Cody Hill, named for my father. Our house stood on
the side hill, just above the military road, and between us and the
hilltop lay the grove that gave the hotel its name. Government hill,
which broke the eastern sky-line, hid Leavenworth and the Missouri
River, culminating to the south in Pilot Knob, the eminence on which my
father was buried, also beyond our view.

Mother's business sagacity was justified in the hotel venture. The trail
began its half-mile ascent of Cody Hill just below our house, and at
this point the expedient known as "doubling" was employed. Two teams
hauled a wagon up the steep incline, the double team returning for the
wagon left behind. Thus the progress of a wagon train, always slow,
became a very snail's pace, and the hotel was insured a full quota of
hungry trainmen.

Will found that his wages were of considerable aid to mother in the
large expense incurred by the building of the hotel; and the winter
drawing on, forbidding further freighting trips, he planned an
expedition with a party of trappers. More money was to be made at this
business during the winter than at any other time.

The trip was successful, and contained only one adventure spiced
with danger, which, as was so often the case, Will twisted to his own
advantage by coolness and presence of mind.

One morning, as he was making the round of his traps, three Indians
appeared on the trail, each leading a pony laden with pelts. One had a
gun; the others carried bows and arrows. The odds were three to one, and
the brave with the gun was the most to be feared.

This Indian dropped his bridle-rein and threw up his rifle; but before
it was at his shoulder Will had fired, and he fell forward on his face.
His companions bent their bows, one arrow passing through Will's hat and
another piercing his arm--the first wound he ever received. Will swung
his cap about his head.

"This way! Here they are!" he shouted to an imaginary party of friends
at his back. Then with his revolver he wounded another of the Indians,
who, believing reinforcements were at hand, left their ponies and fled.

Will took the ponies on the double-quick back to camp, and the trappers
decided to pull up stakes at once. It had been a profitable season, and
the few more pelts to be had were not worth the risk of an attack by
avenging Indians; so they packed their outfit, and proceeded to Fort
Laramie. Will realized a handsome sum from the sale of his captured
furs, besides those of the animals he had himself trapped.

At the fort were two men bound east, and impatient to set out, and Will,
in his haste to reach home, joined forces with them. Rather than wait
for an uncertain wagon train, they decided to chance the dangers of the
road. They bought three ponies and a pack-mule for the camp outfit, and
sallied forth in high spirits.

Although the youngest of the party, Will was the most experienced
plainsman, and was constantly on the alert. They reached the Little Blue
River without sign of Indians, but across the stream Will espied a band
of them. The redskins were as keen of eye, and straightway exchanged the
pleasures of the chase for the more exciting pursuit of human game. But
they had the river to cross; and this gave the white men a good start.
The pursuit was hot, and grew hotter, but the kindly darkness fell, and
under cover of it the trio got safely away. That night they camped in a
little ravine that afforded shelter from both Indians and weather.

A look over the ravine disclosed a cave that promised a snug harbor, and
therein Will and one of his companions spread their blankets and fell
asleep. The third man, whose duty it was to prepare the supper, kindled
a fire just inside the cave, and returned outside for a supply of fuel.
When he again entered the cave the whole interior was revealed by the
bright firelight, and after one look he gave a yell of terror, dropped
his firewood, and fled.

Will and the other chap were on their knees instantly, groping for their
rifles, in the belief that the Indians were upon them; but the sight
that met their eyes was more terror-breeding than a thousand Indians. A
dozen bleached and ghastly skeletons were gathered with them around the
camp-fire, and seemed to nod and sway, and thrust their long-chilled
bones toward the cheery blaze.

Ghastly as it was within the cave, Will found it more unpleasant in the
open. The night was cold, and a storm threatened.

"Well," said he to his companions, "we know the worst that's in there
now. Those old dead bones won't hurt us. Let's go back."

"Not if I know myself, sonny," returned one of the men decidedly, and
the other heartily agreed with him, swearing that as it was, he should
not be able to close his eyes for a week. So, after a hurried lunch upon
the cold provisions, the party mounted their ponies and pushed on. The
promised snowstorm materialized, and shortly became a young blizzard,
and obliged to dismount and camp in the open prairie, they made a
miserable night of it.

But it had an end, as all things have, and with the morning they resumed
the trail, reaching Marysville, on the Big Blue, after many trials and
privations.

From here the trail was easier, as the country was pretty well settled,
and Will reached home without further adventure or misadventure. Here
there was compensation for hardship in the joy of handing over to mother
all his money, realizing that it would lighten her burdens--burdens
borne that she might leave her children provided for when she could
no longer repel the dread messenger, that in all those years seemed to
hover so near that even our childish hearts felt its presence ere it
actually crossed the threshold.

It was early in March when Will returned from his trapping expedition.
Mother's business was flourishing, though she herself grew frailer with
the passing of each day. The summer that came on was a sad one for us
all, for it marked Turk's last days on earth. One evening he was lying
in the yard, when a strange dog came up the road, bounded in, gave Turk
a vicious bite, and went on. We dressed the wound, and thought little of
it, until some horsemen rode up, with the inquiry, "Have you seen a dog
pass here?"

We answered indignantly that a strange dog had passed, and had bitten
our dog.

"Better look out for him, then," warned the men as they rode away. "The
dog is mad."

Consternation seized us. It was dreadful to think of Turk going mad--he
who had been our playmate from infancy, and who, through childhood's
years, had grown more dear to us than many human beings could; but
mother knew the matter was serious, and issued her commands. Turk must
be shut up, and we must not even visit him for a certain space. And so
we shut him up, hoping for the best; but it speedily became plain that
the poison was working in his veins, and that the greatest kindness we
could do him was to kill him.

That was a frightful alternative. Will utterly refused to shoot him, and
the execution was delegated to the hired man, Will stipulating that
none of his weapons should be used, and that he be allowed to get out of
ear-shot.

Late that afternoon, just before sunset, we assembled in melancholy
silence for the funeral. A grave had been dug on the highest point of
the eastern extremity of Cody Hill, and decorated in black ribbons, we
slowly filed up the steep path, carrying Turk's body on a pine board
softened with moss. Will led the procession with his hat in his hand,
and every now and then his fist went savagely at his eyes. When we
reached the grave, we formed around it in a tearful circle, and Will,
who always called me "the little preacher," told me to say the Lord's
Prayer. The sun was setting, and the brilliant western clouds were
shining round about us. There was a sighing in the treetops far below
us, and the sounds in the valley were muffled and indistinct.

"Our Father which art in heaven," I whispered softly, as all the
children bent their heads, "Hallowed be Thy name. Thy kingdom come,
Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven." I paused, and the other
children said the rest in chorus. The next day Will procured a large
block of red bloodstone, which abounds in that country, squared it off,
carved the name of Turk upon it in large letters, and we placed it at
the head of the grave.

To us there had been no incongruity in the funeral ceremonials and
burial. Turk had given us all that dog could give; we, for our part,
gave him Christian sepulture. Our sorrow was sincere. We had lost an
honest, loyal friend. For many succeeding days his grave was garlanded
with fresh flowers, placed there by loving hands. Vale Turk! Would that
our friends of the higher evolution were all as stanch as thou!

THE BURIAL OF TURK.

     Only a dog! but the tears fall fast.
     As we lay him to rest underneath the green sod,
     Where bountiful nature, the sweet summer through,
     Will deck him with daisies and bright goldenrod.

     The loving thought of a boyish heart
     Marks the old dog's grave with a bloodstone red;
     The name, carved in letters rough and rude,
     Keeps his memory green, though his life be sped.
     For the daring young hero of wood and plain,

     Like all who are generous, strong, and brave,
     Has a heart that is loyal and kind and true,
     And shames not to weep o'er his old friend's grave.

     Only a dog, do you say? but I deem
     A dog who with faithfulness fills his trust,
     More worthy than many a man to be given
     A tribute of love, when but ashes and dust.

An unusually good teacher now presided at the schoolhouse in our
neighborhood, and Will was again persuaded into educational paths.
He put in a hard winter's work; but with the coming of spring and its
unrest, the swelling of buds and the springing of grass, the return
of the birds and the twittering from myriad nests, the Spirits of the
Plains beckoned to him, and he joined a party of gold-hunters on the
long trail to Pike's Peak.

The gold excitement was at its apogee in 1860. By our house had passed
the historic wagon bearing on its side the classic motto, "Pike's Peak
or Bust!" Afterward, stranded by the wayside, a whole history of failure
and disappointment, borne with grim humor, was told by the addition of
the eloquent word, "Busted!"

For all his adventures, Will was only fourteen, and although tall for
his age, he had not the physical strength that might have been expected
from his hardy life. It was not strange that he should take the gold
fever; less so that mother should dread to see him again leave home to
face unknown perils; and it is not at all remarkable that upon reaching
Auraria, now Denver, he should find that fortunes were not lying around
much more promiscuously in a gold country than in any other.

Recent events have confirmed a belief that under the excitement of a
gold craze men exercise less judgment than at any other time. Except in
placer mining, which almost any one can learn, gold mining is a science.
Now and again a nugget worth a fortune is picked up, but the average
mortal can get a better livelihood, with half the work, in almost any
other field of effort. To become rich a knowledge of ores and mining
methods is indispensable.

But Will never reached the gold-fields. Almost the first person he met
on the streets of Julesberg was George Chrisman, who had been chief
wagon-master for Russell, Majors & Waddell. Will had become well
acquainted with Chrisman on the various expeditions he had made for the
firm.

This man was located at Julesberg as agent for the Pony Express line,
which was in process of formation. This line was an enterprise of
Russell, Majors & Waddell. Mr. Russell met in Washington the Senator
from California. This gentleman knew that the Western firm of
contractors was running a daily stagecoach from the Missouri River to
Sacramento, and he urged upon Mr. Russell the desirability of operating
a pony express line along the same route. There was already a line known
as the "Butterfield Route," but this was circuitous; the fastest time
ever made on it was twenty-one days.

Mr. Russell laid the matter before his partners. They were opposed
to it, as they were sure it would be a losing venture; but the senior
member urged the matter so strongly that they consented to try it, for
the good of the country, with no expectation of profit. They utilized
the stagecoach stations already established, and only about two months
were required to put the Pony Express line in running order.

Riders received from a hundred and twenty to a hundred and twenty-five
dollars a month, but they earned it. In order to stand the life great
physical strength and endurance were necessary; in addition, riders must
be cool, brave, and resourceful. Their lives were in constant peril,
and they were obliged to do double duty in case the comrade that was to
relieve them had been disabled by outlaws or Indians.

Two hundred and fifty miles was the daily distance that must be made;
this constituted an average of a little over ten miles an hour. In the
exceedingly rough country this average could not be kept up; to balance
it, there were a few places in the route where the rider was expected to
cover twenty-five miles an hour.

In making such a run, it is hardly necessary to say that no extra weight
was carried. Letters were written on the finest tissue paper; the charge
was at the rate of five dollars for half an ounce. A hundred of
these letters would make a bulk not much larger than an ordinary
writing-tablet.


The mail-pouches were never to carry more than twenty pounds. They
were leather bags, impervious to moisture; the letters, as a further
protection, were wrapped in oiled silk. The pouches were locked, sealed,
and strapped to the rider's side. They were not unlocked during the
journey from St. Joseph to Sacramento.

The first trip was made in ten days; this was a saving of eleven days
over the best time ever made by the "Butterfield Route." Sometimes the
time was shortened to eight days; but an average trip was made in nine.
The distance covered in this time was nineteen hundred and sixty-six
miles.

President Buchanan's last presidential message was carried in December,
1860, in a few hours over eight days. President Lincoln's inaugural, the
following March, was transmitted in seven days and seventeen hours. This
was the quickest trip ever made.

The Pony Express line made its worth at once felt. It would have become
a financial success but that a telegraph line was put into operation
over the same stretch of territory, under the direction of Mr. Edward
Creighton. The first message was sent over the wires the 24th of
October, 1861. The Pony Express line had outlived its usefulness, and
was at once discontinued. But it had accomplished its main purpose,
which was to determine whether the route by which it went could be made
a permanent track for travel the year through. The cars of the Union
Pacific road now travel nearly the same old trails as those followed by
the daring riders of frontier days.

Mr. Chrisman gave Will a cordial greeting. He explained the business of
the express line to his young friend, and stated that the company had
nearly perfected its arrangements. It was now buying ponies and putting
them into good condition, preparatory to beginning operations. He added,
jokingly:

"It's a pity you're not a few years older, Billy. I would give you a job
as Pony Express rider. There's good pay in it."

Will was at once greatly taken with the idea, and begged so hard to be
given a trial that Mr. Chrisman consented to give him work for a month.
If the life proved too hard for him, he was to be laid off at the end
of that time. He had a short run of forty-five miles; there were three
relay stations, and he was expected to make fifteen miles an hour.

The 3d of April, 1860, Mr. Russell stood ready to receive the mail from
a fast New York train at St. Joseph. He adjusted the letter-pouch on the
pony in the presence of an excited crowd. Besides the letters, several
large New York papers printed special editions on tissue paper for
this inaugural trip. The crowd plucked hairs from the tail of the first
animal to start on the novel journey, and preserved these hairs as
talismans. The rider mounted, the moment for starting came, the signal
was given, and off he dashed.

At the same moment Sacramento witnessed a similar scene; the rider of
that region started on the two thousand mile ride eastward as the other
started westward. All the way along the road the several other riders
were ready for their initial gallop.

Will looked forward eagerly to the day when the express line should
be set in motion, and when the hour came it found him ready, standing
beside his horse, and waiting for the rider whom he was to relieve.
There was a clatter of hoofs, and a horseman dashed up and flung him
the saddlebags. Will threw them upon the waiting pony, vaulted into the
saddle, and was off like the wind.

The first relay station was reached on time, and Will changed with
hardly a second's loss of time, while the panting, reeking animal he had
ridden was left to the care of the stock-tender. This was repeated at
the end of the second fifteen miles, and the last station was reached a
few minutes ahead of time. The return trip was made in good order, and
then Will wrote to us of his new position, and told us that he was in
love with the life.


CHAPTER IX. -- WILL AS PONY EXPRESS RIDER.

AFTER being pounded against a saddle three dashes daily for three
months, to the tune of fifteen miles an hour, Will began to feel a
little loose in his joints, and weary withal, but he was determined
to "stick it out." Besides the daily pounding, the track of the Pony
Express rider was strewn with perils. A wayfarer through that wild
land was more likely to run across outlaws and Indians than to pass
unmolested, and as it was known that packages of value were frequently
dispatched by the Pony Express line, the route was punctuated by
ambuscades.

Will had an eye out every trip for a hold-up, but three months went by
before he added that novelty to his other experiences. One day, as he
flew around a bend in a narrow pass, he confronted a huge revolver in
the grasp of a man who manifestly meant business, and whose salutation
was:

"Halt! Throw up your hands!"

Most people do, and Will's hands were raised reluctantly. The highwayman
advanced, saying, not unkindly:

"I don't want to hurt you, boy, but I do want them bags."

Money packages were in the saddlebags, and Will was minded to save them
if he could, so, as the outlaw reached for the booty, Will touched the
pony with his foot, and the upshot was satisfactory to an unexpected
degree. The plunge upset the robber, and as the pony swept over him he
got a vicious blow from one hoof. Will wheeled for a revolver duel, but
the foe was prostrate, stunned, and bleeding at the head. Will disarmed
the fellow, and pinioned his arms behind him, and then tied up his
broken head. Will surmised that the prisoner must have a horse hidden
hard by, and a bit of a search disclosed it. When he returned with the
animal, its owner had opened his eyes and was beginning to remember a
few things. Will helped him to mount, and out of pure kindness tied him
on; then he straddled his own pony, and towed the dismal outfit along
with him.

It was the first time that he had been behind on his run, but by way of
excuse he offered to Mr. Chrisman a broken-headed and dejected gentleman
tied to a horse's back; and Chrisman, with a grin, locked the excuse up
for future reference.

A few days after this episode Will received a letter from Julia, telling
him that mother was ill, and asking him to come home. He at once sought
out Mr. Chrisman, and giving his reason, asked to be relieved.

"I'm sorry your mother is sick," was the answer, "but I'm glad something
has occurred to make you quit this life. It's wearing you out, Billy,
and you're too gritty to give it up without a good reason."

Will reached home to find mother slightly improved. For three weeks was
he content to remain idly at home; then (it was November of 1860) his
unquiet spirit bore him away on another trapping expedition, this time
with a young friend named David Phillips.

They bought an ox-team and wagon to transport the traps, camp outfit,
and provisions, and took along a large supply of ammunition, besides
extra rifles. Their destination was the Republican River. It coursed
more than a hundred miles from Leavenworth, but the country about it was
reputed rich in beaver. Will acted as scout on the journey, going ahead
to pick out trails, locate camping grounds, and look out for breakers.
The information concerning the beaver proved correct; the game was
indeed so plentiful that they concluded to pitch a permanent camp and
see the winter out.

They chose a hollow in a sidehill, and enlarged it to the dimensions of
a decent-sized room. A floor of logs was put in, and a chimney fashioned
of stones, the open lower part doing double duty as cook-stove and
heater; the bed was spread in the rear, and the wagon sheltered the
entrance. A corral of poles was built for the oxen, and one corner of
it protected by boughs. Altogether, they accounted their winter quarters
thoroughly satisfactory and agreeable.

The boys had seen no Indians on their trip out, and were not concerned
in that quarter, though they were too good plainsmen to relax their
vigilance. There were other foes, as they discovered the first night in
their new quarters. They were aroused by a commotion in the corral where
the oxen were confined, and hurrying out with their rifles, they found
a huge bear intent upon a feast of beef. The oxen were bellowing in
terror, one of them dashing crazily about the inclosure, and the other
so badly hurt that it could not get up.

Phillips, who was in the lead, fired first, but succeeded only in
wounding the bear. Pain was now added to the savagery of hunger, and the
infuriated monster rushed upon Phillips. Dave leaped back, but his foot
slipped on a bit of ice, and he went down with a thud, his rifle flying
from his hand as he struck.

But there was a cool young head and a steady hand behind him. A ball
from Will's rifle entered the distended mouth of the onrushing bear and
pierced the brain, and the huge mass fell lifeless almost across Dave's
body.

Phillips's nerves loosened with a snap, and he laughed for very relief
as he seized Will's hands.

"That's the time you saved my life, old fellow!" said he. "Perhaps I can
do as much for you sometime."

"That's the first bear I ever killed," said Will, more interested in
that topic than in the one Dave held forth on.

One of the oxen was found to be mortally hurt, and a bullet ended its
misery. Will then took his first lesson in the gentle art of skinning a
bear.

Dave's chance to square his account with Will came a fortnight later.
They were chasing a bunch of elk, when Will fell, and discovered that he
could not rise.

"I'm afraid I've broken my leg," said he, as Dave ran to him.

Phillips had once been a medical student, and he examined the leg with a
professional eye. "You're right, Billy; the leg's broken," he reported.

Then he went to work to improvise splints and bind up the leg; and this
done, he took Will on his back and bore him to the dugout. Here the leg
was stripped, and set in carefully prepared splints, and the whole bound
up securely.

The outlook was unpleasant, cheerfully as one might regard it. Living
in the scoop of a sidehill when one is strong and able to get about and
keep the blood coursing is one thing; living there pent up through a
tedious winter is quite another. Dave meditated as he worked away at the
pair of crutches.

"Tell you what I think I'd better do," said he. "The nearest settlement
is some hundred miles away, and I can get there and back in twenty days.
Suppose I make the trip, get a team for our wagon, and come back for
you?"

The idea of being left alone and well-nigh helpless struck dismay to
Will's heart, but there was no help for it, and he assented. Dave put
matters into shipshape, piled wood in the dugout, cooked a quantity of
food and put it where Will could reach it without rising, and fetched
several days' supply of water. Mother, ever mindful of Will's education,
had put some school-books in the wagon, and Dave placed these beside the
food and water. When Phillips finally set out, driving the surviving ox
before him, he left behind a very lonely and homesick boy.

During the first day of his confinement Will felt too desolate to eat,
much less to read; but as he grew accustomed to solitude he derived real
pleasure from the companionship of books. Perhaps in all his life he
never extracted so much benefit from study as during that brief period
of enforced idleness, when it was his sole means of making the dragging
hours endurable. Dave, he knew, could not return in less than twenty
days, and one daily task, never neglected, was to cut a notch in the
stick that marked the humdrum passage of the days. Within the week he
could hobble about on his crutches for a short distance; after that he
felt more secure.

A fortnight passed. And one day, weary with his studies, he fell asleep
over his books. Some one touched his shoulder, and looking up, he saw an
Indian in war paint and feathers.

"How?" said Will, with a show of friendliness, though he knew the brave
was on the war-path.

Half a score of bucks followed at the heels of the first, squeezing into
the little dugout until there was barely room for them to sit down.

With a sinking heart Will watched them enter, but he plucked up
spirit again when the last, a chief, pushed in, for in this warrior he
recognized an Indian that he had once done a good turn.

Whatever Lo's faults, he never forgets a kindness any more than he
forgets an injury. The chief, who went by the name of Rain-in-the-Face,
at once recognized Will, and asked him what he was doing in that place.
Will displayed his bandages, and related the mishap that had made them
necessary, and refreshed the chief's memory of a certain occasion when
a blanket and provisions had drifted his way. Rain-in-the-Face replied,
with proper gravity, that he and his chums were out after scalps, and
confessed to designs upon Will's, but in consideration of Auld Lang Syne
he would spare the paleface boy.

Auld Lang Syne, however, did not save the blankets and provisions, and
the bedizened crew stripped the dugout almost bare of supplies; but Will
was thankful enough to see the back of the last of them.

Two days later a blizzard set in. Will took an inventory, and found
that, economy considered, he had food for a week; but as the storm would
surely delay Dave, he put himself on half rations.

Three weeks were now gone, and he looked for Dave momentarily; but as
night followed day, and day grew into night again, he was given over
to keen anxiety. Had Phillips lost his way? Had he failed to locate the
snow-covered dugout? Had he perished in the storm? Had he fallen victim
to Indians? These and like questions haunted the poor lad continually.
Study became impossible, and he lost his appetite for what food there
was left; but the tally on the stick was kept.

The twenty-ninth day dawned. Starvation stalked into the dugout. The
wood, too, was nigh gone. But great as was Will's physical suffering,
his mental distress was greater. He sat before a handful of fire,
shivering and hungry, wretched and despondent.

Hark! Was that his name? Choking with emotion, unable to articulate, he
listened intently. Yes; it was his name, and Dave's familiar voice, and
with all his remaining energy he made an answering call.

His voice enabled Phillips to locate the dugout, and a passage was
cleared through the snow. And when Will saw the door open, the tension
on his nerves let go, and he wept--"like a girl," as he afterward told
us.

"God bless you, Dave!" he cried, as he clasped his friend around the
neck.


CHAPTER X. -- ECHOES FROM SUMTER.

THE guns that opened on Fort Sumter set the country all ablaze. In
Kansas, where blood had already been shed, the excitement reached an
extraordinary pitch. Will desired to enlist, but mother would not listen
to the idea.

My brother had never forgotten the vow made in the post-trader's, and
now with the coming of war his opportunity seemed ripe and lawful; he
could at least take up arms against father's old-time enemies, and at
the same time serve his country. This aspect of the case was presented
to mother in glowing colors, backed by most eloquent pleading; but she
remained obdurate.

"You are too young to enlist, Willie," she said. "They would not accept
you, and if they did, I could not endure it. I have only a little time
to live; for my sake, then, wait till I am no more before you enter the
army."

This request was not to be disregarded, and Will promised that he would
not enlist while mother lived.

Kansas had long been the scene of bitter strife between the two parties,
and though there was a preponderance of the Free-Soil element when it
was admitted to the Union in 1861, we were fated to see some of the
horrors of slavery. Suffering makes one wondrous kind; mother had
suffered so much herself that the misery of others ever vibrated a
chord of sympathy in her breast, and our house became a station on "the
underground railway." Many a fugitive slave did we shelter, many here
received food and clothing, and, aided by mother, a great number reached
safe harbors.

One old man, named Uncle Tom, became so much attached to us that he
refused to go on. We kept him as help about the hotel. He was with us
several months, and we children grew very fond of him. Every evening
when supper was over, he sat before the kitchen fire and told a
breathless audience strange stories of the days of slavery. And one
evening, never to be forgotten, Uncle Tom was sitting in his accustomed
place, surrounded by his juvenile listeners, when he suddenly sprang
to his feet with a cry of terror. Some men had entered the hotel
sitting-room, and the sound of their voices drove Uncle Tom to his own
little room, and under the bed.

"Mrs. Cody," said the unwelcome visitors, "we understand that you are
harboring our runaway slaves. We propose to search the premises; and if
we find our property, you cannot object to our removing it."

Mother was sorely distressed for the unhappy Uncle Tom, but she knew
objection would be futile. She could only hope that the old colored man
had made good his escape.

But no! Uncle Tom lay quaking under his bed, and there his brutal master
found him. It is not impossible that there were slaveholders kind and
humane, but the bitter curse of slavery was the open door it left
for brutality and inhumanity; and never shall I forget the barbarity
displayed by the owner of Uncle Tom before our horrified eyes. The poor
slave was so old that his hair was wholly white; yet a rope was tied to
it, and, despite our pleadings, he was dragged from the house, every cry
he uttered evoking only a savage kick from a heavy riding-boot. When he
was out of sight, and his screams out of hearing, we wept bitterly on
mother's loving breast.

Uncle Tom again escaped, and made his way to our house, but he reached
it only to die. We sorrowed for the poor old slave, but thanked God that
he had passed beyond the inhumanity of man.

Debarred from serving his country as a soldier, Will decided to do so in
some other capacity, and accordingly took service with a United States
freight caravan, transporting supplies to Fort Laramie. On this trip
his frontier training and skill as a marksman were the means of saving a
life.

In Western travel the perils from outlaws and Indians were so real that
emigrants usually sought the protection of a large wagon-train. Several
families of emigrants journeyed under the wing of the caravan to which
Will was attached.

When in camp one day upon the bank of the Platte River, and the members
of the company were busied with preparations for the night's rest and
the next day's journey, Mamie Perkins, a little girl from one of the
emigrant families, was sent to the river for a pail of water. A moment
later a monster buffalo was seen rushing upon the camp. A chorus of
yells and a fusillade from rifles and revolvers neither checked nor
swerved him. Straight through the camp he swept, like a cyclone, leaping
ropes and boxes, overturning wagons, and smashing things generally.

Mamie, the little water-bearer, had filled her pail and was returning in
the track selected by the buffalo. Too terrified to move, she watched,
with white face and parted lips, the maddened animal sweep toward her,
head down and tail up, its hoofs beating a thunderous tattoo on the
plain.

Will had been asleep, but the commotion brought him to his feet, and
snatching up his rifle, he ran toward the little girl, aimed and fired
at the buffalo. The huge animal lurched, staggered a few yards farther,
then dropped within a dozen feet of the terrified child.

A shout of relief went up, and while a crowd of praising men gathered
about the embryo buffalo-hunter, Mamie was taken to her mother. Will
never relished hearing his praises sung, and as the camp was determined
to pedestal him as a hero, he ran away and hid in his tent.

Upon reaching Fort Laramie, Will's first business was to look up Alf
Slade, agent of the Pony Express line, whose headquarters were at
Horseshoe Station, twenty miles from the fort. He carried a letter of
recommendation from Mr. Russell, but Slade demurred.

"You're too young for a Pony Express rider," said he.

"I rode three months a year ago, sir, and I'm much stronger now," said
Will.

"Oh, are you the boy rider that was on Chrisman's division?"

"Yes, sir."

"All right; I'll try you. If you can't stand it, I 'll give you
something easier."

Will's run was from Red Buttes, on the North Platte, to Three Crossings,
on the Sweetwater--seventy-six miles.

The wilderness was of the kind that is supposed to howl, and no person
fond of excitement had reason to complain of lack of it. One day Will
arrived at his last station to find that the rider on the next run had
been mortally hurt by Indians. There being no one else to do it, he
volunteered to ride the eighty-five miles for the wounded man. He
accomplished it, and made his own return trip on time--a continuous ride
of three hundred and twenty-two miles. There was no rest for the rider,
but twenty-one horses were used on the run--the longest ever made by a
Pony Express rider.

Shortly afterward Will fell in with California Joe, a remarkable
frontier character. He was standing beside a group of bowlders that
edged the trail when Will first clapped eyes on him, and the Pony
Express man instantly reached for his revolver. The stranger as quickly
dropped his rifle, and held up his hands in token of friendliness.
Will drew rein, and ran an interested eye over the man, who was clad in
buckskin.

California Joe, who was made famous in General Custer's book, entitled
"Life on the Plains," was a man of wonderful physique, straight and
stout as a pine. His red-brown hair hung in curls below his shoulders;
he wore a full beard, and his keen, sparkling eyes were of the brightest
hue. He came from an Eastern family, and possessed a good education,
somewhat rusty from disuse.

"Hain't you the boy rider I has heard of--the youngest rider on the
trail?" he queried, in the border dialect. Will made an affirmative
answer, and gave his name.

"Waal," said Joe, "I guess you've got some money on this trip. I was
strikin' fer the Big Horn, and I found them two stiffs up yonder layin'
fer ye. We had a little misunderstandin', and now I has 'em to plant."

Will thanked him warmly, and begged him not to risk the perils of the
Big Horn; but California Joe only laughed, and told him to push ahead.

When Will reached his station he related his adventure, and the
stock-tender said it was "good by, California Joe" But Will had
conceived a better opinion of his new friend, and he predicted his safe
return.

This confidence was justified by the appearance of California Joe, three
months later, in the camp of the Pony Riders on the Overland trail. He
received a cordial greeting, and was assured by the men that they had
not expected to see him alive again. In return he told them his story,
and a very interesting story it was.

"Some time ago," said he (I shall not attempt to reproduce his dialect),
"a big gang of gold-hunters went into the Big Horn country. They never
returned, and the general sent me to see if I could get any trace of
them. The country is full of Indians, and I kept my eye skinned for
them, but I wasn't looking for trouble from white men. I happened to
leave my revolver where I ate dinner one day, and soon after discovering
the loss I went back after the gun. Just as I picked it up I saw a white
man on my trail. I smelled trouble, but turned and jogged along as if
I hadn't seen anything. That night I doubled back over my trail until I
came to the camp where the stranger belonged. As I expected, he was
one of a party of three, but they had five horses. I'll bet odds, Pard
Billy"--this to Will--"that the two pilgrims laying for you belonged to
this outfit.

"They thought I'd found gold, and were going to follow me until I struck
the mine, then do me up and take possession.

"The gold is there, too, lots of it. There's silver, iron, copper, and
coal, too, but no one will look at them so long as gold is to be had;
but those that go for gold will, many of them, leave their scalps
behind.

"We kept the trail day after day; the men stuck right to me, the chap
ahead keeping me in sight and marking out the trail for his pard. When
we got into the heart of the Indian country I had to use every caution;
I steered clear of every smoke that showed a village or camp, and didn't
use my rifle on game, depending on the rations I had with me.

"At last I came to a spot that showed signs of a battle. Skulls and
bones were strewn around, and after a look about I was satisfied beyond
doubt that white men had been of the company. The purpose of my trip was
accomplished; I could safely report that the party of whites had been
exterminated by Indians.

"The question now was, could I return without running into Indians? The
first thing was to give my white pursuers the slip.

"That night I crept down the bed of a small stream, passed their camp,
and struck the trail a half mile or so below.

"It was the luckiest move I ever made. I had ridden but a short distance
when I heard the familiar war-whoop, and knew that the Indians had
surprised my unpleasant acquaintances and taken their scalps. I should
have shared the same fate if I hadn't moved.

"But, boys, it is a grand and beautiful country, full of towering
mountains, lovely valleys, and mighty trees."

About the middle of September the Indians became very troublesome
along the Sweetwater. Will was ambushed one day, but fortunately he was
mounted on one of the fleetest of the company's horses, and lying flat
on the animal's back, he distanced the redskins. At the relay station he
found the stock-tender dead, and as the horses had been driven off, he
was unable to get a fresh mount; so he rode the same horse to Plontz
Station, twelve miles farther.

A few days later the station boss of the line hailed Will with the
information:

"There's Injun signs about; so keep your eyes open."

"I'm on the watch, boss," was Will's answer, as he exchanged ponies and
dashed away.

The trail ran through a grim wild. It was darkened by mountains,
overhung with cliffs, and fringed with monster pines. The young rider's
every sense had been sharpened by frontier dangers. Each dusky rock
and tree was scanned for signs of lurking foes as he clattered down the
twilight track.

One large bowlder lay in plain view far down the valley, and for a
second he saw a dark object appear above it.

He kept his course until within rifle-shot, and then suddenly swerved
away in an oblique line. The ambush had failed, and a puff of smoke
issued from behind the bowlder. Two braves, in gorgeous war paint,
sprang up, and at the same time a score of whooping Indians rode out of
timber on the other side of the valley.

Before Will the mountains sloped to a narrow pass; could he reach
that he would be comparatively safe. The Indians at the bowlder were
unmounted, and though they were fleet of foot, he easily left them
behind. The mounted reds were those to be feared, and the chief rode
a very fleet pony. As they neared the pass Will saw that it was life
against life. He drew his revolver, and the chief, for his part, fitted
an arrow to his bow.

Will was a shade the quicker. His revolver cracked, and the warrior
pitched dead from his saddle. His fall was the signal for a shower of
arrows, one of which wounded the pony slightly; but the station was
reached on time.

The Indians were now in evidence all the time. Between Split Rock
and Three Crossings they robbed a stage, killed the driver and two
passengers, and wounded Lieutenant Flowers, the assistant division
agent. They drove the stock from the stations, and continually harassed
the Pony Express riders and stage-drivers. So bold did the reds become
that the Pony riders were laid off for six weeks, though stages were to
make occasional runs if the business were urgent. A force was
organized to search for missing stock. There were forty men in the
party--stage-drivers, express-riders, stock-tenders, and ranchmen;
and they were captained by a plainsman named Wild Bill, who was a good
friend of Will for many years.

He had not earned the sobriquet through lawlessness. It merely denoted
his dashing and daring. Physically he was well-nigh faultless--tall,
straight, and symmetrical, with broad shoulders and splendid chest. He
was handsome of face, with a clear blue eye, firm and well-shaped mouth,
aquiline nose, and brown, curling hair, worn long upon his shoulders.
Born of a refined and cultured family, he, like Will, seemingly
inherited from some remote ancestor his passion for the wild, free life
of the plains.

At this time Wild Bill was a well-known scout, and in this capacity
served the United States to good purpose during the war.


CHAPTER XI. -- A SHORT BUT DASHING INDIAN CAMPAIGN.

AS Will was one of the laid-off riders, he was allowed to join the
expedition against the Indian depredators, though he was the youngest
member of the company.

The campaign was short and sharp. The Indian trail was followed to
Powder River, and thence along the banks of the stream the party
traveled to within forty miles of the spot where old Fort Reno now
stands; from here the trail ran westerly, at the foot of the mountains,
and was crossed by Crazy Woman's Fork, a tributary of the Powder.

Originally this branch stream went by the name of the Big Beard, because
of a peculiar grass that fringed it. On its bank had stood a village of
the Crow Indians, and here a half-breed trader had settled. He bought
the red man's furs, and gave him in return bright-colored beads and
pieces of calico, paints, and blankets. In a short time he had all the
furs in the village; he packed them on ponies, and said good by to his
Indian friends. They were sorry to see him go, but he told them he would
soon return from the land of the paleface, bringing many gifts. Months
passed; one day the Indian sentinels reported the approach of a strange
object. The village was alarmed, for the Crows had never seen ox, horse,
or wagon; but the excitement was allayed when it was found that the
strange outfit was the property of the half-breed trader.

He had brought with him his wife, a white woman; she, too, was an object
of much curiosity to the Indians.

The trader built a lodge of wood and stones, and exposed all his goods
for sale. He had brought beads, ribbons, and brass rings as gifts for
all the tribe.

One day the big chief visited the store; the trader led him into a back
room, swore him to secrecy, and gave him a drink of black water. The
chief felt strangely happy. Usually he was very dignified and stately;
but under the influence of the strange liquid he sang and danced on the
streets, and finally fell into a deep sleep, from which he could not be
wakened. This performance was repeated day after day, until the Indians
called a council of war. They said the trader had bewitched their chief,
and it must be stopped, or they would kill the intruder. A warrior was
sent to convey this intelligence to the trader; he laughed, took the
warrior into the back room, swore him to secrecy, and gave him a drink
of the black water. The young Indian, in his turn, went upon the street,
and laughed and sang and danced, just as the chief had done. Surprised,
his companions gathered around him and asked him what was the matter.
"Oh, go to the trader and get some of the black water!" said he.

They asked for the strange beverage. The trader denied having any, and
gave them a drink of ordinary water, which had no effect. When the young
warrior awoke, they again questioned him. He said he must have been
sick, and have spoken loosely.

After this the chief and warrior were both drunk every day, and all
the tribe were sorely perplexed. Another council of war was held, and
a young chief arose, saying that he had made a hole in the wall of the
trader's house, and had watched; and it was true the trader gave their
friends black water. The half-breed and the two unhappy Indians were
brought before the council, and the young chief repeated his accusation,
saying that if it were not true, they might fight him. The second victim
of the black water yet denied the story, and said the young chief lied;
but the trader had maneuvered into the position he desired, and he
confessed. They bade him bring the water, that they might taste it; but
before he departed the young chief challenged to combat the warrior that
had said he lied. This warrior was the best spearsman of the tribe,
and all expected the death of the young chief; but the black water had
palsied the warrior's arm, his trembling hand could not fling true, he
was pierced to the heart at the first thrust. The tribe then repaired
to the trader's lodge, and he gave them all a drink of the black water.
They danced and sang, and then lay upon the ground and slept.

After two or three days the half-breed declined to provide black water
free; if the warriors wanted it, they must pay for it. At first he gave
them a "sleep," as they called it, for one robe or skin, but as the
stock of black water diminished, two, then three, then many robes
were demanded. At last he said he had none left except what he himself
desired. The Indians offered their ponies, until the trader had all the
robes and all the ponies of the tribe.

Now, he said, he would go back to the land of the paleface and procure
more of the black water. Some of the warriors were willing he should do
this; others asserted that he had plenty of black water left, and was
going to trade with their enemy, the Sioux. The devil had awakened in
the tribe. The trader's stores and packs were searched, but no black
water was found. 'Twas hidden, then, said the Indians. The trader must
produce it, or they would kill him. Of course he could not do this. He
had sowed the wind; he reaped the whirlwind. He was scalped before the
eyes of his horrified wife, and his body mutilated and mangled. The poor
woman attempted to escape; a warrior struck her with his tomahawk, and
she fell as if dead. The Indians fired the lodge. As they did so, a
Crow squaw saw that the white woman was not dead. She took the wounded
creature to her own lodge, bound up her wounds, and nursed her back to
strength. But the unfortunate woman's brain was crazed, and could not
bear the sight of a warrior.

As soon as she could get around she ran away. The squaws went out to
look for her, and found her crooning on the banks of the Big Beard. She
would talk with the squaws, but if a warrior appeared, she hid herself
till he was gone. The squaws took her food, and she lived in a covert on
the bank of the stream for many months. One day a warrior, out hunting,
chanced upon her. Thinking she was lost, he sought to catch her, to take
her back to the village, as all Indian tribes have a veneration for the
insane; but she fled into the hills, and was never seen afterward. The
stream became known as the "Place of the Crazy Woman," or Crazy Woman's
Fork, and has retained the name to this day.

At this point, to return to my narrative, the signs indicated that
reinforcements had reached the original body of Indians. The plainsmen
were now in the heart of the Indian country, the utmost caution was
required, and a sharp lookout was maintained. When Clear Creek, another
tributary of the Powder, was come up with, an Indian camp, some three
miles distant, was discovered on the farther bank.

A council of war was held. Never before had the white man followed
the red so far into his domain, and 'twas plain the Indian was off his
guard; not a scout was posted.

At Wild Bill's suggestion, the attack waited upon nightfall. Veiled by
darkness, the company was to surprise the Indian camp and stampede the
horses.

The plan was carried out without a hitch. The Indians outnumbered the
white men three to one, but when the latter rushed cyclonically through
the camp, no effort was made to repel them, and by the time the Indians
had recovered from their surprise the plainsmen had driven off all
the horses--those belonging to the reds as well as those that had been
stolen. A few shots were fired, but the whites rode scathless away, and
unpursued.

The line of march was now taken up for Sweetwater Bridge, and here, four
days later, the plainsmen brought up, with their own horses and about a
hundred Indian ponies.

This successful sadly repressed the hostilities for a space. The
recovered horses were put back on the road, and the stage-drivers and
express-riders resumed their interrupted activity.

"Billy," said Mr. Slade, who had taken a great fancy to Will--"Billy,
this is a hard life, and you're too young to stand it. You've done
good service, and in consideration of it I'll make you a supernumerary.
You'll have to ride only when it's absolutely necessary."

There followed for Will a period of _dolce far niente_; days when he
might lie on his back and watch the clouds drift across the sky; when
he might have an eye to the beauty of the woodland and the sweep of the
plain, without the nervous strain of studying every tree and knoll that
might conceal a lurking redskin. Winter closed in, and with it came the
memories of the trapping season of 1860-61, when he had laid low his
first and last bear. But there were other bears to be killed--the
mountains were full of them; and one bracing morning he turned his
horse's head toward the hills that lay down the Horseshoe Valley.
Antelope and deer fed in the valley, the sage-hen and the jack-rabbit
started up under his horse's hoofs, but such small game went by
unnoticed.

Two o'clock passed without a sign of bear, save some tracks in the snow.
The wintry air had put a keen edge on Will's appetite, and hitching his
tired horse, he shot one of the lately scorned sage-hens, and broiled it
over a fire that invited a longer stay than an industrious bear-hunter
could afford. But nightfall found him and his quarry still many miles
asunder, and as he did not relish the prospect of a chaffing from the
men at the station, he cast about for a camping-place, finding one in an
open spot on the bank of a little stream. Two more sage-hens were added
to the larder, and he was preparing to kindle a fire when the whinnying
of a horse caught his ear. He ran to his own horse to check the certain
response, resaddled him, and disposed everything for flight, should it
be necessary. Then, taking his rifle, he put forth on a reconnoissance.

He shortly came upon a bunch of horses, a dozen or more, around a crook
of the stream. Above them, on the farther bank, shone a light. Drawing
nearer, he saw that it came from a dugout, and he heard his own language
spoken. Reassured, he walked boldly up to the door and rapped.

Silence--followed by a hurried whispering, and the demand:

"Who's there?"

"Friend and white man," answered Will.

The door opened reluctantly, and an ugly-looking customer bade him
enter. The invitation was not responded to with alacrity, for eight such
villainous-looking faces as the dugout held it would have been hard to
match. Too late to retreat, there was nothing for it but a determined
front, and let wit point the way of escape. Two of the men Will
recognized as discharged teamsters from Lew Simpson's train, and from
his knowledge of their longstanding weakness he assumed, correctly, that
he had thrust his head into a den of horsethieves.

"Who's with you?" was the first query; and this answered, with sundry
other information esteemed essential, "Where's your horse?" demanded the
most striking portrait in the rogues' gallery.

"Down by the creek," said Will.

"All right, sonny; we'll go down and get him," was the obliging
rejoinder.

"Oh, don't trouble yourself," said Will. "I'll fetch him and put up
here over night, with your permission. I'll leave my gun here till I get
back."

"That's right; leave your gun, you won't need it," said the leader of
the gang, with a grin that was as near amiability as his rough, stern
calling permitted him. "Jim and I will go down with you after the
horse."

This offer compelled an acquiescence, Will consoling himself with the
reflection that it is easier to escape from two men than from eight.

When the horse was reached, one of the outlaws obligingly volunteered to
lead it.

"All right," said Will, carelessly. "I shot a couple of sage-hens here;
I'll take them along. Lead away!"

He followed with the birds, the second horsethief bringing up the rear.
As the dugout was neared he let fall one of the hens, and asked the chap
following to pick it up, and as the obliging rear guard stopped, Will
knocked him senseless with the butt of his revolver. The man ahead heard
the blow, and turned, with his hand on his gun, but Will dropped him
with a shot, leaped on his horse, and dashed off.

The sextet in the dugout sprang to arms, and came running down the bank,
and likely getting the particulars of the escape from the ruffian by
the sage-hen, who was probably only stunned for the moment, they buckled
warmly to the chase. The mountain-side was steep and rough, and men on
foot were better than on horseback; accordingly Will dismounted, and
clapping his pony soundly on the flank, sent him clattering on down the
declivity, and himself stepped aside behind a large pine. The pursuing
party rushed past him, and when they were safely gone, he climbed back
over the mountain, and made his way as best he could to the Horseshoe.
It was a twenty-five mile plod, and he reached the station early in the
morning, weary and footsore.

He woke the plainsmen, and related his adventure, and Mr. Slade at
once organized a party to hunt out the bandits of the dugout. Twenty
well-armed stock-tenders, stage-drivers, and ranchmen rode away at
sunrise, and, notwithstanding his fatigue, Will accompanied them as
guide.

But the ill-favored birds had flown; the dugout was deserted.

Will soon tired of this nondescript service, and gladly accepted a
position as assistant wagon-master under Wild Bill, who had taken a
contract to fetch a load of government freight from Rolla, Missouri.

He returned with a wagon-train to Springfield, in that state, and thence
came home on a visit. It was a brief one, however, for the air was too
full of war for him to endure inaction. Contented only when at work,
he continued to help on government freight contracts, until he received
word that mother was dangerously ill. Then he resigned his position and
hastened home.


CHAPTER XII. -- THE MOTHER'S LAST ILLNESS.

IT was now the autumn of 1863, and Will was a well-grown young man,
tall, strong, and athletic, though not yet quite eighteen years old. Our
oldest sister, Julia, had been married, the spring preceding, to Mr. J.
A. Goodman.

Mother had been growing weaker from day to day; being with her
constantly, we had not remarked the change for the worse; but Will was
much shocked by the transformation which a few months had wrought. Only
an indomitable will power had enabled her to overcome the infirmities of
the body, and now it seemed to us as if her flesh had been refined away,
leaving only the sweet and beautiful spirit.

Will reached home none too soon, for only three weeks after his return
the doctor told mother that only a few hours were left to her, and if
she had any last messages, it were best that she communicate them at
once. That evening the children were called in, one by one, to receive
her blessing and farewell. Mother was an earnest Christian character,
but at that time I alone of all the children appeared religiously
disposed. Young as I was, the solemnity of the hour when she charged me
with the spiritual welfare of the family has remained with me through
all the years that have gone. Calling me to her side, she sought to
impress upon my childish mind, not the sorrow of death, but the glory
of the resurrection. Then, as if she were setting forth upon a pleasant
journey, she bade me good by, and I kissed her for the last time in
life. When next I saw her face it was cold and quiet. The beautiful
soul had forsaken its dwelling-place of clay, and passed on through the
Invisible, to wait, a glorified spirit, on the farther shore for the
coming of the loved ones whose life-story was as yet unfinished.

Julia and Will remained with her throughout the night. Just before
death there came to her a brief season of long-lost animation, the
last flicker of the torch before darkness. She talked to them almost
continuously until the dawn. Into their hands was given the task of
educating the others of the family, and on their hearts and consciences
the charge was graven. Charlie, who was born during the early Kansas
troubles, had ever been a delicate child, and he lay an especial burden
on her mind.

"If," she said, "it be possible for the dead to call the living, I shall
call Charlie to me."

Within the space of a year, Charlie, too, was gone; and who shall say
that the yearning of a mother's heart for her child was not stronger
than the influences of the material world?

Upon Will mother sought to impress the responsibilities of his destiny.
She reminded him of the prediction of the fortune-teller, that "his name
would be known the world over."

"But," said she, "only the names of them that are upright, brave,
temperate, and true can be honorably known. Remember always that 'he
that overcometh his own soul is greater than he who taketh a city.'
Already you have shown great abilities, but remember that they carry
with them grave responsibilities. You have been a good son to me. In
the hour of need you have always aided me so that I can die now feeling
that my children are not unprovided for. I have not wished you to enlist
in the war, partly because I knew you were too young, partly because my
life was drawing near its close. But now you are nearly eighteen, and
if when I am gone your country needs you in the strife of which we in
Kansas know the bitterness, I bid you go as soldier in behalf of the
cause for which your father gave his life."

She talked until sleep followed exhaustion. When she awoke she tried to
raise herself in bed. Will sprang to aid her, and with the upward look
of one that sees ineffable things, she passed away, resting in his arms.

     Oh, the glory and the gladness
     Of a life without a fear;
     Of a death like nature fading
     In the autumn of the year;
     Of a sweet and dreamless slumber,
     In a faith triumphant borne,
     Till the bells of Easter wake her
     On the resurrection morn!

     Ah, for such a blessed falling
     Into quiet sleep at last,
     When the ripening grain is garnered,
     And the toil and trial past;
     When the red and gold of sunset
     Slowly changes into gray;
     Ah, for such a quiet passing,
     Through the night into the day!

The morning of the 22d day of November, 1863, began the saddest day of
our lives. We rode in a rough lumber wagon to Pilot Knob Cemetery, a
long, cold, hard ride; but we wished our parents to be united in death
as they had been in life, so buried mother in a grave next to father's.

The road leading from the cemetery forked a short distance outside of
Leavenworth, one branch running to that city, the other winding homeward
along Government Hill. When we were returning, and reached this fork,
Will jumped out of the wagon.

"I can't go home when I know mother is no longer there," said he. "I
am going to Leavenworth to see Eugene Hathaway. I shall stay with him
to-night."

We, pitied Will--he and mother had been so much to each other--and
raised no objection, as we should have done had we known the real
purpose of his visit.

The next morning, therefore, we were much surprised to see him and
Eugene ride into the yard, both clothed in, the blue uniforms of United
States soldiers. Overwhelmed with grief over mother's death, it seemed
more than we could bear to see our big brother ride off to war. We
threatened to inform the recruiting officers that he was not yet
eighteen; but he was too thoroughly in earnest to be moved by our
objections. The regiment in which he had enlisted was already ordered to
the front, and he had come home to say good by. He then rode away to
the hardships, dangers, and privations of a soldier's life. The joy of
action balanced the account for him, while we were obliged to accept the
usual lot of girlhood and womanhood--the weary, anxious waiting, when
the heart is torn with uncertainty and suspense over the fate of the
loved ones who bear the brunt and burden of the day.

The order sending Will's regiment to the front was countermanded, and
he remained for a time in Fort Leavenworth. His Western experiences were
well known there, and probably for this reason he was selected as
a bearer of military dispatches to Fort Larned. Some of our old
pro-slavery enemies, who were upon the point of joining the Confederate
army, learned of Will's mission, which they thought afforded them an
excellent chance to gratify their ancient grudge against the father by
murdering the son. The killing could be justified on the plea of service
rendered to their cause. Accordingly a plan was made to waylay Will and
capture his dispatches at a creek he was obliged to ford.

He received warning of this plot. On such a mission the utmost vigilance
was demanded at all times, and with an ambuscade ahead of him, he was
alertness itself. His knowledge of Indian warfare stood him in good
stead now. Not a tree, rock, or hillock escaped his keen glance. When he
neared the creek at which the attack was expected, he left the road, and
attempted to ford the stream four or five hundred yards above the common
crossing, but found it so swollen by recent rains that he was unable to
cross; so he cautiously picked his way back to the trail.

The assassins' camp was two or three hundred feet away from the creek.
Darkness was coming on, and he took advantage of the shelter afforded
by the bank, screening himself behind every clump of bushes. His enemies
would look for his approach from the other direction, and he hoped to
give them the slip and pass by unseen.

When he reached the point where he could see the little cabin where
the men were probably hiding, he ran upon a thicket in which five
saddle-horses were concealed.

"Five to one! I don't stand much show if they see me," he decided as he
rode quietly and slowly along, his carbine in his hand ready for use.

"There he goes, boys! he's at the ford!" came a sudden shout from the
camp, followed by the crack of a rifle. Two or three more shots rang
out, and from the bound his horse gave Will knew one bullet had reached
a mark. He rode into the water, then turned in his saddle and aimed like
a flash at a man within range. The fellow staggered and fell, and Will
put spurs to his horse, turning again only when the stream was crossed.
The men were running toward the ford, firing as they came, and getting
a warm return fire. As Will was already two or three hundred yards in
advance, pursuers on foot were not to be feared, and he knew that before
they could reach and mount their horses he would be beyond danger. Much
depended on his horse. Would the gallant beast, wounded as he was, be
able to long maintain the fierce pace he had set? Mile upon mile was put
behind before the stricken creature fell. Will shouldered the saddle
and bridle and continued on foot. He soon reached a ranch where a fresh
mount might be procured, and was shortly at Fort Larned.

After a few hours' breathing-spell, he left for Fort Leavenworth with
return dispatches. As he drew near the ford, he resumed his sharp
lookout, though scarcely expecting trouble. The planners of the
ambuscade had been so certain that five men could easily make away
with one boy that there had been no effort at disguise, and Will had
recognized several of them. He, for his part, felt certain that they
would get out of that part of the country with all dispatch; but he
employed none the less caution in crossing the creek, and his carbine
was ready for business as he approached the camp.

The fall of his horse's hoofs evoked a faint call from one of the
buildings. It was not repeated; instead there issued hollow moans.

It might be a trap; again, a fellow-creature might be at death's door.
Will rode a bit nearer the cabin entrance.

"Who's there?" he called.

"Come in, for the love of God! I am dying here alone!" was the reply.

"Who are you?"

"Ed Norcross."

Will jumped from his horse. This was the man at whom he had fired. He
entered the cabin.

"What is the matter?" he asked.

"I was wounded by a bullet," moaned Norcross, "and my comrades deserted
me."

Will was now within range of the poor fellow lying on the floor.

"Will Cody!" he cried.

Will dropped on his knee beside the dying man, choking with the emotion
that the memory of long years of friendship had raised.

"My poor Ed!" he murmured. "And it was my bullet that struck you."

"It was in defense of your own life, Will," said Norcross. "God knows, I
don't blame you. Don't think too hard of me. I did everything I could
to save you. It was I who sent you warning. I hoped you might find some
other trail."

"I didn't shoot with the others," continued Norcross, after a short
silence. "They deserted me. They said they would send help back, but
they haven't."

Will filled the empty canteen lying on the floor, and rearranged the
blanket that served as a pillow; then he offered to dress the neglected
wound. But the gray of death was already upon the face of Norcross.

"Never mind, Will," he whispered; "it's not worth while. Just stay with
me till I die."

It was not a long vigil. Will sat beside his old friend, moistening his
pallid lips with water. In a very short time the end came. Will disposed
the stiffening limbs, crossing the hands over the heart, and with a last
backward look went out of the cabin.

It was his first experience in the bitterness and savagery of war, and
he set a grave and downcast face against the remainder of his journey.

As he neared Leavenworth he met the friend who had conveyed the dead
man's warning message, and to him he committed the task of bringing
home the body. His heaviness of spirit was scarcely mitigated by the
congratulations of the commander of Fort Leavenworth upon his pluck and
resources, which had saved both his life and the dispatches.

There followed another period of inaction, always irritating to a lad
of Will's restless temperament. Meantime, we at home were having our own
experiences.

We were rejoiced in great measure when sister Julia decided that we had
learned as much as might be hoped for in the country school, and
must thereafter attend the winter and spring terms of the school at
Leavenworth. The dresses she cut for us, however, still followed the
country fashion, which has regard rather to wear than to appearance, and
we had not been a day in the city school before we discovered that our
apparel had stamped "provincial" upon us in plain, large characters. In
addition to this, our brother-in-law, in his endeavor to administer the
estate economically, bought each of us a pair of coarse calfskin
shoes. To these we were quite unused, mother having accustomed us to
serviceable but pretty ones. The author of our "extreme" mortification,
totally ignorant of the shy and sensitive nature of girls, only laughed
at our protests, and in justice to him it may be said that he really had
no conception of the torture he inflicted upon us.

We turned to Will. In every emergency he was our first thought, and here
was an emergency that taxed his powers to an extent we did not dream of.
He made answer to our letter that he was no longer an opulent trainman,
but drew only the slender income of a soldier, and even that pittance
was in arrears. Disappointment was swallowed up in remorse. Had we
reflected how keenly he must feel his inability to help us, we would
not have sent him the letter, which, at worst, contained only a sly
suggestion of a fine opportunity to relieve sisterly distress. All his
life he had responded to our every demand; now allegiance was due his
country first. But, as was always the way with him, he made the best of
a bad matter, and we were much comforted by the receipt of the following
letter:

"MY DEAR SISTERS:

"I am sorry that I cannot help you and furnish you with such clothes
as you wish. At this writing I am so short of funds myself that if an
entire Mississippi steamer could be bought for ten cents I couldn't
purchase the smokestack. I will soon draw my pay, and I will send it,
every cent, to you. So brave it out, girls, a little longer. In the mean
time I will write to Al.

"Lovingly,

"WILL."


We were comforted, yes; but my last hope was gone, and I grew desperate.
I had never worn the obnoxious shoes purchased by my guardian, and I
proceeded to dispose of them forever. I struck what I regarded as a
famous bargain with an accommodating Hebrew, and came into possession
of a pair of shiny morocco shoes, worth perhaps a third of what mine
had cost. One would say they were designed for shoes, and they certainly
looked like shoes, but as certainly they were not wearable. Still they
were of service, for the transaction convinced my guardian that the
truest economy did not lie in the pur-chasing of calfskin shoes for at
least one of his charges. A little later he received a letter from Will,
presenting our grievances and advocating our cause. Will also sent us
the whole of his next month's pay as soon as he drew it.

In February, 1864, Sherman began his march through Mississippi.
The Seventh Kansas regiment, known as "Jennison's Jayhawkers," was
reorganized at Fort Leavenworth as veterans, and sent to Memphis, Tenn.,
to join General A. J. Smith's command, which was to operate against
General Forrest and cover the retreat of General Sturgis, who had
been so badly whipped by Forrest at Cross-Roads. Will was exceedingly
desirous of engaging in a great battle, and through some officers with
whom he was acquainted preferred a petition to be transferred to this
regiment. The request was granted, and his delight knew no bounds. He
wrote to us that his great desire was about to be gratified, that he
should soon know what a real battle was like.

He was well versed in Indian warfare; now he was ambitious to learn,
from experience, the superiority of civilized strife--rather, I should
say, of strife between civilized people.

General Smith had acquainted himself with the record made by the young
scout of the plains, and shortly after reaching Memphis he ordered Will
to report to headquarters for special service.

"I am anxious," said the general, "to gain reliable information
concerning the enemy's movements and position. This can only be done by
entering the Confederate camp. You possess the needed qualities--nerve,
coolness, resource--and I believe you could do it."

"You mean," answered Will, quietly, "that you wish me to go as a spy
into the rebel camp."

"Exactly. But you must understand the risk you run. If you are captured,
you will be hanged."

"I am ready to take the chances, sir," said Will; "ready to go at once,
if you wish."

General Smith's stern face softened into a smile at the prompt response.

"I am sure, Cody," said he, kindly, "that if any one can go through
safely, you will. Dodging Indians on the plains was good training
for the work in hand, which demands quick intelligence and ceaseless
vigilance. I never require such service of any one, but since you
volunteer to go, take these maps of the country to your quarters and
study them carefully. Return this evening for full instructions."

During the few days his regiment had been in camp, Will had been on
one or two scouting expeditions, and was somewhat familiar with the
immediate environments of the Union forces. The maps were unusually
accurate, showing every lake, river, creek, and highway, and even the
by-paths from plantation to plantation.

Only the day before, while on a reconnoissance, Will had captured a
Confederate soldier, who proved to be an old acquaintance named Nat
Golden. Will had served with Nat on one of Russell, Majors & Waddell's
freight trains, and at one time had saved the young man's life, and
thereby earned his enduring friendship. Nat was born in the East, became
infected with Western fever, and ran away from home in order to become a
plainsman.

"Well, this is too bad," said Will, when he recognized his old friend.
"I would rather have captured a whole regiment than you. I don't like
to take you in as a prisoner. What did you enlist on the wrong side for,
anyway?"

"The fortunes of war, Billy, my boy," laughed Nat. "Friend shall be
turned against friend, and brother against brother, you know. You
wouldn't have had me for a prisoner, either, if my rifle hadn't snapped;
but I'm glad it did, for I shouldn't want to be the one that shot you."

"Well, I don't want to see you strung up," said Will; "so hand me over
those papers you have, and I will turn you in as an ordinary prisoner."

Nat's face paled as he asked, "Do you think I'm a spy, Billy?"

"I know it."

"Well," was the reply, "I've risked my life to obtain these papers, but
I suppose they will be taken from me anyway; so I might as well give
them up now, and save my neck."

Examination showed them to be accurate maps of the location and position
of the Union army; and besides the maps, there were papers containing
much valuable information concerning the number of soldiers and officers
and their intended movements. Will had not destroyed these papers, and
he now saw a way to use them to his own advantage. When he reported for
final instructions, therefore, at General Smith's tent, in the evening,
Will said to him:

"I gathered from a statement dropped by the prisoner captured yesterday,
that a Confederate spy has succeeded in making out and carrying to the
enemy a complete map of the position of our regiment, together with some
idea of the projected plan of campaign."

"Ah," said the general; "I am glad that you have put me on my guard. I
will at once change my position, so that the information will be of no
value to them."

Then followed full instructions as to the duty required of the
volunteer.

"When will you set out?" asked the general.

"To-night, sir. I have procured my uniform, and have everything prepared
for an early start."

"Going to change your colors, eh?"

"Yes, for the time being, but not my principles."

The general looked at Will approvingly. "You will need all the wit,
pluck, nerve, and caution of which you are possessed to come through
this ordeal safely," said he. "I believe you can accomplish it, and I
rely upon you fully. Good by, and success go with you!"

After a warm hand-clasp, Will returned to his tent, and lay down for a
few hours' rest. By four o'clock he was in the saddle, riding toward the
Confederate lines.


CHAPTER XIII. -- IN THE SECRET-SERVICE.

IN common walks of life to play the spy is an ignoble role; yet the work
has to be done, and there must be men to do it. There always are such
men--nervy fellows who swing themselves into the saddle when their
commander lifts his hand, and ride a mad race, with Death at the horse's
flank every mile of the way. They are the unknown heroes of every war.

It was with a full realization of the dangers confronting him that Will
cantered away from the Union lines, his borrowed uniform under his
arm. As soon as he had put the outposts behind him, he dismounted and
exchanged the blue clothes for the gray. Life on the plains had bronzed
his face. For aught his complexion could tell, the ardent Southern sun
might have kissed it to its present hue. Then, if ever, his face was
his fortune in good part; but there was, too, a stout heart under his
jacket, and the light of confidence in his eyes.

The dawn had come up when he sighted the Confederate outposts. What lay
beyond only time could reveal; but with a last reassuring touch of
the papers in his pocket, he spurred his horse up to the first of the
outlying sentinels. Promptly the customary challenge greeted him:

"Halt! Who goes there?"

"Friend."

"Dismount, friend! Advance and give the countersign!"

"Haven't the countersign," said Will, dropping from his horse, "but I
have important information for General Forrest. Take me to him at once."

"Are you a Confederate soldier?"

"Not exactly. But I have some valuable news about the Yanks, I reckon.
Better let me see the general."

"Thus far," he added to himself, "I have played the part. The
combination of 'Yank' and 'I reckon' ought to establish me as a
promising candidate for Confederate honors."

His story was not only plausible, but plainly and fairly told; but
caution is a child of war, and the sentinel knew his business. The
pseudo-Confederate was disarmed as a necessary preliminary, and marched
between two guards to headquarters, many curious eyes (the camp being
now astir) following the trio.

When Forrest heard the report, he ordered the prisoner brought before
him. One glance at the general's handsome but harsh face, and the young
man steeled his nerves for the encounter. There was no mercy in those
cold, piercing eyes. This first duel of wits was the one to be most
dreaded. Unless confidence were established, his after work must be done
at a disadvantage.

The general's penetrating gaze searched the young face before him for
several seconds.

"Well, sir," said he, "what do you want with me?"

Yankee-like, the reply was another question:

"You sent a man named Nat Golden into the Union lines, did you not,
sir?"

"And if I did, what then?"

"He is an old friend of mine. He tried for the Union camp to verify
information that he had received, but before he started he left certain
papers with me in case he should be captured."

"Ah!" said Forrest, coldly. "And he was captured?"

"Yes, sir; but, as I happen to know, he wasn't hanged, for these weren't
on him."

As he spoke, Will took from his pocket the papers he had obtained from
Golden, and passed them over with the remark, "Golden asked me to take
them to you."

General Forrest was familiar with the hapless Golden's handwriting, and
the documents were manifestly genuine. His suspicion was not aroused.

"These are important papers," said he, when he had run his eye over
them. "They contain valuable information, but we may not be able to
use it, as we are about to change our location. Do you know what these
papers contain?"

"Every word," was the truthful reply. "I studied them, so that in case
they were destroyed you would still have the information from me."

"A wise thing to do," said Forrest, approvingly. "Are you a soldier?"

"I have not as yet joined the army, but I am pretty well acquainted with
this section, and perhaps could serve you as a scout."

"Um!" said the general, looking the now easy-minded young man over. "You
wear our uniform."

"It's Golden's," was the second truthful answer. "He left it with me
when he put on the blue."

"And what is your name?"

"Frederick Williams."

Pretty near the truth. Only a final "s" and a rearrangement of his given
names.

"Very well," said the general, ending the audience; "you may remain in
camp. If I need you, I'll send for you."

He summoned an orderly, and bade him make the volunteer scout
comfortable at the couriers' camp. Will breathed a sigh of relief as he
followed at the orderly's heels. The ordeal was successfully passed. The
rest was action.

Two days went by. In them Will picked up valuable information here and
there, drew maps, and was prepared to depart at the first favorable
opportunity. It was about time, he figured, that General Forrest found
some scouting work for him. That was a passport beyond the lines, and he
promised himself the outposts should see the cleanest pair of heels that
ever left unwelcome society in the rear. But evidently scouting was a
drug in the general's market, for the close of another day found Will
impatiently awaiting orders in the couriers' quarters. This sort of
inactivity was harder on the nerves than more tangible perils, and
he about made up his mind that when he left camp it would be without
orders, but with a hatful of bullets singing after him. And he was quite
sure that his exit lay that way when, strolling past headquarters,
he clapped eyes on the very last person that he expected or wished to
see--Nat Golden.

And Nat was talking to an adjutant-general!

There were just two things to do, knock Golden on the head, or cut and
run. Nat would not betray him knowingly, but unwittingly was certain
to do so the moment General Forrest questioned him. There could be
no choice between the two courses open; it was cut and run, and as
a preliminary Will cut for his tent. First concealing his papers,
he saddled his horse and rode toward the outposts with a serene
countenance.

{illust. caption = "NOW RIDE FOR YOUR LIVES!"}

The same sergeant that greeted him when he entered the lines chanced to
be on duty, and of him Will asked an unimportant question concerning the
outer-flung lines. Yet as he rode along he could not forbear throwing
an apprehensive glance behind. No pursuit was making, and the farthest
picket-line was passed by a good fifty yards. Ahead was a stretch of
timber. Suddenly a dull tattoo of horses' hoofs caught his ear, and he
turned to see a small cavalcade bearing down upon him at a gallop. He
sank the spurs into his horse's side and plunged into the timber. It
was out of the frying-pan into the fire. He ran plump into a half-dozen
Confederate cavalrymen, guarding two Union prisoners. "Men, a Union spy
is escaping!" shouted Will. "Scatter at once, and head him off. I'll
look after your prisoners." There was a ring of authority in the
command; it came at least from a petty officer; and without thought of
challenging it, the cavalrymen hurried right and left in search of the
fugitive. "Come," said Will, in a hurried but smiling whisper to the
dejected pair of Union men. "I'm the spy! There!" cutting the ropes that
bound their wrists. "Now ride for your lives!" Off dashed the trio, and
not a minute too soon. Will's halt had been brief, but it had been of
advantage to his pursuers, who, with Nat Golden at their head, came on
in full cry, not a hundred yards behind. Here was a race with Death at
the horse's flanks. The timber stopped a share of the singing bullets,
but there were plenty that got by the trees, one of them finding
lodgment in the arm of one of the fleeing Union soldiers. Capture meant
certain death for Will; for his companions it meant Andersonville or
Libby, at the worst, which was perhaps as bad as death; but Will would
not leave them, though his horse was fresh, and he could easily have
distanced them. Of course, if it became necessary, he was prepared
to cut their acquaintance, but for the present he made one of the
triplicate targets on which the galloping marksmen were endeavoring
to score a bull's-eye. The edge of the wood was shortly reached, and
beyond--inspiring sight!--lay the outposts of the Union army. The
pickets, at sight of the fugitives, sounded the alarm, and a body of
blue-coats responded. Will would have gladly tarried for the skirmish
that ensued, but he esteemed it his first duty to deliver the papers he
had risked his life to obtain; so, leaving friend and foe to settle the
dispute as best they might, he put for the clump of trees where he had
hidden his uniform, and exchanged it for the gray, that had served its
purpose and was no longer endurable. Under his true colors he rode
into camp. General Forrest almost immediately withdrew from that
neighborhood, and after the atrocious massacre at Fort Pillow, on the
12th of April, left the state. General Smith was recalled, and Will was
transferred, with the commission of guide and scout for the Ninth Kansas
Regiment. The Indians were giving so much trouble along the line of the
old Santa Fe trail that troops were needed to protect the stagecoaches,
emigrants, and caravans traveling that great highway. Like nearly all
our Indian wars, this trouble was precipitated by the injustice of the
white man's government of certain of the native tribes. In 1860 Colonel
A. G. Boone, a worthy grandson of the immortal Daniel, made a treaty with
the Comanches, Kiowas, Cheyennes, and Arapahoes, and at their request he
was made agent. During his wise, just, and humane administration all of
these savage nations were quiet, and held the kindliest feelings toward
the whites. Any one could cross the plains without fear of molestation.
In 1861 a charge of disloyalty was made against Colonel Boone by Judge
Wright, of Indiana, and he succeeded in having the right man removed
from the right place. Russell, Majors & Waddell, recognizing his
influence over the Indians, gave him fourteen hundred acres of land near
Pueblo, Colorado. Colonel Boone moved there, and the place was named
Booneville. Fifty chieftains from the tribes referred to visited Colonel
Boone in the fall of 1862, and implored him to return to them. He told
them that the President had sent him away. They offered to raise money,
by selling their horses, to send him to Washington, to tell the Great
Father what their agent was doing--that he stole their goods and sold
them back again; and they bade the colonel say that there would be
trouble unless some one were put in the dishonest man's place. With the
innate logic for which the Indian is noted, they declared that they had
as much right to steal from passing caravans as the agent had to steal
from them. No notice was taken of so trifling a matter as an injustice
to the Indian. The administration had its hands more than full in the
attempt to right the wrongs of the negro. In the fall of 1863 a caravan
passed along the trail. It was a small one, but the Indians had been
quiet for so long a time that travelers were beginning to lose fear
of them. A band of warriors rode up to the wagon-train and asked for
something to eat. The teamsters thought they would be doing humanity a
service if they killed a redskin, on the ancient principle that "the only
good Indian is a dead one." Accordingly, a friendly, inoffensive Indian
was shot. The bullet that reached his heart touched that of every
warrior in these nations. Every man but one in the wagon-train was
slain, the animals driven off, and the wagons burned. The fires of
discontent that had been smoldering for two years in the red man's
breast now burst forth with volcanic fury. Hundreds of atrocious murders
followed, with wholesale destruction of property. The Ninth Kansas
Regiment, under the command of Colonel Clark, was detailed to protect
the old trail between Fort Lyon and Fort Larned, and as guide and scout
Will felt wholly at home. He knew the Indian and his ways, and had no
fear of him. His fine horse and glittering trappings were an innocent
delight to him; and who will not pardon in him the touch of pride--say
vanity--that thrilled him as he led his regiment down the Arkansas
River? During the summer there were sundry skirmishes with the Indians.
The same old vigilance, learned in earlier days on the frontier, was in
constant demand, and there was many a rough and rapid ride to drive the
hostiles from the trail. Whatever Colonel Clark's men may have had to
complain of, there was no lack of excitement, no dull days, in that
summer. In the autumn the Seventh Kansas was again ordered to the front,
and at the request of its officers Will was detailed for duty with
his old regiment. General Smith's orders were that he should go
to Nashville. Rosecrans was then in command of the Union forces in
Missouri. His army was very small, numbering only about 6,500 men, while
the Confederate General Price was on the point of entering the state
with 20,000. This superiority of numbers was so great that General Smith
received an order countermanding the other, and remained in Missouri,
joining forces with Rosecrans to oppose Price. Rosecrans's entire force
still numbered only 11,000, and he deemed it prudent to concentrate his
army around St. Louis. General Ewing's forces and a portion of General
Smith's command occupied Pilot Knob. On Monday, the 24th of September,
1864, Price advanced against this position, but was repulsed with heavy
losses. An adjacent fort in the neighborhood of Ironton was assaulted,
but the Confederate forces again sustained a severe loss. This fort
held a commanding lookout on Shepard Mountain, which the Confederates
occupied, and their wall-directed fire obliged General Ewing to fall
back to Harrison Station, where he made a stand, and some sharp fighting
followed. General Ewing again fell back, and succeeded in reaching
General McNeill, at Rolla, with the main body of his troops. This was
Will's first serious battle, and it so chanced that he found himself
opposed at one point by a body of Missouri troops numbering many of the
men who had been his father's enemies and persecutors nine years before.
In the heat of the conflict he recognized more than one of them, and
with the recognition came the memory of his boyhood's vow to avenge his
father's death. Three of those men fell in that battle; and whether or
not it was he who laid them low, from that day on he accounted himself
freed of his melancholy obligation. After several hard-fought battles,
Price withdrew from Missouri with the remnant of his command--seven
thousand where there had been twenty. During this campaign Will received
honorable mention "for most conspicuous bravery and valuable service
upon the field," and he was shortly brought into favorable notice in many
quarters. The worth of the tried veterans was known, but none of the
older men was in more demand than Will. His was seemingly a charmed
life. Often was he detailed to bear dispatches across the battlefield,
and though horses were shot under him--riddled by bullets or torn by
shells--he himself went scathless. During this campaign, too, he ran
across his old friend of the plains, Wild Bill. Stopping at a farm-house
one day to obtain a meal, he was not a little surprised to hear the
salutation: "Well, Billy, my boy, how are you?" He looked around to see
a hand outstretched from a coat-sleeve of Confederate gray, and as he
knew Wild Bill to be a stanch Unionist, he surmised that he was engaged
upon an enterprise similar to his own. There was an exchange of chaffing
about gray uniforms and blue, but more serious talk followed. "Take
these papers, Billy," said Wild Bill, passing over a package. "Take 'em
to General McNeill, and tell him I'm picking up too much good news to
keep away from the Confederate camp." "Don't take too many chances,"
cautioned Will, well knowing that the only chances the other would not
take would be the sort that were not visible. Colonel Hickok, to give
him his real name, replied, with a laugh: "Practice what you preach, my
son. Your neck is of more value than mine. You have a future, but mine
is mostly past. I'm getting old." At this point the good woman of
the house punctuated the colloquy with a savory meal, which the pair
discussed with good appetite and easy conscience, in spite of their
hostess's refusal to take pay from Confederate soldiers. "As long as I
have a crust in the house," said she, "you boys are welcome to it." But
the pretended Confederates paid her for her kindness in better currency
than she was used to. They withheld information concerning a proposed
visit of her husband and son, of which, during one spell of loquacity,
she acquainted them. The bread she cast upon the waters returned to her
speedily. The two friends parted company, Will returning to the Union
lines, and Colonel Hickok to the opposing camp. A few days later, when
the Confederate forces were closing up around the Union lines, and a
battle was at hand, two horsemen were seen to dart out of the hostile
camp and ride at full speed for the Northern lines. For a space
the audacity of the escape seemed to paralyze the Confederates; but
presently the bullets followed thick and fast, and one of the saddles
was empty before the rescue party--of which Will was one--got fairly
under way. As the survivor drew near, Will shouted: "It's Wild Bill, the
Union scout." A cheer greeted the intrepid Colonel Hickok, and he rode
into camp surrounded by a party of admirers. The information he brought
proved of great value in the battle of Pilot Knob (already referred
to), which almost immediately followed. CHAPTER XIV. A RESCUE AND A
BETROTHAL. AFTER the battle of Pilot Knob Will was assigned, through the
influence of General Polk, to special service at military headquarters
in St. Louis. Mrs. Polk had been one of mother's school friends, and the
two had maintained a correspondence up to the time of mother's death.
As soon as Mrs. Polk learned that the son of her old friend was in the
Union army, she interested herself in obtaining a good position for him.
But desk-work is not a Pony Express rush, and Will found the St. Louis
detail about as much to his taste as clerking in a dry-goods store.
His new duties naturally became intolerable, lacking the excitement and
danger-scent which alone made his life worth while to him. One event,
however, relieved the dead-weight monotony of his existence; he met
Louise Frederici, the girl who became his wife. The courtship has
been written far and wide with blood-and-thunder pen, attended by
lariat-throwing and runaway steeds. In reality it was a romantic affair.
More than once, while out for a morning canter, Will had remarked a
young woman of attractive face and figure, who sat her horse with the
grace of Diana Vernon. Now, few things catch Will's eye more quickly
than fine horsemanship. He desired to establish an acquaintance with the
young lady, but as none of his friends knew her, he found it impossible.
At length a chance came. Her bridle-rein broke one morning; there was a
runaway, a rescue, and then acquaintance was easy. From war to love, or
from love to war, is but a step, and Will lost no time in taking it.
He was somewhat better than an apprentice to Dan Cupid. If the reader
remembers, he went to school with Steve Gobel. True, his opportunities
to enjoy feminine society had not been many, which; perhaps, accounts
for the promptness with which he embraced them when they did arise.
He became the accepted suitor of Miss Louise Frederici before the war
closed and his regiment was mustered out. The spring of 1865 found him
not yet twenty, and he was sensible of the fact that before he could
dance at his own wedding he must place his worldly affairs upon a surer
financial basis than falls to the lot of a soldier; so, much as he would
have enjoyed remaining in St. Louis, fortune pointed to wider fields,
and he set forth in search of remunerative and congenial employment.
First, there was the visit home, where the warmest of welcomes awaited
him. During his absence the second sister, Eliza, had married a Mr.
Myers, but the rest of us were at the old place, and the eagerness with
which we awaited Will's home-coming was stimulated by the hope that
he would remain and take charge of the estate. Before we broached this
subject, however, he informed us of his engagement to Miss Frederici,
which, far from awakening jealousy, aroused our delight, Julia voicing
the sentiment of the family in the comment: "When you're married, Will,
you will have to stay at home." This led to the matter of his remaining
with us to manage the estate--and to the upsetting of our plans. The pay
of a soldier in the war was next to nothing, and as Will had been unable
to put any money by, he took the first chance that offered to better his
fortunes. This happened to be a job of driving horses from Leavenworth
to Fort Kearny, and almost the first man he met after reaching the fort
was an old plains friend, Bill Trotter. "You're just the chap I've been
looking for," said Trotter, when he learned that Will desired regular
work. "I'm division station agent here, but stage-driving is dangerous
work, as the route is infested with Indians and outlaws. Several drivers
have been held up and killed lately, so it's not a very enticing job,
but the pay's good, and you know the country. If any one can take the
stage through, you can. Do you want the job?" When a man is in love and
the wedding-day has been dreamed of, if not set, life takes on an added
sweetness, and to stake it against the marksmanship of Indian or outlaw
is not, perhaps, the best use to which it may be put. Will had come
safely through so many perils that it seemed folly to thrust his head
into another batch of them, and thinking of Louise and the coming
wedding-day, his first thought was no. But it was the old story, and
there was Trotter at his elbow expressing confidence in his ability as a
frontiersman--an opinion Will fully shared, for a man knows what he can
do. The pay was good, and the sooner earned the sooner would the wedding
be, and Trotter received the answer he expected. The stage line was
another of the Western enterprises projected by Russell, Majors &
Waddell. When gold was discovered on Pike's Peak there was no method
of traversing the great Western plain except by plodding ox-team,
mule-pack, or stagecoach. A semi-monthly stage line ran from St.
Joseph to Salt Lake City, but it was poorly equipped and very tedious,
oftentimes twenty-one days being required to make the trip. The senior
member of the firm, in partnership with John S. Jones, of Missouri,
established a new line between the Missouri River and Denver, at that
time a straggling mining hamlet. One thousand Kentucky mules were
bought, with a sufficient number of coaches to insure a daily run each
way. The trip was made in six days, which necessitated travel at the
rate of a hundred miles a day. The first stage reached Denver on May
17, 1859. It was accounted a remarkable achievement, and the line
was pronounced a great success. In one way it was; but the expense of
equipping it had been enormous, and the new line could not meet its
obligations. To save the credit of their senior partner, Russell, Majors
& Waddell were obliged to come to the rescue. They bought up all the
outstanding obligations, and also the rival stage line between St.
Joseph and Salt Lake City. They consolidated the two, and thereby hoped
to put the Overland stage route on a paying basis. St. Joseph now became
the starting-point of the united lines. From there the road went to Fort
Kearny, and followed the old Salt Lake trail, already described in
these pages. After leaving Salt Lake it passed through Camp Floyd, Ruby
Valley, Carson City, Placerville, and Folsom, and ended in Sacramento.
The distance from St. Joseph to Sacramento by this old stage route was
nearly nineteen hundred miles. The time required by mail contracts and
the government schedule was nineteen days. The trip was frequently made
in fifteen, but there were so many causes for detention that the limit
was more often reached. Each two hundred and fifty miles of road was
designated a "division," and was in charge of an agent, who had great
authority in his own jurisdiction. He was commonly a man of more than
ordinary intelligence, and all matters pertaining to his division were
entirely under his control. He hired and discharged employee, purchased
horses, mules, harness, and food, and attended to their distribution at
the different stations. He superintended the erection of all buildings,
had charge of the water supply, and he was the paymaster. There was also
a man known as the conductor, whose route was almost coincident with
that of the agent. He sat with the driver, and often rode the whole
two hundred and fifty miles of his division without any rest or sleep,
except what he could catch sitting on the top of the flying coach. The
coach itself was a roomy, swaying vehicle, swung on thorough-braces
instead of springs. It always had a six-horse or six-mule team to
draw it, and the speed was nerve-breaking. Passengers were allowed
twenty-five pounds of baggage, and that, with the mail, express, and
the passengers themselves, was in charge of the conductor. The Overland
stagecoaches were operated at a loss until 1862. In March of that year
Russell, Majors & Waddell transferred the whole outfit to Ben Holliday.
Here was a typical frontiersman, of great individuality and character.
At the time he took charge of the route the United States mail was given
to it. This put the line on a sound financial basis, as the government
spent $800,000 yearly in transporting the mail to San Francisco. Will
reported for duty the morning after his talk with Trotter, and when
he mounted the stage-box and gathered the reins over the six spirited
horses, the passengers were assured of an expert driver. His run was
from Fort Kearny to Plum Creek. The country was sharply familiar. It was
the scene of his first encounter with Indians. A long and lonely ride
it was, and a dismal one when the weather turned cold; but it meant a
hundred and fifty dollars a month; and each pay day brought him nearer
to St. Louis.

Indian signs there had been right along, but they were only signs until
one bleak day in November. He pulled out of Plum Creek with a sharp
warning ringing in his ears. Indians were on the war-path, and trouble
was more likely than not ahead. Lieutenant Flowers, assistant division
agent, was on the box with him, and within the coach were six well-armed
passengers.

Half the run had been covered, when Will's experienced eye detected
the promised red men. Before him lay a stream which must be forded. The
creek was densely fringed with underbrush, and along this the Indians
were skulking, expecting to cut the stage off at the only possible
crossing.

Perhaps this is a good place to say a word concerning the seemingly
extraordinary fortune that has stood by Will in his adventures. Not
only have his own many escapes been of the hairbreadth sort, but he has
arrived on the scene of danger at just the right moment to rescue others
from extinction. Of course, an element of luck has entered into these
affairs, but for the most part they simply proved the old saying that an
ounce of prevention is better than a pound of cure. Will had studied
the plains as an astronomer studies the heavens. The slightest
disarrangement of the natural order of things caught his eye. With the
astronomer, it is a comet or an asteroid appearing upon a field whose
every object has long since been placed and studied; with Will, it was
a feathered headdress where there should have been but tree, or rock, or
grass; a moving figure where nature should have been inanimate.

When seen, those things were calculated as the astronomer calculates the
motion of the objects that he studies. A planet will arrive at a given
place at a certain time; an Indian will reach a ford in a stream in
about so many minutes. If there be time to cross before him, it is a
matter of hard driving; if the odds are with the Indian, that is another
matter.

A less experienced observer than Will would not have seen the skulking
redskins; a less skilled frontiersman would not have apprehended their
design; a less expert driver would not have taken the running chance for
life; a less accurate marksman would not have picked off an Indian with
a rifle while shooting from the top of a swinging, jerking stagecoach.

Will did not hesitate. A warning shout to the passengers, and the whip
was laid on, and off went the horses full speed. Seeing that they had
been discovered, the Indians came out into the open, and ran their
ponies for the ford, but the stage was there full five hundred yards
before them. It was characteristic of their driver that the horses were
suffered to pause at the creek long enough to get a swallow of water;
then, refreshed, they were off at full speed again.

The coach, creaking in every joint, rocked like a captive balloon,
the unhappy passengers were hurled from one side of the vehicle to
the other, flung into one another's laps, and occasionally, when some
uncommon obstacle sought to check the flying coach, their heads collided
with its roof. The Indians menaced them without, cracked skulls seemed
their fate within.

Will plied the whip relentlessly, and so nobly did the powerful horses
respond that the Indians gained but slowly on them. There were some
fifty redskins in the band, but Will assumed that if he could reach the
relay station, the two stock-tenders there, with himself, Lieutenant
Flowers, and the passengers, would be more than a match for the
marauders.

When the pursuers drew within fair rifle range, Will handed the reins to
the lieutenant, swung round in his seat, and fired at the chief.

"There," shouted one of the passengers, "that fellow with the feathers
is shot!" and another fusillade from the coach interior drove holes in
the air.

The relay station was now hard by, and attracted by the firing, the
stock-tenders came forth to take a hand in the engagement. Disheartened
by the fall of their chief, the Indians weakened at the sign of
reinforcements, and gave up the pursuit.

Lieutenant Flowers and two of the passengers were wounded, but Will
could not repress a smile at the excited assurance of one of his fares
that they (the passengers) had "killed one Indian and driven the rest
back." The stock-tenders smiled also, but said nothing. It would have
been too bad to spoil such a good story.

The gravest fears for the safety of the coach had been expressed when
it was known that the reds were on the war-path; it was not thought
possible that it could get through unharmed, and troops were sent out
to scour the country. These, while too late to render service in the
adventure just related, did good work during the remainder of the
winter. The Indians were thoroughly subdued, and Will saw no more of
them.

There was no other adventure of special note until February. Just before
Will started on his run, Trotter took him to one side and advised
him that a small fortune was going by the coach that day, and extra
vigilance was urged, as the existence of the treasure might have become
known.

"I'll do the best I can," said Will; and he had scarcely driven away
when he suspected the two ill-favored passengers he carried. The
sudden calling away of the conductor, whereby he was left alone, was a
suspicious circumstance. He properly decided that it would be wiser
for him to hold up his passengers than to let them hold up him, and he
proceeded to take time by the forelock. He stopped the coach, jumped
down, and examined the harness as if something was wrong; then he
stepped to the coach door and asked his passengers to hand him a rope
that was inside. As they complied, they looked into the barrels of two
cocked revolvers.

"Hands up!" said Will.

"What's the matter with you?" demanded one of the pair, as their arms
were raised.

"Thought I'd come in first--that's all," was the answer.

The other was not without appreciation of humor.

"You're a cute one, youngster," said he, "but you'll find more'n your
match down the road, or I miss my guess."

"I'll look after that when I get to it," said Will. "Will you oblige me
by tying your friend's hands? Thank you. Now throw out your guns. That
all? All right. Let me see your hands."

When both outlaws had been securely trussed up and proven to be
disarmed, the journey was resumed. The remark dropped by one of the pair
was evidence that they were part of the gang. He must reach the relay
station before the attack. If he could do that, he had a plan for
farther on.

The relay station was not far away, and was safely reached. The
prisoners were turned over to the stock-tenders, and then Will disposed
of the treasure against future molestation. He cut open one of the
cushions of the coach, taking out part of the filling, and in the
cavity thus made stored everything of value, including his own watch
and pocketbook; then the filling was replaced and the hole smoothed to a
natural appearance.

If there were more in the gang, he looked for them at the ford where the
Indians had sought to cut him off, and he was not disappointed. As he
drew near the growth of willows that bordered the road, half a dozen men
with menacing rifles stepped out.

"Halt, or you're a dead man!" was the conventional salutation, in this
case graciously received.

"Well, what do you want?" asked Will.

"The boodle you carry. Fork it over!"

"Gentlemen," said Will, smiling, "this is a case where it takes a thief
to catch a thief."

"What's that?" cried one of the outlaws, his feelings outraged by the
frank description.

"Not that I'm the thief," continued Will, "but your pals were one too
many for you this time."

"Did they rob you?" howled the gang in chorus, shocked by such depravity
on the part of their comrades.

"If there's anything left in the coach worth having, don't hesitate to
take it," offered Will, pleasantly.

"Where's your strong-box?" demanded the outlaws, loath to believe there
was no honor among thieves.

Will drew it forth and exposed its melancholy emptiness. The profanity
that ensued was positively shocking.

"Where did they hold you up?" demanded the leader of the gang.

"Eight or nine miles back. You'll find some straw in the road. You can
have that, too."

"Were there horses to meet them?"

"On foot the last I saw them."

"Then we can catch 'em, boys," shouted the leader, hope upspringing in
his breast. "Come, let's be off!"

They started for the willows on the jump, and presently returned,
spurring their horses.

"Give them my regards!" shouted Will. But only the thud! thud! of
horsehoofs answered him. Retribution was sweeping like a hawk upon its
prey.

Will pushed along to the end of his run, and handed over his trust
undisturbed. Fearing that his ruse might have been discovered, he put
the "extra vigilance" urged by Trotter into the return trip, but the
trail was deserted. He picked up the prisoners at the relay station and
carried them to Fort Kearny. If their companions were to discover the
sorry trick played upon them, they would have demanded his life as a
sacrifice.

At the end of this exciting trip he found a letter from Miss Frederici
awaiting him. She urged him to give up the wild life he was leading,
return East, and find another calling. This was precisely what Will
himself had in mind, and persuasion was not needed. In his reply he
asked that the wedding-day be set, and then he handed Trotter his
resignation from the lofty perch of a stage-driver.

"I don't like to let you go," objected Trotter.

"But," said Will, "I took the job only in order to save enough money to
get married on."

"In that case," said Trotter, "I have nothing to do but wish you joy."


CHAPTER XV. -- WILL AS A BENEDICT.

WHEN Will reached home, he found another letter from Miss Frederici,
who, agreeably to his request, had fixed the wedding-day, March 6, 1866.

The wedding ceremony was quietly performed at the home of the bride, and
the large number of friends that witnessed it united in declaring that
no handsomer couple ever bowed for Hymen's benediction.

The bridal journey was a trip to Leavenworth on a Missouri steamer. At
that time there was much travel by these boats, and their equipment was
first-class. They were sumptuously fitted out, the table was excellent,
and except when sectional animosities disturbed the serenity of their
decks, a trip on one of them was a very pleasant excursion.

The young benedict soon discovered, however, that in war times the
"trail of the serpent" is liable to be over all things; even a wedding
journey is not exempt from the baneful influence of sectional animosity.
A party of excursionists on board the steamer manifested so extreme
an interest in the bridal couple that Louise retired to a stateroom
to escape their rudeness. After her withdrawal, Will entered into
conversation with a gentleman from Indiana, who had been very polite
to him, and asked him if he knew the reason for the insolence of the
excursion party. The gentleman hesitated a moment, and then answered:

"To tell the truth, Mr. Cody, these men are Missourians, and say they
recognize you as one of Jennison's Jayhawkers; that you were an enemy of
the South, and are, therefore, an enemy of theirs."

Will answered, steadily: "I was a soldier during the war, and a scout
in the Union army, but I had some experience of Southern chivalry before
that time." And he related to the Indianian some of the incidents of the
early Kansas border warfare, in which he and his father had played so
prominent a part.

The next day the insolent behavior was continued. Will was much inclined
to resent it, but his wife pleaded so earnestly with him to take no
notice of it that he ignored it.

In the afternoon, when the boat landed at a lonely spot to wood up, the
Missourians seemed greatly excited, and all gathered on the guards and
anxiously scanned the riverbank.

The roustabouts were just about to make the boat fast, when a party of
armed horsemen dashed out of the woods and galloped toward the landing.
The captain thought the boat was to be attacked, and hastily gave orders
to back out, calling the crew on board at the same time. These orders
the negroes lost no time in obeying, as they often suffered severely at
the hands of these reckless marauders. The leader of the horsemen rode
rapidly up, firing at random. As he neared the steamer he called out,
"Where is that Kansas Jayhawker? We have come for him." The other men
caught sight of Will, and one of them cried, "We know you, Bill Cody."
But they were too late. Already the steamer was backing away from the
shore, dragging her gang-plank through the water; the negro roustabouts
were too much terrified to pull it in. When the attacking party saw
their plans were frustrated, and that they were balked of their prey,
they gave vent to their disappointment in yells of rage. A random volley
was fired at the retreating steamer, but it soon got out of range, and
continued on its way up the river.

Will had prepared himself for the worst; he stood, revolver in hand, at
the head of the steps, ready to dispute the way with his foes.

There was also a party of old soldiers on board, six or eight in number;
they were dressed in civilians' garb, and Will knew nothing of them; but
when they heard of their comrade's predicament, they hastily prepared
to back up the young scout. Happily the danger was averted, and their
services were not called into requisition. The remainder of the trip was
made without unpleasant incident.

It was afterward learned that as soon as the Missourians became aware of
the presence of the Union scout on board, they telegraphed ahead to the
James and Younger brothers that Will was aboard the boat, and asked to
have a party meet it at this secluded landing, and capture and carry
off the young soldier. Will feared that Louise might be somewhat
disheartened by such an occurrence on the bridal trip, but the welcome
accorded the young couple on their arrival at Leavenworth was flattering
enough to make amends for all unpleasant incidents. The young wife found
that her husband numbered his friends by the score in his own home; and
in the grand reception tendered them he was the lion of the hour.

Entreated by Louise to abandon the plains and pursue a vocation along
more peaceful paths, Will conceived the idea of taking up the business
in which mother had won financial success--that of landlord. The house
she had built was purchased after her death by Dr. Crook, a surgeon in
the Seventh Kansas Regiment. It was now for rent, which fact no doubt
decided Will in his choice of an occupation. It was good to live again
under the roof that had sheltered his mother in her last days; it was
good to see the young wife amid the old scenes. So Will turned boniface,
and invited May and me to make our home with him.

There was a baby in Julia's home, and it had so wound itself around
May's heartstrings that she could not be enticed away; but there was
never anybody who could supplant Will in my heart; so I gladly accepted
his invitation.

Thoreau has somewhere drawn a sympathetic portrait of the Landlord, who
is supposed to radiate hospitality as the sun throws off heat--as its
own reward--and who feeds and lodges men purely from a love of the
creatures. Yet even such a landlord, if he is to continue long in
business, must have an eye to profit, and make up in one corner what
he parts with in another. Now, Will radiated hospitality, and his
reputation as a lover of his fellowman got so widely abroad that
travelers without money and without price would go miles out of
their way to put up at his tavern. Socially, he was an irreproachable
landlord; financially, his shortcomings were deplorable.

And then the life of an innkeeper, while not without its joys and
opportunities to love one's fellowman, is somewhat prosaic, and our
guests oftentimes remarked an absent, far-away expression in the eyes of
Landlord Cody. He was thinking of the plains. Louise also remarked that
expression, and the sympathy she felt for his yearnings was accentuated
by an examination of the books of the hostelry at the close of the first
six months' business. Half smiling, half tearful, she consented to his
return to his Western life.

Will disposed of the house and settled his affairs, and when all the
bills were paid, and Sister Lou and I cozily ensconced in a little home
at Leavenworth, we found that Will's generous thought for our comfort
through the winter had left him on the beach financially. He had planned
a freighting trip on his own account, but the acquiring of a team,
wagon, and the rest of the outfit presented a knotty problem when he
counted over the few dollars left on hand.

For the first time I saw disappointment and discouragement written on
his face, and I was sorely distressed, for he had never denied me a
desire that he could gratify, and it was partly on my account that he
was not in better financial condition. I was not yet sixteen; it would
be two years more before I could have a say as to the disposition of my
own money, yet something must be done at once.

I decided to lay the matter before Lawyer Douglass. Surely he
could suggest some plan whereby I might assist my brother. I had a
half-matured plan of my own, but I was assured that Will would not
listen to it.

Mr. Douglass had been the legal adviser of the family since he won our
first lawsuit, years before. We considered the problem from every side,
and the lawyer suggested that Mr. Buckley, an old friend of the family,
had a team and wagon for sale; they were strong and serviceable, and
just the thing that Will would likely want. I was a minor, but if Mr.
Buckley was willing to accept me as security for the property, there
would be no difficulty in making the transfer.

Mr. Buckley proved entirely agreeable to the proposition. Will could
have the outfit in return for his note with my indorsement.

That disposed of, the question of freight to put into the wagon arose. I
thought of another old friend of the family, M. E. Albright, a wholesale
grocer in Leavenworth. Would he trust Will for a load of supplies? He
would.

Thus everything was arranged satisfactorily, and I hastened home to not
the easiest task--to prevail upon Will to accept assistance at the hands
of the little sister who, not so long ago, had employed his aid in the
matter of a pair of shoes.

But Will could really do nothing save accept, and proud and happy, he
sallied forth one day as an individual freighter, though not a very
formidable rival of Russell, Majors & Waddell.

Alas for enterprises started on borrowed capital! How many of them end
in disaster, leaving their projectors not only penniless, but in debt.
Our young frontiersman, whose life had been spent in protecting the
property of others, was powerless to save his own. Wagon, horses, and
freight were all captured by Indians, and their owner barely escaped
with his life. From a safe covert he watched the redskins plunge him
into bankruptcy. It took him several years to recover, and he has
often remarked that the responsibility of his first business venture on
borrowed capital aged him prematurely.

The nearest station to the scene of this disaster was Junction City, and
thither he tramped, in the hope of retrieving his fortunes. There he met
Colonel Hickok, and in the pleasure of the greeting forgot his business
ruin for a space. The story of his marriage and his stirring adventures
as a landlord and lover of his fellowman were first to be related, and
when these were commented upon, and his old friend had learned, too, of
the wreck of the freighting enterprise, there came the usual inquiry:

"And now, do you know of a job with some money in it?"

"There isn't exactly a fortune in it," said Wild Bill, "but I'm scouting
for Uncle Sam at Fort Ellsworth. The commandant needs more scouts, and I
can vouch for you as a good one."

"All right," said Will, always quick in decision; "I'll go along with
you, and apply for a job at once."

He was pleased to have Colonel Hickok's recommendation, but it turned
out that he did not need it, as his own reputation had preceded him. The
commandant of the fort was glad to add him to the force. The territory
he had to scout over lay between Forts Ellsworth and Fletcher, and he
alternated between those points throughout the winter.

It was at Fort Fletcher, in the spring of 1867, that he fell in with the
dashing General Custer, and the friendship established between them was
ended only by the death of the general at the head of his gallant three
hundred.

This spring was an exceedingly wet one, and the fort, which lay upon the
bank of Big Creek, was so damaged by floods that it was abandoned. A new
fort was erected, some distance to the westward, on the south fork of
the creek, and was named Fort Hayes.

Returning one day from an extended scouting trip, Will discovered signs
indicating that Indians in considerable force were in the neighborhood.
He at once pushed forward at all speed to report the news, when a second
discovery took the wind out of his sails; the hostiles were between him
and the fort.

At that moment a party of horsemen broke into view, and seeing they
were white men, Will waited their approach. The little band proved to
be General Custer and an escort of ten, en route from Fort Ellsworth to
Fort Hayes.

Informed by Will that they were cut off by Indians, and that the only
hope of escape lay in a rapid flank movement, Custer's reply was a
terse:

"Lead on, scout, and we'll follow."

Will wheeled, clapped spurs to his horse, and dashed away, with the
others close behind. All hands were sufficiently versed in Indian
warfare to appreciate the seriousness of their position. They pursued
a roundabout trail, and reached the fort without seeing a hostile, but
learned from the reports of others that their escape had been a narrow
one.

Custer was on his way to Larned, sixty miles distant, and he needed a
guide. He requested that Will be assigned to the position, so pleased
was he by the service already rendered.

"The very man I proposed to send with you, General," said the
commandant, who knew well the keen desire of the Indians to get at
"Yellow Hair," as they called Custer. "Cody knows this part of the
country like a book; he is up to all the Indian games, and he is as full
of resources as a nut is of meat."

At daybreak the start was made, and it was planned to cover the sixty
miles before nightfall. Will was mounted on a mouse-colored mule,
to which he was much attached, and in which he had every confidence.
Custer, however, was disposed to regard the lowly steed in some disdain.

"Do you think, Cody, that mule can set the pace to reach Larned in a
day?" he asked.

"When you get to Larned, General," smiled Will, "the mule and I will be
with you."

Custer said no more for a while, but the pace he set was eloquent, and
the mouse-colored mule had to run under "forced draught" to keep up with
the procession. It was a killing pace, too, for the horses, which did
not possess the staying power of the mule. Will was half regretting
that he had ridden the animal, and was wondering how he could crowd on
another pound or two of steam, when, suddenly glancing at Custer, he
caught a gleam of mischief in the general's eye. Plainly the latter was
seeking to compel an acknowledgment of error, but Will only patted the
mouse-colored flanks.

Fifteen miles were told off; Custer's thoroughbred horse was still in
fine fettle, but the mule had got the second of its three or four winds,
and was ready for a century run.

"Can you push along a little faster, General?" asked Will, slyly.

"If that mule of yours can stand it, go ahead," was the reply.

To the general's surprise, the long-eared animal did go ahead, and when
the party got into the hills, and the traveling grew heavy, it set a
pace that seriously annoyed the general's thoroughbred.

Fifteen miles more were pounded out, and a halt was called for luncheon.
The horses needed the rest, but the mouse-colored mule wore an impatient
expression. Having got its third wind, it wanted to use it.

"Well, General," said Will, when they swung off on the trail again,
"what do you think of my mount?"

Custer laughed. "It's not very handsome," said he, "but it seems to know
what it's about, and so does the rider. You're a fine guide, Cody.
Like the Indian, you seem to go by instinct, rather than by trails and
landmarks."

The praise of Custer was sweeter to the young scout than that of any
other officer on the plains would have been.

At just four o'clock the mouse-colored mule jogged into Fort Larned and
waved a triumphant pair of ears. A short distance behind rode Custer, on
a thoroughly tired thoroughbred, while the escort was strung along the
trail for a mile back.

"Cody," laughed the general, "that remarkable quadruped of yours looks
equal to a return trip. Our horses are pretty well fagged out, but we
have made a quick trip and a good one. You brought us 'cross country
straight as the crow flies, and that's the sort of service I appreciate.
Any time you're in need of work, report to me. I'll see that you're kept
busy."

It was Custer's intention to remain at Fort Larned for some time, and
Will, knowing that he was needed at Hayes, tarried only for supper and a
short rest before starting back.

When night fell, he proceeded warily. On the way out he had directed
Custer's attention to signs denoting the near-by presence of a small
band of mounted Indians.

Suddenly a distant light flashed into view, but before he could check
his mule it had vanished. He rode back a few paces, and the light
reappeared. Evidently it was visible through some narrow space, and the
matter called for investigation. Will dismounted, hitched his mule, and
went forward.

After he had covered half a mile, he found himself between two
sandhills, the pass leading into a little hollow, within which were
a large number of Indians camped around the fire whose light he had
followed. The ponies were in the background.

Will's position was somewhat ticklish, as, without a doubt, an Indian
sentinel was posted in the pass; yet it was his duty, as he understood
it, to obtain a measurably accurate estimate of the number of warriors
in the band. Himself a very Indian in stealth, he drew nearer the
camp-fire, when suddenly there rang out upon the night air--not a
rifle-shot, but the unearthly braying of his mule.

Even in the daylight, amid scenes of peace and tranquillity, the voice
of a mule falls short of the not enchanting music of the bagpipe.
At night in the wilderness, when every nerve is keyed up to the
snapping-point, the sound is simply appalling.

Will was startled, naturally, but the Indians were thrown into dire
confusion. They smothered the campfires and scattered for cover, while a
sentinel sprang up from behind a rock not twenty feet from Will, and was
off like a deer.

The scout held his ground till he had made a good guess at the number of
Indians in the party; then he ran for his mule, whose voice, raised in
seeming protest, guided him unerringly.

As he neared the animal he saw that two mounted Indians had laid hold of
it, and were trying to induce it to follow them; but the mule, true to
tradition and its master, stubbornly refused to budge a foot.

It was a comical tableau, but Will realized that it was but a step from
farce to tragedy. A rifle-shot dropped one of the Indians, and the other
darted off into the darkness.

Another bray from the mule, this time a paean of triumph, as Will
jumped into the saddle, with an arrow from the bow of the wounded Indian
through his coat-sleeve. He declined to return the fire of the wounded
wretch, and rode away into the timber, while all around the sound of
Indians in pursuit came to his ears.

"Now, my mouse-colored friend," said Will, "if you win this race your
name is Custer."

The mule seemed to understand; at all events, it settled down to work
that combined the speed of a racer with the endurance of a buffalo. The
Indians shortly abandoned the pursuit, as they could not see their game.

Will reached Fort Hayes in the early morning, to report the safe arrival
of Custer at Larned and the discovery of the Indian band, which he
estimated at two hundred braves. The mule received "honorable mention"
in his report, and was brevetted a thoroughbred.

The colonel prepared to dispatch troops against the Indians, and
requested Will to guide the expedition, if he were sufficiently rested,
adding, with a smile:

"You may ride your mule if you like."

"No, thank you," laughed Will. "It isn't safe, sir, to hunt Indians with
an animal that carries a brass-band attachment."

Captain George A. Armes, of the Tenth Cavalry, was to command the
expedition, which comprised a troop of colored cavalry and a howitzer.
As the command lined up for the start, a courier on a foam-splashed
horse rode up with the news that the workmen on the Kansas Pacific
Railroad had been attacked by Indians, six of them killed, and over a
hundred horses and mules and a quantity of stores stolen.

The troops rode away, the colored boys panting for a chance at the
redskins, and Captain Armes more than willing to gratify them.

At nightfall the command made camp near the Saline River, at which point
it was expected to find the Indians. Before dawn they were in the saddle
again, riding straight across country, regardless of trails, until the
river was come up with.

Will's judgment was again verified by the discovery of a large camp of
hostiles on the opposite bank of the stream. The warriors were as
quick of eye, and as they greatly outnumbered the soldiers, and were
emboldened by the success of their late exploit, they did not wait the
attack, but came charging across the river.

They were nearly a mile distant, and Captain Armes had time to plant the
howitzer on a little rise of ground. Twenty men were left to handle it.
The rest of the command advanced to the combat.

They were just at the point of attack when a fierce yelling was heard in
the rear, and the captain discovered that his retreat to the gun was cut
off by another band of reds, and that he was between two fires. His only
course was to repulse the enemy in front. If this were done, and the
colored gunners did not flee before the overwhelming numbers, he might
unite his forces by another charge.

The warriors came on with their usual impetuosity, whooping and
screaming, but they met such a raking fire from the disciplined troops
that they fell back in disorder. Just then the men at the howitzer
opened fire. The effect of this field-piece on the children of the
plains was magical--almost ludicrous. A veritable stampede followed.

"Follow me!" shouted Captain Armes, galloping in pursuit; but in their
eagerness to give chase the troops fell into such disorder that a
bugle-blast recalled them before any further damage was done the flying
foe. The Indians kept right along, however; they were pretty badly
frightened.

Captain Armes was somewhat chagrined that he had no prisoners, but
there was consolation in taking back nearly all the horses that had been
stolen. These were found picketed at the camp across the river, where
likely they had been forgotten by the Indians in their flight.

Shortly after this, Will tried his hand at land speculation. During
one of his scouting trips to Fort Harker, he visited Ellsworth, a new
settlement, three miles from the fort. There he met a man named Rose,
who had a grading contract for the Kansas Pacific Railroad, near Fort
Hayes. Rose had bought land at a point through which the railroad was to
run, and proposed staking it out as a town, but he needed a partner in
the enterprise.

The site was a good one. Big Creek was hard by, and it was near enough
to the fort to afford settlers reasonable security against Indian raids.
Will regarded the enterprise favorably. Besides the money sent home
each month, he had put by a small sum, and this he invested in the
partnership with Rose.

The town site was surveyed and staked off into lots; a cabin was
erected, and stocked with such goods as are needed on the frontier, and
the budding metropolis was weighted with the classic name of Rome.

As an encouragement to settlers, a lot was offered to any one that would
agree to erect a building. The proprietors, of course, reserved the
choicest lots.

Rome boomed. Two hundred cabins went up in less than sixty days.
Mr. Rose and Will shook hands and complimented each other on their
penetration and business sagacity. They were coming millionaires, they
said. Alas! they were but babes in the woods.

One day Dr. W. E. Webb alighted in Rome. He was a gentleman of most
amiable exterior, and when he entered the store of Rose & Cody they
prepared to dispose of a large bill of goods. But Dr. Webb was not
buying groceries. He chatted a while about the weather and Rome, and
then suggested that the firm needed a third partner. But this was the
last thing the prospective millionaires had in mind, and the suggestion
of their visitor was mildly but firmly waived.

Dr. Webb was not a gentleman to insist upon a suggestion. He was
locating towns for the Kansas Pacific Railroad, he said, and as Rome was
well started, he disliked to interfere with it; but, really, the company
must have a show.

Neither Mr. Rose nor Will had had experience with the power of a big
corporation, and satisfied that they had the only good site for a town
in that vicinity, they declared that the railroad could not help itself.

Dr. Webb smiled pleasantly, and not without compassion. "Look out for
yourselves," said he, as he took his leave.

And within sight of Rome he located a new town. The citizens of Rome
were given to understand that the railroad shops would be built at the
new settlement, and that there was really nothing to prevent it becoming
the metropolis of Kansas.

Rome became a wilderness. Its citizens stampeded to the new town,
and Mr. Rose and Will revised their estimate of their penetration and
business sagacity.

Meantime, the home in Leavenworth had been gladdened by the birth of a
little daughter, whom her father named Arta. As it was impossible for
Will to return for some months, it was planned that the mother, the
baby, and I should make a visit to the St. Louis home. This was
accomplished safely; and while the grandparents were enraptured with the
baby, I was enjoying the delight of a first visit to a large city.

While the new town of Rome was regarded as an assured success by Will,
he had journeyed to St. Louis after his wife and little one. They
proceeded with him to the cozy cabin home he had fitted up, while I went
back to Leavenworth.

After the fall of Rome the little frontier home was no longer the
desirable residence that Will's dreams had pictured it, and as Rome
passed into oblivion the little family returned to St. Louis.


CHAPTER XVI. -- HOW THE SOBRIQUET OF "BUFFALO BILL" WAS WON.

IN frontier days a man had but to ask for work to get it. There was
enough and to spare for every one. The work that paid best was the kind
that suited Will, it mattered not how hard or dangerous it might be.

At the time Rome fell, the work on the Kansas Pacific Railroad was
pushing forward at a rapid rate, and the junior member of the once
prosperous firm of Rose & Cody saw a new field of activity open for
him--that of buffalo-hunting. Twelve hundred men were employed on the
railroad construction, and Goddard Brothers, who had undertaken to board
the vast crew, were hard pressed to obtain fresh meat. To supply this
indispensable, buffalo-hunters were employed, and as Will was known to
be an expert buffalo-slayer, Goddard Brothers were glad to add him to
their "commissary staff." His contract with them called for en average
of twelve buffaloes daily, for which he was to receive five hundred
dollars a month. It was "good pay," the desired feature, but the work
was hard and hazardous. He must first scour the country for his game,
with a good prospect always of finding Indians instead of buffalo; then,
when the game was shot, he must oversee its cutting and dressing, and
look after the wagons that transported it to the camp where the workmen
messed. It was while working under this contract that he acquired the
sobriquet of "Buffalo Bill." It clung to him ever after, and he wore
it with more pride than he would have done the title of prince or grand
duke. Probably there are thousands of people to-day who know him by that
name only.

At the outset he procured a trained buffalo-hunting horse, which went
by the unconventional name of "Brigham," and from the government he
obtained an improved breech-loading needle-gun, which, in testimony of
its murderous qualities, he named "Lucretia Borgia."

Buffaloes were usually plentiful enough, but there were times when the
camp supply of meat ran short. During one of these dull spells, when the
company was pressed for horses, Brigham was hitched to a scraper. One
can imagine his indignation. A racer dragging a street-car would have
no more just cause for rebellion than a buffalo-hunter tied to a work
implement in the company of stupid horses that never had a thought above
a plow, a hay-rake, or a scraper. Brigham expostulated, and in such
plain language, that Will, laughing, was on the point of unhitching
him, when a cry went up--the equivalent of a whaler's "There she
blows!"--that a herd of buffaloes was coming over the hill.

Brigham and the scraper parted company instantly, and Will mounted him
bareback, the saddle being at the camp, a mile away. Shouting an order
to the men to follow him with a wagon to take back the meat, he galloped
toward the game.

There were other hunters that day. Five officers rode out from the
neighboring fort, and joined Will while waiting for the buffaloes to
come up. They were recent arrivals in that part of the country, and
their shoulder-straps indicated that one was a captain and the others
were lieutenants. They did not know "Buffalo Bill." They saw nothing but
a good-looking young fellow, in the dress of a working man, astride a
not handsome horse, which had a blind bridle and no saddle. It was not a
formidable-looking hunting outfit, and the captain was disposed to be a
trifle patronizing.

"Hello!" he called out. "I see you're after the same game we are."

"Yes, sir," returned Will. "Our camp's out of fresh meat."

The officer ran a critical eye over Brigham. "Do you expect to run down
a buffalo with a horse like that?" said he.

"Why," said Will, innocently, "are buffaloes pretty speedy?"

"Speedy? It takes a fast horse to overhaul those animals on the open
prairie."

"Does it?" said Will; and the officer did not see the twinkle in his
eye. Nothing amuses a man more than to be instructed on a matter that
he knows thoroughly, and concerning which his instructor knows nothing.
Probably every one of the officers had yet to shoot his first buffalo.

"Come along with us," offered the captain, graciously. "We're going to
kill a few for sport, and all we care for are the tongues and a chunk of
the tenderloin; you can have the rest."

"Thank you," said Will. "I'll follow along."

There were eleven buffaloes in the herd, and the officers started after
them as if they had a sure thing on the entire number. Will noticed that
the game was pointed toward a creek, and understanding "the nature of
the beast," started for the water, to head them off.

As the herd went past him, with the military quintet five hundred yards
in the rear, he gave Brigham's blind bridle a twitch, and in a few jumps
the trained hunter was at the side of the rear buffalo; Lucretia Borgia
spoke, and the buffalo fell dead. Without even a bridle signal, Brigham
was promptly at the side of the next buffalo, not ten feet away, and
this, too, fell at the first shot. The maneuver was repeated until the
last buffalo went down. Twelve shots had been fired; then Brigham, who
never wasted his strength, stopped. The officers had not had even a shot
at the game. Astonishment was written on their faces as they rode up.

"Gentlemen," said Will, courteously, as he dismounted, "allow me to
present you with eleven tongues and as much of the tenderloin as you
wish."

"By Jove!" exclaimed the captain, "I never saw anything like that
before. Who are you, anyway?"

"Bill Cody's my name."

"Well, Bill Cody, you know how to kill buffalo, and that horse of yours
has some good running points, after all."

"One or two," smiled Will.

Captain Graham--as his name proved to be--and his companions were
a trifle sore over missing even the opportunity of a shot, but they
professed to be more than repaid for their disappointment by witnessing
a feat they had not supposed possible in a white man--hunting buffalo
without a saddle, bridle, or reins. Will explained that Brigham knew
more about the business than most two-legged hunters. All the rider
was expected to do was to shoot the buffalo. If the first shot failed,
Brigham allowed another; if this, too, failed, Brigham lost patience,
and was as likely as not to drop the matter then and there.

It was this episode that fastened the name of "Buffalo Bill" upon Will,
and learning of it, the friends of Billy Comstock, chief of scouts at
Fort Wallace, filed a protest. Comstock, they said, was Cody's superior
as a buffalo hunter. So a match was arranged to determine whether it
should be "Buffalo Bill" Cody or "Buffalo Bill" Comstock.

The hunting-ground was fixed near Sheridan, Kansas, and quite a crowd of
spectators was attracted by the news of the contest. Officers, soldiers,
plainsmen, and railroadmen took a day off to see the sport, and one
excursion party, including many ladies, among them Louise, came up from
St. Louis.

Referees were appointed to follow each man and keep a tally of the
buffaloes slain. Comstock was mounted on his favorite horse, and carried
a Henry rifle of large caliber. Brigham and Lucretia went with Will. The
two hunters rode side by side until the first herd was sighted and the
word given, when off they dashed to the attack, separating to the right
and left. In this first trial Will killed thirty-eight and Comstock
twenty-three. They had ridden miles, and the carcasses of the dead
buffaloes were strung all over the prairie. Luncheon was served at noon,
and scarcely was it over when another herd was sighted, composed mainly
of cows with their calves. The damage to this herd was eighteen and
fourteen, in favor of Cody.

In those days the prairies were alive with buffaloes, and a third herd
put in an appearance before the rifle-barrels were cooled. In order to
give Brigham a share of the glory, Will pulled off saddle and bridle,
and advanced bareback to the slaughter.

That closed the contest. Score, sixty-nine to forty-eight. Comstock's
friends surrendered, and Cody was dubbed "Champion Buffalo Hunter of the
Plains."

The heads of the buffaloes that fell in this hunt were mounted by
the Kansas Pacific Company, and distributed about the country, as
advertisements of the region the new road was traversing. Meanwhile,
Will continued hunting for the Kansas Pacific contractors, and during
the year and a half that he supplied them with fresh meat he killed four
thousand two hundred and eighty buffaloes. But when the railroad reached
Sheridan it was decided to build no farther at that time, and Will was
obliged to look for other work.

The Indians had again become so troublesome that a general war
threatened all along the border, and General P. H. Sheridan came West
to personally direct operations. He took up his quarters at Fort
Leavenworth, but the Indian depredations becoming more widespread, he
transferred his quarters to Fort Hayes, then the terminus of the Kansas
Pacific Railroad. Will was then in the employ of the quartermaster's
department at Fort Larned, but was sent with an important dispatch to
General Sheridan announcing that the Indians near Larned were preparing
to decamp. The distance between Larned and Hayes was sixty-five miles,
through a section infested with Indians, but Will tackled it, and
reached the commanding General without mishap.

Shortly afterward it became necessary to send dispatches from Fort Hayes
to Fort Dodge. Ninety-five miles of country lay between, and every mile
of it was dangerous ground. Fort Dodge was surrounded by Indians, and
three scouts had lately been killed while trying to get dispatches
through, but Will's confidence in himself or his destiny was unshakable,
and he volunteered to take the dispatches, as far, at least, as the
Indians would let him.

"It is a dangerous undertaking," said General Sheridan, "but it is most
important that the dispatches should go through; so, if you are willing
to risk it, take the best horse you can find, and the sooner you start
the better."

Within an hour the scout was in the saddle. At the outset Will permitted
his horse to set his own pace, for in case of pursuit he should want
the animal fresh enough to at least hold his own. But no pursuit
materialized, and when the dawn came up he had covered seventy miles,
and reached a station on Coon Creek, manned by colored troops. Here
he delivered a letter to Major Cox, the officer in command, and after
eating breakfast, took a fresh horse, and resumed his journey before the
sun was above the plain.

Fort Dodge was reached, the dispatches delivered by nine o'clock, and
Will turned in for a needed sleep. When he awoke, he was assured by John
Austin, chief of the scouts at Dodge, that his coming through unharmed
from Fort Hayes was little short of a miracle. He was also assured
that a journey to his own headquarters, Fort Larned, would be even more
ticklish than his late ride, as the hostiles were especially thick in
that direction. But the officer in command at Dodge desired to send
dispatches to Larned, and as none of the other scouts were willing to
take them, Will volunteered his services.

"Larned's my headquarters," said he, "and I must go there anyway; so if
you'll give me a good horse, I'll take your dispatches."

"We haven't a decent horse left," said the officer; "but you can take
your pick of some fine government mules."

Will made a gesture of despair. Another race on mule-back with Indians
was not an inviting prospect. There were very few mules like unto his
quondam mouse-colored mount. But he succumbed to the inevitable, picked
out the most enterprising looking mule in the bunch, and set forth. And
neither he nor the mule guessed what was in store for each of them.

At Coon Creek Will dismounted for a drink of water, and the mule
embraced the opportunity to pull away, and start alone on the
wagon-trail to Larned. Will did not suspect that he should have any
trouble in overtaking the capricious beast, but at the end of a mile
he was somewhat concerned. He had threatened and entreated, raged
and cajoled. 'Twas all wasted. The mule was as deaf to prayer as to
objurgation. It browsed contentedly along the even tenor of its way, so
near and yet so far from the young man, who, like "panting time, toil'd
after it in vain." And Larned much more than twenty miles away.

What the poet calls "the golden exhalations of the dawn" began to warm
the gray of the plain. The sun was in the roots of the grass. Four miles
away the lights of Larned twinkled. The only blot on a fair landscape
was the mule--in the middle distance. But there was a wicked gleam in
the eye of the footsore young man in the foreground.

Boom! The sunrise gun at the fort. The mule threw back its head, waved
its ears, and poured forth a song of triumph, a loud, exultant bray.

Crack! Will's rifle. Down went the mule. It had made the fatal mistake
of gloating over its villainy. Never again would it jeopardize the life
of a rider.

It had been a thirty-five-mile walk, and every bone in Will's body
ached. His shot alarmed the garrison, but he was soon on the ground with
the explanation; and after turning over his dispatches, he sought his
bed.

During the day General Hazen returned, under escort, from Fort Harker,
with dispatches for Sheridan, and Will offered to be the bearer of them.
An army mule was suggested, but he declined to again put his life in the
keeping of such an animal. A good horse was selected, and the journey
made without incident.

General Sheridan was roused at daylight to receive the scout's report
and praised Will warmly for having undertaken and safely accomplished
three such long and dangerous rides.

"In all," says General Sheridan, in his Memoirs, "Cody rode three
hundred and fifty miles in less than sixty hours, and such an exhibition
of endurance and courage was more than enough to convince me that his
services would be extremely valuable in the campaign; so I retained him
at Fort Hayes until the battalion of Fifth Cavalry arrived, and then
made him chief of scouts for that regiment."


CHAPTER XVII. -- SATANTA, CHIEF OF THE KIOWAS.

WITHIN plain view of Fort Larned lay a large camp of Kiowas and
Comanches. They were not yet bedaubed with war paint, but they were as
restless as panthers in a cage, and it was only a matter of days when
they would whoop and howl with the loudest.

The principal chief of the Kiowas was Satanta, a powerful and
resourceful warrior, who, because of remarkable talents for
speech-making, was called "The Orator of the Plains." Satanta was short
and bullet-headed. Hatred for the whites swelled every square inch
of his breast, but he had the deep cunning of his people, with some
especially fine points of treachery learned from dealings with dishonest
agents and traders. There probably never was an Indian so depraved that
he could not be corrupted further by association with a rascally white
man.

When the Kiowas were friendly with the government, Satanta received a
guest with all the magnificence the tribe afforded. A carpet was spread
for the white man to sit upon, and a folding board was set up for a
table. The question of expense never intruded.

Individually, too, Satanta put on a great deal of style. Had the
opportunity come to him, he would have worn a silk hat with a sack-coat,
or a dress suit in the afternoon. As it was, he produced some startling
effects with blankets and feathers.

It was part of General Hazen's mission to Fort Larned to patch up a
treaty with the outraged Kiowas and Comanches, if it could be brought
about. On one warm August morning, the general set out for Fort Zarah,
on a tour of inspection. Zarah was on the Arkansas, in what is now
Barton County, Kansas. An early start was made, as it was desired to
cover the thirty miles by noon. The general rode in a four-mule army
ambulance, with an escort of ten foot soldiers, in a four-mule escort
wagon.

After dinner at Zarah the general went on to Fort Harker, leaving orders
for the scout and soldiers to return to Larned on the following day. But
as there was nothing to do at Fort Zarah, Will determined to return at
once; so he trimmed the sails of his mule-ship, and squared away for
Larned.

The first half of the journey was without incident, but when Pawnee Rock
was reached, events began to crowd one another. Some forty Indians rode
out from behind the rock and surrounded the scout.

"How? How?" they cried, as they drew near, and offered their hands for
the white man's salutation.

The braves were in war paint, and intended mischief; but there was
nothing to be lost by returning their greeting, so Will extended his
hand.

One warrior seized it and gave it a violent jerk; another caught the
mule's bridle; a third pulled the revolvers from the holsters; a fourth
snatched the rifle from across the saddle; while a fifth, for a climax,
dealt Will a blow on the head with a tomahawk that nearly stunned him.

Then the band started for the Arkansas River, lashing the mule, singing,
yelling, and whooping. For one supposed to be stolid and taciturn, the
Indian makes a good deal of noise at times.

Across the river was a vast throng of warriors, who had finally decided
to go on the war-path. Will and his captors forded the shallow stream,
and the prisoner was conducted before the chiefs of the tribe, with some
of whom he was acquainted.

His head throbbed from the tomahawking, but his wits were still in
working order, and when asked by Satanta where he had been, he replied
that he had been out searching for "whoa-haws."

He knew that the Indians had been promised a herd of "whoa-haws," as
they termed cattle, and he knew, too, that the herd had not arrived, and
that the Indians had been out of meat for several weeks; hence he hoped
to enlist Satanta's sympathetic interest.

He succeeded. Satanta was vastly interested. Where were the cattle? Oh,
a few miles back. Will had been sent forward to notify the Indians that
an army of sirloin steaks was advancing upon them.

Satanta was much pleased, and the other chiefs were likewise interested.
Did General Hazen say the cattle were for them? Was there a chance that
the scout was mistaken?

Not a chance; and with becoming dignity Will demanded a reason for the
rough treatment he had received.

Oh, that was all a joke, Satanta explained. The Indians who had captured
the white chief were young and frisky. They wished to see whether he was
brave. They were simply testing him. It was sport--just a joke.

Will did not offer to argue the matter. No doubt an excellent test of a
man's courage is to hit him over the head with a tomahawk. If he lives
through it, he is brave as Agamemnon. But Will insisted mildly that it
was a rough way to treat friends; whereupon Satanta read the riot act to
his high-spirited young men, and bade them return the captured weapons
to the scout.

The next question was, were there soldiers with the cattle? Certainly,
replied Will; a large party of soldiers were escorting the succulent
sirloins. This intelligence necessitated another consultation. Evidently
hostilities must be postponed until after the cattle had arrived. Would
Will drive the cattle to them? He would be delighted to. Did he desire
that the chief's young men should accompany him? No, indeed. The
soldiers, also, were high-spirited, and they might test the bravery of
the chief's young men by shooting large holes in them. It would be much
better if the scout returned alone.

Satanta agreed with him, and Will recrossed the river without
molestation; but, glancing over his shoulder, he noted a party of ten
or fifteen young braves slowly following him. Satanta was an extremely
cautious chieftain.

Will rode leisurely up the gentle slope of the river's bank, but when
he had put the ridge between him and the Indian camp he pointed his mule
westward, toward Fort Larned, and set it going at its best pace. When
the Indians reached the top of the ridge, from where they could scan the
valley, in which the advancing cattle were supposed to be, there was not
a horn to be seen, and the scout was flying in an opposite direction.

They gave chase, but the mule had a good start, and when it got its
second wind--always necessary in a mule--the Indian ponies gained but
slowly. When Ash Creek, six miles from Larned, was reached, the race
was about even, but two miles farther on, the Indians were uncomfortably
close behind. The sunset gun at the fort boomed a cynical welcome to the
man four miles away, flying toward it for his life.

At Pawnee Fork, two miles from the fort, the Indians had crept up to
within five hundred yards. But here, on the farther bank of the stream,
Will came upon a government wagon containing half a dozen soldiers and
Denver Jim, a well-known scout.

The team was driven among the trees, and the men hid themselves in the
bushes, and when the Indians came along they were warmly received. Two
of the reds were killed; the others wheeled and rode back in safety.

In 1868 General Sheridan had taken command of all the troops in the
field. He arranged what is known as the winter expeditions against the
Kiowas, Comanches, Southern Cheyennes, and Arapahoes. He personally
commanded the expedition which left Fort Dodge, with General Custer as
chief of cavalry. General Penrose started for Fort Lyon, Colorado, and
General Eugene A. Carr was ordered from the Republican River country,
with the Fifth Cavalry, to Fort Wallace, Kansas. Will at this time had
a company of forty scouts with General Carr's command. He was ordered by
General Sheridan, when leaving Fort Lyon, to follow the trail of General
Penrose's command until it was overtaken. General Carr was to proceed to
Fort Lyon, and follow on the trail of General Penrose, who had started
from there three weeks before, when, as Carr ranked Penrose, he would
then take command of both expeditions. It was the 21st of November when
Carr's expedition left Fort Lyon. The second day out they encountered a
terrible snow-storm and blizzard in a place they christened "Freeze
Out Canon," by which name it is still known. As Penrose had only a
pack-train and no heavy wagons, and the ground was covered with snow, it
was a very difficult matter to follow his trail. But taking his general
course, they finally came up with him on the south fork of the Canadian
River, where they found him and his soldiers in a sorry plight,
subsisting wholly on buffalo-meat. Their animals had all frozen to
death.

General Carr made what is known as a supply camp, leaving Penrose's
command and some of his own disabled stock therein. Taking with him
the Fifth Cavalry and the best horses and pack-mules, he started south
toward the main fork of the Canadian River, looking for the Indians. He
was gone from the supply camp thirty days, but could not locate the
main band of Indians, as they were farther to the east, where General
Sheridan had located them, and had sent General Custer in to fight them,
which he did, in what is known as the great battle of Wichita.

They had a very severe winter, and returned in March to Fort Lyon,
Colorado.

In the spring of 1869, the Fifth Cavalry, ordered to the Department of
the Platte, took up the line of march for Fort McPherson, Nebraska.

It was a large command, including seventy-six wagons for stores,
ambulance wagons, and pack-mules. Those chief in authority were Colonel
Royal (afterward superseded by General Carr), Major Brown, and Captain
Sweetman.

The average distance covered daily was only ten miles, and when the
troops reached the Solomon River there was no fresh meat in camp.
Colonel Royal asked Will to look up some game.

"All right, sir," said Will. "Will you send a couple of wagons along to
fetch in the meat?"

"We'll send for the game, Cody, when there's some game to send for,"
curtly replied the colonel.

That settled the matter, surely, and Will rode away, a trifle ruffled in
temper.

He was not long in rounding up a herd of seven buffaloes, and he headed
them straight for camp. As he drew near the lines, he rode alongside
his game, and brought down one after another, until only an old bull
remained. This he killed in almost the center of the camp.

The charge of the buffaloes had nearly stampeded the picketed horses,
and Colonel Royal, who, with the other officers, had watched the hunt,
demanded, somewhat angrily:

"What does this mean, Cody?"

"Why," said Will, "I thought, sir, I'd save you the trouble of sending
after the game."

The colonel smiled, though perhaps the other officers enjoyed the joke
more than he.

At the north fork of the Beaver, Will discovered a large and fresh
Indian trail. The tracks were scattered all over the valley, showing
that a large village had recently passed that way. Will estimated that
at least four hundred lodges were represented; that would mean from
twenty-five hundred to three thousand warriors, squaws, and children.

When General Carr (who had taken the command) got the news, he followed
down a ravine to Beaver Creek, and here the regiment went into camp.
Lieutenant Ward and a dozen men were detailed to accompany Will on a
reconnoissance. They followed Beaver Creek for twelve miles, and
then the lieutenant and the scout climbed a knoll for a survey of the
country. One glance took in a large Indian village some three miles
distant. Thousands of ponies were picketed out, and small bands of
warriors were seen returning from the hunt, laden with buffalo-meat.

"I think, Lieutenant," said Will, "that we have important business at
camp."

"I agree with you," said Ward. "The quicker we get out of here, the
better."

When they rejoined the men at the foot of the hill, Ward dispatched a
courier to General Carr, the purpose of the lieutenant being to follow
slowly and meet the troops which he knew would be sent forward.

The courier rode away at a gallop, but in a few moments came riding
back, with three Indians at his horse's heels. The little company
charged the warriors, who turned and fled for the village.

"Lieutenant," said Will, "give me that note." And as it was passed over,
he clapped spurs to his horse and started for the camp.

He had proceeded but a short distance when he came upon another party of
Indians, returning to the village with buffalo-meat. Without stopping,
he fired a long-range shot at them, and while they hesitated, puzzled by
the action, he galloped past. The warriors were not long in recovering
from their surprise, and cutting loose their meat, followed; but their
ponies were tired from a long hunt, and Will's fresh horse ran away from
them.

When General Carr received the lieutenant's dispatch, he ordered the
bugler to sound the inspiring "Boots and Saddles," and, while two
companies remained to guard the wagons, the rest of the troops hastened
against the Indians.

Three miles out they were joined by Lieutenant Ward's company, and five
miles more brought them within sight of a huge mass of mounted Indians
advancing up the creek. These warriors were covering the retreat of
their squaws, who were packing up and getting ready for hasty flight.

General Carr ordered a charge on the red line. If it were broken, the
cavalry was to continue, and surround the village. The movement was
successfully executed, but one officer misunderstood the order, and,
charging on the left wing of the hostiles, was speedily hemmed in by
some three hundred redskins. Reinforcements were dispatched to his
relief, but the plan of battle was spoiled, and the remainder of the
afternoon was spent in contesting the ground with the Indians, who
fought for their lodges, squaws, and children with desperate and dogged
courage. When night came on, the wagon-trains, which had been ordered to
follow, had not put in an appearance, and, though the regiment went back
to look for them, it was nine o'clock before they were reached.

Camp was broken at daybreak, and the pursuit began, but not an Indian
was in sight. All the day the trail was followed. There was evidence
that the Indians had abandoned everything that might hinder their
flight. That night the regiment camped on the banks of the Republican,
and the next morning caught a distant glimpse of the foe.

About eleven o'clock a charge was made by three hundred mounted
warriors, but they were repulsed with considerable loss, and when they
discovered that defeat was certain, they evaded further pursuit by
breaking up into companies and scattering to all points of the compass.
A large number of ponies were collected as trophies of this expedition.


CHAPTER XVIII. -- WILL MADE CHIEF OF SCOUTS.

IN due time the Fifth Cavalry reached Fort McPherson, which became its
headquarters while they were fitting out a new expedition to go into
the Republican River country. At this time General Carr recommended to
General Augur, who was in command of the Department, that Will be made
chief of scouts in the Department of the Platte.

Will's fancy had been so taken by the scenery along the line of march
that he proceeded to explore the country around McPherson, the result
being a determination to make his future home in the Platte Valley.

Shortly after reaching the fort, the scouts' division of the Fifth
Cavalry was reinforced by Major Frank North and three companies of the
celebrated Pawnee scouts. These became the most interesting and amusing
objects in camp, partly on account of their race, but mainly because
of the bizarre dress fashions they affected. My brother, in his
autobiography, describes the appearance presented by these scouts during
a review of the command by Brigadier-General Duncan.

The regiment made a fine showing, the men being well drilled and
thoroughly versed in tactics. The Pawnees also showed up well on drill,
but their full dress uniforms were calculated to excite even the army
horses to laughter. Regular cavalry suits had been furnished them, but
no two of the Pawnees seemed to agree as to the correct manner in which
the various articles should be worn. As they lined up for dress parade,
some of them wore heavy overcoats, others discarded even pantaloons,
content with a breech-clout. Some wore large black hats, with brass
accouterments, others were bareheaded. Many wore the pantaloons, but
declined the shirts, while a few of the more original cut the seats from
the pantaloons, leaving only leggings. Half of them were without boots
or moccasins, but wore the clinking spurs with manifest pride.

They were a quaint and curious lot, but drilled remarkably well for
Indians, and obeyed orders. They were devoted to their white chief,
Major North, who spoke Pawnee like a native, and they were very proud
of their position in the United States army. Good soldiers they made,
too--hard riders, crack shots, and desperate fighters.

At the close of the parade and review referred to, the officers and the
ladies attended an Indian dance, given by the Pawnees, which climaxed a
rather exciting day.

The following morning an expedition moved back to the Republican River,
to curb the high spirits of a band of Sioux, who had grown boldly
troublesome. This was the sort of service the Pawnees welcomed, as they
and the Sioux were hereditary enemies.

At the journey's end, camp was made at the mouth of the Beaver, and the
Sioux were heard from within the hour. A party of them raided the mules
that had been taken to the river, and the alarm was given by a herder,
who dashed into camp with an arrow sticking in his shoulder.

Will did not wait to saddle his horse, but the Pawnees were as quick as
he, and both of them rather surprised the Sioux, who did not expect
such a swift response. Especially were they surprised to find themselves
confronted by their tribal foe, the Pawnee, and they fell back hastily,
closely pressed by Will and his red allies. A running fight was kept up
for fifteen miles, and when many of the Sioux had been stretched upon
the plain and the others scattered, the pursuing party returned to camp.

Will himself, on a fine horse, had been somewhat chagrined at being
passed in the chase by a Pawnee on an inferior-looking steed. Upon
inquiring of Major North, he found that the swifter horse was, like his
own, government property. The Pawnee was much attached to his mount,
but he was also fond of tobacco, and a few pieces of that commodity,
supplemented by some other articles, induced him to exchange horses.
Will named his new charge "Buckskin Joe," and rode him for four years.
Joe proved a worthy successor to Brigham for speed, endurance, and
intelligence.

This was the first adventure that Will and the Pawnees had pursued
together, and they emerged with an increased esteem for each other. Not
long afterward, Will's skill as a buffalo-hunter raised the admiration
of the Indians to enthusiasm.

Twenty Pawnees that circled around one herd of buffaloes killed only
twenty-two, and when the next herd came in view Will asked Major North
to keep the Indians in the background while he showed them a thing
or two. Buckskin Joe was a capital buffalo-hunter, and so well did he
perform his part that Will brought down thirty-six, about one at every
shot.

The Pawnees were delighted. They held it considerable of an achievement
to kill two or three of the monarchs of the plains at a single run, and
Will's feat dazzled them. He was at once pronounced a great chief, and
ever after occupied a high place in their regard.

Moving up the Republican River, the troops went into camp on Black Tail
Deer Fork. Scarcely were the tents pitched when a band of Indians were
seen sweeping toward them at full speed, singing, yelling, and waving
lances. The camp was alive in an instant, but the Pawnees, instead
of preparing for defense, began to sing and yell in unison with the
advancing braves. "Those are some of our own Indians," said Major North;
"they've had a fight, and are bringing in the scalps."

And so it proved. The Pawnees reported a skirmish with the Sioux, in
which a few of the latter had been killed.

The next day the regiment set forth upon the trail of the Sioux. They
traveled rapidly, and plainly gained ground.

At every camp the print of a woman's shoe was noted among the tracks
of moccasined feet. The band evidently had a white captive in tow, and
General Carr, selecting the best horses, ordered a forced march, the
wagon-trains to follow as rapidly as possible. Will, with six Pawnees,
was to go ahead and locate the hostiles, and send back word, so that a
plan of attack might be arranged before the Indian village was reached.

This village the scouts discovered among the sand-hills at Summit
Springs, a few miles from the South Platte River; and while the Pawnees
remained to watch, Will returned to General Carr with the news.

There was suppressed excitement all along the line, as officers and men
prepared for what promised to be a lively scrimmage. The troops moved
forward by a circuitous route, and reached a hill overlooking the
hostile camp without their presence being dreamed of by the red men.

The bugler was ordered to sound the charge, but he was trembling with
excitement, and unable to blow a note.

"Sound the charge, man!" ordered General Carr a second time; but
the unhappy wight could scarcely hold his horn, much less blow it.
Quartermaster Hays snatched the instrument from the flustered man's
hands, and as the call rang out loud and clear the troops rushed to the
attack.

Taken wholly by surprise, the Indian village went to pieces in a
twinkling. A few of the Sioux mounted and rode forward to repel the
assault, but they turned back in half a minute, while those that were
not mounted scattered for the foothills hard by. The cavalry swept
through the village like a prairie fire, and pursued the flying Indians
until darkness put an end to the chase.

By the next morning the bugler had grown calm enough to sound "Boots
and Saddles!" and General Carr split his force into companies, as it was
discovered that the Indians had divided. Each company was to follow a
separate trail.

Will made one of a band of two hundred, and for two days they dogged
the red man's footsteps. At sunrise of the third day the trail ran into
another, showing that the Sioux had reunited their forces. This was
serious for the little company of regulars, but they went ahead, eager
for a meeting with the savages.

They had not long to wait. The sun was scarcely an hour high when some
six hundred Sioux were espied riding in close ranks along the bank of
the Platte. The Indians discovered the troops at the same moment, and
at once gave battle. The Indian is not a coward, though he frequently
declines combat if the odds are not largely in his favor.

In this engagement the Sioux outnumbered the soldiers three to one,
and the latter fell back slowly until they reached a ravine. Here they
tethered their horses and waited the course of Indian events, which,
as usual, came in circular form. The Sioux surrounded the regulars, and
finding them comparatively few in number, made a gallant charge.

But bows and arrows are futile against powder and ball, and the warriors
reeled back from a scathing fire, leaving a score of their number dead.

Another charge, another repulse; and then a council of war. This lasted
an hour, and evidently evolved a brilliant stratagem, for the Sioux
divided into two bands, and while one made a show of withdrawing, the
other circled around and around the position where the soldiers lay.

At a point in this revolving belt of redskins rode a well-mounted,
handsome warrior, plainly a chief. It had been Will's experience that
to lay low a chief was half the battle when fighting Indians, but this
particular mogul kept just out of rifle-shot. There are, however, as
many ways of killing an Indian as of killing a cat; so Will crawled on
hands and knees along the ravine to a point which he thought would be
within range of the chief when next he swung around the circle.

The calculation was close enough, and when the warrior came loping
along, slacking his pace to cross the ravine, Will rose and fired.

It was a good four hundred yards, but the warrior pitched from his seat,
and his pony ran down the ravine into the ranks of the soldiers, who
were so elated over the success of the shot that they voted the animal
to Will as a trophy.

The fallen warrior was Tall Bull, one of the ablest chiefs the Sioux
ever had. His death so disheartened his braves that they at once
retreated.

A union of General Carr's scattered forces followed, and a few days
later an engagement took place in which three hundred warriors and a
large number of ponies were captured. Some white captives were released,
and several hundred squaws made prisoners.

Among these latter was the amiable widow of Tall Bull, who, far from
cherishing animosity against Will as the slayer of her spouse, took
pride in the fact that he had fallen under the fire of so great a
warrior as "Pahaska," Long-haired Chief, by which name our scout was
known among the Indians.


CHAPTER XIX. -- ARMY LIFE AT FORT M'PHERSON.

IN the spring of 1870 Will proceeded to put into effect the
determination of the previous year--to establish a home in the lovely
country of the westerly Platte. After preparing quarters wherein his
family might be comfortable, he obtained a leave of absence and departed
for St. Louis to fetch his wife and daughter Arta, now a beautiful child
of three.

The fame of "Buffalo Bill" had extended far beyond the plains, and
during his month's sojourn in St. Louis he was the object of a great
deal of attention. When the family prepared to depart for the frontier
home, my sister-in-law wrote to me to ask if I did not wish to accompany
them. I should have been delighted to accept the invitation, but at that
especial time there were strong attractions for me in my childhood's
home; besides, I felt that sister May, who had not enjoyed the pleasure
of the St. Louis trip, was entitled to the Western jaunt.

So May made a visit to McPherson, and a delightful time she had, though
she was at first inclined to quarrel with the severe discipline of
army life. Will ranked with the officers, and as a result May's social
companions were limited to the two daughters of General Augur, who were
also on a visit to the fort. To compensate for the shortage of feminine
society, however, there were a number of young unmarried officers.

Every day had its curious or enlivening incident, and May's letters
to me were filled with accounts of the gayety of life at an army post.
After several months I was invited to join her. She was enthusiastic
over a proposed buffalo-hunt, as she desired to take part in one before
her return to Leavenworth, and wished me to enjoy the sport with her.

In accepting the invitation I fixed a certain day for my arrival at
McPherson, but I was delayed in my journey, and did not reach the fort
until three days after the date set. May was much disturbed. She had
allowed me three days for recuperation from the journey, and I had
arrived on the eve of the buffalo-hunt. Naturally, I was too fatigued
to rave over buffaloes, and I objected to joining the hunt; and I was
encouraged in my objecting by the discovery that my brother was away on
a scouting trip.

"You don't think of going buffalo-hunting without Will, do you?" I asked
May.

"Why," said she, "we can never tell when he will be in camp and when
away; he's off scouting nearly all the time. And we can't get up a
buffalo-hunt on five minutes' notice; we must plan ahead. Our party is
all ready to start, and there's a reporter here from an Omaha paper to
write it up. We can't put it off, and you must go."

After that, of course, there was nothing more to be said, and when the
hunting-party set forth I made one of it.

A gay party it was. For men, there were a number of officers, and the
newspaper man, Dr. Frank Powell, now of La Crosser for women, the wives
of two of the officers, the daughters of General Augur, May, and myself.
There was sunshine, laughter, and incessant chatter, and when one is
young and fond of horseback-riding, and a handsome young officer rides
by one's side, physical fatigue is apt to vanish for a time.

The fort was soon nothing but a break in the sky-line, and with a
sense almost of awe I looked for the first time upon the great American
Desert. To our left, as we rode eastward, ran the swift and shallow
Platte, dotted with green-garbed islands. This river Washington Irving
called "the most magnificent and the most useless of streams" "The
islands," he wrote, "have the appearance of a labyrinth of groves
floating on the waters. Their extraordinary position gives an air
of youth and loveliness to the whole scene. If to this be added the
undulations of the river, the waving of the verdure, the alternations
of light and shade, and the purity of the atmosphere, some idea may
be formed of the pleasing sensations which the traveler experiences on
beholding a scene that seems to have started fresh from the hands of the
Creator."

In sharp contrast was the sandy plain over which we rode. On this grew
the short, stubby buffalo-grass, the dust-colored sage-brush, and cactus
in rank profusion. Over to the right, perhaps a mile away, a long range
of foothills ran down to the horizon, with here and there the great
canons, through which entrance was effected to the upland country, each
canon bearing a historical or legendary name.

To my eyes the picture was as beautiful as it was novel. As far as
one could see there was no sign of human habitation. It was one vast,
untenanted waste, with the touch of infinity the ocean wears.

As we began to get into the foothills, one of our equestriennes narrowly
escaped a fall. Her horse dropped a foot into a prairie-dog's hole, and
came to an abrupt stop. The foot was extricated, and I was instructed in
the dangers that beset the prairie voyager in these blind traps of the
plain.

The trail had been ascending at a gentle grade, and we had a slight
change of scene--desert hill instead of desert plain. The sand-hills
rose in tiers before us, and I was informed that they were formed ages
ago by the action of water. What was hard, dry ground to our horses'
hoofs was once the bottom of the sea.

I was much interested in the geology of my environments; much more so
than I should have been had I been told that those strange, weird hills
were the haunt of the red man, who was on the war-path, and looking
constantly for scalps. But these unpleasant facts were not touched upon
by the officers, and in blissful ignorance we pursued the tenor of our
way.

We were obliged to ride a great distance before we sighted any game,
and after twenty miles had been gone over, my temporarily forgotten
weariness began to reassert itself. Dr. Powell proposed that the ladies
should do the shooting, but my interest in the hunt had waned. It had
been several years since I had ridden a horse, and after the first few
miles I was not in a suitable frame of mind or body to enjoy the most
exciting hunt.

A herd of buffaloes finally came into view, and the party was instantly
alive. One old bull was a little apart from the others of the herd, and
was singled out for the first attack. As we drew within range, a rifle
was given to May, with explicit directions as to its handling. The
buffalo has but one vulnerable spot, and it is next to impossible for
a novice to make a fatal shot. May fired, and perhaps her shot might be
called a good one, for the animal was struck: but it was only wounded
and infuriated, and dropping its shaggy head, it rushed toward us. The
officers fusilladed the mountain of flesh, succeeding only in rousing it
to added fury. Another rifle was handed to May, and Dr. Powell directed
its aim; but terrified by the near presence of the charging bull, May
discharged it at random.

Although this is strictly a narrative of facts, exercising the privilege
of the novelist, we leave our present heroine in her perilous position,
and return, for a space, to the fort.

Will returned from his scouting trip shortly after the departure of the
hunting party, and his first query was:

"Is Nellie here?"

"Come and gone," replied his wife; and she informed him of the manner
in which I had been carried off on the long-talked-of buffalo-hunt.
Whereupon Will gave way to one of his rare fits of passion. The scouting
trip had been long and arduous, he was tired and hungry, but also keenly
anxious for our safety. He knew what we were ignorant of--that should
we come clear of the not insignificant dangers attendant upon a
buffalo-hunt, there remained the possibility of capture by Indians.

"I must go after them at once," said he; and off he went, without
thought of rest or food. He did take time, however, to visit the
officers' quarters and pour a vial of wrath upon the bewildered head of
the inferior who occupied the place of the absent commandant.

"Didn't you know," cried Will, "that my continued absence meant danger
in the air? Fine idea, to let a party of ladies go beyond the fort on
such a foolhardy expedition before I had assured you it was safe to
do so! Understand, if any harm comes to my sisters, I'll hold the
government responsible!"

With which tremendous threat he mounted the swiftest horse in camp and
rode away before the astonished officer had recovered from his surprise.

He was able to track us over the sand-hills, and reached us, in accepted
hero fashion, in the very nick of time. The maddened bull buffalo was
charging on May, unchecked by a peppering fire from the guns of the
officers. All hands were so absorbed by the intense excitement of the
moment that the sound of approaching hoof-beats was unnoted. But I
heard, from behind us, the crack of a rifle, and saw the buffalo fall
dead almost at our feet.

The ill-humor of our rescuer dampened the ardor of the welcome we gave
him. The long ride on an empty stomach had not smoothed a ripple of his
ruffled temper, and we were all properly lectured. We were ordered back
to the fort at once, and the command was of such a nature that no one
thought of disputing it. The only question was, whether we could make
the fort before being cut off by Indians. There was no time to be
wasted, even in cutting meat from the tongue of the fallen buffalo. Will
showed us the shortest cut for home, and himself zigzagged ahead of us,
on the watch for a danger signal.

For my part, I was so worn out that I would as soon be captured by
Indians, if they would agree to provide me with a wigwam wherein I might
lie down and rest; but no Indians appeared. Five miles from the fort was
the ranch of a wealthy bachelor, and at May's request a halt was here
called. It was thought that the owner of the ranch might take pity upon
my deplorable condition, and provide some sort of vehicle to convey the
ladies the remainder of the journey.

We were heartily welcomed, and our bachelor host made us extremely
comfortable in his cozy apartments, while he ordered supper for the
party. Will considered that we were within the safety zone, so he
continued on to the fort to obtain his postponed rest; and after supper
the ladies rode to the fort in a carriage.

The next day's Omaha paper contained an account of the hunt from Dr.
Powell's graphic pen, and in it May Cody received all the glory of
the shot that laid the buffalo low. Newspaper men are usually ready to
sacrifice exact facts to an innate sense of the picturesque.

At this time the fort was somewhat concerned over numerous petty crimes
among the civilians, and General Emory, now chief in authority at the
post, requested the county commissioners to appoint Will a justice of
the peace. This was done, much to the dismay of the new Justice, who, as
he phrased it, "knew no more of law than a mule knows of singing." But
he was compelled to bear the blushing honors thrust upon him, and his
sign was posted In a conspicuous place:

     --------------------------      |    WILLIAM F. CODY,      |
     |  JUSTICE OF THE PEACE.   |
     --------------------------*/

     Almost the first thing he was called upon to do in his new
     capacity was to perform a wedding ceremony.  Cold sweat stood upon
     his brow as he implored our aid in this desperate emergency.
     The big law book with which he had been equipped at his
     installation was ransacked in vain for the needed information.
     The Bible was examined more diligently, perhaps, than it had
     ever been by him before, but the Good Book was as unresponsive
     as the legal tome.  "Remember your own wedding ceremony,"
     was our advice "Follow that as nearly as possible."
     But he shook his head despondently The cool-headed scout
     and Indian fighter was dismayed, and the dignity of the law
     trembled in the balance.

     To put an edge on the crisis, nearly the entire fort attended
     the wedding.  All is well, said we, as we watched the justice take
     his place before the bridal pair with not a sign of trepidation.
     At the outset his conducting of the ceremony was irreproachable,
     and we were secretly congratulating ourselves upon his success,
     when our ears were startled by the announcement:

     "Whom God and Buffalo Bill hath joined together, let no man
          put asunder."

     So far as I am informed, no man has attempted it.

     Before May returned home, Will became the very proud father of
          a son.
     He had now three children, a second daughter, Orra, having
          been born two
     years before.  The first boy of the family was the object of
          the undivided
     interest of the post for a time, and names by the dozen were
          suggested.
     Major North offered Kit Carson as an appropriate name for the
          son of a great
     scout and buffalo-hunter, and this was finally settled on.

     My first touch of real anxiety came with an order to Will
     to report at headquarters for assignment to duty.
     The country was alive with Indians, the officer in command
     informed him, and this intelligence filled me with dread.
     My sister-in-law had grown accustomed to her husband's excursions
     into danger-land, and accepted such sallies as incidents of
     his position.  Later, I, too, learned this stoical philosophy,
     but at first my anxiety was so keen that Will laughed at me.

     "Don't worry," said he; "the Indians won't visit the fort to-night.
     There's no danger of them scalping you."

     "But," said I, "it is for you, not for myself, that I am afraid.
     It is horrible to think of you going out alone among those
          foothills,
     which swarm with Indians."

     The fort was on the prairie, but the distant foothills
          stretched away
     interminably, and these furnished favorite lurking-places for
          the redskins.
     Will drew me to a window, and pointed out the third tier of hills,
     some twelve or fifteen miles away.

     "I would advise you," said he, "to go to bed and sleep,
     but if you insist on keeping awake and worrying, I will kindle
     a blaze on top of that hill at midnight.  Watch closely.
     I can send up only one flash, for there will be Indian eyes
     unclosed as well as yours."

     One may imagine with what a beating heart I stared into the
          darkness
     when the hour of twelve drew on.  The night was a veil that hid
     a thousand terrors, but a gauzy veil, to my excited fancy,
     behind which passed a host of shadowy horsemen with uptossing
          lances.
     How could a man ride alone into such a gloomy, terror-haunted
          domain?
     The knights of old, who sallied forth in search of dismal ogres
     and noxious dragons, were not of stouter heart, and they breasted
     only fancied perils.

     Twelve o'clock! The night had a thousand eyes, but they did
          not pierce
     the darkness of the foothills.

     Ah!  A thin ribbon of light curled upward for an instant, then
          vanished.
     Will was safe thus far.  But there were many hours--and the
          darkest--before the dawn, and I carried to my bed the
          larger share of my forebodings.

     Next day the scout came home to report the exact location
     of the hostile-Sioux. The troops, ready for instant action,
     were hurled against them, and the Indians were thoroughly thrashed.
     A large number of chiefs were captured, among them "Red Shirt,"
     an interesting redskin, who afterward traveled with the "Wild
          West."

     Captive chiefs were always esteemed of great interest by the ladies
     of the fort.  To me the braves taken in the last raid were
          remarkable
     mainly for economy of apparel and sulkiness of demeanor.

     This same fall the fort was visited by a gentleman introduced as
     Colonel Judson, though the public knows him better as "Ned
          Buntline,"
     the story-writer. He desired to accompany the scouts on a certain
     proposed trip, and Major Brown informed Will that the ulterior
          motive
     of the author was to project Buffalo Bill into a novel as hero.

     "Now, I'd look pretty in a novel, wouldn't I?" said Will,
     sarcastically and blushingly.

     "Yes, I think you would," returned the major, eying the other's
     splendid proportions critically.

     Whereupon the scout blushed again, and doffed his sombrero in
          acknowledgment
     of the compliment, for--

     "'Tis pleasant, sure, to see one's name in print;
     A book's a book, although there's nothing in't."

A retired naval officer, Ned Buntline wore a black undress military
suit. His face was bronzed and rugged, determined yet kindly; he walked
with a slight limp, and carried a cane. He shook Will's hand cordially
when they were introduced, and expressed great pleasure in the meeting.
This was the genesis of a friendship destined to work great changes in
Buffalo Bill's career.

During the scouting expedition that followed, the party chanced upon an
enormous bone, which the surgeon pronounced the femur of a human body.
Will understood the Indian tongues well enough to be in part possession
of their traditions, and he related the Sioux legend of the flood.

It was taught by the wise men of this tribe that the earth was
originally peopled by giants, who were fully three times the size
of modern men. They were so swift and powerful that they could run
alongside a buffalo, take the animal under one arm, and tear off a leg,
and eat it as they ran. So vainglorious were they because of their own
size and strength that they denied the existence of a Creator. When it
lightened, they proclaimed their superiority to the lightning; when it
thundered, they laughed.

This displeased the Great Spirit, and to rebuke their arrogance he sent
a great rain upon the earth. The valleys filled with water, and the
giants retreated to the hills. The water crept up the hills, and the
giants sought safety on the highest mountains. Still the rain continued,
the waters rose, and the giants, having no other refuge, were drowned.

The Great Spirit profited by his former mistake. When the waters
subsided, he made a new race of men, but he made them smaller and less
strong.

This tradition has been handed down from Sioux father to Sioux son since
earliest ages. It shows, at least, as the legends of all races do, that
the story of the Deluge is history common to all the world.

Another interesting Indian tradition bears evidence of a later origin.
The Great Spirit, they say, once formed a man of clay, and he was placed
in the furnace to bake, but he was subjected to the heat too long a
time, and came out burnt. Of him came the negro race. At another trial
the Great Spirit feared the second clay man might also burn, and he was
not left in the furnace long enough. Of him came the paleface man. The
Great Spirit was now in a position to do perfect work, and the third
clay man was left in the furnace neither too long nor too short a time;
he emerged a masterpiece, the _ne plus ultra_ of creation--the noble red
man.


CHAPTER XX. -- PA-HAS-KA, THE LONG-HAIRED CHIEF.

ALTHOUGH the glory of killing the buffalo on our hunt was accredited to
sister May, to me the episode proved of much more moment. In the spring
of 1871 I was married to Mr. Jester, the bachelor ranchman at whose
place we had tarried on our hurried return to the fort. His house had a
rough exterior, but was substantial and commodious, and before I entered
it, a bride, it was refitted in a style almost luxurious. I returned to
Leavenworth to prepare for the wedding, which took place at the home of
an old friend, Thomas Plowman, his daughter Emma having been my chum in
girlhood.

In our home near McPherson we were five miles "in the country." Nature
in primitive wildness encompassed us, but life's song never ran into a
monotone. The prairie is never dull when one watches it from day to day
for signs of Indians. Yet we were not especially concerned, as we were
near enough to the fort to reach it on short notice, and besides our
home there was another house where the ranchmen lived. With these I had
little to do. My especial factotum was a negro boy, whose chief duty was
to saddle my horse and bring it to the door, attend me upon my rides,
and minister to my comfort generally. Poor little chap! He was one of
the first of the Indians' victims.

Early one morning John, as he was called, was sent out alone to look
after the cattle. During breakfast the clatter of hoofs was heard, and
Will rode up to inform us that the Indians were on the war-path and
massed in force just beyond our ranch. Back of Will were the troops,
and we were advised to ride at once to the fort. Hastily packing a few
valuables, we took refuge at McPherson, and remained there until the
troops returned with the news that all danger was over.

Upon our return to the ranch we found that the cattle had been driven
away, and poor little John was picked up dead on the skirts of the
foothills. The redskins had apparently started to scalp him, but had
desisted. Perhaps they thought his wool would not make a desirable
trophy, perhaps they were frightened away. At all events, the poor
child's scalp was left to him, though the mark of the knife was plain.

Shortly after this episode, some capitalists from the East visited
my husband. One of them, Mr. Bent, owned a large share in the
cattle-ranches. He desired to visit this ranch, and the whole party
planned a hunt at the same time. As there were no banking facilities on
the frontier, drafts or bills of exchange would have been of no use;
so the money designed for Western investment had been brought along in
cash. To carry this on the proposed trip was too great a risk, and I was
asked banteringly to act as banker. I consented readily, but imagine
my perturbation when twenty-five thousand dollars in bank-notes were
counted out and left in my care. I had never had the responsibility
of so large a sum of money before, and compared to me the man with
the elephant on his hands had a tranquil time of it. After considering
various methods for secreting the money, I decided for the hair mattress
on my bed. This I ripped open, inserted the envelope containing the
bank-notes, and sewed up the slit. No one was aware of my trust, and I
regarded it safe.

A few mornings later I ordered my pony and rode away to visit my nearest
neighbor, a Mrs. Erickson, purposing later to ride to the fort and
spend the day with Lou, my sister-in-law. When I reached Mrs. Erickson's
house, that good woman came out in great excitement to greet me.

"You must come right in, Mrs. Jester!" said she. "The foothills are
filled with Indians on the warpath."

She handed me her field-glasses, and directed my gaze to the trail below
our ranch, over which buffaloes, cattle, and Indians passed down to the
Platte. I could plainly see the warriors tramping along Indian-file,
their head-feathers waving in the breeze and their blankets flapping
about them as they walked. Instantly the thought of the twenty-five
thousand dollars intrusted to my care flashed across my mind.

"Oh, Mrs. Erickson," I exclaimed, "I must return to the ranch
immediately!"

"You must not do so, Mrs. Jester; it's as much as your life is worth to
attempt it," said she.

But I thought only of the money, and notwithstanding warning and
entreaty, mounted my horse and flew back on the homeward path, not even
daring to look once toward the foothills. When I reached the house, I
called to the overseer:

"The Indians are on the war-path, and the foothills are full of them!
Have two or three men ready to escort me to the fort by the time I have
my valise packed."

"Why, Mrs. Jester," was the reply, "there are no Indians in sight."

"But there are," said I. "I saw them as plainly as I see you, and the
Ericksons saw them, too."

"You have been the victim of a mirage," said the overseer. "Look! there
are no Indians now in view."

I scanned the foothills closely, but there was no sign of a warrior.
With my field-glasses I searched the entire rim of the horizon; it was
tranquillity itself. I experienced a great relief, nevertheless. My
nerves were so shaken that I could not remain at home; so I packed a
valise, taking along the package of bank-notes, and visited another
neighbor, a Mrs. McDonald, a dear friend of many years' standing, who
lived nearer the fort.

This excellent woman was an old resident of the frontier. After she had
heard my story, she related some of her own Indian experiences. When she
first settled in her present home, there was no fort to which she could
flee from Indian molestation, and she was often compelled to rely upon
her wits to extricate her from dangerous situations. The story that
especially impressed me was the following:

"One evening when I was alone," said Mrs. McDonald, "I became conscious
that eyes were peering at me from the darkness outside my window. Flight
was impossible, and my husband would not likely reach home for an
hour or more. What should I do? A happy thought came to me. You know,
perhaps, that Indians, for some reason, have a strange fear of a drunken
woman, and will not molest one. I took from a closet a bottle filled
with a dark-colored liquid, poured out a glassful and drank it. In a few
minutes I repeated the dose, and then seemingly it began to take effect.
I would try to walk across the room, staggering and nearly falling. I
became uproariously 'happy.' I flung my arms above my head, lurched from
side to side, sang a maudlin song, and laughed loudly and foolishly.
The stratagem succeeded. One by one the shadowy faces at the window
disappeared, and by the time my husband and the men returned there was
not an Indian in the neighborhood. I became sober immediately. Molasses
and water is not a very intoxicating beverage."

I plucked up courage to return to the ranch that evening, and shortly
afterward the hunting-party rode up. When I related the story of my
fright, Mr. Bent complimented me upon what he was pleased to call my
courage.

"You are your brother's own sister," said he. "We'll make you banker
again."

"Thank you, but I do not believe you will," said I. "I have had all the
experience I wish for in the banking business in this Indian country."

Upon another occasion Indians were approaching the fort from the farther
side, but as we were not regarded as in danger, no warning was sent to
us. The troops sallied out after the redskins, and the cunning warriors
described a circle. To hide their trail they set fire to the prairie,
and the hills about us were soon ablaze. The flames spread swiftly,
and the smoke rolled upon us in suffocating volume. We retreated to the
river, and managed to exist by dashing water upon our faces. Here we
were found by soldiers sent from the fort to warn settlers of their
peril, and at their suggestion we returned to the ranch, saddled horses,
and rode through the dense smoke five miles to the fort. It was the most
unpleasant ride of my life.

In the preceding chapter mention was made of the finding of a remarkable
bone. It became famous, and in the summer of 1871 Professor Marsh, of
Yale College, brought out a party of students to search for fossils.
They found a number, but were not rewarded by anything the most
credulous could torture into a human relic.

This summer also witnessed an Indian campaign somewhat out of the common
in several of its details. More than one volume would be required
to record all the adventures Scout Cody had with the Children of the
Plains, most of which had so many points in common that it is necessary
to touch upon only those containing incidents out of the ordinary.

An expedition, under command of General Duncan, was fitted out for the
Republican River country. Duncan was a jolly officer and a born fighter.
His brother officers had a story that once on a time he had been shot
in the head by a cannon-ball, and that while he was not hurt a particle,
the ball glanced off and killed one of the toughest mules in the army.

Perhaps it was because the Pawnees spoke so little English, and spoke
that little so badly, that General Duncan insisted upon their repeating
the English call, which would be something like this: "Post Number One.
Nine o'clock. All's well." The Pawnee effort to obey was so ludicrous,
and provocative of such profanity (which they could express passing
well), that the order was countermanded.

One afternoon Major North and Will rode ahead of the command to select
a site for the night's camp. They ran into a band of some fifty Indians,
and were obliged to take the back track as fast as their horses could
travel. Will's whip was shot from his hand and a hole put through his
hat. As they sighted the advance-guard of the command, Major North rode
around in a circle--a signal to the Pawnees that hostiles were near.
Instantly the Pawnees broke ranks and dashed pell-mell to the relief of
their white chief. The hostiles now took a turn at retreating, and kept
it up for several miles.

The troops took up the trail on the following day, and a stern chase set
in. In passing through a deserted camp the troops found an aged squaw,
who had been left to die. The soldiers built a lodge for her, and she
was provided with sufficient rations to last her until she reached the
Indian heaven, the happy hunting-grounds. She was in no haste, however,
to get to her destination, and on their return the troops took her to
the fort with them. Later she was sent to the Spotted Tail agency.

In September of 1871 General Sheridan and a party of friends arrived
at the post for a grand hunt. Between him and Will existed a warm
friendship, which continued to the close of the general's life. Great
preparations were made for the hunt. General Emory, now commander of the
fort, sent a troop of cavalry to meet the distinguished visitors at the
station and escort them to the fort. Besides General Sheridan, there
were in the party Leonard and Lawrence Jerome, Carroll Livingstone,
James Gordon Bennett, J. G. Heckscher, General Fitzhugh, Schuyler
Crosby, Dr. Asch, Mr. McCarthy, and other well-known men. When they
reached the post they found the regiment drawn up on dress parade;
the band struck up a martial air, the cavalry were reviewed by General
Sheridan, and the formalities of the occasion were regarded as over.

It was Sheridan's request that Will should act as guide and scout for
the hunting-party. One hundred troopers under Major Brown were detailed
as escort, and the commissary department fairly bulged. Several
ambulances were also taken along, for the comfort of those who might
weary of the saddle.

Game was abundant, and rare sport was had. Buffalo, elk, and deer were
everywhere, and to those of the party who were new to Western life the
prairie-dog villages were objects of much interest. These villages are
often of great extent. They are made up of countless burrows, and so
honeycombed is the country infested by the little animals that travel
after nightfall is perilous for horses. The dirt is heaped around the
entrance to the burrows a foot high, and here the prairie-dogs, who are
sociability itself, sit on their hind legs and gossip with one another.
Owls and rattlesnakes share the underground homes with the rightful
owners, and all get along together famously.

When the hunting-party returned to McPherson its members voted Will a
veritable Nimrod--a mighty hunter, and he was abundantly thanked for his
masterly guidance of the expedition.

That winter a still more distinguished party visited the post--the Grand
Duke Alexis and his friends. As many of my readers will recall, the
nobleman's visit aroused much enthusiasm in this country. The East had
wined and dined him to satiety, but wining and dining are common to all
nations, and the Grand Duke desired to see the wild life of America--the
Indian in his tepee and the prairie monarch in his domain, as well as
the hardy frontiersman, who feared neither savage warrior nor savage
beast.

The Grand Duke had hunted big game in Eastern lands, and he was a
capital shot. General Sheridan engineered this expedition also, and, as
on the previous occasion, he relied upon Will to make it a success. The
latter received word to select a good camp on Red Willow Creek, where
game was plentiful, and to make all needed arrangements for the comfort
and entertainment of the noble party. A special feature suggested by
Sheridan for the amusement and instruction of the continental guests
was an Indian war-dance and Indian buffalo-hunt. To procure this
entertainment it was necessary to visit Spotted Tail, chief of the
Sioux, and persuade him to bring over a hundred warriors. At this time
there was peace between the Sioux and the government, and the dance idea
was feasible; nevertheless, a visit to the Sioux camp was not without
its dangers. Spotted Tail himself was seemingly sincere in a desire to
observe the terms of the ostensible peace between his people and the
authorities, but many of the other Indians would rather have had the
scalp of the Long-haired Chief than a century of peace.

Will so timed his trip as to reach the Indian camp at dusk, and hitching
his horse in the timber, he wrapped his blanket closely about him, so
that in the gathering darkness he might easily pass for a warrior. Thus
invested, he entered the village, and proceeded to the lodge of Spotted
Tail.

The conference with the distinguished redskin was made smooth sailing
by Agent Todd Randall, who happened to be on hand, and who acted as
interpreter. The old chief felt honored by the invitation extended to
him, and readily promised that in "ten sleeps" from that night he, with
a hundred warriors, would be present at the white man's camp, which was
to be pitched at the point where the government trail crossed Red Willow
Creek.

As Spotted Tail did not repose a great amount of confidence in his
high-spirited young men, he kept Will in his own lodge through the
night. In the morning the chief assembled the camp, and presenting his
guest, asked if his warriors knew him.

"It is Pa-has-ka, the Long-haired Chief!" they answered.

Whereupon Spotted Tail informed them that he had eaten bread with the
Long-haired Chief, thus establishing a bond of friendship, against
violating which the warriors were properly warned.

After that Will was entirely at his ease, although there were many
sullen faces about him. They had long yearned for his scalp, and it was
slightly irritating to find it so near and yet so far.


CHAPTER XXI. -- THE HUNT OF THE GRAND DUKE ALEXIS.

A SPECIAL train brought the Grand Duke Alexis and party to North Platte
on January 12, 1872. Will was presented to the illustrious visitor by
General Sheridan, and was much interested in him. He was also pleased to
note that General Custer made one of the party.

