Captain Aylmer had not the slightest objection to such a plan.
Indeed, he regarded it as in all respects a wise and salutary
arrangement. The moiety of the Belton estate might probably be worth
twenty-five thousand pounds, and the addition of such a sum as that
to his existing means would make all the difference in the world as
to the expediency of his marriage. His father's arguments would all
fall to the ground if twenty-five thousand pounds were to be obtained
in this way; and he had but little doubt that such a change in
affairs would go far to mitigate his mother's wrath. But he was by no
means mercenary in his views so, at least, he assured himself. Clara
should have her chance with or without the Belton estate or with or
without the half of it. He was by no means mercenary. Had he not made
his offer to her and repeated it almost with obstinacy, when she had
no prospect of any fortune? He could always remember that of himself
at least; and remembering that now, he could take a delight in these
bright money prospects without having to accuse himself in the
slightest degree of mercenary motives. This fortune was a godsend
which he could take with clean hands if only he should ultimately be
able to take the lady who possessed the fortune!

From London he wrote to Clara, telling her that he proposed to visit
her at Belton. His letter was written before he had seen Mr Green,
and was not very fervent in its expressions; but, nevertheless, it
was a fair letter, written with the intention of giving her a fair
chance. He had seen with great sorrow 'with heartfelt grief,' that
quarrel between his mother and his own Clara. Thinking, as he felt
himself obliged to think, about Mrs Askerton, he could not but feel
that his mother bad cause for her anger. But he himself was
unprejudiced, and was ready, and anxious also the word anxious was
underscored to carry out his engagement. A few words between them
might probably set everything right, and therefore be proposed to
meet her at the Belton Castle house, at such an hour, on such a day.
He should run down to Perivale on his journey, and perhaps Clara
would let him have a line addressed to him there. Such was his
letter.

'What do you think of that?' said Clara, showing it to Mrs Askerton
on the afternoon of the day on which she had received it.

'What do you think of it?' said Mrs Askerton. 'I can only hope, that
he will not come within reach of my hands.'

'You are not angry with me for showing it to you?'

'No why should I be angry with you? Of course I knew it all without
any showing. Do not tell Colonel Askerton, or they will be killing
each other.'

'Of course I shall not tell Colonel Askerton; but I could not help
showing this to you.'

'And you will meet him?'

'Yes; I shall meet him. What else can I do?'

'Unless, indeed, you were to write and tell him that it would do no
good.'

'It will be better that he should come.'

'If you allow him to talk you over you will be a wretched woman all
your life.'

'It will be better that he should come,' said Clara again. And then
she wrote to Captain Aylmer at Perivale, telling him that she would
be at the house at the hour he had named, on the day he had named.

When that day came she walked across the park a little before the
time fixed, not wishing to meet Captain Aylmer before she had reached
the house. It was now nearly the middle of April, and the weather was
soft and pleasant. It was almost summer again, and as she felt this,
she thought of all the events which had occurred since the last
summer of their agony of grief at the catastrophe which had closed
her brother's life, of her aunt's death first, and then of her
father's following so close upon the other, and of the two offers of
marriage made to her as to which she was now aware that she had
accepted the wrong man and rejected the wrong man. She was steadily
minded, now, at this moment, that before she parted from Captain
Aylmer, her engagement with him should be brought to a close. Now, at
this coming interview, so much at any rate should be done. She had
tried to make herself believe that she felt for him that sort of
affection which a woman should have for the man she is to marry, but
she had failed. She hardly knew whether she had in truth ever loved
him; but she was quite sure that she did not love him now. No she had
done with Aylmer Park, and she could feel thankful, amidst all her
troubles, that that difficulty should vex her no more. In showing
Captain Aylmer's letter to Mrs Askerton she had made no such promise
as this, but her mind had been quite made up. 'He certainly shall not
talk me over,' she said to herself as she walked across the park.

But she could not see her way so clearly out of that further
difficulty with regard to her cousin. It might be that she would be
able to rid herself of the one lover with comparative ease; but she
could not bring herself to entertain the idea of accepting the other.
It was true that this man longed for her,--desired to call her his own,
with a wearing, anxious, painful desire which made his heart
grievously heavy as though with lead hanging to its strings;
and it was true that Clara knew that it was so. It was true also that
his spirit had mastered her spirit, and that his persistence had
conquered her resistance,--the resistance, that is, of her feelings.
But there remained with her a feminine shame, which made it seem to
her to be impossible that she should now reject Captain Aylmer, and
as a consequence of that rejection, accept Will Belton's hand. As she
thought of this, she could not see her way out of her trouble in that
direction with any of that clearness which belonged to her in
reference to Captain Aylmer.

She had been an hour in the house before he came, and never did an
hour go so heavily with her. There was no employment for her about
the place, and Mrs Bunce, the old woman who now lived there, could
not understand why her late mistress chose to remain seated among the
unused furniture. Clara had of course told her that a gentleman was
coming. 'Not Mr Will?' said the woman. 'No; it is not Mr Will,' said
Clara; 'his name is Captain Aylmer.' 'Oh, indeed.' And then Mrs Bunce
looked at her with a mystified look. Why on earth should not the
gentleman call on Miss Amedroz at Mrs Askerton's cottage? 'I'll be
sure to show 'un up, when a comes, at any rate,' said the old woman
solemnly and Clara felt that it was all very uncomfortable.

At last the gentleman did come, and was shown up with all the
ceremony of which Mrs Bunce was capable. 'Here he be, mum.' Then Mrs
Bunce paused a moment before she retreated, anxious to learn whether
the new corner was a friend or a foe. She concluded from the
captain's manner that he was a very dear friend, and then she
departed.

'I hope you are not surprised at my coming,' said Captain Aylmer,
still holding Clara by the hand.

'A little surprised,' she said, smiling.

'But not annoyed?'

'No;--not annoyed.'

'As soon as you had left Aylmer Park I felt that it was the right
thing to do;--the only thing to do,--as I told my mother.'

'I hope you have not come in opposition to her wishes,' said Clara,
unable to control a slight tone of banter as she spoke.

'In this matter I found myself compelled to act in accordance with my
own judgment,' said he, untouched by her sarcasm.

'Then I suppose that Lady Aylmer is,--is vexed with you for coming
here. I shall be so sorry for that;--so very sorry, as no good can
come of it.'

'Well;--I am not so sure of that. My mother is a most excellent woman,
one for whose opinions on all matters I have the highest possible
value a value so high, that--that--that--'

'That you never ought to act in opposition to it. That is what you
really mean, Captain Aylmer; and upon my word I think that you are
right.'

'No, Clara; that is not what I mean not exactly that. Indeed, just at
present I mean the reverse of that. There are some things on which a
man must act on his own judgment, irrespectively of the opinions of
any one else.'

'Not of a mother, Captain Aylmer?'

'Yes of a mother. That is to say, a man must do so. With a lady of
course it is different. I was very, very sorry that there should have
been any unpleasantness at Aylmer Park.'

'It was not pleasant to me, certainly.'

'Nor to any of us, Clara.'

'At any rate, it need not be repeated.'

'I hope not.'

'No it certainly need not be repeated. I know now that I was wrong to
go to Aylmer Park. I felt sure beforehand that there were many things
as to which I could not possibly agree with Lady Aylmer, and I ought
not to have gone.'

'I don't see that at all, Clara.'

'I do see it now.'

'I can't understand you. What things? Why should you be determined to
disagree with my mother? Surely you ought at any rate to endeavour to
think as she thinks.'

'I cannot do that, Captain Aylmer.'

'I am sorry to hear you speak in this way. I have come here all the
way from Yorkshire to try to put things straight between us; but you
receive me as though you would remember nothing but that unpleasant
quarrel.'

'It was so unpleasant,--so very unpleasant! I had better speak out
the truth at once. I think that Lady Aylmer ill-used me cruelly. I
do. No one can talk me out of that conviction. Of course I am sorry
to be driven to say as much to you,--and I should never have said it,
had you not come here. But when you speak of me and your mother
together, I must say what I feel. Your mother and I, Captain Aylmer,
are so opposed to each other, not only in feeling, but in opinions
also, that it is impossible that we should be friends;--impossible that
we should not be enemies if we are brought together.'

This she said with great energy, looking intently into his face as
she spoke. He was seated near her, on a chair from which he was
leaning over towards her, holding his hat in both hands between his
legs. Now, as he listened to her, he drew his chair still nearer,
ridding himself of his hat, which he left upon the carpet, and
keeping his eyes upon hers as though he were fascinated. 'I am sorry
to hear you speak like this,' he said.

'It is best to say the truth.'

'But, Clara, if you intend to be my wife--'

'Oh, no that is impossible now.'

'What is impossible?'

'Impossible that I should become your wife. Indeed I have convinced
myself that you do not wish it.'

'But I do wish it.'

'No no. If you will question your heart about it quietly, you will
find that you do not wish it.'

'You wrong me, Clara.'

'At any rate it cannot be so.'

'I will not take that answer from you,' he said, getting up from his
chair, and walking once up and down the room. Then he returned to it,
and repeated his words. 'I will not take that answer from you. An
engagement such as ours cannot be put aside like an old glove. You do
not mean to tell me that all that has been between us is to mean
nothing.' There was something now like feeling in his tone, something
like passion in his gesture, and Clara, though she had no thought of
changing her purpose, was becoming unhappy at the idea of his
unhappiness.

'It has meant nothing,' she said. 'We have been like children
together, playing at being in love. It is a game from which you will
come out scatheless, but I have been scalded.'

'Scalded!'

'Well never mind. I do not mean to complain, and certainly not of
you.'

'I have come here all the way from Yorkshire in order that things may
be put right between us.'

'You have been very good,--very good to come, and I will not say that
I regret your trouble. It is best, I think, that we should meet each
other once more face to face, so that we may understand each other.
There was no understanding anything during those terrible days at
Aylmer Park.' Then she paused, but as he did not speak at once she
went on. 'I do not blame you for anything that has taken place, but I
am quite sure of this that you and I could never be happy together as
man and wife.'

'I do not know why you say so; I do not indeed.'

'You would disapprove of everything that I should do. You do
disapprove of what I am doing now.'

'Disapprove of what?'

'I am staying with my friend, Mrs Askerton.'

He felt that this was hard upon him. As she had shown herself
inclined to withdraw herself from him, he had become more resolute in
his desire to follow her up, and to hold by his engagement. He was
not employed now in giving her another chance as he had proposed to
himself to do but was using what eloquence he had to obtain another
chance for himself. Lady Aylmer had almost made him believe that
Clara would be the suppliant, but now he was the suppliant himself.
In his anxiety to keep her he was willing even to pass over her
terrible iniquity in regard to Mrs Askerton that great sin which had
led to all these troubles. He had once written to her about Mrs
Askerton, using very strong language, and threatening her with his
mother's full displeasure. At that time Mrs Askerton had simply been
her friend. There had been no question then of her taking refuge
under that woman's roof. Now she had repelled Lady Aylmer's counsels
with scorn, was living as a guest in Mrs Askerton's house; and yet he
was willing to pass over the Askerton difficulty without a word. He
was willing not only to condone past offences, but to wink at
existing iniquity! But she,--she who was the sinner, would not permit
of this. She herself dragged up Mrs Askerton's name, and seemed to
glory in her own shame.

'I had not intended,' said he, 'to speak of your friend.'

'I only mention her to show how impossible it is that we should ever
agree upon some subjects as to which a husband and wife should always
be of one mind. I knew this from the moment in which I got your
letter and only that I was a coward I should have said so then.'

'And you mean to quarrel with me altogether?'

'No why should we quarrel?'

'Why, indeed?' said he.

'But I wish it to be settled,--quite settled, as from the nature of
things it must be, that there shall be no attempt at renewal of our
engagement. After what has passed, how could I enter your mother's
house?'

'But you need not enter it.' Now, in his emergency he was willing to
give up anything,--everything. He had been prepared to talk her over
into a reconciliation with his mother, to admit that there had been
faults on both sides, to come down from his high pedestal and discuss
the matter as though Clara and his mother stood upon the same
footing. Having recognized the spirit of his lady-love, he had told
himself that so much indignity as that must be endured. But now, he
had been carried so far beyond this, that he was willing, in the
sudden vehemence of his love, to throw his mother over altogether,
and to accede to any terms which Clara might propose to him. 'Of
course, I would wish you to be friends,' he said, using now all the
tones of a suppliant; 'but if you found that it could not be so--'

'Do you think that I would divide you from your mother?'

'There need be no question as to that.'

'Ah there you are wrong. There must be such questions. I should have
thought of it sooner.'

'Clara, you are more to me than my mother. Ten times more.' As he
said this he came up and knelt down beside her. 'You are everything
to me. You will not throw me over.' He was a suppliant indeed, and
such supplications are very potent with women. Men succeed often by
the simple earnestness of their prayers. Women cannot refuse to give
that which is asked for with so much of the vehemence of true desire.
'Clara, you have promised to be my wife. You have twice promised; and
can have no right to go back because you are displeased with what my
mother may have said. I am not responsible for my mother. Clara, say
that you will be my wife.' As he spoke he strove to take her hand,
and his voice sounded as though there were in truth something of
passion in his heart.


CHAPTER XXIX

THERE IS NOTHING TO TELL

Captain Aylmer had never before this knelt to Clara Amedroz. Such
kneeling on the part of lovers used to be the fashion because lovers
in those days held in higher value than they do now that which they
asked their ladies to give or because they pretended to do so. The
forms at least of supplication were used; whereas in these wiser days
Augustus simply suggests to Caroline that they two might as well make
fools of themselves together and so the thing is settled without the
need of much prayer. Captain Aylmer's engagement had been originally
made somewhat after this fashion. He had not, indeed, spoken of the
thing contemplated as a folly, not being a man given to little
waggeries of that nature; but he had been calm, unenthusiastic, and
reasonable. He had not attempted to evince any passion, and would
have been quite content that Clara should believe that he married as
much from obedience to his aunt as from love for herself, had he not
found that Clara would not take him at all under such a conviction.
But though she had declined to come to him after that fashion though
something more than that had been needed still she had been won
easily, and, therefore, lightly prized. I fear that it is so with
everything that we value with our horses, our houses, our wines, and,
above all, with our women. Where is the man who has heart and soul
big enough to love a woman with increased force of passion because
she has at once recognized in him all that she has herself desired?
Captain Aylmer having won his spurs easily, had taken no care in
buckling them, and now found, to his surprise, that he was like to
lose them. He had told himself that he would only be too glad to
shuffle his feet free of their bondage; but now that they were going
from him, he began to find that they were very necessary for the road
that he was to travel. 'Clara,' he said, kneeling by her side,' you
are more to me than my mother; ten times more!'

This was all new to her. Hitherto, though she had never desired that
he should assume such attitude as this, she had constantly been
unconsciously wounded by his coldness by his cold propriety and
unbending self-possession. His cold propriety and unbending
self-possession were gone now, and he was there at her feet. Such an
argument, used at Aylmer Park, would have conquered her would have
won her at once, in spite of herself; but now she was minded to be
resolute. She had sworn to herself that she would not peril herself,
or him, by joining herself to a man with whom she had so little
sympathy, and who apparently had none with her. But in what way was
she to answer such a prayer as that which was now made to her? The
man who addressed her was entitled to use all the warmth of an
accepted lover. He only asked for that which had already been given
to him.

'Captain Aylmer--' she began.

'Why is it to be Captain Aylmer? What have I done that you should use
me in this way? It was not I who,--who,--made you unhappy at Aylmer
Park.'

'I will not go back to that. It is of no use. Pray get up. It shocks
me to see you in this way.'

'Tell me, then, that it is once more all right between us. Say that,
and I shall be happier than I ever was before yes, than I ever was
before. I know how much I love you now, how sore it would be to lose
you. I have been wrong. I had not thought enough of that, but I will
think of it now.'

She found that the task before her was very difficult,--so difficult
that she almost broke down in performing it. It would have been so
easy and, for the moment, so pleasant to have yielded. He had his
hand upon her arm, having attempted to take her hand. In preventing
that she had succeeded, but she could not altogether make herself
free from him without rising. For a moment she had paused,--paused as
though she were about to yield. For a moment, as he looked into her
eyes, he had thought that he would again be victorious. Perhaps there
was something in his glance, some too visible return of triumph to
his eyes, which warned her of her danger. 'No!' she said, getting up
and walking away from him; 'no!'

'And what does "no" mean, Clara?' Then he also rose, and stood
leaning on the table. 'Does it mean that you will be forsworn?'

'It means this that I will not come between you and your mother; that
I will not be taken into a family in which I am scorned; that I will
not go to Aylmer Park myself or be the means of preventing you from
going there.'

'There need be no question of Aylmer Park.'

'There shall be none!'

'But, so much being allowed, you will be my wife?'

'No, Captain Aylmer no. I cannot be your wife. Do not press it
further; you must know that on such a subject I would think much
before I answered you. I have thought much, and I know that I am
right.'

'And your promised word is to go for nothing?'

'If it will comfort you to say so, you may say it. If you do not
perceive that the mistake made between us has been as much your
mistake as mine, and has injured me more than it has injured you, I
will not remind you of it,--will never remind you of it after this.'

'But there has been no mistake and there shall be no injury.'

'Ah, Captain Aylmer you do not understand; you cannot understand. I
would not for worlds reproach you; but do you think I suffered
nothing from your mother?'

'And must I pay for her sins?'

'There shall be no paying, no punishment, and no reproaches. There
shall be none at least from me. But,--do not think that I speak in
anger or in pride,--I will not marry into Lady Aylmer's family.'

'This is too bad,--too bad! After all that is past, it is too bad!'

'What can I say? Would you advise me to do that which would make us
both wretched?'

'It would not make me wretched. It would make me happy. It would
satisfy me altogether.'

'It cannot be, Captain Aylmer. It cannot be. When I speak to you in
that way, will you not let it be final?'

He paused a moment before he spoke again, and then he turned sharp
upon her. 'Tell me this, Clara; do you love me? Have you ever loved
me?' She did not answer him, but stood there, listening quietly to
his accusations. 'You have never loved me, and yet you have allowed
yourself to say that you did. Is not that true?' Still she did not
answer. 'I ask you whether that is not true?' But though he asked
her, and paused for an answer, looking the while full into her face,
yet she did not speak. And now I suppose you will become your
cousin's wife?' he said. 'It will suit you to change, and to say that
you love him.'

Then at last she spoke. 'I did not think that you would have treated
me in this way, Captain Aylmer! I did not expect that you would
insult me!'

'I have not insulted you.'

'But your manner to me makes my task easier than I could have hoped
it to be. You asked me whether I ever loved you? I once thought that
I did so; and so thinking, told you, without reserve, all my feeling.
When I came to find that I had been mistaken, I conceived myself
bound by my engagement to rectify my own error as best I could; and I
resolved, wrongly as I now think, very wrongly that I could learn as
your wife to love you. Then came circumstances which showed me that a
release would be good for both of us, and which justified me in
accepting it. No girl could be bound by any engagement to a man who
looked on and saw her treated in his own home, by his own mother, as
you saw me treated at Aylmer Park. I claim to be released myself, and
I know that this release is as good for you as it is for me.'

'I am the best judge of that.'

'For myself at any rate I will judge. For myself I have decided. Now
I have answered the questions which you asked me as to my love for
yourself. To that other question which you have thought fit to put to
me about my cousin, I refuse to give any answer whatsoever.' Then,
having said so much, she walked out of the room, closing the door
behind her, and left him standing there alone.

We need not follow her as she went up, almost mechanically, into her
own room the room that used to be her own and then shut herself in,
waiting till she should be assured, first by sounds in the house, and
then by silence, that he was gone. That she fell away greatly from
the majesty of her demeanour when she was thus alone, and descended
to the ordinary ways of troubled females, we may be quite sure. But
to her there was no further difficulty. Her work for the day was
done. In due time she would take herself to the cottage, and all
would be well, or, at any rate, comfortable with her. But what was he
to do? How was he to get himself out of the house, and take himself
back to London? While he had been in pursuit of her, and when he was
leaving his vehicle at the public-house in the village of Belton, he
like some other invading generals had failed to provide adequately
for his retreat. When he was alone he took a turn or two about the
room, half thinking that Clara would return to him. She could hardly
leave him alone in a strange house him, who, as he had twice told
her, had come all the way from Yorkshire to see her. But she did not
return, and gradually he came to understand that he must provide for
his own retreat without assistance. He was hardly aware, even now,
how greatly he had transcended his usual modes of speech and action,
both in the energy of his supplication and in the violence of his
rebuke. He had been lifted for awhile out of himself by the
excitement of his position, and now that he was subsiding into
quiescence, he was unconscious that he had almost mounted into
passion that he had spoken of love very nearly with eloquence. But he
did recognize this as a fact that Clara was not to be his wife, and
that he had better get back from Belton to London as quickly as
possible. It would be well for him to teach himself to look back on
the result of his aunt's dying request as an episode in his life
satisfactorily concluded. His mother had undoubtedly been right.
Clara, he could see now, would have led him a devil of a life; and
even had she come to him possessed of a moiety of the property a
supposition as to which he had very strong doubts still she might
have been dear at the money. 'No real feeling,' he said to himself,
as he walked about the room 'none whatever; and then so deficient in
delicacy!' But still he was discontented because he had been
rejected, and therefore tried to make himself believe that he could
still have her if he chose to persevere. 'But no,' he said, as he
continued to pace the room, 'I have done everything,--more than
everything that honour demands. I shall not ask her again. It is her own
fault. She is an imperious woman, and my mother read her character
aright.' It did not occur to him, as he thus consoled himself for
what he had lost, that his mother's accusation against Clara had been
altogether of a different nature. When we console ourselves by our
own arguments, we are not apt to examine their accuracy with much
strictness.

But whether he were consoled or not, it was necessary that he should
go, and in his going he felt himself to be ill-treated. He left the
room, and as he went down stairs was disturbed and tormented by the
creaking of his own boots. He tried to be dignified as he walked
through the hall, and was troubled at his failure, though he was not
conscious of any one looking at him. Then it was grievous that he
should have to let himself out of the front door without attendance.
At ordinary times he thought as little of such things as most men,
and would not be aware whether he opened a door for himself or had it
opened for him by another but now there was a distressing awkwardness
in the necessity for self-exertion. He did not know the turn of the
handle, and was unfamiliar with the manner of exit. He was being
treated with indignity, and before he had escaped from the house had
come to think that the Amedroz and Belton people were somewhat below
him. He endeavoured to go out without a noise, but there was a slam
of the door, without which he could not get the lock to work; and
Clara, up in her own room, knew all about it.

'Carriage;--yes; of course I want the carriage,' he said to the
unfortunate boy at the public-house. 'Didn't you hear me say that I
wanted it?' He had come down with a pair of horses, and as he saw
them being put to the vehicle he wished he had been contented with
one. As he was standing there, waiting, a gentleman rode by, and the
boy, in answer to his question, told him that the horseman was
Colonel Askerton. Before the day was over Colonel Askerton would
probably know all that had happened to him. 'Do move a little
quicker; will you?' he said to the boy and the old man who was to
drive him. Then he got into the carriage, and was driven out of
Belton, devoutly purposing that he never would return; and as he made
his way back to Perivale he thought of a certain Lady Emily, who
would, as he assured himself, have behaved much better than Clara
Amedroz had done in any such scene as that which had just taken
place.

When Clara was quite sure that Captain Aylmer was off the premises,
she, too, descended, but she did not immediately leave the house. She
walked through the room, and rang for the old woman, and gave certain
directions as to the performance of which she certainly was not very
anxious, and was careful to make Mrs Bunce understand that nothing
had occurred between her and the gentleman that was either exalting
or depressing in its nature. 'I suppose Captain Aylmer went out, Mrs
Bunce?' 'Oh yes, miss, a went out. I stood and see'd un from the top
of the kitchen stairs.' 'You might have opened the door for him, Mrs
Bunce.' 'Indeed then I never thought of it, miss, seeing the house so
empty and the like.' Clara said that it did not signify; and then,
after an hour of composure, she walked back across the park to the
cottage.

'Well?' said Mrs Askerton as soon as Clara was inside the
drawing-room.

'Well,' replied Clara.

'What have you got to tell? Do tell me what you have to tell.'

'I have nothing to tell.'

'Clara, that is impossible. Have you seen him? I know you have seen
him, because he went by from the house about an hour since.'

'Oh yes; I have seen him.'

'And what have you said to him?'

'Pray do not ask me these questions just now. I have got to think of
it all to think what he did say and what I said.'

'But you will tell me.'

'Yes; I suppose so.' Then Mrs Askerton was silent on the subject for
the remainder of the day, allowing Clara even to go to bed without
another question. And nothing was asked on the following morning
nothing till the usual time for the writing of letters.

'Shall you have anything for the post?' said Mrs Askerton.

'There is plenty of time yet.'

'Not too much if you mean to go out at all. Come, Clara, you had
better write to him at once.'

'Write to whom? I don't know that I have any letter to write at all.'
Then there was a pause. 'As far as I can see,' she said, 'I may give
up writing altogether for the future, unless some day you may care to
hear from me.'

'But you are not going away.'

'Not just yet if you will keep me. To tell you the truth, Mrs
Askerton, I do not yet know where on earth to take myself.'

'Wait here till we turn you out.'

'I have got to put my house in order. You know what I mean. The job
ought not to be a troublesome one, for it is a very small house.'

'I suppose I know what you mean.'

'It will not be a very smart establishment. But I must look it all in
the face; must I not? Though it were to be no house at all, I cannot
stay here all my life.'

'Yes, you may. You have lost Aylmer Park because you were too noble
not to come to us.'

'No,' said Clara, speaking aloud, with bright eyes almost with her
hands clenched. 'No I deny that.'

'I shall choose to think so for my own purposes. Clara, you are
savage to me;--almost always savage; but next to him I love you better
than all the world beside. And so does he. "It's her courage," he
said to me the other day. "That she should dare to do as she pleases
here, is nothing; but to have dared to persevere in the fangs of that
old dragon,"--it was just what he said,--"that was wonderful!"'

'There is an end of the old dragon now, so far as I am concerned.'

'Of course there is and of the young dragon too. You wouldn't have
had the heart to keep me in suspense if you had accepted him again.
You couldn't have been so pleasant last night if that had been so.'

'I did not know I was very pleasant.'

'Yes, you were. You were soft and gracious gracious for you, at
least. And now, dear, do tell me about it. Of course I am dying to
know.'

'There is nothing to tell.'

'That is nonsense. There must be a thousand things to tell. At any
rate it is quite decided?'

'Yes; it is quite decided.'

'All the dragons, old and young, are banished into outer darkness.'

'Either that, or else they are to have all the light to themselves.'

'Such light as glimmers through the gloom of Aylmer Park. And was he
contented? I hope not. I hope you had him on his knees before he left
you.'

'Why should you hope that? How can you talk such nonsense?'

'Because I wish that he should recognize what he has lost that he
should know that he has been a fool a mean fool.'

'Mrs Askerton, I will not have him spoken of like that. He is a man
very estimable of estimable qualities.'

'Fiddle-de-dee. He is an ape a monkey to be carried on his mother's
organ. His only good quality was that you could have carried him on
yours. I can tell you one thing there is not a woman breathing that
will ever carry William Belton on hers. Whoever his wife may be, she
will have to dance to his piping.'

'With all my heart and I hope the tunes will be good.'

'But I wish I could have been present to have heard what passed
hidden, you know, behind a curtain. You won't tell me?'

'I will tell you not a word more.'

'Then I will get it out from Mrs Bunce. I'll be bound she was
listening.'

'Mrs Bunce will have nothing to tell you; I do not know why you
should be so curious.'

'Answer me one question at least when it came to the last, did he
want to go on with it? Was the final triumph with him or with you?'

'There was no final triumph. Such things, when they have to end, do
not end triumphantly.'

'And is that to be all?' 'Yes that is to be all.'

'And you say that you have no letter to write.'

'None no letter; none at present; none about this affair. Captain
Aylmer, no doubt, will write to his mother, and then all those who
are concerned will have been told.'

Clara Amedroz held her purpose and wrote no letter, but Mrs Askerton
was not so discreet, or so indiscreet as the case might be. She did
write not on that day or on the next, but before a week had passed
by. She wrote to Norfolk, telling Clara not a word of her letter, and
by return of post the answer came. But the answer was for Clara, not
for Mrs Askerton, and was as follows:--


'Plaistow Hall, April, 186--.

'My dear Clara,

'I don't know whether I ought to tell you but I suppose I may as well
tell you, that Mary has had a letter from Mrs Askerton. It was a
kind, obliging letter, and I am very grateful to her. She has told us
that you have separated yourself altogether from the Aylmer Park
people. I don't suppose you'll think I ought to pretend to be very
sorry. I can't be sorry, even though I know how much you have lost in
a worldly point of view. I could not bring myself to like Captain
Aylmer, though I tried hard.' Oh Mr Belton, Mr Belton! 'He and I
never could have been friends, and it is no use my pretending regret
that you have quarrelled with them. But that, I suppose, is all over,
and I will not say a word more about the Aylmers.

'I am writing now chiefly at Mary's advice, and because she says that
something should be settled about the estate. Of course it is
necessary that you should feel yourself to be the mistress of your
own income, and understand exactly your own position. Mary says that
this should be arranged at once, so that you may be able to decide
how and where you will live. I therefore write to say that I will
have nothing to do with your father's estate at Belton nothing, that
is, for myself. I have written to Mr Green to tell him that you are
to be considered as the heir. If you will allow me to undertake the
management of the property as your agent, I shall be delighted. I
think I could do it as well as any one else: and, as we agreed that
we would always be dear and close friends, I think that you will not
refuse me the pleasure of serving you in this way.

'And now Mary has a proposition to make, as to which she will write
herself tomorrow, but she has permitted me to speak of it first. If
you will accept her as a visitor, she will go to you at Belton. She
thinks, and I think too, that you ought to know each other. I suppose
nothing would make you come here, at present, and therefore she must
go to you. She thinks that all about the estate would be settled more
comfortably if you two were together. At any rate, it would be very
nice for her and I think you would like my sister Mary. She proposes
to start about the 10th of May. I should take her as far as London
and see her off, and she would bring her own maid with her. In this
way she thinks that she would get as far as Taunton very well. She
had, perhaps, better stay there for one night, but that can all be
settled if you will say that you will receive her at the house.

'I cannot finish my letter without saying one word for myself. You
know what my feelings have been, and I think you know that they still
are, and always must be, the same. From almost the first moment that
I saw you I have loved you. When you refused me I was very unhappy;
but I thought I might still have a chance, and therefore I resolved
to try again. Then, when I heard that you were engaged to Captain
Aylmer, I was indeed broken-hearted. Of course I could not be angry
with you. I was not angry, but I was simply broken-hearted. I found
that I loved you so much that I could not make myself happy without
you. It was all of no use, for I knew that you were to be married to
Captain Aylmer. I knew it, or thought that I knew it. There was
nothing to be done only I knew that I was wretched. I suppose it is
selfishness, but I felt, and still feel, that unless I can have you
for my wife, I cannot be happy or car for anything. Now you are free
again free, I mean, from Captain Aylmer and how is it possible that I
should not again have a hope? Nothing but your marriage or death
could keep me from hoping.

'I don't know much about the Aylmers. I know nothing of what has made
you quarrel with the people at Aylmer Park nor do I want to know. To
me you are once more that Clara Amedroz with whom I used to walk in
Belton Park, with your hand free to be given wherever your heart can
go with it. While it is free I shall always ask for it. I know that
it is in many ways above my reach. I quite understand that in
education and habits of thinking you are my superior. But nobody can
love you better than I do. I sometimes fancy that nobody could ever
love you so well. Mary thinks that I ought to allow a time to go by
before I say all this again but what is the use of keeping it back?
It seems to me to be more honest to tell you at once that the only
thing in the world for which I care one straw is that you should be
my wife.

'Your most affectionate Cousin,

'WILLIAM BELTON.'


'Miss Belton is coming here, to the castle, in a fortnight,' said
Clara that morning at breakfast. Both Colonel Askerton and his wife
were in the room, and she was addressing herself chiefly to the
former.

'Indeed, Miss Belton! And is he coming?' said Colonel Askerton.

'So you have heard from Plaistow?' said Mrs Askerton.

'Yes in answer to your letter. No, Colonel Askerton, my Cousin
William is not coming. But his sister purposes to be here, and I must
go up to the house and get it ready.'

'That will do when the time comes,' said Mrs Askerton.

'I did not mean quite immediately.'

'And are you to be her guest, or is she to be yours? said Colonel
Askerton.

'It's her brother's home, and therefore I suppose I must be hers.
Indeed it must be so, as I have no means of entertaining any one.'

'Something, no doubt, will be settled,' said the colonel.

'Oh, what a weary word that is,' said Clara; 'weary, at least, for a
woman's ears! It sounds of poverty and dependence, and endless
trouble given to others, and all the miseries of female dependence.
If I were a young man I should be allowed to settle for myself.'

'There would be no question about the property in that case,' said
the colonel.

'And there need be no question now,' said Mrs Askerton.

When the two women were alone together, Clara, of course, scolded her
friend for having written to Norfolk without letting it be known that
she was doing so scolded her, and declared how vain it was for her to
make useless efforts for an unattainable end; but Mrs Askerton always
managed to slip out of these reproaches, neither asserting herself to
be right, nor owning herself to be wrong. 'But you must answer his
letter,' she said.

'Of course I shall do that.'

'I wish I knew what he said.'

'I shan't show it you, if you mean that.'

'All the same I wish I knew what he said.'

Clara, of course, did answer the letter; but she wrote her answer to
Mary, sending, however, one little scrap to Mary's brother. She wrote
to Mary at great length, striving to explain, with long and laborious
arguments, that it was quite impossible that she should accept the
Belton estate from her cousin. That subject, however, and the manner
of her future life, she would discuss with her dear Cousin Mary, when
Mary should have arrived. And then Clara said how she would go to
Taunton to meet her cousin, and how she would prepare William's house
for the reception of William's sister; and how she would love her
cousin when she should come to know her. All of which was exceedingly
proper and pretty. Then there was a little postscript, 'Give the
enclosed to William.' And this was the note to William:


'Dear William,

'Did you not say that you would be my brother? Be my brother always.
I will accept from your hands all that a brother could do; and when
that arrangement is quite fixed, I will love you as much as Mary
loves you, and trust you as completely; and I will be obedient, as a
younger sister should be.

'Your loving Sister,

'C. A.'


'It's all no good,' said William Belton, as he crunched the note in
his hand. 'I might as well shoot myself. Get out of the way there,
will you?' And the injured groom scudded across the farm-yard,
knowing that there was something wrong with his master.


CHAPTER XXX

MARY BELTON

It was about the middle of the pleasant month of May when Clara
Amedroz again made that often repeated journey to Taunton, with the
object of meeting Mary Belton. She had transferred herself and her
own peculiar belongings back from the cottage to the house, and had
again established herself there so that she might welcome her new
friend. But she was not satisfied with simply receiving her guest at
Belton, and therefore she made the journey to Taunton, and settled
herself for the night at the inn. She was careful to get a bedroom
for an 'invalid lady', close to the sitting-room, and before she went
down to the station she saw that the cloth was laid for tea, and that
the tea parlour had been made to look as pleasant as was possible
with an inn parlour.

She was very nervous as she stood upon the platform waiting for the
new comer to show herself. She knew that Mary was a cripple, but did
not know how far her cousin was disfigured by her infirmity; and when
she saw a pale-faced little woman, somewhat melancholy, but yet
pretty withal, with soft, clear eyes, and only so much appearance of
a stoop as to soften the hearts of those who saw her, Clara was
agreeably surprised, and felt herself to be suddenly relieved of an
unpleasant weight. She could talk to the woman she saw there, as to
any other woman, without the painful necessity of treating her always
as an invalid. 'I think you are Miss Belton?' she said, holding out
her hand. The likeness between Mary and her brother was too great to
allow of Clara being mistaken.

'And you are Clara Amedroz? It is so good of you to come to meet me!'

'I thought you would be dull in a strange town by yourself.'

'It will be much nicer to have you with me.'

Then they went together up to the inn; and when they had taken their
bonnets off, Mary Belton kissed her cousin. 'You are very nearly what
I fancied you,' said Mary.

'Am I? I hope you fancied me to be something that you could like.'

'Something that I could love very dearly. You are a little taller
than what Will said; but then a gentleman is never a judge of a
lady's height. And he said you were thin.'

'I am not very fat.'

'No; not very fat; but neither are you thin. Of course, you know, I
have thought a great deal about you. It seems as though you had come
to be so very near to us; and blood is thicker than water, is it not?
If cousins are not friends, who can be?'

In the course of that evening they became very confidential together,
and Clara thought that she could love Mary Belton better than any
woman that she had ever known. Of course they were talking about
William, and Clara was at first in constant fear lest some word
should be said on her lover's behalf some word which would drive her
to declare that she would not admit him as a lover; but Mary
abstained from the subject with marvellous care and tact. Though she
was talking through the whole evening of her brother, she so spoke of
him as almost to make Clara believe that she could not have heard of
that episode in his life. Mrs Askerton would have dashed at the
subject at once; but then, as Clara told herself, Mary Bolton was
better than Mrs Askerton.

A few words were said about the estate, and they originated in
Clara's declaration that Mary would have to be regarded as the
mistress of the house to which they were going. 'I cannot agree to
that,' said Mary.

'But the house is William's, you know,' said Clara.

'He says not.'

'But of course that must be nonsense, Mary.'

'It is very evident that you know nothing of Plaistow ways, or you
would not say that anything coming from William was nonsense. We are
accustomed to regard all his words as law, and when he says that a
thing is to be so, it always is so.'

'Then he is a tyrant at home.'

'A beneficent despot. Some despots, you know, always were
beneficent.'

'He won't have his way in this thing.'

'I'll leave you and him to fight about that, my dear. I am so
completely under his thumb that I always obey him in everything. You
must not, therefore, expect to range me on your side.'

The next day they were at Belton Castle, and in a very few hours
Clara felt that she was quite at home with her cousin. On the second
day Mrs Askerton came up and called according to an arrangement to
that effect made between her and Clara. I'll stay away if you like
it,' Mrs Askerton had said. But Clara had urged her to come, arguing
with her that she was foolish to be thinking always of her own
misfortune. 'Of course I am always thinking of it,' she had replied,
and always thinking that other people are thinking of it. Your
cousin, Miss Belton, knows all my history, of course, But what
matters? I believe it would be better that everybody should know it.
I suppose she's very straight-laced and prim.'She is not prim at
all,' said Clara. 'Well, I'll come,' said Mrs Askerton, 'but I shall
not be a bit surprised if I hear that she goes back to Norfolk the
next day.'

So Mrs Askerton came, and Miss Belton did not go back to Norfolk.
Indeed, at the end of the visit, Mrs Askerton had almost taught
herself to believe that William Belton had kept his secret, even from
his sister. 'She's a dear little woman,' Mrs Askerton afterwards said
to Clara.

'Is she not?'

'And so thoroughly like a lady.'

'Yes; I think she is a lady.'

'A princess among ladies! What a pretty little conscious way she has
of asserting herself when she has an opinion and means to stick to
it! I never saw a woman who got more strength out of her weakness.
Who would dare to contradict her?'

'But then she knows everything so well,' said Clara.

'And how like her brother she is!'

'Yes there is a great family likeness.'

'And in character, too. I'm sure you'd find, if you were to try her,
that she has all his personal firmness, though she can't show it as
he does by kicking out his feet and clenching his fist.'

'I'm glad you like her,' said Clara.

'I do like her very much.'

'It is so odd the way you have changed. You used to speak of him as
though he was merely a clod of a farmer, and of her as a stupid old
maid. Now, nothing is too good to say of them.'

'Exactly, my dear and if you do not understand why, you are not so
clever as I take you to be.'

Life went on very pleasantly with them at Belton for two or three
weeks but with this drawback as regarded Clara, that she had no means
of knowing what was to be the course of her future life. During these
weeks she twice received letters from her Cousin Will, and answered
both of them. But these letters referred to matters of business which
entailed no contradiction to certain details of money due to the
estate before the old squire's death, and to that vexed question of
Aunt Winterfield's legacy, which had by this time drifted into
Belton's hands, and as to which he was inclined to act in accordance
with his cousin's wishes, though he was assured by Mr Green that the
legacy was as good a legacy as had ever been left by an old woman. 'I
think,' he said in his last letter,' that we shall be able to throw
him over in spite of Mr Green.' Clara, as she read this, could not
but remember that the man to be thrown over was the man to whom she
had been engaged, and she could not but remember also all the
circumstances of the intended legacy of her aunt's death, and of the
scenes which had immediately followed her death. It was so odd that
William Belton should now be discussing with her the means of evading
all her aunt's intentions and that he should be doing so, not as her
accepted lover. He had, indeed, called himself her brother, but he
was in truth her rejected lover.

From time to time during these weeks Mrs Askerton would ask her
whether Mr Belton was coming to Belton, and Clara would answer her
with perfect truth that she did not believe that he had any such
intention. 'But he must come soon,' Mrs Askerton would say. And when
Clara would answer that she knew nothing about it, Mrs Askerton would
ask further questions about Mary Belton. 'Your cousin must know
whether her brother is coming to look after the property?' But Miss
Belton, though she heard constantly from her brother, gave no such
intimation. If he had any intention of coming, she did not speak of
it. During all these days she had not as yet said a word of her
brother's love. Though his name was daily in her mouth and latterly,
was frequently mentioned by Clara there had been no allusion to that
still enduring hope of which Will Belton himself could not but speak
when he had any opportunity of speaking at all. And this continued
till at last Clara was driven to suppose that Mary Belton knew
nothing of her brother's hopes.

But at last there came a change a change which to Clara was as great
as that which had affected her when she first found that her
delightful cousin was not sale against love-making. She had made up
her mind that the sister did not intend to plead for her brother that
the sister probably knew nothing of the brother's necessity for
pleading that the brother probably had no further need for pleading
When she remembered his last passionate words, she could not but
accuse herself of hypocrisy when she allowed place in her thoughts to
this latter supposition. He had been so intently earnest! The nature
of the man was so eager and true! But yet, in spite of all that had
been said, of all the fire in his eyes, and life in his words, and
energy in his actions, he had at last seen that his aspirations were
foolish, and his desires vain. It could not otherwise be that she and
Mary should pass these hours in such calm repose without an allusion
to the disturbing subject! After this fashion, and with such
meditations as these, had passed by the last weeks and then at last
there came the change.

'I have had a letter from William this morning,' said Mary.

'And so have not I,' said Clara, and yet I expect to hear from him.'

'He means to be here soon,' said Mary.

'Oh, indeed!'

'He speaks of being here next week.'

For a moment or two Clara had yielded to the agitation caused by her
cousin's tidings; but with a little gush she recovered her presence
of mind, and was able to speak with all the hypocritical propriety of
a female. 'I am glad to hear it,' she said. 'It is only right that he
should come.'

'He has asked me to say a word to you as to the purport of his
journey.'

Then again Clara's courage and hypocrisy were so far subdued that
they were not able to maintain her in a position adequate to the
occasion. 'Well,' she said laughing, 'what is the word? I hope it is
not that I am to pack up, bag and baggage, and take myself elsewhere.
Cousin William is one of those persons who are willing to do
everything except what they are wanted to do. He will go on talking
about the Belton estate, when I want to know whether I may really
look for as much as twelve shillings a week to live upon.'

'He wants me to speak to you about--about the earnest love he bears
for you.'

'Oh dear! Mary;--could you not suppose it all to be said? It is an old
trouble, and need not be repeated.'

'No,' said Mary, 'I cannot suppose it to be all said.' Clara looking
up as she heard the voice, was astonished both by the fire in the
woman's eye and by the force of her tone. 'I will not think so meanly
of you as to believe that such words from such a man can be passed by
as meaning nothing. I will not say that you ought to be able to love
him; in that you cannot control your heart; but if you cannot love
him, the want of such love ought to make you suffer to suffer much
and be very sad.'

'I cannot agree to that, Mary.'

'Is all his life nothing, then? Do you know what love means with
him;--this love which he bears to you? Do you understand that it is
everything to him?--that from the first moment in which he
acknowledged to himself that his heart was set upon you, he could not
bring himself to set it upon any other thing for a moment? Perhaps
you have never understood this; have never perceived that he is so
much in earnest, that to him it is more than money, or land, or
health,--more than life itself,--that he so loves that he would
willingly give everything that he has for his love? Have you known
this?'

Clara would not answer these questions for a while. What if she had
known it all, was she therefore bound to sacrifice herself? Could it
be the duty of any woman to give herself to a man simply because a
man wanted her? That was the argument as it was put forward now by
Mary Belton.

'Dear, dearest Clara,' said Mary Belton, stretching herself forward
from her chair, and putting out her thin, almost transparent, hand,
'I do not think that you have thought enough of this; or, perhaps,
you have not known it. But his love for you is as I say. To him it is
everything. It pervades every hour of every day, every corner in his
life! He knows nothing of anything else while he is in his present
state.'

'He is very good more than good.'

'He is very good.'

'But I do not see that;--that-- Of course I know how disinterested he is.'

'Disinterested is a poor word. It insinuates that in such a matter
there could be a question of what people call interest.'

'And I know, too, how much he honours me.'

'Honour is a cold word. It is not honour, but love downright true,
honest love. I hope he does honour you. I believe you to be an
honest, true woman; and, as he knows you well, he probably does
honour you but I am speaking of love.' Again Clara was silent. She
knew what should be her argument if she were determined to oppose her
cousin's pleadings; and she knew also she thought she knew that she
did intend to oppose them; but there was a coldness in the argument
to which she was averse. 'You cannot be insensible to such love as
that!' said Mary, going on with the cause which she had in hand.

'You say that he is fond of me.'

'Fond of you! I have not used such trifling expressions as that.'

'That he loves me.'

'You know he loves you. Have you ever doubted a word that he has
spoken to you on any subject?'

'I believe he speaks truly.'

'You know he speaks truly. He is the very soul of truth.'

'But, Mary--'

'Well, Clara! But remember; do not answer me lightly. Do not play
with a man's heart because you have it in your power.'

'You wrong me. I could never do like that. You tell me that he loves
me but what if I do not love him? Love will not be constrained. Am I
to say that I love him because I believe that he loves me?'

This was the argument, and Clara found herself driven to use it not
so much from its special applicability to herself, as on account of
its general fitness. Whether it did or did not apply to herself she
had no time to ask herself at that moment; but she felt that no man
could have a right to claim a woman's hand on the strength of his own
love unless he had been able to win her love. She was arguing on
behalf of women in general rather than on her own behalf.

'If you mean to tell me that you cannot love him, of course I must
give over,' said Mary, not caring at all for men and women in
general, but full of anxiety for her brother. 'Do you mean to say
that that you can never love him?' It almost seemed, from her face,
that she was determined utterly to quarrel with her new-found cousin
to quarrel and to go at once away if she got an answer that would not
please her.

'Dear Mary, do not press me so hard.'

'But I want to press you hard. It is not right that he should lose
his life in longing and hoping.'

'He will not lose his life, Mary.'

'I hope not not not if I can help it. I trust that he will be strong
enough to get rid of his trouble to put it down and trample it under
his feet.' Clara, as she heard this, began to ask herself what it was
that was to be trampled under Will's feet. 'I think he will be man
enough to overcome his passion; and then, perhaps you may regret what
you have lost.'

'Now you are unkind to me.'

'Well; what would you have me say? Do I not know that he is offering
you the best gift that he can give? Did I not begin by swearing to
you that he loved you with a passion of love that cannot but be
flattering to you? If it is to be love in vain, this to him is a
great misfortune. And, yet, when I say that I hope that he will
recover, you tell me that I am unkind.'

'No not for that.'

'May I tell him to come and plead for himself?'

Again Clara was silent, not knowing how to answer that last question.
And when she did answer it, she answered it thoughtlessly. 'Of course
he knows that he can do that.'

'He says that he has been forbidden.'

'Oh, Mary, what am I to say to you? You know it all, and I wonder
that you can continue to question me in this way.'

'Know all what?'

'That I have been engaged to Captain Aylmer.'

'But you are not engaged to him now.'

'No I am not.'

'And there can be no renewal there, I suppose?'

'Oh, no!'

'Not even for my brother would I say a word if I thought'

'No there is nothing of that; but If you cannot understand, I do not
think that I can explain it.' It seemed to Clara that her cousin, in
her anxiety for her brother, did not conceive that a woman, even if
she could suddenly transfer her affections from one man to another,
could not bring herself to say that she had done so.

'I must write to him today,' said Mary, 'and I must give him some
answer. Shall I tell him that he had better not come here till you
are gone?'

'That will perhaps be best,' said Clara.

'Then he will never come at all.'

'I can go can go at once. I will go at once. You shall never have to
say that my presence prevented his coming to his own house. I ought
not to be here. I know it now. I will go away, and you may tell him
that I am gone.'

'No, dear; you will not go.'

'Yes I must go. I fancied things might be otherwise, because he once
told me that he would be a brother to me. And I said I would hold him
to that not only because I want a brother so badly, but because I
love him so dearly. But it cannot be like that.'

'You do not think that he will ever desert you?'

'But I will go away, so that he may come to his own house. I ought
not to be here. Of course I ought not to be at Belton either in this
house or in any other. Tell him that I will be gone before he can
come, and tell him also that I will not be too proud to accept from
him what it may be fit that he should give me. I have no one but him
no one but him no one but him.' Then she burst into tears, and
throwing hack her head, covered her face with her hands.

Miss Belton, upon this, rose slowly from the chair on which she was
sitting, and making her way painfully across to Clara, stood leaning
on the weeping girl's chair. 'You shall not go while I am here,' she
said.

'Yes; I must go. He cannot come till I am gone.'

'Think of it all once again, Clara. May I not tell him to come, and
that while he is coming you will see if you cannot soften your heart
towards him?'

'Soften my heart! Oh, if I could only harden it!'

'He would wait. If you would only bid him wait, he would be so happy
in waiting.'

'Yes till tomorrow morning. I know him. Hold out your little finger
to him, and he has your whole hand and arm in a moment.'

'I want you to say that you will try to love him.'

But Clara was in truth trying not to love him. She was ashamed of
herself because she did love the one man, when, but a few weeks
since, she had confessed that she loved another. She had mistaken
herself and her own feelings, not in reference to her cousin, but in
supposing that she could really have sympathized with such a man as
Captain Aylmer. It was necessary to her self-respect that she should
be punished because of that mistake. She could not save herself from
this condemnation she would not grant herself a respite because, by
doing so, she would make another person happy. Had Captain Aylmer
never crossed her path, she would have given her whole heart to her
cousin. Nay; she had so given it had done so, although Captain Aylmer
had crossed her path and come in her way. But it was matter of shame
to her to find that this had been possible, and she could not bring
herself to confess her shame.

The conversation at last ended, as such conversations always do end,
without any positive decision. Mary wrote of course to her brother,
but Clara was not told of the contents of the letter. We, however,
may know them, and may understand their nature, without learning
above two lines of the letter. 'If you can be content to wait awhile,
you will succeed,' said Mary; 'but when were you ever content to wait
for anything?' 'If there is anything I hate, it is waiting,' said
Will, when he received the letter; nevertheless the letter made him
happy, and he went about his farm with a sanguine heart, as he
arranged matters for another absence. 'Away long?' he said, in answer
to a question asked him by his head man; 'how on earth can I say how
long I shall be away? You can go on well enough without me by this
time, I should think. You will have to learn, for there is no knowing
how often I may be away, or for how long.'

When Mary said that the letter had been written, Clara again spoke
about going. 'And where will you go?' said Mary.

'I will take a lodging in Taunton.'

'He would only follow you there, and there would be more trouble.
That would be all. He must act as your guardian, and in that
capacity, at any rate, you must submit to him.' Clara, therefore,
consented to remain at Belton; but, before Will arrived, she returned
from the house to the cottage.

'Of course I understand all about it,' said Mrs Askerton; 'and let me
tell you this that if it is not all settled within a week from his
coming here, I shall think that you are without a heart. He is to be
knocked about, and cuffed, and kept from his work, and made to run up
and down between here and Norfolk, because you cannot bring yourself
to confess that you have been a fool.'

'I have never said that I have not been a fool,' said Clara.

'You have made a mistake as young women will do sometimes, even when
they are as prudent and circumspect as you are and now you don't
quite like the task of putting it right.'

It was all true, and Clara knew that it was true. The putting right
of mistakes is never pleasant; and in this case it was so unpleasant
that she could not bring herself to acknowledge that it must be done.
And yet, I think that, by this time, she was aware of the necessity.


CHAPTER XXXI

TAKING POSSESSION

'I want her to have it all,' said William Belton to Mr Green, the
lawyer, when they came to discuss the necessary arrangements for the
property.

'But that would be absurd.'

'Never mind. It is what I wish. I suppose a man may do what he likes
with his own.'

'She won't take it,' said the lawyer.

'She must take it, if you manage the matter properly,' said Will.

'I don't suppose it will make much difference,' said the lawyer,--'now
that Captain Aylmer is out of the running.'

'I know nothing about that. Of course I am very glad that he should
be out of the running, as you call it. He is a bad sort of fellow,
and I didn't want him to have the property. But all that has had
nothing to do with it. I'm not doing it because I think she is ever
to be my wife.'

From this the reader will understand that Belton was still fidgeting
himself and the lawyer about the estate when he passed through
London. The matter in dispute, however, was so important that he was
induced to seek the advice of others besides Mr Green, and at last
was brought to the conclusion that it was his paramount duty to
become Belton of Belton. There seemed in the minds of all these
councillors to be some imperative and almost imperious requirement
that the acres should go back to a man of his name. Now, as there was
no one else of the family who could stand in his way, he had no
alternative but to become Belton of Belton. He would, however, sell
his estate in Norfolk, and raise money for endowing Clara with
commensurate riches. Such was his own plan but having fallen among
counsellors he would not exactly follow his own plan, and at last
submitted to an arrangement in accordance with which an annuity of
eight hundred pounds a year was to be settled upon Clara, and this
was to lie as a charge upon the estate in Norfolk.

'It seems to me to be very shabby,' said William Belton.

'It seems to me to be very extravagant,' said the leader among the
counsellors. 'She is not entitled to sixpence.'

But at last the arrangement as above described was the one to which
they all assented.

When Belton reached the house which was now his own he found no one
there but his sister. Clara was at the cottage. As he had been told
that she was to return there, he had no reason to be annoyed. But,
nevertheless, he was annoyed, or rather discontented, and had not
been a quarter of an hour about the place before he declared his
intention to go and seek her.

'Do no such thing, Will; pray do not,' said his sister.

'And why not?'

'Because it will be better that you should wait. You will only injure
yourself and her by being impetuous.'

'But it is absolutely necessary that she should know her own
position. It would be cruelty to keep her in ignorance though for the
matter of that I shall be ashamed to tell her. Yes I shall be ashamed
to look her in the face. What will she think of it after I had
assured her that she should have the whole?'

'But she would not have taken it, Will. And had she done so, she
would have been very wrong. Now she will be comfortable.'

'I wish I could be comfortable,' said he.

'If you will only wait--'

'I hate waiting. I do not see what good it will do. Besides, I don't
mean to say anything about that,--not today, at least. I don't indeed.
As for being here and not seeing her, that is out of the question. Of
course she would think that I had quarrelled with her, and that I
meant to take everything to myself, now that I have the power.'

'She won't suspect you of wishing to quarrel with her, Will.'

'I should in her place. It is out of the question that I should be
here, and not go to her. It would be monstrous. I will wait till they
have done lunch, and then I will go up.'

It was at last decided that he should walk up to the cottage, call
upon Colonel Askerton, and ask to see Clara in the colonel's
presence. It was thought that he could make his statement about the
money better before a third person who could be regarded as Clara's
friend, than could possibly be done between themselves. He did,
therefore, walk across to the cottage, and was shown into Colonel
Askerton's study.

'There he is,' Mrs Askerton said, as soon as she heard the sound of
the bell. 'I knew that he would come at once.'

During the whole morning Mrs Askerton had been insisting that Belton
would make his appearance on that very day the day of his arrival at
Belton, and Clara had been asserting that he would not do so.

'Why should he come?' Clara had said.

'Simply to take you to his own house, like any other of his goods and
chattels.'

'I am not his goods or his chattels.'

'But you soon will be; and why shouldn't you accept your lot quietly?
He is Belton of Belton, and everything here belongs to him.'

'I do not belong to him.'

'What nonsense! When a man has the command of the situation, as he
has, he can do just what he pleases. If he were to come and carry you
off by violence, I have no doubt the Beltonians would assist him, and
say that he was right. And you of course would forgive him. Belton of
Belton may do anything.'

'That is nonsense, if you please.'

'Indeed if you had any of that decent feeling of feminine inferiority
which ought to belong to all women, he would have found you sitting
on the doorstep of his house waiting for him.'

That had been said early in the morning, when they first knew that he
had arrived; but they had been talking about him ever since talking
about him under pressure from Mrs Askerton, till Clara had been
driven to long that she might be spared. 'If he chooses to come, he
will come,' she said. 'Of course he will come,' Mrs Askerton had
answered, and then they heard the ring of the hell. 'There he is. I
could swear to the sound of his foot. Doesn't he step as though he
were Belton of Belton, and conscious that everything belonged to
him?' Then there was a pause. 'He has been shown in to Colonel
Askerton. What on earth could he want with him?'

'He has called to tell him something about the cottage,' said Clara,
endeavouring to speak as though she were calm through it all.

'Cottage! Fiddlestick! The idea of a man coming to look after his
trumpery cottage on the first day of his showing himself as lord of
his own property! Perhaps he is demanding that you shall be delivered
up to him. If he does I shall vote for obeying.'

'And I for disobeying and shall vote very strongly too.'

Their suspense was yet prolonged for another ten minutes, and at the
end of that time the servant came in and asked if Miss Amedroz would
be good enough to go into the master's room. 'Mr Belton is there,
Fanny?' asked Mrs Askerton. The girl confessed that Mr Belton was
there, and then Clara, without another word, got up and left the
room. She had much to do in assuming a look of composure before she
opened the door; but she made the effort, and was not unsuccessful.
In another second she found her hand in her cousin's, and his bright
eye was fixed upon her with that eager friendly glance which made his
face so pleasant to those whom he loved.

'Your cousin has been telling me of the arrangements he has been
making for you with the lawyers,' said Colonel Askerton. 'I can only
say that I wish all the ladies had cousins so liberal, and so able to
be liberal.'

'I thought I would see Colonel Askerton first, as you are staying at
his house. And as for liberality there is nothing of the kind. You
must understand, Clara, that a fellow can't do what he likes with his
own in this country. I have found myself so bullied by lawyers and
that sort of people, that I have been obliged to yield to them. I
wanted that you should have the old place, to do just what you
pleased with It.'

'That was out of the question, Will.'

'Of course it was,' said Colonel Askerton. Then, as Belton himself
did not proceed to the telling of his own story, the colonel told it
for him, and explained what was the income which Clara was to
receive.

'But that is as much out of the question,' said she, 'as the other. I
cannot rob you in that way. I cannot and I shall not. And why should
I? What do I want with an income? Something I ought to have, if only
for the credit of the family, and that I am willing to take from your
kindness; but--'

'It's all settled now, Clara.'

'I don't think that you can lessen the weight of your obligation,
Miss Amedroz, after what has been done up in London,' said the
colonel.

'If you had said a hundred a year--'

'I have been allowed to say nothing,' said Belton; 'those people have
said eight,--and so it is settled. When are you coming over to see
Mary?'

To this question he got no definite answer, and as he went away
immediately afterwards he hardly seemed to expect one. He did not
even ask for Mrs Askerton, and as that lady remarked, behaved
altogether like a bear. 'But what a munificent bear!' she said.
'Fancy;--eight hundred a year of your own. One begins to doubt whether
it is worth one's while to marry at all with such an income as that
to do what one likes with! However, it all means nothing. It will all
be his own again before you have even touched it.'

'You must not say anything more about that,' said Clara gravely.

'And why must I not?'

'Because I shall hear nothing more of it. There is an end of all that
as there ought to be.'

'Why an end? I don't see an end. There will be no end till Belton of
Belton has got you and your eight hundred a year as well as
everything else.'

'You will find that he does not mean anything more,' said Clara.

'You think not?'

'I am sure of it.' Then there was a little sound in her throat as
though she were in some danger of being choked; but she soon
recovered herself, and was able to express herself clearly. 'I have
only one favour to ask you now, Mrs Askerton, and that is that you
will never say anything more about him. He has changed his mind. Of
course he has, or he would not come here like that and have gone away
without saying a word.'

'Not a word! A man gives you eight hundred a year and that is not
saying a word!'

'Not a word except about money! But of course he is right. I know
that he is right. Alter what has passed he would be very wrong to to
think about it any more. You joke about his being Belton of Belton.
But it does make a difference.'

'It does does it?'

'It has made a difference. I see and feel it now. I shall never hear
him ask me that question any more.'

'And if you did hear him, what answer would you make him?'

'I don't know.'

'That is just it. Women are so cross-grained that it is a wonder to
me that men should ever have anything to do with them. They have
about them some madness of a phantasy which they dignify with the
name of feminine pride, and under the cloak of this they believe
themselves to be justified in tormenting their lovers' lives out. The
only consolation is that they torment themselves as much. Can
anything be more cross-grained than you are at this moment? You were
resolved just now that it would be the most unbecoming thing in the
world if he spoke a word more about his love for the next twelve
months--'

'Mrs Askerton, I said nothing about twelve months.'

'And now you are broken-hearted because he did not blurt it all out
before Colonel Askerton in a business interview, which was very
properly had at once, and in which he has had the exceeding good
taste to confine himself altogether to the one subject.'

'I am not complaining.'

'It was good taste; though if he had not been a bear he might have
asked after me, who am fighting his battles for him night and day.'

'But what will he do next?'

'Eat his dinner, I should think, as it is now nearly five o'clock.
Your father used always to dine at five.'

'I can't go to see Mary,' she said, 'till he comes here again.'

'He will be here fast enough. I shouldn't wonder if he was to come
here tonight.' And he did come again that night.

When Belton's interview was over in the colonel's study, he left the
house without even asking after the mistress, as that mistress had
taken care to find out and went off, rambling about the estate which
was now his own. It was a beautiful place, and he was not insensible
to the gratification of being its owner. There is much in the glory
of ownership of the ownership of land and houses, of beeves and
woolly flocks, of wide fields and thick-growing woods, even when that
ownership is of late date, when it conveys to the owner nothing but
the realization of a property on the soil; but there is much more in
it when it contains the memories of old years; when the glory is the
glory of race as well as the glory of power and property. There had
been Beltons of Belton living there for many centuries, and now he
was the Belton of the day, standing on his own ground the descendant
and representative of the Beltons of old Belton of Belton without a
flaw in his pedigree! He felt himself to be proud of his position
prouder than he could have been of any other that might have been
vouchsafed to him. And yet amidst it all he was somewhat ashamed of
his pride. 'The man who can do it for himself is the real man after
all,' he said. 'But I have got it by a fluke and by such a sad chance
too!' Then he wandered on, thinking of the circumstances under which
the property had fallen into his hands, and remembering how and when
and where the first idea had occurred to him of making Clara Amedroz
his wife. He had then felt that if he could only do that he could
reconcile himself to the heirship. And the idea had grown upon him
instantly, and had become a passion by the eagerness with which he
had welcomed it. From that day to this he had continued to tell
himself that he could not enjoy his good fortune unless he could
enjoy it with her. There had come to be a horrid impediment in his
way a barrier which had seemed to have been placed there by his evil
fortune, to compensate the gifts given to him by his good fortune,
and that barrier had been Captain Aylmer. He had not, in fact, seen
much of his rival, but he had seen enough to make it matter of wonder
to him that Clara could be attached to such a man. He had thoroughly
despised Captain Aylmer, and had longed to show his contempt of the
man by kicking him out of the hotel at the London railway station. At
that moment all the world had seemed to him to be wrong and wretched.

But now it seemed that all the world might so easily be made right
again! The impediment had got itself removed. Belton did not even yet
altogether comprehend by what means Clara had escaped from the meshes
of the Aylmer Park people, but he did know that she had escaped. Her
eyes had been opened before it was too late, and she was a free woman
to be compassed if only a man might compass her. While she had been
engaged to Captain Aylmer, Will had felt that she was not assailable.
Though he had not been quite able to restrain himself as on that
fatal occasion when he had taken her in his arms and kissed her still
he had known that as she was an engaged woman, he could not, without
insulting her, press his own suit upon her. But now all that was
over. Let him say what he liked on that head, she would have no
proper plea for anger. She was assailable and, as this was so, why
the mischief should he not set about the work at once? His sister
bade him wait. Why should he wait when one fortunate word might do
it? Wait! He could not wait. How are you to bid a starving man to
wait when you put him down at a well-covered board? Here was he,
walking about Belton Park just where she used to walk with him and
there was she at Belton Cottage, within half an hour of him at this
moment, if he were to go quickly; and yet Mary was telling him to
wait! No; he would not wait. There could be no reason for waiting.
Wait, indeed, till some other Captain Aylmer should come in the way
and give him more trouble!

So he wandered on, resolving that he would see his cousin again that
very day. Such an interview as that which had just taken place
between two such dear friends was not natural,--was not to be endured.
What might not Clara think of it! To meet her for the first time
after her escape from Aylmer Park, and to speak to her only on
matters concerning money! He would certainly go to her again on that
afternoon. In his walking he came to the bottom of the rising ground
on the top of which stood the rock on which he and Clara had twice
sat. But he turned away, and would not go up to it. He hoped that he
might go up to it very soon,--but, except under certain circumstances,
he would never go up to it again.

'I am going across to the cottage immediately after dinner,' he said
to his sister.

'Have you an appointment?'

'No; I have no appointment. I suppose a man doesn't want an
appointment to go and see his own cousin down in the country.'

'I don't know what their habits are.'

'I shan't ask to go in; but I want to see her.'

Mary looked at him with loving, sorrowing eyes, but she said no more.
She loved him so well that she would have given her right hand to get
for him what he wanted but she sorrowed to think that he should want
such a thing so sorely. Immediately after his dinner, he took his hat
and went out without saying a word further, and made his way once
more across to the gate of the cottage. It was a lovely summer
evening, at that period of the year in which our summer evenings just
begin, when the air is sweeter and the flowers more fragrant, and the
forms of the foliage more lovely than at any other time. It was now
eight o'clock, but it was hardly as yet evening; none at least of the
gloom of evening had come, though the sun was low in the heavens. At
the cottage they were all sitting out on the lawn; and as Belton came
near he was seen by them, and he saw them.

'I told you so,' said Mrs Askerton, to Clara, in a whisper.

'He is not coming in,' Clara answered. 'He is going on.'

But when he had come nearer, Colonel Askerton called to him over the
garden paling, and asked him to join them. He was now standing within
ten or fifteen yards of them, though the fence divided them. 'I have
come to ask my Cousin Clara to take a walk with me,' he said. 'She
can be back by your tea time.' He made his request very placidly, and
did not in any way look like a lover.

'I am sure she will be glad to go,' said Mrs Askerton. But Clara said
nothing.

'Do take a turn with me, if you are not tired,' said he.

'She has not been out all day, and cannot be tired,' said Mrs
Askerton, who had now walked up to the paling. 'Clara, get your hat.
But, Mr Belton, what have I done that I am to be treated in this way?
Perhaps you don't remember that you have not spoken to me since your
arrival.'

'Upon my word, I beg your pardon,' said he, endeavouring to stretch
his hand across the bushes.

'I forgot I didn't see you this morning.'

'I suppose I musn't be angry, as this is your day of taking
possession; but it is exactly on such days as this that one likes to
be remembered.'

'I didn't mean to forget you, Mrs Askerton; I didn't, indeed. And as
for the special day, that's all bosh, you know. I haven't taken
particular possession of anything that I know of.'

'I hope you will, Mr Belton, before the day is over,' said she. Clara
had at length arisen, and had gone into the house to fetch her hat.
She had not spoken a word, and even yet her cousin did not know
whether she was coming. 'I hope you will take possession of a great
deal that is very valuable. Clara has gone to get her hat.'

'Do you think she means to walk?'

'I think she does, Mr Belton. And there she is at the door. Mind you
bring her back to tea.'

Clara, as she came forth, felt herself quite unable to speak, or
walk, or look after her usual manner. She knew herself to be a victim
to be so far a victim that she could no longer control her own fate.
To Captain Aylmer, at any rate, she had never succumbed. In all her
dealings with him she had fought upon an equal footing. She had never
been compelled to own herself mastered. But now she was being led out
that she might confess her own submission, and acknowledge that
hitherto she had not known what was good for her. She knew that she
would have to yield. She must have known how happy she was to have an
opportunity of yielding; but yet yet, had there been any room for
choice, she thought she would have refrained from walking with her
cousin that evening. She had wept that afternoon because she had
thought that he would not come again; and now that he had come at the
first moment that was possible for him, she was almost tempted to
wish him once more away.

'I suppose you understand that when I came up this morning I came
merely to talk about business,' said Belton, as soon as they were off
together.

'It was very good of you to come at all so soon after your arrival.'

'I told those people in London that I would have it all settled at
once, and so I wanted to have it off my mind.'

'I don't know what I ought to say to you. Of course I shall not want
so much money as that.'

'We won't talk about the money any more today. I hate talking about
money.'

'It is not the pleasantest subject in the world.'

'No,' said he; 'no indeed. I hate it particularly between friends. So
you have come to grief with your friends, the Aylmers?'

'I hope I haven't come to grief and the Aylmers, as a family, never
were my friends. I'm obliged to contradict you, point by point you
see.'

'I don't like Captain Aylmer at all,' said Will, after a pause.

'So I saw, Will; and I dare say he was not very fond of you.' 'Fond
of me! I didn't want him to be fond of me. I don't suppose he ever
thought much about me. I could not help thinking of him.' She had
nothing to say to this, and therefore walked on silently by his side.
'I suppose he has not any idea of coming back here again?'

'What; to Belton? No, I do not think he will come to Belton any
more.'

'Nor will you go to Aylmer Park?'

'No; certainly not. Of all the places on earth. Will, to which you
could send me, Aylmer Park is the one to which I should go most
unwillingly.'

'I don't want to send you there.'

'You never could be made to understand what a woman she is; how
disagreeable, how cruel, how imperious, how insolent.'

'Was she so bad as all that?'

'Indeed she was, Will. I can't but tell the truth to you.'

'And he was nearly as bad as she.'

'No, Will; no; do not say that of him.'

'He was such a quarrelsome fellow. He flew at me just because I said
we had good hunting down in Norfolk.'

'We need not talk about all that, Will.'

'No of course not. It's all passed and gone, I suppose.'

'Yes it is all passed and gone. You did not know my Aunt Winterfield,
or you would understand my first reason for liking him.'

'No,' said Will; 'I never saw her.'

Then they walked on together for a while without speaking, and Clara
was beginning to feel some relief some relief at first; but as the
relief came, there came back to her the dead, dull, feeling of
heaviness at her heart which had oppressed her after his visit in the
morning. She had been right, and Mrs Askerton had been wrong. He had
returned to her simply as her cousin, and now he was walking with her
and talking to her in this strain, to teach her that it was so. But
of a sudden they came to a place where two paths diverged, and he
turned upon her and asked her quickly which path they should take.
'Look, Clara,' he said, 'will you go up there with me?' It did not
need that she should look, as she knew that the way indicated by him
led up among the rocks.

'I don't much care which way,' she said, faintly.

'Do you not? But I do. I care very much. Don't you remember where
that path goes?' She had no answer to give to this. She remembered
well, and remembered how he had protested that he would never go to
the place again unless he could go there as her accepted lover. And
she had asked herself sundry questions as to that protestation. Could
it be that for her sake he would abstain from visiting the prettiest
spot on his estate that he would continue to regard the ground as
hallowed because of his memories of her? 'Which way shall we go?' he
asked.

'I suppose it does not much signify,' said she, trembling.

'But it does signify. It signifies very much to me. Will you go up to
the rocks?'

'I am afraid we shall be late, if we stay out long.'

'What matters how late? Will you come?'

'I suppose so if you wish it, Will.'

She had anticipated that the high rock was to be the altar at which
the victim was to be sacrificed; but now he would not wait till he
had taken her to the sacred spot. He had of course intended that he
would there renew his offer; but he had perceived that his offer had
been renewed, and had, in fact, been accepted, during this little
parley as to the pathway. There was hardly any necessity for further
words. So he must have thought; for, as quick as lightning, he flung
his arms around her, and kissed her again, as he had kissed her on
that other terrible occasion that occasion on which he had felt that
he might hardly hope for pardon.

'William, William,' she said; 'how can you serve me like that?' But
he had a full understanding as to his own privileges, and was well
aware that he was in the right now, as he had been before that he was
trespassing egregiously. 'Why are you so rough with me?' she said.

'Clara, say that you love me.'

'I will say nothing to you because you are so rough.' They were now
walking up slowly towards the rocks.

And as he had his arm round her waist, he was contented for awhile to
allow her to walk without speaking. But when they were on the summit
it was necessary for him that he should have a word from her of
positive assurance. 'Clara, say that you love me.'

'Have I not always loved you, Will, since almost the first moment
that I saw you?'

'But that won't do. You know that is not fair. Come, Clara; I've had
a deal of trouble and grief too; haven't I? You should say a word to
make up for it that is, if you can say it.'

'What can a word like that signify to you today? You have got
everything.'

'Have I got you?' Still she paused. 'I will have an answer. Have I
got you? Are you now my own?'

'I suppose so, Will. Don't now. I will not have it again. Does not
that satisfy you?'

'Tell me that you love me.'

'You know that I love you.'

'Better than anybody in the world?'

'Yes better than anybody in the world.'

'And after all you will be my wife?'

'Oh, Will how you question one!'

'You shall say it, and then it will all be fair and honest.'

'Say what? I'm sure I thought I had said everything.'

'Say that you mean to be my wife.'

'I suppose so if you wish it.'

'Wish it!' said he, getting up from his seat, and throwing his hat
into the bushes on one side; 'wish it! I don't think you have ever
understood howl have wished it. Look here, Clara; I found when I got
down to Norfolk that I couldn't live without you. Upon my word it is
true. I don't suppose you'll believe me.'

'I didn't think it could be so bad with you as that.'

'No I don't suppose women ever do believe. And I wouldn't have
believed it of myself. I hated myself for it. By George, I did. That
is when I began to think it was all up with me.'

'All up with you! Oh, Will!'

'I had quite made up my mind to go to New Zealand. I had, indeed. I
couldn't have kept my hands off that man if we had been living in the
same country. I should have wrung his neck.'

'Will, how can you talk so wickedly?'

'There's no understanding it till you have felt it. But never mind.
It's all right now; isn't it, Clara?'

'If you think so.'

'Think so! Oh, Clara, I am such a happy fellow. Do give me a kiss.
You have never given me one kiss yet.'

'What nonsense! I didn't think you were such a baby.'

'By George, but you shall or you shall never get home to tea
to-night. My own, own, own darling. Upon my word, Clara, when I begin
to think about it I shall be half mad.'

'I think you are quite that already.'

'No, I'm not but I shall be when I'm alone. What can I say to you,
Clara, to make you understand how much I love you? You remember the
song, "For Bonnie Annie Laurie I'd lay me down and dee". Of course it
is all nonsense talking of dying for a woman. What a man has to do is
to live for her. But that is my feeling. I'm ready to give you my
life. If there was anything to do for you, I'd do it if I could,
whatever it was. Do you understand me?'

'Dear Will! Dearest Will!'

'Am I dearest?'

'Are you not sure of it?'

'But I like you to tell me so. I like to feel that you are not
ashamed to own it. You ought to say it a few times to me, as I have
said it so very often to you.'

'You'll hear enough of it before you've done with me.'

'I shall never have heard enough of it. Oh, Heavens, only think, when
I was coming down in the train last night I was in such a bad way.'

'And are you in a good way now?'

'Yes; in a very good way. I shall crow over Mary so when I get home.'

'And what has poor Mary done?'

'Never mind.'

'I dare say she knows what is good for you better than you know
yourself. I suppose she has told you that you might do a great deal
better than trouble yourself with a wife?'

'Never mind what she has told me. It is settled now is it not?

'I hope so, Will.'

'But not quite settled as yet. When shall it be? That is the next
question.'

But to that question Clara positively refused to make any reply that
her lover would consider to be satisfactory. He continued to press
her till she was at last driven to remind him how very short a time
it was since her father had been among them; and then he was very
angry with himself, and declared himself to be a brute. 'Anything but
that,' she said. 'You are the kindest and the best of men but at the
same time the most impatient.'

'That's what Mary says; but what's the good of waiting? She wanted me
to wait today.'

'And as you would not, you have fallen into a trap out of which you
can never escape. But pray let us go. What will they think of us?'

'I shouldn't wonder if they didn't think something near the truth.'

'Whatever they think, we will go back. It is ever so much past nine.'

'Before you stir, Clara, tell me one thing. Are you really happy?'

'Very happy.'

'And are you glad that this has been done?'

'Very glad. Will that satisfy you?'

'And you do love me?'

'I do--I do--I do. Can I say more than that?

'More than anybody else in the world?'

'Better than all the world put together.'

'Then,' said he, holding her tight in his arms, 'show me that you
love me.' And as he made his request he was quick to explain to her
what, according to his ideas, was the becoming mode by which lovers
might show their love. I wonder whether it ever occurred to Clara, as
she thought of it all before she went to bed that night, that Captain
Aylmer and William Belton were very different in their manners. And
if so, I must wonder further whether she most approved the manners of
the patient man or the man who was impatient.


CHAPTER XXXII

CONCLUSION

About two months after the scene described in the last chapter, when
the full summer had arrived, Clara received two letters from the two
lovers the history of whose loves have just been told, and these
shall be submitted to the reader, as they will serve to explain the
manner in which the two men proposed to arrange their affairs. We
will first have Captain Aylmer's letter, which was the first read;
Clara kept the latter for the last, as children always keep their
sweetest morsels.


'Aylmer Park, August 188

'My dear Miss Amedroz,

'I heard before leaving London that you are engaged to marry your
cousin Mr William Belton, and I think that perhaps you may be
satisfied to have a line from me to let you know that I quite approve
of the marriage.' 'I do not care very much for his approval or
disapproval,' said Clara as she read this. 'No doubt it will be the
best thing you can do, especially as it will heal all the sores
arising from the entail.' 'There never was any sore,' said Clara.
'Pray give my compliments to Mr Belton, and offer him my
congratulations, and tell him that I wish him all happiness in the
married state.' 'Married fiddlestick!' said Clara. In this she was
unreasonable; but the euphonious platitudes of Captain Aylmer were so
unlike the vehement protestations of Mr Belton that she must be
excused if by this time she had come to entertain something of an
unreasonable aversion for the former.

'I hope you will not receive my news with perfect indifference when I
tell you that I also am going to be married. The lady is one whom I
have known for a long time, and have always esteemed very highly. She
is Lady Emily Tagmaggert, the youngest daughter of the Earl of Mull.'
Why Clara should immediately have conceived a feeling of supreme
contempt for Lady Emily Tagmaggert, and assured herself that her
ladyship was a thin, dry, cross old maid with a red nose, I cannot
explain; but I do know that such were her thoughts, almost
instantaneously, in reference to Captain Aylmer's future bride. 'Lady
Emily is a very intimate friend of my sister's; and you, who know how
our family cling together, will feel how thankful I must be when I
tell you that my mother quite approves of the engagement. I suppose
we shall be married early in the spring. We shall probably spend some
months every year at Perivale, and I hope that we may look forward to
the pleasure of seeing you sometimes as a guest beneath our roof.' On
reading this Clara shuddered, and made some inward protestation which
seemed to imply that she had no wish whatever to revisit the dull
streets of the little town with which she had been so well
acquainted. 'I hope she'll be good to poor Mr Possit,' said Clara,
'and give him port wine on Sundays.'

'I have one more thing that I ought to say. You will remember that I
intended to pay my aunt's legacy immediately after her death, but
that I was prevented by circumstances which I could not control. I
have paid it now into Mr Green's hands on your account, together with
the sum of L59 18s 3d., which is due upon it as interest at the rate
of 5 per cent. I hope that this may be satisfactory.' 'It is not
satisfactory at all,' said Clara, putting down the letter, and
resolving that Will Belton should be instructed to repay the money
instantly. It may, however, be explained here that in this matter
Clara was doomed to be disappointed; and that she was forced, by Mr
Green's arguments, to receive the money. 'Then it shall go to the
hospital at Perivale,' she declared when those arguments were used.
As to that, Mr Green was quite indifferent, but I do not think that
the legacy which troubled poor Aunt Winterfield so much on her dying
bed was ultimately applied to so worthy a purpose.

'And now, my dear Miss Amedroz,' continued the letter, 'I will say
farewell, with many assurances of my unaltered esteem, and with
heartfelt wishes for your future happiness. Believe me to be always,

'Most faithfully and sincerely yours,

'FREDERIC F. AYLMER.


'Esteem!' said Clara, as she finished the letter. 'I wonder which he
esteems the most, me or Lady Emily Tagmaggert. He will never get
beyond esteem with any one.

The letter which was last read was as follows:


'Plaistow, August 186--.

'Dearest Clara,

'I don't think I shall ever get done, and I am coming to hate farming.
It is awful lonely here, too, and I pass all my evenings by myself,
wondering why I should be doomed to this kind of thing, while you and
Mary are comfortable together at Belton. We have begun with the
wheat, and as soon as that is safe I shall cut and run. I shall leave
the barley to Bunce. Bunce knows as much about it as I do and as for
remaining here all the summer, it's out of the question.

'My own dear, darling love, of course I don't intend to urge you to do
anything that you don't like; but upon my honour I don't see the
force of what you say. You know I have as much respect for your
father's memory as anybody, but what harm can it do to him that we
should be married at once? Don't you think he would have wished it
himself? It can be ever so quiet. So long as it's done, I don't care
a straw how it's done. Indeed, for the matter of that, I always think
it would be best just to walk to church and to walk home again
without saying anything to anybody. I hate fuss and nonsense, and
really I don't think anybody would have a right to say anything if we
were to do it at once in that sort of way. I have had a bad time of
it for the last twelvemonth. You must allow that, and I think that I
ought to be rewarded.

'As for living, you shall have your choice. Indeed you shall live
anywhere you please at Timbuctoo if you like it. I don't want to give
up Plaistow, because my father and grandfather farmed the land
themselves; but I am quite prepared not to live here. I don't think
it would suit you, because it has so much of the farm-house about it.
Only I should like you sometimes to come and look at the old place.
What I should like would be to pull down the house at Belton and
build another. But you mustn't propose to put it off till that's
done, as I should never have the heart to do it. If you think that
would suit you, I'll make up my mind to live at Belton for a
constancy; and then I'd go in for a lot of cattle, and don't doubt
I'd make a fortune. I'm almost sick of looking at the straight ridges
in the big square fields every day of my life.

'Give my love to Mary. I hope she fights my battle for me. Pray think
of all this, and relent if you can. I do so long to have an end of
this purgatory. If there was any use, I wouldn't say a word; but
there's no good in being tortured, when there is no use. God bless
you, dearest love. I do love you so well!

'Yours most affectionately,

'W. BELTON.'


She kissed the letter twice, pressed it to her bosom, and then sat
silent for half an hour thinking of it of it, and the man who wrote
it, and of the man who had written the other letter. She could not
but remember how that other man had thought to treat her, when it was
his intention and her intention that they two should join their lots
together how cold he had been; how full of caution and counsel; how
he had preached to her himself and threatened her with the preaching
of his mother; how manifestly he had purposed to make her life a
sacrifice to his life; how he had premeditated her incarceration at
Perivale, while he should be living a bachelor's life in London! Will
Belton's ideas of married life were very different. Only come to me
at once now, immediately, and everything else shall be disposed just
as you please. This was his offer. What he proposed to give or rather
his willingness to be thus generous, was very sweet to her; but it
was not half so sweet as his impatience in demanding his reward. How
she doted on him because he considered his present state to be a
purgatory! How could she refuse anything she could give to one who
desired her gifts so strongly?

As for her future residence, it would be a matter of indifference to
her where she should live, so long as she might live with him; but
for him she felt that but one spot in the world was fit for him. He
was Belton of Belton, and it would not be becoming that he should
live elsewhere. Of course she would go with him to Plaistow Hall as
often as he might wish it; but Belton Castle should be his permanent
resting-place. It would be her duty to be proud for him, and
therefore, for his sake, she would beg that their home might be in
Somersetshire.

'Mary,' she said to her cousin soon afterwards, 'Will sends his love
to you.'

'And what else does he say?'

'I couldn't tell you everything. You shouldn't expect it.'

'I don't expect it; but perhaps there may be something to be told.'

'Nothing that I need tell specially. You, who know him so well, can
imagine what he would say.'

'Dear Will! I am sure he would mean to write what was pleasant.'

Then the matter would have dropped had Clara been so minded,--but she,
in truth, was anxious to be forced to talk about the letter. She
wished to be urged by Mary to do that which Will urged her to do or,
at least, to learn whether Mary thought that her brother's wish might
be gratified without impropriety. 'Don't you think we ought to live
here?' she said.

'By all means,--if you both like it.'

'He is so good,--so unselfish, that he will only ask me to do what I
like best.'

'And which would you like best?'

'I think he ought to live here because it is the old family property.
I confess that the name goes for something with me. He says that he
would build a new house.'

'Does he think he could have it ready by the time you are married?'

'Ah that is just the difficulty. Perhaps, after all, you had better
read his letter. I don't know why I should not show it to you. It
will only tell you what you know already that he is the most generous
fellow in all the world.' Then Mary read the letter. 'What am I to
say to him?' Clara asked. 'It seems so hard to refuse anything to one
who is so true, and good, and generous.'

'It is hard.'

'But you see my poor, dear father's death has been so recent.'

'I hardly know,' said Mary, 'how the world feels about such things.'

'I think we ought to wait at least twelve months,' said Clara, very
sadly.

'Poor Will! He will be broken-hearted a dozen times before that. But
then, when his happiness does come, he will be all the happier.'
Clara, when she heard this, almost hated her cousin Mary not for her
own sake, but on Will's account. Will trusted so implicitly to his
sister, and yet she could not make a better fight for him than this!
It almost seemed that Mary was indifferent to her brother's
happiness. Had Will been her brother, Clara thought, and had any girl
asked her advice under similar circumstances, she was sure that she
would have answered in a different way. She would have told such girl
that her first duty was owing to the man who was to be her husband,
and would not have said a word to her about the feeling of the world.
After all, what did the feeling of the world signify to them, who
were going to be all the world to each other?

On that afternoon she went up to Mrs Askerton's; and succeeded in
getting advice from her also, though she did not show Will's letter
to that lady. 'Of course, I know what he says,' said Mrs Askerton.
'Unless I have mistaken the man, he wants to be married tomorrow.'

'He is not so bad as that,' said Clara.

'Then the next day, or the day after. Of course he is impatient, and
does not see any earthly reason why his impatience should not be
gratified.'

'He is impatient.'

'And I suppose you hesitate because of your father's death?

'It seems but the other day;--does it not?' said Clara.

'Everything seems but the other day to me. It was but the other day
that I myself was married.'

'And, of course, though I would do anything I could that he would ask
me to do--'

'But would you do anything?'

'Anything that was not wrong I would. Why should I not, when he is so
good to me?'

'Then write to him, my dear, and tell him that it shall be as he
wishes it. Believe me, the days of Jacob are over. Men don't
understand waiting now, and it's always as well to catch your fish
when you can.'

'You don't suppose I have any thought of that kind?'

'I am sure you have not and I'm sure that he deserves no such thought
but the higher that are his deserts, the greater should be his
reward. If I were you, I should think of nothing but him, and I
should do exactly as he would have me.' Clara kissed her friend as
she parted from her, and again resolved that all that woman's sins
should be forgiven her. A woman who could give such excellent advice
deserved that every sin should be forgiven her. 'They'll be married
yet before the summer is over,' Mrs Askerton said to her husband that
afternoon. 'I believe a man may have anything he chooses to ask for,
if he'll only ask hard enough.'

And they were married in the autumn, if not actually in the summer.
With what precise words Clara answered her lover's letter I will not
say; but her answer was of such a nature that he found himself
compelled to leave Plaistow, even before the wheat was garnered.
Great confidence was placed in Bunce on that occasion, and I have
reason to believe that it was not misplaced. They were married in
September yes, in September, although that letter of Will's was
written in August, and by the beginning of October they had returned
from their wedding trip to Plaistow. Clara insisted that she should
be taken to Plaistow, and was very anxious when there to learn all
the particulars of the farm. She put down in a little book how many
acres there were in each field, and what was the average produce of
the land. She made inquiry about four-crop rotation, and endeavoured,
with Bunce, to go into the great subject of stall-feeding. But Belton
did not give her as much encouragement as he might have done. 'We'll
come here for the shooting next year,' he said; 'that is, if there is
nothing to prevent us.'

'I hope there'll be nothing to prevent us.'

'There might be, perhaps; but we'll always come if there is not. For
the rest of it, I'll leave it to Bunce, and just run over once or
twice in the year. It would not be a nice place for you to live at
long.'

'I like it of all things. I am quite interested about the farm.'

'You'd get very sick of it if you were here in the winter. The truth
is that if you farm well, you must farm ugly. The picturesque nooks
and corners have all to be turned inside out, and the hedgerows must
be abolished, because we want the sunshine. Now, down at Belton, just
above the house, we won't mind farming well, but will stick to the
picturesque.'

The new house was immediately commenced at Belton, and was made to
proceed with all imaginable alacrity. It was supposed at one time at
least Belton himself said that he so supposed that the building would
be ready for occupation at the end of the first summer; but this was
not found to be possible. 'We must put it off till May, after all,'
said Belton, as he was walking round the unfinished building with
Colonel Askerton. 'It's an awful bore, but there's no getting people
really to pull out in this country.'

'I think they've pulled out pretty well. Of course you couldn't have
gone into a damp house for the winter.'

'Other people can get a house built within twelve months. Look what
they do in London.'

'And other people with their wives and children die in consequence of
colds and sore throats and other evils of that nature. I wouldn't go
into a new house, I know, till I was quite sure it was dry.'

As Will at this time was hardly ten months married, he was not as yet
justified in thinking about his own wife and children; but he had
already found it expedient to make arrangements for the autumn, which
would prevent that annual visit to Plaistow which Clara had
contemplated, and which he had regarded with his characteristic
prudence as being subject to possible impediments. He was to be
absent himself for the first week in September, but was to return
immediately after that. This he did; and before the end of that month
he was justified in talking of his wife and family. 'I suppose it
wouldn't have done to have been moving now under all the
circumstances,' he said to his friend, Mrs Askerton, as he still
grumbled about the unfinished house.

'I don't think it would have done at all, under all the
circumstances,' said Mrs Askerton.

But in the following spring or early summer they did get into the new
house and a very nice house it was, as will, I think, be believed by
those who have known Mr William Belton. And when they were well
settled, at which time little Will Belton was some seven or eight
months old,--little Will, for whom great bonfires had been lit, as
though his birth in those parts was a matter not to be regarded
lightly; for was he not the first Belton of Belton who had been born
there for more than a century?--when that time came visitors appeared
at the new Belton Castle, visitors of importance, who were entitled
to, and who received, great consideration. These were no less than
Captain Aylmer, Member for Perivale, and his newly-married bride,
Lady Emily Aylmer, _nee_ Tagmaggert. They were then just married, and
had come down to Belton Castle immediately after their honeymoon
trip. How it had come to pass that such friendship had sprung up,--or
rather how it had been revived,--it would be bootless here to say. But
old affiances, such as that which had existed between the Aylmer and
the Amedroz families, do not allow themselves to die out easily, and
it is well for us all that they should be long-lived. So Captain
Aylmer brought his bride to Belton Park, and a small fatted calf was
killed, and the Askertons came to dinner on which occasion Captain
Aylmer behaved very well, though we may imagine that he must have had
some misgivings on the score of his young wife. The Askertons came to
dinner, and the old rector, and the squire from a neighbouring
parish, and everything was very handsome and very dull. Captain
Aylmer was much pleased with his visit, and declared to Lady Emily
that marriage had greatly improved Mr. William Belton. Now Will had
been very dull the whole evening, and very unlike the fiery, violent,
unreasonable man whom Captain Aylmer remembered to have met at the
station hotel of the Great Northern Railway.

'I was as sure of it as possible,' Clara said to her husband that
night.

'Sure of what, my dear?'

'That she would have a red nose.'

'Who has got a red nose?'

'Don't be stupid, Will. Who should have it but Lady Emily?'

'Upon my word I didn't observe it.'

'You never observe anything, Will; do you? But don't you think she is
very plain?'

'Upon my word I don't know. She isn't as handsome as some people.'

'Don't be a fool, Will. How old do you suppose her to be?' 'How old?
Let me see. Thirty, perhaps.'

'If she's not over forty, I'll consent to change noses with her.'

'No we won't do that; not if I know it.'

'I cannot conceive why any man should marry such a woman as that. Not
but what she's a very good woman, I dare say; only what can a man get
by it? To be sure there's the title, if that's worth anything.' But
Will Belton was never good for much conversation at this hour, and
was too fast asleep to make any rejoinder to the last remark.