Produced by Al Haines


[Frontispiece: The girls paused and waved their handkerchiefs.]


PEGGY-ALONE


BY

MARY AGNES BYRNE

AUTHOR OF
  "THE LITTLE WOMAN IN THE SPOUT,"
  "LITTLE DAME TROT,"
  "ROY AND ROSYROCKS,"
  "THE FAIRY CHASES," ETC.


DRAWINGS BY

ANNA B. CRAIG


THE SAALFIELD PUBLISHING COMPANY

CHICAGO ---- AKRON, OHIO ---- NEW YORK


_Copyright, 1909_

_By_

_The Saalfield Publishing Co._


TO MY SISTER TRESS


CONTENTS


CHAPTER

      I.  PEGGY-ALONE
     II.  UNCLE FRED
    III.  GUMDROPS
     IV.  THE GARDEN OF GOOD INTENTIONS
      V.  A DISGUSTED POET
     VI.  A SCORNFUL BEAUTY
    VII.  THEATRICALS
   VIII.  PICNICKING
     IX.  TISSUE-PAPER HATS
      X.  ALENE'S VISITORS
     XI.  TAFFY PULLING
    XII.  A STRING OF FISH
   XIII.  A GIRLISH TIFF
    XIV.  THE PILGRIM'S PROGRESS
     XV.  AFTER THE SHOW
    XVI.  LAURA'S PROPOSITION
   XVII.  IN THE BERRY PATCH
  XVIII.  TO THE RESCUE
   XIX.  THE BLUE BOX
    XX.  MRS. KUMP'S BIRTHDAY
   XXI.  TO CHINA IN A GLASS-BOAT
  XXII.  VEXATIONS AND CONSOLATIONS
 XXIII.  THE CRIMSON BAG
  XXIV.  THE GARDEN PARTY
   XXV.  IVY'S FRIEND
  XXVI.  AN ADVENTURE
 XXVII.  IN THE TOWER


PEGGY-ALONE


CHAPTER I

PEGGY-ALONE

"Down, Prince!"

High above the shrill exclamations of surprise and terror came that
thin silvery command which the dog, great black fellow that he was,
obeyed at once, and his flight in pursuit of those daring petticoats
which had intruded on his master's orchard was brought to an
ignominious end.

"Girls, say, girls, don't be frightened!  He won't bite!"

One of the children had already scaled the wall, dropping her apron of
apples on the way.  She stood ready to help the second down, while the
third and largest, who had kept in the rear between the smaller ones
and their pursuer, waiting to see them safely over ere hastening her
own steps, on hearing those friendly words paused and looked back.

Some distance away, under the apple trees on the grassy terrace, stood
a little girl dressed all in white; a wreath of green ivy-vines crowded
her glossy curls which fell to her waist and framed her thin face; one
tiny hand was raised in a beckoning gesture and the other was placed
firmly on the head of the dog.

Leading him, she approached the girl who waited in mute surprise.

"Do tell them not to go.  They needn't be afraid of Prince now!"

"She says not to be afraid," hallooed the largest girl, whereupon the
fugitives came back and seated themselves upon the wall overlooking the
scene.

The girl with the dog had come forward.  She stood looking half shyly,
but with evident good-will, from the little maids on the wall to their
friend who had turned after recalling the others, and came back a few
steps to meet her.

"What are their names?" inquired the stranger.

"This is Ivy Bonner," the other said in a formal tone, pointing to her
thinner companion, who swung her feet on the outside of the wall and,
though she sat only half-facing them, seemed to see everything that
went on.  "And this is my sister Nettie," she continued, indicating the
chubby, flaxen-haired party whose ruddy cheeks and great staring blue
eyes reminded one of an over-grown doll-baby.

As each name was pronounced its owner gave a ceremonious little bow
such as is always used in make-believe introductions, and the newcomer
bowed gravely to each in acknowledgment.  Then she turned again to the
largest girl.

"And yours?"

"I am Laura--Laura Lee."

"What's hers?" called Ivy, who felt that there was something lacking in
the ceremony.

"Oh, my name's Alene Dawson," was the answer, and then, turning to
Laura, she added with a somewhat rueful laugh, "but Uncle sometimes
calls me Peggy-Alone."

"Why does he call you such a funny name?"

"Why, you see I'm so much by myself, now that mother and father went
away and left me here with Uncle Fred.  I get lonesome all by myself!"

"I should think you would!" cried Laura compassionately.

"Let's sit down," suggested Alene.  They did so, side by side, on the
grass, while Prince reclined lazily beside them.

"Do you live in the Big House?" inquired Laura, glancing toward a
building which stood far up on the level ground overlooking the
terraced hill; a substantial house whose gray stone walls and square
tower were partly hid with vines.  It was the most pretentious
habitation in the town and occupied the most beautiful site.  Laura and
her friends regarded it somewhat as a fairy palace, around which they
wove many fanciful romances.

"I'm a-visiting there now but when Uncle goes down town and the maids
are all at work I don't know what to do with myself; and when I saw you
all here among the trees I just hurried down, I was so glad to see a
crowd of girls, but naughty Prince ran ahead and scared you away!  What
were you playing?"

"We weren't playing; we were just picking apples."

Alene looked horrified.

"You see, Mr. Dawson allows us to come in and take all we want,"
explained Laura hurriedly, while a shrill voice from the wall cried:

"We weren't _stealing_!"

"I never thought that!"

"Well, she looked as if she did," commented Ivy.

"I looked surprised because--well--to think you would eat such green
apples."

This statement brought forth a ripple of amusement from the two critics
and Alene with reddened cheeks turned to the girl at her side.

"Well, they are dangerous, aren't they?"

"Don't mind those kids, they giggle at 'most anything.  You see we are
used to eating them and they are not injurious if you eat 'em with
salt," explained Laura, though not very clearly.

"She's to take the kids and the apples with a little salt!" cried Ivy.

"Just try one!"

Alene sank her teeth rather gingerly into the rounded green cheek of
the proffered apple.

"It's rather sour!" she said, trying to repress a grimace but unable to
keep the tears from her eyes.

Laura took from her apron pocket a tiny glass saltcellar and shook some
of its contents lightly over the next bite which Alene heroically
swallowed.

"It's not so very bad," she murmured.  So intent was she on accepting
Laura's intended kindness graciously that she envied the ease with
which Ivy and Nettie disposed of the apples, biting off great mouthfuls
and chewing them, core and all, with evident enjoyment.

Laura forgot to eat any herself, being content to watch Alene's
performance and never dreaming what a task it was for her.

"Say, Laura!" came a voice in a loud, hissing tone intended for a
whisper; "she's got lace on her petticoat."

"And silk stockings and slippers!"

"Hush--'tisn't polite to whisper before comp'ny," admonished Laura.

"I don't mind the little thing," said Alene in a confidential aside to
Laura, regardless of the fact that the "little thing" was nearly as
large as herself.

"But she acts years and years older," was Laura's inward comment.  "I
guess she's used to 'sociating with grown folks."

"I don't like to wear lace-trimmed things, either," continued Alene.

"Why, I think they're lovely," said Laura, tenderly fingering one of
the flounces which billowed like waves against her own blue print.

"But you don't have to wear them and be 'called down' by your governess
every minute for fear they'll get torn or dirty!"

"Have you a governess?" inquired Laura in a tone of awe.

"Yes, but she took sick just after mother went away and had to go to
the hospital.  You see mother expected her to come here and take care
of me.  An unknown something steps between them--Nature does not
speak--they are separated forever. The first impulse is an endeavor
to approach; Marfa is the first to make a movement to recede.
Demetrius observes it, and remains for a moment paralyzed. Significant
silence.

DEMETRIUS.

Does thy heart say nothing? Dost thou not recognize thy blood in me?

MARFA is silent.

DEMETRIUS. The voice of nature is holy and free; I will neither
constrain nor belie it.

Had thy heart spoken at the first glance then had mine answered it;
thou shouldst have found a pious, loving son in me.

The claim of duty would have concurred with inclination and heartfelt
affection.

But if thou dost not feel as a mother for me, then, think as a princess,
command thyself as a queen!

Fate unexpectedly gave me to thee as a son; accept me as a gift of
heaven. Though even I were not thy son, which I now appear to be,
still I rob thy son of nothing.

I stripped it from thy foe.

Thee and thy blood have I avenged; I have delivered thee from the
grave in which thou went entombed alive, and led thee back into the
royal seat.

That thy destiny is linked with mine thou knowest.

With me thou standest, and with me must fall.

All the people's eyes are upon us.

I hate deception, and what I do not feel I may not show; but I do really
feel a reverence for thee, and this feeling, which bends my knee
before thee, comes from my heart.

[Dumb show of MARFA, to indicate her internal emotion.

DEMETRIUS. Make thy resolve! Let that which nature will not prompt be
the free act of thy will!

I ask no hypocrisy--no falsehood, from thee; I ask genuine feelings.
Do not seem to be my mother, but be so.

Throw the past from thee--grasp the present with thy whole heart!

If I am not thy son yet I am the Czar--I have power and success
upon my side.

He who lies in his grave is dust; he has no heart to love thee, no eye
to smile upon thee. Turn to the living.

[MARFA bursts into tears.

DEMETRIUS. Oh, these golden drops are welcome to me.

Let them flow!

Show thyself thus to the people!

[At a signal from DEMETRIUS the tent is thrown open, and the assembled
Russians become spectators of this scene.

Entrance of Demetrius into Moscow. Great splendor, but of a military
kind.

Poles and Cossacks compose the procession. Gloom and terror mingle with
the demonstrations of joy. Distrust and misfortune surround the
whole.

Romanow, who came to the army too late, has returned to Moscow to
protect Feodor and Axinia."Yes, Prince, I know she's hiding somewhere, to jump out and scare her
poor old Uncle and set his nerves all a-tremble!  It is not at all certain
that for such a Bill, even though it be abhorred by the electorate of
the United Kingdom, the House of Lords will be practically able
to secure the delay and elaborate discussion to which Mr."I hope she isn't sick," he soliloquized, beginning to feel uneasy.
"She's getting pale and listless.  The poor little thing must be lonely
here all day with no one but the servants.  I wish she knew some
children to play with!  Confounded luck for the governess to fall sick
and leave me as a sort of head nurse!"  His grumbling anxious thoughts
ended in an abrupt exclamation.

"Hello, there!"

Through the open door of the library he saw a little white-robed maid,
seated in a great leather revolving chair, with her eyes fixed upon an
object on the table beside her.  If she noticed the young man's
entrance or heard his voice she gave no sign, nor did she pay any
attention to Prince, who led the way into the room, and strove with a
great show of canine solicitude, in merry barks and gambols, to attract
his young mistress' attention.

"Alene!" her Uncle said sharply, but the silence remained unbroken.

Half alarmed, he came forward and shook her by the shoulder.

"For heaven's sake, child, is anything the matter?"

Still she made no reply; she kept gazing, gazing in one direction as
though fascinated.

Following her glance, he saw the fragments of a fancy Mexican
tobacco-jar, which he had shown to her only the day before.

"Alene, I'm ashamed of you!" he cried in an angry tone.  "Has the
breaking of this jar brought you to such a state as this?  Why, anyone
would think--I'd swear it was the truth myself were anyone else in
question--yes, they would think me an ogre who ate little girls who
chanced to break something!"  Turning away, he paced the floor with
rapid steps backward and forward.  The longer he walked, the faster he
went, and higher the angry red glowed in his cheeks.

For a time Alene kept her unaccountable position.  Presently her eyes
strayed sidewise toward her agitated companion, who, intent on his own
angry mutterings, was unaware of her inspection.  The gleam of mirth
that overspread her countenance was quickly banished; she rose and
stood beside her chair and then crossed the floor to his side.

A little hand stole into his, a pair of blue eyes gazed contritely
upward.

"Oh, Uncle, you said it was a present and I felt so badly!  You aren't
angry?"

"Ain't I?  Do I look as if I'd beat a child?"

Suddenly his angry mood passed away, and he threw himself into a chair,
in a paroxysm of laughter.

"Oh, Polly-Wog, what shall I do to make you pay up for this?"

"The jar?  Did it cost so awfully much?"

"The jar you gave me when I came in, I thought you were in a trance!  I
had a wild notion to lose no time in bringing the doctor!"

She glanced ruefully at the broken vase.

"I was just wondering if it could be pieced together again--"

"Before the ogre got back?"

Alene perched herself on the arm of his chair with one arm around his
shoulders.

"You're more like a fairy godmother--father, I mean."

"How did the terrible accident occur?"

"I picked it up to admire it and my hand got sort o' dizzy and let it
fall."

"And you didn't think of running away and pretending you knew nothing
about it, or blaming it on the maid?"

"Now, Uncle Fred--as if I'd be so dishonorable!"

"Well, I might, if I had such an ogre for an uncle as yours appears to
be!  I shouldn't fancy being ground to sausages!"

"Like Andy Daly's pig was, I guess!  I must tell you about him, but
there's something else to ask you first--something very important!
Since you're the good fairy, you ought to grant me three wishes but
I'll let you off with one."

"I'll not insist on granting the three until I hear Number One--Here
goes!  One, two, three--"

"Can I--may I--join the Happy-Go-Luckys?" implored Alene in an
impressive voice, with clasped hands.

"The Happy-Go-Luckys!  You're sure you don't mean the Ku Klux Klan?
Hark, there's Kizzie coming to announce dinner.  Come along and you can
tell me all about it while we eat."

She took his arm with a mock fine-lady air, and walked beside him with
mincing steps across the hall to the dining-room.

It was a square apartment with windows opening upon a green vista of
gardens, now shut away by latticed blinds, through which the fresh
spring air found way.

The bay window was filled with immense potted palms; another window led
to a balcony where baskets with myrtle and other vines hung round like
a heavy green curtain.  The room was finished in light colored
woodwork.  A square rug in a pattern of tiny green and white tiles
partly covered the polished floor; in the center stood a cosy round
table, whose snowy napery and old silver and china were lit by a bronze
lamp with an ornamental shade that resembled a gorgeous peony.

Seated opposite her Uncle, Alene, in her eagerness to relate her
afternoon's adventure, almost forgot to touch the tempting dishes which
Kizzie, the maid, served so deftly.

Her usually pale cheeks glowed and her eyes beamed brightly while she
told of her new friends and the club.

Mr. Dawson listened with flattering attention.

"You may, you shall, you must, join the Happy-Go-Luckys!  As a society
for the prevention of loneliness to Peggy-Alone or any other forlorn
little girl, it strikes me as a good thing," he declared.

"Oh, Uncle, you're a dear old thing!"

"An article of _virtu_ as it were.  Be careful how you handle me!"

Alene gave him a reproachful look.

"There, don't start that deadly stare again!  I'm not insinuating
anything!"

His air of alarm amused Alene.  She laughed merrily.  Her joy over his
permission to join the Happy-Go-Luckys banished from her Uncle's mind
any doubts he may have had of her mother's approval.  However, he knew
something of Alene's new friends, being personally acquainted with Mr.
Lee, whose work as a riverman allowed him little time at home, while
Mrs. Bonner was a widow who kept a small boarding house; both families,
though poor, were highly respectable.

"Since I'm left in charge of Alene, I'll use my own judgment, which
tells me that it's the very thing for her.  She looks improved already
and I'll not let any snobbish question deprive her of happiness."
Which settled the matter there and then for all concerned.

      *      *      *      *      *      *

"What's the matter now, Alene, that you pucker your brows over that
ponderous tome?"

It was after supper, and Uncle Fred, seated in an easy chair beside the
reading table in the library, was lazily puffing a pipe.

A stand near by held a large dictionary over whose pages Alene's head
was bent.

Glancing up with a puzzled expression, she said: "I don't quite
understand; this book says it means 'plain,' and I'm sure lots of
children are quite ugly long before they are that age, and I don't
think the girls are plain--Laura has lovely eyes and I never heard I
was.  Am I ugly, Uncle?"

"Well, one wouldn't pick you out in a crowd when all the lights were
out, for a fright--"

"Oh, Uncle Fred, do be sober a minute!"

"Alene, I'm ashamed of you to hint that your guardian is ever anything
else!"

"I mean grave!"

"A 'most potent, reverend and grave' old fellow am I!"

"Why, sometimes, Uncle Fred, you act as if you weren't any more than
nine," said Alene, returning to the book with an air of tolerant
resignation that amused the young man.  He crossed to her side.

"Tell me what you are hunting; perhaps I can help you."

Alene ignored his air of exaggerated solemnity.

"You see, Laura said one must be twelve years old to be legible--to the
Club, you know."

"Then if I'm not too old, I'm old enough to belong!  But if I were you,
I'd quit the L's and try something else very like it, with an E
before," suggested Uncle Fred.

"Eligible, of course--how stupid of me!"

On the way upstairs that night Alene paused and gave way to a fit of
laughter.

"What's the fun now?" called Uncle Fred from his cosy position by the
table.

"It seems so funny to think that I," here came a series of mirthful
sounds, "to think that you would think that I was afraid of you."

Uncle Fred's chair was overturned by his energetic uprising in pursuit
of the little tease, who heeded the warning and was safely out of sight
on the landing, with one parting giggle as the door of her room was
shut with a resounding clap.


CHAPTER III

GUMDROPS

"Not a red gum drop was cast!" cried Laura as she jumped lightly from
the garden wall and joined Alene, who for some time had been pacing the
orchard impatiently with Prince jumping beside her.

Alene's look of pleased anticipation changed to dismay.

"I'm so sorry!"

"What for?"

"Why, Uncle Fred would have given me money to buy some, if I knew you
wanted them!"

Laura's laugh rang out merrily.

"Why, Alene, it's _votes_!  We don't buy them like 'lectioneers do--we
get enough to give each member one red and one white gumdrop.  Those
who are for a candidate put in a white and those against her a red!"

Alene danced with joy.

"Then I'm elected!"

"You are now a member of the Happy-Go-Luckys and your name is duly
inscribed on the books!" said Laura, in her judicial tone.

"And they all put in the white drops!  How lovely of them!"

"Yes, all but Ivy; she put hers in her mouth to taste it, and before
she knew, it was gone!"

"Dear me, and what did she do then?"

"She whispered it to me at the last minute, just after I got out the
little mustard box where we cast our votes, and so I allowed her to put
in a button instead.  After it was over, some of us wanted to save the
gumdrops for the first meeting you attended, but those greedy
youngsters had devoured 'em all but two which I managed to keep."

Laura pressed into Alene's hand a small tinsel-paper package.

"You must eat half of each," said Alene, wisely surmising that it was
Laura's own portion that had been saved, and resolving to leave for
another day the blue ribbon-tied box of candy Uncle Fred had given her
that morning, which she had just placed in the grass at the foot of a
tree, awaiting Laura's arrival.

Seated on the green beneath the trees, they ate the gumdrops, whose
scarcity perhaps made them seem the more delicious, and exchanged
confidences concerning themselves and the Happy-Go-Luckys.

Alene, who was an only child, envied Laura's claim to two small sisters
and a baby brother and one brother older than herself.

"Ivy is the only girl in the Bonner family."

"Like me!"

They, curiously enough, gave each other away quite freely, and
complained of each other to the Commandant.

But, as one of our men said to me in excuse for the bad behaviour
of the Belgians, "They was never taught any better.

They hadn't the training we've had."
Another unwritten chapter, which I desire particularly to write, is a
chapter on Newlands, the history of the house which I love only less
than I love Sutton Court,--the house which I and my wife built,
if not with our own hands, at any rate with our own heads,--the
house in which my children were born, and two of my grandchildren,--the
house from which my daughter was married,--the house which I have
seen grow like a tree out of the ground,--finally, a house sanctified
by the sufferings of brave men, who had fought for a great cause
and laid us all under an obligation never to be expressed in words.

Newlands, with its keen, almost mountain, air, its views, its
woodlands, its yews, its groves of ash, and oak, and thorn, its
green paths winding through the greyer and deeper-toned gorse,
heather, and bracken, is a thing to live for.

If one can be grateful, as certainly one can, to things inanimate, I
am grateful for the health and strength which Newlands has given me.

But this must be told, if I ever write it, in the history of the
house.
Still, I regret not to have done more honour to Newlands here, as
I regret not to have been able to make my salute to the wounded in
better form.

Another chapter "arising out of" Newlands, which I should like to
have written, would have been on my work as Chief of the Surrey Guides.
My readers need not be afraid of some burst of amateur militarism. I
should have treated the Surrey Guides simply as a kind of "new
model" version of Cobbett's Rural Rides.

It was my duty to explore all the paths and roads of the county, and
delightful work it was.

My experiences must certainly be put on record somewhere and sometime,
for, alas! the horse is dying out and with him will die the bridle-paths
and the pack-roads.
The night-riding part of my Surrey Guide work was to me particularly
attractive.

No one who has not tried night-riding across country will realise how
fascinating it is and, comparatively speaking, how easy.
Provided you ride a pony, instead of a huge, long-legged, heavy-
weighted, badly-balanced horse, there is neither danger nor
difficulty.

I will not say that the secret of night-riding is to give yourself
up to your horse, for your horse may be as big a blunderer as you,
and become a mixture of stupidity and anxiety. What I advise is,
give yourself up to your sub-consciousness, if you can, and this will
lead you through the darkest places and the roughest roads in ample
security.

Another chapter which I believed I was going to write in this book was
to be devoted to inscriptions.

I have always loved the art of the epigraphists, and I wanted to
quote some examples, including (1) an inscription for a sun-dial,
(2) an inscription for a memorial to Lord Halifax, the trimmer, the
greatest of Whig statesmen, (3) another to William Pitt, and (4)
an inscription to the Quakers who fought and died in the War,--men
whose noble combination of patriotism and self- abnegation impressed
me profoundly.

Their ashes in a peaceful urn shall rest, Their names a great example
stand to show How strangely high endeavour may be blest When Piety
and Valour jointly go.

Another Surrey chapter might have dealt with my activities as Sheriff
and my conceptions of that office.

Still another chapter ought to have centred in my personal life at Newlands.
It was at Newlands that my health broke down and I saw, or thought I
saw, as did my doctors, the advance of the penumbra, the shadow of eclipse
which was to engulf my life. I wanted very much, when I began this
book, to put on record a description of how utterly different than is
commonly supposed are the feelings of the occupant of the condemned
cell.

I should also like to have recorded certain reflections upon how a
serious illness becomes a kind of work of art, a drama or film in
real life, in which the patient, the doctors, the nurses, the
friends, and the relations all play their appropriate parts, and
contribute each in his order to the central theme.

But this and "The Adventure of Dying," a theme which has never yet
been adequately treated, but ought some day to be, must await not, of
course, the actual coming of the Gondolier, for that is too late, but
that interval between life and death which the Emperor Diocletian
boasted that he had created for himself.

Another unwritten chapter on a subject which may sound dull, but
which might very well have been one of the best, was to be called
"The Consolations of the Classics."

Ivy glanced up toward the tower of the Big House that rose almost as
high as a church spire from the top of the hill.

"I do believe one could see behind the hills over there in the west, to
the other side of the world from those windows," she exclaimed.

"Well, you and Laura come up this evening and--"

"Won't your folks object?"

"There's no folks there but Uncle Fred and he's no objector.  Promise
to come and see how far we can see!"

"'Over the hills and far away.'"

"Yes, we promise," cried Laura.


CHAPTER IV

THE GARDEN OF GOOD INTENTIONS

"Oh, Lol, I could hardly keep my face straight!  To think we were
actually invited up to the Big House really and truly, and were right
there where we had so often pretended to live, you as Countess Terilla
and I the Lady Clare-Come-to-See; I could hardly make this face of mine
behave."

"Your eyes just shook inside; little, shining imps danced in them,
wanting to come out.  Yes, I saw them and--"

"And I was so glad of the chance to giggle out loud when you said
something that wasn't at all funny but gave us a chance to pretend it
was.  I could have screamed!"

"After all, it wasn't near so fine as our palace, with its red room and
its green room and its blue room with everything to match."

"But that library was beautiful.  You couldn't help but see lovely
things if you were writing there!"

"Alene is such a dear little thing!  She never gave a thought to her
home being so much finer than ours; she only thought of giving us a
good time!" said Laura.

"She's no snob!  She thinks people are what they are in themselves!"

"And thoughts are the most precious things--that's the reason she
wanted to give you the pleasure of seeing His Gorgeous Lordship from
the tower window!"

For a moment Ivy was silent; her gaze was far away; again she was
looking from that little narrow window so close to the clouds.

"Do you know, Lol, if I owned the Big House I'd live in the tower when
I wasn't in the library.  But it wasn't me in particular, Lol, that
Alene wanted.  To her I'm only a lesser planet when you're near--it's
hearts that count!"

"Yes, she's so good-hearted that you forget her pretty clothes and rich
relations, and come to lock on her as just a little girl like the
others!"  Ivy smiled indulgently as Laura applied her remarks to Alene,
and the unconscious Laura continued, "At first when I proposed that she
should join the Happy-Go-Luckys, it was just because she looked so
lonely with only the dog to play with, in that great house with its
acres of grounds; and when she said her Uncle called her 'Peggy-Alone',
I could see the tears back of her smile and it came to me, 'what if
Nettie or Lois were to be left all alone?'  They're so used to tagging
after me all their lives, you know, and so I just asked her in, though
I was dreadfully afraid you would all be against it."

"And so we were!  Just because we knew she was rich and might be in the
way when we wanted some fun, or would look down on us because we're
poor.  That," glancing at her crutches, "makes some people mild and
sweet-tempered, they say, but it only makes me hatefuller and selfisher
every day!  Lol, I'm going to tell you something so you'll see what a
selfish thing I am.  I swallowed that gumdrop on purpose so I wouldn't
have to vote!  I didn't have the courage to vote against her because
you were so eager to have her join."

"And then you got sorry as you always do."

"No, don't give me too much credit!  I got ashamed when I compared my
conduct with others; but you were unselfish--you didn't stop to
consider the disadvantages to yourself.  You only thought of her."

While Laura, with reddened cheeks, disclaimed this with as much
earnestness as if taxed with a crime, Ivy went on unheeding:

"I thought it over this morning when I took out my Sunset Book, and
instead of writing down what we saw from the tower window--which no one
_could_ describe, no painter nor poet that ever lived, glimpses of
glory that God lets shine down, sometimes, when the Pearly Gate is
opened just a narrow chink (to let some little white angel in perhaps)
and the clouds reflect it, just as the river does the trees, you
know--well, I wrote this instead!"

Laura took the precious book and perused it seriously.

"May I keep it and read it to Alene?  I know she'd enjoy it!"

Ivy demurred, but at last consented and on Laura's next meeting with
Alene she brought forth a green paper-covered copy-book and, with a few
preliminary remarks, proceeded to read:

"'Once upon a time--'"

"It begins all right, anyway," interrupted Alene, settling herself
comfortably against a tree, and half closing her eyes, as if to hear
the better.

"'Once upon a time,'" Laura's voice went on, "'I wandered far away
until I came to a narrow path, on one side of which was a beautiful
garden blooming with flowers and fruit, with gay birds skimming through
the air, while on the other side the grass and flowers lay withered,
the trees leaned over, leafless and dead, and perched in their branches
were mute, broken-winged birds.  I went on until I came to the Witch of
the Woods, who stood leaning on her hazel staff, with her red cloak
wrapped around her, and her long, silvery hair falling, tangled, en her
shoulders.

"'What ails the little maiden that she looks so puzzled?  Perhaps I can
smooth the wrinkles from her brow!' she said in a harsh, cracked voice.

"'Oh, wise woman!' I cried, for I felt so badly about what I had seen
that I never thought of being afraid--'please tell me the mystery of
the blighted garden!'

"'My child, you have come through the Garden of Good Intentions--on one
side are those which never came to blossom but died in the bud, whilst
on the other are those which sprouted and grew and bloomed in beauty
year after year, evergreen--'

"'And the voiceless birds?'

"'The mute birds of the broken wings are kind deeds, thought of, but
left undone, while those performed multiply and fly, gay singing-birds,
making many hearts glad!'"

The reader's voice ceased; the book fell in her lap; a silence
followed; Prince lay blinking in the sunshine; the birds and insects
gave no token of their presence--even the leaves of the trees hung
motionless.

The girls, sitting in the shade side by side, vaguely realized the
calm; the heat gave them only a sense of well-being; their thoughts
were at first too shadowy for words.

Alene was thinking of Ivy's story.  It reminded her of the text she had
heard the previous Sunday in the little vine-covered church on the
crest of the hill; "Be ye kind one to another, merciful, forgiving one
another even as God hath forgiven you in Christ."  She wished that she
too might go through the Garden of Good Intentions whilst flowers
sprang up and birds sang sweetly round about her.  But what could she
do, what deed of kindness perform, however small, that might perhaps
bloom as a wild flower by the wayside to gladden the passer-by?

She gave a start when with a sudden bark Prince leaped up and ran to
chase some stray chickens; a breeze blew up till every leaf and blade
of grass quivered with joy; a bird twittered softly and was answered by
his mate and presently from each bush and tree came the voices of its
lodgers in a song of praise.

Then Laura spoke, showing that her thoughts had divined Alene's in a
sympathetic wave.

"Now, what do you think, Alene, of a 'Kind Deeds' article in the
Happy-Go-Luckys' constitution, pledging each member to the sending out
of little birds with strong wings that can fly?"

"And planting seeds to spring up in fragrant flowers?  Oh, Laura!"
cried Alene, "that would be beautiful!"


CHAPTER V

A DISGUSTED POET

When Laura rashly undertook the rôle of stage manager, or to say more
truly, when the position devolved upon her as a matter of course,
because she was the president of the Happy-Go-Luckys, she accepted the
honor and the duties in blithe confidence, never dreaming of
difficulties.

For a time everything went smoothly, and that lively sympathy for
others in like position which marked her after years would never,
perhaps, have been called forth was it not for her discovery one day in
the attic of an old reader which contained something she thought could
be used as a dialogue in the coming exhibition.

It was a poem in which each of four children expresses a cherished
ambition to the mother, who comments on the wish with approval or
censure.

The piece required two boys, and Laura's brother Mat and his chum, Hugh
Bonner, were called upon, and after some grumbling on their part and as
much coaxing on the part of the girls they "came in to help the
Happy-Go-Luckys out," as they expressed it.

They were assigned their characters; Laura took the rôle of mother,
giving the girls' parts to Alene and Ivy.

  "I ask for beauty, for an eye
  Bright as the stars in yonder sky;
  For tresses on the air to fling
  And put to shame the raven's wing;
  Cheeks where the lily and the rose
  Are blended in a sweet repose;
  For pearly teeth and coral lip,
  Tempting the honey bee to sip,
  And for a fairy foot as light
  As is a young gazelle's in flight,
  And then a small, white, tapering hand--
  I'd reign, a beauty, in the land!"


This was Alene's verse, but Ivy read it over and over instead of her
own, and the oftener she read, the more discontented she grew.

"Why should Alene wish for 'a fairy foot, as light as is the young
gazelle's in flight' when she has one already--two of 'em for that
matter?" she thought.  "The other wish is fine, I know--'a noble gift,'
the mother says, but I don't care, I can't do justice to it as I could
to the other!  Of course, I don't care much for the 'eye, bright as the
stars,' and all that rubbish, but I can imagine being light and gay and
dancing!"

Although Ivy learned her part she went through it at rehearsal in such
a spiritless way that Laura could not have failed to remark it if she
were not occupied with so many other things.

When Alene's turn came and she stepped forward rather timidly to
recite, Ivy listened eagerly to her rendition.  It proved to be
letter-perfect but expressionless.  Ivy was justified in thinking that
she herself could have done much better.

"She says it just in the way you might wish for a piece of plum cake or
another gum-drop," she mused bitterly.

No one suspected her dissatisfaction except Hugh, who someway
understood all the moods of the frail little sister whom he worshiped.

In her sick spells, dating from a fall five years before, no one could
move her so tenderly, nor place her in so comfortable a position as
this sturdy lad of fifteen.

He resented Ivy's affliction even more than she did herself.

"I don't see why it couldn't have been one of us big lubbers of boys
instead of her," he grumbled to his mother.  "She seems to be made to
run and dance and play--almost to fly like a bird."

"It's the Lord's will," returned Mrs. Bonner with a sigh.

"Umph!  I don't know!  When doctors fail to cure a disease, it seems
pesky mean to blame it on the Lord!  If we were only rich enough, I bet
we could find some clever doctor who could make her O.K.!  Why couldn't
it have been a rich girl instead of her?"

"Oh, Hugh!  That is wrong!  Why need it be any poor little creature?"
said the mother, who thought to herself that in this case money would
indeed be a desirable thing; she never envied the rich except when she
thought of Ivy.

But the boy, with all youth's revolt, hated the seeming injustice and
his resentment often extended to those whose wealth made the difference
so marked.

When Ivy, trying to conceal her own disapproval, spoke of Alene's
joining the Happy-Go-Luckys, Hugh was opposed to it.

"I know just how it will be, and you girls are makin' a big guess when
you take her in," he had warned.

"But she seemed so lonely, and Laura wanted it so much--"

"So did that city chap who used to go with us boys.  He looked all
right, but my, nothin' suited him.  He laughed at our dug-bait, and
fishin' rods, and our old-fashioned skiff and things, and talked about
his pa's yacht and motor-cars and his ma's diamonds, until we were sick
of 'em all!"

"But Alene is different," replied Ivy, and her brother said no more but
wore a look of "just wait and you'll find out that I told you so," that
was exasperating.

As time passed and he heard nothing but praises of Alene, and saw for
himself her unassuming manners and her evident good will, he was
obliged to confess that she was a good little thing in spite of her
citified dress and her haughty relations; but in this dialogue affair
he thought it too bad that the fortunate little maid, who had
everything else, should stand in Ivy's way.

"I'll give a hint to Laura," he suggested.

"Oh, no, no, Hugh!  Don't say a word to anyone!  Not for the world!"

"After all, your part is fine.  The other is silly stuff--sounds like
some empty-headed thing!"

"Oh, Hugh, it's beautiful!  Anyway, I could just enter into part of it!
I'm tired of being tied to crutches and people thinkin', because of
them, one never even wants any foolishness and fun, like other girls!"

Hugh looked troubled.

"It's a wonder Laura didn't think you might--"

"Laura didn't think anything about it!  She just saw it was about a
poet, and so the very thing for me!"

"Maybe Alene would--"

"Yes, I know she'd give it up if she knew I wanted it!  She's an
unselfish little thing.  She took it because it was all that was left
when Laura disposed of the 'soulful poet' part," Ivy said.  Then after
a silence, "I wonder why bad health makes me cranky and selfish and
envious, instead of patient and meek, like the little girls in story
books!"

Hugh smiled.  He couldn't imagine his sprightly sister in the story
book rôle of uncomplaining heroine, and he wouldn't wish to have her
so, not for the world.  Ivy was Ivy with all her faults; he wouldn't
wish to have her otherwise except a happier Ivy, with the blessing of
health and strength, flitting gaily through life, having part in the
work and the play of the world.


CHAPTER VI

A SCORNFUL BEAUTY

Ivy could not have complained of Alene's want of animation had she
followed her home after rehearsal one afternoon a few days later.

She entered the library, threw her hat on a chair and herself upon a
snug little sofa that stood invitingly in the embrasure of a window,
which, by drawing the crimson curtains, could be shut off from the rest
of the room, leaving a cosy den--her favorite place for dreaming and
reading, where her eyes, straying from her book, rested on an
ever-varying picture of sky and river, which the window framed.

To-day, not waiting to shut herself away, and paying no attention to
the smiling landscape, she opened a sheet of foolscap paper that she
had held clasped tightly in her hand, and gravely perused the lines of
Ivy's angular writing which covered it.  A similar sheet had been given
to the other actors in the dialogue so that each might learn his part
at leisure.

"'I ask for beauty--' yes, you little numskull, ask for it,--that's all
people think you're good for!  Laura, of course, never thought of it
that way but others will!  And I don't wish for it, I'd rather be a
poet any day!

  'I ask the poet's gift, the lyre,
  With skillful hand to sweep each wire,
  I'd pour my burning thoughts in song,
  In lays deep, passionate and strong,
  Till heart should thrill at every word
  As mind is thrilled at song of bird!
  Oh, I would die and leave some trace
  That earth had been my dwelling place,
  Would live in hearts forevermore
  When this frail, fitful life is o'er!
  Oh, for the gifted poet's power--
  This is my wish, be this my dower!"


Alene jumped to her feet, and standing in the window facing the room,
recited the words with a dash and a fire that brought forth a "Bravo!"
from Uncle Fred, who on his way through the hall had heard her voice
and, stopping softly at the door, witnessed her performance.

It formed a pretty picture, the little tragedienne, standing where the
crimson draperies made an effective background for her slender,
white-robed figure, with the long strands of rumpled brown hair
straying over her shoulder, and her earnest, gray eyes deepening to
black or sparkling into blue, her whole face lit with passion.

"You do your part well, Peggy," said the young man.

Alene's blushes of pleasure faded suddenly.

"But it's not my part, it's Ivy's!  Why does everyone think when you're
rich that's all you are good for or can wish for!  This is my part,"
and she pointed tragically at the detested verse.

"Ah, I see," said Uncle Fred, glancing at the lines.  "It's a pretty
thing.  'Tis a pity to have it spoiled, as I fear it will be, since you
dislike it.  "Why not suggest a change?"

"I'm afraid Laura would feel hurt; besides it is more suitable to Ivy
as she is a poet!"

"The very reason she may wish for something else!"

"Anyway, she said the verse in a sing-song style that just spoiled it!"
declared Alene.

"Poor stage manager!  It's almost as bad as being the leader of a
choir!  Pity Laura's not a mind reader!  But why not be perfectly
honest with her, and tell her how you feel about it; perhaps Ivy has no
preference in the matter."

Alene thought that was out of the question; besides it would be selfish
to want Ivy's part, just because she herself preferred it; poor Ivy,
who, though so clever, was never quite happy.

"Then act on the Golden Rule; but don't spoil it by murdering the
dialogue in revenge," said Uncle Fred.  To which Alene assented, though
she declared it was very hard.

"Since Laura's stars refuse to shine, why doesn't she call on me?  Now,
I rather fancy the part," said the young man; and taking the paper with
an air of solemnity that the twinkling of his eyes belied, he proceeded
to read the verse with an exaggerated air, emphasizing the wrong words
and using gestures which seemed so funny to Alene that she threw
herself on the rug and screamed with laughter.  The noise attracted
Mrs. Major and Kizzie, who reached the door in time to witness the
bewildering wind-up, as the actor, dwelling softly on the words,

  "And for a fairy foot as light
  As is the young gazelle's in flight."

gave his right foot an upward movement bringing his toe in contact with
the chandelier, and then executed a backward kicking act I am sure no
gazelle, old or young, would wish to emulate.


CHAPTER VII

THEATRICALS

The rehearsals went on.  Alene and Ivy recited their parts in the
dialogue in the same listless way, secretly criticising each other's
rendition, but Laura, busy in directing and arranging so many things,
failed to notice the discontent of those two important members of the
Company.

It was only their love of the manager that kept them silent, and even
then it was a hard task, considering Alene's ingenuousness and Ivy's
impulsiveness, both traits alike foes to concealment.

At the last meeting before the great event, everything seemed to go
wrong; the little ones forgot their lines or refused to obey the stage
manager, declaring she was cranky, and threatening to throw up their
parts and go out on the hillside to play; the boys were in a
mischievous mood and teased their sisters unmercifully; Laura was on
the point of tears, which fact Alene discovered by her unusual rigidity
of countenance.

Laura crying would be something terrible!  Alene had seen the others
whimper and complain.  She had been present when Ivy, in her sudden
fierce passions of anger, would attack the little ones viciously with
her crutches, unless they had previously stolen them away; in which
event she would gnash her teeth, and stamp her feet, in powerless rage,
and only Laura could bring peace by banishing her tormentors.  But no
matter what happened, Laura seemed a rock upon which to lean, and if,
in adjusting a grievance, she sometimes failed to use tact, and the
remedy proved worse than the disease, they knew in their hearts she was
acting in good faith, trying to do what was right.

Therefore it behooved Alene upon this occasion to redouble her efforts
to be helpful and cheering.

She won over the babies by promising them each a beautiful doll out of
the trunkful she had at home; whereupon the big boys promised to be
good if she would give them one also, but Alene took their chaffing
good-naturedly and things began to proceed more smoothly.

The last thing on the program, "The Wishes," was called.

Laura, strange to say, for the first time found fault.

"Oh, Ivy, _do_ put a little animation into it!  One would think you
were delivering a funeral oration," she cried testily.

Ivy's nerves, overwrought by the preceding irritations, gave way:

"Well, no wonder, for I hate it!"

"Hate that?  Why, it's the finest thing in the whole piece; even the
mother says 'a noble gift,' while she chides Alene for wanting mere
beauty!"

Ivy's thin cheeks were like crimson roses.  "I'd rather be a dancing
beauty than a broken-winged robin!" she declared defiantly.

"And I'd rather be a poet than go mincing through the world with just a
pretty face!" exclaimed Alene.

"Oh, Alene, would you really like my part?" cried the astonished Ivy.
"Why didn't you say so?"

"Why, because I thought anyone would prefer it to that detestable
beauty part!  Why didn't you speak out?"

Now it would have taken quite a long explanation, each having, as we
know, several reasons for not having spoken, so they only looked at
each other and laughed.

Laura glanced from one speaker to the other, her look of surprise
changing to compunction.

"Oh, girls, why didn't I ask you which verse you preferred instead of
portioning it off as I thought you would like?" she queried ruefully.
While they sought to reassure her, Mrs. Lee entered the room, and
learning the cause of the excitement, said:

"That's just like Laura!  The other morning I heard a great uproar.  In
I came to find Laura helping to dress Lois, insisting upon putting a
certain shoe on her foot, while she cried against it.  I investigated
and found--"

"That I was bent on cramming her fat little footsie into a shoe two
sizes too small for her--I had picked up Elmer's shoe in mistake!"

Although Ivy and Alene were somewhat embarrassed when they rehearsed
the dialogue after exchanging rôles and did not render the new parts
with the power of which they were capable, the improvement was marked
and brought forth much applause, which however was not to be compared
with the hand clappings received the night of the performance--but that
is another story.

Mrs. Bonner's double parlors were used, the front for the audience,
which filled the room.  All of the boarders attended, and the neighbors
came, bringing their own chairs.  The back parlor, ordinarily used as a
dining-room, was the stage, the sliding doors making a good substitute
for a curtain.

Mat had a funny speech by way of introduction; then Lois was called for
a song about lovers meeting at the garden gate, which in her baby
English she rendered, "Meet me at the Garbage Gate."  An original poem
by Laura was unexpectedly brought to light by a mischievous friend, and
read in a sing-song style by Lafe Bonner:

  "That poor old slate
  I always did hate,
  But I had to use it
  At any rate.
  One day by accident (?)
  It fell on the floor,
  It broke to pieces,
  And I saw it no more."


Fortunately the author's blushes were hidden along with herself back in
a corner of the stage.  "It's the only 'pome' I ever executed and I
felt like executing Lafe when I heard him reciting it," she explained
later.

Nettie, looking more than ever like a great waxen doll in her pink
gingham and golden curls, brought down the house by her recitation:

  "Little Bobby, come to daddy!
  Holdy up his tiny paddy,
  Did he hurt his blessed heady?
  Darling, come and get some bready,
  Don'ty cry, poor little laddie,
  Come and kiss his precious daddy."


Baby Elmer represented Bobby, and the little maid went through the
piece with appropriate gestures, unconscious of her audience and not
forgetting a word,--to the joy of her instructor, Laura, whose heart
beat nervously while she watched the performance.

Mr. Frederick Dawson and a few of his companions had come in rather
late and seats were found for them in the rear, as they refused to
allow any at the front to be vacated for them.  It was just before the
doors opened on the great dialogue where Laura was the mother, in a
neat wrapper and gray wig and spectacles, standing in the midst of an
interesting family.  The back of an easy chair served to support Ivy,
who was dressed in white, with red sash and hair ribbons.

What spirit she put in her lines, all leading up to, and centering in,
the wish for the young gazelle's light footfall, the rest being only a
prelude to that!

Then the other little white-robed girl from her seat in the big chair
rose to declare her wish.  A color that was not all excitement glowed
in her cheeks, thrilling Uncle Fred with the conviction that the
Happy-Go-Luckys by banishing loneliness had brought the blessing of
health to Alene.

It was her first appearance before the public, and the thought of it
had brought her much nervous apprehension that she might forget her
lines, falter, or even run away at the last moment.  To perform even
before the other boys and girls at rehearsal had always brought a
preliminary nerve tension which she had tried to conceal.  This,
however, was nothing compared with her dread of the great night when
she thought of facing a whole roomful of people; but now, strange to
say, all her tremors died away.  She found it less difficult to recite
before the crowd than at rehearsal; she forgot herself in the joy of
her lines.  That she recited even better, if anything, than when her
Uncle had overheard her in the library is all that need be said.

When the ensuing applause died away and the doors refused to open
again, Uncle Fred noticed the lips of a small boy seated near him
puffed out in disdain.  Stooping with a show of solicitude to learn the
cause, he heard him say to a companion:

"'A lip to tempt the honey-bee to sip'--I bet she never felt a stinger
or she wouldn't wish for such a silly thing!"

"I don't see why that Dawson girl wants the poet's gift, 'the liar!'
Do all poets tell whoppers, I wonder?" said the other boy, looking up
into Uncle Fred's face with wide, wondering eyes.


CHAPTER VIII

PICNICKING

Such a merry crowd of Happy-Go-Luckys they were as they came marching
along the country road that summer day, wearing gay caps of
tissue-paper with floating streamers, while their brothers' hats were
decorated with rosettes of the same material.

The day was a perfect one for their picnic; sudden, saucy breezes
tempered the warm atmosphere, making the paper ribbons dance merrily
around the heads of the girls.

As they came along with dancing steps and smiling faces, and lips of
laughter and song, the sight of them was enough to lighten the heart of
an onlooker and bring to his mind the shepherds and shepherdesses of
old, who surely could not have been merrier nor a whit more picturesque.

But suddenly the gay voices fell to murmurs.  A whispered command was
borne along the line even to the last straggler.  Laura's voice, low
but impressive, said, "Hats off!" and off came those gay bonnets and
the rosette-trimmed hats, and along the road the children went in
solemn silence, with stately step; for over the hill alongside the road
they saw a neat little house whose upper windows overlooked the road,
all the blinds upstairs and down were closed, and on the door swung
long bands of black crêpe.

It was this sad emblem which had curbed so suddenly the mirth of the
Happy-Go-Luckys, and made them pay respect in their own childish but
expressive way to the grief of the mourners; and it was not until the
little house had been left far behind that the awe was lifted from
their spirits, and the joy of childhood reasserted itself.

They had reached a road bordered with trees that almost met above them,
forming a long green arbor into which the sunlight stole through every
little chink, and Ivy was moving along almost forgetful of her
crutches, her eyes intent on the green loveliness of the place and the
pretty pink parasol with white lace trimmings which Alene carried, when
suddenly the latter gave a shrill scream and threw the parasol away
from her as far as she could.

Immediately the others gathered around, while she stood grimacing,
saying nothing but "Ugh!  Ugh!" to all their questions.  They were
greatly puzzled, until someone picked up the pink parasol at which its
owner pointed so tragically, to find that all the fuss was caused by
two caterpillars which had fallen from the trees.

"'Fraid cat!" said Hugh, contemptuously; "I've seen little tads of four
and five let 'em crawl up their bare arms!"

"I'm not a 'fraid cat!  But those ugly, crawly things make me feel
creepy!" Alene returned with crimsoning cheeks.

"Those ugly things, as you call them, turn into beautiful butterflies!"
returned Hugh, in a tone that to Alene sounded offensively
preacher-like.

"Well, let them wait until they are butterflies before perching on my
parasol," she retorted.

"It's just one's nerves!  They _are_ ugly things, and Alene's not used
to seeing them," said Laura.

"And they say the great Napoleon couldn't bear to touch velvet, and he
was no coward!" cried Ivy, who felt that her brother was often unjust
to Alene.

In spite of their protests, Hugh had his own opinion in the matter.
There are some boys to whom Alene's timidity would have appealed, but
he was not one of that kind.  He was the most outspoken and the least
gentle of all the boys with whom the Happy-Go-Luckys associated.  But
his downright honesty and fearlessness, his renown among the boys as an
athlete, and especially his devotion to his little sister which Laura
dilated upon, and of which new proofs were daily shown, had awakened
Alene's admiration, and made her the more resent his calling her a
coward.

"I've stumbled over my toe!" wailed little Lois, carrying the stubbed
toe and tearstained face to Laura for repairs.

Mat ran to stroke the offending stone with an exaggerated air of
sympathy.

"Naughty girl!  The poor stone was standing in the road, never moving
until you came along and gave it a kick," he said reproachfully, at
which they all laughed, and the caterpillar affair was forgotten for
the time by all except Alene, who had picked up her parasol and walked
along with an air of unconcern that gave her friends no hint of the
tears so bravely forced back.

"'Fraid cat!" her thoughts ran; "why couldn't Hugh have been polite
enough to keep from that slighting remark or at least laugh
good-naturedly with the rest, and paid no more attention to it, instead
of making so much of such a trivial affair!"

She felt at first that the day was spoiled so far as she was concerned;
but the gay chatter of the others, the new experience of tramping the
country paths, climbing fences and crossing runs, discovering new
beauties at every step, made her presently forget her chagrin.

As the day wore on, the smaller children cast wistful glances toward
the baskets, and even went so far as to peek through any little opening
to make sure that certain favorite morsels, which they had seen put in,
had not mysteriously disappeared.

"Laura, you and mother must have loaded this basket with cobblestones,"
cried Mat with a groan, leaning sideways almost to the ground.

"Cobblestones!  You take very good care not to call them that when
you're begging mother to cut her fresh pies!  I'll tell her what you
call 'em in company!"

"Well, it's funny how heavy this basket's grown in the last half hour!"

"I've noticed they always do grow heavier toward noon," commented Hugh.
"Can't we lighten 'em some way?"

"Can't we?  Just let me try!  Keep off, Nettie, or I'll eat you up--I'm
as hungry as Red Riding-hood's famous--or infamous--bear!"

"It was a wolf!" declared Nettie, in the tone of one who knew.

"So much the better to eat you up, my honey!"  Mat smacked his lips
voraciously, displaying two rows of firm white teeth, and made a dart
at the little girl.  She ran screaming to Laura, who, Ivy often
declared, was the children's real and truly Noah's ark of refuge.

Everybody was hungry and they only waited to reach a suitable place for
lunch.

"I know the very spot," said Hugh, leading the way.

"Behold a Moses to lead us out of the wilderness!" cried Mat.

"And behold the Promised Land!" Ivy screamed in delight, as her brother
set his basket among the great knotted roots of a tree that helped to
shade a stretch of green-sward which extended gradually to the river.

"This Moses remains to dine," said Hugh.

The girls spread a white cloth on the ground and proceeded to unpack
the baskets.

Although they had made frequent stops on the road, Laura feared the
walk had over-taxed Ivy's strength, and wished her to rest; but she
refused to be left out of any activity.  She it was who sat, a spirit
of prodigality, in the midst of the baskets, dealing out the good
things one by one, while Alene and Laura arranged them artistically,
piling in the center a pyramid of fruit, and placing the cakes and pies
and pickles in the most tempting proximity, not forgetting sandwiches,
and plain bread and butter.  Indeed, as Mat remarked when he came up
from the spring with a pail of cold water, "The very look of it was
enough to give an imaginative person the nightmare."

"Then don't eat any of it, Mr. Matthew," cried Ivy.

"Thank heaven, I'm not imaginative!  I think I'll try a snack of that
jelly-roll," he returned, reaching for the cake in Ivy's hand.

"I think you won't!  Why, even those greedy children haven't been
allowed a taste of anything, though it's a wonder their eyes have left
a morsel!  What are you laughing at?" she inquired, as Mat's glance
strayed beyond her.

Net waiting for an answer she turned her head to find her little
brother Claude standing at her shoulder, balancing in his out-stretched
palm a slice of brown bread from which he had just taken a huge bite,
whose buttered and jellied traces were seen on his plumped-out cheeks.
Not far away was Lois with a monster pickle.  At a distance, with backs
discreetly turned, were two other small sinners whom Ivy eyed
suspiciously, and she turned at last with a hopeless shake of her head
to Laura, whom she suspected was to be blamed.  But she was mistaken in
her surmise for Alene was the real offender.  Not being used to the
always hungry state of a half dozen small brothers and sisters, she
could not withstand the children's pathetic glances.

"You don't suppose it will spoil their appetite for dinner?" she
inquired anxiously, when the truth was disclosed.

"I haven't the faintest fear that it will," returned Ivy, in a dry tone.

"The wisdom of the innocents!  Wish I had tackled Alene instead of
you," deplored Mat.

At that moment he was hailed by Hugh:

"Come along, Mat!  We boys are going to pick some wild strawberries for
dessert.  I noticed some vines up there over the hill as we came along."

"That will be lovely; run along, little boy," said Ivy, and Mat, with a
last despairing glance at the feast, was gone, leaving her free to
resume her task.

Although there was quite a crowd, almost a dozen young people to feed,
the baskets seemed to disgorge enough for twenty.  But then they were
Happy-Go-Lucky baskets!

"Leagues and Clubs someway have a selfish sound--as though everyone
outside didn't count for anything," Ivy said one day.  "We mustn't let
ourselves get narrow that way," and they did not, for as Laura remarked
later, "When it came to picnics and good times generally, the
Happy-Go-Luckys was very 'stretchible'--it took in all the kids!"

While the girls proceeded blithely to get lunch, helped or hindered by
the younger children, loud voices were heard and presently a crowd of
ragged boys appeared on the upper road.

The girls, expecting them to go on their way, paid no attention to
them, but the lads attracted by the bounteous display of dainties, at
once gave notice of the find, and with whoops of delight came running
down the hillside and attacked the spread.

The girls were alarmed but stood their ground nobly.

"You had better go!  Hugh Bonner and the other boys will soon be here!"
said Laura warningly.

"I've heard of the redoubtable Hughie--we ain't goin' to force our
company, we just want them cakes an' things!  Come on, boys!  Hurry!"

Laura stood guard over the table and Ivy raised a crutch to strike the
foremost but both girls were swept aside.

Some of the little ones turned to Laura for protection, while the
others ran screaming in the direction of the berry-patch, and a moment
later the berry-pickers were seen on the side of the hill.

Hugh, being somewhat in advance, saw the whole engagement.

When Laura and Ivy were routed, he noticed Alene turning as if for
flight.  However, instead of running away as he had expected, she
stooped, picked up the pail of water left by Mat, and, turning back
with a sudden movement, dashed the fluid into the boys' faces.

Choked and blinded by the unexpected assault, they fell back.

The smallest boy, who had been in the rear, was the first to recover
from the sudden bath.  With uplifted hand he made an angry dash at
Alene.

"Don't you dare to strike that girl!" cried a boy who came running down
from the road.  He evidently belonged to the gang but had only appeared
on the scene in time to witness their rout.  He was a well-built lad of
fifteen, with a bearing that showed him to be above his associates, of
whom he proclaimed himself the leader by collaring the angry boy who
had made the attack on Alene.  Then the berry-pickers came hurrying
along with cries of, "A rescue, a rescue!" and the strange boys fled,
leaving the girls mistresses of the field.

Alene was surprised to find herself a heroine.  The girls declared the
day lost but for her, and the boys, who had all witnessed the last of
the engagement, were loud in her praises.

"I heard that big boy say you were a brave little thing and I agree
with him," declared Hugh, who had experienced a sudden compunction for
his hasty judgment in the caterpillar affair.

Whereupon the last vestige of Alene's resentment vanished.

"I think I'm entitled to some of the glory," remarked Mat modestly,
joining the group around the re-arranged feast.  "Didn't I, with
remarkable foresight, provide the pail of water for Alene to drown the
enemy in?"


CHAPTER IX

TISSUE-PAPER HATS

Blame it all on those tissue-paper hats; the surprise and horror of
good Mrs. Ramsey when she beheld Alene Dawson among that madcap crowd,
skipping along gaily intent on her play, unobserving the pained
expression of the portly lady who was coming up the other side of the
street.  Mrs. Ramsey had stopped suddenly, "so flustrated by the
sight," as she said later, that she had not the strength to hail Alene
and when her breath came it was too late, the happy crowd had passed
from sight around the corner leading to the fields, and her feeble,
"Why, Alene Dawson, I'll tell your Uncle about this!" sounded no
farther than her own ears.

Panting with indignation and the heat of the day, she resumed her way
up the steep street and in due time reached her home, a showy, buff
brick house with fancy turrets and pointed roofs and tiny windows with
wooden ornamentations, that gave warning of the interior, where none of
the rooms was of good size or well proportioned.  Most of the space on
the first floor was taken by the reception hall which was not often
used and the whole gave the impression of being built to show off the
hall, of which its owner was very proud.

She was also very proud of her two daughters, Hermione and Vera, whom
she found on this occasion sitting in the study, a tiny alcove on the
second story, which overlooked the garden.  They were apparently deep
in the mysteries of a French grammar which Vera had seized on hearing
the click of the gate announcing Mrs. Ramsey's return, while Hermione
busied herself in hiding under the cushion of her chair two borrowed
books of fairy tales which their mother had denounced and forbidden and
banned and would have burned with a zeal like to that which animated
the burners of the witches.

"When I was your age I never cared for reading.  I knew most books were
lies from beginning to end.  You couldn't hire me to read about goblins
and witches," she often declared.

"What a dull, tiresome girl mamma must have been," said Vera in a low
aside.

"But she didn't have to play exercises on the piano!" returned Hermione.

"No, nor try to _parlez vous_ with a gibbering foreigner."

"I don't see any use for foreign babbling.  As the nurse in the French
tale says to the little girl who is studying English, 'Since the _bon
dieu_ wrote the Bible in French, it shows that he thought it good
enough for anybody,'" said Hermione, laughing, and Vera continued,

"Grandpa was too poor to pay for extras, I guess."

"I almost wish we could say the same of Pa Ramsey, only I'd hate to be
poor--I don't see how poor people can stand it!"

"Oh, they are used to it.  They don't mind it," returned Vera with a
yawn.

"Tissue-paper hats!" they cried when their fond parent, sinking on a
lounge, had recovered sufficient breath to relate her adventure;
"Tissue-paper hats!"

Hermione's thoughts flew to her own room where, reposing in a box, was
her best hat, a huge affair of fine white straw, with ribbons and
flowers galore, whose glories made Alene's headgear appear the more
offensive.  She was wishing she had been along with Alene, wearing her
own hat, of course, until her mother went on to say:

"That wasn't the worst of it!  What can Frederick Dawson mean to allow
Alene to associate with the town children!"

"Town children, mamma!  Do you mean from the poorhouse?"

"No, Miss Density, mamma means that Lee girl and Ivy Bonner and--"

"Oh, them!  They go to our room!  That Bonner girl is awfully bright
but so sarcastic, and Laura Lee is all right!"

Mrs. Ramsey shook her head.

"This comes of the public schools, where the president's child is made
to rub shoulders with the miner's!"

"And the miner's child often beats him in his lessons and the rest of
the scholars are apt to remark and remember it," said Hermione.  "Only
for that, the rich boys could pose as being extra smart!"

"I should have got you girls a governess only papa said he couldn't
possibly afford it, as times are dull; when the children are grown it's
embarrassing to know how to meet their former schoolmates!"

"Nothing easier!  Just turn your shoulder or look straight ahead!"
Vera stood up, and, using a chair to represent the offending party,
illustrated her remarks with appropriate gestures.

"Yes, but the girls aren't like that chair.  They wouldn't be sat upon
so easily!" exclaimed Hermione.

"They would understand the next time unless they were unusually dense,"
retorted Vera.

Hermione laughed.

"I can imagine I see you trying to cut Ivy Bonner that way!  She would
toss up her head and give you the 'icy stare'.  As for Laura, she
wouldn't understand; she'd only think it a pity you were so
near-sighted!"

"Well, girls, don't get to quarreling," interrupted their mother.
"I'll make it a point to warn Alene's uncle.  I'm sure her mother would
have collapsed had she been in my place to-day!  I'm afraid the Dawsons
will be vexed because I've not had her over here to get better
acquainted with you girls!"

"You have asked her often enough, dear knows, and she never came, yet
she seems very intimate with those other girls!" commented Hermione.

"I admire her taste," said Vera.  "It's all because her mother's not
here to look after her.  Some men are queer.  Very likely her uncle
never sees the difference between those town girls and others!"

"Well, what difference is there, except that Ivy and Laura are more
clever than the average?"

"Hermione, you talk like a--a socialist!  The barriers between the
classes must be preserved, especially in these times when education is
trying to sweep them away!  Else where would we land?"

"We, the royal family," muttered Hermione in an aside to Vera.  "Don't
you remember Grandpa Green's prize pigs?"

Vera pretended not to hear, and their mother, taking breath, continued,
"There's no use talking, girls, those children are not in the Dawson
set!  The idea of wearing tissue-paper hats on the street in broad
daylight!"  So saying, she sailed from the room and the hidden books
were promptly brought forth and the interrupted reading resumed.


CHAPTER X

ALENE'S VISITORS

"Alene, Mrs. Ramsey stopped in the office yesterday to lecture me on
the criminality of tissue-paper hats," said Uncle Fred at supper the
next evening.  Although his voice was solemn, the twinkle in his eyes
told much to the observant Alene.

"Tissue-paper hats!  Why, Uncle!"

"She was surprised, or I should say scandalized, when I remarked that I
had superintended the putting on of yours, and that I was sorry I was
too young, or not old enough, to go along with you."

"Oh, Uncle Fred, you are just the right age for--anything; but we
couldn't coax you to go that day!" Alene protested.

"And then I told her of my surprise when I reached the office that
morning to find my hat adorned with a red-white-and-blue rosette, which
horrified her so much that I was glad--I mean sorry, that she hadn't
met me wearing it."

"I wish she had, meddling thing!"

"She thinks I'm very lax in my duty to allow you on the street without
a _chaperone_.  Alene, I'm a failure as a stern old guardian!  I think,
to put myself right with the townspeople, I'll have to get arrested for
beating my incorrigible niece!"

"If they find fault with you, just send them to me and I'll--I'll
settle them," cried Alene, with angry vehemence, holding her fork in
such a threatening position that Kizzie, coming in with the tray, half
paused.

"Don't be alarmed, Kizzie.  She's not going to attack you or me; she's
only indignant because everyone doesn't agree with her in holding me up
as a model guardian!"

"Oh, Mr. Fred, how you do go on!" returned Kizzie with a laugh and a
blush, giving Alene a glance that showed upon whose side she stood.

"But I haven't come to the end of my tale.  It seems that Mrs. Ramsey's
real object in paying me a visit was not to lecture me, as I supposed,
but to say that her two daughters are coming to visit you to-morrow
afternoon."

"Oh, bother!  Laura and Ivy promised to come and stay for tea!"
grumbled Alene.

"Well, the more the merrier.  The Ramsey girls seem to be amiable
enough," returned Mr. Dawson who failed to see any reason for the
little girl's vexation.  Indeed, Alene herself could not define what
was, in reality, the dismay any hostess might feel if called upon to
entertain a group of people which she knows to be utterly uncongenial.

"Don't worry, child!  Just do the best you can," was the advice of the
housekeeper, when Alene, kneeling on a chair at the window next
morning, viewed the forbidding, rain-soaked grounds.

"But I depended on the garden to help me out," said she, giving a
reproachful glance at the soggy grass and dripping trees.  "The girls
could swing and run about in the grass, and now we'll all have to stay
cooped together in the house!  I wouldn't mind it a bit with Laura and
Ivy.  We could do lots of things inside--but the Ramsey girls!"

"There's the tower room and the wide halls.  Surely you can play some
games there!  It does seem unfortunate how things turn out sometimes,
but we must just bear it!" said Mrs. Major.

"That's what makes it so much harder, we _must_ bear it!  Ivy says if
we could take our burdens just because we wanted to for a noble cause,
like some of the martyrs did, it wouldn't be half so hard as when they
are put on one!" grumbled Alene.  "But there, I'm not going to cry
about it!"

"I wouldn't, either," cried Kizzie, broom in hand, her face glowing
from an attack on the upstairs carpets.  "It would only make things
damper!"

The smiling visage of the plump little maid seemed to have captured
some of the sunshine hidden away by the clouds; it radiated from her
blue eyes, her yellow hair, her round rosy cheeks; Alene, turning from
the depressing outside where the rain was steadily falling, felt an
answering glow when she met that sunny gaze, and retorted gaily:

"Does she mean to be profane or funny, or only puny!"

"I mean to tell you what I was thinkin' about!  Wouldn't it be fun for
you and the girls to make taffy this afternoon?"

Alene clapped her hands.

"Oh, Kizzie, the very thing!  And please, _please_ let me be chief
cook--I think it would be lovely to potter round the pans and things!"

"I could come in and show you how, only Mrs. Major let me off this
afternoon and my sister's expecting me--but I might send her word,"
said Kizzie.

"No, you mustn't do that.  Just tell me how much to use and where to
find the stuff--but I don't want anyone to help me!"

So Alene listened solemnly, with a delightful sense of responsibility,
to the directions given by Kizzie and the housekeeper.  It seemed so
easy, just so many cups of sugar, so much vinegar and water, a lump of
butter not too large and enough vanilla to make it taste; then the
greased pans and the flour to use in pulling it.

"Oh, I know it by heart!  Don't say another word till I bring you some
upstairs to the sewing-room this afternoon!  And I'll save some for
Kizzie when she comes."

As the girls intended coming at one o'clock to stay not later than
five, Alene felt secure in having provided something that would pass
the greater part of the time, so she paid no more attention to the
weather.  It could not interfere with the taffy pulling.

She flew happily round making her preparations and it did not seem any
time until Prince gave a joyous bark to notify her of the near approach
of friends.

She ran to the door.  Sure enough, it was Laura and Ivy making their
way through the rain; they were coming around the curve of the walk
which led from the front gate.

"And Laura's holding the umbrella over Ivy so that she herself gets
nothing but the drippings," Alene observed.  She seized an umbrella
from the rack and hastened to meet them, while Prince ran on ahead to
assure them of a welcome.

The barking of the dog and the chatter of the girls made such a din
that it reached Mrs. Major, who came and stood in the hall, enjoying
the excitement.

After greeting the visitors she went upstairs, feeling a pleasant glow
in the consciousness that the little girl, whose loneliness had been a
source of anxiety to the older inmates of the house, was now
light-hearted and happy with companions of her own age.

"Girls, girls, I'm so glad you've come in spite of the rain!" cried the
beaming Alene, dancing round, more of a hindrance than an aid in her
endeavors to help them off with their things.

"Mother was against my going out in the rain, but Hugh knew how much I
wanted to come, and just as he was coaxing her, Laura came in, and they
hustled me off!"

"It's well I did, or the Bonners would have had a weeping Ivy on their
hands, and dear knows it's moist enough without that, so I carried her
away just for pity!" explained Laura, who stood before the rack mirror
surveying a few locks of straight hair which stuck to her forehead.  "I
was just telling Ivy it's good there's no lightning; but the rain does
take the starch out of things.  Just look at my poor hair, while Ivy's
curls are kinkier than ever!"

"Poor Lol, I'd gladly turn some of the kinks over to you if I could,"
cried Ivy with a laugh, as she gave her mop of curls a vigorous
smoothing, trying in vain to make them lie closer to her head.  A
change of feeling or a change of party may cause the Imperial
Parliament to assert its reserved authority. England keeps her
pledges.[105] Yes, but here it is not a mere question of good faith.
When two contractors each from the beginning put _bona fide_ a
different interpretation upon their contract, neither of them is
chargeable with dishonesty for acting in accordance with his own
view of the agreement.

The spirit of Unionism and the spirit of Separation will survive the
creation of the new constitution. Under one form or another Unionists
will be opposed to Federalists and it is more than possible, should the
Bill pass, that the division of English parties may turn upon their
reading of the Irish Government Act, 1893.

The possibility, again, that the Parliament at Westminster may
assert its reserved authority, if it raises the fears of Irishman, may
excite the hopes of English politicians. If at any time the supremacy
of Ireland becomes unbearable to British national sentiment, or if the
condition of Ireland menaces or is thought to menace English interests,
the new constitution places in the hands of a British majority a
ready-made weapon for the restoration of British power.

The result might be attained without the necessity for passing any
Act of Parliament, or of repealing a single section of the Irish
Government Act, 1893.

A strong Viceroy might be sent to Ireland; he might be instructed not
to convoke the Irish Parliament at all; or, having convoked, at
once to prorogue it.

He might thereupon form any Ministry he chose out of the members of
the Irish Privy Council. The Imperial Parliament would at once resume
its present position and could pass laws for Ireland. This might be
called revolution or reaction. For my argument it matters not two
straws by what name this policy be designated. The scheme sketched
out is not a policy which I recommend. My contention is not that it
will be expedient--this is a matter depending upon circumstances
which no man can foresee--but that it will be strictly and absolutely
legal.

The supremacy of the Imperial Parliament, combined with the presence of
the Irish members at Westminster, will thus by a curious fatality
turn out a source at once of permanent disquietude to Ireland and
of immediate, if not of permanent, weakness to England.

Our New Constitution is not made to last Home Rule does not close
a controversy; it opens a revolution.

No one in truth expects that the new constitution will stand.

Its very builders hesitate when they speak of its permanence,[106] and
are grateful for the generous credulity of a friend who believes
in its finality.

Nor is it hard to conjecture (and in such a matter nothing but conjecture
is possible) what are the forces or tendencies which threaten its
destruction.

If Ireland is discontented Irishmen will demand either the extension
of federalism or separation. In every federal government the tendency
of the States is to diminish as far as possible the authority of
the federal power.

But this tendency will be specially strong in the grotesque Anglo-Irish
federation, since the federal power will be nothing but the predominance
of England. The mode of weakening the federal authority is only
too obvious.

'The more there is of the more,' says a profound Spanish proverb,
'the less there is of the less.' The more the number of separate States
in the confederacy, the less will be the weight of England, and the
greater the relative authority of Ireland. Let England, Scotland, and
Wales become separate States, let the Channel Islands and Man,
and, if possible, some colonies, be added to the federation, and
as the greatness of England dwindles so the independence of Ireland
will grow.

Some seven years ago Sir Gavan Duffy predicted that before ten years
had elapsed there would be a federation of the Empire.[107] Like
other prophets he may have antedated the fulfilment of his prediction,
but his dictum is the forecast of an experienced politician--it
points to a pressing danger.

Home Rule for Ireland menaces the dissolution of the United Kingdom, and
the unity of the United Kingdom is the necessary condition for
maintaining the existence of the British Empire.

Home Rule is the first stage to federalism.

But Irish discontent, should it not find satisfaction in a movement for
federalism, will naturally take the form of the demand for
colonial or for national independence. You cannot play with the spirit
of political nationality. The semi-independence of Ireland from
England, combined with the undue influence of Ireland in English
politics, is certain to produce both unreasonable and reasonable
grounds for still further loosening the tie which binds together
the two islands.

The cry 'Ireland a nation' is one of which no Irishman need
be ashamed, and to which North and South alike, irritated by the vexations
of a makeshift constitution, are, as I have already insisted,
likely enough to rally.

Nor is it certain that Irish Federalists or Irish Nationalists will not
obtain allies in England.

The politicians who are content with a light heart to destroy the work
of Pitt may, for aught I know, with equal levity, annul the Union
with Scotland and undo the work of Somers, or by severing Wales
from the rest of England render futile the achievement of the
greatest of the Plantagenets.

Enthusiasts for 'Home Rule all round' would appear to regard their
capacity for destroying the United Kingdom as a proof of their
ability to build up a new fabric of Imperial power, and to fulfil
their vain dreams of a federated Empire.

Sensible men may doubt whether a turn for revolutionary destruction is
any evidence that politicians possess the rare gift of constructive
statesmanship.

And should the working of the new constitution confirm these doubts,
persons of prudence will begin to perceive that Irish independence
is for both England and Ireland a less evil than the extension of
federalism.

The natural expression however of English discontent or disappointment
is reactionary opposition.

Reaction, or the attempt of one party in a state to reverse a fundamental
policy deliberately adopted by the nation, is one of the worst among
the offspring of revolution, and is almost, though not entirely,
unknown to the history of England.

Yet there is more than one reason why if the Home Rule Bill be carried,
reaction should make its ill-omened appearance in the field of
English public life.

The policy of Home Rule, even should it be for the moment successful,
lacks the moral sanctions which have compelled English statesmen to
accept accomplished facts. The methods of agitation in its favour have
outraged the moral sense of the community. Mr. Gladstone's victory
is the victory of Mr.

Parnell, and the triumph of Parnellism is the triumph of conspiracy,
and of conspiracy rendered the more base because it was masked under
the appearance of a constitutional movement.

Neither the numbers nor the composition of the ministerial majority
are impressive.

The tactics of silence, evasion, and ambiguity may aid in gaining a
parliamentary victory, but deprive the victory of that respect for
the victors on the part of the vanquished which, in civil contests at
any rate, alone secures permanent peace. But the pleas and justifications
for reaction are rarely its causes. If Englishmen attempt to bring about
the legal destruction of the new constitution, their action will
be produced by a sense of the false position assigned to England. No
device of statesmanship can stand which is condemned by the nature of
things.

The predominance of England in the affairs of the United Kingdom is secured
by sanctions which in the long run can neither be defied nor set
aside; the constitution which does not recognise this predominance
is doomed to ruin.

That its overthrow would be just no one dare predict; the future is as
uncertain as it is dark. A main reason why a wise man must deprecate
the weak surrender by Englishmen of rightful power is the dread
that, if in a moment of irritation they reassert their strength, they
may exhibit neither their good faith nor their justice.

FOOTNOTES:

[95] J. M'Carthy, April 10, 1893, _Times Parliamentary Debates_, p.
354.
No part of these quotations is italicised in the report.

[96] J. M'Carthy.

[97] Mr. Sexton.

[98] Mr. Gladstone, April 21, 1893, _Times Parliamentary Debates_,
p.
565.

[99] At Bodyke, June 2, 1887, Mr. M. Davitt said:--'Our people, however,
who so leave Ireland are not lost in the Irish cause, for they will join
the ranks of the Ireland of retribution beyond the Atlantic; and when
the day shall again come that we have a right to manage our own affairs,
the sun may some day shine down upon England when we here in Ireland
will have the opportunity of having vengeance upon the enemy for
its crimes in Ireland.'

--_Freeman's Journal_, June 3, 1887. See 'Notes on the Bill,' published
by the Irish Unionist Alliance, p. 368. These expressions were used
after the union of hearts.

[100] 'But all these matters are, as it were, minor details.

They all sink into comparative insignificance before the one great
demand--and I almost apologise for mentioning them--because I want
you to concentrate your attention on the one great demand which we
make, and the one unalterable statement we intend to adhere to,
that whether guilty or innocent, these men, according to their
lights and their consciences, were trying to serve Ireland; that
any of them who were guilty were driven into this course by the
misgovernment of Ireland, and the oppression of Ireland by an outside
power, and that if we are asked to settle this Irish question, if
we are asked to let peace reign where discord and hatred reign at
present, there must be no victims--that if there is to be peace
there must also be amnesty.

I don't discuss the question of guilt or innocence. For the sake of
argument I will say that there are some men in jail who are guilty.

They must come out as well as the innocent, because their guilt is
due to misgovernment in the past.'

--Mr. Pierce Mahony, _Irish Independent_, April 5. See 'Notes on the
Bill,' p. 423.

'There is no use in deceiving ourselves upon this matter; we would be
fools if we thought that in the next few weeks, or within the next
few months, we would succeed in getting our brethren out of prison.

I don't believe we will; ... but I am convinced of this, that there
is not a man amongst them who will ever be called upon to serve anything
like the remainder of his sentence. I am convinced that in a short
time--and the extent of its duration depends upon other circumstances--every
one of these men will be restored to liberty if only we conduct this
agitation with determination, with resolution, and I would say
above all with moderation and with wisdom.'

--Mr. John Redmond, M.P., _Dublin Irish Independent_, April 5. See
'Notes on the Bill,' p. 424.

[101] See Mill, _Representative Government_, 1st ed. p. 300.

[102] Of course I do not for a moment dispute the legal right of
Parliament to repeal all or any of the articles of the Treaty of
Union with Ireland.

I am writing now not upon the law, but upon the ethics of the constitution.
My contention is, that, as things stand, the undoubted assent of Great
Britain (or even perhaps of England, in the narrower sense) is morally
requisite for the repeal or at any rate for the remodelling of the
Treaty of Union.

Note that Ireland would stand morally and logically in a stronger
position if demanding Separation than when demanding a revision
of the Act of Union. An example shows my meaning. _A, B_, and _C_
form a partnership. _A_ is by far the richest, and _C_ by far
the poorest of the firm.

_C_ finds the terms of partnership onerous.

He may have a moral right to retire, but certainly he cannot have
a moral, and would hardly under any system of law have a legal,
right to say, 'I do not want to leave the firm, but I insist that
the terms of partnership be remodelled wholly in my favour.'

Nor again is it conceivable that _B_ and _C_ by uniting together
could in fairness claim to impose upon _A_ disadvantages the burden
of which he had never intended to accept

.

[103] See pp. 22-31, _ante_.

[104] 'But who proposed that Ireland should be anything else than an
integral part of the United Kingdom (Ministerial cheers), or rather
of the Empire?'

(Opposition cheers).--Mr. Sexton, April 20, 1893, _Times Parliamentary
Debates_, p. 522. The confusion of ideas and the hesitation implied
in Mr. Sexton's expressions are noteworthy.

[105] England adhered with absolute fidelity to her renunciation of the
right to legislate for Ireland.

Whatever were the other flaws in the Treaty of Union, it was no
violation either of 22 Geo. III. c. 63, or of 23 Geo. III. c. 28. The
worst features of the method by which the Act of Union was carried
would have been avoided had the English Parliament resumed the right
to legislate for Ireland.

The Treaty of Union depends on Acts both of the British and of the
Irish Legislature. This is elementary but has escaped the attention
of Mr. Sexton (see _Times Parliamentary Debates_, Feb. 13, 1893,
p. 319), whose investigations into the history of his country are
apparently recent.

[106] "The plan that was to be proposed was to be such as, at least
in the judgment of its promoters, presented the necessary
characteristics--I will not say of finality, because it is a
discredited word--but of a real and continuing settlement."

--Mr. Gladstone, Feb. 13, 1893, _Times Parliamentary Debates_, p. 303.

[107] See Mr. Gladstone's Irish Constitution, _Contemporary Review_,
May, 1886, p. 616.

CHAPTER IV
PLEAS FOR THE NEW CONSTITUTION

Gladstonians when pressed with the manifest objections to which the
new constitution is open rely for its defence either upon general
considerations intended to show that the criticisms on the new
constitution are in themselves futile, or upon certain more or less
specific arguments, of which the main object is to establish that
the policy of Home Rule is either necessary or at least free from
danger, and that, therefore, this policy and the new constitution
in which it is to be embodied deserve a trial.

My object in this chapter is to examine with fairness the value both
of these general considerations and of these specific arguments.

The general considerations are based upon the alleged prophetic
character of the criticisms on the new constitution or upon the
anomalies to be found in the existing English constitution.

Ministerialists try to invalidate strictures on the Home Rule Bill,
such as those set forth in the foregoing pages, by the assertion that
the objections are mere prophecy and therefore not worth attention.

This line of defence may, as against Home Rulers, be disposed of
at once by an _argumentum ad hominem_. No politicians have made freer
use of prediction. Every Gladstonian speech is in effect a statement
that is a prophecy of the benefits which Home Rule will confer on the
United Kingdom. Gladstonian anticipations no doubt are prophecies of
future blessings; but whoever foretells the future is equally a prophet,
whether he announces the end of the world or foretells the dawn
of a millennium.

And history affords no presumption in favour of the prophet who prophesies
smooth things.

The prognostics of a pessimist may be as much belied by the event as
the hopes of an optimist. But for one prophet to decry the predictions
of another simply as prophecies is a downright absurdity. Even among
rival soothsayers some regard must be had to fairness and common
sense; when Zedekiah, the son of Chenaanah, smote Micaiah on the cheek,
he struck him not on the ground that he prophesied but that his
gloomy predictions were false.

Zedekiah was an imposter, he was not a fool, and after all Micaiah,
who prophesied evil and not good, turned out the true prophet.

But an _argumentum ad hominem_ is never a satisfactory form of reasoning,
and it is worth while considering for a moment what is the value
of prophecy or foresight in politics.

Candour compels the admission that anticipations of the future are at
best most uncertain.

Cobden and Bright foretold that Free Trade would benefit England; they
also foretold that the civilised world would, influenced by England's
example, reject protective tariffs.

Neither anticipation was unreasonable, but the one was justified whilst
the other was confuted by events.

All that can be said is that on such anticipations, untrustworthy
though they may be, the conduct no less of public than of private
life depends.

Criticism on anything that is new and untried, whether it be a new-built
bridge or a new-made constitution, is of necessity predictive.

But there is an essential difference between foresight and guessing. The
prevision of a philosophic statesman is grounded on the knowledge
of the past and on the analysis of existing tendencies.

It deals with principles. Such, for example, was the foresight of Burke
when he dogmatically foretold that the French Constitution of 1791
could not stand.[108] Guessing is at best based on acute observation
of the current events of the day, that is of things which are in
their nature uncertain.

On January 29, 1848, Tocqueville analysed the condition of French
society, and in the Chamber of Deputies foretold the approach of
revolution.

On February 21, 1848, Girardin said that the monarchy of July would
not last three days longer.

February 24 verified the insight and foresight of the statesman, and
proved that the journalist was an acute observer.
The difference is worth consideration.

Tocqueville's prophecy would in all probability have been substantially
realised had Louis Philippe shown as much energy in 1848 as in
1832, and had the Orleanist dynasty reigned till after his death.

Girardin's guess would not have been even a happy hit if one of a
thousand accidents had averted the catastrophe of February 24.
The worth of the arguments against or for the new constitution depends
upon the extent to which they are based upon a mastery of general
principles and upon a sound analysis of the conditions of the time,
and in these conditions are included the character of the English
and of the Irish people.

But to object to criticisms simply as prophecies is to reject foresight
and to forbid politicians who are creating a constitution for the
future to consider what will be its future working.

Another Gladstonian argument is that because the English constitution
itself is full of paradoxes, peculiarities, and anomalies, therefore
the contradictions or anomalies which are patent in the new
constitution (such for example as the retention of the Irish members
at Westminster) are of no importance.

The fact asserted is past dispute.

Our institutions are based upon fictions.

The Prime Minister, the real head of the English Executive, is an official
unknown to the law.

The Queen, who is the only constitutional head of the Executive,
is not the real head of the Government.

The Crown possesses a veto on all legislation and never exercises
it; the House of Lords might, if the House pleased, reject year
by year every Bill sent up to it by the House of Commons; yet such
a course of action is never actually pursued and could not be dreamt
of except by a madman.

There is no advantage in exemplifying further a condition of things which
must be known to every person who has the slightest acquaintance
with either the law, or the custom, of the constitution.

But the inference which Gladstonian apologists draw from the
existence of anomalies is, in the strict sense of the word, preposterous.
On the face of the matter it is a strange way of reasoning to say that
because the constitution is filled with odd arrangements which no
man can justify in theory, you therefore, when designing a new
constitution, should take no care to make your arrangements consistent
and harmonious.

But the Gladstonian error goes a good deal deeper than is at first sight
apparent.
Her eyes were fixed upon the fish which she felt were the only ones she
could get now.  If she let them go, her opportunity would be lost and
her good offices in Kizzie's behalf fruitless, so she gasped hurriedly,
"Say!"

The boy had noticed the little girl standing like a statue gazing up
the street.  He had given her a glance as he approached but her eyes
were intent upon the fish; he was going on his way, half glad to escape
notice when he heard her feeble call.

He came to a standstill.

"Did you speak to me?"

His voice sounded strangely familiar to Alene.  Hastily looking from
the fish to their owner, she encountered a pair of frank, gray eyes,
whose rather deep setting and coal black brows gave the whole face an
odd, but singularly attractive expression.

She recognized him at once.

"Why, is it you?" she exclaimed, in a startled voice.

The boy flushed.

"Don't be scared--I won't rob you," he said, with a note of vexation
that recalled Alene to herself.

"I must have appeared ridiculous standing here looking half scared to
death," she thought.

"I never dreamed of such a thing!  I guess I did look funny but it was
because of those other boys," she replied with an expressive nod up the
street.

"The rascals!  I came near giving them up that day!  I hope it didn't
spoil your fun!  How the rest did guy that fellow who tried to strike
you!  I bet he'll never try to strike a girl again!"

His tone giving assurance that he had effectually disposed of the
delinquent caused his hearer a thrill of satisfaction.

"But I'm jolly glad you weren't afraid of me!" he concluded with an air
of relief.

Then the humor of the situation seemed to strike Alene.

"The idea!  No, I wasn't a bit afraid.  I knew you didn't mean to rob
me but I intended to rob you!" she said in a mischievous tone.

He gave a ringing laugh and looked very much relieved.

"Well, say, I would never have suspected it!  What did you want, the
fishin' rod or bait?"

"No, not those ugly, squirming things.  I've seen Hugh digging for
them!" she drew back from the can with a look of disgust.

"Well, I've nothin' else worth takin' 'cept the fish!"

"That's it.  Mrs. Major wants them."

"Mrs. Major wants my fish?  Why, I never heard tell of the lady!"

"Yes, it's for Uncle Fred's supper!  She's the housekeeper, you know,
and the fish-cart didn't come round to-day!  So I told Kizzie I'd come
out and get some from the boys, you know!"

"Oh, I see!  Well, it won't do to disappoint Uncle Fred, the
housekeeper and Kizzie and you--especially you!"  So saying, he
tendered her the big string of fish.

As Alene reached for it, one of the fishes gave a sudden jump.  She
recoiled.

"Oh!  Do put them in the basket, won't you?  Their tails wriggle up so!"

He laughed, and while he busied himself to obey her, Alene opened her
little silver purse.  When the boy glanced up from his task she offered
him a silver dollar.

"They're not for sale, thank you!" he said, turning away.

"Oh, then I can't take them!"

"Turn about's fair play!" he cried, quickening his steps; a beam of
mischief shone in his eyes, lighting up his face.

"What do you mean?  Come back and get your fish," cried Alene, swinging
the basket as far as she could reach.  She rushed up the street a short
distance but, seeing the hopelessness of overtaking him, came to a halt
while the dog stood barking beside her.

"Here, Prince, take the basket and follow him," cried Alene excitedly,
but Prince failed to understand why he should rob his master of the
supper they had procured for him.  He took the basket in his mouth and
waited for Alene to lead the way.

"Oh, Prince, you--you idiot!  Boy, boy, say!" she screamed with such a
sharp, insistent treble that it reached the lad's ears.  He turned
around and waved his hat.

"Highway robbery!" he cried, making a trumpet of both hands, and then
with a parting wave he passed from view, leaving the exasperated and
almost tearful Alene to return to the house, with the disobedient
Prince at her side proudly carrying the spoils.


CHAPTER XIII

A GIRLISH TIFF


  GRAND PANORAMA!

  MOVING PICTURES!  THE PILGRIM'S PROGRESS!

  AT JARRETT'S HALL,

  FRIDAY EVENING, JULY THE 16TH

  _Admission ..................  25 cts._

  _Reserved Seats .............  50 cts._


Thus read the attractive handbills scattered throughout the town by
half a dozen small boys, while a man went from street to street posting
gorgeous pictures of the different scenes, until the whole population,
especially the younger portion of it, was aroused into the desire or
intention of attending the show.

The boys who by a happy chance were on hand when the advance agent
stepped from the train, and had secured the privilege of distributing
the bills with the accompanying reward of free admission to the hall,
were the envied of their less favored friends.

Loud was the lamentation of Lafe Bonner, Ivy's eleven-year-old brother,
whose only consolation was the memory of a happier time in the early
spring when the circus had come to town with its elephants and caged
animals, its clown in cap and bells, to say nothing of its fine ladies
in red and green velvet habits all gold bespangled, riding so
gracefully the high-stepping horses to the music of the band, perched
high on a scarlet-and-gold mirrored chariot--not to forget the calliope
bringing up the rear.  Then, with glowing countenance and swift-beating
heart, Lafe and his companions had followed the parade to "the
bottoms," a level space sacred to the circus and baseball, where men
were busy erecting tents for the afternoon's show.

One lusty fellow whose bronze cheeks were tanned by the wind and sun of
many climes immediately engaged the three boys to carry water to the
animals, in exchange for passes to the evening performance, the memory
of which would never, never fade from Lafe's mind, were he to live as
long as Methuselah himself.  Every detail, the sawdust-covered
racetrack around the ring, the acrobats swinging and diving so far, far
up in the air that one held his breath till they made a safe descent;
the jokes of the clown never too old to evoke laughter, the noises of
wild animals which might break through their barred cages and cause a
panic among the people, a possibility that lent spice to the whole; the
peanuts and lemonade,--weak in lemon but strong in sugar, and of a
lovely shade of pink,--genuine circus lemonade, on which they had spent
their last pennies, with all this comparatively fresh in his memory no
wonder that Lafe gazed longingly on the posters, and read with avidity
every item concerning the attraction, which, if not the circus, was
related to it in a sort of third or fourth cousin degree.

Lafe could not gain entrance by the drawing-of-water method, nor yet,
alas, by scattering bills; and he knew it was useless to apply at home.
Did not the pinching of shoes worn the first time the Sunday previous
remind him of his mother's latest ill-spared expenditure?  All he could
do, therefore, was to grumble at his luck in having missed the agent.
This he did so persistently and in tones so loud that everybody either
commiserated or scolded him, with the exception of Ivy, who only
laughed and dubbed him Master Glumface.  To her, who measured every woe
with her own, his disappointment seemed a pitifully small thing to
bewail.

"Now, I'm sure I'd love to see the Pilgrim's Progress--that picture
where Christian is crossing through the Dark Valley just gives me
thrills--and yet I don't go round like a big baby complaining.  And I
didn't even see the circus when it was here, only the side show!" she
said.

Lafe gave her a withering glance.  He felt inclined to catch hold of
that provoking curl that bobbed so impertinently in his direction as
she tossed her head, and give it a good hard pull.

But Laura, who had just come in, soothed his ire by saying in a
sympathetic voice:

"Lafe seems so much taken with the circus and things I shouldn't wonder
if he turns out to be an actor!  Don't you remember how well he did at
our exhibition?"  Ivy nodded.  "So of course, he feels it worse than we
do.  But I'd love to go too and take Nettie.  She's wild about that
picture where the angels are flying.  She thinks they have real angels
at the show.  Mat has a quarter saved up toward a bicycle and--"

"He'd better get an automobile while he's about it," interrupted Lafe.

"He wants me to take it and go; as if I would do such a thing!  You
know, Ivy, he made me take that dime he had saved up when the circus
came, and go to the side show with you; and we had a lot of fun shaking
hands with the giant and the fat lady and seeing the animals; but this
is different, and his mind is quite set on the bicycle."

Which remark reminded Ivy that her admission to the side show--the
bright silver dime--was given her by Lafe, and that before he had any
hope of himself seeing the circus.  So she began to feel sorry for her
flippant attitude and said in a more kindly tone:

"Well, this is only Friday noon and the performance doesn't come off
till to-night.  Who knows what may turn up before then?"

This might have had the intended effect were it not for that curl which
in some way affected Lafe's nerves.  It now gave a careless bob that
exasperated him.

"'Something may turn up;'" he muttered, "an earthquake or Mat's
motor-car, perhaps!"

He went away in disgust and Ivy turned to Laura with a sigh:

"Now, what did I say to make him flare up that way?"

"He thought you didn't care--"

"Well, I don't--I don't!  Laura, if I were to go sympathizing with six
brothers--and boys are always clamoring for attention--I'd end in a mad
house!"

Laura could hardly repress a smile at the thought of Ivy's six sturdy
brothers depending on her in their troubles, knowing as she did that
stone bruises, torn garments and other calamities incident to boyhood
were always carried to their mother, while, as Laura often said, Hugh
made himself a regular oak-tree for Ivy to twine around.

No further remarks were made on the subject, however, and the two girls
started side by side on their way to a shady spot near home, to spend a
few hours of the hot afternoon.

The wind caught them rather sharply at a street corner and Ivy's
endeavors to balance her crutches while holding her hat in place
renewed her irritation.

"If some people had troubles like this, they would have room to
preach," she cried.

"I'm sure I never thought of preaching," returned Laura stiffly.  "But
there's no use always harping on one's own trials and thinking nobody
else has any!"

"Meaning me, of course!  Anyway, I don't care to play this afternoon.
I think I'll go home," said Ivy, turning away with crimsoning cheeks.

Laura gave a backward glance at the haughty little maid hurrying along
as fast as she could, while the wind sent the mop of curls flying
around her head in all directions.

For a few moments she stared blankly down the street, half expecting
Ivy to turn around, but she failed to do so, and Laura, with a
heightened sense of injury, went on her way intending to take the first
side-street home.

But the longer the distance grew between herself and Ivy, the unhappier
she became, the more she repented her harsh words.  It was really no
wonder that Ivy had thought them unfeeling at a time, especially, when
she was already upset by her encounter with Lafe.  Perhaps, too, this
was one of Ivy's bad days when the least contradiction irritated her.

In this strain ran Laura's thoughts and the longer she pondered, the
slower she walked until at last she came to a standstill.

It was right at the top of a hilly street which commanded a fine view.
In the distance were the blue shadows of mountains; the river swept
along between green-verdured hills; a steamboat with lowered stacks was
passing beneath the bridge that hung like a black line connecting the
east and west sides of the town.  Overhead shone the midday sun in a
sky of cloudless blue, but nature spread her canvas all in vain for
Laura.  Another time she would have paused to drink in the beauty of
the scene, to follow with admiring eyes the movements of the boat
which, brave in a new coat of paint, swept along in a wake of billowing
foam, but to-day she stood unheeding.  All that she saw was the
pathetic figure of a little girl with crutches receding in the distance.

Something clutched at Laura's throat.  Her resentment against Ivy died
away, leaving only blame for herself.  With a sudden resolve she turned
and hurriedly retraced her steps.

"Nothing but a cross cat would act the way I did!"

Faster and faster she went until, as she came around a corner, she
almost collided with someone hastening up the street.  A little hot
hand clutched her arm--

"Oh, Lol, is it you?  I came back to make up!  Someway I can't bear to
be on the outs with you!"

Ivy was breathless and perspiring and her hat was blown all to one side.

Laura reached over and set it straight carefully, almost caressingly.

"Oh, Ivy-vine, neither can I--Isn't it funny?  Shall we go on?"

Laughing softly and blinking back the tears of which they were half
ashamed, they continued up the street, happy in the reconciliation, so
facile and so complete in childhood, when bygones are bygones, and
there is no danger of ghosts, once laid, ever rising up again to give
added rancor to future disagreements.

What a beautiful day it was and how the sun shone and how blissfully
they drank in the air!

"Oh, Lol, see, there's a wagon in front of Jarrett's Hall!  I do
believe those men belong to the show!" cried Ivy.

"Let's go up and look round," proposed Laura.

They had reached a long building fronting on Main Street, the first
story of which was occupied by a half dozen stores.  They climbed a
covered stairway that led to the second story.  At the top of the "hall
stairs," as they were called, was the main entrance to the hall which
occupied the second story of the edifice.  These stairs also opened
upon a sort of court, from which a broad flight of stone steps led to
an upper street.

By walking along the court, the girls were on a level with the inner
windows of the hall.  The outside shutters stood wide open to admit
light, and a few children were peering curiously through the dusty
panes.  Further away was a narrow door sacred to the use of actors or
employes of the hall.

Laura observed that this door was closed when she and Ivy first
appeared upon the scene; but after a time, leaving Ivy at a good
position at the window with her inquisitive eyes pressed against the
glass, Laura strayed back and found the door open.

She hastened to the threshold and took a long, eager look into the
dingy hall, from the curious little box-like office at the "grand
entrance," as the double wooden door was styled, past the rows of rough
benches to the stage at the upper end of the hall, where some
carpenters and other employes were busy making arrangements for the
evening's performance.

They are first the existence of States such as the Cantons of
Switzerland or the States of Germany, which are capable of bearing
in the eyes of their inhabitants an impress of common nationality,
and next the existence among the inhabitants of the federalised
country of a very peculiar sentiment, which may be described as the
desire for political union without the desire for political unity.[8]
This condition of opinion leads to a division of powers between the
federal or national government and the States.

Whatever concerns the nation as a whole is placed under the control
of the federal power.

All matters which are not primarily of common interest remain in the
hands of the States. Now each of these conditions upon which federalism
rests has, as a matter of history, been absolutely unknown to the people
of England.

In uniting other countries to England they have instinctively aimed at
an incorporative not at a federal union.

This absence of the federal spirit is seen in two matters
which may appear of subordinate, but are in reality of primary,
consequence.

Every member of Parliament has always stood on a perfect equality
with his fellows; the representatives of a county or of a borough,
English members, Scottish members, Irish members, have hitherto
possessed precisely equal rights, and have been subject to precisely
the same duties.

They have been sent to Parliament by different places, but, when in
Parliament, they have not been the delegates of special localities; they
have not been English members, or Scottish members, or Irish
members, they have been simply members of Parliament; their
acknowledged duty has been to consult for the interest of the whole
nation; it has not been their duty to safeguard the interests of
particular localities or countries.

Hence until quite recent years English parties have not been formed
according to sectional divisions.

There has never been such a thing as an English party or a Scottish
party.

Up to 1832 the Scottish members were almost without exception Tories;
since 1832 they have been for the most part Liberals or Radicals;
they have kept a sharp eye upon Scottish affairs, but they have
never formed a Scottish party.

The same thing has, to a great extent, held good of the Irish members.
The notion of an Irish party is a novelty, and in so far as it has
existed is foreign to the spirit of our institutions.

Hence further, the Cabinet has been neither in form nor in spirit a
federal executive.

No Premier has attempted to constitute a Ministry in which a given
proportion of Irishmen or Scotchmen should balance a certain
proportion of Englishmen.

English politicians have as yet hardly formed the conception of an
English party. Not a single Prime Minister has claimed the confidence
of the country on the ground that his colleagues were, or were
not, English, Scottish, or Irish.

That a Premier should glory in his pure Scottish descent is an
innovation; it is an innovation ominous of revolution; it betrays
a spirit of disintegration.

If at the moment it flatters Scottish pride, Scotchmen and Irishmen
would do well to recollect that it is a certain presage of a time
when some Englishman will rise to power and obtain popular support
on the ground of his staunch English sympathies and of his unadulterated
English blood.

Now place the new constitution side by side with the old. Assume, as I
do assume throughout this chapter, that our new Gladstonian policy
works in accordance with the intentions of its authors.

The new constitution abolishes in Ireland the actual and effective control
and authority of the Imperial Parliament.

The government of Ireland is under the Home Rule Bill[9] placed in the
hands of an executive authority, or, in plain terms, a Cabinet,
undoubtedly to be appointed by the Irish Legislature, in the same
sense in which an English Cabinet is appointed by the British
Parliament, or a New Zealand Cabinet is appointed by the Parliament
of New Zealand.[10] For the first time in the whole course of history
the administration of Irish affairs is placed in the hands of an
Irish Ministry, in the selection of which the Imperial Parliament
has no hand or concern whatever.

Mr. McCarthy, Mr. Healy, Mr. Redmond, Mr. Davitt, any leader, known or
unknown, loyal or disloyal, who commands the confidence of the Irish
Legislature, or, as I will venture to term it, the Irish Parliament,[11]
will naturally become the Premier of Ireland, and, together with
his colleagues, will possess all the authority which belongs to a
Parliamentary Executive.

On the action of this Irish Cabinet the Bill places, with rare
exceptions, either no restrictions at all or restrictions which are only
transitory.[12] Speaking generally, we may lay down that, except
as to the control of the army, if that be an exception, the Irish
Cabinet will, when the constitution gets into full working order,
occupy in Ireland the position now occupied by the British Cabinet
in regard to the whole United Kingdom.

The appointment of officials, the conduct of Irish affairs, all the
ordinary functions of government will, with certain exceptions meant
for the most part to protect the rights of the Imperial Parliament,
be exercised by Irish Ministers responsible to the Irish Parliament;
and the British or Imperial Parliament will, in the ordinary course
of things, have no more to do with the administration of affairs
in Ireland than it has to do with the administration of affairs
in New Zealand.

The Irish, not the British, Cabinet will decide what are the steps
to be taken for the protection throughout Ireland of the rights of
property or of personal liberty; the Irish and not the English
Cabinet will determine by what means the payment of rent is to be
enforced; the Irish and not the English Cabinet will decide what
persons are to be prosecuted for crime; the Irish and not the English
Cabinet will determine whether the means for enforcing the punishment
of crime are adequate, and whether Ireland, or some part of Ireland,
say Belfast, requires to be governed by means of a Coercion Act;
the Irish and not the English Cabinet will decide with what severity
wrong-doers are to be punished, and whether, and under what
circumstances, convicted criminals deserve either pardon or mitigation
of punishment.

It is patent that under the new constitution the Irish Parliament and,
under ordinary circumstances, the Irish Parliament alone will
legislate for Ireland.

For the Irish Parliament can, subject to certain Restrictions,[13] pass
any law whatever 'for the peace, order and good government of
Ireland, in respect of matters exclusively relating to Ireland or
some part thereof'[14]; and, subject to the same Restrictions, may
repeal any law which, before the Home Rule Bill becomes law, is in
force in Ireland.

Under the new constitution the Irish Parliament and not the Imperial
Parliament will, it is clear, as a rule legislate for Ireland.

Under the new constitution the Irish Parliament may enact a Coercion
Act, applying say to Ulster, or may repeal the existing Crimes Act.

It may abolish trial by jury[15] altogether, put any restraints it
sees fit on the liberty of the press, or introduce a system of
administrative law like that which exists in France, but is totally
foreign to English notions of jurisprudence.

Under the new constitution, again, the financial relations of Great
Britain and Ireland are made the subject of an elaborate arrangement
which may fairly be called a contract[16].

Ireland takes over certain charges[17], and speaking very generally,
whilst all the duties of customs levied in Ireland are collected
by and paid over to the Exchequer of the United Kingdom, as Ireland's
contribution to Imperial expenditure, all the other taxes are, as
a general rule, paid over to the Irish Exchequer.

The justice or the policy of these financial arrangements is for my
present purpose immaterial.

All that need be observed is that the ordinary taxation of Ireland
passes from the hands of the Imperial Parliament into the hands of the
Irish Parliament, and that under the new constitution this arrangement
is a settlement which the Imperial Parliament is morally bound to
respect for a period of at least fifteen years[18].

In Ireland therefore the new constitution abolishes the effective
exercise of authority by the Imperial Parliament in matters of
administration, in matters of legislation, in matters of finance;
every concern which affects the daily life of Irishmen will be under
the control of the Irish Cabinet and the Irish Parliament.

The relation of the Imperial Parliament towards Ireland will not
be the relation which it now occupies towards the whole United
Kingdom, and which under the new constitution it will still occupy
towards Great Britain.

The Imperial Parliament, it is true, retains considerable reserved
powers; what are the effect and nature of these powers shall be
considered in its due place. The matter upon which I now insist is
simply this: the new constitution does in any case transfer the effective
government of Ireland from the Imperial Parliament to the Irish Parliament.
The authority reserved to the Imperial Parliament may be termed
supremacy, or sovereignty, or may be described by any other
fine-sounding name which we are pleased to use, but the fact remains
unaltered that, as long as the new constitution stands and works,
the Imperial Parliament will not govern Ireland in the sense in
which it governs England and Scotland, and that such authority as
it exerts in Ireland will be analogous not to the power which it
now exercises there, but to the influence which it possesses in
Canada or in New Zealand.[19]
The new constitution is at bottom a federalist or semi-federalist
constitution; it introduces into English institutions many of the
forms of federalism and still more of its spirit.

The Parliament sitting at Westminster becomes for the first time a
Federal Congress.

Of its members, 567 will represent Great Britain; 80 will represent
Ireland. The exact numbers are for the present purpose insignificant.

The serious matter is that the Imperial Parliament undergoes an essential
change of character. The British members will have, or are intended to
have, no concern with the government of Ireland.

The Irish members ought to have nothing to do with the government of
Great Britain.

On Imperial subjects the Imperial Parliament, or, to call it by its
proper name, the Federal Congress, votes as a whole; on Irish subjects
it does not vote at all; on British topics its British members
only vote.

The British and the Irish members, in short, alike represent, though
in a very clumsy fashion, the States of a Confederacy.

Though the fact be artfully concealed, we have under the new constitution
already, in germ at least, a British State and an Irish State, a
British Parliament and an Irish Parliament, and a third body
consisting of these two Parliaments, which is the Imperial or Federal
Parliament.[20]
The different features of federalism make their appearance though
under strange forms.

The constitution imposes Restrictions on the powers of the State
Governments and of the Federal Government.

This appears unmistakably in the limitations placed upon the authority
of the Irish Parliament.

These Restrictions, be they wise or unwise, politic or impolitic,
are perfectly in keeping with the constitutional arrangements of a
Federal Government, but are absolutely unknown to the theory and
practice of English parliamentary government.

The powers of the Imperial Parliament, it may be said, are under the
new constitution subject to no limitations.

In words this assertion is true, in substance it is false. If the
constitution works properly the Imperial Parliament will clearly
be subject to the terms of the Government of Ireland Act, 1893, or,
in other words, of the Federal Constitution.

This subjection is not absolute; it is moral, not legal, still it exists.
A breach of the federal compact will be no light matter.

The constitution again, as one would expect under a federal scheme,
provides for the enforcement of the compact.

In the case of Ireland this is manifest. The royal veto,[21] the power
of the Courts, and ultimately of the Privy Council, to pronounce
on the constitutionality of any Irish Act, and treat it as void if
it is in excess of the authority bestowed upon the Irish legislature,
the provisions for the legal determination of constitutional
questions,[22] the arrangements as to the payment of the Irish
customs into the Imperial Exchequer, the special and very anomalous
position of the Exchequer Judges, are all attempts, whatever be
their worth, to restrain the Irish legislature and government, or
in effect the Irish people, from the undue assertion of State
rights.

Restraints again are placed on the unconstitutional action of the
Imperial or Federal Parliament.

They are less obvious, but at least as real and effectual as the
safeguards against the breach of the constitution by the Irish
government or legislature.

They are all summed up in the presence of the Irish representatives
at Westminster. The only legitimate reason, if legitimate reason
there be, for their presence is the guardianship of Irish rights under
the constitution. It is for them to see that these rights are held
sacred.

No diminution thereof can take place without either the assent of the
Irish members or else the existence of such a majority in the
Parliament at Westminster as may override the protests of Ireland.[23]
No doubt this is not an absolute security. But whoever considers the
habits of English political life will conclude that, except in the
event of the Imperial Parliament being resolved to suspend or
destroy the constitution, there exists the highest improbability
that any inroad should be made upon the privileges conferred under
the new constitution upon Ireland.

The security, though not absolute, is a good deal better than any safeguard
given by the Bill that the State rights of Great Britain shall be duly
respected by the representatives from Ireland.

Assume, however, that the constitution works properly, and that all
parties respect the spirit of its provisions.

The result is that the new constitution forms a fundamental law,
fixing the respective rights of Ireland, of Great Britain, of the
Irish Parliament, and of the Imperial Parliament.[24]
The federal arrangements which, utterly unknown as they are to our
institutions, form the foundation of the new constitution, are as
nothing compared with the recognition and fostering of the federal
spirit.

Great Britain and Ireland constitute for the first time in history a
confederation. The difference or opposition of their interests receives
legislative acknowledgment: each country is to possess in reality,
though not in name, State rights; each must rely upon the constitution
for the protection of these rights; each may suffer from the
encroachments of the Imperial or central power.

Ireland may complain that the Imperial Parliament by legislation, or the
Privy Council by judicial interpretation, encroaches on her guaranteed
rights. Great Britain may complain either that Irish members intermeddle
in British affairs, and thus British rights are violated, or that
the Privy Council so interprets the constitution that the prerogatives
of the Central Government (which be it remembered must in practice
be identified with the power of England) are unduly diminished.

To imagine such complaints is not to assume that the constitution works
badly. They are of necessity inherent in the federal system.
There exists no federal government throughout the world where such
complaints do not arise, and where they do not at times give rise
to heart-burnings.

It is well indeed, judging from the lessons of history, if they do not
produce bitter conflicts, or even civil war.

Let us take, however, the most sanguine view possible.

Let us grant that both in England and in Ireland every minister, every
legislator, every judge, is inspired with a spirit of perfect
disinterestedness and absolute fairness. This concession, immense though
it be, does not exclude vital differences of opinion. In our new
confederacy, as in every other, there will arise the contest
between State rights and federal rights, between the authority of
the Central Government and of the State Government.

In any case, a whole class of new difficulties and questions of a totally
new description will make their appearance in the field of English
politics, and call for the exercise on the part both of English and
of Irish statesmen of extraordinary wisdom and extraordinary
self-control.

The new constitution in short, in virtue of its federal tendencies,
will revolutionise the public life of the United Kingdom.

From whatever side the matter be considered we arrive at the same result.
The Home Rule Bill is a new constitution; it subverts the bases
of the English constitution as we now know it, for it destroys
throughout Ireland the effective authority of the Imperial Parliament,
and turns the United Kingdom into a federal government of a new and
untried form.

The change may be necessary or needless, wise or unwise. The first and
most pressing necessity of the moment is that every elector throughout
the United Kingdom should, realise the immense import of the
innovation.
It is a revolution far more searching than would be the abolition
of the House of Lords or the transformation of our constitutional
monarchy into a presidential republic.

The next point to which the attention of every man throughout the land
should be directed is, that the new constitution offered to us for
acceptance is unknown to any other civilised country. Parts of it are
borrowed from the United States; some of its provisions are imported
from the British colonies, whilst others are apparently the inventions
of the unknown and irresponsible Abbé Siéyès, who is the ingenious
constitution-maker of the Cabinet.

But the new polity as a whole resembles in its essence neither the
American Commonwealth nor the Canadian Dominion, nor the Government
either of New Zealand or of any other self-governing colony. It is an
attempt--its admirers may think an original and ingenious attempt--to
combine the sovereignty of an Imperial Parliament with the elaborate
limitation and distribution of powers which distinguish federal
government. The whole thing is an experiment and an experiment
without precedent.

Its novelty is not its necessary condemnation, but neither on the
other hand is innovation of necessity the same thing as reform.

The institutions of an ancient realm are not exactly the _corpus vile_
on which theorists hard pressed by the practical difficulties of the
political situation can be allowed to try unlimited experiments.

We are bound to scrutinise with care every provision of this brand-new
polity. We are bound to consider what will be their effect according
to the known laws of human nature and under the actual circumstances
of the time.

It is vain to tell us that many of our institutions remain untouched. The
introduction of new elements into an old political system may revolutionise
the whole; the addition of new cloth to an old garment may, we all
know, rend the whole asunder.

There is no need for panic; there is the utmost need for prudence.

FOOTNOTES:

[5] References made in this treatise to the Home Rule Bill are,
unless otherwise stated, made to the Bill as ordered to be printed by
the House of Commons, February 17, 1893.

_A Leap in the Dark_ was published months before the Bill was sent up as
amended to the House of Lords

.

[6] This is true of both of Mr.

Gladstone's Home Rule Bills, and must necessarily be true of any
Bill which satisfies even for a time the wishes of Home Rulers

.

[7] I have substituted New Zealand for Victoria as the example of
a typical self-governing colony; the position of Victoria has since
1900 been complicated by the country having become a State of the
Australian Commonwealth or Confederation

.

[8] See Dicey, _Law of Constitution_ (7th ed.), ch. iii. pp. 136-140.

Compare Mill, _Rep. Government_, ch. xvii.

[9] For the sake of convenience I throughout this treatise refer to the
'Bill to amend the provision for the government of Ireland' under
its popular name of the Home Rule Bill, 1893, or simply the Bill.
See the Bill in Appendix.

[10] Bill, clause 5.

[11] (The constitutional history of Victoria affords a curious
illustration of what will certainly happen in Ireland.)

"I wonder what makes him look so pleased," she murmured.


CHAPTER XV

AFTER THE SHOW

Meanwhile, outside in the court, many boys and girls who were unable to
attend the show found a great attraction in its immediate vicinity.

To watch the doors through which so many lucky individuals passed had
proved very interesting earlier in the evening, and after the door had
closed upon the latest comer to creep closely to doors and windows, and
listen to the hum and flutter of the crowd, and then to hear the band's
inspiring strains was a source of joy.  But when the music ceased and a
great calm settled on the audience, they knew very well it was because
the show had commenced, and that, alas, was not visible through thick
boards.

One window, whose shutters were pierced by penknives in former years,
was held valiantly all the evening by a special clique of youngsters
who relieved each other at intervals in pressing their eyes to the
holes, thus getting glimpses of the mysteries within.

A certain ingenious lad had repaired to a nearby house, borrowed a red
hot poker, and returning to the hall, bored two peep-holes through
another shutter, while an enterprising companion pried open a third
window, thus giving a full view of the pictures to all who were
fortunate enough to get near.

All these delinquents at first were thrown into intermittent thrills of
fright whenever the word went round that the constable was coming; but
when, after many false alarms, that worthy man was discovered sitting
comfortably in the hall, well up toward the stage, they felt secure,
knowing they could easily find safety in flight at the first show of
activity on his part.

The panorama moved on.  Christian's movements were followed with
intense interest, especially by the younger onlookers.  Claude found a
special fascination in the big bag fastened upon the hero's shoulders.
He wondered what it contained and when, toward the end, it was lost in
some mysterious way that he could not understand, he felt very much
disappointed not to have found out.  Nettie whispered she guessed it
was old clothes, but Claude knew it was something more interesting than
that.

At last came the Dark Valley and then the Grand Transformation scene,
when through the great pearly gates a glimpse of the Celestial City was
obtained.  Little white-robed angels, with crowns and harps, were seen
flying through the pink tinted air; the white walls and shining domes
of the heavenly mansions glittered in the distance, and Christian's
trials were past.  The children, gazing enraptured at the scene, were
sorry that it could not last forever.

Nettie felt a special interest in one chubby cherub who reminded her of
Lois, and wished for a closer acquaintance, and Claude still hoped to
see the bag bobbing up again to display its contents, like a wizard's
hat but, alas, in a moment the fairy scene was blotted out by the
descending curtain!

Everybody rose and took place in the procession toward the door.

At that moment a crash was heard; a pane of glass was shattered by some
one outside leaning too heavily against it.  In a moment the score of
heads which were peering in had disappeared.  The red-faced constable
was seen edging his way through the crowd, and Claude and Nettie had
visions of handcuffs and the jail in store for the offenders, who,
however, were far away when the enforcer of the law arrived upon the
scene.

Ivy nudged Alene, who in turn nudged Laura, who looked round just in
time to see Mr. Edmonds standing near the box-office.

"_Bon jour, mesdemoiselles_," he cried, with a smile and a bow that
included them all.  "I hope you enjoyed your evening."

"Yes, indeed, thank you, sir!"

"It was beautiful!"

"Lovely!"

"Where do you keep Lois, I mean the cherub?" murmured Nettie in so shy
a tone that only her lips were seen moving, and Claude wished he were
well enough acquainted to ask about the missing bag.

The girls felt a thrill of pride at their prominent position.  Speaking
to one of the show people was next to being a real actor, but they had
to move on with the crowd which pressed around them.

Mr. Edmonds handed the beaming Laura a pretty book, which proved to be
an illustrated copy of the Pilgrim's Progress, and with a parting _au
revoir_, re-entered the box-office.

"Decidedly forward, keeping everyone back this way," said Mrs. Ramsey,
who was slightly in the rear, having waited to fasten Vera's hat.
"Alene Dawson is a bold piece!  The idea of making everybody remove
their hats!  I was glad I wore a close-fitting bonnet or I'd actually
have had to take mine off too.  One can't be odd, you know!--Oh,
there's Mr. Dawson!  Good evening!  Why don't you call upon me to
chaperone Alene for you?  She seems so forsaken, poor thing!  I assure
you I'll take her gladly any time with my girls!"

"You are very kind, but to-night is a sort of a Club affair I believe!"

"Club affair!"

"Is it the Happy-Go-Luckys?" inquired Hermione with a smile.

"Yes, Alene came on their invitation."

"But to be out so late, going home alone!" gasped the lady.

"She is never alone!  Half a dozen of the girls and boys intend
escorting her home to-night and, besides, you see I am not far in the
rear!"

"What a likely tale!" cried Mrs. Ramsey, as the crowd carried the
gentleman away.  "As if the Lees or the Bonners could afford such an
expense!  I'll wager Fred Dawson paid for them all; but then he's
always been odd--don't you remember that little foreigner he made such
a fuss over because Mrs. Truby had him arrested for stealing?  He
actually spent a lot of money to get him off!"

"But the boy was innocent, mamma.  Don't you remember how the lady
found the money a long time afterward, where she had hidden and
forgotten it?"

"But that is not the point--Fred Dawson didn't know he was innocent.
And there's old Miss Marlin, the best teacher of painting and the
languages in town--who charges outlandish prices because he upholds
her, and he actually gives her a house, rent free!"

"She is his old teacher and very feeble!  Dawson is a great-hearted
fellow.  In his quiet way he does more good than many of our famed
philanthropists," said the usually silent Mr. Ramsey.

"Philanthropy, indeed!  Were I Alene's mother I wouldn't like it at
all, throwing his money away.  If he doesn't marry, it will all go to
Alene!"

"She will have plenty in any case; her father is very well fixed!"
commented Mr. Ramsey.

"Is Alene an heiress?" cried Vera.  "How funny!  No one would ever
guess it from her manner!"

"It's well you are not; you would want an air-ship in order to live up
in the clouds above the heads of ordinary people!  Alene has brains!"
returned Hermione.

"An unspoiled child, I should judge," said her father.


CHAPTER XVI

LAURA'S PROPOSITION

"There's a club or something of that kind.  I think it's a branch of
the Sunshine Society," said Laura, as they sat under the trees on the
terrace one bright afternoon, "that keeps a record of the birthdays of
certain members who are sick or shut away from active life, and
everybody is invited to a sort of surprise party, as it were; letters,
books, or mementos of any kind are sent to reach the person on a
certain date; it's a red-white-and-blue letter date for her, I guess--"

"Not blue," interrupted Ivy, "I'd call it a red letter day!"

"Well--" said Alene when Laura paused as if to ponder over something
suggested by her words.

"Well," she returned, coming back to the present, to find her two
friends waiting interestedly.  "Well, it strikes me as a good idea for
adoption by the Happy-Go-Luckys.  It wouldn't be original with us, but
if we wait to do only things which have never been done before, we may
remain idle forever and ever, for there's nothing original under the
sun."

"Except original sin," suggested Ivy.

Laura gave her a withering glance that included Alene who always found
Ivy's sallies amusing.  Perhaps Alene's smile on this occasion caused
Ivy to continue:

"Yes, Lol, I've found that's true, especially when one's writing.  If
you put down something you think is decidedly fine or smart, you're
sure to find that the Bible or Shakespeare or the Daily Observer in
to-day's paper has said it all so much better!  But excuse me, I'm
interrupting you!"

Laura was too full of her subject to give more than a stiff little
contraction of the lips to Ivy's digression; she went on to say:--

"Well, what made me think so much of the birthday idea was what Mother
said when she came home from Mrs. Kump's this morning.  The old lady
lives all alone.  She makes a living by doing odd jobs, so Mother
wanted to get her to do some quilting.  She does it beautifully, in an
old-fashioned way that few understand now-a-days.  When Mother got
there she found her going round doing her work on her hands and
knees--her feet were too sore to walk on.  She told Mother she had been
that way for a week.  She was glad of the quilting, not having been
able to do any other kind of work for some time.  Mother was afraid she
might be in actual want, but she didn't dare say a word for fear of
offending her.  Mrs. Kump happened to remark that Thursday, the day
after to-morrow, is her birthday, and hearing that, just after reading
about the birthday party, made me think of the Happy-Go-Luckys' 'Be
kind' clause.  So, girls, what do you think?"  Laura turned to them a
shining, expectant countenance.

"That we might set some birds a-flying straight to the poor old lady,"
was Alene's prompt reply.

"Yes, the birds will be the best in this case as it is rather quick
time for flower seeds to take root and bloom," remarked Ivy.

"But these are a kind of magic flowers that spring up in a single
night," said Alene.

"And who knows, some of them may turn out regular century plants.  I
read a poem not long ago, about a pebble cast upon the beach, that sent
out ripples to the farther shore, which I suppose means that sometimes
our smallest action may have a far reaching influence," said Ivy, who
reclined on the grass, with her eyes fixed dreamily on the blue expanse
of sky that stretched across the river and met the dark blue line of
hills beyond.

"Come down out of the clouds!  We have work to do and precious little
time for its doing," cried Laura, giving her a shaking.  She sat up
laughing.

"Sounds like a sermon on the shortness of time!  What's time to us
children of eternity?  But what shall we give to poor old Mrs. Kump?"

"That's the question," said Laura, glad to have arrived at something
practical, a matter she often found rather difficult with Ivy.  "Mother
has promised a loaf of bread."

"And I'll ask Mother to give some rolls--but that's bread too; sounds
so dry--I hate dry bread!"

"Kizzie always gives me a dish of honey for breakfast.  I'll ask her
for some of it, and Mrs. Major gets the loveliest little pats of butter
from the country, marked with a dear little cow--I'm sure she will give
me one!"

"Instead of a bird that will be a butterfly," interposed Ivy; "or a
cowslip!"

"Or a buttercup and a honey-bee," returned Alene.

"You wretches!  Here's one to get even.  As Mrs. Kump works at
quilting, we ought to send her a quilting-bee!"

Laura's sally was greeted with groans.

"Well, there's something you won't groan about.  Mrs. Kump was
lamenting that she couldn't go out to pick any berries this year and so
will miss her jam.  Let's go blackberrying to-morrow morning, if the
boys will go along; we can get home before noon and I'll make her a jar
of jam."

"Splendid!" cried Alene, "I've never gone berrying in my life!"

"What's the matter with you, Ivy?  You are not usually so shy!"

"It will be too far for me," said Ivy dejectedly.

"Where did you think I meant to go?  Why, just around the road, on the
hillside near the bridge!"

"There's not a berry left there!  Hugh went over this morning and found
the bushes stripped!  The nearest place is Thornley's, three miles
away!"

"Then of course we won't go!  I wonder if you could go horseback?  I
was thinking that Mat could borrow the groceryman's horse."

"No, Lol, I never learned to ride.  Besides, it would be so jolty!  The
rest of you go without me; the walk will be only a pleasure for you!"

The girls protested against this; they talked of other things connected
with Mrs. Kump's birthday party, and the blackberry project was
apparently abandoned.

A bright thought had come to Alene, however, which she resolved to keep
a secret until she found if she could carry out her plan.

It all depended on her uncle, whom she expected to come up the street
at any moment, on his way home from the office.  She jumped up when she
saw him coming.

"Stay here, girls, until I speak to Uncle Fred."

She ran to the wall and climbed up at the spot where she had first seen
her new friends.

Mr. Dawson crossed in answer to her call.

After a few moments' conversation she returned to the girls, saying
gaily:--

"It's all right, he says we may have it!"

They gazed upon her wonderingly.

"What do you mean?"

Alene laughed.

"There, I forgot it was a secret.  Well, here goes--All the horses are
out at the farm now, but Uncle Fred says we may have the surrey if Mat
can get a horse!"

Laura clapped her hands, and Ivy, who had been unusually silent and
depressed in the last half hour, brightened and her face was fairly
radiant with joy as she cried:

"Oh, Alene!  You good fairy godmother!  It's just like Cinderella and
her pumpkin coach!"

"But we mustn't wear glass slippers," said Laura.  "You see, Alene,
when we go a-berrying we always wear our heaviest shoes and battered
bonnets and patched dresses, for the thorns tear our shoes and clothes."

Alene's face clouded.

"I'm afraid I can't find a battered dress or a patched bonnet.  Will I
have to stay at home?"

"No, you goose!  Just wear the plainest you have!"


CHAPTER XVII

IN THE BERRY PATCH

As if in a dream Alene heard a voice:

"It's after five o'clock, Miss Alene.  You better get up if you want to
be ready by six!"

Alene sat up with a yawn.  She blinked her eyes and gazed solemnly at
the rosy, smiling face of the little maid.

"I wonder why it's so much easier to get up the night before!" she
ejaculated.

Kizzie laughed as she crossed the room and raised the blinds.  The lace
curtains billowed in the fresh air and the soft light of dawn stole
into the room.  A pretty room it was, too, with blue and gray matting,
blue tinted walls, its white stand and dresser, and little brass bed.

With another yawn Alene slipped her feet to the white rug beside the
bed, stood up, and lifting her gown as if for a skirt dance, skipped
lightly to a willow rocker which stood invitingly before one of the
tall windows overlooking the terrace and the town.

"I'll run downstairs and get some breakfast ready, and then come back
and help you with your hair and buttons," said Kizzie.

Alene knelt down beside the chair and buried her face in its blue
cushions to say her morning prayers.

There was a time when she had first come to the Towers when to her
regular prayers she always added a sort of petition--"Please, dear
Lord, I am so lonely!"

Now her heart was filled with the beauty of the day, its promises of
joy.  She had so much that for herself there was nothing more to
ask--only thanks to give, but for her friends, beginning with Mrs.
Kump, the latest, and ending with her parents, the oldest and best
beloved, she petitioned many blessings.

Only a few moments given to God, but they were a consecration for the
day!

Alene rose with a song on her lips and proceeded with her bath and
dressing.  She found herself doing so many things now-a-days that a few
months before would have seemed an impossibility.

"I used to be a bigger baby than Nettie or even Lois," she reflected as
she buttoned her shoes and started to comb her hair.  This was always a
difficult task.  The comb that went through those long locks so
smoothly when manipulated by some one else, encountered many snarls,
and Alene was glad when Kizzie came back to relieve her.  A vigorous
brushing and curling soon brought the refractory hair to the required
state, and the glossy brown curls were finally tied at the nape of her
neck with a bow of blue ribbon.

She was too excited to eat her breakfast; it was only Kizzie's reminder
that, "Mr. Fred will ask if you ate a good breakfast.  He will be
displeased if you don't," that induced her to partake of anything.

She had scarcely finished her bowl of milk and crackers when the big
gate clanged through the still air, then came a medley of gay voices;
the walk resounded beneath the tread of light footsteps, and Prince's
sonorous bark gave forth a challenge.

"There they come!"

"Here they are!"  Alene rushed from the table.

She paused for a moment in the open doorway in sheer amazement and then
she gave a peal of laughter.

"No wonder Prince was scared!" she cried.

For there stood the girls with their sunbonnets drawn over their faces,
and their skirts spread out to display each rent and patch, of which
there were not a few.  Laura put one foot forward that a dilapidated
shoe, from which her toes peeped, might not escape notice, and Ivy
seemed proud of a pocket, turned inside out, that was apparently all
holes.

A snickering sound came from the depths of the bonnets and then their
laughter rang out loud and long.

"We had rehearsed a speech about tramping along the tracks all night,
but I couldn't say a word to save my life when I saw your bewildered
face!" explained Ivy when their mirth had subsided.

"You poor girl!" remarked Laura with a commiserating glance at Alene's
neat blue gingham gown with its trimming of fancy braid; "is that the
'very worstest' you could scare up?"

"Kizzie helped me to look through my trunk and wardrobe and we couldn't
find a thing plainer.  I looked it over but there's not a tear in it!
I might have sewed a patch on, but that would have been make-believe!"

Alene's tone was disconsolate.

"Well, never mind, come along!  There's Hugh waiting near the gate and
Mat's minding the rig!  You needn't take your hat, I brought Nettie's
bonnet; it will do fine.  It's too big for her!"

They ran along the walk and scrambled into the surrey.  The girls took
the back seat, Hugh jumped in beside Mat, and with gay good-byes to
Kizzie and Prince they were off on their way to the country.

The bells of the factories rang out, calling the men to work.  Few
pedestrians, however, were seen for the majority of the working people
lived in the streets nearer the river, while the merchants and
leisurely class occupied residences in the upper streets, along which
they drove.  Occasionally an energetic maid was seen cleaning the front
steps or porch, and just on the out-skirts of the town they passed a
group of boys going the same way, who eyed them curiously.

"Hey, Hughie," cried one, "where are you bound for?"

"Berryin'!"

"So are we!"

Mat gave the grocer's slow-going nag a touch that livened him and they
were soon carried out of range of the lads.

"It's that Stony Road gang!" Hugh glanced round to explain.

"The ones who tried to steal our lunch that day?  But I didn't see Mark
Griffin with them--he's your fish-boy, Alene," said Ivy.

"I guess he'll join them later on; that's his home!"

Hugh pointed to a low stone house that stood some distance in from the
road, beyond a well-trimmed hedge and broad stretch of lawn, with
grape-arbors and barns showing in the rear.

"Why, his folks must be well off," said Laura in surprise.

"Old man Griffin owns the boat-yards over in Westville."

"Well, his son might find better company than that, surely!"

"Mark's been away at school most of his life and when he came home this
vacation, the first thing we knew he was hobnobbing with that gang.
They steal and play cards and torture animals!"

"Horrors!"

"I don't think he would torture anything, he doesn't look like that
kind of a boy!" exclaimed Alene, warmly.

"Might as well be bad as in bad company," returned Hugh, with that
"preacher air" of his which Alene always found exasperating.

"Mark and Jack Lever used to be thicker'n flies, but I've not seen 'em
together this year," interposed Mat.

"Jack's fine as silk, couldn't stand the Stony Road pace, I guess!
Fact is, I haven't seen him for six weeks.  He's never in his father's
store; must be out of town."

"Gee up!" interposed Mat.  "If I didn't keep up a perpetual song, I
believe Old Hurricane'd stop still and never go on again; can easily
see he used to be a race horse!"

"Yes, he always raced the last few yards home for his grub!"

"He's doing splendiferous.  Only for him we wouldn't be here, so don't
spurn the ladder by which we climb," cried Ivy.

"Well, he'd make a better ladder than anything else, he's so bony;
besides that he'd rather stand still any day and let us climb him!"

"You ungrateful Mat!  But, Oh, girls and boys, to sit and let the air
blow upon us, and feast our eyes on the glorious sunrise and the lovely
green fields and flowers!  The air is like champagne I tasted once,
kind of thin and clear and nippy and refreshing!"

"If I knew you were a boozer, Miss Bonner, nothing would have induced
me to undertake the management of this nervous racer.  If the air
brings on an attack of the delirium tremenjous, how can I manage the
two of you?"

"Just manage your own tongue, Mr. Lee, but that would be an
impossibility," said Ivy.

"Talking of wine and things reminds me of Claude," said Laura.  "I
overtook him coming down street the other day and we walked together.
He stopped to peer in at the bars of the jail.  'I'd hate to be put in
a stall like the poor drunkards.'  (He called them Dunkards.)  'And I'm
sure you never will, Claude,' said I.  He threw back his shoulders and
said, 'Well, I drank root-beer till I was six years old and then swore
off and haven't drank a drop since!'  I could have screeched!"

Hugh laughed heartily.

"The little scamp!  He insisted on taking the pledge when I did last
year!  The temperance lecturer was here.  He was a speaker, I can tell
you!  When he cried that ancient warning:

  'Young men, Ahoy there!
  'What is it?'
  'The rapids are below you.'

I could see some of our old soaks shrinking in their seats; and when he
wound up, 'Shrieking, howling, blaspheming, over they go,' it was
simply immense!  There was such a stampede for the platform that you'd
think we were drowning, and scrambling for life-buoys.  I knew from the
way Mother spoke when I set out for the hall that she would like me to
pledge myself.  Someway I didn't see any use in it, but that lecturer
made me see lots of things, so I up and followed old man Potter who
hadn't drawn a sober breath ever since I could remember.  Claude clung
to my coat-tails.  "I want a ribbon, too!" he screamed.  The lecturer
gave one look at the little shaver and the crowd roared as he pinned a
badge on the boy's coat.  Ah, here we are at the patch!"

Mat turned the horse into a lane leading to the left.

"Here's your bonnet, Alene," cried Laura.  "Don't forget the buckets,
boys!"

Mat tied Old Hurricane to the fence beneath a shady tree and they
started for the nearest clump of bushes, each carrying a tin cup,
which, when filled with berries, was to be emptied into one of the
buckets placed at a convenient spot.

Alene gave a gasp of joy, when parting the branches she found an
abundance of delicious fruit.  Her first scratch, a tiny one on the
back of her hand, was proudly exhibited to the others.

"How many have you eaten?" inquired Laura.

"Not a one!"

"Show your tongue, little girl," said Ivy in a doubting tone.  "Why,
you poor thing, you haven't tasted one!  Look at mine," she opened her
mouth.

"Poor Mrs. Kump!" said Alene.

The others laughed.

"Oh, there will be plenty for her.  Eat all you wish, Alene; Mat and
Hugh are noted pickers, there's no fear of our taking home empty
buckets," said Laura.

Alene's lips were soon in the same state as Ivy's.  The air had given
her a sharp appetite, and when in the course of the morning, Laura
found a package of sandwiches and tarts hidden under the seat of the
surrey, she declared that nothing had ever tasted quite so good as the
portion she disposed of, along with her tin of clear cold water from a
neighboring well.

While enjoying luncheon her eyes wandered over the berry patch which
sloped gently upward to the road.  A great many children and a few men
and women were scattered over the field, stripping the bushes.

Across the patch a barred gate led to fields of pasture, and some of
the boys on the safe side of the fence were goading a great red bull
into a state of frenzy.

As he tossed his head and bellowed, stamping and goring the ground,
Alene was glad there was a strong fence between them.  She thought she
recognized among the mischievous lads one of the crowd they had passed
on the road in the early morning.

The girls brushed away the crumbs of the feast and went back to the
bushes, while the boys returned the borrowed water bucket to its owner,
who lived a short distance up the lane.

Alene was busy picking the ripe berries from an unusually heavy-laden
branch, rejoicing to see her measure filling so rapidly, when she heard
a terrified shriek.

She jumped to her feet, letting the cup fall from her grasp, and turned
to find the other girls standing with horror-stricken faces, gazing
across the patch.  In a moment she knew what had happened.  The wide,
barred gate had become unfastened in some way, probably by one of the
boys.  It was standing wide open and the angry bull had come through
and was seen tearing like a mad creature in the middle of the patch.

Everyone sought places of safety, the small children clinging to their
elders with frightened cries, while one or two of the more courageous
young men who tried to head the animal and turn him back to his pasture
were compelled to fly, to escape injury.

The three girls stood for a moment as if paralyzed; then Laura grasped
Ivy's arm.

"Quick, quick, to the fence!  He's coming straight upon us!"

"It's my red dress," gasped Ivy.

Alene glanced round.  She saw they were not far from the fence but that
it would be necessary to skirt a row of thick-grown bushes in order to
reach it.  Could they do so in time?

In the meantime Mat and Hugh, returning leisurely along the lane, were
startled into activity by the sight that met their view.  Their gaze at
once sought the place where they had left the girls.  It was deserted;
but not far away, Ivy's dress made a bright spot that immediately held
their glance, and the bull apparently had singled it out for attack;
his mad flight led straight in the path of the girls.

The boys, with one impulse, made a dash across the fence; with clenched
hands and set teeth they stumbled onward; but alas, they were too far
away to render any help!


CHAPTER XVIII

TO THE RESCUE

And then an unlooked-for actor appeared upon the scene; a boyish
figure, supple and well built, sprang, as if miraculously, out of a
dense clump of bushes, just beyond the terror-stricken girls.

With a ringing shout he darted straight in front of the infuriated
brute, and flung his coat defiantly in its eyes.  Angry and snorting,
it tossed the coat aside and started after its tormentor.

The trembling girls, thus suddenly and unexpectedly rescued from their
peril, found new anxiety for the safety of their brave deliverer.

With bated breath they watched him as, having succeeded in diverting
the attention of the enemy, he half circled the field with the maddened
creature in hot pursuit, so close at times that he felt its hot breath
on his neck.

Always heading in one direction, toward the open gate of the pasture
field, the boy led the race, and finally breathless and almost
exhausted, he gained the goal.

Through the gate he ran and gave, as he cleared it, a sudden jump to
one side, while the momentum of the bull carried it forward and beyond
him.  A moment later he stood in the friendly grass of the berry-patch,
with the gate closed securely between him and the foe.

"It's Mark Griffin!" cried Ivy.

"Yes, I knew him at once," returned Alene.

The three girls clapped their hands joyfully, starting a round of
applause.  Soon from every part of the patch came cheers and shouts and
whistling; a small boy, who perhaps was the cause of all the trouble,
scrambled from a tree near the big gate with a whoop that would have
startled an Indian brave.  He ran across the field, picked up the coat
from where it lay on the ground almost in ribbons, and returned it to
its owner.

With a humorous glance at the crumpled and grass-stained object Mark
flung it over his shoulder and, followed by the urchin and one or two
other boys, started away from the field and was soon out of sight down
the lane.

"He wouldn't wait a minute," explained Hugh apologetically, when he and
Mat returned to the girls.

Ivy curled her lip.

"There's a great deal in the way things are asked," she said, and Hugh
knew she was offended.

"Who wouldn't run away from a lot of girls ready to slobber over him
with thanks and prayers?" said Mat with a broad grin.

"As if we would make him a courtesy and say, 'Thank you, sir, for
saving my life!'" retorted Ivy.

Hugh busied himself picking up the tins and the upset buckets.  He
sympathized with Mark's dislike of a scene.

"Any of you fellows would have done the same if you had the chance,"
the latter had said.

"Did she expect us to bring a fellow by the coat collar to be thanked?
Girls are queer, they always enjoy fussing and the limelight,"
concluded Hugh.  He kept resolutely away from them.

"What's the matter with Hugh?" whispered Laura after a time.

"Why?"

"He seems kind o' grumpy."

Ivy picked out a monster berry and put it into her mouth.

"The wind's changing I guess!  Boys are like weather-vanes, you never
can tell what way they're going next!"

Laura smiled at the idea of comparing staid, dependable Hugh with
anything so uncertain as a weather-vane.

Ivy kept on filling her tin cup and pretended not to pay any attention
to her brother.  She knew her uncalled-for, sarcastic remark had
offended him.  Had it been anyone else, she would have made ample
apology, but it was only poor old Hugh--it was not necessary to trouble
herself about him.  He would "come round" after while, as he always
did.  No matter how far in the wrong Ivy might be, it was always Hugh
who made the first advances toward a reconciliation.  Perhaps if he had
waited longer, Ivy might have behaved differently, but Hugh never
waited.

Sure enough, he soon gave signs of the "coming round" process, but
instead of "coming round" to Ivy with a handful of flowers he had
found, he gave them to Alene.

After that it was to Alene he came when he had an especially large
berry to show; he insisted upon her eating it; he compared the state of
his tin cup and hers, and they made a wager as to whose cup would be
filled the first.

His celerity amazed Alene.

"How can you fill yours so quickly?"

"By sticking to a good bush when I find one!"

"You girls lose time by flitting from bush to bush like butterflies,"
added Mat.

"We are more like busy bees, Mat.  We gather only the best as we fly!
There's Laura, no boy can beat her picking berries," said Ivy.

"I believe there's a good deal in what Hugh says," remarked Laura, "not
only in berry picking, but in work and study.  We accomplish more by
sticking to one thing at a time.  They say 'Beware of the man of one
book.'"

"I would indeed be beware of him.  He'd be an insufferable bore!"
retorted Ivy, as she moved away to another bush.

"Now we will transmigrate ourselves into robins and do the 'babes in
the wood' act!"

Ivy gazed at the speaker compassionately.

"Has the poor boy gone daffy?"

Mat pointed to the two buckets, by that time filled with berries.

"We will cover them over with leaves!"

"Do you know what Claude does when he's angry or out of humor?"
inquired Ivy.

"Throws himself on the floor and kicks, I guess!"

"No, he runs to a corner and hides his face!"

"Well?"

"If I were you, I'd follow his example!"

"But I'm not angry or out of humor with you, Ivy.  On the contrary, I
feel as mild as a lamb, and I'm so razzle-dazzle-dizzled pleased with
getting these buckets filled in spite of you girls, that I
could--could--"

"Please don't, whatever it is you could do, be wise and don't do it!"

"What's the time?" asked Laura.

"Eleven A.M.!"

"Are you sure of the A.M.?"

"I'm surer of it than of the eleven!  I made a guess at that!"

"We'd better start home.  It will take some time to make the jam and
get Mrs. Kump's basket ready," said Laura.

Mat made a horn of his hands and gave a yell.

"What's that for?"

"To call our party in."

"We don't want everybody in the field; we're all here but Alene and
Hugh."

"Where are they?  Haven't seen 'em for some time!  Ah, here they come!"

"Hugh took me over to see a thrush's nest," explained Alene.  Her face
glowed with animation beneath Nettie's pink lined bonnet; her lips and
fingers were stained with berries and Laura asked herself if this could
be the white-cheeked, forlorn, little Peggy-Alone she had seen standing
beside Prince on the terrace just a couple of months before.

They trooped gaily into the carriage, Mat again took the reins and away
they went on the return trip.

They came into the town by a different route, which led past the
Ramseys' buff cottage.

"There's Vera and her mother and some ladies sitting on the porch,"
remarked Alene.

"And see, there's Hermione at an upstairs window," said Ivy.

The girls waved their hands to that smiling friend and the boys
gallantly doffed their hats as they raced Old Hurricane past the house.

Mrs. Ramsey gazed after the vehicle with a look of amazement.  She had
obtained a glimpse of the girls, in their print dresses and sunbonnets,
but had failed to recognize them.

"Who can they be?"

"They evidently know you," said one of the ladies, smilingly.  "Didn't
you see that little curly-headed girl swinging her bonnet?"

"Not at us, surely!"

Vera smiled at her mother's shocked tone.

"That was Ivy Bonner; they were waving at Hermione upstairs."

"I thought it looked like Dawson's rig, but surely Alene wasn't--"

"Yes, she was there, with her face all stained with berry juice!  I
guess they were out picking blackberries!"

Mrs. Ramsey raised her eyes in despair.  "What does Fred Dawson mean by
allowing it?  If that poor child's mother only knew!"


CHAPTER XIX

THE BLUE BOX

It was eight o'clock when Jed Granger, a youth of eighteen, who acted
as a sort of under gardener at the Towers, left a hamper at the Lee
home.

"Here's a note from Alene," explained Laura, running her eyes over the
sheet of tinted paper.  "Of all the foolish things to do!"

Ivy sat beside the kitchen table, writing a neat label for Mrs. Kump's
jar of jam.  She glanced up at Laura.

"Well?"

"Just listen!  Mother, listen to this!"


"Laura Dear:--

Good luck!  Uncle Fred gave me two dollars to buy something for Mrs.
Kump.  Didn't have time to consult you or Ivy but I know you will be
pleased!  It's on top of the hamper.  Be sure and look at it.

Good-bye!
  "Alene D."


"Candy!  Let's look at it!"

Laura, still wearing a look of disgust, opened the package, displaying
a box of pale blue and silver tied with narrow ribbons, which after a
careful untying and lifting of the lid disclosed a splendor of
lace-work and tinsel-paper, over layer upon layer of bon bons and
candied fruit, with a cute little silver tongs.

"Delicious!  And what a beautiful box!"

"It's certainly very fine!"

"But for old Mrs. Kump!" cried Laura.  "The money or something
substantial would do so much better!"

"There's plenty of substantials in Alene's hamper," said Mrs. Lee.
"Butter, coffee, tea."

"But this fine candy and the ribbons and fixings!  It's like throwing
the money away!" said Laura sharply, as she wrapped up the box and
replaced it on the hamper.

Though Ivy had doubts of the usefulness of Alene's gift, she felt a
certain satisfaction in having it to send along with the more practical
things; she wished she had a volume of her own poetry, bound in blue
with the name just as she had often pictured it in silver letters,
"Early Blossoms," to send; it would go so well with Alene's box.
Laura's condemnation, however, made this seem a foolish desire, which
she would not dare to mention.

They returned to the work of getting everything ready for the boys to
carry to Mrs. Kump.  Ivy completed her label and pasted it on the jar,
where the fancy initials looked effective.  Laura and her mother
proceeded with the packing.  The former still wore a disapproving
countenance and her vexation hung round them like a cloud.

"This reminds me of something that happened to me once upon a time,"
said Mrs. Lee, who had occasion to move the hamper.  Ivy smiled
encouragingly.

"Ob, a story, a story!  Come and sit here, Lol, and listen!"

"Once upon a time," Mrs. Lee began, "I and my cousin Clementina, just
about my own age, ten years, were the best of chums, even thicker than
you Happy-Go-Lucky girls, for we had just ourselves to play with, all
the other members of both families being much older; the next in age
was my sister Roxana, going on sixteen.  Clemmie and I used to watch
the store windows and I remember one day we stood transfixed at a new
display in Smithley's drug store.  In addition to drugs, they sold many
other things, so there we stood, Clemmie admiring a pair of pink
garters with silver buckles, while I looked longingly at a volume of
_Jane Eyre_.

"'Only thirty cents!  If I only had a pair!' sighed Clementina.

"'A dollar and a half,' I lamented, for in those days there were no
cheap editions of books.

"Day after day on our way to and from school we stopped before our
idols.  Clem told me she often dreamed of that pair of garters with its
shining buckles!

"'Saturday's my birthday; if some kind, rich old gentleman would happen
along and adopt me before then, the first thing I'd ask for would be a
pair of pink garters like these!'

"That day when I reached home I found a small package which my
godmother, Mrs. Keyes, had left for me.  It was a pretty handkerchief
with my initial in the corner, and knotted inside was a silver half
dollar.  To me that was quite a fortune and Roxana gave me much advice
as to its disposal, but I scarcely heard what she said; I was thinking
of something else; you can guess what it was."

"Yes, we know, we know," cried Ivy.

"Friday evening, I sneaked away from Clem and went to Smithley's.

"I could hardly control my voice to speak when the proprietor came
forward.  I had come to a halt near the show window.

"'What's your lowest price for _Jane Eyre_?' I found myself saying.

"'A dollar and a half.  It's a most fascinating book, but for your own
reading I'd advise--'

"'Thank you, sir, but I think I'll buy those.'

"I pointed to the garters.  Mr. Smithley wrapped them up and tied the
package with a pink and white cord.

"I could hardly wait to get home before opening the precious parcel.  I
wanted to show it to mother the first thing, but she was not in and I
proudly displayed it to Roxana.  She eyed the garters dubiously.

"'Very easily soiled!  How much did you pay for them?'

"'Thirty cents, at Smithley's.'

"'Thirty cents!  The idea!  For something you can't wear!'

"'I don't intend wearing them!  It's my present for Clementina's
birthday!'

"'You foolish thing!  Why didn't you consult me?  A pair of black ones
would wear so much longer!'

"Roxana's manner did not chill my pleasure.  I went upstairs and wrote
an inscription on a card:--

"'For Clementina on her Tenth Birthday, from Edna,' and placed it with
the garters.

"I could hardly wait for the next day!  I pictured Clem's surprise and
rapture.

"Mother came home, and after supper I slipped away to get the package
to show to her.  I knew when I returned to the sitting-room, that
Roxana had told her about my purchase and how she regarded it.

"She said it was pretty but--well, they kept on about it, until I began
to think myself a culprit.  I could hardly see the pink garters for my
tears.  At last Roxana suggested an exchange.  By that time I didn't
care for anything; all my pleasure in the gift was spoiled.

"'I'll not give Clementina anything,' I said.

"'Don't be unreasonable, child, the black garters will be so useful,'
chided my mother.

"'But Clementina admired these!'

"'She never dreamed of owning them, though,' said Roxana.

"'Yes, she did!'

"Well, it resulted in Roxana's carrying off my foolish purchase and
coming back with her sensible one.

"I can smile at it now, but at the time it was a real tragedy to me.
Mother never suspected my disappointment.  We were all so used to
accepting Roxana's opinions as laws that to rebel against them would
lay oneself open to the charge of treason.

"Well, the next day I went to Clementina's.  She came running down to
the front gate to meet me.

"'Happy birthday,' I faltered, thrusting the little package into her
hands.

"'Why, Edna,' she said, but I hurried away, not daring to wait to see
her open it.

"That was apparently the end of our friendship.

"When we met again, Clementina treated me very coolly; I was terribly
cut up but I did not blame her.  I knew it would have been better taste
not to have given her anything, but it was too late then.

"For several days we kept apart.

"I avoided Smithley's window, but one day I stopped before it almost in
spite of myself.  There hung the pink garters, with their shining
buckles.  They seemed to mock my chagrin.  Then all at once Clementina
stood at my side.  She held out her hand!

"'Forgive me, Edna, I might have known it was Roxana!'

"My lip trembled.

"'Carrie Smithley told me just now.  You see, she was in the store when
you bought the pink garters and when Roxana returned them she told Mr.
Smithley what a foolish thing you had bought; she said you were too
stubborn to come back yourself and she had to do it.  She always had to
do the things the rest of the family shirked!'

"I had to smile at Clem's mimicking Roxana, it was so true to life.

"Poor Clem!  She said she never expected me to give her anything, but
when she opened the parcel and saw the black garters, she rushed into
the darkened parlor and cried and cried, on the sofa behind the door!
Not because of the garters, but because she expected different
treatment from me--'It just seemed like a slap in the face,' she said."

"I guess it did," murmured Ivy.  "Is that the end?"

"There's a kind of a sequel," said Mrs. Lee with a smile.  "Clementina
gave a glance into Smithley's window.

"'Say, Edna, would you care if--'

"'Oh, Clem, I'd be so glad!' said I."

"And so it ended happily after all!" cried Ivy.

"Yes; and Cousin Clem has them to this day--put away in a cedar box
that belonged to her mother!"

Laura smiled rather doubtfully.

"And of course there's a moral, Mother Lee, but this is different!"

Going home, Ivy talked the matter over with her mother.

"I'm inclined to take Mrs. Lee's view.  The poem says 'Give to the
hungry potatoes,' but I guess it doesn't mean to give potatoes only!"
said that lady.


CHAPTER XX

MRS. KUMP'S BIRTHDAY

Mrs. Kump's home, a one-storied frame building, stood on the west bank
of a run that trickled down from the hills to the river; a small window
faced the main road, while two others with the 'front' door between,
opened upon a porch thickly trellised with grape vines; a couple of
steps at one end of the porch led to a wooden platform which bridged
the stream.

At six o'clock that morning the dew lay heavy upon the matted grape
leaves, and over the little vegetable garden behind the house, with its
outlying poles of hop-vines and sweet-peas.

The scent of pennyroyal came from the banks of the stream; the birds
twittered round the little gray house and the sun shone upon it feebly,
through a thick wall of fog.

Stepping softly across the bridge and through the green opening of the
porch went Hugh and Mat, those worthy aids of the Happy-Go-Luckys; in
front of the door they placed the birthday offerings, and then, giving
a resounding knock on the panel, they ran and hid in the bushes across
the road.

Presently the door opened and a gray head peered forth, then out
stepped a thin figure in a blue calico wrapper.  With hands upraised
she advanced to the porch steps.

"The grocer's man made a mistake," the boys heard her say.  She gazed
along the road but no one was in view.  Retracing her steps she bent
over the baskets.

"There's a card on 'em.  The owner's name, I reckon.  I'll get my specs
and see!"

"Now's our chance to light out!" whispered Mat, and away they flew.

Mrs. Lee crossed the bridge that same evening, followed by Nettie in
starched white frock and golden curls.

A clump of hollyhocks made a gorgeous splash of color against the wall
of the house beneath the end window.  Four-o'clocks, ragged-robins and
blue lark-spur struggled up through the cabbages and long grass of the
little garden, to bid them welcome, and at the door they were met by
the mistress of the house, who had heard their footsteps.

Mrs. Kump was a large-boned woman of medium height; her complexion was
of golden bronze; the flesh had fallen, giving her cheeks a square set,
and her dark eyes gleamed brightly beneath a broad wrinkled brow; a cap
of black lace surmounted her head, a white net fichu was crossed on her
breast and fastened with a cameo pin in a wide gold frame, and her
dress was of silver gray.

She led the way into the little sitting-room and drew aside the muslin
half-curtains.  Through the open window came the murmur of the running
stream, the scent of pennyroyal, and the rays of the setting sun.

A striped rag carpet covered the floor and the walls, with gorgeous
papering of flowers and vines, were hung with many old fashioned
pictures.

There was the Lord's Prayer in an intricate design of crimson and gold,
a framed sampler and motto, and smaller pictures in square and oval
frames; these for the most part friends and relatives of the owner,
their pictured features shadowed and dimmed by time.

In the middle of the room a square table with a red, woolen cover, held
a half-dozen books cross-cornered one upon the other in several groups;
a glass lamp filled with red-colored water and oil stood in the center,
the top covered with a paper shade and the bottom swathed in a woolen
mat.

A high, wooden mantel, painted black, occupied the other end of the
room; the fireplace was hidden by a square, cambric screen, with a
cut-out picture of fruit and flowers pasted in the center.  Nettie's
glance was immediately taken by a white marble book, with yellow
painted edges and clasps, lying upon the old glass-knobbed bureau.

Mrs. Kump drew the straight-backed rattan rocker to the open window,
giving it a hurried dusting with her black silk apron, and invited Mrs.
Lee to be seated.

Then, as she noticed her visitor looking at the quilting frames which
occupied one end of the room, she said,

"You'll think I'm slighting your quilt, Mis' Lee!--I got so far back on
the job, with my poor legs bothering me so!  But sez I to myself, 'I'll
try and catch up on Thursday,' but when I went to the door this mornin'
and found the good fairies' offerings, I fairly wilted.  I made up my
mind to keep the day, and I'm keepin' it; I haven't done a stroke of
work!"

Mrs. Lee looked interested.

"The day--yes--I believe you told me--"

"My birthday--sixty-seven--the years do run up when once you begin to
count 'em!  But about the baskets--thinks I to myself, 'The grocer's
man left 'em at the wrong place,' but he must have druv away fast,
there wasn't a soul in sight, and then I comes in for my specs and
there was my name writ in black and white 'Mrs. Keturah Kump, with best
wishes for her birthday!'  I nearly wilted!  I got so narvous-like that
I could hardly lift 'em!  And who was livin' to care for me or my
birthday?  All my folks dead--all but the young ones.  They live out
west and don't bother their heads about me.  But about the
baskets--you'd orter see what they held--a good share of
everything--I'll show you my cupboard stocked, and lots of things down
cellar--and there, I'd been worryin' and doubtin', not bein' able to
work for so long.  I don't mind tellin' you, Mis' Lee, now that things
is changed for the best, that I was about at the end of my string.
Sugar and tea about out and not enough flour to last a day longer!  I
unpacked the baskets and stood and looked at the things--butter and
eggs and bread and cake and blackberry jam, the only spread I ever et,
and I put 'em away as if in a dream, leavin' out a snack to make
breakfast, though I was so excited I couldn't swallow a bite!

"I put on a drawin' of tea, and puttered about settin' the table, when
all at once I spied a little passel that I had set aside when I brought
the baskets in.  So I opened it--and what do you think!  I sat right
down by the table and cried and cried!  It seemed to me that the other
things might be for any old, worn-out woman, but this was just for me,
and it went straight to my heart!  The loveliest blue box, the inside
fixed with lace just like the valentines that poor David sent me when
he came courtin', and it was filled with candy, the loveliest you ever
saw!--with real cherries and vi'lets fixed up, lookin' too good to eat!
Just think--for me, a poor old woman that most people would think it
all wasted on!  Something beautiful came over the day, I felt young
again, and vigorous and proud and happy all at once, just like I used
to feel long years ago when I'd first see the Johnny-jump-ups in the
spring, way down in the medder near the creek!"

Mrs. Kump rose suddenly and went to the big bureau, wiping her glasses
as she went.  Coming back, she proudly displayed Alene's box.

"Take some, child," she said to Nettie, "and you too, Mis' Lee!  I
thought at first it was too good for me to eat but it'll get spiled, so
I'll eat it little by little, and I can keep the box to hold some
trinkets I've had for years!  Just see the little silver tongs!
Nothin' was too good for me!  Why, I felt so perked up that I got out
my best dress and my silk apron, to do honor to the day!"

A score of years seemed to fall from the speaker, her eyes gleamed
brightly, as she glanced from her silver-toned best dress to her
listener's sympathetic countenance.

As she wended her way homeward with Nettie, who carried a huge bouquet
from Mrs. Kump's garden, Mrs. Lee's thoughts dwelt on the old lady's
words.

"I wish the girls had been along to hear--Ah, there they are!" she
said, as, coming in sight of the Bonner house, she saw Laura and Ivy
seated on the front steps.

Nettie gave a screech of delight and jumped across a gutter to make a
short cut to exhibit her flowers.

Mrs. Bonner, hearing voices, came to the door and one of the boys
brought out chairs for her and Mrs. Lee.

"As you are all so much interested, I guess I'll sit down a while and
tell you all about Mrs. Kump's birthday!" said Mrs. Lee.  "Now, not so
many questions!  Yes, she got the baskets with her name printed so
artistically on the card, and she never suspects who gave the things.
She has enough to tide her over for a long time, and the jam went to
the right spot, but guess what it was that pleased her the most."

"Old ladies are very fond of tea," ventured Mrs. Bonner.

"The print of butter!" cried Ivy.

"Mrs. Bonner's coffee cake," said Laura.

They made several other guesses but Mrs. Lee still shook her head.

"I know," said Nettie quickly, "it was that blue box!"

"Not Alene's candy!" cried Laura, incredulously.

"Yes, that was it!"

Mrs. Lee thereupon told what Mrs. Kump had said, word for word.

A silence followed the recital.

"Who would have thought it?" Laura said at last.

"Ah, Laura dear, you forgot the thought behind the gift.  'The love of
the giver is greater than the gift of the lover,'" said Mrs. Lee.


CHAPTER XXI

TO CHINA IN A GLASS-BOAT

At the upper end of the wharf a small boat was anchored, gay in red
paint with black trimmings.  It consisted of a single deck only, on
which was a raised cabin that extended the whole length of the boat,
having doors at each end and several small windows on the sides.

The girls hastened along the broad plank, over the shallow space of
water between the boat and the shore, and entered the wide front
opening.

The interior resembled a country store.

A counter, running three quarters of the length of the boat and stacked
with all sorts of glassware, divided the room in two parts.

Sandwiched between the counter and the shelves, which were also heavily
laden with glass, was a clerk, intent upon the customers who crowded
the narrow aisle.

And what queer customers they were!  Boys and girls, for the most part
poorly dressed, who kept an eye on the different articles displayed, or
hovered round the large scales at one end of the counter, guarding
strange looking bundles and baskets.

To Laura, who had visited the boat each summer for as long as she could
remember, it was a familiar scene, but everything proved new and
wonderful to Alene.

For a time they were content to wait and watch before making any
investments.

"What are they doing?" inquired Alene, pointing to two boys who had
dragged a battered basket and a great bundle to the scales.

"Just watch and you'll see."

The clerk took the basket which was filled with pieces of old iron,
small bolts, nails, and such things, rusty and apparently good for
nothing, and weighed it on the scales; its owners watched carefully to
verify its correct weight, and while they calculated its value the
clerk proceeded to weigh the bundle.

"Rags," whispered Laura to the wondering Alene.  "They buy them from
all the towns along the river and sell them in the city to make paper
and things."

"The iron?"

"No, silly--that's made over I guess at the foundries."

Alene became interested in watching the two boys whose property had
been valued.  With an air of importance they turned their attention to
choosing its equivalent in crystal ware.

After examining critically the different articles, the older boy at
last decided upon a large plate with "Give us this day our daily bread"
in fancy letters around the rim, but his companion hesitated between
two pitchers.

"Oh, Laura!"  Alene's cry of dismay drew Laura's attention.  "He's
going to buy that purple monstrosity!"

"I think that blue one with the bulgy sides is out o' sight," the boy
was saying, his gaze straying from one to the other; "I wonder which ma
would like the best!"

Laura stepped forward with an elder-sisterly air.

"Is it for water?" she inquired.

"Yes; ma broke her chiny one the other day and I want to s'prise her."

"Then I'd buy that white one with the frosted flowers; it will look so
cool with the water sparkling through.  You think the blue one is
prettier I know, but it would not be so suitable for water.  Don't you
think so?"

"That's so, thank y', miss," said the boy, lifting the straw crown
which served him as a hat.

Alene drew a breath of relief.  "Oh, Laura, you know just what to do!
I'm sure he wanted the purple-blue one awfully and he took the other
just to please you!" she whispered as the boys left the boat with their
treasures, giving a doubtful look backward at the abandoned pitcher.

Laura shrugged her shoulders.

"Oh, boys are funny; they mean well but their tastes run to bright
things.  Any girl in a gaudy dress is beautiful in their eyes!"

"And there isn't always a Laura near to point out the superiority of
the girl in plain white," returned Alene with a sanctimonious air at
which they both laughed.

"Now for our own choosing," said Laura briskly, and the clerk came
forward to her nod.

They spent a delightful half hour at the counter fingering the pretty
things, sometimes having as much trouble to decide between different
objects as the boys had with their pitchers.

"I'll take this sweet little blue goblet for Ivy, and that pitcher for
Mrs. Major, and the berry dish for Kizzie.  I'd like to get Uncle Fred
a new tobacco-jar to replace the one I broke, but I don't see any."
Alene pointed out the things desired, all of which Laura had helped in
selecting; then Laura bought her mother a cake-stand and Mrs. Bonner
had commissioned her to buy a dozen tumblers, which purchase took much
time and thought.

Presently Alene became aware of a pattering on the roof.  Softly it
came at first, then more and more insistent.

"Why, Lol, it's raining like--like in the days of Noah!" she cried.

"It's only a summer shower," said Laura carelessly.

Having completed their purchases, they strayed to the far end of the
boat and discovered a narrow, paneled door which led to a tiny private
cabin.

"It would make a lovely play-house!" exclaimed Laura as they peeped in.

It certainly looked inviting with its gay rug and crimson-cushioned
furniture.

"What do you say?  Let's slip in and wait for the rain to be over!"

Laura's proposition almost took Alene's breath away.

"But will they allow?"

"Oh, yes, what difference could it make?  It's empty, so we won't be in
anyone's way!" returned Laura airily, and as the rain still beat upon
the boat, and they were both very tired, having been on their feet for
several hours, so they entered the inviting little parlor without
further hesitation.

It was cosy and snug within but rather stuffy, the small windows being
closed; but the girls seated side by side on the big chair beside the
table found the situation very enjoyable.

"I feel like a traveler, as if we were taking a sail to some outlandish
place," said Laura, getting up to adjust her hat before a small mirror
set in the wall, beneath which was a stationary wash-stand with holes
for bowl and pitcher.

"Let's pretend we're on one of those funny Chinese boats like Uncle
Fred told me about; they have large, painted eyes without which no
Chinaman would set sail.  They say; 'No got eye, no can see--no can
see, no can walkee!'"

Alene placed her bundles on the center table and leaned back cosily in
the cushioned chair.  She was in the midst of a reverie where a
queer-looking Chinese mandarin was trying to persuade her to buy a blue
glass pitcher, when Laura's voice brought her back to reality.

"Alene, Alene, it's moving--the boat!"

"But it's tied to that big iron ring--it can't move from the wharf!"

There was a creaking and straining of the woodwork around them which
they had not noticed before.  Laura ran to a window, followed by Alene.
The hills appeared to be gliding by!  Sure enough, the boat was moving;
it had left the shore while they were talking.

For a moment they had a strange sensation.

"It's like being abducted," said Alene.

"Oh, dear, I wonder how far they will go!"

They ran through the paneled door to the front of the boat.  The clerk
was busy arranging his stock.

"Why, I thought everybody was gone!" he cried in surprise.

"We went into the cabin to rest awhile; we never dreamed you were going
away.  Where will the boat go?"

The young man laughed.

"Oh, don't get scared!  We are only bound across the river a few miles
above, to catch the train!  Wait, maybe I can get Jones to return and
land you first."

He came back in a few minutes.

"He says he can't do it; the captain is coming on the train and if we
fail to meet him 'on the dot' it's as much as his job is worth.  But it
won't take very long and then we'll put back and land you at home."

The girls were forced to be content.  They returned to the cabin and
discussed the situation.

"I wish Ivy could have come along, she would enjoy this," cried Laura.

When the boat at length drew near to shore and a plank was thrown out,
they went on deck and gazed around.

In front and on each side as far as they could see, a steep, scrubby
bank reached up to the railway tracks which swept along the foot of the
hills.  A small wooden tower stood near the tracks a short distance
away.  The rain had ceased as suddenly as it had come and the sunlight
lay on river and land.

"The train must be late," remarked the clerk.  A muffled rumble was
heard--"Hark, there it is now!"

But it turned out to be a freight, which drew its long length past,
like a many-jointed snake.

Time passed slowly to the impatient girls.  The young man ran up to the
tower to make inquiries.

"The operator says our train may be hour late," he reported.

He felt very sorry for their dilemma, but he knew it would be useless
to ask the man in charge to make a special trip to let them off.

_Judges and Civil Servants_ 26.

Tenure of future judges.
27.

As to existing judges and other persons having salaries charged on
the Consolidated Fund.
28.

As to persons holding civil service appointments.
29. As to existing pensions and superannuation allowances.

_Police_ 30. As to Police.

_Miscellaneous_ 31. Irish Exchequer Consolidated Fund and Audit.
32. Law applicable to both Houses of Irish Legislature.
33.

Supplemental provisions as to powers of Irish Legislature.
34.

Limitation on borrowing by local authorities.

_Transitory Provisions_ 35.

Temporary restriction on powers of Irish Legislature and Executive.
36.

Transitory provisions.

37. Continuance of existing laws, courts, officers, etc.
38. Appointed day.

39. Definitions.

40. Short title.

SCHEDULES
A BILL TO AMEND THE PROVISION FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF IRELAND[138]

Whereas it is expedient that without impairing or restricting the
supreme authority of Parliament, an Irish Legislature should be
created for such purposes in Ireland as in this Act mentioned:
Be it therefore enacted by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty, by
and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
and Commons, in this present Parliament assembled, and by the
authority of the same, as follows:

_Legislative Authority_ 
1.

_On and after the appointed day_ there shall be in Ireland a Legislature
consisting of Her Majesty the Queen and of two Houses, the Legislative
Council and the Legislative Assembly.

2."I noticed you girls running out on deck when the boat drew off and I
thought something was wrong and hurried over to see," he explained half
shyly, as he drew the boat to shore.

"Oh, have you come to take us home?" cried Alene.  "How lovely of you!"

"I'll run back to the cabin for our packages," and Laura, not waiting
for his reply, hurried away.

"If you don't object to going with me!"

"Object!  Why, we are delighted at the chance!  We didn't know what to
do!"

Alene told the cause of their predicament, which the boy had already
guessed.

"It seems funny you thought we would object to being rescued by you;
you didn't wait to find out if we objected or not, that day at the
picnic, and the day you faced the mad bull!"

He laughed.

"Excuse me, you see the old fellow was so quick he didn't give me a
chance!  But this is different!"

Alene was silent.  She was afraid he might think her a great baby were
she to say how very, _very_ much relieved she was by his presence.

"Well, I guess Hugh Bonner would object," returned the lad.

Alene stepped gingerly into the boat, trying to hide her nervousness
when it rocked beneath her and Mark came to her assistance.

"Sit here in the bow and I'll bail out this water," he said.

Alene found it a very spacious and pleasant seat; the rolling of the
boat which had alarmed her when standing gave her only a delightful
sensation.  She put her hand over the side of the skiff and let the
water glide through her fingers while she watched with interest the
movements of the boy.

"You didn't answer my question," he remarked at last.

"What question?"

"About Hugh objecting."

"Why should he object?  Here's Laura with our bundles!"  She moved
aside to let her friend step into the boat.

The packages were put in a safe place, Mark grasped the oars, Laura,
who felt perfectly at home on the water, took a third oar and they
started on their homeward way.

"How glad I am to leave the bleak coast of China!" cried Laura.

"You mean Glass-gow, don't you?" spoke up the boy, pointing over his
shoulder to where the friendly clerk stood calling, 'Bon voyage!' from
the deck of the glass-boat.

The girls laughed.

"I guess we will have to forgive him?"

Alene glanced across the water.

"I suppose we had better, at any rate until we reach dry land," she
replied.

"Won't Ivy be sorry she missed this good chance to say 'thank you,
sir,' for rescuing us again?" remarked Laura.

"Do you mean the little girl with the big, snapping eyes and--"

"Yes; she was offended with Hugh because he failed to drag you back
with him to be thanked prettily by us girls!"

"I didn't want any thanks, but I suspect Hugh wasn't sorry I wouldn't
go with him.  I'm afraid he doesn't approve of me?"

Laura became suddenly occupied with her rowing and Alene felt called
upon to answer.

"Why--" she hesitated.

"You needn't be afraid to say; I know they think I'm a bad case!"

"Oh--no, Hugh said you were all right by _yourself_!"

"Then he doesn't like my chums?"

"He said if you would give up those Stony Road boys--"

"I'm no snob to go back on a boy because he's poor!"

"Why, it's not that!  Hugh and his chums are poor but--"

"They say they torture animals!" broke in Laura.

"I told them I was sure you wouldn't allow that," Alene protested.

Her warm defense seemed to mollify the boy; his air of mockery and
resentment fell away and he gave her a grateful glance.  Then his
attention became absorbed in keeping the skiff a safe distance from
some passing barges.

For a time there was silence.  The boy cleared the tow and continued
rowing, giving all his attention to the boat.

The girls glanced at each other, fearing they had offended him.

With a sudden impulse he ceased his energetic rowing and let the skiff
drift.  His face flushed as he said:

"For myself I make no defense, but you may tell Mr. Hugh that so far as
my chums are concerned he's bearing false witness.  They may be poor
and rough and unruly, but they're not cruel!  They belong to the
Torchlights!"

"The Torchlights?" cried the girls in duet.

But the boy had resumed his oars, cutting the water vigorously as
though glad of a vent for his pent-up indignation.  Alene wondered what
he meant by the Torchlights, but did not like to ask; Laura more
venturesome inquired,

"The Torchlights?  What are they?"

"A sort of club," he responded, shutting his mouth with an air of
finality that vexed them.

They glanced at each other.  Laura's half-curled lip said plainly, "As
if we really cared!" and Alene's returned scornfully, "The idea!"

They pretended not to notice his taciturnity and talked lightly to each
other of their purchases and other personal matters.

The lad, left to his own reflections, continued rowing manfully.
Presently he announced,

"I'll land you at the upper end of the wharf, that will be nearer home."

"Oh, thank you, that will save us quite a walk!" returned Laura.

"And I'll get home before Uncle Fred," cried Alene.

"Wouldn't they all have been scared if we had had to wait for the
glass-boat to take us home?"

The boy smiled.  He thought there were others who would have been
scared in that event.

"Is Mr. Fred Dawson your uncle?"

"Yes.  Do you know him?"

"I used to be captain of the Fred Dawson Baseball Club," he replied
with a tone of pride.

"How nice!" and Alene determined to ask her uncle all about it that
very night.  "Ah, here's the wharf!  It seems to be coming right up to
us!"

A few minutes later their light, little craft swept in to shore.

Mark gallantly gathered up the bundles and handed them out to Laura,
who had skipped lightly across the bow to the bleached stones of the
wharf, then he gave his hand to his more timid passenger and she
stepped ashore.

"And the Happy-Go-Luckys will be on time as usual," cried Laura, as
they said good-by to Mark, who intended taking the skiff farther up the
river.

"The Happy-Go-Luckys?  Who are they?" he exclaimed.

"A sort of a club," returned Laura demurely, glancing mirthfully at
Alene ere they turned away to climb the hilly homeward path.


CHAPTER XXII

VEXATIONS AND CONSOLATIONS

Ivy turned disconsolately from the window.  She had waved good-by to
Laura and Alene when they had looked round at the corner ere passing
from view on their way to the glass-boat.

The trip had been postponed from day to day in the hope of her being
able to go along, and even at the last moment her friends had wished to
give it up and devote the afternoon to an indoor meeting of the
Happy-Go-Luckys; but Ivy would not have it so; she insisted on their
going, she vetoed every argument to the contrary, but now that they
were beyond recall and she faced the empty room she almost regretted
her persistence.

And yet it was a pleasant room enough, with nothing of luxury to
recommend it but having an air of quiet comfort.  An unobtrusive wall
paper, a green-and-oak carpet, a bright rug before the fire-place,
which was filled with tall ferns; a picture of the "Mammoth Trees of
California," above the mantel, a lamp with a green globe hanging over
the center-table, a few chairs, and Ivy's couch drawn close to the two
windows with their snowy curtains--all beautifully neat and clean, but
alas, so tiresomely familiar to the little prisoner.  Even the sight of
her books piled at the foot of the lounge wearied her!

She threw aside the beloved Sunset Book after vainly trying to get
interested in it.  How flat and unprofitable it seemed!  Why could she
never write anything but the trite and useless things that almost
anyone who was able to hold a pen could say as well or better?  The
verses about the four o'clocks, which the other day had seemed a pretty
conceit, to-day sounded silly, fit only for the little waste-basket at
her side, where she threw them with disdain.

Life was unprofitable, friends noticeable only by their absence; even
the faithful Hugh had deserted her.  He had made no motion toward
"making up" since the day they went blackberrying--it would have served
him right if the bull had put an end to her!  If that boy Mark Griffin
hadn't interfered--and why he had she didn't know, what business was it
of his?--Hugh, instead of wearing his air of indifference, would be
crying his eyes out beside her dead body--or rather her grave, for she
would be buried and done with by this time.  But no; here she herself,
instead of Hugh, was crying over it!  For the last week he had been
even less attentive than ever; he was up and out long before she awoke
in the mornings, came home at noon to snatch a hasty lunch and was off
again after supper until bedtime, with only a careless nod to her, Ivy,
whom he had hitherto allowed to claim all his attention and the little
leisure time he could spare from his work as office-boy and assistant
clerk in a real-estate firm down street.

Heigho!  Who was that coming?  Claude and Nettie, hand in hand, with
beaming faces and crumby lips!

"Oh, you greedy youngsters, where do you put all the cake and things
you devour, anyway?"

Simultaneously two mouths were opened wide.

"They are big enough naturally, you needn't stretch them!  No wonder
you are both noted dunces in your class--you are nothing but mouth and
stomach!  Come here, I've a little time.  Let's see what you can do!"

"I can figure!" said Nettie proudly, but she eyed the slate upon which
Ivy had written, half abashed.

"Three plus two equals what?" said Ivy.

"Six!"

"No, try again!"

"Six!" cried Nettie decidedly again.

"No; five, stupid!"

"Six," reiterated Nettie, "Teacher says so!"

"That's three multiplied by two; I said three _plus_--"

"Well, it's six at our school," declared Nettie doggedly, her eyes half
filled with tears.

"To think you are any relation to Laura!  Why, she's as bright--"

"She's big, and awful old, and not half as nice as Nettie!" cried
Claude.

"Indeed, no wonder you stand up for her!  You don't even know the
alphabet!"

"Yes, I do!"

"Well, see here!"  Ivy picked up his primer.

"I don't want to study--it's vacation!" said Claude, drawing back.

"He may injure his brain by overstudy; such a precocious scholar!"

Nettie pursed out her lip.  "Precious scolder herself!" she muttered.

"Come, Claude, I'll give you this big red apple if you say it
correctly," urged Ivy.

"A--B--C," commenced Claude bravely, "A--B--C--Poke Bonnet."

"No, that's D!"

"Well, it looks like a poke," returned Claude.

"How funny!  It only needs a bow and string, see?" cried the little
girl.

Claude proceeded with the letters:

"L--M--N--the same old hoop--I ought to know its name."

"O," whispered Nettie.

He turned upon her indignantly--

"I was just going to say O--that's easy!  P--Q--R--little wormy
thing--Oh, bother T--U--V--W--let's see, see-saw, X--wizie!" he
concluded triumphantly and with a sudden movement he snatched the apple
from Ivy's lap.

"Come back, you didn't earn it!" commanded Ivy.

"I did, didn't I, Nettie?" he cried, digging his uneven little teeth
into the rosy cheek of the apple.

"Come here at once!"

Ivy reached for her crutches but Nettie, too quick for her, grabbed one
and fled with Claude, while Ivy in a rage threw the other after them.
Across the floor it sailed and hit against the wall with a resounding
clap.

Favouring, as I do, real Democracy, and so believing that the Will
of the People alone should prevail, and that we should get complete
and unchallengeable sanction for the laws, I have always regarded
the Referendum, or Poll of the People, as an essential corrective to
the inconveniences and anomalies of the Representative System. The
Popular Veto is, in my view, the essential antiseptic of the Constitutional
Pharmacopeia.

_To put it with brutal plainness, I desire the Referendum in order to
free us from the evils of log-rolling and other exigencies of the
kind which Walt Whitman grouped under the general formula of "the
insolence of elected persons

."_

I am told by my horrified Radical friends that my proposal is
politically odious--a Tory device that would stop all reforms.

This I doubt.

But if it is really the Will of the People that we should not have
reforms, then we must do without them.

Till we can convert the Will of the People, we must abide by it.
Anyway, I have always thought this objection (which, by the way,
is not, as Artemus Ward would say, "writ sarkastic") an exceedingly
illuminating fact.

It shows how skin-deep is the democratic principle in the minds of many
men who think themselves strong Radicals. They do not really believe
in submitting to the Will of the People.

They want to do what they think is good for the People, but they
have no true sense of freedom.

They do not realise that if you are to give a man true freedom, you
must inevitably give him the right to do wrong as well as the right
to do right.

  If you do not do that, he is no freeman, but
    merely a virtuous slave--a creature,
  as Dryden said, "tied up from
    doing ill."

For such compulsory freedom I have no use. I want to convert people, not
to force them, or cajole them. Of course, I cannot banish force altogether,
because if the Will of the Majority is not obeyed, we shall never
arrive anywhere.

We shall spend our time in fruitless and so futile discussions.

What we can avoid by the Poll of the People is coercion by the
minority.

Curiously enough, the minority, _teste_ Lenin, seem to have no sentimental
objection to coercion.

They fly to it at once.

As a rule, however, the show of power is quite enough when the will
of the majority is expressed.

So great is the impact of its declaration that men will not fight
against it.

Having got so far, a great many of my readers will, no doubt, rub their
eyes and say, "Why on earth is this man letting forth this torrent of
rather obvious, well-known, elementary, political stuff? It might do for
a Fourth Form in a public school, or for a lecture on the duties
of persons on the new Register of Electors, but one really thought
that the adult citizen had got beyond this sort of thing."

I apologise humbly for being so elementary; but, after all, I have
an excuse. It seems to me that the real danger of the moment is
minority rule.

Therefore, though all I have said may be condemned as unoriginal, I
hold it worthwhile to bring people's minds back to the fact that
they are in danger of minority rule, in spite of the fact that
they have the very strongest moral reasons for refusing to be ruled
by a minority.

Perhaps some of us have not yet observed that in almost all countries
the so-called Labour Parties are copying the brutal frankness of Lenin
and Trotsky and saying openly that it is only the Proletariat, or,
as the wiser of them put it, the manual workers who have the right to
decide in what direction the Ship of State shall be steered, and how
she shall be worked on the voyage.

Now, though I have no desire to substitute any other section of the
community for the manual workers, and hold most strongly that such
workers have as great a right as University professors, or members
of the Stock Exchange, or even members of the bureaucracy, to say
how we are to be governed, I will never admit that they have a
prerogative right to rule, and that I and other non- manual workers
have only the right to obey.

That is, however, the Proletarian claim. The so-called capitalist
or bourgeois is, in effect, to be outlawed.

In such a context I cannot help thinking of the carman and Uncle Joseph
in _The Wrong Box_. Uncle Joseph makes a remark about the lower
classes, to which the carman replies, "Who are the lower classes?
You are the lower classes yourself!" I claim an inalienable
right to be regarded as one of the people, and I do not mean, if
I can help it, to have that right taken away from me, either by a
Cæsarian Dictator, an Oligarchy of manual workers, a Federation of
Trade Unions, Combined Guild Socialists, or a Soviet of Proletarians.

I will yield anything to the members of these Societies in their
capacity of citizens possessing each the same rights as mine, but I
will yield nothing to them as the possessors of privilege.


      *      *      *      *      *      *

Through the open window came the sound of children's voices,

  "Here comes an old woman from New Foundland.
  With all of her children in her hand,"

shrill and clamoring, but powerless to disturb Ivy who, seated beside
the window with her blue goblet beside her and a pad of writing paper
on her lap, was busy writing.

After a series of brow puckerings and erasures, she gave a sigh of
contentment.

"There it's finished!  I'll read it over and put it in the Sunset Book
to-morrow!"

The old woman from New Foundland had gone home to bed, and Claude, one
of her shrill-voiced children, had rushed in sleepily and thrown
himself upon the rug, where he lay oblivious to all things, when the
absent-minded Ivy came out of her trance; the first thing she saw was
his chubby, outstretched form with both arms flung above the touzled
head from which his cap had partly fallen.

The smile of sisterly love and pride with which she enveloped him, must
have pierced the vale of unconsciousness, for the lad stirred and
smiled in his sleep.

Ivy took the goblet and poured the pebbles into her lap.  They fell
against one another with a velvety sound, and gave forth a rainbow of
color, like precious stones in the light of the lamp.

She mused happily over them, the children's treasures, gathered so
carefully and given so generously.

"How cross I was to-day and all for nothing!  I must be one of those
'hirelings' who are always 'looking for consolations' for I feel
consoled to-night; if only Hugh--"

A noise was heard in the little entry; footsteps and voices, and then a
pushing as of something being moved up the steps.

"What's that?  It's Hugh's voice and there's someone with him!"

Ivy glanced expectantly toward the open doorway.  Presently Hugh and
another boy, their faces reddened with exertion, appeared carrying some
object between them.  Could it be--yes, it was a writing desk, such as
Ivy had often seen in dreams and store windows, but never hoped to
possess!  Her heart gave a sudden jump and then seemed to stand still.

"Bub, be careful you don't scrape it against the side of the door!
Hello, sis--where's the best place to put it?"

Hugh tried to speak in a careless tone, but Ivy's scream of pleasure,
the sudden crimson roses that bloomed in her thin cheeks, and the
shower of stars which flashed through and dried the mist in her eyes,
brought a funny grip to his throat; he gulped and made a wry face.

"Say, Fatty, look out!  You knocked my hand against the wall!"

Attracted by the noise, Mrs. Bonner came in, Claude awoke and everybody
crowded round to see the new article of furniture.

It was placed where Ivy could admire it at leisure, and the strange boy
having said good-night, Hugh displayed a lovely bronze key, unlocked
the lid and disclosed all its attractions.

"See this little drawer and the shelves, and the place for your ink and
paper, and the large drawer below, and then there's a secret drawer
I'll show you when the rest are not here," Hugh whispered the latter
part.

A secret drawer!  Ivy clapped her hands--what a heavenly culmination of
attractions!  And the desk as a whole, of quartered-oak with bronzed
handles and a shelf with a tiny mirror above, was indeed a beauty.

"Oh, Hugh, how--where did you get it?"

"I've been working overtime nights at Pearson's furniture store.  The
old man's sick and his son had to stay home evenings.  I bargained to
stay in his place and take it out this way!  I kind of thought you'd
like it," Hugh explained breathlessly, glancing from his auditors to
the desk.

"Oh, Hugh!" cried Ivy deprecatingly.

"It was dead easy!  Hardest part was to keep it quiet so to surprise
you.  It wouldn't do to get too friendly or I'd a blurted it out!"

Hugh's head was bending over the desk, dangerously close to Ivy as it
proved, for she gave his hair a sudden pull.

"Oh, Hugh, you good-for-nothing!" she cried.


CHAPTER XIII

THE CRIMSON BAG

"Uncle Fred, I'm going to play being poor for a whole week," said
Alene, meeting Mr. Dawson at the gate one evening.

"What put that idea into your head, child?"

"You see it's so much more exciting to do things when you haven't
money!  We felt quite hilarious this afternoon when Nettie discovered
that one could get a great big sugar cake for a cent at the new bakery.
It was Ivy's treat and we all went in a crowd and bought half a dozen
for five cents!  We really don't see how they can afford to give such
big ones!"

"They depend on large sales and small profits, no doubt; besides it
will attract other customers.  A good advertisement too, for here am I,
for one, who would have gone past the new bakery a hundred times, never
once glancing that way, never dreaming of those elephantine sugar
cakes, were it not for you!  Are you sure the bakery didn't bribe you
girls to sound their praises?"

"The idea!"

"It's not so foolish after all; I'm almost famished for one of those
sugar cakes.  Greedy Alene, to devour them every one!"

"No, I did not!  There was Laura and Ivy, and Nettie and Claude, and
Lois and little Elmer, besides myself, to divide among!"

"Which suggests my school days and problems in arithmetic!  I think
this would be a question in short division or would it be short cake?"

"No, indeed!  We all had almost enough!  But, Uncle, do behave!  Here's
my purse; I want you to keep it."

"'With all my lordly goods I thee endow!'  Why, thank you, Miss Dawson!
I hear the gold pieces clinking!  But I don't know if my mamma will
allow me to accept such valuable presents!"

There was a little gurgling laugh from Alene.

"Do let me finish!  I only want you to keep it for me until the end of
the week!"

"Indian giver!  Indian giver!  Take your old purse!  I guess it was
only the clink of pennies I heard, anyway!"

Alene clasped her hands behind her back.

"You must keep it or I can't play being poor!  Now Uncle, won't you be
good!  I feel so ashamed to have so much when the other girls have so
little, and I want to try it for just one little week; besides, it will
be fun!"

"Fun for you, but what a temptation to put in your own Uncle's way!
However I don't want to be too selfish.  I'll keep the purse."

"For a week.  Thank you, Uncle!"

"Have you any more stray pennies to put in my charge?"

"I have exactly six cents left and I must get along on that."

"Won't you allow me to contribute an occasional quarter?"

"Well, not more than a nickel at a time.  Just pretend I'm a poor
little girl who is hired to run errands at the Towers!"

"And if you demand part of the content of the purse?"

"Don't give it to me!  But I shan't!"

Alene held her week's allowance in her hand until they entered the
house; then she placed it beside her plate at dinner.  She found it
troublesome keeping track of it.

"I need a small purse to put it in.  There's a pretty one for a quarter
at Nixon's store--ah, I forgot already, I haven't enough money."

Uncle Fred offered her the use of a flat red-morocco pocketbook, but
Alene said it was not convenient to carry, and besides, people would
expect so much from its size!  She at last decided to use a small knit
bag of crimson silk with silver rings, which she kept in a box upstairs.

The next day she had a long letter to mail to her parents, and the
girls accompanied her to the post-office.

In other words, I would have voted for what has been called "a state
of siege" tariff.

I should have regarded it as an economic loss which must be borne
just as must the charges of the Army and Navy, in order to ensure
the safety and welfare of the realm.

But Mr. Chamberlain and his followers, though there was an occasional
word or two about national security, did not base their appeal to
the nation on the ground of national security.

They based it on quite different grounds.

"Everybody is looking, Alene!  They expect a piece of silver, at least,
from that gorgeous purse!"

"Well, I can't help it!  I paid a nickle postage on my letter, you
know!"

"Yes, I know, but the rest of the town is in ignorance of that great
expenditure."

"You needn't laugh, Miss Bonner.  Considering the amount of my capital,
it was a big payment to meet!"

"And so early, too, in your poverty-stricken career, I can sympathize
with you," said Laura.

The bright bag with its shining rings, over which the heads of the
three girls were bent, seemed to have attracted the attention of the
crowd as Ivy had said, and the penny, hidden away in its crimson
corner, while Alene fumbled in vain for it, held them longer in the
public gaze.

Laura gave a relieved sigh and Ivy a squeak of delight when it at last
appeared, and Alene dropped it, as if it burned her fingers, into the
outstretched cap.

As she turned away with cheeks that were blazing to match the hue of
the bag, a tall boy standing near lifted his hat courteously, and gave
way to her.

"Sir Mark!" whispered the irrepressible Ivy.  "And looking as grave as
a cemetery, without the ghost of a smile!"

"If he hadn't, I'd never, _never_ have spoken to him again!" declared
Alene.  "Girls, I can sympathize now with those who would like to help
others and can't."

"Giant Generosity with his pigmy purse," suggested Ivy.

"It's so much pleasanter as well as more blessed to give," remarked
Laura.

"But, after all, money isn't everything!" said Alene.  "If we are poor
we can still give love and sympathy and unselfishness--"

"And advice," broke in Ivy.  "And feel the richer the more we give!"

Alene said never a word to her uncle, that evening, relative to the
state of her finances.  She kept her collapsed purse hidden away.

"When one is poor, one is too proud to beg!"  Which reflection did not
keep her from being very glad when Mr. Dawson remarked:

"Here, child, is a nickle for the little maid who trimmed my lamp so
nicely."

She dropped him a courtesy.

"Thank you, Uncle.  I think she will be very glad to get it.  I feel
quite prosperous again," she said, shutting the coin away in her
crimson bag.

Mr. Dawson laughed.

"I suspect you will find that wealth has its uses, and when you are of
age and have command of a large sum of money, I only hope that you will
use it well.  I think your experiences as a Happy-Go-Lucky will teach
you much that you would not otherwise learn."

"There's one thing I should like to do--find that clever doctor who
cures the lame children, and have him cure Ivy.  When I'm grown up I'll
build a hospital just for the poor children--but then it will be too
late to help her!"

"My friend Dr. Medway, who assists in those operations, promised to pay
me a visit this summer," remarked the gentleman.

Alene clapped her hands.

"Oh, I'm so glad!"

"What about, Miss Jump-at-Conclusions?"

"To think that if I'm not grown up, someone else is," said Alene
mysteriously.

Uncle Fred made no reply but smiled thoughtfully as he puffed away at
his pipe.

      *      *      *      *      *      *

Heralded by Prince's loud barking, and escorted by Jed and Kizzie, who
ran out to investigate, a vendor, laden with a large square basket,
came to the kitchen door.  Alene, who was at luncheon, hurriedly gulped
down her coffee and joined the group.

The man opened his basket and exhibited some really fine specimens of
Mexican drawn-work, beaded moccasins and Indian blankets.

Mrs. Major bought a centre piece, Kizzie a collar-and-cuff set, and
Alene looked longingly at a pair of dainty moccasins that were now,
alas, beyond her means.  She thought regretfully of the cut-steel purse
in Uncle Fred's possession.

"But even if he were here I wouldn't ask for it.  That would be
breaking my word," she said sturdily.  The man used all his persuasive
powers in vain; she looked and longed and sadly shook her head.

At last he took from the bottom of the basket a long wooden box, and
raised the lid.

"How lovely!"  They all crowded round with cries of admiration.

"You thinka them vair fine!" the man said, picking up a handful and
turning them over in the light till they shone like fairy lanterns of
rainbow-tinted dew.

"Here-a is whata you call heem, black fire opal, here-a meelk, here-a
cherry, here-a blue!" cried the seller volubly.

Alene stood in silent ecstasy!  How she would love to buy three, one
each for Laura, Ivy and herself!  She knew she could borrow the money
from Mrs. Major, and repay her upon Uncle Fred's return that evening,
or even let it stand until the next week, when she would regain her
fortune but--

"And here-a, leettle lady, ees de jewelry--de feela-gree broocha and de
Swastika charm," continued the man persuasively, having noted the
little girl's indecision.  The others, who were aware of her vow of
voluntary poverty, looked on in sympathy and were ready, as she knew,
to help her if she desired.

"The other girls often wish to buy, and it's just as hard for them when
they can't; besides, it wouldn't be right to borrow for such things
when one is poor, and I'm not supposed to know this week that I'll be
able to afford it next," reasoned Alene, shaking her head the more
energetically to fortify her resolution.

The man, disappointed, slowly repacked his wares, shouldered them and
shambled away, while Alene stood looking on.

"After all, opals are unlucky," said Kizzie consolingly.

Alene felt Prince's soft nose against her hand.

"You feel sorry, don't you, old fellow?  But this is what the rest of
the Happy-Go-Luckys have to bear all the time!  I've been used to going
through the world picking up everything I fancied, with never a thought
for others who had to go without.  This is a sort of experience week
for me!  But cheer up, Prince Sobersides, and come along for a run!"

      *      *      *      *      *      *

"Girls, this is the Crimson Bag's last night, and it's my treat!"
announced Alene, when she met her friends Saturday evening.

They proceeded blithely down the street, dressed in their best, in
honor of the evening which was generally observed in the town as the
gala time of the week, when the stores were kept open to accommodate
the workingmen who were paid that night, and the young people
promenaded Main Street as far as the ice-cream parlors.

When the girls reached "Clyde's Parlors and Restaurant," as the highly
gilded sign in the window proclaimed it, they found the place crowded.

Ivy gave Laura a nudge and the latter, turning suddenly, collided with
another girl.

"I beg your pardon--Oh, Hermione, is it you?"

"You can't think it's my ghost that nearly knocked your hat off!  Ah,
there's your other two-thirds, Alene and Ivy!  How d'you do, girls?"
She paused for a chat until Vera with several other girls came along on
their way out of the store.

"Ah, good evening, Alene!  Let me introduce my friends," she said,
proceeding with the ceremony and totally ignoring Laura and Ivy.

"And these are my friends, Miss Lee and Miss Bonner," said Alene.

Vera soon hurried her party away, but they had gone only a few steps
when she paused at a show case, apparently much interested in its
contents.

"I want to see what Alene Dawson is going to buy!" she explained in an
undertone.  "That's the reason she likes to go with those girls; she
can 'show off' more with them and act the Lady Bountiful!  Mamma says
it's a shame for her uncle to allow her so much money to throw away!"

Hermione shrugged her shoulders.

"Oh, come along, girls; it's none of our affair," said she, but Vera's
words had aroused the curiosity of the others and they loitered beside
her.

All unconscious of their spying, Alene and her friends went their way.
Instead of taking seats at one of the many little tables placed
invitingly around, they stopped at the next counter.  Alene unfastened
the crimson bag and gravely searched within it.

"More show!" whispered Vera.

"Three Dill pickles, please; you need not wrap them up," said Alene,
laying a nickle on the counter.

Then Vera made a hasty retreat amid the raillery of her friends.


CHAPTER XXIV

THE GARDEN PARTY

"Letters for the whole bunch!" cried Lafe Bonner, coming into the
sitting-room on his return from the post-office.  "Hugh Bonner,
E--s--q--Esquimau--wonder why they call his nibs that?  Master Donald
Bonner, Master Roy Bonner, Little Claude Bonner, Master Walter Bonner
and--"  Lafe stammered and got very red when he saw the address 'Gen.
Lafayette Bonner.'  "One for me, too," he continued hurriedly; "and
last for Mrs. L. Bonner."

All the members of the family in reach took their letters, and Ivy,
seated at her new writing desk in the corner next to the window, turned
round expectantly, saying,

"Where's mine?"

Lafe held up his empty hands.

"You may search me!  Somebody's forgotten this time!"

"Come here," commanded Ivy.

Lafe advanced, wearing a guileless expression until Ivy ran her hand
into his empty coat pocket, and fumbling round, found a snug space in
the lining and brought forth the missing epistle.

All over the world, we are told, Home Rule has succeeded; there are, under
the government of the British Crown, at least twenty countries
enjoying Home Rule, and their local independence causes no inconvenience
to the United Kingdom or to the British Empire.

  It follows therefore that Home Rule in Ireland will be a success
and will in no way disturb the peace or prosperity of the United
Kingdom.

  The sole difficulty in meeting this argument is the extreme vagueness
of its principal term.

  The words 'Home Rule' are in their signification so vague, at any
rate as employed by Ministerialists, that they cover governments
of totally different descriptions.

  Hungary, Norway, a State of the American Union, a Province of the
Canadian Dominion, the Dominion itself, Man, Jersey, and Guernsey,
every English colony with representative institutions, are each
described, by one Gladstonian reasoner or another, as happy and
prosperous under Home Rule.

But there is no one who will deny that the dissimilarities between
the governments existing in each of the countries referred to are
at least as striking as are their similarities; that the contrast,
for example, between the relation of Hungary to the Austro-Hungarian
Empire and the relation of New York to the United States is at least
as obvious as its likeness.

The analogy, moreover, between Home Rule in any of these countries and
Home Rule in Ireland is at best distant and shadowy.[114]
The crisis is too serious to permit us to waste words in examining the
curiosities of the Home Rule controversy. Of Hungary, and its relation
to the Empire of which it forms part, nothing at all will here
be said.
There is nothing in that relation analogous to Irish Home Rule.

Nor need we trouble ourselves with the 'Home Rule' of Rhodes, of Samos,
or of the Lebanon. Of these and any other States, if such there be, which
enjoy 'Home Rule' under the supremacy of the Sultan, all that need be
said is that it is satisfactory to learn on the authority of Mr.

Gladstone that any part whatever of the Turkish Empire is well
governed and happy.

If any one can seriously suppose that the prosperity of Man and the
Channel Islands, which reap all the benefits and bear none of the burdens
of connection with Great Britain, and moreover have at no time been
discontented, affords any reason for supposing that the secular miseries
and discontent of Ireland will be cured by a system of government
totally different from that which prevails either in Man, or Guernsey,
or in Jersey, let him refer to these interesting islands.[115] For
myself I shall leave them out of account.

Of the cordial relations between Sweden and Norway we hear nothing;
the goodwill generated by a system of Home Rule is bringing these
countries to the brink of civil war.[116]
There are two analogous cases or precedents on which serious reasoners
rely in support of a policy of Home Rule for Ireland.

The success of federal government in other countries, and especially
in the United States, and the success of colonial independence
throughout the British Empire, are adduced as presumptions that
Home Rule would knit together Great Britain and Ireland, or, as the
cant of the day goes, transform a paper union into a union of hearts.

If New York be loyal to the United States, if New Zealand be
loyal to the British Crown, why should not Ireland, when endowed with
local independence resembling the independence of an American State
or of a self-governing British colony, be a loyal member of the
United Kingdom?

[117]

This is the suggested argument--let us consider its validity.

As to federalism.

--All the conditions which make a federal constitution work successfully
in the United States, in Switzerland, and possibly in Germany, are
wanting in England and Ireland.

No man till the last five or six years has even suggested that Englishmen
or Scotsmen desire a federal government for its own sake.

Whether Mr. Gladstone himself has any wish to federalise the
whole United Kingdom is at least open to doubt. Where federalism
has succeeded, it has succeeded as a means of uniting separate
communities into a nation; it has not been used as a means of
disuniting one State into separate nationalities.

The United States, it has been well said, is a nation under the form
of a federal government. Gladstonians apparently wish to bind together
two, or shall we say three or four, nations, or nationalities, under the
reality of a federation and the name of a United Kingdom. While all the
powerful countries of the world are increasing their strength by union,
the advocates of the new constitution pretend to increase the moral
strength of the United Kingdom by loosening the ties of its political
unity.

If any one ask why federalism which has succeeded in America should not
succeed in the United Kingdom, the true answer is best suggested by
another question: Why would not the constitutional monarchy of
England suit the United States?

The answer in each case is the same.
"Hermione's a dear, so for her sake let's set up with Vera," said Laura.

Ivy gave a prodigious groan.

"'Take the bitter with the sweet,' though it will be Vera bitter."

So it came to pass that the library was the scene of many more busy
hours, and the working-force of the Happy-Go-Luckys was increased by
the Ramsey girls, who threw themselves heartily into the making of
tissue-paper caps, rosettes and flowers, in which Vera proved an adept,
and her productions were so much admired and praised by the others that
she became quite amiable, and gave them no reason to regret the
invitation.

The time went fast enough to these busy workers, though it seemed very
slow to the rest of the young people.

Every lawn in town flew yards of dainty garments all belaced and
beruffled; many small frocks and waists having seen much service were
patched and mended to see more, there was an epidemic of ribbons,
curling-irons, and fancy slippers, which grew worse as the great day
approached, and when it came at last--as fine a day as one could
wish--each house sent forth its quota of shining-faced, bedizened
merry-makers to besiege the Towers' gates.

The smaller children were directed to the library, where they were
captured by the larger girls, decorated with tissue-paper favors and
set loose; "like a flock of birds and butterflies," as Hermione said,
or "a plague of hungry locusts," to quote Ivy, who stood on the porch
at the front door watching their flight.

"I don't want this old red cap," declared Claude.

"And I want a yellow one like Lawa's weaf," wailed Lois, while Nettie,
for once figuring as amiability, with a blue top-knot on her golden
tresses, only lingered with the others to give them countenance, as it
were.

"Shoo, shoo!" cried the unfeeling Ivy, waving them away with her
skirts.  "Who are those boys who went past just now, looking so much
amused, Laura?  The short one stared at you as if he knew you."

"I didn't notice," returned Laura, glancing after the lads.

"It's that boy you made buy the white pitcher," said Alene.

"The other looks like one of Mark Griffin's soldiers of misfortune.
Hoy, Mat!" Ivy hailed the latter in passing.  "Who are those boys?"

"Bud Waters and Artie Orr; they came with Mark Griffin and Jack
Lever,--there's Jack now."

"That thin boy leaning on the cane?  I wondered who he was!"

"Yes, he's been laid up with a broken leg; is just able to hobble
round; that's the reason we haven't seen him and Mark together for so
long.  They are hobnobbing with the Stony Road gang to-day."

"The gang?  Why, are they all here?"

"Five or six, I should say.  Mr. Dawson seemed to know them and sent
Jed to show them round."

"That explains where Uncle Fred's invitations went."

"I shouldn't wonder if he knows all about the Torchlights, too!"

"Neither should I, Laura."

"The Torchlights?" cried Vera; "Who are they?"

"'A sort of club,'" said Laura, shutting her lips together in an
imitation of Mark.


CHAPTER XXV

IVY'S FRIEND

In the middle of the afternoon as Ivy sat alone on a bench beneath a
tree, listening to the band and watching the children circling merrily
round a number of maypoles, she heard a voice at her side:

"Excuse me, but may I have part of your seat?"

"Why, certainly!" she said, making room for the speaker, a middle-aged
man with genial blue eyes and a blonde beard, who was dressed in an
easy-fitting, light suit, and carried a large book which he placed with
his hat on the grass at his feet.

"I guess he's a friend of the housekeeper's; I noticed him speaking
with her to-day," thought Ivy, her gaze straying back to the
light-footed dancers.

"It looks easy, twirling those ribbons around the poles, but isn't it
rather warm weather, for dancing?"

Ivy turned upon him a pair of eyes full of pity for his ignorance.

"Why, it would be lovely!  I'm sure I'd never think of the heat if--"
she glanced eloquently at the crutches which leaned against the tree.

"It's too bad, at a time like this especially; I shouldn't like that
either!  Though my dancing days are past, I like to walk a lot and
gather 'yarbs an' things,'" he said.  Taking up the big black book, he
displayed a collection of pressed plants, leaves and flowers, in which
Ivy took so much interest that he showed her through the book,
explaining the value and rarity of his treasures gathered from many
places, and relating incidents connected with his travels in search of
them.

Ivy gave a sigh of admiration.

"How lovely to travel that way!  One could write a book about it!"

"Do you like to write?  I hope then you will get a chance some day to
visit all those countries."

Ivy shook her head.

"Not hopping around on those," she said bitterly, and with a few
sympathetic questions he drew from her the sad story of her affliction.
She was afterwards surprised at her own volubility, being, as a rule,
very shy with strangers.

"I have seen children who were even worse than you completely cured,"
he said; he related several instances while Ivy listened with flaming
cheeks and glistening eyes.  A dozen questions trembled on her tongue
when a crowd of girls came along, one of whom paused beside her, saying,

"Ivy, Ivy, come on!  Don't you hear the bell?"

"Oh, Laura, I forgot all about eating," said Ivy somewhat ruefully.

The stranger smiled.

"Then you are the only one to forget, for see, the youngsters are
racing from everywhere right upon us."  He glanced at his watch.  "Four
o'clock--it's time for me to seek my place at the visitors' table!"  He
picked up his book and hat while the girls hurried away.

The children assembled in front of the Towers and marched in five
battalions headed by chiefs wearing different colored tissue-paper
wreaths.

Laura with yellow roses led the yellow-capped tots; Vera with blue
flowers, the blue-capped ones; Hermione crowned with lilacs, the
lavender; Ivy in crimson roses, the red, and Alene in pink roses, the
pink.

A few of the children marched in wrong companies.  Lois, despite her
blue cap, clung closely to her beloved "Lawa."

"With Claude it's not color blindness, but Nettie," explained Ivy, when
that rebellious red-cap was seen stepping brazenly in Vera's train.

Vera for once seemed to forget herself in seeing to the welfare of her
small charges, who one and all regarded her with admiring eyes; she
enjoyed the sensation of being the centre of attraction and graciously
accepted their homage, although the majority were "nobodies" whom she
had affected to despise.

"Vera bitter has become Vera sweet," observed Ivy, giving a shy nod to
the Botanist who was seated with the other grown-ups at the visitors'
table watching the children filing past.  Beside him was Mrs. Ramsey,
resplendent in black net over coral-colored silk, who at that moment
was explaining for his benefit:

"The tall, fair girl, wearing blue flowers, is my daughter Vera, and
there is Hermione, my oldest, in white with the lilac wreath."

"The Happy-Go-Luckys are partial to tissue-paper," Mr. Dawson said,
smilingly.

"The dear girls!  And the tots look like fairies in those pretty caps!"
said the lady, proud of her daughters' success.

"This active life has certainly done wonders for Freddie's little
niece.  She was pale and delicate when she came here in the spring and
look at her now!" and Miss Marlin, a slight little woman in Quakerish
gray, smiled at Alene whose cheeks outvied the roses in her wreath.

"Her mother will be delighted to find her so improved," said Mrs.
Ramsey.  "My girls think the world of Alene and that funny club, the
what-do-you-call-'ems?"

"The Happy-Go-Luckys," suggested Mrs. Major, who wore her best black
silk in honor of the day.

The Happy-Go-Luckys, unconscious of having won a champion, passed on to
their respective tables; soon all were placed and with mirth and
laughter the feast began.

And what a feast it was!

"Niagaras of lemonade, seas of milk and coffee, pyramids of fruit,
hills of candy, mountains of cake, whole continents of toothsome
things--"

"Not forgetting Sandwich Islands," said Jack Lever, interrupting Mat's
flow of oratory.

"Is that in reference to our cannibalistic appetites?" inquired Mark
Griffin.

"'The bogie man will get you if you don't be good!'" squealed Artie Orr
in a high falsetto voice.

"Who is that farmer-looking gentleman at the visitors' table?  The one
speaking to Mr. Dawson?" Ivy asked in an aside of Kizzie who flitted
from one table to another, her rosy face like a small sun shining above
a cloud of pink and white lawn.

"He's visitin' Mr. Fred--he's from the city, I think.  He just came
to-day and I didn't hear his name."

"Why, that's Dr. Medway," said Alene; "he's from Dr. Luke's hospital."

"I never dreamed he was a doctor!  I talked away like a graphophone,
and he told me about many children worse than I am who were cured, just
think!"

"Oh, Ivy, Ivy, he'll cure you then!" cried Alene with a quick breath of
ecstasy.

Ivy's joy subsided; the tears came in her eyes.

"But I guess it would cost a fortune," she said dejectedly.

Shortly after lunch Dr. Medway, sauntering along the walk enjoying a
cigar and escorted by Prince, who had taken a fancy to him, was
arrested by a voice.

"I beg your pardon, sir, but are you Dr. Medway?"

"I am.  What can I do for you, young man?"

"Ivy, the little lame girl--I'm her brother, Hugh Bonner--you told her
about so many cures--Oh, sir, if you would undertake to cure her--why,
I haven't any money now, but I'd pay you some day if it took me a
lifetime, and I'd--I'd work my fingers to the bone for you!" cried the
lad, forgetting in his earnestness the dignified speech he had
prepared, and speaking with all the intensity of his long-cherished
desire.

"You are a good brother, Hugh, my lad, but I'm not a Shylock.  I heard
of the little girl before I came here.  I shall see your mother about
her to-morrow; and be assured the main thing is to cure Ivy--nothing
else matters!" and the doctor gave Hugh's hand a vigorous grip.


CHAPTER XXVI

AN ADVENTURE

"Where is Lois?"  Laura flitted from one group of people to another,
growing anxious in her continued failure to get any information.

"She was naughty, and she's gone!" screamed Claude and Nettie, who came
rushing hand in hand out the front door.

"Where did she go?"

"Over the roof."

Laura grew pale.

"The roof?  Whereabouts?  Where is she, I say?  Where were you?"  She
took hold of their shoulders as if to shake the answers out of them.

Alas, when they spoke her worst fears were confirmed!  The children had
climbed the four flights of steps to the tower room, where Lois had
crawled out upon the roof; they called to her and in trying to turn she
had slipped out of sight over the edge.

Laura ran moaning toward the foot of the tower, dreading to find a
little crushed body lying there inert, but no! the crowd was gazing
upward horror-stricken, and she caught a glimpse of a white object
clinging to a swinging ladder high up in the air.

Between the second story and the sloping tower roof a scaffold had been
erected by workmen who were repairing the walls.  Fearing possible
injury to the children by falling stones, Mr. Dawson had instructed
them not to work on the day of the picnic and they had secured the
scaffold from the reach of mischievous boys, placing it fortunately
just in position to arrest the child's fall.

"If only she doesn't get dizzy!" a voice was saying and Laura for the
first time noticed that a boy was scaling the wall.  Favored by the
thick vines and uneven stones up he went with the agility of an
acrobat.  He was bareheaded and the sun shone on his face, reddened
with exertion, and on his sandy hair and Laura recognized him as one of
the Stony Road boys, the one she had talked with on the glass-boat.

"It's Bud Waters--the rest of us were too heavy to try it, and he was
off like a squirrel, soon as he saw the child," explained Mat
hurriedly.  He was with a crowd of boys, among whom were Mark, Hugh,
and Jed, carrying a coil of rope.

"We're going up to the roof--if she only holds out that long!"

"Mat, Mat, it's our Lois!" wailed Laura.  She saw Mat's face blanch,
and the crowd passed, leaving her half crazed.  She knew that Alene and
Ivy were standing beside her with tears in their eyes, murmuring half
audible prayers, but she did not see them.  Her gaze turned steadily
upon the little hanging figure, and on the boy who went climbing up the
wall.

Ah, he has almost reached the goal--he has grasped the ladder--a thrill
went through the crowd--he is holding the little one safe from harm!
Then, seated beside her on the ladder, he gave a whoop of joy that was
answered by the crowd's enthusiastic cries.  A moment later the other
boys were seen at the narrow windows above and the rope came gliding
over the roof.

Then everything became a blur to Laura; she heard a shout of many
voices and knew no more until she found herself sitting on a bench with
Mrs. Major fanning her, Miss Marlin demanding fiercely from everybody
why she had forgotten to bring her lavender salts, Kizzie dancing round
with a glass of water, and Ivy and Alene kneeling on the grass chafing
her hands, and then, oh blessed sight, Uncle Fred coming across the
lawn with Lois safe in his arms!

On seeing her big sister, she stuck a tiny finger into her mouth half
abashed.

"Lawa, don't cwy!  I didn't mean to go so far down the woof!" she
cried, cuddling into Laura's arms.

"Oh, girls!  I could kneel to that boy!  I'd go and kiss him now only I
know boys hate to be fussed over!" declared Laura.

"I'll give him a bushel of kisses!" cried Lois rapturously, whereupon
they kissed her all round while Nettie looked on enviously at the stir
the little maid was making.

"I wonder why when I'm naughty I get a scolding instead of kisses," she
confided to Claude.

"I suppose it's because you've never been quite that naughty, though
you've been pretty bad," he said, which latter assurance consoled his
chum.


The allegation is true, but it really tells greatly in favour of
an ultimate reference to the people of any Home Rule Bill passed
in a Parliament.

If such a Bill becomes law, it ought to be a law not admitting of
easy repeal.

No doubt reaction may be justifiable, but reaction is a great evil, and
the Referendum puts a check as well on reaction as on hasty innovation.
In any case the time has arrived when Unionist statesmen should
consider the expediency of announcing that no Home Rule Bill will
finally be accepted until it has undergone a reference to and
received the approval of the electors.

On no better issue could battle be joined with revolutionists than on the
question whether the people of the United Kingdom should or should
not be allowed to express their will.

Unionists have every reason to feel confidence in their cause;
their only policy, their one path of safety is to make it, as they
can do, absolutely plain that they rely upon justice, and that they
appeal from parties to the nation.

We have now before us the essential features of the new constitution
framed by Gladstonians for the whole United Kingdom.

We know its inherent defects and inconsistencies; we have considered
what may be said on its behalf, or rather of the policy of which it
is the outcome.

The proposed change in our form of government touches the very foundations
of the State, and deeply, though indirectly, threatens the unity of
the whole Empire.

Never surely since the day when the National Assembly of France
drew up that Constitution of 1791, which built to be eternal endured
for not quite a year, has an ancient nation been so strangely invited
to accept an untried and unknown polity.

The position indeed of the French constitution-makers was in some
respects stronger and more defensible than the position of our
English innovators.

The members of the National Assembly knew precisely what they
were doing.

They meant to alter the fundamental institutions of France.

A change moreover in the whole scheme of French government was an
admitted necessity.

France might be uncertain as to the working of the new constitution, but
France was absolutely certain that the _ancien régime_ was detestable.
Individuals or nations may wisely risk much when they are escaping
from a social condition which they detest, they may know that an
innovation is in itself of doubtful expediency, yet may consider
any alleged reform worth a trial when no change can be a change for
the worse.

In the France of 1791 confidence in the future meant abhorrence of
the past.

The authors of our new constitution can hardly be called the designers
of their own handiwork; they have been the sport of accident.

Their intention, or rather the intention of their leader, was in 1886
merely to grant some sort of Parliamentary independence to Ireland.

The resolution to concede Home Rule was sudden; it may have been
taken up without due weighing of its consequences.

It has assuredly led to unexpected results. The statesmen who meant
merely to give Home Rule to Ireland have stumbled into the making
of a new constitution for the United Kingdom.

What wonder that their workmanship betrays its accidental origin. It
has no coherence, no consistency; nothing is called by its right
name, and words are throughout substituted for facts; the new
Parliament of Ireland is denied its proper title; the supremacy of
the Imperial Parliament is nominally saved, and is really destroyed;
and the very statesmen who proclaim the supremacy of the Imperial
Parliament refuse to assert the subordination of the Irish Parliament.

The authors of the constitution are at sea as to its leading principles,
and its most essential provision they deem an organic detail, which
may at any moment be modified or removed.

He looked surprised.

"How did you know about it?"

They looked wise but said not a word, and Ivy whispered to the girls
how near she had come to finding out.

At that moment, taking a glass of lemonade, Mark Griffin stood up.

  "To the clever and plucky,
  The Happy-Go-Lucky--club!"

he cried, with a sly smile, which told them he knew all about it.

"How did you know?" asked one.

"Who told you?"

"Hugh, that was shabby of you!"

"You girls are always patching up some mystery or other.  How was I to
know?" said Hugh.

Jack Lever, who was leaning against the table, came over and sat on the
settee beside the girls.

"Mark didn't play fair; he never said a word about it till Mat and Hugh
had told your secret, so to get even I'll tell you his."

Amid the girls' applause and Mark's protests he commenced.

"You ought to know Phillip Gamer, the first Torchlight, ran away from
home when he was twelve to join the Salvation Army.  He was a drummer
boy in the ranks until a detective, hired by his dad, shadowed him and
brought him home, but last year at school he said the Army had helped
him to a view of a question which had puzzled him all his life.  His
mother declared that even as a baby, he had protested in lusty tones
against silver-backed hair-brushes and perfumed soaps, and when the
nurse perambulated him in the park, a bunch of ragged, barefoot kids
would surround the beaming youngster in his silk-lined carriage.  There
might be a dozen other baby vehicles round, which they wouldn't think
of touching, nor of speaking to those tony babies, but they seemed to
overlook Phil's frills and laces and took to him like brothers.

"At school he refused one of the high-priced rooms, because it would
separate him in a way from the boys he wished most to meet, the boys
who thought things out for themselves.  Phil's coming knocked out that
feeling,--a sort of caste--which divided the rich scholars from the
poor; his room was a meeting point--the plane upon which they became
fellow-men.  Here the Torchlights came into being.  Our counter-sign,
The Brotherhood of Man, and though there was only one of us who
intended to work as a minister in the slums, each was pledged to
individual effort in his own locality.

"Mark and I were the only Torchlights from this town, and the first
thing I did when I got home was to break my bones in a runaway, and
that put me out of the race."

"But it didn't keep him from doing a lot for the boys," said Mark.
"Every week we all visited him and had a jolly evening with games,
reading and singing and a dandy lunch.  At first Jack's people rather
scouted the idea of entertaining the Stony Road gang.  The first night
one of them cut a fine china plate in two, and another shied egg-shells
over his shoulder against the wall.  Mrs. Lever was horrified, but we
begged her to wait and give us another trial."

"Now mother and the rest are completely won over and help us lots.  I
believe I would have knocked my brains out against the wall this
summer, only for the Torchlights.  I found we can't do good to others
without receiving a reactionary benefit.  As Phil says, many a rich lad
joins in a patronizing way, thinking he's going to revolutionize
things, and soon finds it's himself that needs to be done over."

"We were surprised to find a sister club ahead of us here, but we are
not at all jealous!" said Mark.

"We can help each other out."

"I thank you in the name of the Happy-Go-Luckys!  The Torchlights are
fine!" said Laura heartily.

"We might all take for our club poem this little verse," and, half
embarrassed by the sudden silence, Alene recited softly--

  "'Jesus bids us shine,
  With a clear pure light,
  Like a little candle,
  Burning in the night.
  In the world is darkness,
  So we must shine,
  You in your corner,
  And I in mine.'"


"Your lights are torches, you can take them with you out into the
world," said Laura.

"As we are all so solemncholy, I'll propose a toast:

  'To the dear, ducky duckies,
  The Happy-Go-Luckys!'"

cried Mat.

"And here's another--take it for your motto:

  'For lofty flights
  The Torchlights!'"


Ivy's neat allusion brought forth three cheers for Bud Waters.

"Mr. Dawson inquired about Bud to-day.  I bet he'll look out for him,
though he has been kind to the Torchlights all along."

The girls glanced at each other as if to say, "What did I tell you?"

"The other day he gave us the use of a big room over his offices; said
we could use it for a library and he'd provide the books and
furniture," said Mark.

In any case, it had both rhetorically and intellectually a considerable
influence on my mind.

Here is a _précis_ of our conversation.
"Did you ever see Newman?"
"Only once, and then I heard him preach."
"Was he in a big sense eloquent?" 
"Yes.They all descended to the first floor, where the boys joined the men in
the library, and the girls went outside for a parting ramble and chat,
with Prince gambolling around them.

"There are things about the Torchlights we might copy," remarked Laura.
"They take in members whether they like them or not, and try to help
them."

"We might invite Hermione and Vera to start with," suggested Ivy.

"That would be kind.  I think they would like it," said Alene.

They had reached the grassy terrace beneath the apple-trees, and Ivy,
with a sudden recollection exclaimed,

"Girls, it was here we first met, or I should say parted, for Net and I
ran so hard we lost our apples in tumbling over the wall, leaving poor
Lol to be eaten up by Prince."

.

(6) Her Majesty the Queen in Council may provide for the transfer
of such property, rights, and liabilities, and the doing of such
other things as may appear to Her Majesty necessary or proper for
carrying into effect this Act or any Order in Council under this ActThen Alene uttered hopefully a prediction that in time proved a true
one:

"Girls, we'll have a happier time still on the anniversary of that
day--Ivy will be cured, and we'll dance round the Maypole together, the
'maddest, merriest' Happy-Go-Luckys in all the world!"




THE END.