Produced by Susan Skinner, Peter Vachuska, Chuck Greif and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


WAITING FOR
DAYLIGHT

       *       *       *       *       *

_BOOKS BY H. M. TOMLINSON_

THE SEA AND THE JUNGLE
OLD JUNK
LONDON RIVER
WAITING FOR DAYLIGHT

       *       *       *       *       *

  THE FIRST PRINTING OF THIS BOOK CONSISTS
       OF TWENTY-ONE HUNDRED COPIES,
    OF WHICH TWO THOUSAND ARE FOR SALE.

               THIS IS NUMBER

                    669

       *       *       *       *       *


WAITING FOR
DAYLIGHT

By H. M. TOMLINSON


NEW YORK · ALFRED · A · KNOPF · MCMXXII

       *       *       *       *       *

COPYRIGHT, 1922, BY
ALFRED A. KNOPF, Inc.

_Published May, 1922_


_Set up, electrotyped and printed by the Vail-Ballou Co., Binghamton, N. Y._
_Paper furnished by Henry Lindenmeyr & Sons, New York, N. Y._
_Bound by the H. Wolff Estate, New York, N. Y._


MANUFACTURED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

       *       *       *       *       *

      To
   MY WIFE

       *       *       *       *       *


CONTENTS


     I. IN YPRES                                              3

    II. A RAID NIGHT                                         12

   III. ISLANDS                                              24

    IV. TRAVEL BOOKS                                         28

     V. SIGNS OF SPRING                                      31

    VI. PROSE WRITING                                        36

   VII. THE MODERN MIND                                      40

  VIII. MAGAZINES                                            44

    IX. THE MARNE                                            49

     X. CARLYLE                                              56

    XI. HOLIDAY READING                                      58

   XII. AN AUTUMN MORNING                                    65

  XIII. NEWS FROM THE FRONT                                  74

   XIV. AUTHORS AND SOLDIERS                                 80

    XV. WAITING FOR DAYLIGHT                                 88

   XVI. THE NOBODIES                                         96

  XVII. BOOKWORMS                                           112

 XVIII. SAILOR LANGUAGE                                     115

   XIX. ILLUSIONS                                           120

    XX. FIGURE-HEADS                                        127

   XXI. ECONOMICS                                           133

  XXII. OLD SUNLIGHT                                        135

 XXIII. RUSKIN                                              140

  XXIV. THE REWARD OF VIRTUE                                147

   XXV. GREAT STATESMEN                                     149

  XXVI. JOY                                                 152

 XXVII. THE REAL THING                                      162

XXVIII. LITERARY CRITICS                                    170

  XXIX. THE SOUTH DOWNS                                     175

   XXX. KIPLING                                             182

  XXXI. A DEVON ESTUARY                                     188

 XXXII. BARBELLION                                          194

XXXIII. BREAKING THE SPELL                                  200


WAITING FOR
DAYLIGHT


I. In Ypres


JULY, 1915. My mouth does not get so dry as once it did, I notice, when
walking in from Suicide Corner to the Cloth Hall. There I was this summer
day, in Ypres again, in a silence like a threat, amid ruins which might
have been in Central Asia, and I, the last man on earth, contemplating
them. There was something bumping somewhere, but it was not in Ypres, and
no notice is taken in Flanders of what does not bump near you. So I sat
on the disrupted pedestal of a forgotten building and smoked, and
wondered why I was in the city of Ypres, and why there was a war, and why
I was a fool.

It was a lovely day, and looking up at the sky over what used to be a
school dedicated to the gentle Jesus, which is just by the place where
one of the seventeen-inchers has blown a forty-foot hole, I saw a little
round cloud shape in the blue, and then another, and then a cluster of
them; the kind of soft little cloudlets on which Renaissance cherubs
rest their chubby elbows and with fat faces inclined on their hands
consider mortals from cemetery monuments. Then dull concussions arrived
from heaven, and right overhead I made out two German 'planes. A
shell-case banged the _pavé_ and went on to make a white scar on a wall.
Some invisible things were whizzing about. One's own shrapnel can be
tactless.

There was a cellar near and I got into it, and while the intruders were
overhead I smoked and gazed at the contents of the cellar--the wreckage
of a bicycle, a child's chemise, one old boot, a jam-pot, and a dead cat.
Owing to an unsatisfactory smell of many things I climbed out as soon as
possible and sat on the pedestal again.

A figure in khaki came straight at me across the Square, its boots
sounding like the deliberate approach of Fate in solitude. It stopped and
saluted, and said: "I shouldn't stay 'ere, sir. They gen'ally begin about
now. Sure to drop some 'ere."

At that moment a mournful cry went over us, followed by a crash in
Sinister Street. My way home! Some masonry fell in sympathy from the
Cloth Hall.

"Better come with me till it blows over, sir. I've got a dug-out near."

We turned off into a part of the city unknown to me. There were some
unsettling noises, worse, no doubt, because of the echoes behind us; but
it is not dignified to hurry when one looks like an officer. One ought to
fill a pipe. I did so, and stopped to light it. I paused while drawing at
it, checked by the splitting open of the earth in the first turning to
the right and the second to the left, or thereabouts.

"That's a big 'un, sir," said my soldier, taking half a cigarette from
behind his ear and a light from my match; we then resumed our little
promenade. By an old motor 'bus having boards for windows, and War Office
neuter for its colour, but bearing for memory's sake on its brow the
legend "Liverpool Street," my soldier hurried slightly, and was then
swallowed up. I was alone. While looking about for possible openings I
heard his voice under the road, and then saw a dark cavity, low in a
broken wall, and crawled in. Feeling my way by knocking on the dark with
my forehead and my shins, I descended to a lower smell of graves which
was hollowed by a lighted candle in a bottle. And there was the soldier,
who provided me with an empty box, and himself with another, and we had
the candle between us. On the table were some official documents under a
shell-nose, and a tin of condensed milk suffering from shock. Pictures of
partly clad ladies began to appear on the walls through the gloom. Now
and then the cellar trembled.

"Where's that old 'bus come from?" I asked.

"Ah! The pore old bitch, sir," said the soldier sadly.

"Yes, of course, but what's the matter with her?"

"She's done in, sir. But she's done her bit, she has," said my soldier,
changing the crossing of his legs. "Ah! little did she think when I used
to take 'er acrorse Ludget Circus what a 'ell of a time I'd 'ave to give
'er some day. She's a good ole thing. She's done 'er bit. She won't see
Liverpool Street no more. If medals wasn't so cheap she ought to 'ave
one, she ought."

The cellar had a fit of the palsy, and the candle-light shuddered and
flattened.

"The ruddy swine are ruddy wild to-day. Suthin's upset 'em. 'Ow long will
this ruddy war last, sir?" asked the soldier, slightly plaintive.

"I know," I said. "It's filthy. But what about your old 'bus?"

"Ah! what about 'er. She ain't 'arf 'ad a time. She's seen enough war to
make a general want to go home and shell _peas_. What she knows about it
would make them clever fellers in London who reckon they know all about
it turn green if they heard a door slam. Learned it all in one jolly old
day, too. Learned it sudden, like you gen'ally learn things you don't
forget. And I reckon I 'adn't anything to find out, either, not after
Antwerp. Don't tell me, sir, war teaches you a lot. It only shows fools
what they didn't know but might 'ave guessed.

"You know Poperinghe? Well, my trip was between there an' Wipers,
gen'ally. The stones on the road was enough to make 'er shed nuts and
bolts by the pint. But it was a quiet journey, take it all round, and
after a cup o' tea at Wipers I used to roll home to the park. It was
easier than the Putney route. Wipers was full of civilians. Shops all
open. Estaminets and nice young things. I used to like war better than a
school-boy likes Sat'd'y afternoons. It wasn't work and it wasn't play.
And there was no law you couldn't break if you 'ad sense enough to come
to attention smart and answer quick. Yes, sir.

"I knew so little about war then that I'm sorry I never tried to be a
military expert. But my education was neglected. I can only write picture
postcards. It's a pity. Well, one day it wasn't like that. It dropped on
Wipers, and it wasn't like that. It was bloody different. I wasn't
frightened, but my little inside was.

"First thing was the gassed soldiers coming through. Their faces were
green and blue, and their uniform a funny colour. I didn't know what was
the matter with 'em, and that put the wind up, for I didn't want to look
like that. We could hear a gaudy rumpus in the Salient. The civvies were
frightened, but they stuck to their homes. Nothing was happening there
then, and while nothing is happening it's hard to believe it's going to.
After seeing a Zouave crawl by with his tongue hanging out, and his face
the colour of a mottled cucumber, I said good-bye to the little girl
where I was. It was time to see about it.

"And fact is, I didn't 'ave much time to think about it, what with
gettin' men out and gettin' reinforcements in. Trip after trip.

"But I shall never have a night again like that one. Believe me, it was
a howler. I steered the old 'bus, but it was done right by accident. It
was certainly touch and go. I shouldn't 'ave thought a country town, even
in war, could look like Wipers did that night.

"It was gettin' dark on my last trip, and we barged into all the world
gettin' out. And the guns and reinforcements were comin' up behind me.
There's no other road out or in, as you know. I forgot to tell you that
night comin' on didn't matter much, because the place was alight. The sky
was full of shrapnel, and the high-explosives were falling in the houses
on fire, and spreading the red stuff like fireworks. The gun ahead of me
went over a child, but only its mother and me saw that, and a house in
flames ahead of the gun got a shell inside it, and fell on the crowd that
was mixed up with the army traffic.

"When I got to a side turning I 'opped off to see how my little lady was
getting on. A shell had got 'er estaminet. The curtains were flying in
little flames through the place where the windows used to be. Inside, the
counter was upside down, and she was laying with glass and bottles on the
floor. I couldn't do anything for her. And further up the street my
headquarters was a heap of bricks, and the houses on both sides of it on
fire. No good looking there for any more orders.

"Being left to myself, I began to take notice. While you're on the job
you just do it, and don't see much of anything else except out of the
corner of the eye. I've never 'eard such a row--shells bursting, houses
falling, and the place was foggy with smoke, and men you couldn't see
were shouting, and the women and children, wherever they were, turning
you cold to hear 'em.

"It was like the end of the world. Time for me to 'op it. I backed the
old 'bus and turned 'er, and started off--shells in front and behind and
overhead, and, thinks I, next time you're bound to get caught in this
shower. Then I found my officer. 'E was smoking a cigarette, and 'e told
me my job. 'E gave me my cargo. I just 'ad to take 'em out and dump 'em.

"'Where shall I take 'em, sir?'

"'Take 'em out of this,' says he. 'Take 'em anywhere, take 'em where you
like, Jones, take 'em to hell, but take 'em away,' says he.

"So I loaded up. Wounded Tommies, gassed Arabs, some women and children,
and a few lunatics, genuine cock-eyed loonies from the asylum. The
shells chased us out. One biffed us over on to the two rear wheels, but
we dropped back on four on the top speed. Several times I bumped over
soft things in the road and felt rather sick. We got out o' the town with
the shrapnel a bit in front all the way. Then the old 'bus jibbed for a
bit. Every time a shell burst near us the lunatics screamed and laughed
and clapped their hands, and trod on the wounded, but I got 'er goin'
again. I got 'er to Poperinghe. Two soldiers died on the way, and a
lunatic had fallen out somewhere, and a baby was born in the 'bus; and me
with no conductor and no midwife.

"I met our chaplain and says he: 'Jones, you want a drink. Come with me
and have a Scotch.' That was a good drink. I 'ad the best part of 'arf a
bottle without water, and it done me no 'arm. Next morning I found I'd
put in the night on the parson's bed in me boots, and 'e was asleep on
the floor."


II. A Raid Night


SEPTEMBER 17, 1915. I had crossed from France to Fleet Street, and was
thankful at first to have about me the things I had proved, with their
suggestion of intimacy, their look of security; but I found the once
familiar editorial rooms of that daily paper a little more than
estranged. I thought them worse, if anything, than Ypres. Ypres is within
the region where, when soldiers enter it, they abandon hope, because they
have become sane at last, and their minds have a temperature a little
below normal. In Ypres, whatever may have been their heroic and exalted
dreams, they awake, see the world is mad, and surrender to the doom from
which they know a world bereft will give them no reprieve.

There was a way in which the office of that daily paper was familiar. I
had not expected it, and it came with a shock. Not only the compulsion,
but the bewildering inconsequence of war was suggested by its activities.
Reason was not there. It was ruled by a blind and fixed idea. The
glaring artificial light, the headlong haste of the telegraph
instruments, the wild litter on the floor, the rapt attention of the men
scanning the news, their abrupt movements and speed when they had to
cross the room, still with their gaze fixed, their expression that of
those who dreaded something worse to happen; the suggestion of tension,
as though the Last Trump were expected at any moment, filled me with
vague alarm. The only place where that incipient panic is not usual is
the front line, because there the enemy is within hail, and is known to
be another unlucky fool. But I allayed my anxiety. I leaned over one of
the still figures and scanned the fateful document which had given its
reader the aspect of one who was staring at what the Moving Finger had
done. Its message was no more than the excited whisper of a witness who
had just left a keyhole. But I realized in that moment of surprise that
this office was an essential feature of the War; without it, the War
might become Peace. It provoked the emotions which assembled civilians in
ecstatic support of the sacrifices, just as the staff of a corps
headquarters, at some comfortable leagues behind the trenches, maintains
its fighting men in the place where gas and shells tend to engender
common sense and irresolution.

I left the glare of that office, its heat and half-hysterical activity,
and went into the coolness and quiet of the darkened street, and there
the dread left me that it could be a duty of mine to keep hot pace with
patriots in full stampede. The stars were wonderful. It is such a
tranquillizing surprise to discover there are stars over London. Until
this War, when the street illuminations were doused, we never knew it. It
strengthens one's faith to discover the Pleiades over London; it is not
true that their delicate glimmer has been put out by the remarkable
incandescent energy of our power stations. There they are still. As I
crossed London Bridge the City was as silent as though it had come to the
end of its days, and the shapes I could just make out under the stars
were no more substantial than the shadows of its past. Even the Thames
was a noiseless ghost. London at night gave me the illusion that I was
really hidden from the monstrous trouble of Europe, and, at least for one
sleep, had got out of the War. I felt that my suburban street, secluded
in trees and unimportance, was as remote from the evil I knew of as
though it were in Alaska. When I came to that street I could not see my
neighbours' homes. It was with some doubt that I found my own. And there,
with three hours to go to midnight, and a book, and some circumstances
that certainly had not changed, I had retired thankfully into a fragment
of that world I had feared we had completely lost.

"What a strange moaning the birds in the shrubbery are making!" my
companion said once. I listened to it, and thought it was strange. There
was a long silence, and then she looked up sharply. "What's that?" she
asked. "Listen!"

I listened. My hearing is not good.

"Nothing!" I assured her.

"There it is again." She put down her book with decision, and rose, I
thought, in some alarm.

"Trains," I suggested. "The gas bubbling. The dog next door. Your
imagination." Then I listened to the dogs. It was curious, but they all
seemed awake and excited.

"What is the noise like?" I asked, surrendering my book on the antiquity
of man.

She twisted her mouth in a comical way most seriously, and tried to mimic
a deep and solemn note.

"Guns," I said to myself, and went to the front door.

Beyond the vague opposite shadows of some elms lights twinkled in the
sky, incontinent sparks, as though glow lamps on an invisible pattern of
wires were being switched on and off by an idle child. That was shrapnel.
I walked along the empty street a little to get a view between and beyond
the villas. I turned to say something to my companion, and saw then my
silent neighbours, shadowy groups about me, as though they had not
approached but had materialized where they stood. We watched those
infernal sparks. A shadow lit its pipe and offered me its match. I heard
the guns easily enough now, but they were miles away.

A slender finger of brilliant light moved slowly across the sky, checked,
and remained pointing, firmly accusatory, at something it had found in
the heavens. A Zeppelin!

There it was, at first a wraith, a suggestion on the point of vanishing,
and then illuminated and embodied, a celestial maggot stuck to the round
of a cloud like a caterpillar to the edge of a leaf. We gazed at it
silently, I cannot say for how long. The beam of light might have pinned
the bright larva to the sky for the inspection of interested Londoners.
Then somebody spoke. "I think it is coming our way."

I thought so too. I went indoors, calling out to the boy as I passed his
room upstairs, and went to where the girls were asleep. Three miles,
three minutes! It appears to be harder to waken children when a Zeppelin
is coming your way. I got the elder girl awake, lifted her, and sat her
on the bed, for she had become heavier, I noticed. Then I put her small
sister over my shoulder, as limp and indifferent as a half-filled bag. By
this time the elder one had snuggled into the foot of her bed, resigned
to that place if the other end were disputed, and was asleep again. I
think I became annoyed, and spoke sharply. We were in a hurry. The boy
was waiting for us at the top of the stairs.

"What's up?" he asked with merry interest, hoisting his slacks.

"Come on down," I said.

We went into a central room, put coats round them, answering eager and
innocent questions with inconsequence, had the cellar door and a light
ready, and then went out to inspect affairs. There were more searchlights
at work. Bright diagonals made a living network on the overhead dark. It
was remarkable that those rigid beams should not rest on the roof of
night, but that their ends should glide noiselessly about the invisible
dome. The nearest of them was followed, when in the zenith, by a faint
oval of light. Sometimes it discovered and broke on delicate films of
high fair-weather clouds. The shells were still twinkling brilliantly,
and the guns were making a rhythmless baying in the distance, like a
number of alert and indignant hounds. But the Zeppelin had gone. The
firing diminished and stopped.

They went to bed again, and as I had become acutely depressed, and the
book now had no value, I turned in myself, assuring everyone, with the
usual confidence of the military expert, that the affair was over for the
night. But once in bed I found I could see there only the progress
humanity had made in its movement heavenwards. That is the way with us;
never to be concerned with the newest clever trick of our enterprising
fellow-men till a sudden turn of affairs shows us, by the immediate
threat to our own existence, that that cleverness has added to the peril
of civilized society, whose house has been built on the verge of the pit.
War now would be not only between soldiers. In future wars the place of
honour would be occupied by the infants, in their cradles. For war is not
murder. Starving children is war, and it is not murder. What treacherous
lying is all the heroic poetry of battle! Men will now creep up after
dark, ambushed in safety behind the celestial curtains, and drop bombs on
sleepers beneath for the greater glory of some fine figment or other. It
filled me, not with wrath at the work of Kaisers and Kings, for we know
what is possible with them, but with dismay at the discovery that one's
fellows are so docile and credulous that they will obey any order,
however abominable. The very heavens had been fouled by this obscene and
pallid worm, crawling over those eternal verities to which eyes had been
lifted for light when night and trouble were over dark. God was dethroned
by science. One looked startled at humanity, seeing not the accustomed
countenance, but, for a moment, glimpsing instead the baleful lidless
stare of the evil of the slime, the unmentionable of a nightmare....

A deafening crash brought us out of bed in one movement. I must have been
dozing. Someone cried, "My children!" Another rending uproar interrupted
my effort to shepherd the flock to a lower floor. There was a raucous
avalanche of glass. We muddled down somehow--I forget how. I could not
find the matches. Then in the dark we lost the youngest for some eternal
seconds while yet another explosion shook the house. We got to the
cellar stairs, and at last there they all were, their backs to the coals,
sitting on lumber.

A candle was on the floor. There were more explosions, somewhat muffled.
The candle-flame showed a little tremulous excitement, as if it were one
of the party. It reached upwards curiously in a long intent flame, and
then shrank flat with what it had learned. We were accompanied by
grotesque shadows. They stood about us on the white and unfamiliar walls.
We waited. Even the shadows seemed to listen with us; they hardly moved,
except when the candle-flame was nervous. Then the shadows wavered
slightly. We waited. I caught the boy's eye, and winked. He winked back.
The youngest, still with sleepy eyes, was trembling, though not with
cold, and this her sister noticed, and put her arms about her. His mother
had her hand on her boy's shoulder.

There was no more noise outside. It was time, perhaps, to go up to see
what had happened. I put a raincoat over my pyjamas, and went into the
street. Some of my neighbours, who were special constables, hurried by.
The enigmatic night, for a time, for five minutes, or five seconds (I do
not know how long it was), was remarkably still and usual. It might have
been pretending that we were all mistaken. It was as though we had been
merely dreaming our recent excitements. Then, across a field, a villa
began to blaze. Perhaps it had been stunned till then, and had suddenly
jumped into a panic of flames. It was wholly involved in one roll of fire
and smoke, a sudden furnace so consuming that, when it as suddenly
ceased, giving one or two dying spasms, I had but an impression of flames
rolling out of windows and doors to persuade me that what I had seen was
real. The night engulfed what may have been an illusion, for till then I
had never noticed a house at that point.

Whispers began to pass of tragedies that were incredible in their
incidence and craziness. Three children were dead in the rubble of one
near villa. The ambulance that was passing was taking their father to the
hospital. A woman had been blown from her bed into the street. She was
unhurt, but she was insane. A long row of humbler dwellings, over which
the dust was still hanging in a faint mist, had been demolished, and one
could only hope the stories about that place were far from true. We were
turned away when we would have assisted; all the help that was wanted
was there. A stranger offered me his tobacco pouch, and it was then I
found my rainproof was a lady's, and therefore had no pipe in its
pocket.

The sky was suspect, and we watched it, but saw only vacuity till one
long beam shot into it, searching slowly and deliberately the whole
mysterious ceiling, yet hesitating sometimes, and going back on its path
as though intelligently suspicious of a matter which it had passed over
too quickly. It peered into the immense caverns of a cloud to which it
had returned, illuminating to us unsuspected and horrifying possibilities
of hiding-places above us. We expected to see the discovered enemy boldly
emerge then. Nothing came out. Other beams by now had joined the pioneer,
and the night became bewildering with a dazzling mesh of light. Shells
joined the wandering beams, those sparks of orange and red. A world of
fantastic chimney-pots and black rounds of trees leaped into being
between us and the sudden expansion of a fan of yellow flame. A bomb! We
just felt, but hardly heard, the shock of it. A furious succession of
such bursts of light followed, a convulsive opening and shutting of
night. We saw that when midnight is cleft asunder it has a fiery inside.

The eruptions ceased. Idle and questioning, not knowing we had heard the
last gun and bomb of the affair, a little stunned by the maniacal
rapidity and violence of this attack, we found ourselves gazing at the
familiar and shadowy peace of our suburb as we have always known it. It
had returned to that aspect. But something had gone from it for ever. It
was not, and never could be again, as once we had known it. The security
of our own place had been based on the goodwill or indifference of our
fellow-creatures everywhere. To-night, over that obscure and unimportant
street, we had seen a celestial portent illuminate briefly a little of
the future of mankind.


III. Islands


JANUARY 5, 1918. The editor of the _Hibbert Journal_ betrays a secret and
lawless passion for islands. They must be small sanctuaries, of course,
far and isolated; for he shows quite rightly that places like the British
Isles are not islands in any just and poetic sense. Our kingdom is earth,
sour and worm-riddled earth, with all its aboriginal lustre trampled out.
By islands he means those surprising landfalls, Kerguelen, the Antarctic
Shetlands, Timor, Amboyna, the Carolines, the Marquesas, and the
Galapagos. An island with a splendid name, which I am sure he would have
mentioned had he thought of it, is Fernando de Noronha.

There must be a fair number of people to-day who cherish that ridiculous
dream of an oceanic solitude. We remember that whenever a storyteller
wishes to make enchantment seem thoroughly genuine, he begins upon an
island. One might say, if in a hurry, that Defoe began it, but in leisure
recall the fearful spell of islands in the Greek legends. It is easily
understood. If you have watched at sea an island shape, and pass,
forlorn in the waste, apparently lifeless, and with no movement to be
seen but the silent fountains of the combers, then you know where the
Sirens were born, and why awful shapes grew in the minds of the simple
Greeks out of the wonders in Crete devised by the wise and mysterious
Minoans, who took yearly the tribute of Greek youth--youth which never
returned to tell.

How easily the picture of one's first island in foreign seas comes back!
I had not expected mine, and was surprised one morning, when
eastward-bound in the Mediterranean, to see a pallid mass of rock two
miles to port, when I had imagined I knew the charts of that sea well
enough. It was a frail ghost of land on that hard blue plain, and had a
light of its own; but it looked arid and forbidding, a place of seamen's
bones. Turning quickly to the mate I asked for its name. "Alboran," he
said, very quietly, without looking at it, as though keeping something
back. He said no more. But while that strange glimmer was on the sea I
watched it; I have learned nothing since of Alboran; and so the memory of
that brief sight of a strange rock is as though once I had blundered on a
dreadful secret which the men who knew it preferred to keep.

But there is a West Indian Island which for me is the best in the seas,
because the memory of it is but a reflection of my last glimpse of the
tropics. That landfall in the Spanish Main was as soundless as a dream.
It was but an apparition of land. It might have been no more than an
unusually vivid recollection of a desire which had once stirred the
imagination of a boy. Looking at it, I felt sceptical, quite unprepared
to believe that what once was a dream could be coming true by any chance
of my drift through the years. Yet there it remained, right in our
course, on a floor of malachite which had stains of orange drift-weed. It
could have been a mirage. It appeared diaphanous, something so frail that
a wind could have stirred it. Did it belong to this earth? It grew
higher, and the waves could be seen exploding against its lower rocks. It
_was_ a dream come true. Yet even now, as I shall not have that landfall
again, I have a doubt that waters could be of the colours which were
radiant about that island, that rocks could be of rose and white, that
trees could be so green and aromatic, and light--except of the
Hesperides, which are lost--so like the exhilarating life and breath of
the prime. A doubt indeed! For every whisper one hears to-day deepens the
loom of a gigantic German attack.


IV. Travel Books


JANUARY 19, 1918. What long hours at night we wait for sleep! Sleep will
not come. A friend, who grows more like a sallow congestion of scorn than
a comfortable companion, warned me yesterday, when I spoke of the end of
the War, that it might have no end. He said that we could not escape our
fate. Our star, I gathered, was to receive a celestial spring-cleaning.
There would be bonfires of litter. We had become impeded with the rubbish
of centuries of wise and experienced statecraft, and we had hardly more
than begun to get rid of it. A renaissance with a vengeance! Youth was in
revolt against the aged and the dead.

But what an idea to look at when waiting for sleep! I turned over with
another sigh, and recalled that William James has advised us that a
deleterious thought may be exorcised by willing another that is sunny. I
tried to command a more enjoyable picture for eyes that were closed but
intent. Yet you never know where the most promising image will transport
you through some inconsequential association. I recalled a pleasing day
in the Eastern Mediterranean, and that brought _Eothen_ into my mind, by
chance. And instantly, instead of seeing Sfax in Tunis, I was looking
down from a window on a black-edged day of rain, watching an unending
procession of moribund figures jolting over the _pavé_ of a street in
Flanders, in every kind of conveyance, from the Yser. There I was, back
at the War, at two in the morning, and all because I had read _Eothen_
desperately in odd moments while waiting for the signs which would warn
me that the enemy was about to enter that village.

No escape yet! I could hear the old clock slowly making its way towards
another day. I heard a belated wayfarer going home, his feet muffled in
snow. Anyhow, I never had much of an opinion of _Eothen_, a book over
which the cymbals have been banged too loudly. Compare it, as a travel
book, for substance and style, with _A Week on the Concord_; though that
is a silly thing to ask, if no sillier than literary criticism usually
is. But though all the lists the critics make of our best travel books
invariably give Kinglake's a principal place, I have not once seen
Thoreau's narrative included.

What is the test for such a book? I should ask it to be a trustworthy
confidence of a kingdom where the marches may be foreign to our cheap and
usual experience, though familiar enough to our dreams. It may not offer,
but it must promise that Golden City which drew Raleigh to the Orinoco,
Thoreau to Walden Pond, Doughty to Arabia, Livingstone to Tanganyika, and
Hudson to the Arctic. The fountain of life is there. We hope to come to
our own.

We never notice whether that country has good corn-land, or whether it is
rich enough in minerals to arouse an interest in its future. But its
prospects are lovely and of good report. It is always a surprise to find
the earth can look so good, and behave so handsomely, on the quiet, to a
vagabond traveller like Thoreau, who has no valid excuse for not being at
honest work, as though it reserved its finest mornings to show to
favoured children when really good people are not about. The Sphinx has a
secret only for those who do not see her wink.


V. Signs of Spring


FEBRUARY 16, 1918. A catalogue of second-hand books was sent to me
yesterday. A raid warning, news of the destruction of Parliament House,
or a whisper of the authentic ascent of Mr. Lloyd George in a fiery
chariot and of the flight of God, would do no more to us than another
kick does to the dead. But that catalogue had to be handled to be
believed. It was an incredible survival from the days before the light
went out. Those minor gratifications have gone. I had even forgotten they
were ever ours. Sometimes now one wakes to a morning when the window is a
golden square, a fine greeting to a good earth, and the whistle of a
starling in the apple tree just outside is as tenuous as a thread of
silver; the smell of coffee brings one up blithe as a boy about to begin
play again. Yet something we feel to be wrong--a foggy memory of an ugly
dream--ah, yes; the War, the War. The damned remembrance of things as
they are drops its pall. The morning paper, too, I see, has the
information that our men are again cheerfully waiting for the spring
offensive.

Cheerfully! But, of course, the editor knows. And the _spring_ offensive!
I have seen that kind of vernal gladness. What an advent! When you find
the first blue egg in the shrubbery behind your billet in Artois; when
the G. S. O. 2 comes into the mess with a violet in his fingers, and
shows it to every doubter, then you know the time has come for the
testing of the gas cylinders, and you wonder whether this is the last
time you will be noteworthy because you had the earliest news of the
chiffchaff. The spring offensive! Guns are now converging by leagues of
roads to a new part of the Front, to try to do there what they failed to
do elsewhere. The men, as all important editors know, are happily waiting
for the great brutes to begin bellowing again in infernal concert. So
there accumulates at breakfast in these spring days all that evidence
which makes one proud to share with one's fellows the divine gift of
reason, instead of a blind and miserable animal instinct. No wonder the
cuckoo has a merry note!

That is the way we idle and hapless civilians now begin our day. I look
up to the sky, and wonder whether this inopportune spell of fine weather
means that some London children will be killed in bed to-night. As I pass
the queues of women who have been waiting for hours for potatoes, and
probably won't get any, though the earth doubtless is still abundant, if
we had but the sense and opportunity to try it, I cannot help wondering
whether it would not have been better for us to have refused the gift of
reason from which could be devised the edifying wonders of civilization,
and have remained in the treetops instead, so ignorant that we were
unaware we were lucky.

Another grave statement by a great statesman, and, when we are fortunate,
a field postcard, are to-day our full literary deserts. Is it surprising
that catalogues of old books do not come our way? We do not deserve them.
Hope faintly revives, when the postman cheers us with an overdue field
postcard, of a morning to dawn when the abstraction we name the "average
intelligence" and the "great heart of the public" and the "herd mind,"
will not only regret that it made a ruinous fool of itself the night
before, but solemnly resolve to end all disruptive and dirty habits. This
wild hope was born in me of such a postcard (all right so far!)
coinciding with the arrival of the list of old books. It seemed at that
moment that things could be different and better. Then, when closing the
front door that morning--very gently--not slamming it on the run--I saw
something else. The door noiselessly closed, an easy launch into a
tranquil day, as though I had come down through the night with the
natural process of the hours, and so had commenced the day at the right
moment, I noticed the twig of a lilac bush had intruded into the porch.
It directly indicated me with a black finger. What did it want? I looked
intently, sure that an omen was here. Aha! So that was it! The twig was
showing me that it had a green nail.

Four young officers of the Flying Corps passed me, going ahead briskly,
and I thought that an elm under which they walked had kindling in it a
suggestion of coloured light. But it was too delicate to be more than a
hope. It must be confessed that the men who fight in the air were more
distinct than that light. Then the four officers parted, two to either
side, when marching past another figure. They went beyond it swiftly,
taking no notice of it, turned into the future, and vanished. I drew near
the bowed and leisurely being, which had a spade over its shoulder.

It stopped to light a pipe, and I caught up to it. The edge of the spade
was like silver with use, and the big hand which grasped it was brown
with dry earth. The lean neck of this figure was tinctured with many
summers, and cross-hatched by the weather and mature maleness. I caught a
smell of newly-turned earth. The figure moved as though time were
nothing. It turned its face as I drew level, and said it was a good
morning. The morning was better than good; and somehow this object in an
old hat and clothes as rough as bark, with a face which probably had the
same expression when William was momentous at Hastings, and when Pitt
solemnly ordered the map of Europe to be rolled up, was in accord with
the light in the elm, and the superior and convincing insolence of the
blackbirds. They all suggested the tantalizing idea that solid ground is
near us, in this unreasonable world of anxious change, if only we had
intelligence enough to know where to look for it.


VI. Prose Writing


MARCH 16, 1918. DEBRETT and Mr. BURKE, but the style and substance of
their work are relatively so flimsy that one is justified, I think, in
neglecting them. In any case their public is a limited one. So,
of course, is Mr.
BRADSHAW'S; but it is better than theirs. Mr. DEBRETT'S book we read
idly in an idle hour; when we read Mr.

BRADSHAW'S it is because we feel that we simply must; and that perhaps
is the surest test of genius.

It is no wonder that in some circles Mr. BRADSHAW holds a position
comparable only to the position of HOMER. I once knew an elderly clergyman
who knew the whole of Mr. BRADSHAW'S book by heart. He could tell you
without hesitation the time of any train from anywhere to anywhere else.
He looked forward each month to the new number, as other people look
forward to the new numbers of magazines. When it came he skimmed eagerly
through its pages and noted with a fierce excitement that they had
taken off the 5.30 from Larne Harbour, or that the 7.30 from Galashiels
was stopping that month at Shankend. He knew all the connections; he
knew all the restaurant trains; and, if you mentioned the 6.15 to Little
Buxton, he could tell you offhand whether it was a Saturdays Only
or a Saturdays Excepted.

This is the exact truth, and I gathered that he was not unique.

It seems that there is a Bradshaw cult; there may even be a Bradshaw club,
where they meet at intervals for Bradshaw dinners, after which a
paper is read on "Changes I have made, with some Observations on
Salisbury." I suppose some of them have first editions, and talk about
them very proudly; and they have hot academic discussions on the best
way to get from Barnham Junction to Cardiff without going through Bristol.
Then they drink the toast of "The Master" and go home in omnibuses.
My friend was a schoolmaster and took a small class of boys in Bradshaw;
he said they knew as much about it as he did. I call that corrupting
the young.

But apart from this little band of admirers I am afraid that the book
does suffer from neglect. Who is there, for example, who has read the
"Directions" on page 1, where we are actually shown the method of reading
tentatively suggested by the author himself? The ordinary reader, coming
across a certain kind of thin line, lightly dismisses it as a misprint or
a restaurant car on Fridays. If he had read the Preface he would
know that it meant a SHUNT. He would know that a SHUNT means that
passengers are enabled to continue their journey by changing into the
next train.

Whether he would know what that means I do not know. The best
authorities suppose it to be a poetical way of saying that you have to
change--what is called an euphemism.

No, you must not neglect the Preface; and you must not neglect the
Appendix on Hotels. As sometimes happens in works of a philanthropic
character, Mr. BRADSHAW'S Appendix has a human charm that is lacking in
his treatment of his principal theme, the arrival and departure of
trains. To the careful student it reveals also a high degree of organisation
among his collaborators, the hotel-managers. It is obvious, for
example, that at Bournemouth there must be at least one hotel which
has the finest situation on the South coast. Indeed one would expect to
find that there was more than one. But no; Bournemouth, exceptionally
fortunate in having at once the most select hotel on the South
coast, the largest and best-appointed hotel on the South coast and the
largest and most up-to-date hotel on the South coast, has positively only
one which has the finest position on the South coast. Indeed, there is
only one of these in the whole of England, though there are two which
have the finest position on the East coast.

How is it, we wonder, that with so much variation on a single theme
such artistic restraint is achieved?

It is clear, I think, that before they send in their manuscripts the
hotel-managers must meet somewhere and agree together the exact terms
of their contributions to the book.
"The George" agrees that for the coming year "The Crown" shall have
the "finest cuisine in England," provided "The George" may have "the
most charming situation imaginable," and so on. I should like to be at one
of those meetings.

This is the only theory which accounts for the curious phrases we find so
frequently in the text:--"_Acknowledged_ to be the finest"; "_Admittedly_
in the best position." Who is it that acknowledges or admits these things?
It must be the other managers at these annual meetings. Yes, the restraint
of the collaborators is wonderful, and in one point only has it broken
down.

  There are no fewer than seventeen hotels with
   an Unrivalled Situation, and two of these are at Harrogate.

For a small place like the British Isles it seems to me that this is too
many.

For the rest, what imagery, what exaltation we find in this Appendix!

  Dazed with imagined beauty we pass from one
   splendid haunt to another.
   One of them has _three_ golf-courses of
   its own; several are _replete_ with
   every comfort (and is
   not "replete" the perfect epithet?). Here is a
   seductive one "on the sea-edge,"
   and another whose principal glory is its
   sanitary certificate.

Another stands on the spot where TENNYSON received his inspiration for
the _Idylls of the King_, and leaves it at that. In such a spot even
"cuisine" is negligible.

On the whole, from a literary point of view, the hydros come out better
than the mere hotels. But of course they have unequalled advantages.
With such material as Dowsing Radiant Heat, D'Arsonval High Frequency and
Fango Mud Treatment almost any writer could be sensational.

What is High Frequency, I wonder? It is clear, at any rate, that it would
be madness to have a hydro without it.

Well, I have selected my hotel--on purely literary grounds. Or
rather I have selected two. One is the place where they have the Famous
Whirlpool Baths. I shall go there at once.

The manager of the other is a great artist; alone among the collaborators
he understands simplicity. His contribution occupies a whole page; but
there is practically nothing in it, nothing about cuisine or sanitation,
or elegance or comfort. Only, in the middle, he writes quite simply THE
MOST PERFECT HOTEL IN THE WORLD.

A.P.H.

[Footnote 1: "Bradshaw's General Railway and Steam Navigation Guide for
Great Britain and Ireland."]
* * * * *
A ZOOLOGICAL CURIOSITY.

"The complaint made was that men came to the district and asked inflated
prices for shares, far above the market value, and it was argued
that the new exchange would tend to obviate this system of sharks
feathering their nests."

--_Lancashire Paper_.
* * * * *
[Illustration: BEHIND THE SCENES IN CINEMA-LAND.

"THAT'S FINE. BUT, AS I HAVEN'T GOT ANY FILMS LEFT, I SUPPOSE THERE'S
NO USE STAYING HERE."]
* * * * *
AN INTER-SERVICE MATCH.

(_With the British Army in France_.)
Frederick entered the Mess with a decided sea-roll, hitched his
slacks and berthed himself on the starboard settee.

"Cheerio, my hearties," said he breezily. "Everybody on the old lugger still
luffing along all serene?"
"Why so oppressively nautical?" inquired Percival. "You haven't been on
the leave-boat lately."
"'Tis true, old messmate.

I'm under the influence of my new batman, one 'Enery 'Enson. After
a lifetime in the Marines he's now spending his declining days in the
Army, and he's terribly infectious. I found myself saying, 'Ay, ay,
Sir,' when the C.O. spoke to me."
"I think I've noticed your 'Enery," said Percival. "Isn't he
about ten feet high by six broad, tattooed all over like a circulating
art gallery, and addicted to chewing quids and swabbing out your hut
in his bare feet?"
"My cabin, you mean. And says he's going ashore when he takes a trip down
the village. That's 'Enery."
"Incidentally he's a confirmed bath-lifter," interjected Binnie.

"Yesterday morning my batman prepared me a tub, and while he was fetching
me along your hulking pirate boosted out my sponge and towels and
installed your lily-white self in it. You were so busy wallowing in my
hot water that you never heard my protests on the door. You really must
curb his buccaneering instincts, old Tirps."
"I accept no responsibility for his methods," said Frederick haughtily;
"I merely profit by them. In any case I didn't _take_ your hot water; I
simply used it. You should live near the bath-house and get up promptly
when you are called, as I do."
"Well, I don't mind the British Navy ruling the waves," grumbled
Binnie, "but I object to its extending its sphere of influence over
my bath-water."

"It jolly well doesn't extend over mine," said Percival with pride.
"Frederick's 'Enery doesn't get the better of my Elfred. This morning a
queue, consisting of two perfectly good Loots, a really excellent Skipper
and a priceless Major were waiting for vacant baths. But was Elfred Fry
dismayed? To forestall an answer that might possibly be wrong I may say
that he wasn't. He promptly appropriated a cubicle that happened to be
unoccupied--"
"Really, my frowsty old Camembert, don't ask us to believe that they had
_all_ overlooked it," expostulated Frederick.

"Not for worlds would I endeavour to impose on your gentle trusting
natures. So far from their overlooking it the bath had been the subject
of earnest scrutiny, and they had all regretfully come to the conclusion
that it lacked one important attribute of a bath--it wouldn't hold
water. The plug was missing."
"And by a singular chance the plug happened to be in the possession of
your Elfred?"
"That is my case, me luds," said Percival simply. "If the silent Navy
wants to beat my Elfred it's got to rise very early in the morning."

"We shall see," said Frederick darkly. "I'm going to tell this tale
to the Marines."

That evening the troops had organised a stupendous boxing tournament in
the Recreation Hut. Binnie by invitation combined the offices of referee,
M.C. and timekeeper, and Frederick and Percival at the ring-side unanimously
disagreed with his verdicts.

"Most appalling decision," said Percival in a loud whisper. "The referee
has obviously been got at."
"Sh!" replied Frederick. "He hasn't been told it's a boxing contest.
He thinks it's a clog-dancing competition and is giving the points for
footwork."
Unfortunately the M.C. did not hear. He was speaking himself.

"The next bout should conclude our programme," he said, "but I am asked
to announce that Private Henson challenges Private Fry to box six
two-minute rounds, backing himself for five francs against a small
article of no intrinsic value."

Enthusiastic applause greeted the announcement.

A disturbance in the rear of the hut indicated that Elfred was heading
for cover.

"'E 's twice my size," he wailed as strong hands hauled him back.

"The challenger admits that he holds a slight advantage in weight," continued
the M.C., "but considers that is counterbalanced by his advanced years."

"This is _your_ fiendish work," hissed Percival to Frederick.

"Not a bit of it, old sportsman," replied Frederick cheerfully. "The
patent rights are held by 'Enery. I merely mentioned to him that Elfred
possessed a desirable bath-plug that it might be useful to acquire."

Percival left his seat to confer with the shrinking Elfred.

"'E can 'ave the old bath-plug an' welcome, Sir, as far as I'm
concerned," said the latter.

"Tut, tut!" said Percival. "You must make a fight for it. The honour of
the Army is at stake."
"I ain't all that set on the honour of the Army," said Elfred. "But 'im
being the challenger, shouldn't I be justified in putting the plug in one
of my gloves?"
"The rules don't provide for such a contingency. Hurry up now and get
stripped, and I'll give you twenty francs if you win."
Both combatants were warmly received.

'Enery's decorative tattooing was much admired, and Elfred was urgently
requested not to spoil the pictures. By desire of the referee the stakes
were handed to him--Frederick producing the five francs for 'Enery--and
the battle commenced.

It was early evident that the Navy intended shock tactics, while the
Army favoured a system of elastic defence. A salvo of short-arm jabs
by 'Enery was answered by long-range sniping on the part of Elfred, no
direct hits being recorded.

Towards the end of the round 'Enery attempted to approach under cover of a
smoke screen, but action was broken off at the sound of the gong.

The second round opened sensationally. Elfred, on the advice of his seconds,
was "making use of the ring" when he accidentally collided with his
opponent coming in the reverse direction and gave him a violent thump
without return. There seemed every prospect of trouble, but clever
footwork prevented the incident developing into a _fracas_.
Round two concluded with Elfred leading handsomely by one point to
nothing.

"Two to one on Elfred," said Percival excitedly.

"Take you--in bath plugs," answered Frederick, carefully entering the
bet.

'Enery equalised in the third round, Elfred having incautiously
wandered into the track of a stray upper-cut and bounced off.

More footwork followed, Elfred winning by about two yards. Both were breathing
heavily when time was called, and 'Enery was complaining about his
bronchitis.

Skirmishing tactics in the fourth round resulted in Elfred having a narrow
escape from being torpedoed beneath the belt, and during several subsequent
clinches he was requested to stop studying the pictures and get on with
the business.

The fifth and sixth rounds were marked by the departure of most of
the spectators, and in the end a draw was the only possible verdict.

"But what about the plug, old scout?" asked Percival, as they wandered
back to their quarters.

"As referee," answered Binnie, "I gave a draw; as Battalion Boxing
Board of Control I order the match to be re-fought in six months' time,
to give the men a chance to get into condition; and meanwhile as stakeholder
I continue to hold the five francs and the bath-plug."
* * * * *

[Illustration: _Profiteer_ (_to M.F.H._). "LOOK 'ERE!--THIS IS THE THIRD
TIME I'VE BEEN OUT WITH YOUR CROWD, AN' Y' 'AVEN'T CAUGHT A FOX. BEST THING
_YOU_ CAN DO IS TO GIMME BACK ME 'SUB' AN' SELL YER BLOOMIN' DOGS!"]
* * * * *
[ILLUSTRATION: _BLUSTEROUS PERSON_ (_WHO HAS FORCED A CIGAR ON UNWILLING
CLUB ACQUAINTANCE_), "THERE MY BOY--YOU DON'T OFTEN SMOKE A THING
LIKE THAT! THAT'S SOMETHING LIKE A CIGAR, EH?"
_The Victim_. "YES--SOMETHING. WHAT IS IT?"]
* * * * *
THE TRUE SONG-STUFF.

[A writer in an evening paper describes a certain song as being sung,
"sometimes with a lump in the throat and a tear in the eye," all over
England.]
If you wish to succeed as a writer Of songs that undoubtedly count,
By making the atmosphere brighter, The moral barometer mount, Then
be it your aim and endeavour to try For the lump in the throat and
the tear in the eye.

SCRIABINE and STRAVINSKY may flatter The ears of the brainy _élite_, But
the musical numbers that matter Express what is simple and sweet;
You may easily miss, by aspiring too high, Both the lump in the throat
and the tear in the eye.

Though cynics conspire to repress it, To sentiment, "heavenly link"
(As the Bard of Savoy would address it), With joy "I eternally
drink;" For it gives us the key, which no science can buy, To the
lump in the throat and the tear in the eye.

But, if you are anti-Victorian And, scorning the coo of the dove, Hold the
roar of the primitive Saurian The final expression of love, You may have,
if you choose, an alternative shy At a tear in the throat and a lump
in the eye.

* * * * *
"For 70 years Regent Street has basked in sunshine, and now it is to be
cast into shadow again. It will be like a gloomy canon between dour
stone walls."--_Daily Chronicle_.

We have heard of a gloomy Dean, whose habitat answers to the
description given. Can this be his understudy?

* * * * *
"The 'brasses' worn by the modern cart-horse are a direct survival of the
amulets which bedecked the horses of the time of Julius Cæsar. They
are worn on the farthingale as charms against the Evil Eye."--_Daily
Paper_.

You should see our Clydesdale in her crinoline.

* * * * *

[Illustration: AN UNPOPULAR REVIVAL.

FRITZ. "THIS IS NO GOOD TO ME NOW. YOU WANT A SWELLED HEAD FOR THIS SORT
OF THING."]
* * * * *
ESSENCE OF PARLIAMENT.

_Monday, March 15th_. The great Food-prices debate hardly justified
its preliminary advertisement. Mr. MCCURDY took sure ground when he argued
that high prices were mainly due to world-shortage; and, though he entered
more disputable territory when he declared that the Profiteering Act
was not primarily intended to punish profiteers, Mr. ASQUITH did not
seriously attempt to dislodge him. Indeed, the EX-PREMIER'S speech was
mainly composed of truisms, his only excursion into the speculative being
an assertion--with which not all economists will agree--that inflation
of currency is a consequence and not a cause of high prices.

An ex-Food Controller, Mr. GEORGE ROBERTS, defended the Government
against charges of extravagance, and ventured to remind Labour--as
THOMAS DRUMMOND reminded Irish landlords--that it had duties as well as
rights.

Early in the evening the PRIME MINISTER, who had sat through many speeches
in readiness for the threatened attack, folded his notes and silently
stole away.

On the adjournment General PAGE CROFT accused the Ministry of Munitions
of unfair treatment to one of its employees. The peroration to Mr.
KELLAWAY'S spirited defence deserves quotation: "The decision taken by
the Ministry is a decision that will stand." That's the stuff to give
'em.

_Tuesday, March 16th_.--"The LORD CHANCELLOR was so unusually apologetic
in his exposition of the War Emergency Laws (Continuance) Bill that none
of the Peers had the heart seriously to oppose him.
Lord SALISBURY took note of the Government's admission that they were anxious
to say Good-bye to D.O.R.A. and only complained that the farewell ceremony
was so long-drawn-out. Lord BUCKMASTER failed to understand why D.O.R.A.
should have a longer life in Ireland than in England, and was so
carried away by his own eloquence as to declare that all the
crimes attributed to the Sinn Feiners had been due "to misguided attempts
to enforce special legislation against a misunderstood and a gallant
people." Lord BIRKENHEAD replied that there was at least a plausible case
for the contention that the boot was on the other leg.

[Illustration: "CONTROLLERS" CONTROLLED.

MR CLYNES. MR. MCCURDY. MR. G. ROBERTS.]
It is unusual to find Members of the House of Commons objecting to
their speeches being reported, but apparently some of them do--when
the reporters are police constables.

The HOME SECRETARY thought it quite possible that if Members attended
certain meetings the official stenographers might think it worth while
to take down their utterances but I gathered that he was not prepared
to give any guarantee on the subject, and that Colonel WEDGWOOD and
Lieut.

-Commander KENWORTHY must not count too confidently on having a further
road to fame opened to them.

[Illustration: THE CORNUCOPIA, OR HORNE OF PLENTY. SIR ROBERT HORNE.]

Mr. BONAR LAW read a telegram from Lord KILMARNOCK regarding the
situation in Berlin. As it was already a day old, was admittedly based
on a _communiqué_ from _Wolff's Bureau_, "censored" by Mr. TREBITSCH
LINCOLN (late Liberal Member for Darlington), and had in the meantime
been officially contradicted by the old Government, it did not add
much to our knowledge.
Time was when it was usual to move to reduce a Vote by a hundred
pounds if you wanted to defeat the Government. But such paltry
figures are no good in these spacious days. Sir DONALD MACLEANS'S
proposed reduction in the Vote on Account for the Civil Services
was the much more mouth-filling morsel of one hundred million pounds.
Mr.
CHAMBERLAIN considered it very handsome of the Opposition, on the
eve, he understood, of coming into office, thus to cut off its own
supplies. Nevertheless he declined to accept the generous offer.
Our finances would be all right if the House would back the Government
by practising economy as well as preaching it. As it was, he thought
the worst was over, for--strange and agreeable phenomenon--the
floating debt was sinking.
After this it was, perhaps, not very complimentary'of Mr. J.W.
WILSON to urge the Government to put forth their best speakers. The
PRIME MINISTER was still coy, but Sir ROBERT HORNE, in virtue of
his new office as President of the Board of Trade, stepped nimbly
into the breach, and made a speech so cheerful both in substance
and delivery as to justify the hope that in him the Government have
found the HORNE of Plenty.
_Wednesday, March 17th_.--Seventeen years ago Lord BALFOUR OF
BURLEIGH, as a hard-shell Free Trader, sacrificed office sooner
than bow the knee to the new gods of Birmingham. This afternoon he
brought in a Bill (to safeguard "key industries" and counteract
"dumping") which would have gladdened the heart of Mr. JOSEPH
CHAMBERLAIN. Some of the other Free Trade Peers were still unrepentant.
Lord BEAUCHAMP, for example, declaring that shipping was our real
"quay-industry" and needed no protection, announced his intention
of moving the rejection of the Bill; and Lord CREWE, although one
of the authors of the Paris resolutions, on which the measure was
ostensibly based, thought that it went far beyond present necessities.
The only dumps with which Germany was likely to be associated for
some time to come were doleful, not aggressive.
The Report of the Supplementary Estimates furnished the Commons
with abundant points for criticism. In protesting against an increase
in the remuneration of the Law Officers, Mr. HOGGE revealed a
hitherto unsuspected admiration for the PRIME MINISTER, whose
services, he considered, were most inadequately rewarded with five
thousand pounds a year and no pension. If anyone deserved an increase
of salary it was he.
Mr. TYSON-WILSON had the temerity to complain that the Government
were not finding work for all the disabled ex-Service men whom they
trained in the technical schools, and laid himself open to a damaging
"_tu quoque_" from Sir ROBERT HORNE, who pointed out that this lack
of employment was largely due to the trade unions, which refused
to admit these men as "improvers."
In introducing the Naval Estimates for eighty odd millions Mr. LONG
was almost apologetic for not having made them larger. The _personnel_
has been drastically reduced, and parents are actually being offered
a premium of three hundred pounds to remove their sons from Osborne.
On the other hand promotion from the lower deck was to be encouraged,
and in future every youngster entering the Navy would metaphorically
carry a broad-pennant in his ditty-box.
_Thursday, March 18th_.--A proposal to erect a military monument
on a hill near Jerusalem was adversely criticised by Lord TREOWEN.
Lord SOUTHBOROUGH, as a recent visitor to the Holy City, thought
that the Government would be better advised to demolish some of the
recent buildings, including the ex-Kaiser's ridiculous clock-tower,
which had not even the negative merit of telling the time.
In consequence of his rather exhausting séance with the Liberal
Party the PRIME MINISTER was looking a little jaded. But he perked
up wonderfully when Mr. WILL THORNE, _à propos_ of a story that the
Russian Soviet Government had introduced martial law into the
workshops, asked whether he did not think that all able-bodied
people ought to be compelled to work. There was the old twinkle in
his eyes as he replied that it would be very interesting to know
if that was the view of the trade unions. From recent information
I gather that the bricklayers, at any rate, would not subscribe to
it.
Upon the further consideration of the Navy Estimates General SEELY
urged the re-establishment of the Committee of Imperial Defence.
Mr.
LONG said the Admiralty were most anxious for it. Mr. ASQUITH also
approved, but from his ten years' experience as its President entered
a _caveat_ against expecting the Committee to take upon itself
executive functions. "Had it done so," he observed, "there would
have been collisions, cross-purposes, waste of application, and in
many cases something approaching to administrative confusion." Which
things of course never occurred under his _régime_ of--shall I
say?--expectant watchfulness.
The rest of the debate was chiefly remarkable for Lady ASTOR'S bold
declaration, "The sea belongs to England, and it could not be in
better hands." Coming from a country-woman of Mr. DANIELS it was
doubly exhilarating.That
is what put holiday thoughts and literature away. I felt I had been very
unfairly treated, especially as the mutilated, being young men, were
unpleasantly noticeable in so small a village on fine mornings. It is not
right that the calm of our well-earned leisure should be so savagely
ruined. There was one morning on the quay when, watching the incoming
tide, two of us were discussing Mametz Wood and some matters relating to
it which will never be published, and the young man who was instructing
me was approached by an older man, who beamed, and held in his hand a
news-sheet. "Splendid news this morning," said the elderly man to the
young soldier. He wanted the opinion of one who had fought on that
ground, and I regret to say he got it. The soldier indifferently handed
back the glorious news, without inspecting it, with words which youth
should never address to age.

So how can I stay by the quay all the golden day long? I have not come
here prepared to endure the sudden Arctic shadows which fall, even in
summer, from such clouds. The society of our fellows was never so
uncertain, so likely to be stormy, as in these days. And the opinions of
none of our fellow-men can be so disturbing as those of the rebel from
the trenches, who appears, too, to expect us to agree with him at once,
as though he had a special claim on our sympathetic attention. While
considering him and his views of society, of peace and war, I see what
might come upon us as the logical consequence of such a philosophy, and
the dread vision does not accord with the high serenity of this Atlantic
coast, where the wind, like the hilarious vivacity of a luminous globe
spinning through the blue, is mocking these very sheets as I write them,
and is trying to blow them, a little before their time, into vacuity.

It is not easy, and perhaps this summer it would not be right, to find
the exact mood for a holiday. In the frame of mind which is more usual
with us, I put Ecclesiastes--forsaken by a previous visitor, and used to
lengthen a short leg of the dressing-table--in my pocket, and leave the
quay to its harsh new thoughts, and to the devices by which it gets a
bare sustenance out of the tides, the seasons, and the winds, complicated
now with high explosives in cunning ambush; and go out to the headland,
where wild goats among the rocks which litter the steep are the only life
to blatter critical comment to high heaven. I left that holiday quay and
its folk, and took with me a prayer which might go far to brace me to
support the blattering of goats, if that, too, should be my luck even
when in solitude. I passed at the hill-top the last whitewashed wall of
the village, where the open Atlantic is sighted, and stopped to glance at
the latest official poster on the wall. That explained to me, while the
west wind blew, what the penalties are for young men who are in the wrong
because they are young, not having attained the middle-age which brings
with it immunity for the holding of heroic notions. Yet how if those
young men are not bellicose like their wise seniors? Why should they get
the evil which their elders, who will it, take so much care to avoid?

The dust of official lorries in a hurry no longer made the wayside hedges
appear aged. The wind was newly arrived from mid-ocean. I met it coming
ashore. It knew nothing about us, so far. In the distance, the village
with its shipping was a faint blur, already a faded impress on earth, as
though more than half forgotten in spite of its important problems. It
was hardly more than a discoloration, and suggested nothing of
consequence. The sun on the grey rocks was giving a hint that, should
ever it be required, there was heat enough left to begin things anew. I
realized in alarm that such a morning of re-birth might be beautiful; for
I might not be there to sing _Laus Deo_. I might miss that fine morning.
There was a suggestion of leisure in the pattern of the lichen on the
granite; it gave the idea of prolonged yet still merely tentative efforts
at design. The lichen seemed to have complete assurance that there was
time enough for new work. The tough stems of the heather, into which I
put my hand, felt like the sinews of a body that was as ancient as the
other stars, but still so young that it was tranquilly fixed in the joy
of its first awakening, knowing very little yet, guessing nothing of its
beginning nor of its end; still infantile, with all life before it, its
voice merely the tiny shrilling of a grasshopper. The rocks were poised
so precariously above the quivering plain of the sea that they appeared
to tremble in mid-air, being things of no weight, in the rush of the
planet. The distant headlands and moors dilated under the generating sun.
It was then that I pulled Ecclesiastes out of my pocket, leaned against
the granite, and began:

"Vanity of vanities..."

I looked up again. There was a voice above me. An old goat, the
venerable image of all-knowledge, of sneering and bearded sin, was
contemplating me. It was a critical comment of his that I had heard.
Embarrassed, I put away my book.


XII. An Autumn Morning


SEPTEMBER 28, 1918. The way to my suburban station and the morning train
admonishes me sadly with its stream of season-ticket holders carrying
dispatch-cases, and all of them anxious, their resolute pace makes it
evident, for work. This morning two aeroplanes were over us in the blue,
in mimic combat; they were, of course, getting into trim for the raid
to-night, because the barometer is beautifully high and steady. But the
people on their way to the 9.30 did not look up at the flight. Life is
real, life is earnest. When I doubt that humanity knows what it is doing,
I get comfort from watching our local brigadiers and Whitehall ladies on
their way these tranquil Autumn mornings to give our planet another good
shove towards the millennium. Progress, progress! I hear their feet
overtaking me, brisk and resolute, as though a revelation had come to
them overnight, and so now they know what to do, undiverted by any doubt.
There is a brief glimpse of a downcast face looking as though it had just
chanted the Dies Iræ through the mouthfuls of a hurried breakfast; and
once more this laggard is passed in the day's race towards the higher
peak. The reproof goes home. It justly humiliates. But the weather is
only a little west of south for one of the last fair days of the year;
and the gloom of the yew in the churchyard--which stands over the obscure
headstone of a man named Puplett--that yew which seems the residue of the
dark past, has its antiquity full of little smouldering embers of new
life again; and so a lazy man has reasons to doubt whether the millennium
is worth all this hurry. As it is, we seem to have as much trouble as
there is time to classify before supper; by which time, from the look of
the weather, there will be more. Then why hurry over it? The tombstone
says Puplett was a "thrifty and industrious parent," and I can see what
happened to him in 1727. What would I not give, I ask myself, as I pause
by the yew, and listen to the aeroplanes overhead, for a few words from
this Puplett on thrift, industry, and progress! Does he now know more
than brigadiers?

It may be that what Europe is suffering from in our time is the
consequence of having worked too hard, since that unlucky day when Watt
gave too much thought to a boiling kettle. We have worked too hard
without knowing why we were doing it, or what our work would do with us.
We were never wise enough to loaf properly, to stop and glance casually
around for our bearings. We went blindly on. Consider the newspapers, as
they are now! A casual inspection of the mixture of their hard and
congested sentences is enough to show that what is wanted by our writers
famous for their virility, their power of "graphic description" as their
outpour is called by their disciples, and their knowledge of what
everybody ought to be doing, is perhaps no more than an occasional
bromide. They would feel better for a long sleep. This direction by them
of our destiny is an intoxicating pursuit, but it is as exhausting as
would be any other indulgence. We might do quite well if they would only
leave it to us. But they will never believe it. Ah! the Great Men of
Action! What the world has suffered from their inspired efforts to
shepherd humanity into worried flocks hurrying nobody knew whither, every
schoolboy reads; and our strong men to-day, without whose names and
portraits no periodical is considered attractive, would surely have been
of greater benefit to us if they had remained absorbed in their earlier
skittles. This explained the cause of the skylark's strange actions.

A pair of these Larks had built their nest in a meadow. When the time came
for mowing the grass, the little ones were not large enough to leave the
nest. The mother bird laid herself flat on the ground, with her wings
spread out. The father bird took one of the little ones from the nest
and placed it on the mother's back. She flew away, took the baby bird
to a safe place, and came back for another.

This time the father took his turn. In this way they carried the
little ones to a safe place before the mowers came.

Like our Meadow Lark, the Skylark builds her nest on the ground--never
in bushes or trees. Usually it is built in a hole below the surface of the
ground. It is for this reason that it is hard to find.

Then, too, the color of the nest is much like that of the ground.

Four or five eggs are usually laid, and in two weeks the little larks
crack the shells, and come into the world crying for worms and bugs.

THE SKYLARK.

The English Skylark has been more celebrated in poetry than any other
song-bird. Shelley's famous poem is too long to quote and too symmetrical
to present in fragmentary form. It is almost as musical as the sweet
singer itself.

"By the first streak of dawn," says one familiar with the Skylark, "he
bounds from the dripping herbage, and on fluttering wings mounts
the air for a few feet ere giving forth his cheery notes. Then upward,
apparently without effort he sails, sometimes drifting far away as
he ascends, borne as it were by the ascending vapors, so easily he
mounts the air. His notes are so pure and sweet, and yet so loud and
varied withal, that when they first disturb the air of early morning all
the other little feathered tenants of the fields and hedgerows seem
irresistibly compelled to join him in filling the air with melody.
Upwards, ever upwards, he mounts, until like a speck in the highest ether
he appears motionless; yet still his notes are heard, lovely in their
faintness, now gradually growing louder and louder as he descends,
until within a few yards of the earth they cease, and he drops like a
fragment hurled from above into the herbage, or flits about it for a
short distance ere alighting." The Lark sings just as richly on the ground
as when on quivering wing. When in song he is said to be a good guide
to the weather, for whenever we see him rise into the air, despite the
gloomy looks of an overcast sky, fine weather is invariably at hand.

The nest is most frequently in the grass fields, sometimes amongst the
young corn, or in places little frequented. It is made of dry grass
and moss, and lined with fibrous roots and a little horse hair.
The eggs, usually four or five in number, are dull white, spotted,
clouded, and blotched over the entire surface with brownish green.
The female Lark, says Dixon, like all ground birds, is a very close
sitter, remaining faithful to her charge. She regains her nest by
dropping to the ground a hundred yards or more from its concealment.
The food of the Lark is varied,--in spring and summer, insects and
their larvae, and worms and slugs, in autumn and winter, seeds.
Olive Thorne Miller tells this pretty anecdote of a Skylark which
she emancipated from a bird store: "I bought the skylark, though I
did not want him. I spared no pains to make the stranger happy. I
procured a beautiful sod of uncut fresh grass, of which he at once
took possession, crouching or sitting low among the stems, and
looking most bewitching.This dealer
in lumber read through large goggles, and when he had decided to admit he
knew you were in his shop he bent his head, and questioned you steadily
but without a word over the top of his spectacles. If you showed no real
interest in what you proposed to buy he would refuse to sell it.

There I found him again, still reading--Swedenborg this time--with most
of the old things about him, including the Duck-billed Platypus; for
nobody, apparently, had shown sufficient interest in them. The shop,
therefore, was as I have always known it. There was a spark of a summer's
day of 1914 still burning in the heart of a necromancer's crystal ball on
the upper shelf by the window.

The curio there which was really animated put down his book after I had
been in the shop for some minutes, regarded me deliberately as though
looking to see what change had come to me in four such years, and then
glanced up and nodded to the soothsayer's crystal. "It's a pity," he
said, "that those things won't really work." He asked no questions. He
did not inquire after my friend. He did not refer to those problems which
the crowds in the morning trains were eagerly discussing at that moment.
He sat on a heap of forgotten magazines, and remained apart with
Swedenborg. I loafed in the fertile dust and quiet among old prints,
geological specimens, antlers, pewter, bed-warmers, amphoræ, and books.
The proprietor presided over the dim litter of his world, bowed, pensive,
and silent, suggesting in his aloofness not indifference but a retired
sadness for those for whom the mysteries could be made plain, but who are
wilful in their blindness, and so cannot be helped.

I came upon a copy of _Walden_, in its earliest Camelot dress (price
sixpence), and remembered that one who was not there had once said he was
looking for it in that edition. I turned to the last page and read: "Only
that day dawns to which we are awake..."

I reserved the book for him at once, though knowing I could not give it
to him. But what is the good of cold reason? Are we awake in such dawns
as we now witness? Or has there been no dawn yet because we are only
restless in our sleep? It might be either way, and in such a perplexity
reason cannot help us. I thought that perhaps I might now be stirring, on
the point of actually rousing. There, in any case, was the evidence of
that fugitive spark of the early summer of 1914 still imprisoned in its
crystal, proof that the world had experienced a dawn or two. An entirely
unreasonable serenity possessed me--perhaps because I was not fully
roused--because of the indestructibility of those few voiceless hopes we
cherish that seem as fugitive as the glint in the crystal ball, hopes
without which our existence would have no meaning, for if we lost them we
should know the universe was a witless jest, with nobody to laugh at it.

"I want this book," I said to the shopman.

"I know," he answered, without looking up. "I've kept it for you."


XIII. News from the Front


OCTOBER 12, 1918. My remembrance of the man, when I got his letter from
France--and it was approved, apparently, by one of his regimental
officers, for a censorial signature, was upon its envelope--was a
regrettable and embarrassing check to my impulse to cry Victory. I found
it hard, nevertheless, in the moment when victory was near, to forgive
the curious lapse that letter betrayed in a fellow who did not try for
exemption but volunteered for the infantry, and afterwards declined a
post which would have saved him from the trenches. He was the sort of
curious soldier that we civilians will never understand. He aided the
enemy he was fighting. His platoon officer reported that fact as
characteristic and admirable. He had gone out under fire to hold up a
wounded German and give him water. He did not die then, but soon after,
on the Hindenburg Line, because, chosen as a good man who was expert in
killing others with a deadly mechanism, he was leading in an attack. This
last letter of his, which arrived after the telegram warning us, in
effect, that there could be no more correspondence with him, alluded in
contempt to his noble profession and task, and ended with a quotation
from Drum Taps which he prayed I would understand.

His prayer was in vain. I did not understand. I read that quotation at
breakfast, just after finishing my fierce and terrible _Daily Dustpan_,
and the quotation, therefore, was at once repugnant and unfortunate. For
clearly the leader-writer of the _Dustpan_ was a bolder and more martial
man. It is but fair to assume, however, that as that journalist in the
normal routine of a day devoted to his country had not had the good
fortune to run up against the machine guns of the Hindenburg trenches,
naturally he was better able to speak than a soldier who was idly
swinging in the wire there. The quotation, strange for a Guardsman to
make, is worth examining as an example of the baleful influence war has
upon those who must do the fighting which journalists have the hard fate
merely to indicate is the duty of others. The verse actually is called
Reconciliation. After a partial recovery from the shame of the revelation
of my correspondent's unsoldierly spirit, a shame which was a little
softened by the thought that anyhow he was dead, I went to _Leaves of
Grass_ for the first time for some years, to see whether Drum Taps
accorded with war as we know it.

And now I am forced to confess that we may no longer accuse the Americans
of coming late into the War. They appear to have been in it, if the date
of Drum Taps is ignored, longer even than Fleet Street. I cannot see that
we have contributed anything out of our experiences of battle which can
compare with Whitman's poems. He appears to have known of war in
essential episodes and incidents, as well as from a high vision of it, in
a measure which the literature of our own tragedy does not compass.

A minor poet told me once that he could not read Whitman. He declared it
was like chewing glass. When we criticize others, the instant penalty is
that we unwittingly confess what we are ourselves. We know the reception
of _Leaves of Grass_ was of the kind which not seldom greets the
appearance of an exceptional book, though Emerson recognized its worth.
So when occasionally we admit, shyly and apologetically, as is our habit
(in the way we confess that once we enjoyed sugar candy), that long ago
we used to read Emerson, it would do our superior culture no harm to
remember that Emerson was at least the first of the world of letters to
tell the new poet that his _Leaves_ was "the most extraordinary piece of
wit and wisdom America has yet produced." Nothing in all his writing
proves the quality of Emerson's mind so well as his instant and full
knowledge of Whitman, when others felt that what Whitman was really
inviting was laughter and abuse. I suppose what the young poet meant when
he said reading Whitman was like a mouthful of glass was that Whitman has
no music, and so cannot be read aloud. There is always a fair quantity of
any poet's work which would do much to make this world a cold and
unfriendly place if we persevered in reading it aloud. In some
circumstances even Shakespeare might cause blasphemy. Perhaps he has. And
Whitman, like summer-time, and all of us, is not always at his best. But
I think it is possible that many people to-day will know the music and
the solace of the great dirge beginning "When lilacs last in the dooryard
bloom'd." And again, if capturing with words those surmises which
intermittently and faintly show in the darkness of our speculations and
are at once gone, if the making of a fixed star of such wayward glints is
the mark of a poet, then Whitman gave us "On the beach at night."

I had never thought Whitman so good till that soldier's letter
accidentally discovered it to me. If Whitman had been through the
campaign across the narrow straits, if Ypres, Vimy, and Cambrai had been
in his own experience, he could have added little to Drum Taps. For there
is nothing that is new in war. It is only the campaign that is new, and
the men who are young. Yet all has happened before. But each young
soldier in a new campaign feels that his experience is strangely
personal. He will have the truth revealed to him, and will think that it
is an intimacy for his soul alone; yet others, too, have seen it, but are
dead. The survivors of this War will imagine their experiences unique,
admonitory, terrible, and that if they had the words to tell us their
knowledge they would not be believed or understood. That is why the
succeeding generation, too, gets caught. Yet there is enough of this War
in Drum Taps to have stopped it more than two years ago if only one
European in ten had had so much imagination and enterprise as would take
a man through a strange field gate when he was convinced it was in that
direction he should go, and enough of charity in his heart to stay him
from throwing stones at the sheep while on his way.


XIV. Authors and Soldiers


OCTOBER 26, 1918. If a man who knew no books, but who became serious when
told of his emptiness, and showed eagerness to begin to fill it, were
confronted with the awful strata in the library of the British Museum,
and were told that that was his task, he might fall unconscious. But what
cruelty! He could be warned that the threat has little in it; that the
massed legions of books could do him no harm, if he did not disturb them.
It could be whispered to the illiterate man--whose wisdom, it might
chance, was better than much scholarship--that it is possible to read the
best of the world's drama in a few months, and that in the remainder of
the year he could read its finest poetry, history, and philosophy. I am
but paraphrasing what was said recently by an Oxford professor. I would
not dare to give it as my own opinion, within hearing of the high
priests.

Yet the professor's declaration may be not only outrageous, but right.
It is a terrible thought, except to those who are merely bibliophiles
just as some little boys are lovers of old postage stamps. I think he may
be right, for I have a catalogue of all the books and documents prompted
by the War and published before June, 1916. It runs to 180 pages of small
type. It contains the names of about 3500 books and pamphlets. Now, let
us suppose a student wished to know the truth about the War, for perhaps
a very youthful student could imagine it was possible to get the truth
about it. The truth may be somewhere in that catalogue; but I know, for I
have tried, that it has no significant name to betray its pure gold, no
strange brilliance to make the type dance on that page as one turns the
leaves with a hopeless eye. There are, however, two certainties about the
catalogue. One is that it would require a long life, a buoyant
disposition, and a freedom from domestic cares, to read every book in it.
And the other is that there are no more books in it--which we ought to
count as books--than one evening would see us through, interruptions and
all. The books in that mass are as dead as the leaves of their June of
the War.

I must confess, though, that I am a bibliophile with War books. Any book
about the Great War is good enough for me. I am to that class of
literature what little boys are to stamps. Yes; I know well the dread
implication. I am aware of the worm in the mind; that I probe a wound;
that I surrender to an impulse to peer into the darkness of the pit; that
I encourage a thought which steals in with the quiet of midnight, and
that it keeps me awake while the household sleeps. I know I consort with
ghosts in a region of evil. I get the horrors, and I do not repel them.
For some reason I like those ghosts. Most of them have no names for me,
but I count them as old friends of mine; and where should I meet them
again, at night, but amid the scenes we knew?

And what do I look for in these War books? It is not easy to say. It is a
private matter. Songs the soldiers used to sing on French roads are often
in my head. I am like the man who was once bewitched, and saw and heard
things in another place which nobody will believe, and who goes aside,
therefore, unsociable and morose, to brood on what is not of this world.
I am confessing this but to those who themselves have been lost in the
dark, and are now awake again. The others will not know. They will only
answer something about "Cheering up," or--and this is the strangest thing
to hear--"to forget it." I don't want to forget it. So if in a book I see
names like Château Thierry, Crépy-en-Valois, Dickebusch, Hooge,
Vermelles, Hulluch, Festubert, Notre Dame de Lorette, Ligny-Tilloy,
Sailly-Saillisel, Croiselles, Thiepval, Contalmaison, Dompierre, then I
am caught. I do not try to escape.

Yet these books rarely satisfy me. Is it not remarkable that soldiers who
could face the shells with an excellent imitation of indifference should
falter in their books, intimidated by the opinions of those who stayed at
home? They rarely summon the courage to attack those heroic dummies which
are not soldiers but idols set up in a glorious battlefield that never
existed except as a romance among the unimaginative; the fine figures and
the splendid war that were air-built of a rapture. These authors who were
soldiers faced the real War, but they dare not deride the noble and
popular figments which lived but in the transports of the exalted. They
write in whispers, as it were, embarrassed by a knowledge which they
would communicate, but fear they may not. To shatter a cherished
illusion, to expose the truth to a proud memory, that, I will confess,
is always a task before which a sensitive man will hesitate. Yet it is
also part of the test of a writer's courage; by his hesitation a
soldier-author may know that he is in danger of failing in his duty. Yet
the opinion of the public, which intimidates us, is no mere bugbear. It
is very serious. People do not enjoy the destruction of their cherished
illusions. They do not crown the defamers of their idols. What is it that
balks a soldier's judgment when he begins to write about the War? He is
astonished by the reflection that if he were to reproduce with enjoyment
the talk of the heroes which was usual in France, then many excellent
ladies might denounce it indignantly as unmanly. Unmanly! But he is
right. They not only might, but they would. How often have I listened to
the cool and haughty contralto of ladies of education and refinement who
were clearly unaware that what they were encouraging, what to them
afforded so much pride, what deepened their conviction of righteous
sacrifice, was but an obscene outrage on the souls and bodies of young
men. How is one to convey that to ladies? All that a timid writer may do
is to regret the awful need to challenge the pious assurance of
Christians which is sure to be turned to anger by the realities.

I have read in very few books anything that was as good as the gossip one
could hear by chance in France. The intimate yarn of the observant
soldier home on leave, who could trust his listener, is superior to much
one sees in print. In that way I heard the best story of the War. If it
could be put down as it was given to me it would be a masterpiece. But it
cannot be reproduced. It came as I heard it because, remembering his
incredible experience, the narrator found himself in secure and familiar
circumstances again, was confident of his audience, and was thinking only
of his story. His mind was released, he was comfortable, and he was
looking backward in a grim humour which did not quite disguise his
sadness. His smile was comical, but it could move no answering smile.
These intelligent soldiers, who tell us the stories we never see in
print, are not thinking about their style, or of the way the other men
have told such tales, but only of what happened to themselves. They are
as artless as the child who at breakfast so tells its dream of the night
before that one wants to listen, and Tolstoy says that is art. The child
has heard nothing of the apocalyptic visions, and does not know Poe,
Ambrose Bierce, or Kipling. He is concerned only with his own sensations,
and you listen to him because you have had such dreams, and he recalls a
dark adventure you had forgotten.

But the difficulty in the writing of such stories is that the narrator,
as soon as he begins, becomes conscious of the successful methods of
other men. I have been reading a number of War stories published
recently, and it was painful to see how many were ruined by Kipling
before this War began. Kipling was original, and his tricks of manner,
often irritating, and his deplorable views of human society, were usually
carried off by his genius for observation, and the spontaneity of the
drama of his stories. But when his story was thin, and he was wandering
in an excursion with his childish philosophy, he was usually facetious.
As an obvious and easily imitable trick for dull evenings, this elaborate
jocularity seems to have been more enjoyed by his disciples than his
genius for narrative when he was happy, and his material was full and
sound. Yet his false and vulgar fun has spoiled many of these volumes
pollinated from India. They have another defect, too, though it would be
unfair to blame Kipling for that when it may be seen blossoming with the
unassuming modesty of a tulip in any number of _Punch_. I mean that
amusing gravity of the snob who is sure of the exclusive superiority of
his caste mark, with not the trace of a smile on his face, and at a time
when all Europe is awakening to the fact that it sentenced itself to ruin
when it gave great privileges to his kind of folk in return for the
guidance of what it thought was a finer culture, but was no more than a
different accent. It was, we are now aware, the mere Nobodies who won the
War for us; and yet we still meekly accept as the artistic representation
of the British soldier or sailor an embarrassing guy that would disgrace
pantomime. And how the men who won must enjoy it!


XV. Waiting for Daylight


NOVEMBER 9, 1918. I read again my friend's last field service postcard,
brief and enigmatic, and now six weeks old. I could find in it no more
than when it first came. Midnight struck, and I went to the outer gate.
The midnight had nothing to tell me. Not that it was silent; we would not
call it mere silence, that brooding and impenetrable darkness charged
with doom unrevealed, which is now our silent night, unrelenting to
lonely watchers.

Near my gate is a laburnum tree. Once upon a time, on nights of rain such
as this, the shower caught in it would turn to stars, and somehow from
the brightness of that transient constellation I could get my bearings. I
knew where I was. One noticed those small matters in the past, and was
innocently thankful for them. Those lights sufficed us. There was
something companionable even in the street lamp. But what is it now? You
see it, when you are accustomed to the midnight gloom of war, shrouded, a
funeral smear of purple in a black world. No bearing can be got from it
now. What one looks into is the lightless unknown. I peer into the night
and rain for some familiar and reasonable shape to loom--I am permitted
to do this, for so far the police do not object to a citizen cherishing a
hopeful though fatuous disposition--but my usual reward is but the sound
of unseen drainage, as though I were listening to my old landmarks in
dissolution. I feel I should not be surprised, when daylight came, to
find that the appearance of my neighbourhood had become like
Spitzbergen's.

That is why I soon retreat now from my gate, no wiser, bringing in with
me on these nights of rain little more than the certainty that we need
expect no maroons or bombs; and then, because the act is most unpatriotic
in a time of shortage, put on more coal with my fingers, as this makes
less noise than a shovel. I choose a pipe, the one I bought in a hurry at
Amiens. I choose it for that reason, and because it holds more tobacco
than the others; watch the flames, and take stock.

In the winter, as we know, it never rains. It is merely wet weather.
Still, that means only a retirement into winter quarters, into those long
evenings against which we have hoarded our books, light and warmth in
store. Perhaps in the case of the more idle there may be the
consideration, pleasant and prolonged, of that other book, known to no
other man, not yet written, and perhaps destined to perish, a secret
dream. But what are now these books? What now is even that book which is
perfect and unwritten? It, too, has lost its light. I am left staring
into the fire. The newspapers tell us of a common joy at the coming of
Peace. Peace? If she is coming, then we are much obliged to her. I
remember during an earlier and wasted joy at a word in France of the
coming of Peace agreeing with several young soldiers that Brussels would
be the place to meet, to hail there with flagons the arrival of the Dove.
But I do not want to be reminded of what has happened since that day.
That festival could now have but one celebrant. Then, in another year of
the War, in a mood of contrition and dismay, some people began to feel
that on the day Peace arrived it would be seemly if she found them on
their knees in church. Since that day, too, much has happened; and when
Peace does come I suppose most of us will make reasonably certain the
bird resembles a dove, and go to bed early--taking another look at the
long-lost creature next morning, in the presence of a competent witness,
to confirm that we have not been deceived again by another turkey
buzzard; and, if that is certain, then let the matter drop.

For in these years, when heavy weather obscures the fixed lights, and we
are not certain about our bearings, it is useless to pretend that the
darkness which once made us content with a book is now a worse kind of
darkness only because intensified by a private shadow. The shadow of a
personal grief does not wholly explain its sinister intensity. The night
itself is different. It hides a world unknown. If a sun is to rise on
that world, then not even a false dawn yet shows. When we stand peering
into our night, where the sound of rain and wind is like nothing the
memory knows, and may be even the dark tumult portending a day of wrath,
we may turn again in solitude to what is left to us, to our books; but
not with quiet content. To-morrow we may pull ourselves together.
Curiosity about our new world may awaken. We may become adventurous, and
make an effort towards greeting the unknown with a cheer, to show it
there is no settled ill-feeling. But it has been my experience that when
leaving port in dark weather, though the voyage to come was to be novel
and interesting, one heard very little cheering from the glum figures
working about the deck. The ship is sea-worthy, but she is bleak and
foreign. In a week all will be well. We shall have cleared these icy
latitudes. The sky will be fairer. We shall have more sun. We shall have
become accustomed to our shipmates' unfamiliar faces and ways. It is only
the start that is sullen and unpropitious.

And here is Peace coming, and a new world, and there are my books; yet
though this pipe after midnight is nearly done, and the fire too, I have
not been able to settle on a book. The books are like the ashes on the
hearth. And listen to the wind, with its unpromising sounds from the wide
and empty desert places! What does any of these old books know about me,
in the midst of those portents of a new age? We are all outward bound,
and this is the first night of a long voyage, its port unknown.

Even my bookshelves seem strange to-night. They look remarkably like a
library I saw once in a house in Richbourg S. Vaast, which, you may
remember, was a village near Neuve Chapelle. Those French volumes also
survived from circumstances that had passed. They were litter. They had
been left behind. I doubted whether, if I tried, I could touch them. They
were not within my time. That was on a day more than three years ago--it
was July, 1915--and Richbourg had then only just left this world. There
was a road without a sign of life; not a movement, except in one house.
The front of that house had gone, exposing the hollow inside, the
collapsed floors and hanging beams, and showing also a doll with a
foolish smirk caught in a wire and dangling from a rafter. The doll
danced in hysteric merriment whenever hidden guns were fired. That was
the only movement in Richbourg S. Vaast, and the guns made the only
sound. I was a survivor from the past, venturing at peril among the
wreckage and hardly remembered relics of what used to be familiar.
Richbourg was possessed by the power which had overwhelmed it, and which
was re-forming it in a changing world. To what was the world changing?
There was no clue, except the oppression of my mind, the shock of the
guns, and the ecstatic mockery of mirth over ruin by that little idiot
doll.

Beyond the sloughing and leprous tower of Richbourg Church, where the
ancient dead in the graveyard had been brought to light again, there was
a house which seemed in being. I entered it, for I was told by a soldier
companion that from a displaced tile in its roof I might see La Bassée. I
looked through that gap, and saw La Bassée. It was very near. It was a
terracotta smudge. It might have been a brickfield. But it was the
Enemy.

What I chiefly remember to-day is only the floor of that upper room from
which, through a gap in its wall, I saw the ambush of the enemy. On the
floor were scattered, mixed with lumps of plaster, a child's alphabetical
blocks. A shoe of the child was among them. There was a window where we
dared not show ourselves, though the day was fair without, and by it was
an old bureau, open, with its pad of blotting-paper, and some letters,
all smothered with fragments of glass and new dust. A few drawers of the
desk were open, and the contents had been spilled. Round the walls of the
room were bookcases with leaded diamond panes. Whoever was last in the
room had left sections of the bookcases open, and there were gaps in the
rows of books. Volumes had been taken out, had been dropped on the floor,
put on the mantelpiece, or, as I had noticed when coming up to the room,
left on the stairs. One volume, still open face upwards, was on the
bureau.

I barely glanced at those books. What could they tell me? What did they
know about it? Just as they were, open on the floor, tumbled on the
stairs, they were telling me all they could. Was there more to be said?
Sitting on a bracket in the shadow of a corner, a little bust of Rousseau
overlooked the scene with me. In such a place, at such a time, you must
make your own interpretation of the change, receiving out of the silence,
which is not altered in nature by occasional abominable noises, just
whatever your mind wishes to take. There the books are, and the dust on
them is of an era which abruptly fell; is still falling.


XVI. The Nobodies


NOVEMBER 11, 1918. The newspapers tell us that to-day the signal to
"cease fire" will be given. This news is called "Official," to give us
assurance in the fog of myth. Maroons will explode above the City. Then
we shall know it is the end of the War. We ought to believe it, because
They tell us this; They who do everything for us--who order us what to
think and how to act, arrange for our potatoes, settle the coming up and
the going down of the sun, and who for years have been taking away our
friends to make heroes of them, and worse. They have kept the War going,
but now They are going to stop it. We shall know it is stopped when the
rockets burst.

Yet "The War" has become a lethargic state of mind for us. We accepted it
from the beginning with green-fly, influenza, margarine, calling-up
notices, and death. It is as much outside our control as the precession
of the equinoxes. We believed confidently in the tumultuous first weeks
of the affair that mankind could not stand that strain for more than a
few months; but we have learned it is possible to habituate humanity to
the long elaboration of any folly, and for men to endure uncomplainingly
racking by any cruelty that is devised by society, and for women to
support any grief, however senselessly caused. Folly and cruelty become
accepted as normal conditions of human existence. They continue superior
to criticism, which is frequent enough though seldom overheard. The
bitter mockery of the satirists, and even the groans of the victims, are
unnoticed by genuine patriots. There seems no reason why those signal
rockets should ever burst, no reason why the mornings which waken us to
face an old dread, and the nights which contract about us like the
strangle of despair, should ever end. We remember the friends we have
lost, and cannot see why we should not share with them, in our turn, the
punishment imposed by solemn and approved dementia. Why should not the
War go on till the earth in final victory turns to the moon the
pock-scarred and pallid mask which the moon turns to us?

I was looking, later this morning, at Charing Cross Bridge. It was, as
usual, going south to the War. More than four years ago I crossed it on a
memorable journey to France. It seemed no different to-day. It was still
a Via Dolorosa projecting straight and black over a chasm. While I gazed
at it, my mind in the past, a rocket exploded above it. Yes, I saw a
burst of black smoke. The guns had ceased?

A tug passing under the bridge began a continuous hooting. Locomotives
began to answer the tug deliriously. I could hear a low muttering, the
beginning of a tempest, the distant but increasing shouting of a great
storm. Two men met in the thoroughfare below my outlook, waved their
hats, and each cheered into the face of the other.

Out in the street a stream of men and women poured from every door, and
went to swell the main cataract which had risen suddenly in full flood in
the Strand. The donkey-barrow of a costermonger passed me, loaded with a
bluejacket, a flower-girl, several soldiers, and a Staff captain whose
spurred boots wagged joyously over the stern of the barrow. A motor cab
followed, two Australian troopers on the roof of that, with a hospital
nurse, her cap awry, sitting across the knees of one of them. A girl on
the kerb, continuously springing a rattle in a sort of trance, shrieked
with laughter at the nurse. Lines of people with linked arms chanted and
surged along, bare-headed, or with hats turned into jokes. A private car,
a beautiful little saloon in which a lady was solitary, stopped near me,
and the lady beckoned with a smile to a Canadian soldier who was close.
He first stared in surprise at this fashionable stranger, and then got in
beside her with obviously genuine alacrity. The hubbub swelled and rolled
in increasing delirium. Out of the upper windows of the Hotel Cecil, a
headquarters of the Air Force, a confetti of official forms fell in
spasmodic clouds. I returned soon to the empty room of an office where I
was likely to be alone; because, now the War was over, while listening to
the jollity of Peace which had just arrived, I could not get my thoughts
home from France, and what they were I cannot tell.

But there were some other memories, more easily borne. There was that
night, for instance, late in the August of 1914, when three of us were
getting away from Creil. It was time to go. We were not soldiers. Lying
on the floor of a railway carriage I tried to sleep, pillowed
involuntarily on someone's boot. I never knew to whom that foot
belonged, for the compartment was chaos, like the world. The carriage
light was feeble, and the faces I saw above me drooped under the glim,
wilted and dingy. The eyes of the dishevelled were shut, and this
traveller, counting the pulse of the wheels beneath, presently forgot
everything ... there was a crash, and my heart bounded me to my feet.
There had been a fortnight of excitements of this kind. A bag fell and
struck me back to the floor. Unseen people trampled over me, shouting.
Somebody cried: "Here they are!" A cascade of passengers and luggage
tumbled over to a station platform.

It was a chilly morning. And where were we? A clock in a tower said it
was five. People hurried without apparent reason in all directions. So
the world may appear to us if some day we find, to our surprise, that we
have returned from the dead. I leaned against a lamppost, my mind
gravel-rashed, and waited for something that could be understood. The
Germans would do. We heard the enemy was close, and that the railway
officials would get us away if they could. The morning became no warmer,
there was no coffee, and our tobacco pouches were empty. But at least we
were favoured with the chance of watching the French railwaymen at work.
This was a junction, and the men moved about as though they were only
busy on holiday traffic. They were easy and deliberate. I could see they
would hold that line to the last pull of cotton-waste, and would run
their trains while there was a mile of track. So we learned gradually
that confident invaders are baffled by railwaymen and other common
people, such as old women insistent on their cows, almost as much as they
are by bayonets. A country's readiness for war may be slight, yet the
settled habits of the peaceful Nobodies, which are not reckoned by
Imperialists when they are calculating the length of the road to
conquest, are strangely tough and obstinate. You could go to a girl at
the pigeon-hole of a booking-office in France, demand a ticket for a
place which by all the signs might then have fallen behind the van of the
German Army, and she would hand the ticket to you as though she had never
heard of the War. Then the engine-driver would go on towards the sound of
the guns till you wondered, made uneasy by the signs without, whether he
was phrenetic and intended to run the enemy down. The train would stop,
and while the passengers were listening to the shells the guard would
come along and give some advice as to the best thing to do.

A little ahead of the Germans, a train came into that junction and took
us away. I fell asleep again, and presently awoke to see a sombre orchard
outside my window of our stationary train. It was a group of trees
entranced, like a scene before the stage is occupied. The grass in the
twilight beneath the trees was rank. My sight fell drowsily to an
abandoned _képi_, and, while wondering what had become of the man who
used to wear it, I saw a bright eye slyly shut at me. A wink in the
grass! A bearded face was laughing up at me from under the _képi_. A
rifle with a fixed bayonet slid forward. Then I saw the orchard had a
secret crop of eyes, which smiled at us from the ground. We moved on, and
farewell kisses were blown to us.

Among the laurels of a garden beyond field batteries were in position. We
crossed a bridge over a lower road and a stream. Infantry were waiting
below for something, and from their attitudes seemed to expect it soon.
My fellow-passengers were now awake to these omens. Broad streams of
cattle undulated past our train going south, but west. "My poor Paris!"
exclaimed a French lady. It was not for themselves these people were
sorry. The common sort of people in the train were sorry for Paris, for
all their unlucky fellows. The train moved with hesitancy for hours.
During one long pause we listened to a cannonade. One burst of sound
seemed very close. A young English girl, sitting in a corner with her
infant, abruptly handed the child to her husband. She rummaged in a
travelling case with the haste of incipient panic. She produced a
spirit-lamp, a bowl, and a tin. She had suddenly remembered it was past
her baby's feeding time.

Who won the War for us? It was such folk. They turned in docility, with
no more than a pause, a pause of ignorance and wonder, of dismay they
could hardly conceal, from the accustomed order of their days to form
vast armies, to populate innumerable factories for the making of
munitions of war, and, while their households came everywhere to ruin,
they held stubbornly to the task fate had thrust upon them; yet their
august governors and popular guides, frantic and afraid through the dire
retribution which had fallen on that monstrous European society which so
many of us had thought eternal, abjured and abused the common sort whose
efforts were all that could save us. What did they call the Nobodies?
Slackers, cowards, rabbits, and field vermin; mean creatures unable to
leave their football and their drink. I recall one sombre winter's day of
the first November of the War, when a column of wounded Belgian soldiers
shambled by me, coming out of the Yser line, on the way to succour which
I knew they would not find. The doctors and the hospitals were few. These
fellows were in rags which were plastered to their limbs with mud. Their
eyes had the vacant look of men who had returned from the grave and who
had forgotten this world. The bare feet of some of them left bloody
trails on the road. Others clutched their bodies, and the blood drained
between their fingers. One dropped dead at my feet. I came home with that
in my mind; and the next sunrise, hearing unusual sounds outside, I
lifted the blind to a dawn which was cold and ominously scarlet behind
skeleton trees. I saw beneath the trees a company of my young neighbours,
already in khaki, getting used to the harshness of sergeants, and to the
routine of those implacable circumstances which would take them to Neuve
Chapelle, to Gallipoli, to Loos, to the Somme; names that had no meaning
for us then.

That serious company of young Englishmen making soldiers of themselves
in a day with so unpropitious an opening light did not look like national
indifference. Those innocents getting used to rifles were as affecting as
that single line of bodies I saw across a mile of stubble near Compiegne,
where a rearguard of the "Contemptibles" had sacrificed themselves to
their comrades. But one could not be sure. I went to find one who could
tell me whether England was awake to what confronted it. I remembered he
was a quiet observer, that he knew what allowance to make for those
patriotic newspapers which so early were holding up in ruinous caricature
their country and their countrymen for the world to see and to scorn. He
was a scholar, he was a Socialist and a pacifist, he had a sense of
humour to keep him balanced. But he had gone. He had enlisted; and he is
dead.

It was a common experience. From the day the Germans entered Belgium a
dumb resolution settled on our Nobodies. They did not demonstrate. They
made long silent queues at the recruiting offices. It is true those
offices were not ready for them and turned them away; and when by sheer
obstinacy they got into the Army they were put into concentration camps
that were as deadly as battle. That did not daunt them, nor turn them
from their purpose, whatever that was, for they never said; and the
newspapers, by tradition, had no time to find out, being devoted to the
words and activities of the Highly Important. We therefore knew nothing
of the munition factories that were springing up magically, as in a
night, like toadstools, all over the country, and were barely aware that
for some mysterious reason the hosts of the enemy were stopped dead on
the road to Calais. Whose work was all this? But how should we know? Who
can chronicle what Nobody does?

Sometimes there was a hint. Once again, when I returned from France in
1916, unhappy with a guess at what the future would be like, I learned
that our workers were not working. They were drinking. They had been
passionately denounced by the Great and Popular, and our Press was forced
to admit this disastrous crime to the world, for fidelity to the truth is
a national quality. I went to an engineer who would know the worst, and
would not be afraid to tell me what it was. I found him asleep in his
overalls, where he had dropped after thirty-six hours of continuous duty.
Afterwards, when his blasphemous indignation over profiteers,
politicians, and newspapers had worn itself out, he told me. His men,
using dimmed lights while working on the decks of urgent ships, often
forced to work in cramped positions and in all weathers, and while the
ship was under way to a loading berth, with no refreshment provided
aboard, and dropped at any hour long distances from home, were still
regarded by employers in the old way, not as defenders of their country's
life, but as a means to quick profits, against whom the usual debasing
tricks of economy could be devised. A battleship in the north had been
completed five months under contract time. Working girls, determined to
make a record output of ammunition, persisted twenty-two hours at a
stretch, topped their machines with Union Jacks, and fainted next morning
while waiting for the factory gates to open. The spirit of the English!
What virtue there is in bread and tea! Yet we might have guessed it. And
again we might have remembered, as a corrective, how many grave speeches,
which have surprised, shocked, and directed the nation, have been made by
Great Men too soon after a noble dinner, words winged by the Press
without an accompanying and explanatory wine list.

But the Nobodies are light-minded, casual, and good-hearted. Their great
labour over, and their sacrifices buried, they have come out this day to
celebrate the occasion with hilarious and ironic gaiety. They have won
the Greatest of Wars, so they ride in motor-lorries and make delirious
noises with comic instruments. Their heroic thoughts are blattering
through penny trumpets. They have accomplished what had been declared
impossible, and now they rejoice with an inconsequential clatter on
tea-trays and tin cans.

Yet some of us who watched their behaviour saw the fantastic brightness
in the streets on Armistice Day only as a momentary veiling of the
spectres of a shadow land which now will never pass. Who that heard
"Tipperary" sung by careless men marching in France in a summer which
seems a century gone will hear that foolish tune again without a sudden
fear that he will be unable to control his emotion? And those Nobodies of
Mons, the Marne, and the Aisne, what were they? The "hungry squad," the
men shut outside the factory gates, the useless surplus of the labour
market so necessary for a great nation's commercial prosperity. Their
need kept the wages of their neighbours at an economic level. The men of
Mons were of that other old rearguard, the hope of the captains of
industry when there are revolts against the common lot of our industrial
cities where the death-rates of young Nobodies, casualty lists of those
who fall to keep us prosperous, are as ruinous as open war; a mutilation
of life, a drainage of the nation's body that is easily borne by
Christian folk who are moved to grief and action at the thought of
Polynesians without Bibles.

Frank M. Chapman, Mr. J. W. Baskett, and others.

The general text of BIRDS--the biographies--has been conscientiously
prepared from the best authorities by a careful observer of the feather-growing
denizens of the field, the forest, and the shore, while the juvenile
autobiographies have received the approval of the highest ornithological
authority.

The publishers take pleasure in the announcement that the general excellence
of BIRDS will be maintained in subsequent volumes. The subjects
selected for the third and fourth volumes--many of them--will be of the
rare beauty in which the great Audubon, the limner _par excellence_
of birds, would have found "the joy of imitation."

NATURE STUDY PUBLISHING COMPANY.

BIRDS.
ILLUSTRATED BY COLOR PHOTOGRAPHY ================================ VOL.
II. AUGUST NO. 2 ================================

BIRD SONG.

We made several early morning excursions into the woods and fields
during the month of June, and were abundantly rewarded in many ways--by
beholding the gracious awakening of Nature in her various forms,
kissed into renewed activity by the radiance of morn; by the sweet
smelling air filled with the perfume of a multitude of opening
flowers which had drunk again the dew of heaven; by the sight of
flitting clouds across the bluest of skies, patching the green earth
with moving shadows, and sweetest of all, by the twittering, calling,
musical sounds of love and joy which came to the ear from the throats
of the feathered throng.

How pleasant to lie prone on one's back on the cool grass, and gaze upward
through the shady green canopy of boughs, watching the pretty manoeuvers,
the joyous greetings, the lively anxieties, the graceful movements,
and even the sorrowful happenings of the bird-life above us.

Listen to the variety of their tones, as manifest as the difference
of form and color.

What more interesting than to observe their habits, and discover
their cosy nests with their beautiful eggs in the green foliage?

Strange that so many persons think only of making a collection of them,
robbing the nests with heartless indifference to the suffering of the
parents, to say nothing of the invasion which they make of the undoubted
rights the birds have from nature to protection and perpetuation.

Strictly speaking, there are few birds to which the word "singing" can
properly be applied, the majority of them not having more than two or
three notes, and they with little suggestion of music in them.
Chanticleer crows, his spouse cackles or clucks, as may be suitable to
the occasion. To what ear are these noises musical? They are rather
language, and, in fact, the varying notes of every species of bird
have a significance which can alone be interpreted by its peculiar habits.
If careful note be made of the immediate conduct of the male or female
bird, as the case may be, after each call or sound, the meaning
of it becomes plain.

A hen whose chicks are scattered in search of food, upon seeing a hawk,
utters a note of warning which we have all heard, and the young scamper
to her for protection beneath her wings. When she has laid an egg,
_Cut-cut-cut-cut-ot-cut!_ announces it from the nest in the barn.
When the chicks are hatched, her _cluck, cluck, cluck_, calls them from
the nest in the wide world, and her _chick, chick, chick_, uttered
quickly, selects for them the dainty which she has found, or teaches
them what is proper for their diet. A good listener will detect enough
intonations in her voice to constitute a considerable vocabulary, which,
if imitated
[CONTINUED ON PAGE 57.]

THE AMERICAN OSPREY.

Here is the picture of a remarkable bird. We know him better by the name
Fish Hawk. He looks much like the Eagle in July "BIRDS." The Osprey has
no use for Mr. Eagle though.

You know the Bald Eagle or Sea Eagle is very fond of fish. Well, he is
not a very good fisherman and from his lofty perch he watches for the Fish
Hawk or Osprey. Do you ask why? Well, when he sees a Fish Hawk with
his prey, he is sure to chase him and take it from him. It is for this
reason that Ospreys dislike the Bald Eagle.

Their food is fish, which as a rule they catch alive.

It must be interesting to watch the Osprey at his fishing. He wings
his way slowly over the water, keeping a watch for fish as they appear
near the surface.

When he sees one that suits him, he hovers a moment, and then, closing
his wings, falls upon the fish.

Sometimes he strikes it with such force that he disappears in the water for
a moment. Soon we see him rise from the water with the prey in
his claws.

He then flies to some tall tree and if he has not been discovered by his
enemy, the Eagle, can have a good meal for his hard work.

Look at his claws; then think of them striking a fish as they must when
he plunges from on high.

A gentleman tells of an Osprey that fastened his claws in a fish
that was too large for him.

The fish drew him under and nothing more was seen of Mr. Osprey. The same
gentleman tells of a fish weighing six pounds that fell from the claws
of a Fish Hawk that became frightened by an Eagle.

The Osprey builds his nest much like the Bald Eagle. It is usually found
in a tall tree and out of reach.

Like the Eagle, he uses the same nest each year, adding to it.
Sometimes it measures five feet high and three feet across.

One nest that was found, contained enough sticks, cornstalks, weeds,
moss, and the like, to fill a cart, and made a load for a horse to draw.
Like the Crows and Blackbirds they prefer to live together in numbers.
Over three hundred nests have been found in the trees on a small
island.

One thing I want you to remember about the Osprey. They usually remain
mated for life.

[Illustration: From col. F. M. Woodruff.
OSPREY.]

THE AMERICAN OSPREY.

An interesting bird, "Winged Fisher," as he has been happily called, is
seen in places suited to his habits, throughout temperate North America,
particularly about islands and along the seacoast.

At Shelter Island, New York, they are exceedingly variable in the
choice of a nesting place. On Gardiner's Island they all build in trees
at a distance varying from ten to seventy-five feet from the ground; on
Plum Island, where large numbers of them nest, many place their nests on
the ground, some being built up to a height of four or five feet while
others are simply a few sticks arranged in a circle, and the eggs laid
on the bare sand. On Shelter Island they build on the chimneys of houses,
and a pair had a nest on the cross-bar of a telegraph pole. Another
pair had a nest on a large rock. These were made of coarse sticks and
sea weed, anything handy, such as bones, old shoes, straw, etc. A curious
nest was found some years ago on the coast of New Jersey. It contained
three eggs, and securely imbedded in the loose material of the Osprey's
nest was a nest of the Purple Grackle, containing five eggs, while at
the bottom of the Hawk's nest was a thick, rotten limb, in which was a
Tree Swallow's nest of seven eggs.

In the spring and early autumn this familiar eagle-like bird can
be seen hovering over creek, river, and sound.

It is recognized by its popular name of Fish-Hawk. Following a school
of fish, it dashes from a considerable height to seize its prey with its
stout claws. If the fish is small it is at once swallowed, if it is
large, (and the Osprey will occasionally secure shad, blue fish, bass,
etc., weighing five or six pounds,) the fish is carried to a convenient
bluff or tree and torn to bits. The Bald Eagle often robs him of the
fish by seizing it, or startling him so that he looses his hold.

The Osprey when fishing makes one of the most breezy, spirited pictures
connected with the feeding habits of any of our birds, as often there is
a splashing and a struggle under water when the fish grasped is
too large or the great talons of the bird gets entangled.

He is sometimes carried under and drowned, and large fish have been washed
ashore with these birds fastened to them by the claws.

Mrs. Mabel Osgood Wright says: "I found an Osprey's nest in a crooked
oak on Wakeman's Island in late April, 1893. As I could not get close
to the nest (the island is between a network of small creeks, and the flood
tides covered the marshes,) I at first thought it was a monstrous crow's
nest, but on returning the second week in May I saw a pair of Ospreys
coming and going to and fro from the nest. I hoped the birds might return
another season, as the nest looked as if it might have been used for
two or three years, and was as lop-sided as a poorly made haystack.

The great August storm of the same year broke the tree, and the
nest fell, making quite a heap upon the ground.

Among the debris were sticks of various sizes, dried reeds, two bits of
bamboo fishing rod, seaweeds, some old blue mosquito netting, and some
rags of fish net, also about half a bushel of salt hay in various stages
of decomposition, and malodorous dirt galore."
It is well known that Ospreys, if not disturbed, will continue
indefinitely to heap rubbish upon their nests till their bulk is very
great. Like the Owls they can reverse the rear toe.

THE SORA RAIL.

Various are the names required to distinguish the little slate-colored
Carolina Rail from its brethren, Sora, Common Rail, and, on the
Potomac river, Ortolan, being among them. He is found throughout temperate
North America, in the weedy swamps of the Atlantic states in great
abundance, in the Middle states, and in California. In Ohio he is a
common summer resident, breeding in the extensive swamps and wet
meadows. The nest is a rude affair made of grass and weeds, placed on
the ground in a tussock of grass in a boggy tract of land, where there
is a growth of briers, etc., where he may skulk and hide in the wet grass
to elude observation. The nest may often be discovered at a distance by
the appearance of the surrounding grass, the blades of which are
in many cases interwoven over the nest, apparently to shield the
bird from the fierce rays of the sun, which are felt with redoubled
force on the marshes.

The Rails feed on both vegetable and animal food. During the months of
September and October, the weeds and wild oats swarm with them. They feed
on the nutricious seeds, small snail shells, worms and larvae of
insects, which they extract from the mud.

The habits of the Sora Rail, its thin, compressed body, its aversion to
take wing, and the dexterity with which it runs or conceals itself
among the grass and sedge, are exactly similar to those of the more
celebrated Virginia Rail.

The Sora frequents those parts of marshes preferably where fresh water
springs rise through the morass. Here it generally constructs its
nest, "one of which," says an observer, "we had the good fortune to
discover. It was built in the bottom of a tuft of grass in the midst of
an almost impenetrable quagmire, and was composed altogether of old wet
grass and rushes. The eggs had been flooded out of the nest by the
extraordinary rise of the tide in a violent northwest storm, and lay
scattered about the drift weed. The usual number of eggs is from six to
ten. They are of a dirty white or pale cream color, sprinkled with
specks of reddish and pale purple, most numerous near the great end."
When on the wing the Sora Rail flies in a straight line for a short
distance with dangling legs, and suddenly drops into the water.

The Rails have many foes, and many nests are robbed of their eggs by
weasels, snakes, Blackbirds, and Marsh Hawks, although the last cannot
disturb them easily, as the Marsh Hawk searches for its food while
flying and a majority of the Rails' nests are covered over, making it
hard to distinguish them when the Hawk is above.

[Illustration: From col. Chi. Acad. Sciences.
SORA RAIL.]
THE SORA RAIL.

This is one of our fresh-water marsh birds. I show you his picture taken
where he spends most of his time.

If it were not for the note calls, these tall reeds and grasses would keep
from us the secret of the Rail's home.

Like most birds, though, they must be heard, and so late in the afternoon
you may hear their clear note, ker-wee.

From all parts of the marsh you will hear their calls which they keep up
long after darkness has set in.

This Rail was just about to step out from the grasses to feed when the
artist took his picture. See him--head up, and tail up. He steps along
carefully.

He feels that it is risky to leave his shelter and is ready at the first
sign of danger, to dart back under cover.

There are very few fresh-water marshes where the Rail is not found.

When a boy, I loved to hear their note calls and would spend hours
on the edge of a marsh near my home.

It seemed to me there was no life among the reeds and cat-tails of the
marsh, but when I threw a stone among them, the Rails would always
answer with their _peeps_ or _keeks_.

And so I used to go down to the marsh with my pockets filled with
stones. Not that I desired or even expected to injure one of these birds.
Far from it. It pleased me to hear their calls from the reeds and grass
that seemed deserted.

Those of you who live near wild-rice or wild-oat marshes have a good chance
to become acquainted with this Rail.

In the south these Rails are found keeping company with the Bobolinks or
Reed-birds as they are called down there.

THE KENTUCKY WARBLER.

Although this bird is called the Kentucky Warbler, we must not think he
visits that state alone.

We find him all over eastern North America. And a beautiful bird he
is.

As his name tells you he is one of a family of Warblers.

I told you somewhere else that the Finches are the largest family of
birds. Next to them come the Warblers.

Turn back now and see how many Warblers have been pictured so far.

See if you can tell what things group them as a family. Notice their bills
and feet.

This bird is usually found in the dense woods, especially where
there are streams of water.

He is a good singer, and his song is very different from that of any of
the other Warblers.

I once watched one of these birds--olive-green above and yellow beneath.
His mate was on a nest near by and he was entertaining her with
his song.

He kept it up over two hours, stopping only a few seconds between
his songs.

When I reached the spot with my field-glass I was attracted by his
peculiar song. I don't know how long he had been singing. I stayed and
spent two hours with him and he showed no signs of stopping. He may be
singing yet. I hope he is.

You see him here perched on a granite cliff. I suppose his nest is near
by.

He makes it of twigs and rootlets, with several thicknesses of leaves.

It is neatly lined with fine rootlets and you will always find it on or
near the ground.

In the September and October number of "BIRDS" you will find several
Warblers and Finches. Try to keep track of them and may be you can do
as many others have done--tell the names of new birds that come along
by their pictures which you have seen in "BIRDS."
[Illustration: From col. F. M. Woodruff.
KENTUCKY WARBLER.]

THE KENTUCKY WARBLER.

Between sixty and seventy warblers are described by Davie in his "Nests
and Eggs of North American Birds," and the Kentucky Warbler is recognized
as one of the most beautiful of the number, in its manners almost the
counterpart of the Golden Crowned Thrush (soon to delight the eyes of
the readers of BIRDS), though it is altogether a more conspicuous bird,
both on account of its brilliant plumage and greater activity, the
males being, during the season of nesting, very pugnacious, continually
chasing one another about the woods.

It lives near the ground, making its artfully concealed nest among the
low herbage and feeding in the undergrowth, the male singing from
some old log or low bush, his song recalling that of the Cardinal, though
much weaker.

The ordinary note is a soft _schip_, somewhat like the common call of the
Pewee. Considering its great abundance, says an observer, the nest of
this charmer is very difficult to find; the female, he thought, must
slyly leave the nest at the approach of an intruder, running beneath the
herbage until a considerable distance from the nest, when, joined by her
mate, the pair by their evident anxiety mislead the stranger as to its
location.

It has been declared that no group of birds better deserves the
epithet "pretty" than the Warblers.

Tanagers are splendid, Humming Birds refulgent, others brilliant, gaudy,
or magnificent, but Warblers alone are pretty.

The Warblers are migratory birds, the majority of them passing rapidly
across the United States in spring on the way to their northern
nesting grounds, and in autumn to their winter residence within the
tropics. When the apple trees bloom they revel among the flowers, vieing
in activity and numbers with the bees; "now probing the recesses of a
blossom for an insect, then darting to another, where, poised daintily
upon a slender twig, or suspended from it, they explore hastily but
carefully for another morsel. Every movement is the personification of
nervous activity, as if the time for their journey was short; as,
indeed, appears to be the case, for two or three days at most suffice
some species in a single locality."

We recently saw a letter from a gentleman living at Lake Geneva,
in which he referred with enthusiasm to BIRDS, because it had enabled
him to identify a bird which he had often seen in the apple trees
among the blossoms, particularly the present season, with which he
was unacquainted by name. It was the Orchard Oriole, and he was
glad to have a directory of nature which would enable him to add
to his knowledge and correct errors of observation. The idea is a
capitol one, and the beautiful Kentucky Warbler, unknown to many
who see it often, may be recognized in the same way by residents
of southern Indiana and Illinois, Kansas, some localities in Ohio,
particularly in the southwestern portion, in parts of New York and
New Jersey, in the District of Columbia, and in North Carolina. It
has not heretofore been possible, even with the best painted specimens
of birds in the hand, to satisfactorily identify the pretty creatures,
but with BIRDS as a companion, which may readily be consulted, the
student cannot be led into error.

THE RED BREASTED MERGANSER.
Why this duck should be called red-breasted is not at first apparent,
as at a distance the color can not be distinguished, but seen near,
the reason is plain. It is a common bird in the United States in
winter, where it is found in suitable localities in the months of
May and June. It is also a resident of the far north, breeding
abundantly in Newfoundland, Labrador, Greenland, and Iceland. It
is liberally supplied with names, as Red-Breasted Goosander or
Sheldrake, Garbill, Sea Robin, etc.
There is a difference in opinion as to the nesting habits of the
Red-Breast, some authorities claiming that, like the Wood Duck, the
nest is placed in the cavity of a tree, others that it is usually
found on the ground among brushwood, surrounded with tall grasses
and at a short distance from water. Davie says that most generally
it is concealed by a projecting rock or other object, the nest being
made of leaves and mosses, lined with feathers and down, which are
plucked from the breast of the bird. The observers are all probably
correct, the bird adapting itself to the situation.
Fish is the chief diet of the Merganser, for which reason its flesh
is rank and unpalatable. The Bird's appetite is insatiable, devouring
its food in such quantities that it has frequently to disgorge
several times before it is able to rise from the water. This Duck
can swallow fishes six or seven inches in length, and will attempt
to swallow those of a larger size, choking in the effort.
The term Merganser is derived from the plan of the bird's bill,
which is furnished with saw teeth fitting into each other.
The eggs of the Red-Breasted Merganser vary from six to twelve, are
oval in shape, and are of a yellowish or reddish-drab, sometimes a
dull buffy-green.
You may have seen pictures of this Duck, which frequently figures
in dining rooms on the ornamental panels of stuffed game birds, but
none which could cause you to remember its life-like appearance.
You here see before you an actual Red-Breasted Merganser.
[Illustration: From col. J. G. Parker, Jr.
RED-BREASTED MERGANSER.] 

BIRD SONG--Continued from page 41.
with exactness, will deceive Mistress Pullet herself.
To carry the idea further, we will take the notes of some of the
birds depicted in this number of BIRDS. The Osprey, or Fish-Hawk,
has been carefully observed, and his only discovered note is a high,
rapidly repeated whistle, very plaintive. Doubtless this noise is
agreeable and intelligible to his mate, but cannot be called a song,
and has no significance to the listener.
The Vulture utters a low, hissing sound when disturbed. This is its
only note. Not so with the Bald Eagle, whose scream emulates the
rage of the tempest, and implies courage, the quality which associates
him with patriotism and freedom. In the notes of the Partridge there
is a meaning recognizable by every one. After the nesting season,
when the birds are in bevies, their notes are changed to what
sportsmen term "scatter calls." Not long after a bevy has been
flushed, and perhaps widely scattered, the members of the disunited
family may be heard signaling to one another in sweet minor calls
of two and three notes, and in excitement, they utter low, twittering
notes.
Of the Sora Rails, Mr. Chapman says, "knowing their calls, you have
only to pass a May or June evening near a marsh to learn whether
they inhabit it. If there, they will greet you late in the afternoon
with a clear whistled _ker-wee_, which soon comes from dozens of
invisible birds about you, and long after night has fallen, it
continues like a springtime chorus of piping hylas. Now and again
it is interrupted by a high-voiced, rolling whinney, which, like a
call of alarm, is taken up and repeated by different birds all over
the marsh."
Poor Red-Breasted Merganser! He has only one note, a croak. Perhaps
it was of him that Bryant was thinking when he wrote the stanzas
"To a Water-Fowl."
"The sentiment of feeling awakened by any of the aquatic fowls is
pre-eminently one of loneliness," says John Burroughs. "The Wood
Duck (see July BIRDS) which you approach, starts from the pond or
the marsh, the Loon neighing down out of the April sky, the Wild
Goose, the Curlew, the Stork, the Bittern, the Sandpiper, etc.,
awaken quite a different train of emotions from those awakened by
the land birds."But you can't say it was along of
that tar-brush..."

"You young chaps ain't got no sense," here interrupted Uncle, his voice
evidently under control, but shaky. "I'd like to know where you were
brought up. You learn it all wrong at them schools of yours, and you
never get it right afterwards. You learn about the guts of engines and
'lectricity, and you mix it up with the tales your grandmothers told you,
and you get nothing straight. What you've got is all science and
superstition. And then you wonder why you make a mess of it. Listen! It
don't matter what you do to a figger-'ed, if you're fool enough to spoil
it. It's having it that matters. It's something to go by, and a ship
you're glad to work in."

He turned on the stoker. There was astonishment and pity in his glance.
"Look at you. In and out of a ship, and you forget her name when you've
signed off. You don't care the leavings in a Dago's mess-kit for any ship
you work in, if you can get a bit out of her and skip early."

"That's me, Uncle," muttered the stoker.

"Can you remember names, like some of us remember the _Mermus_, the
_Blackadder_, and the _Titania_? Not you. Your ships haven't got names,
properly speaking. They're just a run out and home again for you, and a
row about the money and the grub."

"Sure to be a row about the grub," murmured the stoker.

"What are ships nowadays?" he went on, raising a shaking index finger.
"Are they ships at all? They're run by companies on the make, and worked
by factory hands who curse their own house-flags. It's a dirty game, I
call it. Things are all wrong. I can't make them out. You fellers take no
pride in your work, and you've got no work to take pride in. You don't
know who you work for or what, and your ships got no names. They might
be damned goods vans. No good in a figger-'ed! Then I'll tell you this.
Then I'll tell you this. _You'll_ get no good till you learn better, my
lad."


XXI. Economics


MARCH 22, 1919. There is an astonishing number of books on what is called
Reconstruction in the new publications of this spring. Reconstruction
seems to be as easy as conscription or destruction. We have only to
change our mind, and there we are, as though nothing had happened. It is
the greatest wonder of the human brain that its own accommodating
ratiocination never affords it any amusement. We use reason only to make
convincing disguises for our desires and appetites. Perhaps it is fear of
the wrath to come that is partly responsible for the clamour of the
economists and sociologists in the publishers' announcements, almost
drowning there the drone of the cataract of new novels. But it is too
late now. The wrath will come. After mischievously bungling with the
magic which imprisoned the Djinn, we may wish we had not done it; but
once he is out there is nothing for it but to be surprised and sorry.
The lid is off; and it is useless for the clever reconstructionists to
press in upon us with their little screw-drivers, chattering eagerly
about locks and hinges. When the crafty but ignorant Russian generals and
courtiers got from the Czar the order for mobilizing the armies, and
issued it, they did not know it, but that was when they released Lenin.
And who on earth can now inveigle that terrific portent safely under lid
and lock again?


XXII. Old Sunlight


APRIL 5, 1919. I find the first signs of this spring, now the War is
over, almost unbelievable. I have watched this advent with astonishment,
as though it were a phantom. The feeling is the same as when waking from
an ugly dream, and seeing in doubt the familiar objects in a morning
light. They seem steadfast. Are they real, or is the dream? The morning
works slowly through the mind to take the place of the night. Its
brightness and tranquillity do not seem right. And is it not surprising
to find the spring has come again to this world? The almond tree might be
an untimely, thoughtless, and happy stranger. What does it want with us?
That spiritual and tinted fire with which its life burns touches and
kindles no responsive and volatile essence in us. I passed a hedge-bank
which looked south and was reviving. There were crumbs and nuggets of
chalk in it, and they were as remarkable to me this year as though I had
once seen those flecks of white showing through the herbage of another
planet. That crumbling earth with the grey matting of old grass was as
warm to the touch as though some inner virtue had grown, all unsuspected
by us, in the heart of this glacial ball. I picked up a lump of chalk
with its cold greenish shadows, and powdered it in my fingers, wondering
why it looked so suddenly bright. It confirmed my existence. Its smell
was better than any news I have heard of late.

I saw suddenly the gleaming coast of a continent of dark cloud, and the
blue ocean into which it jutted its headlands; memory had suddenly
returned. At that moment the sun touched my hand. All this was what we
used to know in a previous life. When I got home I took down _Selborne_.
Two photographs fell out of it, and when I picked them up--they were
those of a young amateur and were yellow with age--spring really began to
penetrate the bark. But it was not the spring of this year.

How often, like another tortoise, has the mind come out of its winter to
sun itself in the new warmth of a long-gone Selborne April? Did Gilbert
White imagine he was bequeathing light to us? Of course not. He lived
quietly in the obscure place where he was born, and did not try to
improve or influence anybody. It seems he had no wish to be a great
leader, or a great thinker, or a great orator. The example of Chatham did
not fire him. He was friendly with his neighbours, but went about his
business. When he died there did not appear to be any reason whatever to
keep him in memory. He had harmed no man. He left us without having
improved gunpowder. Could a man have done less?

Think of the events which were stirring men while he was noting the
coming and going of swallows. While he lived, Clive began the conquest of
India, and Canada was taken from the French. White heard the news that
our American colonists had turned Bolshevik because of the traditional
skill of the administrators of other people's affairs at Whitehall. The
world appears to have been as full then of important uproar as it is
to-day. I suppose the younger Pitt, "the youngest man ever appointed
Prime Minister," had never heard of White. But Gilbert does not seem to
have heard of _him_; nor of Hargreaves' spinning jenny, nor of the
inventor of the steam engine. "But I can show you some specimens of my
new mice," he remarks on March 30, 1768. That was the year in which the
great Pitt resigned. His new mice!

Yet for all the stirring affairs and inventions of his exciting time,
with war making and breaking empires, and the foundations of this
country's wealth and power being nobly laid, it would not be easy to show
that we to-day are any the happier. Our own War was inherent in the
inventions of mechanical cotton-spinning and the steam-engine--the need
to compel foreign markets to buy the goods we made beyond our own needs.
We know now what were the seeds the active and clever fellows of
Gilbert's day were sowing for us. We were present at the harvesting. Why
did not those august people, absorbed in the momentous deeds which have
made history so sonorous, the powder shaking out of their wigs with the
awful gravity of their labours (while all the world wondered), just stop
doing such consequential things, and accept Gilbert's invitation to go
and listen to him about those new mice? The mice might have saved us, and
the opportunity was lost.

Looking back at those times, of all the thunderous events which then
loosened excited tongues, caused by high-minded men of action expertly
conjuring crisis after crisis while their docile followers scrambled out
of one sublime trouble into another, heated and exhausted, but still
gaping with obedience and respect, we can see that nothing remains but
the burial parties, whose work is yet uncompleted in France. What good
does persist out of those days is the light in which Gilbert's tortoise
sunned itself. It is a light which has not gone out. And it makes us
wonder, not how much of our work in these years will survive to win the
gratitude of those who will follow us, but just what it is they will be
grateful for. Where is it, and what happy man is doing it? And what are
we thinking of him? Do we even know his name?


XXIII. Ruskin


APRIL 19, 1919. Some good people have been celebrating Ruskin, whose
centenary it is. And to-day a little friend of mine left her school books
so that I might wonder what they were when I saw them on my table. One of
them was _The Crown of Wild Olive_. It put me in a reminiscent mood. I
looked at Ruskin's works on my shelves, and tried to recall how long it
was since they interested me. Nevertheless, I would not part with them.
In my youth Ruskin's works were only for the wealthy, and I remember that
my purchase of those volumes was an act of temerity, and even of
sacrifice. And who but an ingrate would find fault with Ruskin, or would
treat him lightly? With courage and eloquence he denounced dishonesty in
the days when it was not supposed that cheating could be wrong if it were
successful. He did that when minds were so dark that people blinked with
surprise at a light which showed as a social iniquity naked children
crawling with chains about them in the galleries of coal-mines. Was it
really wrong to make children do that? Or was Ruskin only an impossible
idealist? They were the happy years, radiant with the certain knowledge
of the British that the Holy Grail would be recognized immediately it was
seen, for over it would be proudly floating the confirmatory Union Jack.
We had not even begun to suspect that our morals, manners, and laws were
fairly poor compared with the standards of the Mohawks and Mohicans whom
our settlers had displaced in America a century before. And Ruskin told
that Victorian society it had an ugly mind, and did ugly things. When
Ruskin said so, with considerable emotion, Thackeray was so hurt that he
answered as would any clever editor to-day about a contribution which
convinced him that it would make readers angry; he told Ruskin it would
never do. Thackeray's readers, of course, were assured they were the best
people, and that worldly cynic did well to reject Ruskin, and preserve
the _Cornhill Magazine_.

"Ruskin," it says in the introduction to _The Crown of Wild Olive_ which
my little friend reads at school, "is certainly one of the greatest
masters of English prose." That has often been declared. But is he? Or
is our tribute to Ruskin only a show of gratitude to one who revealed to
us the unpleasant character of our national habits when contrasted with a
standard for gentlemen? It ought not to have required much eloquence to
convince us that Widnes is unlovely; the smell of it should have been
enough. It is curious that we needed festoons of chromatic sentences to
warn us that cruelty to children, even when profit can be made of it, is
not right. But I fear some people really enjoy remorseful sobbing. It is
half the fun of doing wrong. Yet I would ask in humility--for it is a
fearful thing to doubt Ruskin, the literary divinity of so many
right-thinking people--whether English children who are learning the
right way to use their language, and the noblest ideas to express, should
run the risk of having Ruskin's example set before them by softhearted
teachers? I think that a parent who knew a child of his, on a certain
day, was to take the example of Ruskin as a prose stylist on the subject
of war, would do well, on moral and æsthetic grounds, to keep his child
away from school on that day to practise a little roller-skating. For
humility and gratitude should not blind us to the fact that few writers
in English of Ruskin's reputation have ever considered such a rosy cloud
of rhetoric as is his lecture on war, in which a reasonable shape no
sooner looms than it is lost again, to be worth preserving. The subject
of war is of importance, inflammable humanity being what it is, and the
results of war being what we know; and the quality of the critical
attention we give to so great a matter is unfortunately clear when we
regard the list of distinguished critics of letters who have accepted,
apparently without difficulty, as great prose, Ruskin's heedless rush of
words upon it. Perhaps his language appears noble because the rhythmic
pour of its sentences lulls reason into a comfortable and benignant
sleepiness.

I remember the solemn voice of a lecturer on English literature, years
ago, moving me to buy _The Crown of Wild Olive_. Such obvious ignorance
as I knew mine to be could not be tolerated. Whatever I went without, it
could not be that book. I put it in my hold-all when, as was my duty, I
went for my training with the artillery volunteers. I read in camp the
essay on war, when bombardiers no longer claimed my attention, and the
knightly words of sergeant instructors were taking a needed rest. I
pondered over that essay, and concluded that though plainly I was very
young and very wrong to feel puzzled and even derisive over English
prose which fascinated a learned lecturer into solemnity, yet I would
sooner learn to make imitation flowers of wool than read that essay to a
critical audience, especially if I had written it myself.

Ruskin, in fact, with no more experience of war than a bishop's wife, did
not know what he was talking about. Throughout the essay, too, he is in
two minds. One is that of a gentleman who knows that war is the same
phenomenon, artistically, ethically, and socially, as a public-house riot
with broken bottles caused by a dispute over one of those fundamental
principles which are often challenged in such a place. Those riots are
natural enough. They are caused by the nature of man. They continue to
happen, for it has taken the Church longer to improve our manners than it
has taken stock-raisers to improve the milking qualities of kine. And
Ruskin's other mind is still in the comical Tennysonian stage about war,
dwelling with awe on swords and shields, glory, honour, patriotism,
courage, spurs, pennants, and tearful but resolute ladies who wave their
handkerchiefs in the intervals of sobbing over their "loved ones."

He calls war "noble play." He scorns cricket. As for his "style" and his
"thought": "I use," says Ruskin, "in such a question, the test which I
have adopted, of the connexion of war with other arts, and I reflect how,
as a sculptor, I should feel if I were asked to design a monument for
Westminster Abbey, with a carving of a bat at one end and a ball at the
other. It may be there remains in me only a savage Gothic prejudice; but
I had rather carve it with a shield at one end and a sword at the
other."

I cannot tell whether Ruskin reflected so because of a savage Gothic
prejudice, but I am certain he wrote like that moved by what we feel--the
feeling goes deeper into time even than the Goths--about the victim for
sacrifice. We must justify that sacrifice, and so we give it a ceremonial
ritual and dignity. Otherwise, I think, Ruskin would not have suggested
the shield and sword as the symbolic decorations. He felt instinctively
and because of a long-accepted tradition that those antique symbols were
the only way to hide the ugly look of the truth. For certainly he could
have used a ball at one end--a cannon-ball--and a mortar at the other.
Just as we might use an aerial torpedo at one end, and the image of a
mutilated child at the other; or a gas cylinder at one end, and a
gas-mask at the other. But the artist is not going to be deprived of his
romance through a touch of the actual, any more than the lady with the
handkerchief can be expected to forego her anguished sob over her hero as
he goes forth to battle.

We saw that in our Great War. The ancient appeal of the patriots rushed
us away from reason with "last stands," and the shot-riddled banners
wavering in the engulfing waves of barbarians, till an irresistible
cavalry charge scattered the hordes. All this replaced the plumes, the
shining armour, and the chivalrous knights. Ruskin, however, was a subtle
improvement even on the last stand with the shot-riddled banner. He
anticipated those who have been most popular because they made our War
entrancing and endurable. He went to the heart of the matter. He knew
that the audience which would the more readily agree with him when he
made an emotional case for the ennobling nature of war would be mainly of
reclused women. He addressed them. So did, of late, some of our most
successful writers on war. They, like Ruskin, made their appeal to that
type of mind which obtains a real satisfaction, a sensuous pleasure, from
contemplating the unseen sufferings of the young and vicarious victim
sobbing, and feeling noble and enduring.


XXIV. The Reward of Virtue


MAY 9, 1919. The Treaty of Peace is published. Compared with what the
innocent in 1915 called the "objects of the War," this treaty is as the
aims of Captain Morgan's ruffians to those of the Twelve Apostles. The
truth is, some time ago the Versailles drama fell to the level of an
overworked newspaper story which shrewd editors saw was past its day.
Those headlines, Humiliate the Hun, Hang the Kaiser, and Make Germany
Pay, had become no more interesting than a copy of last week's _Morning
Mischief_ in a horse-pond. The subject was old and wet. Because five
months ago we thoughtfully elected men of the counting-house to the work
of governing the State, of late we have been too indignant over the cost
and difficulty of living to spare a thought for the beauty of Peace; that
is why we are now examining the clauses of the famous Treaty with about
as much care for what they may mean to us as if they concerned the
movements of the Asteroids. A year ago the German attacks seemed near to
making guns the deciding voice in the affairs of unhappy humanity. On the
chill and overcast spring morning when the Treaty was published, it was
significant that those very few men to whom we could go for courage a
year ago were the only people dismayed by the terms of the Peace Treaty.
And the timid, who once went to those stout hearts for assurance--to
have, as the soldiers used to say, their cold feet massaged--were the
bright and cheerful souls. It was ominous. Yet those careless and happy
hearts are not so trying to me as the amiable but otherwise sensible men
who were sure our statesmen would not betray the dead, and who are
incredulous over the Treaty now they see what it clearly intends to
convey. This character, however, when combined with other glyphs, and
when used otherwise than as a day symbol, sometimes varies from
the types given. For example, in the symbol of the month _Mac_ it is as
shown in plate LXIV, 4. In this a minute, divided oblong, takes the
place of the dark spot at the top, and a double curved line accompanies
the circle of dots. Another form is shown in plate LXIV, 5.
The only variation in this from the usual type is the introduction
of two or three minute circles in the curved line of dots and the
divided oblong.

Dr Seler is inclined to believe that these are essential variants
from the true _imix_ symbol; nevertheless, as _m_ is the chief
consonant element both in _imix_, or _mox_ and _mac_, there appears
to be a relation between the form of the glyphs and their phonetic
value.

Drs Seler and Schellhas believe _im_ to be the radical of _imix_ and
_imox_, which are dialectal variations of the same word. Dr Brinton,
however, basing his opinion on the fact that _mox_ and _moxin_ are used
sometimes as equivalents, decides that the radical syllable is _m-x_.
In this he is probably correct, and if so, this furnishes additional
evidence of the close relation between form and sound, as in one case _m-x_
are the chief phonetic elements and in the other _m-c_. It is probable
that Drs Schellhas and Seler were led to their conclusion by the
fact that the symbol bears a close resemblance to the conventional
form of the female breast, which in Maya is _im_. This, which was perhaps
the origin of the symbol, was probably selected simply because _m_
is its only prominent element. Nevertheless, it is worthy of notice
that the symbol for the day _Ix_ is frequently represented as shown in
plate LXVI, 36, from Tro. 5*c. This is similar in some respects to the
_Imix_ symbol, and the name contains the _i_ and _x_ of the latter. If
the writing is phonetic, the points of resemblance may have some significance,
otherwise they do not.

In a previous paper[208-1] I suggested that the probable signification of
the character LXIV, 7, from Dres. 14c and 46b, is _maax_, "monkey,
ape, imitator."

Below the text in each case is seen a dark male figure (or deity), to
which it undoubtedly refers, as is conceded by Drs Schellhas and
Seler. The face character, which forms part of the glyph, may be
only a determinative; at least I am unable to assign it any other value
in this connection, and the necessity for such determinative is apparent.
Brasseur, under _akab-maax_, speaks of a phantom or hobgoblin of this name,
which he says signifies "the great monkey of the night." Perez gives as
definitions "duende" (elf or hobgoblin) and "mico nocturno."
Henderson, who writes the name _akabmax_, simply says "sprite,
phantom." It would seem, therefore, that among the superstitious beliefs
of the Maya was that of a night phantom or deity, which took the form of
a monkey. But this black figure appears to be different from those on
Tro. 34*-31*, with which Seler connects it and to which he applies the
name Ekchuah.[208-2]
In the paper above referred to, I have interpreted the symbol shown
in plate LXIV, 8 (from Dres. 35c) _maach_, "the crow," assuming the
birdhead to be a determinative. Seler concludes that the bird which this
represents is "a substitute, colleague, or symbol of the Rain god
Chac," the so-called Maya Tlaloc so frequently represented in the
codices.
Although there is in this case no bird figure below to confirm our
interpretation, yet it appears to be justified by the comparisons
given and by its agreement with the phonetic value of the _imix_
symbol.

It is also further confirmed by the two glyphs shown in plate LXVIII,
13, 14, which occur together in Dres. 38b.

In this case the two characters, which are combined in plate LXIV, 8,
are separated, yet must have the same signification. Here the bird figure
(a man with a bird's head or bird mask) is seen below. In both instances
rain is represented, showing that the bird is supposed to bear some relation
thereto. But it is more likely that it has direct reference to the wind
which accompanies the rain storm rather than to "fruitfulness," as Seler
supposes. Be this, however, as it may, our rendering of the _imix_
symbol in this connection appears to be justified, and indicates that
the symbol is used here for its phonetic value rather than with any
reference to its primary signification.

[Illustration: PL. LXIV. COPIES OF GLYPHS FROM THE CODICES]
Dr Seler also refers in this connection to the lower line of symbols
on Dres. 29-30b (three of which are shown in plate LXVIII, 15, 16,
17); to those shown in plate LXVIII, 18, 19, from Tro. 14c; and those
shown in plate LXVIII, 20, 21, from Tro. 11a. He remarks that "in a
number of hieroglyphs the character _imix_ stands as an equivalent of
a peculiar animal head which bears as a distinctive mark the element
_akbal_ over the eye. Thus in the hieroglyphs enumerating those above
mentioned which, standing after the hieroglyphs of the cardinal
points, seem to express the deities presiding over them, indeed there
appears here on the same animal head, on one hand the character
_imix_, on the other the element figure 165" (our plate LXIV, 5).

Although I am unable to interpret satisfactorily the _imix_ symbols in
the places above referred to, I think it can be made apparent that Dr
Seler's explanation is without foundation. For instance, by referring
to the plates of the Dresden and Troano codices mentioned, it will be
seen that there is nothing whatever that refers to an "animal head which
bears the element _akbal_ over the eye," unless we suppose it to be in
plate LXVIII, 16 (from Dres. 29b) and LXVIII, 21 (from Tro. 11a). There
is no figure below or connected with either series to justify this
conclusion.

It is also certain that plate LXVIII, 21 (Tro. 11a) is not an animal head.
Possibly plate LXVIII, 16 (Dres. 29b) may be intended for an animal
head, but this is not certain and, moreover, it is not repeated in the
series.

Referring to Cort. 27a it will be seen that the compound glyph shown in
plate LXVIII, 22 (apparently the same as that on Tro. 11a) is repeated
four times in one line, each connected with a cardinal point symbol, and
each standing immediately over and evidently referring to a large
vessel.[209-1] It is stated that it was a custom among the Maya during
certain religious ceremonies to place a vessel in their temples at
each of the four cardinal points.[209-2] As _cum_ and _xamach_ are
Maya words signifying vessel, we still find in these the _m_ sound.

It is therefore possible that the similar glyphs on Dres. 29b and Tro. 14
and 15 also refer to vessels. The supposition seems to be strengthened
by the fact that connected with the former are figures of the four classes
of food animals--quadrupeds, birds, reptiles (iguana), and fishes. The
latter refer to the hunter's occupation, being accompanied by figures
of the deer. Landa, in his descriptions of the various festivals,
repeatedly alludes to the four Chacs or Bacabs which represent the four
cardinal points, and to the different classes of food animals presented
where vessels were used.

It is therefore more likely that the symbol is used in the places
mentioned because of its phonetic value rather than as a substitute for
the heads of lightning animals, for which supposed substitution Dr Seler
admits he can not account.

Dr Seler refers also to the glyph on which the long nose deity is seated,
Dres. 44a, shown in our plate LXVIII, 23.

The prefix he interprets by "man, human being," and supposes the whole glyph
refers to the attributes of the Rain god. As the deity holds a fish in his
hand, and is seen in the lowest division of the same plate in the act of
seining fish, is it not more likely that this symbol should be
rendered by _cayom_, "a fisherman"? This is appropriate and retains the
phonetic value of the _imix_ symbol.

In the compound glyph 24, plate LXVIII, from Dres. 67b, to which
Seler also refers in the same connection, we see in the figure below the
same deity wading in water in which a fish is swimming. The right portion
of the symbol is the same as the last (plate LXVIII, 23) and
presumably has the same signification--_cayom_, "a fisherman," or
_cayomal_, "to fish."

I am unable to interpret the first or left-hand character; possibly it
may be found in one of the terms _chucay_, or _[c]aucay_, which Henderson
gives as equivalents of _cayomal_. The latter--_[c]aucay_--would give to
this prefix precisely the phonetic value I have hitherto assigned it.

The next character Dr Seler refers to in this connection is that shown
in plate LXVIII, 25, from Dres. 40c, where the long-nose god is seen
below rowing a boat on the water. The adjoining symbol in the text is
a fish. It is probable therefore that substantially the same interpretation
is to be given here.

The group shown in plate LXIV, 9, consisting of an _Imix_ and _Kan_
symbol, is of frequent occurrence in all the codices. The relation of
the characters in this combination varies, the order being frequently the
reverse of that given in the figure, and again one being placed on top
of the other. They frequently follow deity symbols, especially the
symbol of the so called "Corn god," and in these instances seem to refer
to some attribute of the divinity indicated.

However, they are by no means confined to these relations, being found
quite frequently in other connections. The combination is occasionally
borne upon the back of an individual, as Dres. 16a, and on Tro. 21b it is
on the back of a dog. Dr Seler concludes "that it denotes the copal
or the offering of incense." However, he subsequently[210-1] expresses
the view that it may signify "beans and maize." In a previous work[210-2]
some reasons were presented by me for believing this combination was
intended to denote bread or maize bread. This belief is based on the
statement by Landa in his account of the sacrifices at the beginning of
the year _Muluc_, that they made "images of dogs, in baked earth, carrying
bread on the back," and the fact that in plate 21 of the Codex Tro.,
representing the sacrifices of this year, we see the figure of a dog
with this _Kan-Imix_ group on its back. This figure (plate LXIV, 10)
probably represents the images of which Landa speaks, and the
symbols on the back, bread or food in the general sense.

Further notice of this combination will be given under the fourth day,
_Kan_.

The character shown in plate LXVIII, 26, from Tro. 20*d, is erroneously
given by Seler as an example of the _kan-imix_ symbol. The two glyphs
on the mat figure are unquestionably _imix_ symbols, though of the two
different types shown in plate LXIV, 1 and 5. He suggests that here it
replaces the deity symbol, but this is contradicted by the fact that
in both groups where it appears the deity symbol is present. The mat-like
figure, which is probably a determinative, shows that it refers to the
sack, bag, or kind of hamper which the women figured below bear on
the back, filled with corn, bones, etc. As _mucuc_ signifies "portmanteau,
bag, sack, etc," _mucub_ "a bag or sack made of sackcloth," and _mucubcuch_
"to carry anything in a sack or folded in a shawl," it is more
than probable we have in these words the signification of the symbol.

The duplication of the _imix_ symbol may be to denote the plural; or, as
the words come from a root signifying "secret, hidden, covered," it
may be to intensify. It is noticeable also that the latter or right-hand
_Imix_ symbol is similar to that used for the mouth _Mac_.

In the right section of Dres. 41b is the glyph shown in plate LXIV, 11,
which, according to the phonetic system that appears to prevail in this
writing, may be translated _yulpolic_, from _yulpol_, "to smooth or plane
wood," or, as given by Henderson (MS. Lexicon), "to smooth, plane,
or square timber, to beat off the log." This interpretation, which is
given here merely because of its relation to the symbol which follows,
is based in part on the following evidence: The left character, which has
_y_ as its chief phonetic element, is the same as the upper character
in the symbol for the month _Yax_ (plate LXIV, 12), and also the upper
character of the symbol for the month _Yaxkin_ (plate LXIV, 13). Other
evidence of its use with this value will be presented farther on, and
also in reference to the right character of the above-mentioned symbol
(plate LXIV, 11), which has been given _p_ as its chief phonetic element.
By reference to the figure below the text the appropriateness of this
rendering is at once apparent, as here is represented an individual
in the act of chipping off the side of a tree.

This he appears to be doing by holding in his left hand an instrument
resembling a frow, which he strikes with a hatchet.

The character immediately below the one above mentioned and belonging
to the same series is shown in plate LXIV, 14. It may be interpreted
_mamachah_, "to make flat by repeated strokes." The phonetic value
of the parts is obtained in this way. The upper character with two wings
is Landa's _ma_, except that the circular wings contain the lines or
strokes which the bishop has omitted, and which appear to indicate the
_m_ sound and are observed in the _Imix_ symbol. Colonel Mallery,
comparing this with the sign of negation made by the Indians and that
of the Egyptians given by Champollion (our plate LXIV, 15), concludes
that it is derived from the symmetrically extended arms with the hands
curved slightly downward. This will furnish an explanation of the strokes
in the terminal circles.

The left of the two lower characters is almost identical with the
symbol for the month _Mac_ (plate LXIV, 4), omitting the _ca_ glyph. The
lower right-hand character is similar to the symbol for the month _Chuen_.
We thus obtain legitimately the sounds _ma ma-ch_, whether we consider
the parts truly phonetic or only ikonomatic.

For further illustration of the use of this symbol and evidence of
phoneticism, the reader is referred to the article in the _American
Anthropologist_ above mentioned.

The fact that a symbol is used to denote a given Maya day does not
prove, supposing it to be in any sense phonetic, that the Maya
name gives the original equivalent.

  It may have been adopted
   to represent the older name
     in the Tzental, or
     borrowed from the
   Zapotec calendar and retained in the Maya calendar for the new
name given in that tongue.

However, the symbol for this first day, which has substantially the
same name in the Maya and Tzental, appears to represent the name
in these languages and to be in some degree phonetic, _m_ being the
chief phonetic element represented by it.

The crosshatching in the little circle at the top, seen in some of the
older forms found in the inscriptions, may indicate, as will later
be seen, the _x_ or _ch_ sound, thus giving precisely the radical
_m-x_.

It may be said, in reference to the signification of the names of the day
in different dialects, that no settled or entirely satisfactory
conclusion has been reached in regard to either.

The Cakchiquel word _imox_ is translated by the grammarian Ximenes as
"swordfish," thus corresponding with the usual interpretation of
the Mexican _cipactli_.

Dr Seler thinks, however, that the Maya names were derived, as above stated,
from _im_. Nevertheless he concludes that the primitive signification
of both the Maya and Mexican symbols is the earth, "who brings forth
all things from her bosom and takes all living things again into it."
If we may judge from its use, there is no doubt that the Mexican
_cipactli_ figure is a symbol of the earth or underworld. The usual
form of the day symbol in the Mexican codices is shown in plate LXIV, 16,
and more elaborately in plate LXIV, 17. As proof that it indicates the
earth or underworld, there is shown on plate 73 of the Borgian
Codex an individual, whose heart has been torn from his breast,
plunging downward through the open jaws of the monster into the
shades or earth below.

On plate 76 of the same codex, the extended jaws open upward, and into
them a number of persons are marching in regular order. These apparently
represent the thirteen months of the sacred year. One has passed
on and disappeared from view, and the other twelve are following with
bowed heads. It would seem from these to be not only symbolic of the
earth or hades, but also to have some relation to time.

For positive proof that it is sometimes used to denote the earth, or
that from which vegetation comes, it is only necessary to refer to the
lower right-hand figure of plate 12, Borgian Codex.

Here is Tlaloc sending down rain upon the earth, from which the enlivened
plants are springing forth and expanding into leaf and blossom. The
earth, on which they stand and from which they arise, is represented by
the figure of the mythical _Cipactli_.

It is quite probable that the monster on plates 4 and 5 of the Dresden
Codex, which appears to be of the same genus, is a time symbol, and
also that on plate 74 of the same codex. It is therefore more than
likely that the animal indicated by the Mexican name of the day is
mythical, represented according to locality by some known animal
which seems to indicate best the mythical conception. Some figures
evidently refer to the alligator, and others apparently to the
iguana; that on plates 4 and 5 of the Dresden Codex is purely mythical,
but contains reptilian characteristics.

Dr Brinton, probably influenced to some extent by the apparent signification
of the Nahuatl name and symbol, explains the other names as follows:

This leads me to identify it [the Maya name] with, the Maya _mex_ or
_meex_, which is the name of a fish (the "pez arana," "un pescado que
tiene muchos brazos"), probably so called from another meaning of _mex_,
"the beard." ... This identification brings this day name into direct
relation to the Zapotec and Nahuatl names. In the former, _chiylla_,
sometimes given as _pi-chilla_, is apparently from _bi-chilla-beo_,
water lizard, and Nahuatl _cipactli_ certainly means some fish or fish-like
animal--a swordfish, alligator, or the like, though exactly which
is not certain, and probably the reference with them was altogether
mythical.

Dr Seler, in his subsequent paper, gives the following explanation of the
Zapotec name _chilla_ or _chijlla_:

For this I find in the lexicon three principal meanings: One is the
cubical bean (wurfel bohne). "Pichijlla, frisolillos o havas con que
echan las suertes los sortilegos" [beans used by the sorcerers in
casting lots or telling fortunes]; another meaning is "the ridge"
(pichijlla, lechijlla, chijllatani, loma o cordillera de sierra); another
is "the crocodile" (cocodrillo, lagarto grande de agua); and another
"swordfish" (pella-pichijlla-tao, espadarte pescado).

Finally, we have chilla-tao, "the great Chilla," given again as one of the
names of the highest being. Here it seems to me that the signification
"crocodile" is the original one, and thus far suitable. For the manner
in which the first day character is delineated in Mexican and Zapotec
picture writing [our plate LXIV, 16] shows undoubtedly the head of the
crocodile with the movable snapping upper jaw, which is so characteristic
of the animal.

Attention is called to the apparently closely related word as given by
Perez--_mech_, _ixmech_, "lagartija."

It will not be out of place here to refer to a superstition pervading
the islands of the Pacific ocean, which seems strangely coincident
with the conception of the physical symbol of this day. This is a
mythological monster known in some sections by the name _Taniwha_,
and in others as _moko_ or _mo'o_.
Dr Edward Tregear[214-1] speaks of it as follows:
Taniwha were water monsters generally. They mostly inhabited lakes
and streams, but sometimes the sea.This was market
day, and the house was full. A poster outside pictured a bridge blowing
up, and a motor-car falling into space. The midday sun was looking full
at Torhaven's High Street, which runs south and downhill steeply to the
quay; a schooner filled the bottom of the street that day. Anything a not
too unreasonable man could desire was offered in the shops of that
thoroughfare. This being a time of change, when our thoughts are all
unfixed and we have had rumours of the New Jerusalem, the side window of
a fashionable jeweller's was devoted to tiny jade pigs, minute dolls,
silver acorns, and other propitiators of luck which time and experience
have tested. Next door to the jeweller's was a studio supporting the
arts, with local pottery shaped as etiolated blue cats and yellow
puppies; and there one could get picture postcards of the London
favourites in revue, and some water-colour paintings of the local coast
which an advertisement affirmed were real.

That was not all. Opposite was the one bookshop of the town. Its famous
bay front and old diamond panes frankly presented the new day with
ladies' handbags, ludo and other games, fountain pens, mounted texts from
Ella Wilcox, local guide books, and apparently a complete series--as much
as the length of the window would hold, at least--of Hall Caine's works;
and in one corner prayer-books in a variety of bindings.

Down on the quay, sitting on a bollard, with one leg stretched stiffly
before him, was a young native I had not met since one day on the Menin
Road. I had known him, before that strange occasion, as an ardent student
of life and letters. He had entered a profession in which sound learning
is essential, though the reward is slight, just when the War began. Then
he believed, in high seriousness, as young and enthusiastic students
did, all he was told in that August; and his professional career is now
over.

He pointed out to me mildly, and with a little reproach, that I was wrong
in supposing Torhaven had not changed. I learned that the War had made a
great change there. Motor-cars were now as commonly owned as bicycles
used to be, though he admitted that it did not seem that the queue
waiting to buy books, our sort of books, was in need of control by the
police. But farmers who had been tenants when Germany violated the
independence of Belgium were now freeholders. Men who were in essential
industries, and so could not be spared for the guns, were now shipowners.
We could see for ourselves how free and encouraging was the new wealth in
this new world; true, the size of his pension did not fairly reflect the
new and more liberal ideas of a better world, but we must admit he had no
need to travel to Bond Street to spend it. "Why fear," he asked me,
pointing with his crutch up the busy High Street behind us, "that what
our pals in France learned was wrong with that old Europe which made the
War, will not be known there? Have you seen," he said, "our bookshop,
our cinema, and the new memorial porch of our church?"

Near us was waiting a resplendent motor-car, in which reposed a young
lady whose face decorates the covers of the popular magazines every
month, and as the wounded soldier finished speaking it moved away with a
raucous hoot.


XXVIII. Literary Critics


MARCH 27, 1920. The last number of the _Chapbook_, containing "Three
Critical Essays on Modern English Poetry," by three well-known critics of
literature, I read with suspiciously eager attention, for I will confess
that I have no handy rule, not one that I can describe, which can be run
over new work in poetry or prose with unfailing confidence. My
credentials as a literary critic would not, I fear, bear five minutes'
scrutiny; but I never cease to look for that defined and adequate
equipment, such as even a carpenter calls his tool-chest, full of cryptic
instruments, each designed for some particular task, and every implement
named. It is sad to have to admit it, but I know I possess only a
home-made gimlet to test for dry-rot, and another implement, a very
ancient heirloom, snatched at only on blind instinct, a stone ax. But
these are poor tools, and sooner or later I shall be found out.

There was a time when I was very hopeful about discovering a book on
literary criticism which would make the rough places plain for me, and
encourage me to feel less embarrassed when present where literary folk
were estimating poetry and prose. I am such a simple on these occasions.
If one could only discover the means to attain to that rather easy
assurance and emphasis when making literary comparisons! Yet though this
interesting number of the _Chapbook_ said much that I could agree with at
once, it left me as isolated and as helpless as before. One writer said:
"There is but one art of writing, and that is the art of poetry. The test
of poetry is sincerity. The test of sincerity is style; and the test of
style is personality." Excellent, I exclaimed immediately; and then
slowly I began to suspect a trap somewhere in it. Of course, does not the
test for sunlight distinguish it at once from insincere limelight? But
what is the test, and would it be of any use to those likely to mistake
limelight for daylight?

I cannot say I have ever been greatly helped by what I have read
concerning the standards for literary criticism. Of the many wise and
learned critics to whose works I have gone for light, I can remember only
Aristotle, Longinus, Tolstoy, and Anatole France--probably because it is
easy for the innocent to agree with dominating men. Of the moderns I
enjoy reading anything "Q" has to say about books; useless pleasure
again, for what does one get but "Q's" full, friendly, ironic, and
humorous mind? Lately, too, the critics have been unanimously
recommending to us--and that shows the genuine value to the community of
mere book reviewers--the _Letters of Tchehov_, as noble a document as we
have had for a very long time. But I thought they did not praise Tchehov
enough as a critic, for that wise and lovable author, among his letters,
made many casual asides about art that were pleasing and therefore right
to me. I begin to fear that most of the good things said about literature
are said in casual asides.

If I were asked to say why I preferred Christabel or Keats's odes to
Tennyson's Revenge or the _Barrack-Room Ballads_, I should find it hard
to explain satisfactorily to anyone who preferred to read Tennyson or
Kipling. Where are the criteria? Can a Chinaman talk to an Arab? The
difference, we see at once, is even deeper than that of language. It is a
difference in nature; and we may set up any criterion of literature we
like, but it will never carry across such a chasm. Our only consolation
is that we may tell the other man he is on the wrong side of it, but he
will not care, because he will not see it. The means by which we are able
to separate what is precious in books from the matrix is not a process,
and is nothing measurable. It is instinctive, and not only differs from
age to age, but changes in the life of each of us. It is as indefinable
as beauty itself. An artist may know how to create a beautiful thing, but
he cannot communicate his knowledge except by that creation. That is all
he can tell us of beauty, and, indeed, he may be innocent of the measure
of his effort; and the next generation may ridicule the very thing which
gave us so much pleasure, pleasure we proved to our own satisfaction to
be legitimate and well founded by many sound generalizations about art.
The canons of criticism are no more than the apology for our personal
preferences, no matter how gravely we back them. Sometimes it has
happened that a book or a poem has succeeded in winning the approval of
many generations, and so we may call it a classic. Yet what is the virtue
of a classic, or of the deliberate and stately billows going with the
wind when the world has sweep and is fair, or of a child with a flower,
or of the little smile on the face of the dead boy in the muck when the
guns were filling us with fear and horror of mankind? I don't know; but
something in us appears to save us from the punishing comet of Zeus.


XXI. The South Downs


MAY 22, 1920. The southern face of the hill fell, an abrupt promontory,
to the woods of the plain. Its face was scored by the weather, and the
dry drainage channels were headlong cascades of grey pebbles. Clumps of
heather, sparse oak scrub with young leaves of bronze, contorted birch,
and this year's croziers of the bracken (heaven knows their secret for
getting lush aromatic sap out of such stony poverty), all made a tough
life which held up the hill, steep as it was; though the hill was going,
for the roots of some of the oaks were exposed, empty coils of rope from
which the burden had slipped. In that sea of trees whose billows came to
the foot of our headland, and out of sight beneath its waves, children
were walking, gathering bluebells. We knew they were there, for we could
hear their voices. But there was no other sign of our form of life except
a neolithic flint scraper one of us had picked up on the hilltop. The
marks of the man who made it were as clear as the voices below. It had
been lost since yesterday, it might be--anyhow, about the day the first
Pyramid was finished. It depends on how one looks at the almanac. For you
could feel the sun fire was young. It had not been long kindled. Its heat
in the herbage was moist. One of the youngsters with me, bruising the
bracken and snuffing it, said it smelt of almond and cucumber. Another
said the crushed birch leaves smelt of sour apples. We could not say what
the oak leaves smelt like. Then another grabbed a handful of leafmould,
damp and brown and full of fibre. What did that smell of? They were not
sure that they liked it. Perhaps it was the smell of the hill. They
admitted that it wasn't a bad smell. They seemed a little afraid of that
odour.

But I was trying to read, and neolithic times and the bluebell gatherers
had run together. They were in the same day. My book had made of that May
morning in Surrey an apparition without time and place. We hear ourselves
laughing now, intent, for instance, on confirming the almond and cucumber
in bruised bracken, or catch the sound of our serious voices raised in a
dispute over literature or politics. But these things are not really in
our minds. We would not betray our secret thoughts to bluebell gatherers
and boys snuffing the bracken. This book I was reading, and a fancied
resemblance in that hill and its prospect, moved the shadows again--they
are so readily moved--and I saw two of us in France on such a hill,
gazing intently and innocently over just such a prospect, in the summer
of 1915, without in the least guessing what, in that landscape before us,
was latent for us both. Those downs across the way would be Beaumont
Hamel and Thiepval. Bluebells! The publishers may send out what advice
they choose to authors concerning the unpopularity of books about the
War--always excepting, of course, the important reminiscences, the soft
and heavy masses of words of the great leaders of the nations in the War,
which merely reveal that they never knew what they were doing. Certainly
we could spare that kind of war book, though it continues to arrive in
abundance; a volume by a famous soldier explaining why affairs went
strangely wrong is about the last place where we should look for anything
but folly solemnly pondering unrealities. But whatever the publishers may
say, we do want books about the War by men who were in it. Some of us
have learned by now that France is a memory of such a nature that, though
it is not often we dare stop to look directly at it, for the day's work
must be done, yet it looms through the importance of each of these latter
days as though the event of our lives were past, and we were at present
merely watching the clock. The shadow of what once was in France is an
abiding presence for us. We know nothing can happen again which will
release us from it. And yet how much has been written of it? That is the
measure of its vastness and its mystery--it possesses the minds of many
men, but they are silent on what they know. They rarely speak of it,
except to one of the fraternity. But where are their thoughts? Wandering,
viewless and uneasy wraiths, over Flanders, in Artois and Picardy. Those
thoughts will never come home again to stay.

It is strange to me that publishers should suppose that books, intimate
about the invisible but abiding shadow which is often more potent than
present May sunshine, should not be wanted. Take for example this book I
was reading, _The Squadroon_, by Ardern Beaman. To induce readers to buy
it it has a picture on its dust-cover which kept me from reading it for
weeks. This wrapper shows a ghostly knight in armour leading a charge of
British cavalry in this War. I should have thought we had had enough of
that romantic nonsense during the actual events. The War was written for
the benefit of readers who made a luxury of the sigh, and who were told
and no doubt preferred to believe that the young soldier went into battle
with the look we so admire in the picture called The Soul's Awakening. He
was going to glory. There are no dead. There are only memorial crosses
for heroes and the Last Post. The opinions of most civilians on the War
were as agreeable as stained-glass windows. The thought of a tangle of a
boy's inside festooned on rusty wire would naturally have spoiled the
soul's awakening and the luxury of the sigh. I heard of a civilian
official, on his way to Paris after the Armistice, who was just saved by
rapid explanations from the drastic attention of a crowd of Tommies who
mistook him for a War Correspondent.

But Mr. Beaman's book is not like war correspondence. It can be commended
to those who were not there, but who wish to hear a true word or two. Mr.
Beaman as a good-natured man remembers how squeamish we are, and being
also shy and dainty indicates some matters but briefly. I wish, for one
thing, that when describing the doings of his cavalry squadron after the
disaster on the Fifth Army front--the author enables you to feel how
slender was the line of resolute men which then saved the Army from
downfall--he had ventured to record with more courage the things which it
shamed him to see. Why should only such as he know of those shocks to
affability? But all he says about some unpleasant matters is: "During
those days we saw things of which it is not good to speak--of which
afterwards we never did speak, except late at nights, in the privacy of
our own mess."

Mr. Beaman's simple narrative, however, with its humanity and easy
humour, often lets in light on strange affairs, as though he had
forgotten what had been locked up, and had carelessly opened a forbidden
door. He shuts it again at once, like a gentlemen, and we follow him
round hoping that presently he will do the same again. Ambrose Bierce
could have made something of what is suggested in such a passage as
this:

  "On the borders of this horrid desolation (the Somme) we met a
  Salvage Company at work. That warren of trenches and dugouts
  extended for untold miles.... They warned us, if we insisted on
  going further in, not to let any man go singly, but only in strong
  parties, as the Golgotha was peopled with wild men, British,
  French, Australian, German deserters, who lived there underground,
  like ghouls among the mouldering dead, and who came out at nights
  to plunder and kill. In the night, an officer said, mingled with
  the snarling of carrion dogs, they often heard inhuman cries and
  rifle-shots coming from that awful wilderness. Once they (the
  Salvage Company) had put out, as a trap, a basket containing food,
  tobacco, and a bottle of whisky. But the following morning they
  found the bait untouched, and a note in the basket, 'Nothing
  doing!'"


XXX. Kipling


JUNE 5, 1920. One day, when I did not know Kipling's name, I found in a
cabin of a ship from Rangoon two paper-covered books, with a Calcutta
imprint, smelling of something, whatever it was, that did not exist in
England. The books were _Plain Tales from the Hills_ and _Soldiers
Three_. It was high summer, and in that cabin of a ship in the Albert
Dock, with its mixed odour of tea, teak, and cheroots, I read through
all. The force in those stories went nearer to capturing me completely
than anything I have read since. I can believe now that I just escaped
taking a path which would have given me a world totally different from
the one I know, and the narrowness of the escape makes me feel tolerant
towards the young people who give up typewriting and book-keeping, and go
out into an unfriendly world determined to be Mary Pickfords and Charlie
Chaplins. A boy boards a ship merely to get a parrot, and his friend, who
brought it from Burma, has gone to Leadenhall Street; there is a long
interval, with those books lying in a bunk. Such a trivial
incident--something like it happening every week to everybody--and to-day
that boy, but for the Grace of God, might be reading the leaders of the
_Morning Post_ as the sole relief to a congested mind, going every week
to the cartoon of _Punch_ as to barley water for chronic prickly heat,
and talking of dealing with the heterodox as the Holy Office used to deal
with unbaptized Indian babies for the good of their little souls.

I have recovered from those astonishing adventures with Kipling. I may
read him to-day with enjoyment, but safe from excitation. This is due,
perhaps, to a stringy constitution, subject to bilious doubts, which
loves to see lusty Youth cock its hat when most nervous, swagger with
merry insolence to hide the uncertainty which comes of self-conscious
inexperience, assume a cynical shrewdness to protect its credulity, and
imitate the abandon of the hard fellow who has been to Hong Kong, Tal
Tal, and Delagoa Bay. We enjoy seeing Youth act thus; but one learns in
time that a visit to Rhodesia, worse luck, makes one no more intelligent
than a week-end at Brighton. Well, it doesn't matter. What ingrates we
should be now to turn on Kipling because we disagree with the politics he
prefers, those loud opinions of his which, when we get too much of them,
remain in the ears for a while like the echoes of a brass tray which a
hearty child banged for a drum. Though we hold the British Constitution
as sacred as the family vault we do not think the less of Dickens because
the awful spectacle of our assembled legislators made him laugh, nor do
we leave the room when Beethoven is played because his careless regard
for a monarch's divine right is painful to us. If Kipling had not given
us _My Sunday at Home_ and _The Incarnation of Krishna Mulvaney_, how
should we have got them?

I have just read Kipling's book, _Letters of Travel_. Its attractive
title drew me to it, and is to blame. Kipling has an uncanny gift of
sight. It prompts no divination in him, but its curiosity misses nothing
that is superficial. If he had watched the Crucifixion, and had been its
sole recorder, we should have had a perfect representation of the
soldiers, the crowds, the weather, the smells, the colours, and the three
uplifted figures; so lively a record that it would be immortal for the
fidelity and commonness of its physical experience. But we should never
have known more about the central figure than that He was a cool and
courageous rebel. Kipling can make a picture of an indifferent huddle of
fishing boats in a stagnant harbour which is more enjoyable than being
there. Letters from such a traveller would attract one directly across
the bookshop. But these letters of his were addressed to his friends the
Imperialists before the War, and one may guess the rest. Such an exposure
moves one to sorrow over a writer whose omniscience used to make the
timorous believe that arrogance, if lively enough, had some advantage
over reason.

Yet there is in a few of the letters enough to show what we missed
because they were not addressed to himself, or to anybody but a Composite
Portrait of The Breed. There are passages in the chapter called "Half a
Dozen Pictures" which clear all irritation from the mind (for many of the
author's insults are studied and gratuitous) and leave nothing but
respect for the artist. These come when the artist sees only a riot of
Oriental deck passengers, bears, and macaws, in the tropics; or a steamer
coming round, exposed by a clarity like crystal in the trough of immense
seas somewhere in the neighbourhood of the Auckland Islands at dayfall.
We get such impressions when Kipling has, for the moment, forgotten the
need to make a genuflection towards the Absolute and Everlasting
Chutney, and is a man and brother delighting in his craft.

The rest of the book has, one must admit, a value, but it is an
undesigned value; indeed, its value is that it was designed to prove, at
the time it was written, something quite different. From this book, with
its recurring contempt for England, you may see what value we need have
attached to much that the assured and the violent ever had to tell us
about our Empire. If this publication is, indeed, an act of contrition
for words unwisely written, then it should be read as a warning by all
who write. Materialists naturally attach to transient circumstances a
value which the less patriotic of us might think not really material. "We
discussed, first of all, under the lee of a wet deck-house in
mid-Atlantic; man after man cutting in and out of the talk as he sucked
at his damp tobacco." There is no doubt Kipling supposes that the wet
deck-house adds a value to the words spoken under its lee-side. Yet the
words he reports are what one may hear, with grief, any day in any tavern
in the hurry and excitement of ten minutes before closing time. But
Kipling always thought an opinion gained in value if expressed elsewhere
than in England. His ideal government would be a polo-player from Simla
leading the crew of the _Bolivar_.

Every horror in the world, the author of these letters tells us, has its
fitting ritual. How easily, too, one realizes it, when feeling again the
fanatic heat and force of this maker of old magic with the tom-tom; the
vicious mockery, certain of popular applause, of ideas that are not
marketable; the abrupt rancour whenever the common folk must be
mentioned; the spite felt for England--"in England ... you see where the
rot starts"; the sly suspicion of other countries, and the consequent
jealousy and fear; here it all is, convulsive, uncertain, inflammable.
No one will be surprised to hear that the Christian name of Mr.
BRADSHAW was George. Indeed, it is difficult to think what other name a
man of his calibre could have had. But many people will be surprised
to hear that Mr. BRADSHAW is no longer alive.And what of the British youngsters who did
that, who were not materialists in the least, but many of them the
idealists for whom no abuse once could be too vicious? The corruption of
the Somme! That faceless and nameless horror was the apotheosis of the
Imperialist.


XXXI. A Devon Estuary


SEPTEMBER 11, 1920. "This dreary expanse," the guide-book explains, "will
not attract the tourist." The guide was right. I was alone to that degree
beyond mere solitude when you feel you are not alone, but that the place
itself is observing you. Yet only five miles away long lines of
motor-cars were waiting to take tourists, at ruinous prices, to the
authentic and admitted beauty spots. There was not, as the polite
convention would put it, a soul about. It was certainly a dreary expanse,
but the sunlight there seemed strangely brilliant, I thought, and, what
was more curious, appeared to be alive. It was quivering. The transient
glittering of some seagulls remote in the blue was as if you could
glimpse, now and then, fleeting hints of what is immaculate in heaven.
Nothing of our business was in sight anywhere except the white stalk of a
lighthouse, and that, I knew, was miles away across the estuary whose
waters were then invisible, for it was not only low tide, but I was
descending to the saltings, having left the turf of the upper salt
marshes.

You felt that here in the saltings you were beyond human associations.
The very vegetation was unfamiliar. The thrift, sea lavender, rocket, sea
campion, and maritime spurge did not descend so low as this. They came no
nearer than where the highest tidal marks left lines of driftwood and
bleached shells, just below the break of the upper marshes. Here it was
another kingdom, neither sea nor land, but each alternately during the
spring tides. At first the sandy mud was reticulated with sun-cracks, not
being daily touched by the sea, and the crevasses gave a refuge for algæ.
There was a smell, neither pleasant nor unpleasant, which reminded you of
something so deep in the memory that you could not give it a name. But it
was sound and good. Beyond that dry flat the smooth mud glistened as if
earth were growing a new skin, which yet was very tender. It was spongy,
but it did not break when I trod on it, though the earth complained as I
went. It was thinly sprinkled with a plant like little fingers of green
glass, the maritime samphire, and in the distance this samphire gave the
marsh a sheen of continuous and vivid emerald.

The saltings looked level and unbroken. But on walking seaward I was
continually surprised by drainage channels. These channels serpentined
everywhere, and were deep and wide. The leader of the strike, Meyer
Shoenfeld, has been working so hard in the interests of his fellow-laborers
that he is quite ill. At one of the last meetings of the strikers he broke
down in the midst of a speech he was making, and was unable to
continue.

When he heard that the contractors were about to sign, he insisted on
getting out of his sick-bed and going to the meeting, to make sure everything
was being properly arranged.

The success of the strikers will cause a slight increase in the price of
ready-made clothes, but few are likely to begrudge this when they
realize what an increase of comfort it means to the poor workers

.

* * * * *
Austria and Hungary are not getting along as well as they might.

There are two reasons for this unfriendly feeling.

One is that Austria has asked Hungary to pay a larger proportion of the
common expenses of the two countries. It was arranged that Hungary
should pay thirty per cent. of these expenses, and Austria the other
seventy per cent., because Austria was much larger and wealthier than
the sister land.

Since these arrangements were made Hungary has become exceedingly
prosperous, and Austria now asks her to pay thirty-seven per cent.
of the expenses instead of the former thirty per cent.

Hungary will not listen to any arguments on the subject, and threatens
to separate herself from Austria.

These two countries are governed by one sovereign, and, like Sweden and
Norway, or the various States of our own country, have each their
own local government, but are united on all matters of foreign
affairs, national defences, tariff, etc.

[Illustration]
The Hungarians and Austrians are, however, people of very different races,
and, in spite of the years they have been joined under one federal
government, they have never grown to like each other.

The Hungarians are Magyars, and were originally of Asiatic origin. They
are a fierce, fiery race. The Austrians come of the same stock as
the Germans, and are of a much milder temperament.

Hungary is a conquered country. In the fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries it was a very great kingdom, but in the sixteenth century
its power declined, and, the king having died, Turkey and Austria
fought for the possession of the crown, Austria eventually gaining
the day.
Ferdinand I., a prince of the Austrian House of Hapsburg, was
declared King of Hungary, and ever since then the Emperor of Austria
has been crowned King of Hungary.
The Hungarians have never felt satisfied with the Austrian rule,
and have frequently revolted. The last rising was in 1848, under
Louis Kossuth. This rebellion was put down with the help of the
Russians.
Last June a great patriotic celebration took place in Hungary, and
this possibly roused the national feeling so strongly in the hearts
of the Hungarians that it has made them a little more restless than
usual.
This celebration was called the Banderium, and was to celebrate the
thousandth year of Hungary's existence as a kingdom.I was rather scared at first when I got rid of
my sense of duty. But, after all, it is not so hard to be free. Perhaps
the world already has more soft and easy people than is good for it. I
find one benefit of this life is that, being free of the crowd, I feel
indifferent about the way the crowd chooses to go. I don't care now what
the public does--that's its own affair, and I hope it will enjoy it."
After a silence he said: "That sounds selfish, I know. And I'm not sure
yet that it isn't. Anyhow, if one could help one's fellows one would.
But is it possible to help them? When did they last listen to reason? The
only guides they will listen to are frauds obvious enough to make an ass
lay back his ears. Well, I think I'll wait here till the crowd knows
enough to stop before it gets to the edge of the steep place--if it can
stop now."

I asked him what he read. "Very little. I fish more than I read. You'd
think it would take only a week to learn all there is here. I should have
thought so once. I see now that I shall never thoroughly know this
estuary. It's a wonderful place. Every tide is a new experience. I am
beginning to feel right again." In the boat, going round to the village,
he learned I was a writer, rested on his oars, and drifted with the tide.
"I'll give you a job," he said. "Write a book that will make people hate
the idea that the State is God as Moloch was at last hated. Turn the
young against it. The latest priest is the politician. No ritual in any
religion was worse than this new worship of the State. If men don't wake
up to that then they are doomed." He began then to pull me towards
humanity again.


XXXII. Barbellion


DECEMBER 18, 1920. When posterity feels curious to discover what may have
caused the disaster to our community it will get a little light from the
merry confessions of our contemporary great folk. Let it read Colonel
Repington's _Diary_, Mrs. Asquith's book, and the memoirs of General
French. The general, of course, implies that he was so puzzled by the
neutrality of time and space, and by the fact that the treacherous enemy
was in trenches and used big guns. Our descendants may learn from these
innocent revelations what quality of knowledge and temper, to be found
only in a superior caste, guided the poor and lowly, and shaped our fate
for us. They will know why wars and famines were inevitable for us, and
why nothing could avert doom from the youth of our Europe. There is no
disputing the importance of these confessions. But their relationship to
literature? For that matter they might be linoleum. Yet there has been a
book of confessions published recently which may be read as literature
when the important gossip with the vast sales is merely curious evidence
for historians equipped for psychological analysis. I mean Barbellion's
_Journal of a Disappointed Man_.

It will interest our descendants to learn that outside the circle which
Colonel Repington reports at its dinner-tables where the ladies were so
diverting, the fare usually excellent, and the gentlemen discussed the
"combing out" of mere men for places like Ypres, there was genuine
knowledge and warm understanding. Beyond those cheerful dinner-tables,
and in that outer darkness of which the best people knew nothing except
that it was possible to rake it fruitfully with a comb, there was a host
of young men from which could be manifested the courageous intellectual
curiosity, the ardour for truth, the gusto for life, and the love of
earth, which we see in Keeling's letters and Barbellion's diary. All is
shown in these two books in an exceptional degree, and, in Barbellion's
diary, is expressed with a remarkable wit and acuteness, and not seldom,
as in the description of a quarry, of a Beethoven Symphony, of a
rock-pool of the Devon coast, with a beauty that is startling.

Keeling was killed in the War. Barbellion (who, as we know now, was Bruce
Cummings) never went to France, for he was dying, though he did not know
it, when he presented himself for medical examination. But it is clear
that though secluded from the turmoil in a country cottage, paralyzed,
and his trunk already dead, Barbellion's sensitive mind and imaginative
sympathy knew more of what was happening to his fellows in France, and
what it meant for us all, than the combined Cabinet in Downing Street.
That spark of dying light was aware when the luminaries on whom we
depended were blind and ignorant. In his _Last Diary_, and within a day
or two of his death, he wrote of the Peace Treaty (May, 1919): "After all
the bright hopes of last autumn, justice will be done only when all the
power is vested in the people. Every liberal-minded man must feel the
shame of it." But did such men feel the shame of it? Refer to what the
popular writers, often liberal-minded, said about the shame they felt at
the time, and compare. To Barbellion, by the light of his expiring lamp,
was revealed what was hidden from nearly all experienced and active
publicists. Is there any doubt still of the superiority of imagination
over hard-headedness?

Imagination instantly responds. Percolation is a slow process in the hard
head of the worldly-wise. When we know that in the elderly, the shrewd,
and the practical, the desire for material power and safety, qualified
only by fear, served as their substitute for the City of God during the
War, it is heartening to remember that there were select though unknown
young men, mere subjects for "combing" like Barbellion, who made
articulate an immense rebellious protest that was in the best of our
boys; who showed a mocking intuition into us and our motives, as though
we were a species apart; a scorn of the world we had made for them, a
cruel knowledge of the cowardice and meanness at the back of our warlike
minds, and a yearning for that world of beauty which might have been, but
which the acts of the clever and the practical have turned into carrion
among the ruins. Would it matter now if we were bankrupt, and our Empire
among the things that were, if only we were turning to sackcloth and
ashes because of that dousing of the glim in the heart of the young?

in such an excited tone of voice; and when he has shaken hands a score
of times, falls back upon his pillow very wearily. But I sit by his
side, and try to cheer him with talk about the future, when he shall
grow well, and see home, and hear them all thank him for what he has been
helping to do, so that he grows all right in a few minutes; but,
hearing that I am on the way to the front, gets excited again; for, you
see, illness and weakness make these strong men as children, not least
in the patient unmurmuring resignation with which they suffer. I think
my Irish friend had an indistinct idea of a "muddle" somewhere, which
had kept him for weeks on salt meat and biscuit, until it gave him
the "scurvy," for he is very anxious that I should take over plenty
of vegetables, of every sort.

"And, oh! mother!"--and it is strange to hear his almost plaintive tone as
he urges this--"take them plenty of eggs, mother; we never saw eggs over
there."
At some slight risk of giving offence, I cannot resist the temptation of
lending a helping hand here and there--replacing a slipped bandage, or
easing a stiff one. But I do not think any one was offended; and one
doctor, who had with some surprise and, at first, alarm on his face,
watched me replace a bandage, which was giving pain, said, very kindly,
when I had finished, "Thank you, ma'am."
One thought never left my mind as I walked through the fearful miles of
suffering in that great hospital. If it is so here, what must it not
be at the scene of war--on the spot where the poor fellows are stricken
down by pestilence or Russian bullets, and days and nights of agony must
be passed before a woman's hand can dress their wounds. And I felt happy
in the conviction that _I must_ be useful three or four days nearer to
their pressing wants than this.

It was growing late before I felt tired, or thought of leaving Scutari,
and Dr. S----, another Jamaica friend, who had kindly borne me company
for the last half-hour agreed with me that the caicque was not
the safest conveyance by night on the Bosphorus, and recommended me to
present my letter to Miss Nightingale, and perhaps a lodging for the
night could be found for me.

So, still under the Sergeant's patient guidance, we thread our way
through passages and corridors, all used as sick-wards, until we
reach the corner tower of the building, in which are the nurses'
quarters.

I think Mrs. B----, who saw me, felt more surprise than she could
politely show (I never found women so quick to understand me as the men)
when I handed her Dr. F----'s kind letter respecting me, and apologized
for troubling Miss Nightingale. There is that in the Doctor's letter (he
had been much at Scutari) which prevents my request being refused, and
I am asked to wait until Miss Nightingale, whose every moment is valuable,
can see me. Meanwhile Mrs. B.
questions me very kindly, but with the same look of curiosity and surprise.

What object has Mrs. Seacole in coming out? This is the purport of her
questions. And I say, frankly, to be of use somewhere; for other
considerations I had not, until necessity forced them upon me.
Willingly, had they accepted me, I would have worked for the wounded,
in return for bread and water. I fancy Mrs.

B---- thought that I sought for employment at Scutari, for she said,
very kindly--
"Miss Nightingale has the entire management of our hospital staff, but I
do not think that any vacancy--"
"Excuse me, ma'am," I interrupt her with, "but I am bound for the front
in a few days;" and my questioner leaves me, more surprised than ever.
The room I waited in was used as a kitchen. Upon the stoves were cans
of soup, broth, and arrow-root, while nurses passed in and
out with noiseless tread and subdued manner. I thought many of them had
that strange expression of the eyes which those who have gazed
long on scenes of woe or horror seldom lose.
In half an hour's time I am admitted to Miss Nightingale's presence.I no longer heard the bubbling of the well
of life.

I finished reading the papers. Now I knew our current fate, and felt as
if I heard again the gas gong going continuously. I had the feeling in
April, unknown to any snail on the thorn, that the park was deafening
with the clangour of pallid, tense, and contending lunatics. The
Serpentine had receded from this tumult. Its tranquil shimmering was now
fatuous and unbelievable. It was but half seen; its glittering was a
distant grimacing and mockery at my troubled human intelligence. It was
nothing to do with me, and showed it in that impertinent way. Two ducks,
two absurd ducks, suddenly appeared before me on the polished water. They
were bowing politely to each other--only I was looking at them--and were
making soothing noises in imbecile ignorance of the fate overhanging us
all. There was a boy not far away. He stood as still as a thought
entranced. He was watching a boat with a paper sail. He was as intent as
if he were God observing the progress of Columbus, knowing now that
America is about to be found.

If that boy had but guessed what I knew! But he had not read the latest
news. It is the privilege of knowledge to be superior and grave; to be
able to smile sadly at the dream of a Golden Galleon which childhood sees
in April by the Serpentine; for knowledge is aware of the truth, the
tumult surrounding us of contentious lunatics, endless, inexplicable; the
noise of mankind in its upward journey towards the eclipse, or some other
heavenly mystery.

Presently that tinted mist which was a tree in flower began to shine
again through the dark noise which the papers had made. The uproar
cleared a little. The water came nearer, its glittering growing
stronger, its fire burning towards me. I saw in surprise through the
gloom in my mind that the fire had touched the elms; their dark masses
were faintly luminous. And the mallard drake, riding on the outer pulses
of that radiation, was purple and emerald. But would the beauty of the
spring surprise us, I wonder; would it still give the mind a twinge,
sadden us with a nameless disquiet, shoot through us so keen an anguish
when the almond tree is there again on a bright day, if we were decent,
healthy, and happy creatures? Perhaps not. It is hard to say. It is a
great while since our skinless and touchy crowds of the wonderful
industrial era, moving as one man to the words of the daily papers, were
such creatures. Perhaps we should merely yawn and stretch ourselves, feel
revived with the sun a little warmer on our backs, and snuff up a
pleasant smell which we remembered; begin to whistle, and grope for an
adze.

But we cannot have it so. The spring is not for us. We have been so
inventive. We have desired other things, and we have got them. We have
cleverly made a way of life that exacts so close an attention, if we
would save it from disaster, that we are now its prisoners. Peace and
freedom have become but a vision which the imprisoned view through the
bars they themselves have made. The spring we see now is in a world not
ours, a world we have left, which is still close to us, but is
unapproachable. The children are in it, and even, apparently, the ducks.
It is a world we see sometimes, as a reminder--once a year or so--of what
we could have made of life, and what we have.

Which is the real world? I worried over that as I was leaving the park. I
seemed to be getting nearer to reality near Rotten Row. A reassuring
policeman was in sight. Motor-cars that were humiliating with their
enamel and crystal were threading about. The fashionable ladies and their
consorts seemed to be in no doubt about the world they were in. I began
to feel mean and actual. While thus composing my mind I chanced to look
backwards. A miniature glade was there, where the tree-trunks were the
columns in an aisle. Was it a sward between them? I doubt whether we
could walk it. I call it green. I know of no other word. Perhaps the sun
was playing tricks with it. It may not have been there. As I kept my eye
on it, disbelieving that light--desirous to believe it, but unable to,
faith being weak--a rabbit moved into the aisle. I call it a rabbit, for
I know no other word. But I declare now that I do not accept that
creature. It sat up, and watched me. I don't say it was there. As far as
I know, any rabbit would have been terrified with all those people about.
But not this apparition, its back to the sunset, with an aura and radiant
whiskers of gold. It regarded me steadfastly. I looked around to see if I
were alone in this.

The policeman was unconscious of it. The lady who sat on the chair
opposite, the lady with the noticeable yellow legs, was talking in
animation, but I doubt it was about this rabbit. The saunterers were
passing without a sign. But one little girl stood, her hands behind her,
oblivious of all but that admonitory creature in an unearthly light, and
was smiling at it. Early in the spring the Skylark begins his song,
and he may be heard for most of the year.

                               Sometimes he sings while on the ground, but usually it is while he
is soaring far above us.

Skylarks do not often seek the company of persons.
The following corrections have been made to the original text:

Page 12: Septemer to September

Page 103: foward to forward

Page 146: irresistable to irresistible

Page 199: sarcifice to sacrifice