Produced by David Widger


THE TRAGIC COMEDIANS

A STUDY IN A WELL-KNOWN STORY

By George Meredith

1892


BOOK 1.

The word 'fantastical' is accentuated in our tongue to so scornful an
utterance that the constant good service it does would make it seem an
appointed instrument for reviewers of books of imaginative matter
distasteful to those expository pens. Upon examination, claimants to the
epithet will be found outside of books and of poets, in many quarters,
Nature being one of the prominent, if not the foremost. Wherever she can
get to drink her fill of sunlight she pushes forth fantastically. As for
that wandering ship of the drunken pilot, the mutinous crew and the angry
captain, called Human Nature, 'fantastical' fits it no less completely
than a continental baby's skull-cap the stormy infant.

Our sympathies, one may fancy, will be broader, our critical acumen
shrewder, if we at once accept the thing as a part of us and worthy of
study.

The pair of tragic comedians of whom there will be question pass under
this word as under their banner and motto. Their acts are incredible:
they drank sunlight and drove their bark in a manner to eclipse
historical couples upon our planet. Yet they do belong to history, they
breathed the stouter air than fiction's, the last chapter of them is
written in red blood, and the man pouring out that last chapter, was of a
mighty nature not unheroical, a man of the active grappling modern brain
which wrestles with facts, to keep the world alive, and can create them,
to set it spinning.

A Faust-like legend might spring from him: he had a devil. He was the
leader of a host, the hope of a party, venerated by his followers, well
hated by his enemies, respected by the intellectual chiefs of his time,
in the pride of his manhood and his labours when he fell. And why this
man should have come to his end through love, and the woman who loved him
have laid her hand in the hand of the slayer, is the problem we have to
study, nothing inventing, in the spirit and flesh of both. To ask if it
was love is useless. Love may be celestial fire before it enters into the
systems of mortals. It will then take the character of its place of
abode, and we have to look not so much for the pure thing as for the
passion. Did it move them, hurry them, animating the giants and gnomes of
one, the elves and sprites of the other, and putting animal nature out of
its fashionable front rank? The bare railway-line of their story tells of
a passion honest enough to entitle it to be related. Nor is there
anything invented, because an addition of fictitious incidents could
never tell us how she came to do this, he to do that; or how the comic in
their natures led by interplay to the tragic issue. They are real
creatures, exquisitely fantastical, strangely exposed to the world by a
lurid catastrophe, who teach us, that fiction, if it can imagine events
and persons more agreeable to the taste it has educated, can read us no
such furrowing lesson in life.


THE TRAGIC COMEDIANS


CHAPTER I

An unresisted lady-killer is probably less aware that he roams the
pastures in pursuit of a coquette, than is the diligent Arachne that her
web is for the devouring lion. At an early age Clotilde von Rudiger was
dissatisfied with her conquests, though they were already numerous in her
seventeenth year, for she began precociously, having at her dawn a lively
fancy, a womanly person, and singular attractions of colour, eyes, and
style. She belonged by birth to the small aristocracy of her native land.
Nature had disposed her to coquettry, which is a pastime counting among
the arts of fence, and often innocent, often serviceable, though
sometimes dangerous, in the centres of polished barbarism known as
aristocratic societies, where nature is not absent, but on the contrary
very extravagant, tropical, by reason of her idle hours for the imbibing
of copious draughts of sunlight. The young lady of charming countenance
and sprightly manners is too much besought to choose for her choice to be
decided; the numbers beseeching prevent her from choosing instantly,
after the fashion of holiday schoolboys crowding a buffet of pastry.
These are not coquettish, they clutch what is handy: and little so is the
starved damsel of the sequestered village, whose one object of the
worldly picturesque is the passing curate; her heart is his for a nod.
But to be desired ardently of trooping hosts is an incentive to taste to
try for yourself. Men (the jury of householders empanelled to deliver
verdicts upon the ways of women) can almost understand that. And as it
happens, tasting before you have sounded the sense of your taste will
frequently mislead by a step or two difficult to retrieve: the young
coquette must then be cruel, as necessarily we kick the waters to escape
drowning: and she is not in all cases dealing with simple blocks or limp
festoons, she comes upon veteran tricksters that have a knowledge of her
sex, capable of outfencing her nascent individuality. The more
imagination she has, for a source of strength in the future days, the
more is she a prey to the enemy in her time of ignorance.

Clotilde's younger maiden hours and their love episodes are wrapped in
the mists Diana considerately drops over her adventurous favourites. She
was not under a French mother's rigid supervision. In France the mother
resolves that her daughter shall be guarded from the risks of that
unequal rencounter between foolish innocence and the predatory. Vigilant
foresight is not so much practised where the world is less accurately
comprehended. Young people of Clotilde's upper world everywhere, and the
young women of it especially, are troubled by an idea drawn from what
they inhale and guess at in the spirituous life surrounding them, that
the servants of the devil are the valiant host, this world's elect,
getting and deserving to get the best it can give in return for a little
dashing audacity, a flavour of the Fronde in their conduct; they sin, but
they have the world; and then they repent perhaps, but they have had the
world. The world is the golden apple. Thirst for it is common during
youth: and one would think the French mother worthy of the crown of
wisdom if she were not so scrupulously provident in excluding love from
the calculations on behalf of her girl.

Say (for Diana's mists are impenetrable and freeze curiosity) that
Clotilde was walking with Count Constantine, the brilliant Tartar trained
in Paris, when first she met Prince Marko Romaris, at the Hungarian Baths
on the borders of the Styrian highlands. The scene at all events is
pretty, and weaves a fable out of a variety of floating threads. A
stranger to the Baths, dressed in white and scarlet, sprang from his
carriage into a group of musical gypsies round an inn at the arch of the
chestnut avenue, after pulling up to listen to them for a while. The
music had seized him. He snatched bow and fiddle from one of the ring,
and with a few strokes kindled their faces. Then seating himself, on a
bench he laid the fiddle on his knee, and pinched the strings and flung
up his voice, not ceasing to roll out the spontaneous notes when Clotilde
and her cavalier, and other couples of the party, came nigh; for he was
on the tide of the song, warm in it, and loved it too well to suffer
intruders to break the flow, or to think of them. They were close by when
the last of it rattled (it was a popular song of a fiery tribe) to its
finish: He rose and saluted Clotilde, smiled and jumped back to his
carriage, sending a cry of adieu to the swarthy, lank-locked,
leather-hued circle, of which his dark oriental eyes and skin of
burnished walnut made him look an offshoot, but one of the celestial
branch.

He was in her father's reception-room when she reached home: he was
paying a visit of ceremony on behalf of his family to General von
Rudiger; which helped her to remember that he had been expected, and also
that his favourite colours were known to be white and scarlet. In those
very colours, strange to tell, Clotilde was dressed; Prince Marko had
recognized her by miraculous divination, he assured her he could have
staked his life on the guess as he bowed to her. Adieu to Count
Constantine. Fate had interposed the prince opportunely, we have to
suppose, for she received a strong impression of his coming straight from
her invisible guardian; and the stroke was consequently trenchant which
sent the conquering Tartar raving of her fickleness. She struck, like
fate, one blow. She discovered that the prince, in addition to his beauty
and sweet manners and gift of song, was good; she fell in love with
goodness, whereof Count Constantine was not an example: so she set her
face another way, soon discovering that there may be fragility in
goodness. And now first her imagination conceived the hero who was to
subdue her. Could Prince Marko be he, soft as he was, pliable, a docile
infant, burning to please her, enraptured in obeying?--the hero who would
wrestle with her, overcome and hold her bound? Siegfried could not be
dreamed in him, or a Siegfried's baby son-in-arms. She caught a glorious
image of the woman rejecting him and his rival, and it informed her that
she, dissatisfied with an Adonis, and more than a match for a famous
conqueror, was a woman of decisive and independent, perhaps unexampled,
force of character. Her idea of a spiritual superiority that could soar
over those two men, the bad and the good--the bad because of his
vileness, the good because of his frailness--whispered to her of
deserving, possibly of attracting, the best of men: the best, that is, in
the woman's view of us--the strongest, the great eagle of men, lord of
earth and air.

One who will dominate me, she thought.

Now when a young lady of lively intelligence and taking charm has brought
her mind to believe that she possesses force of character, she persuades
the rest of the world easily to agree with her, and so long as her
pretensions are not directly opposed to their habits of thought, her
parents will be the loudest in proclaiming it, fortifying so the maid's
presumption, which is ready to take root in any shadow of subserviency.
Her father was a gouty general of infantry in the diplomatic service,
disinclined to unnecessary disputes, out of consideration for his
vehement irritability when roused. Her mother had been one of the
beauties of her set, and was preserving an attenuated reign, through the
conversational arts, to save herself from fading into the wall. Her
brothers and sisters were not of an age to contest her lead. The temper
of the period was revolutionary in society by reflection of the state of
politics, and juniors were sturdy democrats, letting their elders know
that they had come to their inheritance, while the elders, confused by
the impudent topsy-turvy, put on the gaping mask (not unfamiliar to
history) of the disestablished conservative, whose astounded state
paralyzes his wrath.

Clotilde maintained a decent measure in the liberty she claimed, and it
was exercised in wildness of dialogue rather than in capricious
behaviour. If her flowing tongue was imperfectly controlled, it was
because she discoursed by preference to men upon our various affairs and
tangles, and they encouraged her with the tickled wonder which bids the
bold advance yet farther into bogland. Becoming the renowned original of
her society, wherever it might be, in Germany, Italy, Southern France,
she grew chillily sensible of the solitude decreed for their heritage to
our loftiest souls. Her Indian Bacchus, as a learned professor supplied
Prince Marko's title for her, was a pet, not a companion. She to him was
what she sought for in another. As much as she pitied herself for not
lighting on the predestined man, she pitied him for having met the woman,
so that her tenderness for both inspired many signs of warm affection,
not very unlike the thing it moaned secretly the not being. For she could
not but distinguish a more poignant sorrow in the seeing of the object we
yearn to vainly than in vainly yearning to one unseen. Dressed, to
delight him, in Prince Marko's colours, the care she bestowed on her
dressing was for the one absent, the shrouded comer: so she pleased the
prince to be pleasing to her soul's lord, and this, owing to an
appearance of satisfactory deception that it bore, led to her thinking
guiltily. We may ask it: an eagle is expected, and how is he to declare
his eagleship save by breaking through our mean conventional systems,
tearing links asunder, taking his own in the teeth of vulgar ordinances?
Clotilde's imagination drew on her reading for the knots it tied and
untied, and its ideas of grandeur. Her reading was an interfusion of
philosophy skimmed, and realistic romances deep-sounded. She tried hard,
but could get no other terrible tangle for her hero's exhibition of
flaming azure divineness than the vile one of the wedded woman. Further
thinking of it, she revived and recovered; she despised the complication,
yet without perceiving how else he was to manifest himself legitimately
in a dull modern world. The rescuing her from death would be a poor
imitation of worn-out heroes. His publication of a trumpeting book fell
appallingly flat in her survey. Deeds of gallantry done as an officer in
war (defending his country too) distinguished the soldier, but failed to
add the eagle feather to the man. She had a mind of considerable soaring
scope, and eclectic: it analyzed a Napoleon, and declined the position of
his empress. The man must be a gentleman. Poets, princes, warriors,
potentates, marched before her speculative fancy unselected.

So far, as far as she can be portrayed introductorily, she is not without
exemplars in the sex. Young women have been known to turn from us
altogether, never to turn back, so poor and shrunken, or so fleshly-bulgy
have we all appeared in the fairy jacket they wove for the right one of
us to wear becomingly. But the busy great world was round Clotilde while
she was malleable, though she might be losing her fresh ideas of the
hammer and the block, and that is a world of much solicitation to induce
a vivid girl to merge an ideal in a living image. Supposing, when she has
accomplished it, that men justify her choice, the living will retain the
colours of the ideal. We have it on record that he may seem an eagle.

'You talk curiously like Alvan, do you know,' a gentleman of her country
said to her as they were descending the rock of Capri, one day. He said
it musingly.

He belonged to a circle beneath her own: the learned and artistic. She
had not heard of this Alvan, or had forgotten him; but professing
universal knowledge, especially of celebrities, besides having an envious
eye for that particular circle, which can pretend to be the choicest of
all, she was unwilling to betray her ignorance, and she dimpled her
cheek, as one who had often heard the thing said to her before. She
smiled musingly.


CHAPTER II

'Who is the man they call Alvan?' She put the question at the first
opportunity to an aunt of hers.

Up went five-fingered hands. This violent natural sign of horror was
comforting: she saw that he was a celebrity indeed.

'Alvan! My dear Clotilde! What on earth can you want to know about a
creature who is the worst of demagogues, a disreputable person, and a
Jew!'

Clotilde remarked that she had asked only who he was. 'Is he clever?'

'He is one of the basest of those wretches who are for upsetting the
Throne and Society to gratify their own wicked passions: that is what he
is.'

'But is he clever?'

'Able as Satan himself, they say. He is a really dangerous, bad man. You
could not have been curious about a worse one.'

'Politically, you mean.'

'Of course I do.'

The lady had not thought of any other kind of danger from a man of that
station.

The likening of one to Satan does not always exclude meditation upon him.
Clotilde was anxious to learn in what way her talk resembled Alvan's. He
being that furious creature, she thought of herself at her wildest, which
was in her estimation her best; and consequently, she being by no means a
furious creature, though very original, she could not meditate on him
without softening the outlines given him by report; all because of the
likeness between them; and, therefore, as she had knowingly been taken
for furious by very foolish people, she settled it that Alvan was also a
victim of the prejudices he scorned. It had pleased her at times to scorn
our prejudices and feel the tremendous weight she brought on herself by
the indulgence. She drew on her recollections of the Satanic in her bosom
when so situated, and never having admired herself more ardently than
when wearing that aspect, she would have admired the man who had won the
frightful title in public, except for one thing--he was a Jew.

The Jew was to Clotilde as flesh of swine to the Jew. Her parents had the
same abhorrence of Jewry. One of the favourite similes of the family for
whatsoever grunted in grossness, wriggled with meanness, was Jew: and it
was noteworthy from the fact that a streak of the blood was in the veins
of the latest generation and might have been traced on the maternal side.

Now a meanness that clothes itself in the Satanic to terrify cowards is
the vilest form of impudence venturing at insolence; and an insolent
impudence with Jew features, the Jew nose and lips, is past endurance
repulsive. She dismissed her contemplation of Alvan. Luckily for the
gentleman who had compared her to the Jew politician, she did not meet
him again in Italy.

She had meanwhile formed an idea of the Alvanesque in dialogue; she
summoned her forces to take aim at it, without becoming anything Jewish,
still remaining clean and Christian; and by her astonishing practice of
the art she could at any time blow up a company--scatter mature and
seasoned dames, as had they been balloons on a wind, ay, and give our
stout sex a shaking.

Clotilde rejected another aspirant proposed by her parents, and falling
into disgrace at home, she went to live for some months with an ancient
lady who was her close relative residing in the capital city where the
brain of her race is located. There it occurred that a dashing officer of
social besides military rank, dancing with her at a ball, said, for a
comment on certain boldly independent remarks she had been making: 'I see
you know Alvan.'

Alvan once more.

'Indeed I do not,' she said, for she was addressing an officer high above
Alvan in social rank; and she shrugged, implying that she was almost past
contradiction of the charge.

'Surely you must,' said he; 'where is the lady who could talk and think
as you do without knowing Alvan and sharing his views!'

Clotilde was both startled and nettled.

'But I do not know him at all; I have never met him, never seen him. I am
unlikely to meet the kind of person,' she protested; and she was amazed
yet secretly rejoiced on hearing him, a noble of her own circle, and a
dashing officer, rejoin: 'Come, come, let us be honest. That is all very
well for the little midges floating round us to say of Alvan, but we two
can clasp hands and avow proudly that we both know and love the man.'

'Were it true, I would own it at once, but I repeat, that he is a total
stranger to me,' she said, seeing the Jew under quite a different
illumination.

'Actually?'

'In honour.'

'You have never met, never seen him, never read any of his writings?'

'Never. I have heard his name, that is all.'

'Then,' the officer's voice was earnest, 'I pity him, and you no less,
while you remain strangers, for you were made for one another. Those
ideas you have expressed, nay, the very words, are Alvan's: I have heard
him use them. He has just the same original views of society and history
as yours; they're identical; your features are not unlike . . . you talk
alike: I could fancy your voice the sister of his. You look incredulous?
You were speaking of Pompeius, and you said "Plutarch's Pompeius," and
more for it is almost incredible under the supposition that you do not
know and have never listened to Alvan--you said that Pompeius appeared to
have been decorated with all the gifts of the Gods to make the greater
sacrifice of him to Caesar, who was not personally worth a pretty woman's
"bite." Come, now--you must believe me: at a supper at Alvan's table the
other night, the talk happened to be of a modern Caesar, which led to the
real one, and from him to "Plutarch's Pompeius," as Alvan called him; and
then he said of him what you have just said, absolutely the same down to
the allusion to the bite. I assure you. And you have numbers of little
phrases in common: you are partners in aphorisms: Barriers are for those
who cannot fly: that is Alvan's. I could multiply them if I could
remember; they struck me as you spoke.'

'I must be a shameless plagiarist,' said Clotilde.

'Or he,' said Count Kollin.

It is here the place of the Chorus to state that these: ideas were in the
air at the time; sparks of the Vulcanic smithy at work in politics and
pervading literature: which both Alvan and Clotilde might catch and give
out as their own, in the honest belief that the epigram was, original to
them. They were not members of a country where literature is confined to
its little paddock, without, influence on the larger field (part lawn,
part marsh) of the social world: they were readers in sympathetic action
with thinkers and literary artists. Their saying in common, 'Plutarch's
Pompeius,' may be traceable to a reading of some professorial article on
the common portrait-painting of the sage of Chaeroneia. The dainty
savageness in the 'bite' Plutarch mentions, evidently struck on a
similarity of tastes in both, as it has done with others. And in regard
to Caesar, Clotilde thought much of Caesar; she had often wished that
Caesar (for the additional pleasure in thinking of him) had been endowed
with the beauty of his rival: one or two of Plutarch's touches upon the
earlier history of Pompeius had netted her fancy, faintly (your
generosity must be equal to hearing it) stung her blood; she liked the
man; and if he had not been beaten in the end, she would have preferred
him femininely. His name was not written Pompey to her, as in English, to
sound absurd: it was a note of grandeur befitting great and lamentable
fortunes, which the young lady declined to share solely because of her
attraction to the victor, her compulsion to render unto the victor the
sunflower's homage. She rendered it as a slave: the splendid man beloved
to ecstasy by the flower of Roman women was her natural choice.

Alvan could not be even a Caesar in person, he was a Jew. Still a Jew of
whom Count Kollin spoke so warmly must be exceptional, and of the
exceptional she dreamed. He might have the head of a Caesar. She imagined
a huge head, the cauldron of a boiling brain, anything but bright to the
eye, like a pot always on the fire, black, greasy, encrusted, unkempt:
the head of a malicious tremendous dwarf. Her hungry inquiries in a city
where Alvan was well known, brought her full information of one who
enjoyed a highly convivial reputation besides the influence of his
political leadership; but no description of his aspect accompanied it,
for where he was nightly to be met somewhere about the city, none thought
of describing him, and she did not push that question because she had
sketched him for herself, and rather wished, the more she heard of his
genius, to keep him repulsive. It appeared that his bravery was as well
proved as his genius, and a brilliant instance of it had been given in
the city not long since. He had her ideas, and he won multitudes with
them: he was a talker, a writer, and an orator; and he was learned, while
she could not pretend either to learning or to a flow of rhetoric. She
could prattle deliciously, at times pointedly, relying on her intuition
to tell her more than we get from books, and on her sweet impudence for a
richer original strain. She began to appreciate now a reputation for
profound acquirements. Learned professors of jurisprudence and history
were as enthusiastic for Alvan in their way as Count Kollin. She heard
things related of Alvan by the underbreath. That circle below her own,
the literary and artistic, idolized him; his talk, his classic breakfasts
and suppers, his undisguised ambition, his indomitable energy, his
dauntlessness and sway over her sex, were subjects of eulogy all round
her; and she heard of an enamoured baroness. No one blamed Alvan. He had
shown his chivalrous valour in defending her. The baroness was not a
young woman, and she was a hardbound Blue. She had been the first to
discover the prodigy, and had pruned, corrected, and published him; he
was one of her political works, promising to be the most successful. An
old affair apparently; but the association of a woman's name with
Alvan's, albeit the name of a veteran, roused the girl's curiosity,
leading her to think his mental and magnetic powers must be of the very
highest, considering his physical repulsiveness, for a woman of rank to
yield him such extreme devotion. She commissioned her princely
serving-man, who had followed and was never far away from her, to obtain
precise intelligence of this notorious Alvan.

Prince Marko did what he could to please her; he knew something of the
rumours about Alvan and the baroness. But why should his lady trouble
herself for particulars of such people, whom it could scarcely be
supposed she would meet by accident? He asked her this. Clotilde said it
was common curiosity. She read him a short lecture on the dismal
narrowness of their upper world; and on the advantage of taking an
interest in the world below them and more enlightened; a world where
ideas were current and speech was wine. The prince nodded; if she had
these opinions, it must be good for him to have them too, and he shared
them, as it were, by the touch of her hand, and for the length of time
that he touched her hand, as an electrical shock may be taken by one far
removed from the battery, susceptible to it only through the link; he was
capable of thinking all that came to him from her a blessing--shocks,
wounds and disruptions. He did not add largely to her stock of items, nor
did he fetch new colours. The telegraph wire was his model of style. He
was more or less a serviceless Indian Bacchus, standing for sign of the
beauty and vacuity of their world: and how dismally narrow that world
was, she felt with renewed astonishment at every dive out of her
gold-fish pool into the world of tides below; so that she was ready to
scorn the cultivation of the graces, and had, when not submitting to the
smell, fanciful fits of a liking for tobacco smoke--the familiar incense
of those homes where speech was wine.

At last she fell to the asking of herself whether, in the same city with
him, often among his friends, hearing his latest intimate remarks--things
homely redolent of him as hot bread of the oven--she was ever to meet
this man upon whom her thoughts were bent to the eclipse of all others.
She desired to meet him for comparison's sake, and to criticize a popular
hero. It was inconceivable that any one popular could approach her
standard, but she was curious; flame played about him; she had some
expectation of easing a spiteful sentiment created by the recent
subjection of her thoughts to the prodigious little Jew; and some feeling
of closer pity for Prince Marko she had, which urged her to be rid of her
delusion as to the existence of a wonder-working man on our earth, that
she might be sympathetically kind to the prince, perhaps compliant, and
so please her parents, be good and dull, and please everybody, and adieu
to dreams, good night, and so to sleep with the beasts! . . .

Calling one afternoon on a new acquaintance of the flat table-land she
liked tripping down to from her heights, Clotilde found the lady in
supreme toilette, glowing, bubbling: 'Such a breakfast, my dear!' This
is very true where they are unforeseen or inevitable. Those I have
depicted are not unforeseen. They are so far from inevitable, we are
going to bring them into being by our vote; we choose the consequences,
and become as justly answerable for them, as for the measure that we
know will produce them.

By rejecting the posts, we light the savage fires, we bind the victims.
This day we undertake to render account to the widows and orphans
whom our decision will make,--to the wretches that will be roasted
at the stake,--to our country,--and I do not deem it too serious
to say, to conscience and to God.

We are answerable; and if duty be anything more than a word of
imposture, if conscience be not a bugbear, we are preparing to make
ourselves as wretched as our country.

There is no mistake in this case; there can be none. Experience has already
been the prophet of events, and the cries of our future victims has
already reached us. The Western inhabitants are not a silent and
uncomplaining sacrifice. The voice of humanity issues from the
shade of the wilderness.

It exclaims, that while one hand is held up to reject this treaty, the
other grasps the tomahawk.
It summons our imagination to the scenes that will open. It is no great
effort of the imagination to conceive that events so near are already
begun.

I can fancy that I listen to the yells of savage vengeance and the shrieks
of torture! Already they seem to sigh in the western wind!

Already they mingle with every echo from the mountains!

F. Ames.

LIV.

SPEECH AGAINST A LIBELLER.

I am one of those who believe that the heart of the wilful and deliberate
libeller is blacker than that of the highway robber, or of one who
commits the crime of midnight arson. The man who plunders on the highway
may have the semblance of an apology for what he does. An affectionate
wife may demand subsistence; a circle of helpless children raise to
him the supplicating hand for food. He may be driven to the desperate
act by the high mandate of imperative necessity. The mild features of the
husband and father may intermingle with those of the robber and
soften the roughness of the shade.

But the robber of character plunders that which "not enricheth him,"
though it makes his neighbor "poor indeed."

The man who at the midnight hour consumes his neighbor's dwelling does
him an injury which perhaps is not irreparable. Industry may rear another
habitation. The storm may indeed descend upon him until charity opens
a neighboring door; the rude winds of heaven may whistle around his uncovered
family. But he looks forward to better days; he has yet a hook left
to hang a hope on. No such consolation cheers the heart of him whose
character has been torn from him.
If innocent he may look, like Anaxagoras, to the heavens; but he must
be constrained to feel this world is to him a wilderness. For whither
shall he go? Shall he dedicate himself to the service of his country?
But will his country receive him? Will she employ in her councils, or
in her armies, the man at whom the "slow unmoving finger of scorn" is
pointed? Shall he betake himself to the fireside? The story of his
disgrace will enter his own doors before him.

And can he bear, think you, can he bear the sympathizing agonies
of a distressed wife?

Can he endure the formidable presence of scrutinizing, sneering domestics?
Will his children receive instructions from the lips of a disgraced
father?

Gentlemen, I am not ranging on fairy ground.

I am telling the plain story of my client's wrongs. By the guiltless
hand of malice his character has been wantonly massacred,--and he now
appears before a jury of his country for redress. Will you deny him
this redress? Is character valuable? On this point I will not insult
you with argument. There are certain things to argue which is treason
against nature. The Author of our being did not intend to leave
this point afloat at the mercy of opinion, but with His own hand
has He kindly planted in the soul of man an instinctive love of character.
This high sentiment has no affinity to pride. It is the ennobling
quality of the soul; and if we have hitherto been elevated above the ranks
of surrounding creation, human nature owes its elevation to the love of
character. It is the love of character for which the poet has sung, the
philosopher toiled, the hero bled.

It is the love of character which wrought miracles at ancient
Greece; the love of character is the eagle on which Rome rose to empire.
And it is the love of character, animating the bosoms of her sons, on
which America must depend in those approaching crises that may "try men's
soul's." Will a jury weaken this our nation's hope? Will they by
their verdict pronounce to the youth of our country, that character is
scarce worth possessing?

We read of that philosophy which can smile at the destruction of property--of
that religion which enables its possessor to extend the benign
look of forgiveness and complacency to his murderers.

But it is not in the soul of man to bear the laceration of slander. The
philosophy which could bear it we should despise. The religion which could
bear it we should not despise,--but we should be constrained to say,
that its kingdom was not of this world.
Griffin.

LV.

NEW ENGLAND AND THE UNION.

Glorious New England! thou art still time to thy ancient fame, and
worthy of thy ancestral honors. We, thy children, have assembled in this
far-distant land to celebrate thy birthday.

A thousand fond associations throng upon us, roused by the spirit
of the hour. On thy pleasant valleys rest, like sweet dews of morning,
the gentle recollections of our early life; around thy hills and mountains
cling, like gathering mists, the mighty memories of the Revolution; and,
far away in the horizon of thy past, gleam, like thy own bright northern
lights, the awful virtues of our Pilgrim Sires!

But while we devote this day to the remembrance of our native land, we
forget not that in which our happy lot is cast. We exult in the reflection,
that though we count by thousands the miles which separate us from our
birthplace, still our country is the same. We are no exiles, meeting
upon the banks of a foreign river to swell its waters with our homesick
tears.
Here floats the same banner which rustled above our boyish heads, except
that its mighty folds are wider, and its glittering stars increased
in number.

The sons of New England are found in every State of the broad Republic.
In the East, the South, and the unbounded West, their blood mingles
freely with every kindred current. We have but changed our chamber in the
paternal mansion; in all its rooms we are at home, and all who inhabit
it are our brothers.

To us the Union has but one domestic hearth; its household gods are all
the same. Upon us then peculiarly devolves the duty of feeding the fires
upon that kindly hearth, of guarding with pious care those sacred
household gods.

We cannot do with less than the whole Union; to us it admits of no division.
In the veins of our children flows Northern and Southern blood.
How shall it be separated? Who shall put asunder the best affections of
the heart, the noblest instincts of our nature? We love the land of our
adoption; so do we that of our birth. Let us ever be true to both, and
always exert ourselves in maintaining the unity of our country, the
integrity of the Republic. Accursed, then, be the hand put forth to
loosen the golden cord of the Union!--thrice accursed the traitorous
lips which shall propose its severance! But no; the Union cannot be
dissolved. Its fortunes are too brilliant to be marred; its destinies too
powerful to be resisted. Here will be their greatest triumphs, their
most mighty development.

And when, a century hence, this Crescent City shall have filled
her golden horns,--when within her broad-armed port shall be gathered
the products of the industry of a hundred millions of freemen,--when
galleries of art and halls of learning shall have made classic this mart
of trade,--then may the sons of the Pilgrims, still wandering from the
bleak hills of the North, stand upon the banks of the great river and
exclaim with mingled pride and wonder,--"Lo, this is our country: when
did the world ever behold so rich and magnificent a city,--so great and
glorious a Republic!" S. S. Prentiss.

LVI.

ON SENDING RELIEF TO IRELAND.

We have assembled, not to respond to shouts of triumph from the West, but
to answer to the cry of want and suffering which comes from the East.
The Old World stretches out her arms to the New. The starving parent
supplicates the young and vigorous child for bread.

There lies, upon the other side of the wide Atlantic, a beautiful island
famous in history and in song. Its area is not so great as that of the
State of Louisiana, while its population is almost half that of
the Union.

It has given to the world more than its share of genius and of
greatness.

It has been prolific in statesmen, warriors, and poets. Its brave and
generous sons have fought successfully all battles but their own.

In wit and humor it has no equal, while its harp, like its history, moves
to tears, by its sweet but melancholy pathos. Into this fair region
God has seen fit to send the most terrible of all those fearful ministers
who fulfil his inscrutable decrees.

The earth has failed to give her increase; the common mother has forgotten
her offspring, and her breast no longer affords them their accustomed
nourishment.

Famine, gaunt and ghastly famine, has seized a nation in its
strangling grasp; and unhappy Ireland, in the sad woes of the
present, forgets, for a moment, the gloomy history of the past.

Oh, it is terrible, in this beautiful world: which the good God has
given us, and in which there is plenty for us all, that men should die
of starvation!

You who see, each day, poured into the lap of your city, food sufficient
to assuage the hunger of a nation, can form but an imperfect idea of the
horrors of famine. In battle, in the fulness of his pride and strength,
little recks the soldier whether the hissing bullet sings his
sudden requiem, or the cords of life are severed by the sharp steel.

But he who dies of hunger, wrestles alone, day after day with his grim and
unrelenting enemy. The blood recedes, the flesh deserts, the muscles relax,
and the sinews grow powerless. At last, the mind, which, at first, had
bravely nerved itself for the contest, gives way, under the mysterious
influences which govern its union with the body.

Then he begins to doubt the existence of an overruling Providence;
he hates his fellow-men, and glares upon them with the longings of
a cannibal, and it may be, dies blaspheming!

Who will hesitate to give his mite to avert such awful results? Surely not
the citizens of New Orleans, ever famed for deeds of charity and
benevolence.

Freely leave your hearts and purses opened, heretofore, to the call
of suffering humanity.

Nobly did you respond to oppressed Greece and to struggling Poland. Within
Erin's borders is an enemy more cruel than the Turk, more tyrannical than
the Russian. Bread is the only weapon that can conquer him.

Let us, then load ships with this glorious munition, and, in the name of
our common humanity wage war against this despot Famine.

Let us, in God's name, "cast our bread upon the waters," and if we are
selfish enough to desire it back again, we may recollect the promise,
that it shall return to us after many days.
S. S. Prentiss.

LVII.

THE NEW ENGLAND COMMON SCHOOL.

Behold yon simple building near the crossing of the village road!

It is small, and of rude construction, but stands in a pleasant and quiet
spot. A magnificent old elm spreads its broad arms above, and seems
to lean towards it, as a strong man bends to shelter and protect a child.
A brook runs through the meadow near, and hard by there is an orchard;
but the trees have suffered much, and bear no fruit, except upon
the most remote and inaccessible branches.

From within its walls comes a busy hum, such as you may hear in a
disturbed beehive.

Now peep through yonder window, and you will see a hundred children
with rosy cheeks, mischievous eyes, and demure faces, all engaged,
or pretending to be so, in their little lessons.

It is the public school,--the free, the common school,--provided
by law; open to all; claimed from the community as a right, not
accepted as a bounty.

Here the children of the rich and poor, high and low, meet upon perfect
equality, and commence, under the same auspices, the race of life.

Here the sustenance of the mind is served up to all alike, as the
Spartans served their food upon the public table.

Here, young Ambition climbs his little ladder, and boyish Genius plumes
his half-fledged wing. From among these laughing children will go forth
the men who are to control the destinies of their age and country; the
statesman, whose wisdom is to guide the Senate; the poet, who will take
captive the hearts of the people, and bind them together with immortal
song; the philosopher, who, boldly seizing upon the elements themselves,
will compel them to his wishes, and, through new combinations of their
primal laws, by some great discovery, revolutionize both art
and science.

The common village-school is New England's fairest boast,--the brightest
jewel that, adorns her brow. The principle that society is bound to
provide for its members' education as well as protection, so that none
need be ignorant except from choice, is the most important that
belongs to modern philosophy. It is essential to a republican government.
Universal education is not only the best and surest, but the only sure,
foundation for free institutions. True liberty is the child of
knowledge; she pines away and dies in the arms of ignorance. Honor, then,
to the early fathers of New England, from whom came the spirit which
has built a school-house by every sparkling fountain, and bids all come
as freely to the one as to the other.
S. S. Prentiss.

LVIII.

CHRISTIANITY THE SOURCE OF REFORM.

The great element of reform is not born of human wisdom: it does not
draw its life from human organizations. I find it only in Christianity.
"Thy kingdom come!" There is a sublime and pregnant burden in this prayer.
It is the aspiration of every soul that goes forth in the spirit
of Reform.

For what is the significance of this prayer?

It is a petition that all holy influences would penetrate, and subdue,
and dwell in the heart of man, until he shall think, and speak, and
do good, from the very necessity of his being. So would the institutions
of error and wrong crumble and pass away. So would sin die out from
the earth; and the human soul living in harmony with the Divine Will, this
earth would become like Heaven. It is too late for the reformers
to sneer at Christianity,--it is foolishness for them to reject it. In
it are enshrined our faith in human progress,--our confidence in
reform.

It is indissolubly connected with all that is hopeful, spiritual,
capable in man.

That men have misunderstood it, and perverted it, is true. But it is also
true, that the noblest efforts for human melioration have come out of
it,--have been based upon it. Is it not so? Come, ye remembered ones,
who sleep the sleep of the just,--who took your conduct from the
line of Christian philosophy--come from your tombs, and answer!

Come, Howard, from the gloom of the prison and the taint of the
lazar-house, and show us what philanthropy can do when imbued with the
spirit of Jesus. Come, Eliot, from the thick forest where the red man
listens to the Word of Life;--come, Penn, from thy sweet counsel and
weaponless victory,--and show us what Christian zeal and Christian love
can accomplish with the rudest barbarians or the fiercest hearts. Come,
Raikes, from thy labors with the ignorant and the poor, and show us with
what an eye this Faith regards the lowest and the least of our race;
and how diligently it labors, not for the body, not for the rank, but for
the plastic soul that is to course the ages of immortality. And ye,
who are a great number,--ye nameless ones,--who have done good in your
narrow spheres, content to forego renown on earth, and seeking your reward
in the Record on High,--come and tell us how kindly a spirit, how lofty
a purpose, or how strong a courage, the Religion ye professed can
breathe into the poor, the humble, and the weak.

Go forth, then, Spirit of Christianity, to thy great work of Reform!

The Past bears witness to thee in the blood of thy martyrs, and the
ashes of thy saints and heroes: the Present is hopeful because of
thee; the Future shall acknowledge thy omnipotence.

E. H. Chapin.

LIX.

NORTHERN LABORERS.

The gentleman, sir, has misconceived the spirit and tendency of Northern
institutions. He is ignorant of Northern character. He has forgotten the
history of his country. Preach insurrection to the Northern laborers!
Who are the Northern laborers? The history of your country is their
history.
The renown of your country is their renown. The brightness of their doings
is emblazoned on its every page. Blot from your annals the words
and the doings of Northern laborers, and the history of your country
presents but a universal blank.

Sir, who was he that disarmed the Thunderer; wrested from his grasp
the bolts of Jove; calmed the troubled ocean; became the central sun of
the philosophical system of his age, shedding his brightness and
effulgence on the whole civilized world; whom the great and mighty
of the earth delighted to honor; who participated in the achievement of
your Independence, prominently assisted in moulding your free institutions,
and the beneficial effects of whose wisdom will be felt to the last moment
of "recorded time?" Who sir, I ask, was he? A Northern laborer, a Yankee
tallow-chandler's son,--a printer's runaway boy!

And who, let me ask the honorable gentleman, who was he that, in the
days of our Revolution, led forth a northern army,--yes, an army of
Northern laborers,--and aided the chivalry of South Carolina in their
defence against British aggression, drove the spoilers from their
firesides, and redeemed her fair fields from foreign invaders?

Who was he?

A Northern laborer, a Rhode Island blacksmith,--the gallant General
Greene, who left his hammer and his forge, and went forth conquering
and to conquer in the battle for our Independence! And will you preach
insurrection to men like these?

Sir, our country is full of the achievements of Northern laborers.

Where is Concord, and Lexington, and Princeton, and Trenton, and
Saratoga, and Bunker Hill, but in the North? And what, sir, has shed
an imperishable renown on the never-dying names of those hallowed spots,
but the blood and the struggles, the high daring, and patriotism,
and sublime courage of Northern laborers? The whole North is an everlasting
monument of the freedom, virtue, intelligence, and indomitable
independence of Northern laborers! Go, sir, go preach insurrection to men
like these!

The fortitude of the men of the North, under intense suffering for liberty's
sake, has been almost godlike! History has so recorded it. Who comprised
that gallant army, without food, without pay shelterless, shoeless,
penniless, and almost naked, in that dreadful winter,--the midnight of
our Revolution,--whose wanderings could be traced by their blood-tracks
in the snow; whom no arts could seduce, no appeal lead astray, no
sufferings disaffect; but who, true to their country and its holy cause,
continued to fight the good fight of liberty until it finally
triumphed?
Who, sir, were these men? Why, Northern laborers! Yes, sir, Northern
laborers! Who, sir, were Roger Sherman, and--but it is idle to enumerate.

To name the Northern laborers who have distinguished themselves, and
illustrated the history of their country, would require days of the time
of this House; nor is it necessary. Posterity will do them Justice.
Their deeds have been recorded in characters of fire!
C. Naylor.

LX.

BROUGHAM'S ATTACK ON CANNING DESCRIBED.
Upon that occasion, the oration of Brougham was, at the outset,
disjointed and ragged, and apparently without aim or application.
He careered over the whole annals of the world, and collected every
instance in which genius had degraded itself at the footstool of
power, or principle had been sacrificed for the vanity or the lucre
of place; but still there was no allusion to Canning, and no
connection that ordinary men could discover with the business before
the House. When however, he had collected every material which
suited his purpose,--when the mass had become big and black, he
bound it about and about with the cords of illustration and of
argument; when its union was secure, he swung it round and round
with the strength of a giant and the rapidity of a whirlwind, in
order that its impetus and effect might be more tremendous; and,
while doing this, he ever and anon glared his eye, and pointed his
finger to make the aim and direction sure.
Canning was the first who seemed to be aware where and how terrible
was to be the collision; and he kept writhing his body in agony,
and rolling his eyes in fear, as if anxious to find some shelter
from the impending bolt.Their common anticipations differed in this, that
he had expected comeliness, she the reverse--an Esau of the cities; and
seeing superb manly beauty in the place of the thick-featured sodden
satyr of her miscreating fancy, the irresistible was revealed to her on
its divinest whirlwind.

They both desired beauty; they had each stipulated for beauty before
captivity could be acknowledged; and he beholding her very attractive
comeliness, walked into the net, deeming the same a light thing to wear,
and rather a finishing grace to his armoury; but she, a trained disciple
of the conventional in social behaviour (as to the serious points and the
extremer trifles), fluttered exceedingly; she knew not what she was
doing, where her hand was, how she looked at him, how she drank in his
looks on her. Her woman's eyes had no guard they had scarcely
speculation. She saw nothing in its passing, but everything backward,
under haphazard flashes. The sight of her hand disengaged told her it had
been detained; a glance at the company reminded her that those were men
and women who had been other than phantoms; recollections of the words
she listened to, assented to, replied to, displayed the gulfs she had
crossed. And nevertheless her brain was as quick as his to press forward
to pluck the themes which would demonstrate her mental vividness and at
least indicate her force of character. The splendour of the man quite
extinguished, or over-brightened, her sense of personal charm; she set
fire to her brain to shine intellectually, treating the tale of her fair
face as a childish tale that might have a grain of truth in it, some
truth, a very little, and that little nearly worthless, merely womanly, a
poor charm of her sex. The intellectual endowment was rarer: still rarer
the moral audacity. O, to match this man's embracing discursiveness! his
ardour, his complacent energy, the full strong sound he brought out of
all subjects! He struck, and they rang. There was a bell in everything
for him; Nature gave out her cry, and significance was on all sides of
the universe; no dead stuff, no longer any afflicting lumpishness. His
brain was vivifying light. And how humane he was! how supremely tolerant!
Where she had really thought instead of flippantly tapping at the doors
of thought, or crying vagrantly for an echo, his firm footing in the
region thrilled her; and where she had felt deeper than fancifully, his
wise tenderness overwhelmed. Strange to consider: with all his precious
gifts, which must make the gift of life thrice dear to him, he was
fearless. Less by what he said than by divination she discerned that he
knew not fear. If for only that, she would have hung to him like his
shadow. She could have detected a brazen pretender. A meaner mortal
vaunting his great stores she would have written down coxcomb. Her social
training and natural perception raised her to a height to measure the
bombastical and distinguish it from the eloquently lofty. He spoke of
himself, as the towering Alp speaks out at a first view, bidding that
which he was be known. Fearless, confident, able, he could not but be, as
he believed himself, indomitable. She who was this man's mate would
consequently wed his possessions, including courage. Clotilde at once
reached the conclusion of her having it in an equal degree. Was she not
displaying it? The worthy people of the company stared, as she now
perceived, and she was indifferent; her relatives were present without
disturbing her exaltation. She wheeled above their heads in the fiery
chariot beside her sun-god. It could not but be courage, active courage,
superior to her previous tentative steps--the verbal temerities she had
supposed so dauntless. For now she was in action, now she was being tried
to match the preacher and incarnation of the virtues of action!

Alvan shaped a comparison of her with Paris, his beloved of cities--the
symbolized goddess of the lightning brain that is quick to conceive,
eager to realize ideas, impassioned for her hero, but ever putting him to
proof, graceful beyond all rhyme, colloquial as never the Muse; light in
light hands, yet valiant unto death for a principle; and therefore not
light, anything but light in strong hands, very stedfast rather: and oh!
constantly entertaining.

The comparison had to be strained to fit the living lady's shape. Did he
think it, or a dash of something like it?

His mood was luxurious. He had found the fair and youthful original woman
of refinement and station desired by him. He had good reason to wish to
find her. Having won a name, standing on firm ground, with promise of a
great career, chief of what was then taken for a growing party and is not
yet a collapsed, nor will be, though the foot on it is iron, his youth
had flown under the tutelage of an extraordinary Mentor, whom to call
Athene robs the goddess of her personal repute for wisdom in conduct, but
whose head was wise, wise as it was now grey. Verily she was original;
and a grey original should seem remarkable above a blooming blonde. If
originality in woman were our prime request, the grey should bear the
palm. She has gone through the battle, retaining the standard she carried
into it, which is a victory. Alas, that grey, so spirit-touching in Art,
should be so wintry in reality!

The discovery of a feminine original breathing Spring, softer, warmer
than the ancient one, gold instead of snowcrested, and fully as intrepid
as devoted, was an immense joy to Alvan. He took it luxuriously because
he believed in his fortune, a kind of natal star, the common heritage of
the adventurous, that brought him his good things in time, in return for
energetic strivings in a higher direction apart from his natural
longings.

Fortune had delayed, he had wintered long. All the sweeter was the breath
of the young Spring. That exquisite new sweetness robed Clotilde in the
attributes of the person dreamed of for his mate; and deductively
assuming her to possess them, he could not doubt his power of winning
her. Barriers are for those who cannot fly. The barriers were palpable
about a girl of noble Christian birth: so was the courage in her which
would give her wings, he thought, coming to that judgement through the
mixture of his knowledge of himself and his perusal of her exterior. He
saw that she could take an impression deeply enough to express it
sincerely, and he counted on it, sympathetically endowing her with his
courage to support the originality she was famed for.

They were interrupted between-whiles by weariful men running to Alvan for
counsel on various matters--how to play their game, or the exact phrasing
of some pregnant sentence current in politics or literature. He satisfied
them severally and shouldered them away, begging for peace that night.
Clotilde corroborated his accurate recital of the lines of a contested
verse of the incomparable Heinrich, and they fell to capping verses of
the poet-lucid metheglin, with here and there no dubious flavour of acid,
and a lively sting in the tail of the honey. Sentiment, cynicism, and
satin impropriety and scabrous, are among those verses, where pure poetry
has a recognized voice; but the lower elements constitute the popularity
in a cultivated society inclining to wantonness out of bravado as well as
by taste. Alvan, looking indolently royal and royally roguish, quoted a
verse that speaks of the superfluousness of a faithless lady's vowing
bite:

       'The kisses were in the course of things,
        The bite was a needless addition.'

Clotilde could not repress her reddening--Count Kollin had repeated too
much! She dropped her eyes, with a face of sculpture, then resumed their
chatter. He spared her the allusion to Pompeius. She convinced him of her
capacity for reserve besides intrepidity, and flattered him too with her
blush. She could dare to say to Kollin what her scarlet sensibility
forbade her touching on with him: not that she would not have had an airy
latitude with him to touch on what she pleased: he liked her for her
boldness and the cold peeping of the senses displayed in it: he liked
also the distinction she made.

The cry to supper conduced to a further insight of her adaptation to his
requirements in a wife. They marched to the table together, and sat
together, and drank a noble Rhine wine together--true Rauenthal. His
robustness of body and soul inspired the wish that his well-born wife
might be, in her dainty fashion, yet honestly and without mincing, his
possible boonfellow: he and she, glass in hand, thanking the bountiful
heavens, blessing mankind in chorus. It belonged to his hearty dream of
the wife he would choose, were she to be had. The position of interpreter
of heaven's benevolence to mankind through his own enjoyment of the
gifts, was one that he sagaciously demanded for himself, sharing it with
the Philistine unknowingly; and to have a wife no less wise than he on
this throne of existence was a rosy exaltation. Clotilde kindled to the
hint of his festival mood of Solomon at the banquet. She was not devoid
of a discernment of flavours; she had heard grave judges at her father's
board profoundly deliver their verdicts upon this and that vineyard and
vintage; and it is a note of patriotism in her country to be enthusiastic
for wine of the Rhine: she was, moreover, thirsty from much talking and
excitement. She drank her glass relishingly, declaring the wine princely.
Alvan smacked his hands in a rapture: 'You are not for the extract of
raisin our people have taken to copy from French Sauternes, to suit a
female predilection for sugar?'

'No, no, the grape for me!' said she: 'the Rhine grape with the elf in
it, and the silver harp and the stained legend!'

'Glorious!'

He toasted the grape. 'Wine of the grape is the young bride--the young
sun-bride! divine, and never too sweet, never cloying like the withered
sun-dried, with its one drop of concentrated sugar, that becomes ten of
gout. No raisin-juice for us! None of their too-long-on-the-stem
clusters! We are for the blood of the grape in her youth, her
heaven-kissing ardour. I have a cellar charged with the bravest of the
Rhine. We--will we not assail it, bleed it in the gallant days to come?
we two!' The picture of his bride and him drinking the sun down after a
day of savage toil was in the shout--a burst unnoticed in the incessantly
verbalizing buzz of a continental supper-table. Clotilde acquiesced: she
chimed to it like a fair boonfellow of the rollicking faun. She was
realizing fairyland.

They retired to the divan-corner where it was you-and-I between them as
with rivulets meeting and branching, running parallel, uniting and
branching again, divided by the theme, but unending in the flow of the
harmony. So ran their chirping arguments and diversions. The carrying on
of a prolonged and determined you-and-I in company intimates to those
undetermined floating atoms about us that a certain sacred something is
in process of formation, or has formed; and people looked; and looked
hard at the pair, and at one another afterward: none approached them. The
Signor conjuror who has a thousand arts for conjuring with nature was
generally considered to have done that night his most ancient and
reputedly fabulous trick--the dream of poets, rarely witnessed anywhere,
and almost too wonderful for credence in a haunt of our later
civilization. Yet there it was: the sudden revelation of the intense
divinity to a couple fused in oneness by his apparition, could be
perceived of all having man and woman in them; love at first sight, was
visible. 'Who ever loved that loved not at first sight?' And if nature,
character, circumstance, and a maid clever at dressing her mistress's
golden hair, did prepare them for Love's lightning-match, not the less
were they proclaimingly alight and in full blaze. Likewise, Time,
imperious old gentleman though we know him to be, with his fussy
reiterations concerning the hour for bed and sleep, bowed to the magical
fact of their condition, and forbore to warn them of his passing from
night to day. He had to go, he must, he has to be always going, but as
long as he could he left them on their bank by the margin of the stream,
where a shadow-cycle of the eternal wound a circle for them and allowed
them to imagine they had thrust that old driver of the dusty high-road
quietly out of the way. They were ungrateful, of course, when the
performance of his duties necessitated his pulling them up beside him
pretty smartly, but he uttered no prophecy of ever intending to rob them
of the celestial moments they had cut from him and meant to keep between
them 'for ever,' and fresh.

The hour was close on the dawn of a March morning. Alvan assisted at the
cloaking and hooding of Clotilde. Her relatives were at hand; they hung
by while he led her to the stairs and down into a spacious moonlight that
laid the traceries of the bare tree-twigs clear-black on grass and stone.

'A night to head the Spring!' said Alvan. 'Come.'

He lifted her off the steps and set her on the ground, as one who had an
established right to the privilege and she did not contest it, nor did
her people, so kingly was he, arrayed in the thunder of the bolt which
had struck the pair. These things, and many things that islands know not
of, are done upon continents, where perhaps traditions of the awfulness
of Love remain more potent in society; or it may be, that an island
atmosphere dispossesses the bolt of its promptitude to strike, or the
breastplates of the islanders are strengthened to resist the bolt, or no
tropical heat is there to create and launch it, or nothing is to be seen
of it for the haziness, or else giants do not walk there. But even where
he walked, amid a society intellectually fostering sentiment, in a land
bowing to see the simplicity of the mystery paraded, Alvan's behaviour
was passing heteroclite. He needed to be the kingly fellow he was,
crowned by another kingly fellow--the lord of hearts--to impose it
uninterruptedly. 'She is mine; I have won her this night!' his bearing
said; and Clotilde's acquiesced; and the worthy couple following them had
to exhibit a copy of the same, much wondering. Partly by habit, and of
his natural astuteness, Alvan peremptorily usurped a lead that once taken
could not easily be challenged, and would roll him on a good tideway
strong in his own passion and his lady's up against the last
defences--her parents. A difficulty with them was foreseen. What is a
difficulty!--a gate in the hunting-field: an opponent on a platform: a
knot beneath a sword: the dam to waters that draw from the heavens. Not
desiring it in this case--it would have been to love the difficulty
better than the woman--he still enjoyed the bracing prospect of a
resistance, if only because it was a portion of the dowry she brought
him. Good soldiers (who have won their grades) are often of a peaceful
temper and would not raise an invocation to war, but a view of the enemy
sets their pugnacious forces in motion, the bugle fills their veins with
electrical fire, till they are as racers on the race-course.--His inmost
hearty devil was glad of a combat that pertained to his possession of
her, for battle gives the savour of the passion to win, and victory
dignifies a prize: he was, however, resolved to have it, if possible,
according to the regular arrangement of such encounters, formal, without
snatchings, without rash violence; a victory won by personal ascendancy,
reasoning eloquence.

He laughed to hear her say, in answer to a question as to her present
feelings: 'I feel that I am carried away by a centaur!' The comparison
had been used or implied to him before.

'No!' said he, responding to a host of memories, to shake them off, 'no
more of the quadruped man! You tempt him--may I tell you that? Why, now,
this moment, at the snap of my fingers, what is to hinder our taking the
short cut to happiness, centaur and nymph? One leap and a gallop, and we
should be into the morning, leaving night to grope for us, parents and
friends to run about for the wits they lose in running. But no! No more
scandals. That silver moon invites us by its very spell of bright
serenity, to be mad: just as, when you drink of a reverie, the more
prolonged it is the greater the readiness for wild delirium at the end of
the draught. But no!' his voice deepened--'the handsome face of the orb
that lights us would be well enough were it only a gallop between us two.
Dearest, the orb that lights us two for a lifetime must be taken all
round, and I have been on the wrong side of the moon.

I have seen the other face of it--a visage scored with regrets, dead
dreams, burnt passions, bald illusions, and the like, the like!--sunless,
waterless, without a flower! It is the old volcano land: it grows one
bitter herb: if ever you see my mouth distorted you will know I am
revolving a taste of it; and as I need the antidote you give, I will not
be the centaur to win you, for that is the land where he stables himself;
yes, there he ends his course, and that is the herb he finishes by
pasturing on. You have no dislike of metaphors and parables? We Jews are
a parable people.'

'I am sure I do understand . . .' said Clotilde, catching her breath to
be conscientious, lest he should ask her for an elucidation.

'Provided always that the metaphor be not like the metaphysician's
treatise on Nature: a torch to see the sunrise!--You were going to add?'

'I was going to say, I think I understand, but you run away with me
still.'

'May the sensation never quit you!'

'It will not.'

'What a night!' Alvan raised his head: 'A night cast for our first
meeting and betrothing! You are near home?'

'The third house yonder in the moonlight.'

'The moonlight lays a white hand on it!'

'That is my window sparkling.'

'That is the vestal's cresset. Shall I blow it out?'

'You are too far. And it is a celestial flame, sir!'

'Celestial in truth! My hope of heaven! Dian's crescent will be ever on
that house for me, Clotilde. I would it were leagues distant, or the door
not forbidden!'

'I could minister to a good knight humbly.'

Alvan bent to her, on a sudden prompting:

'When do father and mother arrive?'

'To-morrow.'

He took her hand. 'To-morrow, then! The worst of omens is delay.'

Clotilde faintly gasped. Could he mean it?--he of so evil a name in her
family and circle!

Her playfulness and pleasure in the game of courtliness forsook her.

'Tell me the hour when it will be most convenient to them to receive me,'
said Alvan.

She stopped walking in sheer fright.

'My father--my mother?' she said, imaging within her the varied horror of
each and the commotion.

'To-morrow or the day after--not later. No delays! You are mine, we are
one; and the sooner my cause is pleaded the better for us both. If I
could step in and see them this instant, it would be forestalling
mischances. Do you not see, that time is due to us, and the minutes are
our gold slipping away?'

She shrank her hand back: she did not wish to withdraw the hand, only to
shun the pledge it signified. He opened an abyss at her feet, and in
deadly alarm of him she exclaimed: 'Oh! not yet; not immediately.' She
trembled, she made her petition dismal by her anguish of speechlessness.
'There will be such . . . not yet! Perhaps later. They must not be
troubled yet--at present. I am . . . I cannot--pray, delay!'

'But you are mine!' said Alvan. 'You feel it as I do. There can be no
real impediment?'

She gave an empty sigh that sought to be a run of entreaties. In fear of
his tongue she caught at words to baffle it, senseless of their
imbecility: 'Do not insist: yes, in time: they will--they--they may. My
father is not very well . . . my mother: she is not very well. They are
neither of them very well: not at present!--Spare them at present.'

To avoid being carried away, she flung herself from the centaur's back to
the disenchanting earth; she separated herself from him in spirit, and
beheld him as her father and mother and her circle would look on this
pretender to her hand, with his lordly air, his Jew blood, and his
hissing reputation--for it was a reputation that stirred the snakes and
the geese of the world. She saw him in their eyes, quite coldly: which
imaginative capacity was one of the remarkable feats of cowardice, active
and cold of brain even while the heart is active and would be warm.

He read something of her weakness. 'And supposing I decide that it must
be?'

'How can I supplicate you!' she replied with a shiver, feeling that she
had lost her chance of slipping from his grasp, as trained women of the
world, or very sprightly young wits know how to do at the critical
moment: and she had lost it by being too sincere. Her cowardice appeared
to her under that aspect.

'Now I perceive that the task is harder,' said Alvan, seeing her huddled
in a real dismay. 'Why will you not rise to my level and fear nothing!
The way is clear: we have only to take the step. Have you not seen
tonight that we are fated for one another? It is your destiny, and
trifling with destiny is a dark business. Look at me. Do you doubt my
having absolute control of myself to bear whatever they put on me to
bear, and hold firmly to my will to overcome them! Oh! no delays.'

'Yes!' she cried; 'yes, there must be.'

'You say it?'

The courage to repeat her cry was wanting.

She trembled visibly: she could more readily have bidden him bear her
hence than have named a day for the interview with her parents; but
desperately she feared that he would be the one to bid; and he had this
of the character of destiny about him, that she felt in him a maker of
facts. He was her dream in human shape, her eagle of men, and she felt
like a lamb in the air; she had no resistance, only terror of his power,
and a crushing new view of the nature of reality.

'I see!' said he, and his breast fell. Her timid inability to join with
him for instant action reminded him that he carried many weights: a bad
name among her people and class, and chains in private. He was old enough
to strangle his impulses, if necessary, or any of the brood less fiery
than the junction of his passions. 'Well, well!--but we might so soon
have broken through the hedge into the broad highroad! It is but to
determine to do it--to take the bold short path instead of the wearisome
circuit. Just a little lightning in the brain and tightening of the
heart. Battles are won in that way: not by tender girls! and she is a
girl, and the task is too much for her. So, then, we are in your hands,
child! Adieu, and let the gold-crested serpent glide to her bed, and
sleep, dream, and wake, and ask herself in the morning whether she is not
a wedded soul. Is she not a serpent? gold-crested, all the world may see;
and with a mortal bite, I know. I have had the bite before the kisses.
That is rather an unjust reversal of the order of things. Apropos, Hamlet
was poisoned--ghost-poisoned.'

'Mad, he was mad!' said Clotilde, recovering and smiling.

'He was born bilious; he partook of the father's constitution, not the
mother's. High-thoughted, quick-nerved to follow the thought, reflective,
if an interval yawned between his hand and the act, he was by nature
two-minded: as full of conscience as a nursing mother that sleeps beside
her infant:--she hears the silent beginning of a cry. Before the ghost
walked he was an elementary hero; one puff of action would have whiffed
away his melancholy. After it, he was a dizzy moralizer, waiting for the
winds to blow him to his deed-ox out. The apparition of his father to him
poisoned a sluggish run of blood, and that venom in the blood distracted
a head steeped in Wittenberg philosophy. With metaphysics in one and
poison in the other, with the outer world opened on him and this world
stirred to confusion, he wore the semblance of madness; he was throughout
sane; sick, but never with his reason dethroned.'

'Nothing but madness excuses his conduct to Ophelia!'

'Poison in the blood is a pretty good apology for infidelity to a lady.'

'No!'

'Well, to an Ophelia of fifty?' said Alvan.

Clotilde laughed, not perfectly assured of the wherefore, but pleased to
be able to laugh. Her friends were standing at the house door, farewells
were spoken, Alvan had gone. And then she thought of the person that
Ophelia of fifty might be, who would have to find a good apology for him
in his dose of snake-bite, or love of a younger woman whom he termed
gold-crested serpent.

He was a lover, surely a lover: he slid off to some chance bit of
likeness to himself in every subject he discussed with her.

And she? She speeded recklessly on the back of the centaur when he had
returned to the state of phantom and the realities he threatened her with
were no longer imminent.


CHAPTER V

Clotilde was of the order of the erring who should by rights have a short
sermon to preface an exposure of them, administering the whip to her own
sex and to ours, lest we scorn too much to take an interest in her. The
exposure she had done for herself, and she has not had the art to frame
her apology. The day after her meeting, with her eagle, Alvan, she saw
Prince Marko. She was gentle to him, in anticipation of his grief; she
could hardly be ungentle on account of his obsequious beauty, and when
her soft eyes and voice had thrilled him to an acute sensibility to the
blow, honourably she inflicted it.

'Marko, my friend, you know that I cannot be false; then let me tell you
I yesterday met the man who has but to lift his hand and I go to him, and
he may lead me whither he will.'

The burning eyes of her Indian Bacchus fixed on her till their brightness
moistened and flashed.

Whatever was for her happiness he bowed his head to, he said. He knew the
man.

Her duty was thus performed; she had plighted herself. For the first few
days she was in dread of meeting, seeing, or hearing of Alvan. She feared
the mention of a name that rolled the world so swiftly. Her parents had
postponed their coming, she had no reason for instant alarm; it was his
violent earnestness, his imperial self-confidence that she feared, as
nervous people shrink from cannon: and neither meeting, seeing, nor
hearing of him, she began to yearn, like the child whose curiosity is
refreshed by a desire to try again the startling thing which frightened
it. Her yearning grew, the illusion of her courage flooded back; she
hoped he would present himself to claim her, marvelled that he did not,
reproached him; she could almost have scorned him for listening to the
hesitations of the despicable girl so little resembling what she really
was--a poor untried girl, anxious only on behalf of her family to spare
them a sudden shock. Remembering her generous considerations in their
interests, she thought he should have known that the creature he called a
child would have yielded upon supplication to fly with him. Her
considerateness for him too, it struck her next, was the cause of her
seeming cowardly, and the man ought to have perceived it and put it
aside. He should have seen that she could be brave, and was a mate for
him. And if his shallow experience of her wrote her down nerveless, his
love should be doing.

Was it love? Her restoration to the belief in her possessing a decided
will whispered of high achievements she could do in proof of love, had
she the freedom of a man. She would not have listened (it was quite true)
to a silly supplicating girl; she would not have allowed an interval to
yawn after the first wild wooing of her. Prince Marko loved. Yes, that
was love! It failed in no sign of the passion. She set herself to study
it in Marko, and was moved by many sentiments, numbering among them pity,
thankfulness, and the shiver of a feeling between admiration and pathetic
esteem, like that the musician has for a precious instrument giving sweet
sound when shattered. He served her faithfully, in spite of his distaste
for some of his lady's commissions. She had to get her news of Alvan
through Marko. He brought her particulars of the old trial of Alvan, and
Alvan's oration in defence of himself for a lawless act of devotion to
the baroness; nothing less than the successfully scheming to wrest by
force from that lady's enemy a document precious to her lawful interests.
It was one of those cases which have a really high gallant side as well
as a bad; an excellent case for rhetoric. Marko supplied the world's
opinion of the affair, bravely owning it to be not unfavourable. Her
worthy relatives, the Frau v. Crestow and husband, had very properly
furnished a report to the family of the memorable evening; and the hubbub
over it, with the epithets applied to Alvan, intimated how he would have
been received on a visit to demand her in marriage. There was no chance
of her being allowed to enter houses where this 'rageing demagogue and
popular buffoon' was a guest; his name was banished from her hearing, so
she was compelled to have recourse to Marko. Unable to take such services
without rewarding him, she fondled: it pained her to see him suffer.
Those who toss crumbs to their domestic favourites will now and then be
moved to toss meat, which is not so good for them, but the dumb
mendicant's delight in it is winning, and a little cannot hurt. Besides,
if any one had a claim on her it was the prince; and as he was always
adoring, never importunate, he restored her to the pedestal she had been
really rudely shaken from by that other who had caught her up suddenly
into the air, and dropped her! A hand abandoned to her slave rewarded him
immeasurably. A heightening of the reward almost took his life. In the
peacefulness of dealing with a submissive love that made her queenly, the
royal, which plucked her from throne to footstool, seemed predatory and
insolent. Thus, after that scene of 'first love,' in which she had been
actress, she became almost (with an inward thrill or two for the
recovering of him) reconciled to the not seeing of the noble actor; for
nothing could erase the scene--it was historic; and Alvan would always be
thought of as a delicious electricity. She and Marko were together on the
summer excursion of her people, and quite sisterly, she could say, in her
delicate scorn of his advantages and her emotions. True gentlemen are
imperfectly valued when they are under the shadow of giants; but still
Clotilde's experience of a giant's manners was favourable to the liberty
she could enjoy in a sisterly intimacy of this kind, rather warmer than
her word for it would imply. She owned that she could better live the
poetic life--that is, trifle with fire and reflect on its charms in the
society of Marko. He was very young, he was little more than an
adolescent, and safely timid; a turn of her fingers would string or
slacken him. One could play on him securely, thinking of a distant
day--and some shipwreck of herself for an interlude--when he might be
made happy.

Her strangest mood of the tender cruelty was when the passion to
anatomize him beset her. The ground of it was, that she found him in her
likeness, adoring as she adored, and a similar loftiness; now grovelling,
now soaring; the most radiant of beings, the most abject; and the
pleasure she had of the sensational comparison was in an alteregoistic
home she found in him, that allowed of her gathering a picked
self-knowledge, and of her saying: 'That is like me: that is very like
me: that is terribly like': up to the point where the comparison wooed
her no longer with an agreeable lure of affinity, but nipped her so
shrewdly as to force her to say: 'That is he, not I': and the vivisected
youth received the caress which quickened him to wholeness at a touch. It
was given with impulsive tenderness, in pity of him. Anatomy is the title
for the operation, because the probing of herself in another, with the
liberty to cease probing as soon as it hurt her, allowed her while unhurt
to feel that she prosecuted her researches in a dead body. The moment her
strong susceptibility to the likeness shrank under a stroke of pain, she
abstained from carving, and simultaneously conscious that he lived, she
was kind to him.

'This love of yours, Marko--is it so deep?'

'I love you.'

'You think me the highest and best?'

'You are.'

'So deep that you could bear anything from me?'

'Try me!'

'Unfaithfulness?'

'You would be you!'

'Do you not say that because you cannot suspect evil of me?'

'Let me only see you!'

'You are sure that happiness would not smother it?'

'Has it done so yet?'

'Though you know I am a serpent to that man's music?'

'Ah, heaven! Oh!--do not say music. Yes! though anything!'

'And if ever you were to witness the power of his just breathing to me?'

'I would . . . . Ah!'

'What? If you saw his music working the spell?--even the first notes of
his prelude!'

'I would wait'

'It might be for long.'

'I would eat my heart.'

'Bitter! bitter!'

'I would wait till he flung you off, and kneel to you.'

She had a seizure of the nerves.

The likeness between them was, she felt, too flamingly keen to be looked
at further. She reached to the dim idea of some such nauseous devotion,
and took a shot in her breast as she did so, and abjured it, and softened
to her victim. Clotilde opened her arms, charming away her wound, as she
soothed him, both by the act of soothing and the reflection that she
could not be so very like one whom she pitied and consoled.

If the pupil has made proper effort without success, he should be assisted
by the teacher. It is very important that the selection should be suited
to the capacity and progress of the pupil.
Beginners should take simple pieces, and not be allowed, as is sometimes
the case, to murder a passage from Paradise Lost, or Macbeth. Sometimes
a fault is committed on the part of the teacher, by permitting a pupil
to confine his selections to one favorite class. I have observed
in certain schools, that one particular boy would always appear in
a comic piece, another in a tragic, and so on.

It would be better for the teacher to require each pupil to speak a
variety of pieces, so as to secure a more general and comprehensive
culture than would result from practice on a single class of selections.

The choice of the piece should be determined upon a considerable
period previous to the day appointed for the public performance of the
stage, so as to afford ample time for preparation. The piece should be
accurately committed to memory, without the variation of a syllable. It
should be made familiar, so that in the delivery no effort will
be required in recalling it. The young pupil should be instructed in
the best method of learning his piece. It will generally be found best
to take one sentence at a time. The teacher's chief work consists in
attending to individual private rehearsals. The rehearsal should be a
drill. The piece should be analyzed more or less minutely, the allusions
and difficult points being explained.
It should be the first aim to make the pupil understand it, not only in
its general spirit and scope, but in its particular ideas. His
attention should then be turned to the emotions which it expresses.
Let it be remembered that the paramount object should be to make the
pupil understand the meaning and feel the spirit of the piece. If he is
timid and diffident he should be encouraged. Tell him that even
Daniel Webster could not make a declamation at the first attempt; but
that he did not despair; he did not cease his efforts; he
persevered and succeeded.

After the rehearsal, the pupil should have time to practice by himself
and apply and confirm the instruction received from his teacher.
It must be impressed upon his mind that if he would attain excellence
he must practice, practice, practice. He must be made to understand that
the repetition of a piece three or four times is no adequate preparation,
and that it is necessary to go over with it twenty, thirty, or fifty
times, if he would excel, and take a high rank.

When the declamation takes place, excepting on public occasions, the
criticisms ought to be made immediately after the performance of each
speaker. The faults of the diffident should be mildly criticized. It is
very important to call attention to points of special excellence in
any performance.

It should be remembered that judicious commendation is a most powerful
stimulant to exertion.

The most difficult task in teaching declamation is to develop that
indescribable fervor, that unaffected earnestness of manner which always
captivates the hearers, and wins the highest marks at an exhibition for
prizes. There will always be one speaker in a school who excels all the
rest in this quality. The teacher should point out the peculiar excellence
of this speaker, and show wherein it differs from loudness of
voice, and violence of actions and affected passion. Let it be remembered
that the perfection of declamation consists in delivering the piece as
though it were real speaking. The speaker must "put himself in imagination,
so completely into the situation of him whom he personages, and adopt
for the moment, so perfectly, all the sentiments and views of that
character, as to express himself exactly as such a person would have
done, in the supposed situation."

Give the speaker every other quality--let his enunciation, his modulation
of voice, and his action be faultless, and yet without earnestness,
real earnestness,--not the semblance of it, not boisterous vociferation,
not convulsive gesticulation, but genuine emotion felt in the
heart, carrying the conviction to the hearers that the sentiments
uttered are real, the spontaneous, irrepressible outpouring of the
thought and feeling of the speaker,--without this sovereign, crowning
quality, he cannot be said to speak with eloquence.

To bring out and develop this highest quality of delivery, requires
the highest skill in the teacher.

Unless the teacher possesses some degree of this quality himself
he cannot develop it in his pupils.

The best immediate preparation for speaking is rest.

I have often noticed that speakers at exhibitions have in many cases
failed to do themselves justice from sheer exhaustion.

A day or two of repose previous to speaking, enables the speaker
to bring to the performance that vigor of the faculties which is
indispensable to the highest success, Webster told the Senate, and
truly, no doubt, that he slept soundly on the night previous to the
delivery of his second speech on Foote's resolution, which is
considered his greatest parliamentary effort.

It is well for the speaker to remember what Mr.

Everett said in allusion to this fact: "So the great Condé slept
on the eve of the battle of Rocroi, so Alexander slept on the eve
of the battle of Arbela, and so they awoke to deeds of immortal
fame."

The best training cannot make good readers and good speakers of all pupils,
but it can do much.

And it is a fact worthy of observation that those who are most sceptical
as to the possibilities of elocutionary culture, are invariably those who
are themselves unskillful teachers in this branch.

BOOK FIRST.

STANDARD SELECTIONS
FOR
RECITATION AND DECLAMATION
IN PROSE AND POETRY.

BOOK FIRST.

STANDARD SELECTIONS.

PROSE.

I. THE NOBLE PURPOSES OF ELOQUENCE.

If we consider the noble purposes to which Eloquence may be made
subservient, we at once perceive its prodigious import ance to the
best interests of mankind. The greatest masters of the art have
concurred, upon the greatest occasions of its display, in pronouncing
that its estimation depends on the virtuous and rational use made of it.

It is but reciting the common praises of the Art of Persuasion, to remind
you how sacred truths may be most ardently promulgated at the
altar--the cause of oppressed innocence be most woefully defended--the
march of wicked rulers be most triumphantly resisted--defiance the
most terrible be hurled at the oppressor's head.

In great convulsions of public affairs, or in bringing about salutary
changes, every one confesses how important an ally eloquence
must be. But in peaceful times, when the progress of events is slow and
even as the silent and unheeded pace of time, and the jars
of a mighty tumult in foreign and domestic concerns can no longer be
heard, then, too, she flourishes--protectress of liberty--patroness of
improvement--guardian of all the blessings that can be showered upon the
mass of human kind;--nor is her form ever seen but on ground consecrated
to free institutions.

To me, calmly revolving these things, such pursuits seem far more
noble objects of ambition than any upon which the vulgar herd of busy
men lavish prodigal their restless exertions. To diffuse useful information,
to further intellectual refinement, sure forerunner of moral improvement,--to
hasten the coming of the bright day when the dawn of general knowledge
shall chase away the lazy, lingering class, even from the base of the
great social pyramid;--this indeed is a high calling, in which the most
splendid talents and consummate virtue may well press onward, eager
to bear a part.
Lord Brougham.

II.

ROLLA TO THE PERUVIANS.

My brave associates--partners of my toil, my feelings, and my fame!

Can Rolla's words add vigor to the virtuous energies which inspire your
hearts?--No!

You have judged, as I have, the foulness of the crafty plea, by which
these bold invaders would delude you. Your generous spirit has compared,
as mine has, the motives which, in a war like this, can animate their
minds and ours.

They, by a strange frenzy driven, fight for power, for plunder, and
extended rule;--we, for our country, our altars, and our homes. They
follow an adventurer whom they fear, and obey a power which they hate;--we
serve a monarch whom we love,--a God whom we adore. Wherever they move
in anger, desolation tracks their progress. Wherever they pause in amity,
affliction mourns their friendship.

They boast they come but to improve our state, enlarge our thoughts, and
free us from the yoke of error! Yes;--they will give enlightened freedom
to our minds, who are themselves the slaves of passion, avarice,
and pride.

They offer us their protection! Yes, such protections as vultures give to
lambs,--covering and devouring them! They call on us to barter all
the good we have inherited and proved, for the desperate chance of
something better, which they promise!

Be our plain answer this: The throne we honor is the People's choice,--the
laws we reverence are our brave fathers' legacy,--the faith we
follow teaches us to live in bonds of charity with all mankind, and
die with hope of bliss beyond the grave. Tell your invaders this; and
tell them too, we seek no change; and, least of all, such change
as they would bring us!
R. B. Sheridan.

III.

INVECTIVE AGAINST WARREN HASTINGS.

If, my Lords, a stranger had at this time gone into the province of
Oude, ignorant of what had happened since the death of Sujah Dowlah--that
prince who with a savage heart had still great lines of character,
and who, with all his ferocity in war, had, with a cultivating hand,
preserved to his country the wealth which it derived from benignant
skies and a prolific soil--if, ignorant of all that had happened
in the short interval, and observing the wide and general devastation
of fields unclothed and brown; of vegetation burned up and extinguished;
of villages depopulated and in ruins; of temples unroofed and
perishing; of reservoirs broken down and dry, this stranger should
ask, "what has thus laid waste this beautiful and opulent land;
what monstrous madness has ravaged with wide-spread war; what
desolating foreign foe; what civil discords; what disputed succession;
what religious zeal; what fabled monster has stalked abroad, and,
with malice and mortal enmity to man, withered by the grasp of death
every growth of nature and humanity, all means of delight, and each
original, simple principle of bare existence?"

the answer would have been, not one of these causes! No wars have ravaged
these lands and depopulated these villages! No desolating foreign
foe! No domestic broils! No disputed succession! No religious super-serviceable
zeal! No poisonous monster! No affliction of Providence, which, while it
scourged us, cut off the sources of resuscitation! No! This damp of
death is the mere effusion of British amity! We sink under the pressure
of their support! We writhe under their perfidious gripe! They have
embraced us with their protecting arms, and lo!
these are the fruits of their alliance!

What then, my Lords, shall we bear to be told that, under such circumstances,
the exasperated feelings of a whole people, thus spurred on to clamor
and resistance, were excited by the poor and feeble influence of the
Begums?

After hearing the description given by an eye-witness of the paroxysm of
fever and delirium into which despair threw the natives when on the banks
of the polluted Ganges, panting for breath, they tore more widely
open the lips of their gaping wounds, to accelerate their dissolution;
and while their blood was issuing, presented their ghastly eyes to heaven,
breathing their last and fervent prayer that the dry earth might not
be suffered to drink their blood, but that it might rise up to the
throne of God, and rouse the eternal Providence to avenge the wrongs
of their country,--will it be said that all this was brought about
by the incantations of these Begums in their secluded Zenana; or
that they could inspire this enthusiasm and this despair into the
breasts of a people who felt no grievance, and had suffered no
torture?

What motive, then, could have such influence in their bosom?

What motive!
That which nature, the common parent, plants in the bosom of man; and which,
though it may be less active in the Indian than in the Englishman, is
still congenial with, and makes a part of his being. That feeling
which tells him that man was never made to be the property of man; but
that, when in the pride and insolence of power, one human creature dares
to tyrannize over another, it is a power usurped, and resistance is a
duty. That principle which tells him that resistance to power usurped
is not merely a duty which he owes to himself and to his neighbor, but
a duty which he owes to his God, in asserting and maintaining the rank
which he gave him in his creation--that God, who, where he gives the form
of man, whatever may be the complexion, gives also the feelings and the
rights of man. That principle which neither the rudeness of ignorance can
stifle, nor the enervation of refinement extinguish! That principle
which makes it base for a man to suffer when he ought to act; which,
tending to preserve to the species the original designations of Providence,
spurns at the arrogant distinctions of man, and indicates the independent
quality of his race.
R. B. Sheridan.

IV.

THE BIBLE THE BEST CLASSIC
The Bible is the only book which God has ever sent, and the only one
he ever will send into the world. All other books are frail and transient
as time, since they are only the registers of time; but the Bible is as
durable as eternity, for its pages contain the records of eternity. All
other books are weak and imperfect, like their author, man; but the Bible
is a transcript of infinite power and perfection.

Every other volume is limited in its usefulness and influence; but
the Bible came forth conquering and to conquer,--rejoicing as a
giant to run his course,--and like the sun, "there is nothing hid
from the heat thereof."

The Bible only, of all the myriads of books the world has seen, is equally
important and interesting to all mankind. Its tidings, whether of
peace or of woe, are the same to the poor, the ignorant, and the weak
as to the rich, the wise, and the powerful.

Among the most remarkable of its attributes, is justice; for it
looks with impartial eyes on kings and on slaves, on the hero and
the soldier, on philosophers and peasants, on the eloquent and the
dumb.

From all, it exacts the same obedience to its commandments: to the
good, it promises the fruits of his labors; to the evil, the reward
of his hands.

Nor are the purity and holiness, the wisdom, benevolence, and truth
of the Scriptures less conspicuous than their justice.

In sublimity and beauty, in the descriptive and pathetic, in dignity and
simplicity of narrative, in power and comprehensiveness, in depth
and variety of thought, in purity and elevation of sentiment, the
most enthusiastic admirers of the heathen classics have conceded
their inferiority to the Scriptures.

The Bible, indeed, is the only universal classic, the classic of
all mankind, of every age and country of time and eternity; more humble
and simple than the primer of a child, more grand and magnificent
than the epic and the oration, the ode and the dramas when genius,
with his chariot of fire, and his horses of ire, ascends in whirlwind
into the heaven of his own invention.

It is the best classic the world has ever seen, the noblest that
has ever honored and dignified the language of mortals!

If you boast that the Aristotles and the Platos, and the Tullies of the
classic age, "dipped their pens in intellect," the sacred authors
dipped theirs in inspiration.

If those were the "secretaries of nature," these were the secretaries
of the very Author of nature.

If Greece and Rome have gathered into their cabinet of curiosities
the pearls of heathen poetry and eloquence, the diamonds of pagan
history and philosophy, God himself has treasured up in the Scriptures,
the poetry and eloquence, the philosophy and history of sacred
law-givers, of prophets and apostles, of saints, evangelists, and
martyrs.

In vain you may seek for the pure and simple light of universal truth in
the Augustan ages of antiquity. In the Bible only, is the poet's
wish fulfilled,-- "And like the sun be all one boundless eye."

T. S. Grimké.

V.

WHAT WE OWE TO THE SWORD.

To the question, "What have the People ever gained but by Revolution?" I
answer, boldly, If by revolution be understood the law of the sword,
Liberty has lost far more than she ever gained by it. The sword was the
destroyer of the Lycian Confederacy and the Achæan League. The sword
alternately enslaved and disenthralled Thebes and Athens, Sparta, Syracuse,
and Corinth. The sword of Rome conquered every other free State, and
finished the murder of Liberty in the ancient world, by destroying
herself.
What but the sword, in modern times, annihilated the Republics of Italy,
the Hanseatic Towns, and the primitive independence of Ireland, Wales,
and Scotland? What but the sword partitioned Poland, assassinated the
rising liberty of Spain, banished the Huguenots from France, and made
Cromwell the master, not the servant, of the People? And what but the
sword of Republican France destroyed the independence of half of Europe,
deluged the continent with tears, devoured its millions upon
millions, and closed the long catalogue of guilt, by founding and
defending to the last, the most powerful, selfish, and insatiable
of military despotisms?

The sword, indeed, delivered Greece from the Persian invader,
expelled the Tarquins from Rome, emancipated Switzerland and Holland,
restored the Prince to his throne, and brought Charles to the
scaffold.

And the sword redeemed the pledge of the Congress of '76 when they plighted
to each other "their lives, their fortunes, and their sacred honor."
And yet, what would the redemption of that pledge have availed towards the
establishment of our present government, if the spirit of American
institutions had not been both the birthright and the birth-blessing
of the Colonies? The Indians, the French, the Spaniards, and even England
herself, warred in vain against a people, born and bred in the household,
at the domestic altar of Liberty herself They had never been slaves,
for they were born free. The sword was a herald to proclaim their freedom,
but it neither created nor preserved it. A century and a half had already
beheld them free in infancy, free in youth, free in early manhood.
Theirs was already the spirit of American institutions; the spirit of
Christian freedom of a temperate, regulated freedom, of a rational
civil obedience. For such a people the sword, the law of violence,
did and could do nothing but sever the bonds which bound her colonial
wards to their unnatural guardian. They redeemed their pledge, sword in
hand; but the sword left them as it found them, unchanged in character,
freemen in thought and in deed, instinct with the immortal spirit of
American institutions.
T. S Grimké.

Light literature is the
garden and the orchard, the fountain, the rainbow, the far view; the view
within us as well as without. Our blood runs through it, our history in
the quick. The Philistine detests it, because he has no view, out or in.
The dry confess they are cut off from the living tree, peeled and
sapless, when they condemn it. The vulgar demand to have their pleasures
in their own likeness--and let them swamp their troughs! they shall not
degrade the fame of noble fiction. We are the choice public, which will
have good writing for light reading. Poet, novelist, essayist, dramatist,
shall be ranked honourable in my Republic. I am neither, but a man of
law, a student of the sciences, a politician, on the road to government
and statecraft: and yet I say I have learnt as much from light literature
as from heavy-as much, that is, from the pictures of our human blood in
motion as from the clever assortment of our forefatherly heaps of bones.
Shun those who cry out against fiction and have no taste for elegant
writing. For to have no sympathy with the playful mind is not to have a
mind: it is a test. But name the books.'

She named one or two.

'And when does Dr. Alvan date the first year of his Republic?'

'Clotilde!' he turned on her.

'My good sir?'

'These worthy good people who are with you: tell me-to-morrow we leave
them!'

'Leave them?'

'You with me. No more partings. The first year, the first day shall be
dated from to-morrow. You and I proclaim our Republic on these heights.
All the ceremonies to follow. We will have a reaping of them, and make a
sheaf to present to the world with compliments. To-morrow!'

'You do not speak seriously?'

'I jest as little as the Talmud. Decide at once, in the happy flush of
this moment.'

'I cannot listen to you, dear sir!'

'But your heart beats!'

'I am not mistress of it.'

'Call me master of it. I make ready for to-morrow.'

'No! no! no! A thousand times no! You have been reading too much fiction
and verse. Properly I should spurn you.'

'Will you fail me, play feu follet, ward me off again?'

'I must be won by rules, brave knight!'

'Will you be won?'

'And are you he--the Alvan who would not be centaur?'

'I am he who chased a marsh-fire, and encountered a retiarius, and the
meshes are on my head and arms. I fancied I dealt with a woman; a woman
needing protection! She has me fast--I am netted, centaur or man. That is
between us two. But think of us facing the world, and trust me; take my
hand, take the leap; I am the best fighter in that fight. Trust it to me,
and all your difficulties are at an end. To fly solves the problem.'

'Indeed, indeed, I have more courage than I had,' said Clotilde.

His eyes dilated, steadied, speculated, weighed her.

'Put it to proof while you can believe in it!'

'How is it every one but you thinks me bold?' she complained.

'Because I carry a touchstone that brings out the truth. I am your
reality: all others are phantoms. You can impose on them, not on me.
Courage for one inspired plunge you may have, and it will be your
salvation:--southward, over to Italy, that is the line of flight, and the
subsequent struggle will be mine: you will not have to face it. But the
courage for daily contention at home, standing alone, while I am distant
and maligned--can you fancy your having that? No! be wise of what you
really are; cast the die for love, and mount away tomorrow.'

'Then,' said Clotilde, with elvish cunning, 'do you doubt your ability to
win me without a scandal?'

'Back me, and I win you!' he replied in a tone of unwonted humility: a
sudden droop.

She let her hand fall. He grasped it.

'Gradations appear to be unknown to you,' she said.

He cried out: 'Count the years of life, span them, think of the work to
be done, and ask yourself whether time and strength should run to waste
in retarding the inevitable? Pottering up steps that can be taken at one
bound is very well for peasant pilgrims whose shrine is their bourne, and
their kneecaps the footing stumps. But for us two life begins up there.
Onward, and everywhere around, when we two are together, is our shrine. I
have worked, and wasted life; I have not lived, and I thirst to live.'

She murmured, in a fervour, 'You shall!' and slipped behind her defences.
'To-morrow morning we shall wander about; I must have a little time; all
to-morrow morning we can discuss plans.'

'You know you command me,' said he, and gazed at her.

She was really a child compared with him in years, and if it was an
excuse for taking her destiny into his hands, she consenting,--it was
also a reason why he dared not press his whole weight to win her to the
step.

She had the pride of the secret knowledge of her command of this giant at
the long table of the guests at dinner, where, after some play of knife
and fork among notable professors, Prussian officers, lively Frenchmen
and Italians, and the usual over-supply of touring English of both sexes,
not encouraging to conversation in their look of pallid disgust of the
art, Alvan started general topics and led them. The lead came to him
naturally, because he was a natural speaker, of a mind both stored and
effervescent; and he was genial, interested in every growth of life. She
did not wonder at his popularity among men of all classes and sets, or
that he should be famed for charming women. Her friend was enraptured
with him. Friendly questions pressed in an evening chatter between the
ladies, and Clotilde fenced, which is half a confession.

'But you are not engaged?' said the blunt Englishwoman.

According to the explanation, Clotilde was hardly engaged. It was not an
easy thing to say how she stood definitely. She had obeyed her dying
relative and dearest on earth by joining her hand to Prince Marko's, and
had pleased her parents by following it up with the kindest attentions to
the prince. It had been done, however, for the sake of peace; and chiefly
for his well-being. She had reserved her full consent: the plighting was
incomplete. Prince Marko knew that there was another, a magical person, a
genius of the ring, irresistible. He had been warned, that should the
other come forth to claim her . . . . And she was about to write to him
this very night to tell him . . . tell him fully . . . . In truth, she
loved both, but each so differently! And both loved her! And she had to
make her choice of one, and tell the prince she did love him, but . . .
Dots are the best of symbols for rendering cardisophistical subtleties
intelligible, and as they are much used in dialogue, one should have now
and then permission to print them. Especially feminine dialogue referring
to matters of the uncertain heart takes assistance from troops of dots;
and not to understand them at least as well as words, when words have as
it were conducted us to the brink of expression, and shown us the
precipice, is to be dull, bucolic of the marketplace.

Sunless rose the morning. The blanketed figures went out to salute a
blanketed sky. Drizzling they returned, images of woefulness in various
forms, including laughter's. Alvan frankly declared himself the
disappointed showman; he had hoped for his beloved to see the sight long
loved by him of golden chariot and sun-steeds crossing the peaks and the
lakes; and his disappointment became consternation on hearing Clotilde's
English friend (after objection to his pagan clothing of the solemn
reality of sunrise, which destroyed or minimized by too materially
defining a grandeur that derived its essence from mystery, she thought)
announce the hour for her departure. He promised her a positive sunrise
if she would delay. Her child lay recovering from an illness in the town
below, and she could not stay. But Clotilde had coughed in the damp
morning air, and it would, he urged, be dangerous for her to be exposed
to it. Had not the lady heard her cough? She had, but personally she was
obliged to go; with her child lying ill she could not remain. 'But,
madam, do you hear that cough again? Will you drag her out with such a
cough as that?' The lady repeated 'My child!' Clotilde said it had been
agreed they should descend this day; her friend must be beside her child.
Alvan thundered an 'Impossible!' The child was recovering; Clotilde was
running into danger: he argued with the senseless woman, opposing reason
to the feminine sentiment of the maternal, and of course he was beaten.
He was compelled to sit and gnaw his eloquence. Clotilde likened his
appearance to a strangled roar. 'Mothers and their children are too much
for me!' he said, penitent for his betrayal of over-urgency, as he helped
to wrap her warmly, and counselled her very mode of breathing in the raw
mountain atmosphere.

'I admire you for knowing when to yield,' said she.

He groaned, with frown and laugh: 'You know what I would beg!'

She implored him to have some faith in her.

The missiles of the impassioned were discharged at the poor English: a
customary volley in most places where they intrude after quitting their
shores, if they diverge from the avenue of hotel-keepers and waiters: but
Clotilde pointed out to him that her English friend was not showing
coldness in devoting herself to her child.

'No, they attend to their duties,' he assented generally, desperately
just.

'And you owe it to her that you have seen me.'

'I do,' he said, and forthwith courted the lady to be forgiven.

Clotilde was taken from him in a heavy downpour and trailing of mists.

At the foot of the mountain a boy handed her a letter from Alvan--a
burning flood, rolled out of him like lava after they had separated on
the second plateau, and confided to one who knew how to outstrip
pathfarers. She entered her hotel across the lake, and met a telegram. At
night the wires flashed 'Sleep well' to her; on her awakening, 'Good
morning.' A lengthened history of the day was telegraphed for her
amusement. Again at night there was a 'God guard you!'

'Who can resist him?' sighed Clotilde, excited, nervous, flattered,
happy, but yearning to repose and be curtained from the buzz of the
excess of life that he put about her. This time there was no prospect of
his courtship relapsing.

'He is a wonderful, an ideal lover!' replied her friend.

'If he were only that!' said Clotilde, musing expressively. 'If, dear
Englishwoman, he were only that, he might be withstood. But Alvan mounts
high over such lovers: he is a wonderful and ideal man: so great, so
generous, heroical, giant-like, that what he wills must be.'

The Englishwoman was quick enough to seize an indication difficult to
miss--more was expected to be said of him.

'You see the perfect gentleman in Dr. Alvan,' she remarked, for she had
heard him ordering his morning bath at the hotel, and he had also been
polite to her under vexation.

Clotilde nodded hurriedly; she saw something infinitely greater, and
disliked the bringing of that island microscope to bear upon a giant. She
found it repugnant to hear a word of Alvan as a perfect gentleman.
Justly, however, she took him for a splendid nature, and assuming upon
good authority that the greater contains the lesser, she supposed the
lesser to be a chiselled figure serviceably alive in the embrace.


BOOK 2.


CHAPTER VII

He was down on the plains to her the second day, and as usual when they
met, it was as if they had not parted; his animation made it seem so. He
was like summer's morning sunlight, his warmth striking instantly through
her blood dispersed any hesitating strangeness that sometimes gathers
during absences, caused by girlish dread of a step to take, or shame at
the step taken, when coldish gentlemen rather create these backflowings
and gaps in the feelings. She had grown reconciled to the perturbation of
his messages, and would have preferred to have him startling and
thrilling her from a distance; but seeing him, she welcomed him, and
feeling in his bright presence not the faintest chill of the fit of
shyness, she took her bravery of heart for a sign that she had reached
his level, and might own it by speaking of the practical measures to lead
to their union. On one subject sure to be raised against him by her
parents, she had a right to be inquisitive: the baroness.

She asked to see a photograph of her.

Alvan gave her one out of his pocketbook, and watched her eyelids in
profile as she perused those features of the budless grey woman. The
eyelids in such scrutinies reveal the critical mind; Clotilde's drooped
till they almost closed upon their lashes--deadly criticism.

'Think of her age,' said Alvan, colouring. He named a grandmaternal date
for the year of the baroness's birth.

Her eyebrows now stood up; her contemplation of those disenchanting
lineaments came to an abrupt finish.

She returned the square card to him, slowly shaking her head, still
eyeing earth as her hand stretched forth the card laterally. He could not
contest the woeful verdict.

'Twenty years back!' he murmured, writhing. The baroness was a woman fair
to see in the days twenty years back, though Clotilde might think it
incredible: she really was once.

Clotilde resumed her doleful shaking of the head; she sighed. He
shrugged; she looked at him, and he blinked a little. For the first time
since they had come together she had a clear advantage, and as it was
likely to be a rare occasion, she did not let it slip. She sighed again.
He was wounded by her underestimate of his ancient conquest.

'Yes--now,' he said, impatiently.

'I cannot feel jealousy, I cannot feel rivalry,' said she, sad of voice.

The humour of her tranced eyes in the shaking head provoked him to defend
the baroness for her goodness of heart, her energy of brain.

Clotilde 'tolled' her naughty head.

'But it is a strong face,' she said, 'a strong face--a strong jaw, by
Lavater! You were young--and daringly adventurous; she was captivating in
her distress. Now she is old--and you are friends.'

'Friends, yes,' Alvan replied, and praised the girl, as of course she
deserved to be praised for her open mind.

'We are friends!' he said, dropping a deep-chested breath. The title this
girl scornfully supplied was balm to the vanity she had stung, and his
burnt skin was too eager for a covering of any sort to examine the mood
of the giver. She had positively humbled him so far as with a single word
to relieve him; for he had seen bristling chapters in her look at the
photograph. Yet for all the natural sensitiveness of the man's vanity, he
did not seek to bury the subject at the cost of a misconception injurious
in the slightest degree to the sentiments he entertained toward the older
lady as well as the younger. 'Friends! you are right; good friends; only
you should know that it is just a little--a trifle different. The fact
is, I cannot kill the past, and I would not. It would try me sharply to
break the tie connecting us, were it possible to break it. I am bound to
her by gratitude. She is old now; and were she twice that age, I should
retain my feeling for her. You raise your eyes, Clotilde! Well, when I
was much younger I found this lady in desperate ill-fortune, and she
honoured me with her confidence. Young man though I was, I defended her;
I stopped at no measure to defend her: against a powerful husband,
remember--the most unscrupulous of foes, who sought to rob her of every
right she possessed. And what I did then I again would do. I was vowed to
her interests, to protect a woman shamefully wronged; I did not stick at
trifles, as you know; you have read my speech in defence of myself before
the court. By my interpretation of the case, I was justified; but I
estranged my family and made the world my enemy. I gave my time and
money, besides the forfeit of reputation, to the case, and reasonably
there was an arrangement to repay me out of the estate reserved for her,
so that the baroness should not be under the degradation of feeling
herself indebted. You will not think that out of the way: men of the
world do not. As for matters of the heart between us, we're as far apart
as the Poles.'

He spoke hurriedly. He had said all that could be expected of him.

They were in a wood, walking through lines of spruce firs of deep golden
green in the yellow beams. One of these trees among its well-robed
fellows fronting them was all lichen-smitten. From the low sweeping
branches touching earth to the plumed top, the tree was dead-black as its
shadow; a vision of blackness.

'I will compose a beautiful, dutiful, modest, oddest, beseeching,
screeching, mildish, childish epistle to her, and you shall read it, and
if you approve it, we shall despatch it,' said Clotilde.

'There speaks my gold-crested serpent at her wisest!' replied Alvan. 'And
now for my visit to your family: I follow you in a day. En avant! contre
les canons! A run to Lake Leman brings us to them in the afternoon. I
shall see you in the evening. So our separation won't be for long this
time. All the auspices are good. We shall not be rich--nor poor.'

Clotilde reminded him that a portion of money would be brought to the
store by her.

'We don't count it,' said he. 'Not rich, certainly. And you will not
expect me to make money by my pen. Above all things I detest the writing
for money. Fiction and verse appeal to a besotted public, that judges of
the merit of the work by the standard of its taste: avaunt! And
journalism for money is Egyptian bondage. No slavery is comparable to the
chains of hired journalism. My pen is my fountain--the key of me; and I
give my self, I do not sell. I write when I have matter in me and in the
direction it presses for, otherwise not one word!'

'I would never ask you to sell yourself,' said Clotilde. 'I would rather
be in want of common comforts.'

He squeezed her wrist. They were again in front of the black-draped
blighted tree. It was the sole tree of the host clad thus in scurf
bearing a semblance of livid metal. They looked at it as having seen it
before, and passed on.

'But the wife of Sigismund Alvan will not be poor in renown!' he resumed,
radiating his full bloom on her.

'My highest ambition is to be Sigismund Alvan's wife!' she exclaimed.

To hear her was as good as wine, and his heart came out on a genial
chuckle. 'Ay, the choice you have made is not, by heaven, so bad.
Sigismund Alvan's wife shall take the foremost place of all. Look at me.'
He lifted his head to the highest on his shoulders, widening his eagle
eyes. He was now thoroughly restored and in his own upper element,
expansive after the humiliating contraction of his man's vanity under the
glances of a girl. 'Do you take me for one who could be content with the
part of second? I will work and do battle unceasingly, but I will have
too the prize of battle to clasp it, savour it richly. I was not
fashioned to be the lean meek martyr of a cause, not I. I carry too
decisive a weight in the balance to victory. I have a taste for fruits,
my fairest! And Republics, my bright Lutetia, can give you splendid
honours.' He helped her to realize this with the assuring splendour of
his eyes.

'"Bride of the Elect of the People!" is not that as glorious a title,
think you, as queen of an hereditary sovereign mumbling of God's grace on
his worm-eaten throne? I win that seat by service, by the dedication of
this brain to the people's interests. They have been ground to the dust,
and I lift them, as I did a persecuted lady in my boyhood. I am the
soldier of justice against the army of the unjust. But I claim my reward.
If I live to fight, I live also to enjoy. I will have my station. I win
it not only because I serve, but because also I have seen, have seen
ahead, seen where all is dark, read the unwritten--because I am soldier
and prophet. The brain of man is Jove's eagle and his lightning on
earth--the title to majesty henceforth. Ah! my fairest; entering the city
beside me, and the people shouting around, she would not think her choice
a bad one?'

Clotilde made sign and gave some earnest on his arm of ecstatic hugging.

'We may have hard battles, grim deceptions, to go through before that day
comes,' he continued after a while. 'The day is coming, but we must wait
for it, work on. I have the secret of how to head the people--to put a
head to their movement and make it irresistible, as I believe it will be
beneficent. I set them moving on the lines of the law of things. I am no
empty theorizer, no phantasmal speculator; I am the man of science in
politics. When my system is grasped by the people, there is but a step to
the realization of it. One step. It will be taken in my time, or
acknowledged later. I stand for index to the people of the path they
should take to triumph--must take, as triumph they must sooner or later:
not by the route of what is called Progress--pooh! That is a middle-class
invention to effect a compromise. With the people the matter rests with
their intelligence! meanwhile my star is bright and shines reflected.'

'I notice,' she said, favouring him with as much reflection as a splendid
lover could crave for, 'that you never look down, you never look on the
ground, but always either up or straight before you.'

'People have remarked it,' said he, smiling. 'Here we are at this
funereal tree again. All roads lead to Rome, and ours appears to conduct
us perpetually to this tree. It 's the only dead one here.'

He sighted the plumed black top and along the swelling branches
decorously clothed in decay: a salted ebon moss when seen closely; the
small grey particles giving a sick shimmer to the darkness of the mass.
It was very witch-like, of a witch in her incantation-smoke.

'Not a single bare spot! but dead, dead as any peeled and fallen!' said
Alvan, fingering a tuft of the sooty snake-lichen. 'This is a tree for a
melancholy poet--eh, Clotilde?--for him to come on it by moonlight, after
a scene with his mistress, or tales of her! By the way and by the way, my
fair darling, let me never think of your wearing this kind of garb for
me, should I be ordered off the first to join the dusky army below. Women
who put on their dead husbands in public are not well-mannered women,
though they may be excellent professional widows, excellent!'

He snapped the lichen-dust from his fingers, observing that he was not
sure the contrast of the flourishing and blighted was not more impressive
in sunlight: and then he looked from the tree to his true love's hair.
The tree at a little distance seemed run over with sunless lizards: her
locks were golden serpents.

'Shall I soon see your baroness?' Clotilde asked him.

'Not in advance of the ceremony,' he answered. 'In good time. You
understand--an old friend making room for a new one, and that one young
and beautiful, with golden tresses; at first . . . ! But her heart is
quite sound. Have no fear! I guarantee it; I know her to the roots. She
desires my welfare, she does my behests. If I am bound to her by
gratitude, so, and in a greater degree, is she to me. The utmost she will
demand is that my bride shall be worthy of me--a good mate for me in the
fight to come; and I have tested my bride and found her half my heart;
therefore she passes the examination with the baroness.'

They left the tree behind them.

'We will take good care not to return this way again,' said Alvan,
without looking back. 'That tree belongs to a plantation of the under
world; its fellows grow in the wood across Acheron, and that tree has
looked into the ghastliness of the flood and seen itself. Hecate and
Hermes know about it. Phoebus cannot light it. That tree stands for Death
blooming. We think it sinister, but down there it is a homely tree. Down
there! When do we go? The shudder in that tree is the air exchanging
between Life and Death--the ghosts going and coming: it's on the border
line. I just felt the creep. I think you did. The reason is--there is
always a material reason--that you were warm, and a bit of chill breeze
took you as you gazed; while for my part I was imagining at that very
moment what of all possible causes might separate us, and I acknowledged
that death could do the trick. But death, my love, is far from us two!'

'Does she look as grimmish as she does in the photograph?' said Clotilde.

'Who? the baroness?' Alvan laughed. The baroness was not so easily
defended from a girl as from her husband, it appeared. 'She is the best
of comrades, best of friends. She has her faults; may not relish the writ
announcing her final deposition, but be you true to me, and as true as
she has unfailingly been to me, she will be to you. That I can promise.
My poor Lucie! She is winter, if you will. It is not the winter of the
steppes; you may compare her to winter in a noble country; a fine
landscape of winter. The outlines of her face . . . . She has a great
brain. How much I owe that woman for instruction! You meet now and then
men who have the woman in them without being womanized; they are the pick
of men. And the choicest women are those who yield not a feather of their
womanliness for some amount of manlike strength. And she is one; man's
brain, woman's heart. I thought her unique till I heard of you. And how
do I stand between you two? She has the only fault you can charge me
with; she is before me in time, as I am before you. Shall I spoil you as
she spoilt me? No, no! Obedience to a boy is the recognition of the
heir-apparent, and I respect the salique law as much as I love my love. I
do not offer obedience to a girl, but succour, support. You will not rule
me, but you will invigorate, and if you are petted, you shall not be
spoilt. Do not expect me to show like that undertakerly tree till my
years are one hundred. Even then it will be dangerous to repose beneath
my branches in the belief that I am sapless because I have changed
colour. We Jews have a lusty blood. We are strong of the earth. We serve
you, but you must minister to us. Sensual? We have truly excellent
appetites. And why not? Heroical too! Soldiers, poets, musicians; the
Gentile's masters in mental arithmetic--keenest of weapons: surpassing
him in common sense and capacity for brotherhood. Ay, and in charity; or
what stores of vengeance should we not have nourished! Already we have
the money-bags. Soon we shall hold the chief offices. And when the
popular election is as unimpeded as the coursing of the blood in a
healthy body, the Jew shall be foremost and topmost, for he is
pre-eminently by comparison the brain of these latter-day communities.
But that is only my answer to the brutish contempt of the Jew. I am no
champion of a race. I am for the world, for man!'

Clotilde remarked that he had many friends, all men of eminence, and a
large following among the people.

He assented: 'Yes: Tresten, Retka, Kehlen, the Nizzian. Yes, if I were
other than for legality:--if it came to a rising, I could tell off able
lieutenants.'

'Tell me of your interview with Ironsides,' she said proudly and fondly.

'Would this ambitious little head know everything?' said Alvan, putting
his lips among the locks. 'Well, we met: he requested it. We agreed that
we were on neutral ground for the moment: that he might ultimately have
to decapitate me, or I to banish him, but temporarily we could compare
our plans for governing. He showed me his hand. I showed him mine. We
played open-handed, like two at whist. He did not doubt my honesty, and I
astonished him by taking him quite in earnest. He has dealt with
diplomatists, who imagine nothing but shuffling: the old Ironer! I love
him for his love of common sense, his contempt of mean deceit. He will
outwit you, but his dexterity is a giant's--a simple evolution rapidly
performed: and nothing so much perplexes pygmies! Then he has them,
bagsful of them! The world will see; and see giant meet giant, I suspect.
He and I proposed each of us in the mildest manner contrary
schemes--schemes to stiffen the hair of Europe! Enough that we parted
with mutual respect. He is a fine fellow: and so was my friend the
Emperor Tiberius, and so was Richelieu. Napoleon was a fine
engine:--there is a difference. Yes, Ironsides is a fine fellow! but he
and I may cross. His ideas are not many. The point to remember is that he
is iron on them: he can drive them hard into the density of the globe. He
has quick nerves and imagination: he can conjure up, penetrate, and
traverse complications--an enemy's plans, all that the enemy will be able
to combine, and the likeliest that he will do. Good. We opine that we are
equal to the same. He is for kingcraft to mask his viziercraft--and save
him the labour of patiently attempting oratory and persuasion, which
accomplishment he does not possess:--it is not in iron. We think the more
precious metal will beat him when the broader conflict comes. But such an
adversary is not to be underrated. I do not underrate him: and certainly
not he me. Had he been born with the gifts of patience and a fluent
tongue, and not a petty noble, he might have been for the people, as
knowing them the greater power. He sees that their knowledge of their
power must eventually come to them. In the meantime his party is forcible
enough to assure him he is not fighting a losing game at present: and he
is, no doubt, by lineage and his traditions monarchical. He is curiously
simple, not really cynical. His apparent cynicism is sheer irritability.
His contemptuous phrases are directed against obstacles: against things,
persons, nations that oppose him or cannot serve his turn against his
king, if his king is restive; but he respects his king: against your
friends' country, because there is no fixing it to a line of policy, and
it seems to have collapsed; but he likes that country the best in Europe
after his own. He is nearest to contempt in his treatment of his dupes
and tools, who are dropped out of his mind when he has quite squeezed
them for his occasion; to be taken up again when they are of use to him.
Hence he will have no following. But let me die to-morrow, the party I
have created survives. In him you see the dam, in me the stream. Judge,
then, which of them gains the future!--admitting that, in the present he
may beat me. He is a Prussian, stoutly defined from a German, and yet
again a German stoutly defined from our borderers: and that completes
him. He has as little the idea of humanity as the sword of our Hermann,
the cannon-ball of our Frederick. Observe him. What an eye he has! I
watched it as we were talking: and he has, I repeat, imagination; he can
project his mind in front of him as far as his reasoning on the possible
allows: and that eye of his flashes; and not only flashes, you see it
hurling a bolt; it gives me the picture of a Balearic slinger about to
whizz the stone for that eye looks far, and is hard, and is dead certain
of its mark-within his practical compass, as I have said. I see farther,
and I fancy I proved to him that I am not a dreamer. In my opinion, when
we cross our swords I stand a fair chance of not being worsted. We shall:
you shrink? Figuratively, my darling have no fear! Combative as we may
be, both of us, we are now grave seniors, we have serious business: a
party looks to him, my party looks to me. Never need you fear that I
shall be at sword or pistol with any one. I will challenge my man,
whoever he as that needs a lesson, to touch buttons on a waistcoat with
the button on the foil, or drill fiver and eights in cards at twenty
paces: but I will not fight him though he offend me, for I am stronger
than my temper, and as I do not want to take his nip of life, and judge
it to be of less value than mine, the imperilling of either is an
absurdity.'

'Oh! because I know you are incapable of craven fear,' cried Clotilde,
answering aloud the question within herself of why she so much admired,
why she so fondly loved him. To feel his courage backing his high good
sense was to repose in security, and her knowledge that an astute
self-control was behind his courage assured her he was invincible. It
seemed to her, therefore, as they walked side by side, and she saw their
triumphant pair of figures in her fancy, natural that she should
instantly take the step to prepare her for becoming his Republican
Princess. She walked an equal with the great of the earth, by virtue of
her being the mate of the greatest of the great; she trod on some, and
she thrilled gratefully to the man who sustained her and shielded her on
that eminence. Elect of the people he! and by a vaster power than kings
can summon through the trumpet! She could surely pass through the trial
with her parents that she might step to the place beside him! She pressed
his arm to be physically a sharer of his glory. Was it love? It was as
lofty a stretch as her nature could strain to.

She named the city on the shores of the great Swiss lake where her
parents were residing; she bade him follow her thither, and name the
hotel where he was to be found, the hour when he was to arrive. 'Am I not
precise as an office clerk?' she said, with a pleasant taste of the
reality her preciseness pictured.

'Practical as the head of a State department,' said he, in good faith.

'I shall not keep you waiting,' she resumed.

'The sooner we are together after the action opens the better for our
success, my golden crest!'

'Have no misgivings, Sigismund. You have transformed me. A spark of you
is in my blood. Come. I shall send word to your hotel when you are to
appear. But you will come, you will be there, I know. I know you so
entirely.'

'As a rule, Lutetia, women know no more than half of a man even when they
have married him. At least you ought to know me. You know that if I were
to exercise my will firmly now--it would not waver if I called it
forth--I could carry you off and spare you the flutter you will have to
go through during our interlude with papa and mama.'

'I almost wish you would,' said she. She looked half imploringly, biting
her lip to correct the peeping wish.

Alvan pressed a finger on one of her dimples: 'Be brave. Flight and
defiance are our last resource. Now that I see you resolved I shun the
scandal, and we will leave it to them to insist on it, if it must be. How
can you be less than resolved after I have poured my influence into your
veins? The other day on the heights--had you consented then? Well! it
would have been very well, but not so well. We two have a future, and are
bound to make the opening chapters good sober reading, for an example, if
we can. I take you from your father's house, from your mother's arms,
from the "God speed" of your friends. That is how Alvan's wife should be
presented to the world.'

Clotilde's epistle to the baroness was composed, approved, and
despatched. To a frigid eye it read as more hypocritical than it really
was; for supposing it had to be written, the language of the natural
impulse called up to write it was necessarily in request, and that
language is easily overdone, so as to be discordant with the situation,
while it is, as the writer feels, a fairly true and well-formed
expression of the pretty impulse. But wiser is it always that the star in
the ascendant should not address the one waning. Hardly can a word be
uttered without grossly wounding. She would not do it to a younger rival:
the letter strikes on the recipient's age! She babbles of a friendship:
she plays at childish ninny! The display of her ingenuous happiness
causes feminine nature's bosom to rise in surges. The declarations of her
devotedness to the man waken comparisons with a deeper, a longer-tried
suffering. Actually the letter of the rising star assumes personal
feeling to have died out of the abandoned luminary, and personal feeling
is chafed to its acutest edge by the perusal; contempt also of one who
can stupidly simulate such innocence, is roused.

Among Alvan's gifts the understanding of women did not rank high. He was
too robust, he had been too successful. Your very successful hero regards
them as nine-pins destined to fall, the whole tuneful nine, at a peculiar
poetical twist of the bowler's wrist, one knocking down the
other--figuratively, for their scruples, or for their example with their
sisters. His tastes had led him into the avenues of success, and as he
had not encountered grand resistances, he entertained his opinion of
their sex. The particular maxim he cherished was, to stake everything on
his making a favourable first impression: after which single figure, he
said, all your empty naughts count with women for hundreds, thousands,
millions: noblest virtues are but sickly units. He would have stared like
any Philistine at the tale of their capacity to advance to a likeness
unto men in their fight with the world. Women for him were objects to be
chased, the politician's relaxation, taken like the sportsman's business,
with keen relish both for the pursuit and the prey, and a view of the
termination of his pastime. Their feelings he could appreciate during the
time when they flew and fell, perhaps a little longer; but the change in
his own feelings withdrew him from the communion of sentiment. This is
the state of men who frequent the avenues of success. At present he was
thinking of a wife, and he approved the epistle to the baroness
cordially.

'I do think it a nice kind of letter, and quite humble enough,' said
Clotilde.

He agreed, 'Yes, yes: she knows already that this is really serious with
me.'

So much for the baroness.

Now for their parting. A parting that is no worse than the turning of a
page to a final meeting is made light of, but felt. Reason is all in our
favour, and yet the gods are jealous of the bliss of mortals; the slip
between the cup and the lip is emotionally watched for, even though it be
not apprehended, when the cup trembles for very fulness. Clotilde
required reassuring and comforting: 'I am certain you will prevail; you
must; you cannot be resisted; I stand to witness to the fact,' she sighed
in a languor: 'only, my people are hard to manage. I see more clearly
now, that I have imposed on them; and they have given away by a sort of
compact so long as I did nothing decisive. That I see. But, then again,
have I not your spirit in me now? What has ever resisted you?--Then, as I
am Alvan's wife, I share his heart with his fortunes, and I do not really
dread the scenes from anticipating failure, still-the truth is, I fear I
am three parts an actress, and the fourth feels itself a shivering morsel
to face reality. No, I do not really feel it, but press my hand, I shall
be true--I am so utterly yours: and because I have such faith in you. You
never, yet have failed.'

'Never: and it is impossible for me to conceive it,' said Alvan
thoughtfully.

His last word to her on her departure was 'Courage!' Hers to him was
conveyed by the fondest of looks. She had previously said 'To-morrow!' to
remind him of his appointment to be with her on the morrow, and herself
that she would not long stand alone. She did not doubt of her courage
while feasting on the beauty of one of the acknowledged strong men of
earth. She kissed her hand, she flung her heart to him from the waving
fingers.


CHAPTER VIII

Alvan, left to himself, had a quiet belief in the subjugation of his
tricksy Clotilde, and the inspiriting he had given her. All the rest to
come was mere business matter of the conflict, scarcely calling for a
plan of action. Who can hold her back when a woman is decided to move?
Husbands have tried it vainly, and parents; and though the husband and
the parents are not dealing with the same kind of woman, you see the same
elemental power in her under both conditions of rebel wife and rebel
daughter to break conventional laws, and be splendidly irrational. That
is, if she can be decided: in other words, aimed at a mark and inflamed
to fly the barriers intercepting. He fancied he had achieved it. Alvan
thanked his fortune that he had to treat with parents. The consolatory
sensation of a pure intent soothed his inherent wildness, in the
contemplation of the possibility that the latter might be roused by those
people, her parents, to upset his honourable ambition to win a wife after
the fashion of orderly citizens. It would be on their heads! But why
vision mischance? An old half-jesting prophecy of his among his friends,
that he would not pass his fortieth year, rose upon his recollection
without casting a shadow. Lo, the reckless prophet about to marry!

No dark bride, no skeleton, no colourless thing, no lichened tree, was
she. Not Death, my friends, but Life, is the bride of this doomed
fortieth year! Was animation ever vivider in contrast with obstruction?
Her hair would kindle the frosty shades to a throb of vitality: it would
be sunshine in the subterranean sphere. The very thinking of her
dispersed that realm of the poison hue, and the eternally inviting
phosphorescent, still, curved forefinger, which says, 'Come.'

To think of her as his vernal bride, while the snowy Alps were a
celestial garden of no sunset before his eyes, was to have the taste of
mortal life in the highest. He wondered how it was that he could have
waited so long for her since the first night of their meeting, and he
just distinguished the fact that he lived with the pulses of the minutes,
much as she did, only more fierily. The ceaseless warfare called politics
must have been the distraction: he forgot any other of another kind. He
was a bridegroom for whom the rosed Alps rolled out, a panorama of
illimitable felicity. And there were certain things he must overcome
before he could name his bride his own, so that his innate love of
contention, which had been constantly flattered by triumph, brought, his
whole nature into play with the prospect of the morrow: not much liking
it either. There is a nerve, in brave warriors that does not like the
battle before, the crackle of musketry is heard, and the big artillery.

But whether this my coniecture bee righte or wrong, they oughte to
consider, whiche firste began the warres. The Albanes haue created me
their Captaine of this enterpryse. I come to geue aduertisement to thee,
O Tullus, of this one thing. Which is, that the Thuscans being a great
nation, and of power right famous, doth inuirone vs both rounde
about, and the nerer they be vnto you, the more knowledge you haue of
them.
They be mightie vpon lande, and of great power vpon Sea. Call to thy
remembraunce and consider, that when thou geuest the signe and watch
worde of the battell, our twoo armies shall bee but a ridiculous spectacle
to them. So sone as they doe perceiue vs twoo to bee spent, and weried
with fighting, they will bothe assayle the vanquished, and him
also that doeth ouercome.

Wherefore if the Goddes do fauour eyther of vs, let vs not shewe our selues
to bee wearie of our libertie and franchise that is certaine, and hazard
the dice to incurre perpetuall seruitude and bondage. Therfore let vs
deuise some other waye, wherby the one of vs may gouerne the other without
effusion of eithers bloud."
This condition nothing displeased Tullus, although in courage, and hope
of victorie, he was more fierce and bolder then the other. And being
in consultation about the purpose, fortune ministred an apt occasion
to them both: for in either campes there were thre brethren, of age and
valiance semblable.

The brethren that were in the Romaine campe were called Horatij, the
other Curiatij. Whereupon a combate was thought meete betwene these sixe
persones.

After the Romaines had vsed their solempne maners of consecrating the
truces, and other rites concerning the same, either partes repaired
to the combate.

Both the armies stode in readines before their campes, rather voyde
of present perill then of care: for the state of either of their
Empires, consisted in the valiance and fortune of a fewe.

Wherfore theire mindes were wonderfullye bent and incensed vpon
that vnpleasant sight.

The signe of the combat was giuen.

The thre yonge men of either side do ioigne with furious and cruel
onset, representing the courages of two battelles of puissaunt
armies.

For the losse consisted in neither those three, but the publique
gouernement or common thraldome of both the cities, and that was
the future fortune, whiche they did trie and proue.

So sone as the clashing armoure did sound at their first incountrie,
and their glittering swordes did shine, an incredible horror and
feare perced the beholders, and hope inclining to either partes,
their voyce and myndes were whist and silent.

But after they were closed together, not onely the mouing of their
bodies, and doubtfull welding and handling of their weapons, but
bloudye woundes appeared, two of the Romaines falling downe starke
dead one vppon an other: But before the three Albanes were sore hurt.

Whereat the Albane hoste shouted for ioye. The Romaine Legions were
voyde of hope, amazed to see but one remayne against three: It chaunced
that hee that liued whyche as hee was but one alone (an vnmeete matche
for the rest) so he was fierce, and thought himselfe good enough for them
all.

Therefore to separate their fight, he flede backe, meaning thereby
to geue euery of them their welcome as they followed.

When he was retired a good space from the place wher they fought,
loking back, he sawe them followe some distance one from an other,
and as one of them approched, he let driue at him with great violence.

And whiles the Albane hoste cried out vpon the Curiatij, to helpe their
brother, Horatius had killed his enemie, and demaunded for the seconde
battaile.

Then the Romaines incouraged their champion with acclamations and shoutes,
as fearefull men be wont to do vpon the sodaine, and Horatius
spedeth himselfe to the fight.

And before the other could ouertake him, which was not farre off,
hee had killed an other of the Curiatij.

Nowe were they equally matched one to one, but in hope and strengthe
vnlike.

For the one was free of wounde or hurte: cruell and fierce by reason
of double victorie, the other faint for losse of bloud, and wearie
of running, and who with panting breath, discomfited for his brethrens
slaughter, slaine before him, is now obiected to fight with his
victorious enemy.

A match altogether vnequall. Horatius reioysing sayd, two of thy brethren
I haue dispatched, the thirde, the cause of this battaill, I will
take in hand:
that the Romaines maye bee lordes of the Albanes.

Curiatius not able to sustaine his blowe, fell downe, and lying vpon
his backe, he thrust him into the throte with his sworde, whiche
done he dispoyled him of his armure.

Then the Romanies in great triumphe and reioyse intertaigned Horatius,
and their ioye was the greater, for that the feare of their ouerthrowe was
the nearer. This combate being ended, the Albanes became subiecte to the
Romaines, and before Metius departed, he asked Tullus if hee would
commaunde him any further seruice. Who willed him to kepe the younge
souldiours still in intertaignement, for that hee woulde require their
aide against the Veientes. The armie dissolued, Horatius like a Conquerour
marched home to Rome, the three spoyles of his ennemies being borne
before hym.

The said Horatius had a sister, which was espoused to one of the
Curiatij that were slaine, who meeting her brother in the triumphe,
at one of the gates called Capena, and knowing the coate armure of
her paramour, borne vpon her brothers shoulders, which she had
wrought and made with her owne handes: She tore and rent the heare
of her heade, and most piteouslye bewayled the death of her beloued.

Her brother being in the pride of his victorie taking the lamentation of
his sister, in disdainful part, drew oute his sword, and thruste her
through speaking these reprochfull woordes: "Auaunt with thy vnreasonable
loue, gette thee to thy spouse. Hast thou forgotten the deathe of thy two
brethren that be slaine, the prosperous successe of thy victorious brother,
and chiefelye the happye deliueraunce of thy countrie: Let that
Romaine woman whatsoeuer she be, take like rewarde, that shall
bewaile the death of the ennemie."

Which horrible facte seemed most cruell to the fathers and people. For
which offence he was brought before the kinge, whom he deliuered to be
iudged according to the lawe. The law condempned him, then he appealed
to the people. In which appeale P. Horatius his father spake these
wordes: "My doughter is slaine, not without iust desert, which if it
were not so, I would haue sued for condigne punishmente, to be executed
vpon my sonne, according to the naturall pietie of a father:
Wherfore I beseech you do not suffer me, whom you haue seene in time past,
beautified with a noble race and progenie of children, nowe to
be vtterlye destitute and voyde of all together."
Then hee embrased his sonne amonges them all, and shewed the spoiles
of the Curatiens, sayinge: "Can you abide to see this noble Champion (O
ye Romaines) whom lately ye behelde to go in order of triumphe in victorious
maner, to lye nowe bounde vnder the gibet, expecting for tormentes of
death: Which cruell and deformed sight, the Albanes eyes can not well
be able to beholde, goe to then thou hangman, and binde the handes of
him, who hath atchieued to the Romaine people a glorious Empyre: Goe,
I saye, and couer the face of him that hath deliuered this citie out of
thraldome and bondage.

Hang him vpon some vnhappie tree, and scourge him in some place within
the Citie, either amongs these our triumphes, where the spoiles of our
enemies do remaine, or els without the walles, amonges the graues of
the vanquished. Whether can yee deuise to carrie him, but that his
honourable and worthye actes, shal reueng the villanie of his cruel death."
The people hearing the lamentable talke of his father, and seinge in him
an vnmoueable minde, able to sustaine al aduersity, acquited him rather
through the admiration of his vertue and valiance, then by iustice and
equity of his cause. Such was the straite order of iustice amonges
the Romaines, who although this yonge gentleman had vindicated his
countrie from seruitude and bondage (a noble memorye of perfecte manhode)
yet by reason of the murder done vppon his owne sister, were very
straite and slacke to pardon: because they would not incourage the
posteritie to like inconuenience, nor prouoke wel doers in their glorye
and triumphe, to perpetrate thinges vnlawfull.

THE SECOND NOUELL.

_Sextus Tarquinius rauished Lucrece. And she bewayling the losse
of her chastitie, killed her selfe._

Great preparation was made by the Romaines, against a people called
Rutuli, who had a citie named Ardea, excelling in wealth and riches
which was the cause that the Romaine king, being exhausted and quite voyde
of money, by reason of his sumptuous buildinges, made warres vppon
that countrie. In the time of the siege of that citie the yonge Romaine
gentlemen banqueted one another, amonges whom there was one called
Collatinus Tarquinius, the sonne of Egerius.

And by chaunce they entred in communication of their wiues, euery one
praysing his seueral spouse.

At length the talke began to grow hot, whereupon Collatinus said, that
words were vaine. For within few houres it might be tried, how much his
wife Lucretia did excel the rest, wherefore (quoth he) if there be any
liuelihod in you, let us take our horse, to proue which of oure wiues
doth surmount.

Wheruppon they roode to Rome in post. At their comming they found
the kinges doughters, sportinge themselues with sondrye pastimes: From
thence they went to the house of Collatinus, where they founde
Lucrece, not as the other before named, spending time in idlenes,
but late in the night occupied and busie amonges her maydes in the
middes of her house spinning of woll.

The victory and prayse wherof was giuen to Lucretia, who when she
saw her husband, gentlie and louinglie intertained him, and curteouslye
badde the Tarquinians welcome.

Immediately Sextus Tarquinius the sonne of Tarquinias Superbus, (that time
the Romaine king) was incensed wyth a libidious desire, to construpate
and defloure Lucrece.

When the yonge gentlemen had bestowed that night pleasantly with their
wiues, they retourned to the Campe. Not long after Sextus Tarquinius with
one man retourned to Collatia vnknowen to Collatinus, and ignorant to
Lucrece and the rest of her houshold, for what purpose he came. Who
being well intertayned, after supper was conueighed to his chamber.
Tarquinius burninge with the loue of Lucrece, after he perceiued
the housholde to be at reste, and all thinges in quiet, with his
naked sworde in his hande, wente to Lucrece being a sleepe, and
keeping her downe with his lefte hande, saide: "Holde thy peace
Lucrece, I am Sextus Tarquinius, my sworde is in my hand, if thou
crie, I will kill thee."

The gentlewoman sore afrayed, being newely awaked oute of her sleepe,
and seeing iminent death, could not tell what to do. Then Tarquinius
confessed his loue, and began to intreate her, and therewithall
vsed sundry minacing wordes, by all meanes attempting to make her
quiet: when he saw her obstinate, and that she woulde not yelde to
his request, notwithstanding his cruell threates, he added shameful
and villanous speach, saying: That he would kill her, and when she
was slaine, he woulde also kill his slaue, and place him by her,
that it might be reported howe she was slaine, being taken in
adulterie.

She vanquished with his terrible and infamous threate, his fleshlye
and licentious enterprice, ouercame the puritie of her chaste and
honest hart, which done he departed.

Then Lucrece sent a post to Rome to her father, and an other to Ardea to
her husbande, requiringe them that they would make speede to come
vnto her, with certaine of their trustie frendes, for that a cruell
facte was chaunced.

Then Sp. Lucretius with P.

Valerius the sonne of Volesius, and Collatinus with L.

Iunius Brutus, made hast to Lucrece: where they founde her sitting,
very pensife and sadde, in her chamber.

So sone as she sawe them she began pitiously to weepe. Then her husband
asked her, whether all thinges were well, vnto whom she sayde these
wordes.

"No dere husbande, for what can be well or safe vnto a woman, when she hath
lost her chastitie?

Alas Collatine, the steppesof an other man, be now fixed in thy bed. But
it is my bodye onely that is violated, my minde God knoweth is giltles,
whereof my death shalbe witnesse.

But if you be men giue me your handes and trouth, that the adulterer
may not escape vnreuenged. It is Sextus Tarquinius whoe being an enemie,
in steede of a frende, the other night came vnto mee, armed with his
sword in his hand, and by violence caried away from me (the Goddes
know) a woful ioy." Then euery one of them gaue her their faith, and
comforted the pensife and languishing lady, imputing the offence
to the authour and doer of the same, affirming that her bodye was
polluted, and not her minde, and where consent was not, there the
crime was absente.

Whereunto shee added: "I praye you consider with your selues, what punishmente
is due for the malefactour. As for my part, though I cleare my selfe
of the offence, my body shall feele the punishment: for no vnchast or ill
woman, shall hereafter impute no dishonest act to Lucrece." Then she
drewe out a knife, which she had hidden secretely, vnder her kirtle, and
stabbed her selfe to the harte. Which done, she fell downe grouelinge
vppon her wound and died. Whereupon her father and husband made
great lamentation, and as they were bewayling the death of Lucrece,
Brutus plucked the knife oute of the wound, which gushed out with
aboundance of bloude, and holding it vp said: "I sweare by the chast
bloud of this body here dead, and I take you the immortall Gods to witnes,
that I will driue and extirpate oute of this Citie, both L. Tarquinius
Superbus, and his wicked wife, with all the race of his children and
progenie, so that none of them, ne yet any others shall raigne anye longer
in Rome." Then hee deliuered the knife to Collatinus. Lucretius and
Valerius, who marueyled at the strangenesse of his words: and from whence
he should conceiue that determination. They all swore that othe. And
followed Brutus, as their captaine, in his conceiued purpose. The body
of Lucrece was brought into the market place, where the people wondred
at the vilenesse of that facte, euery man complayning vppon the mischiefe
of that facinorous rape, committed by Tarquinius. Whervpon Brutus perswaded
the Romaynes, that they should cease from teares and other childishe
lamentacions, and to take weapons in their handes, to shew themselues
like men.

Then the lustiest and most desperate persons within the citie, made
themselues prest and readie, to attempte any enterprise: and after
a garrison was placed and bestowed at Collatia, diligent watche and
ward was kept at the gates of the Citie, to the intent the kinge
should haue no aduertisement of that sturre.

The rest of the souldiours followed Brutus to Rome.

When he was come thither, the armed multitude did beate a marueilous
feare throughout the whole Citie: but yet because they sawe the chiefeste
personages goe before, they thought that the same enterprise was
taken in vaine.

Wherefore the people out of all places of the citie, ranne into the
market place.

Where Brutus complained of the abhominable Rape of Lucrece, committed
by Sextus Tarquinius.

And thereunto he added the pride and insolent behauiour of the king,
the miserie and drudgerie of the people, and howe they, which in
time paste were victours and Conquerours, were made of men of warre,
Artificers, and Labourers.

He remembred also the infamous murder of Seruius Tullius their late
kinge.
These and such like he called to the peoples remembraunce, whereby they
abrogated and deposed Tarquinius, banishing him, his wife, and
children.

Then he leuied an armie of chosen and piked men, and marched to the Campe
at Ardea, committing the gouernemente of the Citie to Lucretius, who
before was by the king appointed Lieutenant. Tullia in the time of
this hurlie burlie, fledde from her house, all the people cursing and
crying vengeaunce vpon her.

Newes brought into the campe of these euentes, the king with great feare
retourned to Rome, to represse those tumultes, and Brutus hearinge of his
approche, marched another waye, because hee woulde not meete him. When
Tarquinius was come to Rome, the gates were shutte against him, and he
himselfe commaunded to auoide into exile. The campe receiued Brutus with
great ioye and triumphe, for that he had deliuered the citie of
such a tyraunte.

Then Tarquinius with his children fledde to Cære, a Citie of the Hetrurians.
And as Sextus Tarquinius was going, he was slaine by those that
premeditated reuengemente, of olde murder and iniuries by him done
to their predecessours.

This L. Tarquinius Superbus raigned XXV yeares. The raigne of the kinges
from the first foundation of the citie continued CCxliiii. yeares.

After which gouernmente two Consuls were appointed, for the order and
administration of the Citie. And for that yeare L. Iunius Brutus, and L.
Tarquinius, Collatinus.

THE THIRD NOUELL.

_The siege of Rome by Porsenna, and the valiaunt deliuerie thereof
by Mutius Sc[oe]uola, with his stoute aunswere vnto the kinge._
When P.

Valerius and T. Lucretius were created Consuls, Porsenna kinge of
Hetruria, vppon the instigation of the banished Tarquinians, came before
the citie with a huge armie. The brute wherof did wonderfully appall the
Senate: for the like occasion of terrour, neuer before that time
chaunced to the Romaines, who did not onely feare their enemies,
but also their owne subiects, suspecting lest they should be forced
to retaine the kinges againe.

All which afterwards, were through the wisedome and discretion of the fathers
quietlye appeased, and the citie reduced to such vnitie and courage, as
all sorts of people despised the name of king. When the enemies were
approched, the rurall people abandoning their colonies, fled for
rescue into the citie.

The citie was diuided into garrisons: some kept the walles, and
some the waye ouer Tiber, which was thought very safe and able to
be defended.

Althoughe the wodden bridge made ouer the Riuer, had almost been an open
way for the enemies entrie, whereof Horacius Cocles, as fortune serued
that day, had the charge. Who so manfully behaued himselfe, as after he
had broken vp and burned the bridge, and done other notable exploites,
he defended that passage with such valiance, that the defence therof
seemed miraculous, to the great astonishment of the enemies. In fine
Porsenna seing that he coulde litle preuaile in the assault, retourned
to the Campe, determining neuerthelesse to continue his siege. At which
time one Caius Mutius, a yonge gentleman of Rome, purposed to
aduenture some notable enterprise: saying to the Senators these
wordes: "I determine to passe the Riuer, and enter if I can, into
the campe of the enemies, not to fetch spoile, or to reuenge mutuall
iniuries, but to hazard greater matters, if the Gods be assistant
vnto me."

The senate vnderstanding the effect of his indeuour, allowed his deuise.
And then hauinge a sword vnder his garment, went forth.

When he was come into the throng, he conueighed himselfe as nere the
kinges pauilion as he could. It chaunced that he was paying wages
that day to his souldiours, by whom his Secretarie did sit in such
apparell, almost as the king himselfe did weare.

Mutius being afraide to demaunde which of them was the king, lest he should
bewray himselfe, sodainly killed the Secretarie in steede of the king,
and as he was making waye with his bloudie sworde to escape, he was
apprehended and brought before the king, and with maruailous stoutnesse
and audacitie, spake these wordes: "I am a citizen of Rome, and
my name is Mutius, and beinge an enemy, I woulde faine haue killed
mine enemie.

For which attempt I esteeme no more to die, then I cared to commit the
murder. It is naturally giuen to the Romaines, both valiantly to do and
stoutly to suffer. And not I alone haue conspired thy death, but a greate
nomber of vs, haue promised the like, and hope to prosecute semblable
prayse and glorie: wherfore if this beginninge do not please thee, make
thy selfe ready euerye houre to expect like perill, and to fight for thy
selfe.

And make accompt, that euery day euen at the dore of thine owne lodging,
thy enemye armed doth waite for thee: we alone yong gentlemen of the Citie
do stand at defiance, and pronounce vppon thee this kinde of battaile.
Feare no armies or other hostilitie, for with thee alone, and with
euerye one of vs these warres shalbe tryed."

The king astonied with that bold and desperate enterprise, fell
into a great rage and furie, commaundinge Mutius presentlye to be consumed
with fyre, vnlesse he would out of hand tell him the order of the purposed
and deuised treason.

"Behold O king (quoth hee) how litle they care for theyr bodies, that do
aspire and seeke for fame and glorie." And then he thrust his right
hand into the fire, and rosted the same in the flame, like one
that had been out of his wits.

The craven's first instinct for safety, quick as the cavern lynx for
light, set her on the idea that she was abandoned: it whispered of
quietness if she submitted.

And thus she reasoned: Had Alvan taken her, she would not have been
guilty of more than a common piece of love-desperation in running to him,
the which may be love's glory when marriage crowns it. By his rejecting
her and leaving her, he rendered her not only a runaway, but a castaway.
It was not natural that he should leave her; 'not natural in him to act
his recent part; but he had done it; consequently she was at the mercy of
those who might pick her up. She was, in her humiliation and dread, all
of the moment, she could see to no distance; and judging of him, feeling
for herself, within that contracted circle of sensation--sure, from her
knowledge of her cowardice, that he had done unwisely--she became swayed
about like a castaway in soul, until her distinguishing of his mad
recklessness in the challenge of a power greater than his own grew
present with her as his personal cruelty to the woman who had flung off
everything, flung herself on the tempestuous deeps, on his behalf. And
here she was, left to float or founder! Alvan had gone. The man rageing
over the room, abusing her 'infamous lover, the dirty Jew, the notorious
thief, scoundrel, gallowsbird,' etc., etc., frightful epithets, not to be
transcribed--was her father. He had come, she knew not how. Alvan had
tossed her to him.

Abuse of a lover is ordinarily retorted on in the lady's heart by the
brighter perception of his merits; but when the heart is weak, the
creature suffering shame, her lover the cause of it, and seeming cruel,
she is likely to lose all perception and bend like a flower pelted. Her
cry to him: 'If you had been wiser, this would not have been!' will sink
to the inward meditation: 'If he had been truer!'--and though she does
not necessarily think him untrue for charging him with it, there is
already a loosening of the bonds where the accusation has begun. They are
not broken because they are loosened: still the loosening of them makes
it possible to cut them with less of a snap and less pain.

Alvan had relinquished her he loved to brave the tempest in a frail small
boat, and he certainly could not have apprehended the furious outbreak
she was exposed to. She might so far have exonerated him had she been
able to reflect; but she whom he had forced to depend on him in blind
reliance, now opened her eyes on an opposite power exercising material
rigours. After having enjoyed extraordinary independence for a young
woman, she was treated as a refractory child, literally marched through
the streets in the custody of her father, who clutched her by the
hair-Alvan's beloved golden locks!--and held her under terror of a huge
forester's weapon, that he had seized at the first tidings of his
daughter's flight to the Jew. He seemed to have a grim indifference to
exposure; contempt, with a sense of the humour of it: and this was a
satisfaction to him, founded on his practical observance of two or three
maxims quite equal to the fullest knowledge of women for rightly managing
them: preferable, inasmuch as they are simpler, and, by merely cracking a
whip, bring her back to the post, instead of wasting time by hunting her
as she likes to run. Police were round his house. The General chattered
and shouted of the desperate lawlessness and larcenies of that Jew--the
things that Jew would attempt. He dragged her indoors, muttering of his
policy in treating her at last to a wholesome despotism.

This was the medicine for her--he knew her! Whether he did or not, he
knew the potency of his physic. He knew that osiers can be made to bend.
With a frightful noise of hammering, he himself nailed up the
window-shutters of the room she was locked in hard and fast, and he left
her there and roared across the household that any one holding
communication with the prisoner should be shot like a dog. This was a
manifestation of power in a form more convincing than the orator's.

She was friendless, abused, degraded, benighted in broad daylight;
abandoned by her lover. She sank on the floor of the room, conceiving
with much strangeness of sentiment under these hard stripes of
misfortune, that reality had come. The monster had hold of her. She was
isolated, fed like a dungeoned captive. She had nothing but our natural
obstinacy to hug, or seem to do so when wearifulness reduced her to cling
to the semblance of it only. 'I marry Alvan!' was her iterated answer to
her father, on his visits to see whether he had yet broken her; and she
spoke with the desperate firmness of weak creatures that strive to nail
themselves to the sound of it. He listened and named his time for
returning. The tug between rigour and endurance continued for about forty
hours. She then thought, in an exhaustion: 'Strange that my father should
be so fiercely excited against this man! Can he have reasons I have not
heard of?' Her father's unwonted harshness suggested the question in her
quailing nature, which was beginning to have a movement to kiss the whip.
The question set her thinking of the reasons she knew. She saw them
involuntarily from the side of parents, and they wore a sinister
appearance; in reality her present scourging was due to them as well as
to Alvan's fatal decision. Her misery was traceable to his conduct and
his judgement--both bad. And yet all this while he might be working to
release her, near upon rescuing! She swung round to the side of her lover
against these executioner parents, and scribbled to him as well as she
could under the cracks in her windowshutters, urging him to appear. She
spent her heart on it. A note to her friend, the English lady, protested
her love for Alvan, but with less abandonment, with a frozen resignation
to the loss of him--all around her was so dark! By-and-by there was a
scratching at her door. The maid whom she trusted brought her news of
Alvan: outside the door and in, the maid and mistress knelt. Hope
flickered up in the bosom of Clotilde: the whispers were exchanged
through the partition.

'Where is he?'

'Gone.'

'But where?'

'He has left the city.'

Clotilde pushed the letter for her friend under the door: that one for
Alvan she retained, stung by his desertion of her, and thinking
practically that it was useless to aim a letter at a man without an
address. She did not ask herself whether the maid's information was
honest, for she wanted to despair, as the exhausted want to lie down.

She wept through the night. It was one of those nights of the torrents of
tears which wash away all save the adamantine within us, if there be
ought of that besides the breathing structure. The reason why she wept
with so delirious a persistency was, that her nature felt the necessity
for draining her of her self-pitifulness, knowing that it nourished the
love whereby she was tormented. They do not weep thus who have a heart
for the struggle. In the morning she was a dried channel of tears, no
longer self-pitiful; careless of herself, as she thought: in other words,
unable any further to contend.

Reality was too strong! This morning her sisters came to her room
imploring her to yield:--if she married Alvan, what could be their
prospects as the sisters-in law of such a man?--her betrothed sister
Lotte could not hope to espouse Count Walburg: Alvan's name was infamous
in society; their house would be a lazar-house, they would be condemned
to seclusion. A favourite brother followed, with sympathy that set her
tears running again, and arguments she could not answer: how could he
hold up his head in his regiment as the relative of the scandalous Jew
democrat? He would have to leave the service, or be duelling with his
brother officers every other day of his life, for rightly or wrongly
Alvan was abhorred, and his connection would be fatal to them all,
perhaps to her father's military and diplomatic career principally: the
head of their house would be ruined. She was compelled to weep again by
having no other reply. The tears were now mixed drops of pity for her
absent lover and her family; she was already disunited from him when she
shed them, feeling that she was dry rock to herself, heartless as many
bosoms drained of self-pity will become.

Incapable of that any further, she leaned still in that direction and had
a languid willingness to gain outward comfort. To be caressed a little by
her own kindred before she ceased to live was desireable after her heavy
scourging. She wished for the touches of affection, knowing them to be
selfish, but her love of life and hard view of its reality made them seem
a soft reminder of what life had been. Alvan had gone. Her natural
blankness of imagination read his absence as an entire relinquishment; it
knelled in a vacant chamber. He had gone; he had committed an
irretrievable error, he had given up a fight of his own vain provoking,
that was too severe for him: he was not the lover he fancied himself, or
not the lord of men she had fancied him. Her excessive misery would not
suffer a picture of him, not one clear recollection of him, to stand
before her. He who should have been at hand, had gone, and she was
fearfully beset, almost lifeless; and being abandoned, her blank night of
imagination felt that there was nothing left for her save to fall upon
those nearest.

She gave her submission to her mother. In her mind, during the last
wrestling with a weakness that was alternately her love, and her
cowardice, the interpretation of the act ran: 'He may come, and I am his
if he comes: and if not, I am bound to my people.' He had taught her to
rely on him blindly, and thus she did it inanimately while cutting
herself loose from him. In a similar mood, the spiritual waverer vows to
believe if the saint will appear. However, she submitted. Then there was
joy in the family, and she tasted their caresses.


CHAPTER IX

After his deed of loftiness Alvan walked to his hotel, where the sight of
the room Clotilde had entered that morning caught his breath. He
proceeded to write his first letter to General von Rudiger, repressing
his heart's intimations that he had stepped out of the friendly path, and
was on a strange and tangled one. The sense of power in him was leonine
enough to promise the forcing of a way whithersoever the path: yet did
that ghost of her figure across the room haunt him with searching eyes.
They set him spying over himself at an actor who had not needed to be
acting his part, brilliant though it was. He crammed his energy into his
idea of the part, to carry it forward victoriously. Before the world, it
would without question redound to his credit, and he heard the world
acclaiming him:

'Alvan's wife was honourably won, as became the wife of a Doctor of Law,
from the bosom of her family, when he could have had her in the old
lawless fashion, for a call to a coachman! Alvan, the republican, is
eminently a citizen. Consider his past life by that test of his
character.'

He who had many times defied the world in hot rebellion, had become,
through his desire to cherish a respectable passion, if not exactly
slavish to it, subservient, as we see royal personages, that are happy to
be on bowing terms with the multitude bowing lower. Lower, of course, the
multitude must bow, to inspire an august serenity; but the nod they have
in exchange for it is not an independent one. Ceasing to be a social
rebel, he conceived himself as a recognized dignitary, and he passed
under the bondage of that position.

Clotilde had been in this room; she had furnished proof that she could be
trusted now. She had committed herself, perished as a maiden of society,
and her parents, even the senseless mother, must see it and decide by it.
The General would bring her to reason: General von Rudiger was a man of
the world. An honourable son-in-law could not but be acceptable to
him--now, at least. And such a son-in-law would ultimately be the pride
of his house. 'A flower from thy garden, friend, and my wearing it shall
in good time be cause for some parental gratification.'

The letter despatched, Alvan paced his chamber with the ghost of
Clotilde. He was presently summoned to meet Count Walburg and another
intimate of the family, in the hotel downstairs. These gentlemen brought
no message from General von Rudiger: their words were directed to extract
a promise from him that he would quit his pursuit of Clotilde, and of
course he refused; they hinted that the General might have official
influence to get him expelled the city, and he referred them to the
proof; but he looked beyond the words at a new something of extraordinary
and sinister aspect revealed to him in their manner of treating his
pretensions to the hand of the lady.

He had not yet perfectly seen the view the world took of him, because of
his armed opposition to the world; nor could he rightly reflect on it
yet, being too anxious to sign the peace. He felt as it were a blow
startling him from sleep. His visitors tasked themselves to be strictly
polite; they did not undervalue his resources for commanding respect
between man and man. The strange matter was behind their bearing, which
indicated the positive impossibility of the union of Clotilde with one
such as he, and struck at the curtain covering his history. He could not
raise it to thunder his defence of himself, or even allude to the implied
contempt of his character: with a boiling gorge he was obliged to swallow
both the history and the insult, returning them the equivalent of their
courtesies, though it was on his lips to thunder heavily.

A second endeavour, in an urgent letter before nightfall to gain him
admission to head-quarters, met the same repulse as the foregoing. The
bearer of it was dismissed without an answer.

Alvan passed a night of dire disturbance. The fate of the noble Genoese
conspirator, slipping into still harbour water on the step from boat to
boat, and borne down by the weight of his armour in the moment of the
ripeness of his plot at midnight, when the signal for action sparkled to
lighten across the ships and forts, had touched him in his boy's
readings, and he found a resemblance of himself to Fiesco, stopped as he
was by a base impediment, tripped ignominiously, choked by the weight of
the powers fitting him for battle. A man such as Alvan, arrested on his
career by an opposition to his enrolment of a bride!--think of it! What
was this girl in a life like his? But, oh! the question was no sooner
asked than the thought that this girl had been in this room illuminated
the room, telling him she might have been his own this instant,
confounding him with an accusation of madness for rejecting her. Why had
he done it? Surely women, weak women, must be at times divinely inspired.
She warned him against the step. But he, proud of his armoury, went his
way. He choked, he suffered the torture of the mailed Genoese going
under; worse, for the drowner's delirium swirls but a minute in the
gaping brain, while he had to lie all, night at the mercy of the night.

He was only calmer when morning came. Night has little mercy for the
self-reproachful, and for a strong man denouncing the folly of his error,
it has none. If we from Massachusetts, or any other State,--senators or
members of the House, are to be called to account by some "gallant
uncle," when we utter something which does not suit their sensitive
nature, we desire to know it.

If the conflict is to be transferred from the peaceful, intellectual
field to one where, it is said, "honors are easy and responsibilities
equal," then we desire to know it. Massachusetts, if her sons and
representatives are to have the rod held over them,--though she
utters no threats,--may be called upon to withdraw them to her own bosom,
where she can furnish to them that protection which is not vouchsafed
to them under the flag of their common country. But while she permits us
to remain, we shall do our duty; we shall speak whatever we choose
to speak, whatever we will, and however we will, regardless of the
consequences.

Sir, the sons of Massachusetts are educated, at the knees of their mothers,
in the doctrines of peace and good-will, and God knows we desire to
cultivate those feelings,--feelings of social kindness, and public
kindness.

The House will bear witness that we have not violated or trespassed upon
any of them; but, sir, if we are pushed too long and too far, there are
men from the old Commonwealth of Massachusetts who will not shrink
from a defence of freedom of speech, and the State they represent: in
any field where they may be assailed.
A. Burlingame.

CCLVIII.

STRENGTH OF THE GOVERNMENT.

I know that I may be met at once by the objection that our general government
is, after all, but a qualified and imperfect government. I may be reminded
that it was from Massachusetts that the amendment came which expressly
declares that all powers not given, are withheld. And then it may be asked,
is there not here a manifest division of sovereignty and of power, and
does not this show that much is wanting--that all which is retained at
home is wanting--to constitute the full strength of a national
government? My answer is twofold. First, I say, the national government
has at this moment, by force of the Constitution, all the strength--absolutely
all--which it needs, or could profitably use, as a central national
government. I answer next, that by the admirable provisions of our
Constitution, the reserved powers of every State may be, and, so
far as that State does its duty, will be, prepared and developed to their
utmost efficiency, and then imparted to the nation in its need.

Do we want a proof and illustration of all this?

Very recent events have supplied one, which history will not
forget, if we do. How happened it that, a few weeks since, when the
general government seemed to be feeble, and was in peril, and the
demand--I may as well say the cry for help came forth--why was it
that Massachusetts was the first to spring to the rescue?
Why was it that she was able, in four days from that in which this
cry reached her, to add a new glory to the day of Lexington? Why was it
that she could begin that offering of needed aid which has since poured
itself in a full, and swollen, and rushing stream, into the war power
of the national government? Even as I ask the question, the answer
is in all your minds. It is, that Massachusetts could do this because
she had done her own duty beforehand. She could do this because, within
her own bounds, she had prepared and organized her own strength,
and stood ready for the moment when she could place it in the outstretched
hands of the government. And other States followed, offering their
contributions with no interval--with almost too little of delay; with a
haste which was sometimes precipitation; with an importunate begging for
acceptance--all of it yet far behind the earnest desire and demand
of the people of these States, until at length we stood before an
astonished world the strongest government on the face of the earth.

Stronger, therefore, for all the purposes to which our national government
should apply its strengths stronger for all the good it can do and all
the harm it can prevent, that government is, as it is now constructed,
and because it is so constructed, than it could be if it were the
single, central, consolidated power of other nations. And it will show its
strength, not by preventing all checks and reverses, for that is
impossible; but, as I believe, in prompt and thorough recovery from
them.
T. Parsons.

CCLIX.

THE HIGHER LAW.

In the whole political history of our own country, there has been no sin
so atrocious as the repudiation of a higher than human law. It is stark
atheism; for, with the law, this position virtually denies also the
providence of God, and makes men and nations sole arbiters of their
own fortunes.

But "the Heavens do rule." If there be institutions or measures inconsistent
with immutable rectitude, they are fostered only under the ban of a
righteous God; they inwrap the germs of their own harvest of
shame, disorder, vice, and wretchedness; nay, their very prosperity is
but the verdure and blossoming which shall mature the apples of Sodom.
O, how often have our legislators had reason to recall those pregnant
words of Jefferson,--sad indeed is it that they should have become
almost too trite for repetition, without having worked their way
into the national conscience,--"I tremble for my country, when I consider
that God is just!" The nations that have passed away, the decaying nations,
the convulsed thrones, the smouldering rebellion-fires of the Old
World, reveal the elements of national decline and ruin, and hold
out baleful signals over the career on which our republic is hurrying;
assuring us, by the experience of all climes and ages, that slavery,
the unprincipled lust of power and territory official corruption
and venality, aggressive war, partisan legislation, are but "sowing
the wind to reap the whirlwind."

Our statesmen of the "manifest destiny" type seem to imagine oar country
necessary to the designs of Providence. So thought the Hebrews, and on
far more plausible grounds, of their commonwealth; but, rather than
fulfil to such degenerate descendants the promise made to their great
ancestor, "God is able," said the divine Teacher. "of these stones to
raise up children unto Abraham."
Our destiny must be evolved, not from the blending of the world's noblest
races in our ancestral stock; not from a position in which we hold the
keys of the world's commerce, and can say to the North, "Give up," and to
the South, "Keep not back;" not from our capacity to absorb and assimilate
immigrant millions. Destiny is but the concrete of character. God
needs no man or nation. He will bring in the reign of everlasting
righteousness; and as a people, we must stand or fall as we accept or spurn
that reign.
Brethren, scholars, patriots also, I trust,--you whose generous
nurture gives you large and enduring influence,--seek for the country
of your pride and love, above all things else, her establishment
on the eternal right as on the Rock of Ages.

Thus shall there be no spot on her fame, no limit to her growth,
no waning to her glory.

A. P. Peabody.

CCLX.

"STEP TO THE CAPTAINS OFFICE AND SETTLE."
This old watchword, so often heard by travellers in the early stages of
steam-navigation, is now and then ringing in our ears with a very pointed
and pertinent application. It is a note that belongs to all the
responsibilities of this life for eternity. There is a day of
reckoning, a day for the settlement of accounts. All unpaid bills
will then have to be paid; all unbalanced books will have to be settled.
There will be no loose memorandums forgotten; there will be no heedless
commissioners for the convenience of careless consciences; there will
be no proxies; there will be no bribed auditors.

Neither will there be such a thing as a hesitating conscience; but
the inward monitor, so often drugged and silenced on earth, will
speak out.

There will be no doubt nor question as to the right and wrong. There
will be no vain excuses! nor any attempt to make them. There will be no
more sophistry, no more considerations of expediency, no more
pleading of the laws of men and the customs of society, no more
talk about organic sins being converted into constructive righteousness,
or collective and corporate frauds releasing men from individual
responsibilities.

When we see a man, a professed Christian, running a race with the worshippers
of wealth and fashion, absorbed in the vanities of the world, or endeavoring
to serve both God and mammon, we hear the voice, Step to the captain's
office and settle!

When we see editors and politicians setting power in the place of goodness,
and expediency in the place of justice and law in the place of equity,
and custom in the place of right, putting darkness for light, and evil
for good, and tyranny for general benevolence, we think of the day when
the issuers of such counterfeit money will be brought to light,
and their sophistries and lies exposed,--for among the whole tribe
of unprincipled politicians there will be great consternation when
the call comes to step to the captain's office and settle.

When we see unjust rulers in their pride of power fastening chains upon
the bondmen, oppressing the poor, and playing their pranks of defiant
tyranny before high heaven, then also come these words to mind,
like a blast from the last trumpet, Step to the captain's office
and settle!

G. B. Cheever

CCLXI.

THE MURDER OF THE SOUL.

There are some people whose sympathies have been excited upon the
subject of slavery, who, if they can only be satisfied that the
slaves have enough to eat, think it is all very well, and that
nothing more is to be said or done.

If slaves were merely animals, whose only or chief enjoyment consisted
in the gratification of their bodily appetites, there would be some
show of sense in this conclusion.

But, in fact, however crushed and brutified, they are still men;
men whose bosoms beat with the same passions as our own; whose
hearts swell with the same aspirations,--the same ardent desire to
improve their condition; the same wishes for what they have not;
the same indifference towards what they have; the same restless
love of social superiority; the same greediness of acquisition; the
same desire to know; the same impatience of all external control.

The excitement which the singular case of Caspar Hauser produced a
few years since in Germans is not yet forgotten. From the representations
of that enigmatical personage, it was believed that those from
whose custody he declared himself to have escaped, had endeavored
to destroy his intellect, or rather to prevent it from being
developed, so as to detain him forever in a state of infantile
imbecility.

This supposed attempt at what they saw fit to denominate the murder of the
soul, gave rise to great discussions among the German jurists; and they
soon raised it into a new crime, which they placed at the very head of
social enormities.

It is this very crime, the murder of the soul, which is in the course of
continuous and perpetual perpetration throughout the southern States
of the American Union; and not upon a single individual only, but upon
nearly one half of the entire population.

Consider the slaves as men, and the course of treatment which custom and
the laws prescribe is an artful, deliberate and well-digested scheme to
break their spirit; to deprive them of courage and of manhood; to
destroy their natural desire for an equal participation in the benefits
of society; to keep them ignorant, and therefore weak; to reduce
them, if possible, to a state of idiocy; to crowd them down to a level
with the brutes.
R. Hildreth.

CCLXII.

JUDICIAL TRIBUNALS.

Let me here say that I hold judges, and especially the Supreme Court of the
country, in much respect; but I am too familiar with the history of
judicial proceedings to regard them with any superstitious
reverence.
Judges are but men, and in all ages have shown a full share of frailty.

Alas! alas! the worst crimes of history have been perpetrated under their
sanction. The blood of martyrs and of patriots, crying from the
ground, summons them to judgment.

It was a Judicial tribunal which condemned Socrates to drink the fatal
hemlock, and which pushed the Saviour barefoot over the pavements of
Jerusalem, bending beneath his cross. It was a judicial tribunal which,
against the testimony and entreaties of her father, surrendered
the fair Virginia as a slave; which arrested the teachings of the
great apostle to the Gentiles, and sent him in bonds from Judea to
Rome; which, in the name of the Old Religion, adjudged the saints and
fathers of the Christian Church to death, in all its most dreadful forms;
and which afterwards, in the name of the New Religion, enforced
the tortures of the Inquisition, amidst the shrieks and agonies of its
victims, while it compelled Galileo to declare, in solemn denial
of the great truth he had disclosed, that the earth did not move
round the sun.

It was a judicial tribunal which, in France, during the long reign of her
monarchs, lent itself to be the instrument of every tyranny, as during
the brief reign of terror it did not hesitate to stand forth the unpitying
accessory of the unpitying guillotine. Ay, sir, it was a judicial tribunal
in England, surrounded by all the forms of law, which sanctioned every
despotic caprice of Henry the Eighth, from the unjust divorce of his
queen, to the beheading of Sir Thomas More; which lighted the fires of
persecution that glowed at Oxford and Smithfield, over the cinders of
Latimer, Ridley, and John Rogers; which, after elaborate argument,
upheld the fatal tyranny of ship-money against the patriotic resistance
of Hampden; which, in defiance of justice and humanity, sent
Sydney and Russell to the block; which persistently enforced the laws
of Conformity that our Puritan Fathers persistently refused to obey; and
which afterwards, with Jeffries on the bench, crimsoned the pages of
English history with massacre and murder--even with the blood of
innocent woman.

Ay, sir, and it was a judicial tribunal in our country, surrounded
by all the forms of law, which hung witches at Salem,--which affirmed
the constitutionality of the Stamp Act, while it admonished "jurors
and the people" to obey,--and which now, in our day has lent its
sanction to the unutterable atrocity of the Fugitive Slave Bill.

C. Sumner.

CCLXIII.

SLAVERY THE MAINSPRING OF THE REBELLION.

The whole quantity of slave-owners, great and small, according to the
recent census, is not more than four hundred thousand; out of whom
there are not more than one hundred thousand who are interested to any
considerable extent in this peculiar species of property; and yet this
petty oligarchy--itself controlled by a squad still more petty--in a
population of many millions, has aroused and organized this gigantic
rebellion. The future historian will record that the present
rebellion--notwithstanding its protracted origin, the multitudes it has
enlisted, and its extensive sweep--was at last precipitated by
fewer than twenty men; Mr.

Everett says, by as few as ten. It is certain that thus far it has
been the triumph of a minority; but of a minority moved, inspired,
combined, and aggrandized by slavery.

And now this traitorous minority, putting aside all the lurking, slimy
devices of conspiracy steps forth in the full panoply of war.
Assuming to itself all the functions of a government, it organizes States
under a common head--sends ambassadors into foreign countries--levies
taxes--borrows money--issues letters of marque--and sets armies in the
field, summoned from distant Georgia, Louisiana, and Texas, as well
as from nearer Virginia, and composed of the whole lawless
population--the poor who cannot own slaves as well as the rich who
own them--throughout the extensive region where, with satanic grasp,
this slaveholding minority claims for itself
"--ample room and verge enough The characters of hell to trace."

Pardon the language which I employ. The words of the poet do not picture
too strongly the object proposed.

And now these parricidal hosts stand arrayed openly against that paternal
Government to which they owed loyalty, protection, and affection Never in
history did rebellion assume such a front. Call their numbers four hundred
thousand or two hundred thousand--what you will--they far surpass any armed
forces ever before marshalled in rebellion; they are among the largest
ever marshalled in war.
And all this is in the name of slavery, and for the sake of slavery, and
at the bidding of slavery. The profligate favorite of the English
monarch--the famous Duke of Buckingham--was not more exclusively
supreme--even according to those words by which he was exposed to the
judgment of his contemporaries:

"Who rules the kingdom? The king.
"Who rules the king? The Duke.
"Who rules the Duke? The Devil."

The prevailing part here attributed to the royal favorite belongs
now to slavery, which in the rebel States is a more than royal
favorite.

Who rules the rebel States? The President.
Who rules the President? Slavery.
Who rules slavery?--
The latter question I need not answer. But all must see--and nobody
can deny--that slavery is the ruling idea of this rebellion. It is slavery
which marshals these hosts and breathes into their embattled ranks its
own barbarous fire. It is slavery which stamps its character alike upon
officers and men. It is slavery which inspires all, from the general to
the trumpeter. It is slavery which speaks in the words of command, and
which sounds in the morning drum-beat.

It is slavery which digs trenches and builds hostile forts. It is slavery
which pitches its white tents and stations its sentries over against the
national capital. It is slavery which sharpens the bayonet and casts the
bullet; which points the cannon and scatters the shell, blazing, bursting
with death. Wherever this rebellion shows itself--whatever form it
takes--whatever thing it does--whatever it meditates--it is moved by
slavery; nay, it is slavery itself, incarnate, living, acting, raging,
robbing, murdering, according to the essential law of its being.
C Sumner.

CCLXIV.

ABOLITION OF SLAVERY IN THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA.

Mr. President, with unspeakable delight I hail this measure and the
prospect of its speedy adoption. It is the first instalment of that great
debt which we all owe to an enslaved race, and will be recognized
in history as one of the victories of humanity. At home, throughout our
own country, it will be welcomed with gratitude, while abroad it will
quicken the hopes of all who love freedom.

Liberal institutions will gain everywhere by the abolition of slavery at
the national Capital. Nobody can read that slaves were once sold in the
markets of Rome, beneath the eyes of the sovereign Pontiff without confessing
the scandal to religion, even in a barbarous age; and nobody can
hear that slaves are now sold in the markets of Washington, beneath
the eyes of the President, without confessing the scandal to liberal
institutions.

For the sake of our good name, if not for the sake of justice, let the
scandal disappear.

Slavery, beginning in violence, can have no legal or constitutional
existence, unless through positive words expressly authorizing it.

As no such positive words can be found in the Constitution, all legislation
by Congress supporting slavery must be unconstitutional and void,
while it is made still further impossible by positive words of prohibition
guarding the liberty of every person within the exclusive jurisdiction
of Congress. But the question is asked, Shall we vote money for this
purpose? I cannot hesitate; and I place it at once under the
sanction of that commanding charity proclaimed by prophets and
enjoined by apostles, which all history recognizes and which the
Constitution cannot impair.A stir seemed to her to prognosticate a rescue and she went not
unwillingly. To be in motion, to see roadside faces, pricked her senses
with some hope. She had gained the peace she needed, and in that state
her heart began to be agitated by a fresh awakening, luxurious at first
rather than troublesome. She had sunk so low that the light of Alvan
seemed too distant for a positive expectation of him; but few approached
her whom she did not fancy under strange disguises: the gentlemen were
servants, the blouses were gentlemen; she looked wistfully at old women
bearing baskets, for the forbidden fruit to peep out in the form of an
envelope. All passed her blankly, noticing her eyes.

The journey was short; she was taken to a place a little beyond the head
of the lake, and there, though she had liberty to breathe the air, fast
fixed within the walls of a daily sameness that became gradually the hum
of voices accusing Alvan of one in excess of the many sins laid against
him by his enemies. Was he not possibly an empty pretender to power--a
mere great talker?

Her bit of liberty increased her chafing at the deadly monotony of this
existence, and envenomed the accusation by seeming to push her forth
quite half way to meet him, if he would but come or show sign! She
impetuously vindicated him from the charge of crediting the sincerity of
any words she might have committed to paper at the despotic dictation of
her father. Oh, no; Alvan could not be guilty of such folly as that; he
could not; it would be to suppose him unacquainted with her, ignorant of
the nature of women. He would know that she wrote the words--why? She
could not perfectly recollect how she had come to write them, and found
it easier to extinguish the act of having written them at all, which was
done by the angry recurrence to his failure to intervene now when the
drama cried for his godlike appearance. Perhaps he was really
unacquainted with her thought her stronger than she was! The idea
reflected a shadow on his intelligence. She was not in a situation that
could bear of her blaming herself.

While she was thus devoured by the legions of her enfeebled wits,
Clotilde was assiduously courted by her family, and her father from time
to time brought pen and paper for her to write anew from his dictation.
He was pleased to hail her as his fair secretary, and when the letters
were unimportant she wrote flowingly, happy to be praised. They were
occasionally addressed to friends; she discovered herself writing one to
the professor, in which he was about to be informed that she had resolved
to banish Alvan from her mind for ever. She stopped; her heart stopped;
the pen fell from her hand, in loathing. Her father warily bade her
proceed. She could not; she signified it choking. Only a few days before
she had written to the professor exultingly of her engagement. She
refused to belie herself in such a manner; retrospectively her rapid
contradictions appeared impossible; the picture of her was not human, and
she gave out a negative of her whole frame convulsed, whereat the General
was not slow to remind her of the scourgings she had undergone by a
sudden burst of his wrath. He knew the proper physic. 'You girls want the
lesson we read to skittish recruits; you shall have it. Write: "He is now
as nothing to me." You shall write that you hate him, if you hesitate!
Why, you unreasonable slut, you have given him up; you have told him you
have given him up, and what objection can you have to telling others now
you have done it?'

'I was forced to it, body and soul!' cried Clotilde, sobbing and bursting
into desperation out of a weak show of petulance that she had put on to
propitiate him. 'If I have to tell, I will tell how it was. For that my
heart is unchanged, and Alvan is, and will be, my lord, all the world may
see. I would rather write that I hate him.'

'You write, the man is now as nothing to me!' said her father, dashing
his finger in a fiery zig-zag along the line for her pen to follow. 'Or
else, my girl, you've been playing us a pretty farce!' He strung himself
for a mad gallop of wrath, gave her a shudder, and relapsed. 'No, no,
you're wiser, you're a better girl than that. Write it. I must have it
written-here, come! The worst is over; the rest is child's play. Come,
take the pen, I'll guide your hand.'

The pen was fixed in her hand, and the first words formed. They looked
such sprawling skeletons that Clotilde had the comfort of feeling sure
they would be discerned as the work of compulsion. So she wrote on
mechanically, solacing herself for what she did with vows of future
revolt. Alvan had a saying, that want of courage is want of sense; and
she remembered his illustration of how sense would nourish courage by
scattering the fear of death, if we would only grasp the thought that we
sink to oblivion gladly at night, and, most of us, quit it reluctantly in
the morning. She shut her eyes while writing; she fancied death would be
welcome; and as she certainly had sense, she took it for the promise of
courage. She flattered herself by believing, therefore, that she who did
not object to die was only awaiting the cruelly-delayed advent of her
lover to be almost as brave as he--the feminine of him. With these ideas
in her head much clearer than when she wrote the couple of lines to
Alvan--for then her head was reeling, she was then beaten and
prostrate--she signed her name to a second renunciation of him, and was
aware of a flush of self-reproach at the simple suspicion of his being
deceived by it; it was an insult to his understanding. Full surely the
professor would not be deceived, and a lover with a heart to reach to her
and read her could never be hoodwinked by so palpable a piece of
slavishness. She was indeed slavish; the apology necessitated the
confession. But that promise of courage, coming of her ownership of
sense, vindicated her prospectively; she had so little of it that she
embraced it as a present possession, and she made it Alvan's task to put
it to the trial. Hence it became Alvan's offence if, owing to his
absence, she could be charged with behaving badly. Her generosity
pardoned him his inexplicable delay to appear in his might: 'But see what
your continued delay causes!' she said, and her tone was merely
sorrowful.

She had forgotten her signature to the letter to the professor when his
answer arrived. The sight of the handwriting of one of her lover's
faithfullest friends was like a peal of bells to her, and she tore the
letter open, and began to blink and spell at a strange language, taking
the frosty sentences piecemeal. He begged her to be firm in her
resolution, give up Alvan and obey her parents! This man of high
intelligence and cultivation wrote like a provincial schoolmistress
moralizing. Though he knew the depth of her passion for Alvan, and had
within the month received her lark-song of her betrothal, he, this
man--if living man he could be thought--counselled her to endeavour to
deserve the love and respect of her parents, alluded to Alvan's age and
her better birth, approved her resolve to consult the wishes of her
family, and in fine was as rank a traitor to friendship as any
chronicled. Out on him! She swept him from earth.

And she had built some of her hopes on the professor. 'False friend!' she
cried.

She wept over Alvan for having had so false a friend.

There remained no one that could be expected to intervene with a strong
arm save the baroness. The professor's emphasized approval of her resolve
to consult the wishes of her family was a shocking hypocrisy, and
Clotilde thought of the contrast to it in her letter to the baroness. The
tripping and stumbling, prettily awkward little tone of gosling innocent
new from its egg, throughout the letter, was a triumph of candour. She
repeated passages, paragraphs, of the letter, assuring herself that such
affectionately reverential prattle would have moved her, and with the
strongest desire to cast her arms about the writer: it had been composed
to be moving to a woman, to any woman. The old woman was entreated to
bestow her blessing on the young one, all in Arcadia, and let the young
one nestle to the bosom she had not an idea of robbing. She could not
have had the idea, else how could she have made the petition? And in
order to compliment a venerable dame on her pure friendship for a
gentleman, it was imperative to reject the idea. Besides, after seeing
the photograph of the baroness, common civility insisted on the purity of
her friendship. Nay, in mercy to the poor gentleman, friendship it must
be.

A letter of reply from that noble lady was due. Possibly she had
determined not to write, but to act. She was a lady of exalted birth, a
lady of the upper aristocracy, who could, if she would, bring both a
social and official pressure upon the General: and it might be in motion
now behind the scenes, Clotilde laid hold of her phantom baroness, almost
happy under the phantom's whisper that she need not despair. 'You have
been a little weak,' the phantom said to her, and she acquiesced with a
soft sniffle, adding: 'But, dearest, honoured lady, you are a woman, and
know what our trials are when we are so persecuted. O that I had your
beautiful sedateness! I do admire it, madam. I wish I could imitate.' She
carried her dramatic ingenuousness farthel still by saying: 'I have seen
your photograph'; implying that the inimitable, the much coveted air of
composure breathed out of yonder presentment of her features. 'For I
can't call you good looking,' she said within herself, for the
satisfaction of her sense of candour, of her sense of contrast as well.
And shutting her eyes, she thought of the horrid penitent a harsh-faced
woman in confession must be:

The picture sent her swimmingly to the confessional, where sat a man with
his head in a hood, and he soon heard enough of mixed substance to dash
his hood, almost his head, off. Beauty may be immoderately frank in soul
to the ghostly. The black page comprised a very long list. 'But put this
on the white page,' says she to the surging father inside his box--'I
loved Alvan!' A sentence or two more fetches the Alvanic man jumping out
of the priest: and so closely does she realize it that she has to hunt
herself into a corner with the question, whether she shall tell him she
guessed him to be no other than her lover. 'How could you expect a girl,
who is not a Papist, to come kneeling here?' she says. And he answers
with no matter what of a gallant kind.

In this manner her natural effervescence amused her sorrowful mind while
gazing from her chamber window at the mountain sides across the valley,
where tourists, in the autumnal season, sweep up and down like a tidal
river. She had ceased to weep; she had outwept the colour of her eyes and
the consolation of weeping. Dressed in black to the throat, she sat and
waited the arrival of her phantom friend, the baroness--that angel! who
proved her goodness in consenting to be the friend of Alvan's beloved,
because she was the true friend of Alvan! How cheap such a way of proving
goodness, Clotilde did not consider. She wanted it so.

The mountain heights were in dusty sunlight. She had seen them day after
day thinly lined on the dead sky, inviting thunder and doomed to
sultriness. She looked on the garden of the house, a desert under bee and
butterfly. Looking beyond the garden she perceived her father on the
glaring road, and one with him, the sight of whom did not flush her cheek
or spring her heart to a throb, though she pitied the poor boy: he was
useless to her, utterly.

Soon her Indian Bacchus was in her room, and alone with her, and at her
feet. Her father had given him hope. He came bearing eyes that were like
hope's own; and kneeling, kissing her hands, her knees, her hair, he
seemed unaware that she was inanimate.

There was nothing imaginable in which he could be of use.

He was only another dust-cloud of the sultry sameness. She had been
expecting a woman, a tempest choral with sky and mountain and
valley-hollows, as the overture to Alvan's appearance.

But he roused her. With Marko she had never felt her cowardice, and his
passionately beseeching, trembling, 'Will you have me?' called up the
tiger in the girl; in spite of pity for his voice she retorted on her
parents:

'Will I have you? I? You ask me what is my will? It sounds oddly from
you, seeing that I wrote to you in Lucerne what I would have, and nothing
has changed in me since then, nothing! My feeling for him is unaltered,
and everything you have heard of me was wrung out of me by my
unhappiness. The world is dead to me, and all in it that is not.
Sigismund Alvan. To you I am accustomed to speak every thought of my
soul, and I tell you the world and all it has is dead to me, even my
parents--I hate them.'

Marko pressed her hands. If he loved her slavishly, it was generously.
The wild thing he said was one of the frantic leaps of generosity in a
heart that was gone to impulse: 'I see it, they have martyrized you. I
know you so well, Clotilde! So, then, come to me, come with me, let me
cherish you. I will take you and rescue you from your people, and should
it be your positive wish to meet Alvan again, I myself will take you to
him, and then you may choose between us.'

The generosity was evident. There was nevertheless, to a young woman
realizing the position foreshadowed by such a project, the suspicion of a
slavish hope nestling among the circumstances in the background, and this
she was taught by the dangerous emotion of gratitude gaining on her, and
melting her to him.

She too had a slavish hope that was athirst and sinking, and it flew at
the throat of Marko's, eager to satiate its vengeance for these long
delays in the destroying of a weaker.

She left her chair and cried: 'As you will. What is it to me? Take me, if
you please. Take that glove; it is the shape of my hand. You have as much
of me as is there. My life is gone. You or another! But take this warning
and my oath with it. I swear to you, that wherever I see Sigismund Alvan
I go straight to him, though the way be over you, all of you, lying dead
beneath me.'

The lift of incredulous horror in Marko's large black eyes excited her to
a more savage imagination: 'Rejoice! I should rejoice to see you, all of
you, dead, that I might walk across you safe from disturbance to get to
him I love. Be under no delusion. I love him better than the lives of any
dear to me, or my own. I am his. He is my faith, my worship. I am true to
him, I am, I am. You force my hand from me, you take this miserable body,
but my soul is free to love him and to go to him when God gives me sight
of him. I am Alvan's eternally. All your laws are mockeries. You, and my
people, and your priests, and your law-makers, are shadows,
brain-vapours. Let him beckon!--So you have your warning. Do what I may,
I cannot be called untrue. And now let me be; I want repose; my head
breaks; I have been on the rack and I am in pieces!'

Marko clung to her hand, said she was terrible and pitiless, but clung.

The hand was nerveless: it was her dear hand. Had her tongue been more
venomous in wildness than the encounter with a weaker than herself made
it be, the holding of her hand would have been his antidote. In him there
was love for two.

Clotilde allowed him to keep the hand, assuring herself she was
unconscious he did so. He brought her peace, he brought her old throning
self back to her, and he was handsome and tame as a leopard-skin at her
feet.

If she was doomed to reach to Alvan through him, at least she had warned
him. The vision of the truthfulness of her nature threw a celestial wan
beam on her guilty destiny.

She patted his head and bade him leave her, narrowing her shoulders on
the breast to let it be seen that the dark household within was locked
and shuttered.

He went. He was good, obedient, humane; he was generous, exquisitely
bred; he brought her peace, and he had been warned. It is difficult in
affliction to think of one who belongs to us as one to whom we owe a
duty. The unquestionably sincere and devoted lover is also in his candour
a featureless person; and though we would not punish him for his
goodness, we have the right to anticipate that it will be equal to every
trial. Perhaps, for the sake of peace . . . after warning him . . . her
meditations tottered in dots.

But when the heart hungers behind such meditations, that thinking without
language is a dangerous habit; for there will suddenly come a dash
usurping the series of tentative dots, which is nothing other than the
dreadful thing resolved on, as of necessity, as naturally as the
adventurous bow-legged infant pitches back from an excursion of two paces
to mother's lap; and not much less innocently within the mind, it would
appear. The dash is a haven reached that would not be greeted if it stood
out in words. Could we live without ourselves letting our animal do our
thinking for us legibly? We live with ourselves agreeably so long as his
projects are phrased in his primitive tongue, even though we have clearly
apprehended what he means, and though we sufficiently well understand the
whither of our destination under his guidance. No counsel can be saner
than that the heart should be bidden to speak out in plain verbal speech
within us. For want of it, Clotilde's short explorations in Dot-and-Dash
land were of a kind to terrify her, and yet they seemed not only
unavoidable, but foreshadowing of the unavoidable to come. Or
possibly--the thought came to her--Alvan would keep his word, and save
her from worse by stepping to the altar between her and Marko, there
calling on her to decide and quit the prince; and his presence would
breathe courage into her to go to him. It set her looking to the altar
as a prospect of deliverance.

Her mother could not fail to notice a change in Clotilde's wintry face
now that Marko was among them; her inference tallied with his report of
their interview, so she supposed the girl to have accepted more or less
heartily Marko's forgiveness. For him the girl's eyes were soft and kind;
her gaze was through the eyelashes, as one seeing a dream on a far
horizon. Marko spoke of her cheerfully, and was happy to call her his
own, but would not have her troubled by any ceremonial talk of their
engagement, so she had much to thank him for, and her consciousness of
the signal instance of ingratitude lying ahead in the darkness, like a
house mined beneath the smiling slumberer, made her eager to show the
real gratefulness and tenderness of her feelings. This had the appearance
of renewed affection; consequently her parents lost much of their fear of
the besieger outside, and she was removed to the city. Two parties were
in the city, one favouring Alvan, and one abhorring the audacious Jew.
Together they managed to spread incredible reports of his doings, which
required little exaggeration to convince an enemy that he was a man with
whom hostility could not be left to sleep. The General heard of the man's
pleading his cause in all directions to get pressure put upon him,
showing something like a devilish persuasiveness, Jew and demagogue
though he was; for there seemed to be a feeling abroad that the interview
this howling lover claimed with Clotilde ought to be granted. The latest
report spoke of him as off to the General's Court for an audience of his
official chief. General von Rudiger looked to his defences, and he had
sufficient penetration to see that the weakest point of them might be a
submissive daughter.

A letter to Clotilde from the baroness was brought to the house by a
messenger. The General thought over it. The letter was by no means a
seductive letter for a young lady to receive from such a person, yet he
did not anticipate the whole effect it would produce when ultimately he
decided to give it to her, being of course unaware of the noble style of
Clotilde's address to the baroness. He stipulated that there must be no
reply to it except through him, and Clotilde had the coveted letter in
her hands at last. Here was the mediatrix--the veritable goddess with the
sword to cut the knot! Here was the manifestation of Alvan!


BOOK 3.


CHAPTER XII

She ran out to the shade of the garden walls to be by herself and in the
air, and she read; and instantly her own letter to the baroness crashed
sentence upon sentence, in retort, springing up with the combative
instinct of a beast, to make discord of the stuff she read, and deride
it. Twice she went over the lines with this defensive accompaniment; then
they laid octopus-limbs on her. The writing struck chill as a glacier
cave. Oh, what an answer to that letter of fervid respectfulness, of
innocent supplication for maternal affection, for some degree of
benignant friendship!

The baroness coldly stated, that she had arrived in the city to do her
best in assisting to arrange matters which had come to a most unfortunate
and impracticable pass. She alluded to her established friendship for
Alvan, but it was chiefly in the interests of Clotilde that the latter
was requested to perceive the necessity for bringing her relations with
Dr. Alvan to an end in the discreetest manner now possible to the
circumstances. This, the baroness pursued, could only be done by her
intervention, and her friendship for Dr. Alvan had caused her to
undertake the little agreeable office. For which purpose, promising her
an exemption from anything in the nature of tragedy scenes, the baroness
desired Clotilde to call on her the following day between certain
specified hours of the afternoon.

That was all.

The girl in her letter to the baroness had constrained herself to write,
and therefore to think, in so beautiful a spirit of ignorant innocence,
that the vileness of an answer thus brutally throwing off the mask of
personal disinterestedness appeared to her both an abominable piece of
cynicism on the part of a scandalous old woman, and an insulting
rejection of the cover of decency proposed to the creature by a
daisy-minded maiden.

She scribbled a single line in receipt of the letter and signed her
initials.

'The woman is hateful!' she said to her father; she was ready to agree
with him about the woman and Alvan. She was ashamed to have hoped
anything of the woman, and stamped down her disappointment under a
vehement indignation, that disfigured the man as well. He had put the
matter into the hands of this most detestable of women, to settle it as
she might think best! He and she!--the miserable old thing with her
ancient arts and cajoleries had lured him back! She had him fast again,
in spite of--for who could tell? perhaps by reason of her dirty habits:
she smoked dragoon cigars! All day she was emitting tobacco-smoke; it was
notorious, Clotilde had not to learn it from her father; but now she saw
the filthy rag that standard of female independence was--that petticoated
Unfeminine, fouler than masculine! Alvan preferred the lichen-draped tree
to the sunny flower, it was evident, for never a letter from Alvan had
come to her. She thought in wrath, nothing but the thoughts of wrath, and
ran her wits through every reasonable reflection like a lighted brand
that flings its colour, if not fire, upon surrounding images. Contempt of
the square-jawed withered woman was too great for Clotilde to have a
sensation of her driving jealousy until painful glimpses of the man made
jealousy so sharp that she flew for refuge to contempt of the pair. That
beldam had him back: she had him fast. Oh! let her keep him! Was he to be
regretted who could make that choice?

Her father did not let the occasion slip to speak insistingly as the
world opined of Alvan and his baroness. He forced her to swallow the
calumny, and draw away with her family against herself through strong
disgust.

Out of a state of fire Clotilde passed into solid frigidity. She had
neither a throb nor a passion. Wishing seemed to her senseless as life
was. She could hear without a thrill of her frame that Alvan was in the
city, without a question whether it was true. He had not written, and he
had handed her over to the baroness! She did not ask herself how it was
that she had no letter from him, being afraid to think about it, because,
if a letter had been withheld by her father, it was a part of her
whipping; if none had been written, there was nothing to hope for. Her
recent humiliation condemned him by the voice of her sufferings for his
failure to be giant, eagle, angel, or any of the prodigious things he had
taught her to expect; and as he had thus deceived her, the glorious lover
she had imaged in her mind was put aside with some of the angry disdain
she bestowed upon the woman by whom she had been wounded. He ceased to be
a visioned Alvan, and became an obscurity; her principal sentiment in
relation to him was, that he threatened her peace. But for him she would
never have been taught to hate her parents; she would have enjoyed the
quiet domestic evenings with her people, when Marko sang, and her sisters
knitted, and the betrothed sister wore a look very enviable in the
abstract; she would be seeing a future instead of a black iron gate! But
for him she certainly would never have had, that letter from the
baroness!

On the morning after the information of Alvan's return, her father, who
deserved credit as a tactician, came to her to say that Alvan had sent to
demand his letters and presents. The demand was unlike what her stunned
heart recollected of Alvan; but a hint that the baroness was behind it,
and that a refusal would bring the baroness down on her with another
piece of insolence, was effective. She dealt out the letters, arranged
the presents, made up the books, pamphlets, trinkets, amulet coins, lock
of black hair, and worn post-marked paper addressed in his hand to
Clotilde von Rudiger, carefully; and half as souvenir, half with the
forlorn yearning of the look of lovers when they break asunder--or of one
of them--she signed inside the packet not 'Clotilde,' but the gentlest
title he had bestowed on her, trusting to the pathos of the word 'child'
to tell him that she was enforced and still true, if he should be
interested in knowing it. Weak souls are much moved by having the pathos
on their side. They are consoled too.

Time passed, whole days: the tender reminder had no effect on him! It had
been her last appeal: she reflected that she had really felt when he had
not been feeling at all: and this marks a division.

She was next requested to write a letter to Alvan, signifying his release
by the notification of her engagement to Prince Marko. She was personally
to deliver it to a gentleman who was of neither party, and who would give
her a letter from Alvan in exchange, which, while assuring the gentleman
she was acting with perfect freedom, she was to be under her oath not to
read, and dutifully to hand to Marko, her betrothed. Her father assumed
the fact of her renewed engagement to the prince, as her whole family
did; strangely, she thought: it struck her as a fatality. He said that
Alvan was working him great mischief, doing him deadly injury in his
position, and for no just reason, inasmuch as he--a bold, bad man
striving to ruin the family on a point of pride--had declared that he
simply considered himself bound in honour to her, only a little doubtful
of her independent action at present; and a release of him, accompanied
by her plain statement of her being under no compulsion, voluntarily the
betrothed of another, would solve the difficulty. A certain old woman, it
seemed, was anxious to have him formally released.

With the usual dose for such a patient, of cajoleries and threats, the
General begged her to comply, pulling the hands he squeezed in a way to
strongly emphasize his affectionate entreaty.

She went straight to Marko, consenting that he should have Alvan's letter
unopened (she cared not to read it, she said), on his promise to give it
up to her within a stated period. There was a kind of prohibited
pleasure, sweet acid, catching discord, in the idea of this lover's
keeping the forbidden thing she could ask for when she was curious about
the other, which at present she was not; dead rather; anxious to please
her parents, and determined to be no rival of the baroness. Marko
promised it readily, adding: 'Only let the storm roll over, that we may
have more liberty, and I myself, when we two are free, will lead you to
Alvan, and leave it to you to choose between us. Your happiness, beloved,
is my sole thought. Submit for the moment.' He spoke sweetly, with his
dearest look, touching her luxurious nature with a belief that she could
love him; untroubled by another, she could love and be true to him: her
maternal inner nature yearned to the frailbodied youth.

She made a comparison in her mind of Alvan's love and Marko's, and of the
lives of the two men. There was no grisly baroness attached to the
prince's life.

She wrote the letter to Alvan, feeling in the words that said she was
plighted to Prince Marko, that she said, and clearly said, the baroness
is now relieved of a rival, and may take you! She felt it so acutely as
to feel that she said nothing else.

Severances are accomplished within the heart stroke by stroke; within the
craven's heart each new step resulting from a blow is temporarily an
absolute severance. Her letter to Alvan written, she thought not tenderly
of him but of the prince, who had always loved a young woman, and was
unhampered by an old one. The composition of the letter, and the sense
that the thing was done, made her stony to Alvan.

On the introduction of Colonel von Tresten, whose name she knew, but was
dull to it, she delivered him her letter with unaffected composure,
received from him Alvan's in exchange, left the room as if to read it,
and after giving it unopened to Marko, composedly reappeared before the
colonel to state, that the letter could make no difference, and all was
to be as she had written it.

The colonel bowed stiffly.

It would have comforted her to have been allowed to say: 'I cease to be
the rival of that execrable harridan!'

The delivery of so formidable a cat-screech not being possible, she stood
in an attitude of mild resignation, revolving thoughts of her father's
praises of his noble daughter, her mother's kiss, the caresses of her
sisters, and the dark bright eyes of Marko, the peace of the domestic
circle. This was her happiness! And still there was time, still hope for
Alvan to descend and cut the knot. She conceived it slowly, with some
flush of the brain like a remainder of fever, but no throbs of her
pulses. She had been swayed to act against him by tales which in her
heart she did not credit exactly, therefore did not take within herself,
though she let them influence her by the goad of her fears and angers;
and these she could conjure up at will for the defence of her conduct,
aware of their shallowness, and all the while trusting him to come in the
end and hear her reproaches for his delay. He seemed to her now to have
the character of a storm outside a household wrapped in comfortable
monotony. Her natural spiritedness detested the monotony, her craven soul
fawned for the comfort. After her many recent whippings the comfort was
immensely desireable, but a glance at the monotony gave it the look of a
burial, and standing in her attitude of resignation under Colonel von
Tresten's hard military stare she could have shrieked for Alvan to come,
knowing that she would have cowered and trembled at the scene following
his appearance. Yet she would have gone to him; without any doubt his
presence and the sense of his greater power declared by his coming would
have lifted her over to him. The part of her nature adoring storminess
wanted only a present champion to outweigh the other part which cuddled
security. Colonel von Tresten, however, was very far from offering
himself in such a shape to a girl that had jilted the friend he loved,
insulted the woman he esteemed; and he stood there like a figure of
soldierly complacency in marble. Her pencilled acknowledgement of the
baroness's letter, and her reply to it almost as much, was construed as
an intended insult to that lady, whose champion Tresten was. He had
departed before Clotilde heard a step.

Immediately thereupon it came: to her mind that Tresten was one of
Alvan's bosom friends. How, then, could he be of neither party? And her
father spoke of him as an upright rational man, who, although, strangely
enough, he entertained, as it appeared, something like a profound
reverence for the baroness, could see and confess the downright
impossibility of the marriage Alvan proposed. Tresten, her father said,
talked of his friend Alvan as wild and eccentric, but now becoming
convinced that such a family as hers could never tolerate
him--considering his age, his birth, his blood, his habits, his politics,
his private entanglements and moral reputation, it was partly hinted.

She shuddered at this false Tresten. He and the professor might be strung
together for examples of perfidy! His reverence of the baroness gave his
cold blue eyes the iciness of her loathed letter. Alvan, she remembered,
used to exalt him among the gallantest of the warriors dedicating their
swords to freedom. The dedication of the sword, she felt sure, was an
accident: he was a man of blood. And naturally, she must be hated by the
man reverencing the baroness. If ever man had executioner stamped on his
face, it was he! Like the professor, nay, like Alvan himself, he would
not see that she was the victim of tyranny: none of her signs would they
see. They judged of her by her inanimate frame in the hands of her
torturers breaking her on the wheel. She called to mind a fancy that she
had looked at Tresten out of her deadness earnestly for just one instant:
more than an instant she could not, beneath her father's vigilant watch
and into those repellant cold blue butcher eyes. Tresten might clearly
have understood the fleeting look. What were her words! what her deeds!

The look was the truth revealed-her soul. It begged for life like an
infant; and the man's face was an iron rock in reply! No wonder--he
worshipped the baroness! So great was Clotilde's hatred of him that it
overflooded the image of Alvan, who called him friend, and deputed him to
act as friend. Such blindness, weakness, folly, on the part of one of
Alvan's pretensions, incurred a shade of her contempt. She had not ever
thought of him coldly: hitherto it would have seemed a sacrilege; but now
she said definitely, the friend of Tresten cannot be the man I supposed
him! and she ascribed her capacity for saying it, and for perceiving and
adding up Alvan's faults of character, to the freezing she had taken from
that most antipathetic person. She confessed to sensations of spite which
would cause her to reject and spurn even his pleadings for Alvan, if they
were imaginable as actual. Their not being imaginable allowed her to
indulge her naughtiness harmlessly, for the gratification of the idea of
wounding some one, though it were her lover, connected with this Tresten.

The letter of the baroness and the visit of the woman's admirer had
vitiated Clotilde's blood. She was not only not mistress of her thoughts,
she was undirected either in thinking or wishing by any desires, except
that the people about her should caress and warm her, until, with no gaze
backward, she could say good-bye to them, full of meaning as a good-bye
to the covered grave, as unreluctantly as the swallow quits her
eaves-nest in autumn: and they were to learn that they were chargeable
with the sequel of the history. There would be a sequel, she was sure, if
it came only to punish them for the cruelty which thwarted her timid
anticipation of it by pressing on her natural instinct at all costs to
bargain for an escape from pain, and making her simulate contentment to
cheat her muffled wound and them.


CHAPTER XIII

His love meantime was the mission and the burden of Alvan, and he was not
ashamed to speak of it and plead for it; and the pleading was not done
troubadourishly, in soft flute-notes, as for easement of tuneful emotions
beseeching sympathy. He was liker to a sturdy beggar demanding his crust,
to support life, of corporations that can be talked into admitting the
rights of man; and he vollied close logical argumentation, on the basis
of the laws, in defence of his most natural hunger, thunder in his breast
and bright new heavenly morning alternating or clashing while the
electric wires and post smote him with evil tidings of Clotilde, and the
success of his efforts caught her back to him. Daily many times he
reached to her and lost her, had her in his arms and his arms withered
with emptiness. The ground he won quaked under him. All the evidence
opposed it, but he was in action, and his reason swore that he had her
fast. He had seen and felt his power over her; his reason told him by
what had been that it must be. Could he doubt? He battled for his reason.
Doubt was an extinguishing wave, and he clung to his book of the Law,
besieging Church and State with it, pointing to texts of the law which
proved her free to choose her lord and husband for herself, expressing
his passionate love by his precise interpretation of the law: and still
with the cold sentience gaining on him, against the current of his
tumultuous blood and his hurried intelligence, of her being actually what
he had named her in moments of playful vision--slippery, a serpent, a
winding hare; with the fear that she might slip from him, betray, deny
him, deliver him to ridicule, after he had won his way to her over every
barrier. During his proudest exaltations in success, when his eyes were
sparkling, there was a wry twitch inward upon his heart of hearts.

He will tell you, did I say? He has already told you, from his death-bed,
and his illumined spirit still whispers from the heavens, with well-known
eloquence, the solemn admonition.

"Mortals! hastening to the tomb, and once the companions of my pilgrimage,
take warning and avoid my errors--Cultivate the virtues I have
recommended--Choose the Saviour I have chosen--Live disinterestedly--Live
for immortality; and would you rescue anything from final dissolution,
lay it up in God." Dr. Nott.

CXXXVII.

INVECTIVE AGAINST MR. FLOOD.

It is not the slander of an evil tongue that can defame me. I maintain my
reputation in public and in private life. No man who has not a bad
character can ever say that I deceived; no country can call me cheat. But
I will suppose such a public character. I will suppose such a man to have
existence. I will begin with his character in its political cradle,
and I will follow him to the last state of political dissolution. I will
suppose him, in the first stage of his life, to have been intemperate;
in the second, to have been corrupt; and in the last, seditious;
that after an envenomed attack upon the persons and measures of a
succession of viceroys, and after much declamation against their
illegalities and their profusion, he took office, and became a
supporter of government when the profusion of ministers had greatly
increased, and their crimes multiplied beyond example.

At such a critical moment, I will suppose this gentleman to be corrupted
by a great sinecure office to muzzle his declamation, to swallow
his invective, to give his assent and vote to the ministers, and
to become a supporter of government, its measures, its embargo, and
its American war.She does it rarely, for
though to be loved by a bitten giant is one of the dreams of woman, the
considerate Mother of Love knows how needful it is to protect the
sentiment of the passion and save them from an exhibition of the fires of
that dragon's breath. Do they not fly shrieking when they behold it?
Barely are they able to read of it. Men, too, accustomed to minor doses
of the goddess, which moderate, soften, counteract, instead of inflicting
the malady, abhor and have no brotherhood with its turbulent victim.

It was justly matter for triumph, due to an extraordinary fervour of
pleading upon a plain statement of the case, that Alvan should return
from his foray bringing with him an emissary deputed by General von
Rudiger's official chief to see that the young lady, so passionately
pursued by the foremost of his time in political genius and oratory, was
not subjected to parental tyranny, but stood free to exercise her choice.
Of the few who would ever have thought of attempting, a diminished number
would have equalled that feat. Alvan was no vain boaster; he could gain
the ears of grave men as well as mobs and women. The interview with
Clotilde was therefore assured to him, and the distracting telegrams and
letters forwarded to him by Tresten during his absence were consequently
stabs already promising to heal. They were brutal stabs--her packet of
his letters and presents on his table made them bleed afresh, and the odd
scrawl of the couple of words on the paper set him wondering at the
imbecile irony of her calling herself 'The child' in accompaniment to
such an act, for it reminded him of his epithet for her, while it dealt
him a tremendous blow; it seemed senselessly malign, perhaps flippant, as
she could be, he knew. She could be anything weak and shallow when out of
his hands; she had recently proved it still, in view of the interview,
and on the tide of his labours to come to that wished end, he struck his
breast to brave himself with a good hopeful spirit. 'Once mine!' he said.

Moreover, to the better account, Clotilde's English friend had sent him
the lines addressed to her, in which the writer dwelt on her love of him
with a whimper of the voice of love. That was previous to her perjury by
little, by a day-eighteen hours. How lurid a satire was flung on events
by the proximity of the dates! But the closeness of the time between this
love-crooning and the denying of him pointed to a tyrannous intervention.
One could detect it. Full surely the poor craven was being tyrannized and
tutored to deny him! though she was a puss of the fields too, as the
mounted sportsman was not unwilling to think.

Before visiting his Mentor, Alvan applied for an audience of General von
Rudiger, who granted it at once to a man coming so well armed to claim
the privilege. Tresten walked part of the way to the General's house with
him, and then turned aside to visit the baroness.

Lucie, Baroness von Crefeldt, was one of those persons who, after a
probationary term in the character of woman, have become men, but of whom
offended man, amazed by the flowering up of that hard rough jaw from the
tender blooming promise of a petticoat, finds it impossible to imagine
they had once on a sweet Spring time the sex's gentleness and charm of
aspect. Mistress Flanders, breeched and hatted like a man, pulling at the
man's short pipe and heartily invoking frouzy deities, committing a whole
sackful of unfeminine etcaetera, is an impenetrable wall to her maiden
past; yet was there an opening day when nothing of us moustached her. She
was a clear-faced girl and mother of young blushes before the years were
at their work of transformation upon her countenance and behind her
bosom. The years were rough artists: perhaps she was combative, and
fought them for touching her ungallantly; and that perhaps was her first
manly step. Baroness Lucie was of high birth, a wife openly maltreated, a
woman of breeding, but with a man's head, capable of inspiring man-like
friendships, and of entertaining them. She was radically-minded, strongly
of the Radical profession of faith, and a correspondent of revolutionary
chiefs; both the trusted adviser and devoted slave of him whose future
glorious career she measured by his abilities. Rumour blew out a candle
and left the wick to smoke in relation to their former intercourse. The
Philistines revenged themselves on an old aristocratic Radical and a Jew
demagogue with the weapon that scandal hands to virtue. They are virtuous
or nothing, and they must show that they are so when they can; and best
do they show it by publicly dishonouring the friendship of a man and a
woman; for to be in error in malice does not hurt them, but they
profoundly feel that they are fools if they are duped.

She was aware of the recent course of events; she had as she protested,
nothing to accuse herself of, and she could hardly part her lips without
a self-exculpation.

'It will fall on me!' she said to Tresten, in her emphatic tone. 'He will
have his interview with the girl. He will subdue the girl. He will
manacle himself in the chains he makes her wear. She will not miss her
chance! I am the object of her detestation. I am the price paid for their
reconcilement. She will seize her opportunity to vilipend me, and I shall
be condemned by the kind of court-martial which hurries over the forms of
a brial to sign the execution-warrant that makes it feel like justice.
You will see. She cannot forgive me for not pretending to enter into her
enthusiasm. She will make him believe I conspired against her. Men in
love are children with their mistresses--the greatest of them; their
heads are under the woman's feet. What have I not done to aid him! At his
instance, I went to the archbishop, to implore one of the princes of the
Church for succour. I knelt to an ecclesiastic. I did a ludicrous and a
shameful thing, knowing it in advance to be a barren farce. I obeyed his
wish. The tale will be laughable. I obeyed him. I would not have it on my
conscience that the commission of any deed ennomic, however unwonted, was
refused by me to serve Alvan. You are my witness, Tresten, that for a
young woman of common honesty I was ready to pack and march. Qualities of
mind-mind! They were out of the question. He had a taste for a wife. If
he had hit on a girl commonly honest, she might not have harmed him--the
contrary; cut his talons. What is this girl? Exactly what one might be
sure his appreciation, in woman-flesh, would lead him to fix on; a
daughter of the Philistines, naturally, and precisely the one of all on
earth likely to confound him after marriage as she has played fast and
loose with him before it. He has never understood women--cannot read
them. Could a girl like that keep a secret? She's a Cressida--a creature
of every camp! Not an idea of the cause he is vowed to! not a sentiment
in harmony with it! She is viler than any of those Berlin light o' loves
on the eve of Jena. Stable as a Viennese dancing slut home from
Mariazell! This is the girl-transparent to the whole world! But his heart
is on her, and he must have her, I suppose; and I shall have to bear her
impertinences, or sign my demission and cease to labour for the cause at
least in conjunction with Alvan. And how other wise? He is the life of
it, and I am doomed to uselessness.'

Tresten nodded a protesting assent.

'Not quite so bad,' he said, with the encouraging smile which could
persuade a friend to put away bilious visions. 'Of the two, if you two
are divisible, we could better dispense with him. She'll slip him, she's
an eel. I have seen eels twine on a prong of the fork that prods them;
but she's an actress, a slippery one through and through, with no real
embrace in her, not even a common muscular contraction. Of every camp! as
you say. She was not worth carrying off. I consented to try it to quiet
him. He sets no bounds to his own devotion to friendship, and we must
take pattern by him. It's a mad love.'

'A Titan's love!' the baroness exclaimed, groaning. 'The woman!--no
matter how or at what cost! I can admire that primal barbarism of a great
man's passion, which counts for nothing the stains and accidents fraught
with extinction for it to meaner men. It reads ill, it sounds badly, but
there is grand stuff in it. See the royalty of the man, for whom no
degradation of the woman can be, so long as it brings her to him!
He--that great he--covers all. He burns her to ashes, and takes the
flame--the pure spirit of her--to himself. Were men like him!--they would
have less to pardon. We must, as I have ever said, be morally on alpine
elevations to comprehend Alvan; he is Mont Blanc above his fellows. Do
not ask him to be considerate of her. She has planted him in a storm, and
the bigger the mountain, the more savage, monstrous, cruel--yes, but she
blew up the tourmente! That girl is the author of his madness. It is the
snake's nature of the girl which distracts him; she is in his blood. Had
she come to me, I would have helped her to cure him; or had you succeeded
in carrying her off, I would have stood by their union; or were she a
different creature, and not the shifty thing she is, I could desire him
to win her. A peasant girl, a workman's daughter, a tradesman's, a
professional singer, actress, artist--I would have given my hand to one
of these in good faith, thankful to her! As it is, I have acted in
obedience to his wishes, without idle remonstrances--I know him too well;
and with as much cordiality as I could put into an evil service. She will
drag him down, down, Tresten!'

'They are not joined yet,' said the colonel.

'She has him by the worst half of him. Her correspondence with me--her
letter to excuse her insolence, which she does like a prim chit--throws a
light on the girl she is. She will set him aiming at power to trick her
out in the decorations. She will not keep him to his labours to
consolidate the power. She will pervert the aesthetic in him, through her
hold on his material nature, his vanity, his luxuriousness. She is one of
the young women who begin timidly, and when they see that they enjoy
comparative impunity, grow intrepid in dissipation, and that palling,
they are ravenously ambitious. She will drive him at his mark before the
time is ripe--ruin-him. He is a Titan, not a god, though god-like he
seems in comparison with men. He would be fleshly enough in any hands.
This girl will drain him of all his nobler fire.'

'She shows mighty little of the inclination,' said the colonel.

'To you. But when they come together? I know his voice!'

The colonel protested his doubts of their coming together.

'Ultimately?' the baroness asked, and brooded. 'But she will have to see
him; and then will she resist him? I shall change one view of her if she
does.'

'She will shirk the interview,' Tresten remarked. 'Supposing they meet: I
don't think much will come of it, unless they meet on a field, and he has
an hour's grace to catch her up and be off with her. She's as calm as the
face of a clock, and wags her Yes and No about him just as unconcernedly
as a clock's pendulum. I've spoken to many a sentinel outpost who wasn't
deader on the subject in monosyllables than mademoiselle. She has a
military erectness, and answers you and looks you straight at the eyes,
perfectly unabashed by your seeing "the girl she is," as you say. She
looked at me downright defying me to despise her. Alvan has been tricked
by her colour: she's icy. She has no passion. She acts up to him when
they're together, and that deceives him. I doubt her having
blood--there's no heat in it, if she has.'

'And he cajoled Count Hollinger to send an envoy to see him righted!' the
baroness ejaculated. 'Hollinger is not a sentimental person, I assure
you, and not likely to have taken a step apparently hostile to the
Rudigers, if he had not been extraordinarily shaken by Alvan. What
character of man is this Dr. Storchel?'

Tresten described Count Hollinger's envoy, so quaintly deputed to act the
part of legal umpire in a family business, as a mild man of law with no
ideas or interests outside the law; spectacled, nervous, formal, a
stranger to the passions; and the baroness was amused to hear of Storchel
and Alvan's placid talk together upon themes of law, succeeded by the
little advocate's bewildered fright at one of Alvan's gentler explosions.
Tresten sketched it. The baroness realized it, and shut her lips tight
for a laugh of essential humour.


CHAPTER HIV

Late in the day Alvan was himself able to inform her that he had overcome
Clotilde's father after a struggle of hours. The General had not
consented to everything: he had granted enough, evidently in terror of
the man who had captured Count Hollinger; and it way arranged that
Tresten and Storchel were to wait on Clotilde next morning, and hear from
her mouth whether she yielded or not to Alvan's request to speak with her
alone before the official interview in the presence of the notary, when
she was publicly to state her decision and freedom of choice, according
to Count Hollinger's amicable arrangement through his envoy.

'She will see me-and the thing is done!' said Alvan. 'But I have worked
for it--I have worked! I have been talking to-day for six hours
uninterruptedly at a stretch to her father, who reminds me of a caged
bear I saw at a travelling menagerie, and the beast would perform none of
his evolutions for the edification of us lads till his keeper touched a
particular pole, and the touch of it set him to work like the winding of
a key. Hollinger's name was my magic wand with the General. I could get
no sense from him, nor any acquiescence in sense, till I called up
Hollinger, when the General's alacrity was immediately that of the bear,
or a little boy castigated for his share of original sin. They have been
hard at her, the whole family! and I shall want the two hours I
stipulated for to the full. What do you say?--come, I wager I do it
within one hour! They have stockaded her pretty closely, and it will be
some time before I shall get her to have a clear view of me behind her
defences; but an hour's an age with a woman. Clotilde? I wager I have her
on her knees in half an hour! These notions of duty, and station, and her
fiddle-de-dee betrothal to that Danube osier with Indian-idol eyes, count
for so much mist. She was and is mine. I swear to strike to her heart in
ten minutes! But, madam, if not, you may pronounce me incapable of
conquering any woman, or of taking an absolute impression of facts. I say
I will do it! I am insane if I may not judge from antecedents that my
voice, my touch, my face, will draw her to me at one signal--at a look! I
am prepared to stake my reason on her running to me before I speak a
word:--and I will not beckon. I promise to fold my arms and simply look.'

'Your task of two hours, then, will be accomplished, I compute, in about
half a minute--but it is on the assumption that she consents to see you
alone,' said the baroness.

Alvan opened his eyes. He perceived in his deep sagaciousness woman at
the bottom of her remark, and replied: 'You will know Clotilde in time.
She points to me straight; but of course if you agitate the compass the
needle's all in a tremble: and the vessel is weak, I admit, but the
instinct's positive. To doubt it would upset my understanding. I have had
three distinct experiences of my influence over her, and each time,
curiously each time exactly in proportion to my degree of resolve--but,
baroness, I tell you it was minutely in proportion to it; weighed down to
the grain!--each time did that girl respond to me with a similar degree
of earnestness. As I waned, she waned; as I heated, so did she, and from
spark-heat to flame and to furnace-heat!'

'A refraction of the rays according to the altitude of the orb,' observed
the baroness in a tone of assent, and she smiled to herself at the
condition of the man who could accept it for that.

He did not protest beyond presently a transient frown as at a bad taste
on his tongue, and a rather petulant objection to her use of analogies,
which he called the sapping of language. She forbore to remind him in
retort of his employment of metaphor when the figure served his purpose.

'Marvellously,' cried Alvan, 'marvellously that girl answered to my lead!
and to-morrow--you'll own me right--I must double the attraction. I shall
have to hand her back to her people for twenty-four hours, and the dose
must be doubled to keep her fast and safe. You see I read her flatly. I
read and am charitable. I have a perfect philosophical tolerance. I'm in
the mood to-day of Horace hymning one of his fair Greeks.'

'No, no that is a comparison past my endurance,' interposed the baroness.
'Friend Sigismund, you have no philosophy, you never had any; and the
small crow and croon of Horace would be the last you could take up. It is
the chanted philosophy of comfortable stipendiaries, retired merchants,
gouty patients on a restricted allowance of the grape, old men who have
given over thinking, and young men who never had feeling--the philosophy
of swine grunting their carmen as they turn to fat in the sun. Horace
avaunt! You have too much poetry in you to quote that unsanguine
sensualist for your case. His love distressed his liver, and gave him a
jaundice once or twice, but where his love yields its poor ghost to his
philosophy, yours begins its labours. That everlasting Horace! He is the
versifier of the cushioned enemy, not of us who march along flinty ways:
the piper of the bourgeois in soul, poet of the conforming unbelievers!'

'Pyrrha, Lydia, Lalage, Chloe, Glycera,' Alvan murmured, amorous of the
musical names. 'Clotilde is a Greek of one of the Isles, an Ionian. I see
her in the Horatian ode as in one of those old round shield-mirrors which
give you a speck of the figure on a silver-solar beam, brilliant, not
much bigger than a dewdrop. And so should a man's heart reflect her! Take
her on the light in it, she is perfection. We won't take her in the shady
part or on your flat looking-glasses. There never was necessity for
accuracy of line in the portraiture of women. The idea of them is all we
want: it's the best of them. You will own she's Greek; she's a
Perinthian, Andrian, Olythian, Saurian, Messenian. One of those delicious
girls in the New Comedy, I remember, was called THE POSTPONER, THE
DEFERRER, or, as we might say, THE TO-MORROWER. There you have Clotilde:
she's a TO-MORROWER. You climb the peak of to-morrow, and to see her at
all you must see her on the next peak: but she leaves you her promise to
hug on every yesterday, and that keeps you going. Ay, so we have
patience! Feeding on a young woman's promises of yesterday in one's
fortieth year!--it must end to-morrow, though I kill something.'

Kill, he meant, the aerial wild spirit he could admire as her character,
when he had the prospect of extinguishing it in his grasp.

'What do you meditate killing?' said the baroness.

'The fool of the years behind me,' he replied, 'and entering on my
forty-first a sage.'

'To be the mate and equal of your companion?'

'To prove I have had good training under the wisest to act as her guide
and master.'

'If she--' the baroness checked her exclamation, saying: 'She declined to
come to me. I would have plumbed her for some solid ground, something to
rest one's faith on. Your Pyrrhas, Glyceras, and others of the like, were
not stable persons for a man of our days to bind his life to one of them.
Harness is harness, and a light yoke-fellow can make a proud career
deviate.'

'But I give her a soul!' said Alvan. 'I am the wine, and she the crystal
cup. She has avowed it again and again. You read her as she is when away
from me. Then she is a reed, a weed, what you will; she is unfit to
contend when she stands alone. But when I am beside her, when we are
together--the moment I have her at arms' length she will be part of me by
the magic I have seen each time we encountered. She knows it well.'

'She may know it too well.'

'For what?' He frowned.

'For the chances of your meeting.'

'You think it possible she will refuse?'

A blackness passing to lividness crossed his face. He fetched a big
breath.

'Then finish my history, shut up the book; I am a phantom of a man, and
everything written there is imposture! I can account for all that she has
done hitherto, but not that she should refuse to see me. Not that she
should refuse to see me now when I come armed to demand it! Refuse? But I
have done my work, done what I said I would do. I stand in my order of
battle, and she refuses? No! I stake my head on it! I have not a clod's
perception, I have not a spark of sense to distinguish me from a
flat-headed Lapp, if she refuses:--call me a mountebank who has gained
his position by clever tumbling; a lucky gamester; whatever plays blind
with chance.'

He started up in agitation. 'Lucie! I am a grinning skull without a brain
if that girl refuses! She will not.' He took his hat to leave, adding, to
seem rational to the cool understanding he addressed: 'She will not
refuse; I am bound to think so in common respect for myself; I have done
tricks to make me appear a rageing ape if she--oh! she cannot, she will
not refuse. Never! I have eyes, I have wits, I am not tottering yet on my
grave--or it's blindly, if I am. I have my clear judgement, I am not an
imbecile. It seems to me a foolish suspicion that she can possibly
refuse. Her manners are generally good; freakish, but good in the main.
Perhaps she takes a sting . . . but there is no sting here. It would be
bad manners to refuse; to say nothing of . . . she has a heart! Well,
then, good manners and right feeling forbid her to refuse. She is an
exceedingly intelligent girl, and I half fear I have helped you to a
wrong impression of her. You will really appreciate her wit; you will
indeed; believe me, you will. We pardon nonsense in a girl. Married, she
will put on the matron with becoming decency, and I am responsible for
her then; I stand surety for her then; when I have her with me I warrant
her mine and all mine, head and heels, at a whistle, like the Cossack's
horse. I fancy that at forty I am about as young as most young men. I
promise her another forty manful working years. Are you dubious of that?'

'I nod to you from the palsied summit of ninety,' said the baroness.

Alvan gave a short laugh and stammered excuses for his naked egoism,
comparing himself to a forester who has sharpened such an appetite in
toiling to slay his roe that he can think of nothing but the fire
preparing the feast.

'Hymen and things hymenaeal!' he said, laughing at himself for resuming
the offence on the apology for it. 'I could talk with interest of a
trousseau. I have debated in my mind with parliamentary acrimony about a
choice of wedding-presents. As she is legally free to bestow her hand on
me--and only a brute's horns could contest the fact--she may decide to be
married the day after to-morrow, and get the trousseau in Paris. She has
a turn for startling. I can imagine that if I proposed a run for it she
would be readier to spring to be on the road with me than in acquiescing
in a quiet arrangement about a ceremonial day; partly because, in the
first case, she would throw herself and the rest of the adventure on me,
at no other cost than the enjoyment of one of her impulses; and in the
second, because she is a girl who would require a full band of the best
Berlin orchestra in perpetual play to keep up her spirits among her
people during the preparations for espousing a democrat, demagogue, and
Jew, of a presumed inferior station by birth to her own. Give Momus a
sister, Clotilde is the lady! I know her. I would undertake to put a
spell on her and keep her contented on a frontier--not Russian, any
barbarous frontier where there is a sun. She must have sun. One might
wrap her in sables, but sun is best. She loves it best, though she looks
remarkably well in sables. Never shall I forget . . . she is frileuse,
and shivers into them! There are Frenchmen who could paint it--only
Frenchmen. Our artists, no. She is very French. Born in France she would
have been a matchless Parisienne. Oh! she's a riddle of course. I don't
pretend to spell every letter of her. The returning of my presents is
odd. No, I maintain that she is a coward acting under domination, and
there's no other way of explaining the puzzle. I was out of sight, they
bullied her, and she yielded--bewilderingly, past comprehension it
seems--cat!--until you remember what she's made of: she's a reed. Now I
reappear armed with powers to give her a free course, and she, that
abject whom you beheld recently renouncing me, is, you will see, the
young Aurora she was when she came striking at my door on the upper Alp.
That was a morning! That morning is Clotilde till my eyes turn over! She
is all young heaven and the mountains for me! She's the filmy light above
the mountains that weds white snow and sky. By the way, I dreamt last
night she was half a woman, half a tree, and her hair was like a dead
yewbough, which is as you know of a brown burnt-out colour, suitable to
the popular conception of widows. She stood, and whatever turning you
took, you struck back on her. Whether my widow, I can't say: she must
first be my wife. Oh, for tomorrow!'

'What sort of evening is it?' said the baroness.

'A Mont Blanc evening: I saw him as I came along,' Alvan replied, and
seized his hat to be out to look on the sovereign mountain again. They
touched hands. He promised to call in the forenoon next day.

'Be cool,' she counselled him.

'Oh!' He flung back his head, making light of the crisis. 'After all,
it's only a girl. But, you know, what I set myself to win! . . . The
thing's too small--I have been at such pains about it that I should be
ridiculous if I allowed myself to be beaten. There is no other reason for
the trouble we 're at, except that, as I have said a thousand times, she
suits me. No man can be cooler than I.'

'Keep so,' said the baroness.

He walked to where the strenuous blue lake, finding outlet, propels a
shoulder, like a bright-muscled athlete in action, and makes the
Rhone-stream. There he stood for an hour, disfevered by the limpid liquid
tumult, inspirited by the glancing volumes of a force that knows no
abatement, and is the skiey Alps behind, the great historic citied plains
ahead.

His meditation ended with a resolution half in the form of a prayer (to
mixed deities undefined) never to ask for a small thing any more if this
one were granted him!

He had won it, of course, having brought all his powers to bear on the
task; and he rejoiced in winning it: his heart leapt, his imagination
spun radiant webs of colour: but he was a little ashamed of his frenzies,
though he did not distinctly recall them; he fancied he had made some
noise, loud or not, because his intentions were so pure that it was
infamous to thwart them. At a certain age honest men made sacrifice of
their liberty to society, and he had been ready to perform the duty of
husbanding a woman. A man should have a wife and rear children, not to be
forgotten in the land, and to help mankind by transmitting to future
times qualities he has proved priceless: he thought of the children, and
yearned to the generations of men physically and morally through them.

This was his apology to the world for his distantly-recollected excesses
of temper.

Was she so small a thing? Not if she succumbed. She was petty, vexatious,
irritating, stinging, while she resisted: she cast an evil beam on his
reputation, strength and knowledge of himself, and roused the giants of
his nature to discharge missiles at her, justified as they were by his
pure intentions and the approbation of society. But he had a broad full
heart for the woman who would come to him, forgiving her, uplifting her,
richly endowing her. No meanness of heart was in him. He lay down at
night thinking of Clotilde in an abandonment of tenderness. 'Tomorrow!
you bird of to-morrow!' he let fly his good-night to her.


CHAPTER XV

He slept. Near upon morning he roused with his tender fit strong on him,
but speechless in the waking as it had been dreamless in sleep. It was a
happy load on his breast, a life about to be born, and he thought that a
wife beside him would give it language. She should have, for she would
call out, his thousand flitting ideas now dropped on barren ground for
want of her fair bosom to inspire, to vivify, to receive. Poetry laid a
hand on him: his desire of the wife, the children, the citizen's good
name--of these our simple civilized ambitions--was lowly of the earth,
throbbing of earth, and at the same time magnified beyond scope of speech
in vast images and emblems resembling ranges of Olympian cloud round the
blue above earth, all to be decipherable, all utterable, when she was by.
What commoner word!--yet wife seemed to him the word most reverberating
of the secret sought after by man, fullest at once of fruit and of
mystery, or of that light in the heart of mystery which makes it
magically fruitful.

He felt the presence of Clotilde behind the word; but in truth the
delicate sensations breeding these half-thoughts of his, as he lay
between sleeping and waking, shrank from conjuring up the face of the
woman who had wounded them, and a certain instinct to preserve and be
sure of his present breathing-space of luxurious tranquillity kept her
veiled. Soon he would see her as his wife, and then she would be she,
unveiled ravishingly, the only she, the only wife! He knew the cloud he
clasped for Clotilde enough to be at pains to shun a possible prospect of
his execrating it. Oh, the only she, the only wife! the wild man's
reclaimer! the sweet abundant valley and channel of his river of
existence henceforward! Doubting her in the slightest was doubting her
human. It is the brain, the satanic brain which will ever be pressing to
cast its shadows: the heart is clearer and truer.

He multiplied images, projected visions, nestled in his throbs to drug
and dance his brain. He snatched at the beauty of a day that outrolled
the whole Alpine hand-in-hand of radiant heaven-climbers for an assurance
of predestined celestial beneficence; and again, shadowily thoughtful of
the littleness of the thing he exalted and claimed, he staked his reason
on the positive blessing to come to him before nightfall, telling himself
calmly that he did so because there would be madness in expecting it
otherwise: he asked for so little! Since he asked for so little, to
suppose that it would not be granted was irrational. None but a very
coward could hesitate to stake his all on the issue.

Singularly small indeed the other aims in life appeared by comparison
with this one, but his intellect, in the act of pleading excuses for his
impatience, distinguished why it should be so. The crust, which is not
much, is everything to the starving beggar; and he was eager for the
crust that he might become sound and whole again, able to give their just
proportion to things, as at present he acknowledged himself hardly able
to do. He could not pursue two thoughts on a political question, or grasp
the idea of a salutary energy in the hosts animated by his leadership.
There would have to be an end of it speedily, else men might name him
worthless dog!

Morning swam on the lake in her beautiful nakedness, a wedding of white
and blue, of purest white and bluest blue. Alvan crossed the island
bridges when the sun had sprung on his shivering fair prey, to make the
young fresh Morning rosy, and was glittering along the smooth
lake-waters. Workmen only were abroad, and Alvan was glad to be out with
them to feel with them as one of them. Close beside him the vivid genius
of the preceding century, whose love of workmen was a salt of heaven in
his human corruptness, looked down on the lake in marble. Alvan cherished
a worship of him as of one that had first thrilled him with the feeling
of our common humanity, with the tenderness for the poor, with the
knowledge of our frailty. Him, as well as the great Englishman and a
Frenchman, his mind called Father, and his conscience replied to that
progenitor's questioning of him, but said 'You know the love of woman: He
loved indeed, but he was not an amatory trifler. He too was a worker, a
champion worker. He doated on the prospect of plunging into his work; the
vision of jolly giant labours told of peace obtained, and there could be
no peace without his prize.

He listened to the workmen's foot-falls. The solitary sound and steady
motion of their feet were eloquent of early morning in a city, not less
than the changes of light in heaven above the roofs. With the golden
light came numbers, workmen still. Their tread on the stones roused some
of his working thoughts, like an old tune in his head, and he watched the
scattered files passing on, disciplined by their daily necessities,
easily manageable if their necessities are but justly considered. These
numbers are the brute force of earth, which must have the earth in time,
as they had it in the dawn of our world, and then they entered into
bondage for not knowing how to use it. They will have it again: they have
it partially, at times, in the despot, who is only the reflex of their
brute force, and can give them only a shadow of their claim. They will
have it all, when they have illumination to see and trust to the
leadership of a greater force than they--in force of brain, in the
spiritual force of ideas; ideas founded on justice; and not the justice
of these days of the governing few whose wits are bent to steady our
column of civilized humanity by a combination of props and jugglers'
arts, but a justice coming of the recognized needs of majorities, which
will base the column on a broad plinth for safety-broad as the base of
yonder mountain's towering white immensity--and will be the guarantee for
the solid uplifting of our civilization at last. 'Right, thou!' he
apostrophized--the old Ironer, at a point of his meditation. 'And right,
thou! more largely right!' he thought, further advanced in it, of the
great Giuseppe, the Genoese. 'And right am I too, between that metal-rail
of a politician and the deep dreamer, each of them incomplete for want of
an element of the other!' Practically and in vision right was Alvan, for
those two opposites met fusing in him: like the former, he counted on the
supremacy of might; like the latter, he distinguished where it lay in
perpetuity.

During his younger years he had been like neither in the moral curb they
could put on themselves--particularly the southern-blooded man. He had
resembled the naturally impatient northerner most, though not so supple
for business as he. But now he possessed the calmness of the Genoese; he
had strong self-command now; he had the principle that life is too short
for the indulgence of public fretfulness or of private quarrels; too
valuable for fruitless risks; too sacred, one may say, for the shedding
of blood on personal grounds. Oh! he had himself well under, fear not.

He could give and take from opposition. And rightly so, seeing that he
confessed to his own bent for sarcastically stinging: he was therefore
bound to endure a retort. Speech for speech, pamphlet for pamphlet, he
could be temperate. Nay, he defied an adversary to produce in him the
sensation of intemperateness; so there would not be much danger of his
being excited to betray it. Shadowily he thought of the hard words hurled
at him by the Rudigers, and of the injury Clotilde's father did him by
plotting to rob him of his daughter. But how had an Alvan replied?--with
the arts of peaceful fence victoriously. He conceived of no temptation to
his repressed irascibility save the political. A day might come for him
and the vehement old Ironer to try their mettle in a tussle. On that day
he would have to be wary, but, as Alvan felt assured, he would be more
master of himself than his antagonist. He was for the young world, in the
brain of a new order of things; the other based his unbending system on
the visions of a feudal chief, and would win a great step perchance, but
there he would stop: he was not with the future!

This immediate prospect of a return to serenity after his recent
charioteering, had set him thinking of himself and his days to come,
which hung before him in a golden haze that was tranquillizing. He had a
name, he had a station: he wanted power and he saw it approaching.

He wanted a wife too. Colonel von Tresten took coffee with him previous
to the start with Dr. Storchel to General von Rudiger's house. Alvan
consequently was unable any longer to think of a wife in the abstract. He
wanted Clotilde. Here was a man going straight to her, going to see her,
positively to see her and hear her voice!--almost instantly to hear her
voice, and see her eyes and hair, touch her hand. Oh! and rally her,
rouse her wit; and be able to tell him the flower she wore for the day,
and where she wore it--at her temples, or sliding to the back hair, or in
her bosom, or at her waist! She had innumerable tricks of indication in
these shifty pretty ways of hers, and was full of varying speech to the
cunning reader of her.

'But keep her to seriousness,' Alvan said. 'Our meeting must be early
to-day--early in the afternoon. She is not unlikely to pretend to trifle.
She has not seen me for some time, and will probably enough play at
emancipation and speak of the "singular impatience of the seigneur
Alvan." Don't you hear her? I swear to those very words! She "loves her
liberty," and she curves her fan and taps her foot. "The seigneur Alvan
appears pressed for time:" She has "letters to write to friends to-day."
Stop that! I can't join in play: to-morrow, if she likes; not to-day. Or
not till I have her by the hand. She shall be elf and fairy, French
coquette, whatever she pleases to-morrow, and I'll be satisfied. All I
beg is for plain dealing on a business matter. This is a business matter,
a business meeting. I thoroughly know the girl's heart, and know that in
winning the interview I win her. Only'--he pressed his friend's
arm--'but, my dear Tresten, you understand. You're a luckier fellow than
I--for the time, at all events. Make it as short as you can. You'll find
me here. I shall take a book--one of the Pandects. I don't suppose I
shall work. I feel idle. Any book handy; anything will interest me. I
should walk or row on the lake, but I would rather be sure of readiness
for your return. You meet Storchel at the General's house?'

'The appointment was at the house,' Tresten said.

'I have not seen him this morning. I know of nothing to prepare him for.
You see, it was invariable with her: as soon as she met me she had twice
her spirit: and that she knows;--she was a new woman, ten times the
happier for having some grains of my courage. Truly you cannot well say
so. But if you will saye, perchaunce with a poore man, I confesse it: and
verely it is to your shame, that you haue not vouchsafed to place
in highe estate a man so honest, being your owne seruaunt. Neuerthelesse,
pouertie doth not depriue anye parte of nobilitie, but riches hath.
Manye kinges and greate Princes, haue bin poore in olde time, and manye
ploughmen and sheepeheardes in times past, haue bin aduaunced to riche
estate. And the last doubt which troubleth you, is, that you be doubtfull
what to doe with me: caste boldly out of your minde that doubte, and
if you do intend in thextremity of your age to vse that which in your
youth you neuer did, I purpose to become cruel also. Use your cruelty
against me, for the auoyding whereof I haue not determined to make any
supplication to you as giltie of this faulte, if faultes may be rehearsed.
Assuring you, that if you do not vnto me, that which you haue done or
will doe to Guiscardo, mine owne handes shall doe it. Wherefore goe to,
and let fall your teares with women, and if you purpose to be cruell,
kill him and let me also drincke of the same Cuppe, if you thincke
we haue deserued it." The king hearing the stout words of his doughter,
thoughte not that shee woulde haue done in deede, as her wordes pretended,
and as she said she would doe. Wherefore departing from her, and not
willing to vse any maner of crueltie towards her, hee thoughte by the
destruction and slaughter of Guiscardo, to coole her burning loue. And
therefore commaunded two of his seruauntes (that had Guiscardo in
keeping) without any noise, to strangle him the next nighte, and afterwardes
plucking his harte out of his bodie, to bringe it vnto him: who did
as they were commaunded. And the next day the king caused a faire Cuppe
of gold to be broughte vnto him, wherein he laid the harte of Guiscardo,
which he sent (by one of his trustiest seruauntes) vnto his doughter: and
commaunded him, when hee presented the same vnto her to say these wordes:
"Thy father hath sent thee this presente, to comforte thy selfe with
the thing, which thou doest chiefle loue, as thou haste comforted him of
that which he loued most."

Gismonda not amoued from her cruel determination, caused to be
brought vnto her (after her father was gone) venemous herbes and
rootes, which she distilled together, and made water thereof to
drincke sodenly if that came to passe which she doubted.

And when the kinges seruaunte was come vnto her, and deliuered his
presente, he said as he was commaunded. Gismonda toke the Cuppe with
stoute countenaunce, and couering it, so soone as she sawe the harte,
and vnderstoode the woordes, shee thoughte verelye that it was the hart
of Guiscardo, wherefore beholding the seruaunt, she saide vnto him: "Truly
it behoueth that such a hart as this is, shoulde be intombed in no
worse graue then in golde, which my father hath most wisely done."
Afterwards lifting the Cuppe to her mouth, she kissed it, saying: "I
haue in all thinges, euen vnto this time (being the last ende of my
life) alwayes found the tender loue of my father towards mee: but nowe
I knowe it to be greater, then euer I did before. And therefore in my
behalfe, you shall render vnto him, the last thanckes that euer I shall
giue him, for so great a presente." After those wordes, tourning herselfe
towardes the Cuppe, which shee helde faste, beholdinge the hart, shee said
thus: "Oh sweete harboroughe of my pleasures, cursed be the crueltye of
him that hath caused mee at this time to loke vppon thee with the
eyes of my face: it was pleasure ynoughe, to see thee euery hower,
amonges people of knowledge and vnderstanding.

Thou hast finished thy course, and by that ende, which fortune vouchsafed
to giue thee, thou art dispatched, and arriued to the ende wherunto all
men haue recourse: thou hast forsaken the miseries and traueyles of this
world, and haste had by the enemy himselfe such a sepulture as thy
worthinesse deserueth. There needeth nothing els to accomplishe thy
funerall, but onely the teares of her whom thou diddest hartelye loue all
the dayes of thy lyfe. For hauing wherof, our Lord did put into the
head of my vmercifull father to send thee vnto me, and truly I will bestow
some teares vppon thee, although I was determined to die, without
sheading any teares at all, stoutlie, not fearefull of any thinge.
And when I haue powred them out for thee, I will cause my soule, which
thou hast heretofore so carefully kepte, to be ioyned wyth thine. For,
in what company can I trauell, more contented, or in better safegard in
places vnknowen, then with thy soule?

Truly I am well assured, that it is yet here within, that hath
respecte to the place, aswell of his owne pleasures, as of mine,
being assured (as she who is certaine, that yet he looueth me) that
he attendeth for myne, of whom he is greatly beloued."

When she had thus sayd, she beganne to let fall (as thoughe there
had been a fountaine in her head) so many teares, as it was a myracle
to beholde her, oftentimes kissing the deade harte.

Her maydens that stoode aboute her, knewe not what hart that was, nor
whereunto those woords did tende: but being moued with compassion
they all wepte: pitifullie demaundinge (althoughe in vayne) the
occasion of her sorowfull plaintes: and comforted her so well as
they could.

Who after she had powred forth sufficient teares, lifted vppe her heade
and when she had wiped her eyes, she sayd: "Oh louing hart, all my dutie
is fulfilled towardes thee, hauinge nowe nothinge to doe but onely
to yelde foorth my ghoste, to accompany thyne."

And this sayd, she caused the glasse of water, which she had made the daye
before, to be brought vnto her: and poured it out into the cuppe where
the hart laye, all bained with a multitude of teares: whiche shee putting
to her mouthe, without feare, dronke vp all. And that done went into
her bedde, with the cuppe in her hand, tossing her bodie as decently
as she could vppon the same, holding the harte of her dead frende, so nere
as shee coulde, vnto her owne. Her maidens seing this (although they
knewe not what water it was, that she dranke) sent worde to the king,
who fearing that whiche happened, incontinentlye wente downe into his
doughters chamber: where he arriued euen at that instante that she
had cast her selfe vpon the bedde, and being come to late to succour
her, with sweete woordes he began (seing her in those pangues) to wepe
bitterly. To whome his doughter sayde: "Father, kepe in those vndesired
teares and bestowe them not vpon me, for I desire them not:
who euer sawe man beside you, to bewayle the wilfulnesse of his owne
facte. Howe be it, if there do yet reste in you any sparke of that
loue, which you haue alwayes borne towardes me: graunt me this last
requeste, that although you were not contented that I should liue
secretly and couertly with Guiscardo, yet at lest, cause our bodies to bee
openly buried togethers, where it pleaseth you to bestowe them." The
anguishe and sorowe would not suffer the Prince to aunsweare one
worde for weping.

And the Ladie perceiuing her ende approche, cleped and strained the dead
hart harde to her stomacke, saying: "Farewell sweete harte in God,
for I am going to him." And therewithall she closed her eyes, and lost
her senses, departing out of this dolorous life. In this maner sorowefully
ended the loue of Gismonda and Guiscardo, as you haue hearde,
whome the prince after he had wepte his fill, and taken to late repentaunce
for his crueltie: caused honorablie to be buried, and intombed both in one
graue, not without great sorowe of all the people of Salerne.

THE FORTYETH NOUELL.

_Mahomet one of the Turkishe Emperours, executeth curssed crueltie vpon
a Greeke maiden, whome hee tooke prisoner, at the wynning of Constantinople._

If you doe euer make any proofe of trial, to knowe of what trampe the
Arrowes of Loue be, and what fruite they brynge to them, that doe vse and
practise them: I am assured you shall be touched with some pitie when ye
vnderstande the beastlie crueltie of an Infidell louer towards his Ladie.
He of whome I wyll declare the historie, is Mahomet, not the false Prophete,
but the great graundfather of Soliman Otiman, Emperoure of the Turkes,
whiche raigned at that tyme. He it is, that to the shame and eternall
infamie of all Christian Princes of his tyme, did wynne Constantinople,
and tooke awaye the Easte Empire from Constantine, a Christian
Emperour, the yeare of our Lord 1453.

Mahomet then hauing obteined so great victorie at Constantinople,
amonges the spoyle of that riche Citie, there was founde a Greeke mayden,
of suche rare and excellent beautie, as she allured the eyes of euery
wight, to wonder and beholde her, as a thing miraculous, whose name was
Hyerenee, of the age of sixtene or seuentene yeares: whom a Capitaine to
gratifie his Lorde, did presente, a Iewell, (as hee thought) moste
acceptable to him, aboue all thinges of the worlde. The Emperour Mahomet,
young and wanton beyonde measure, after he had caste his eye upon
the mayden, and had grauen her beautie in his harte, gaue a straighte
charge that shee shoulde bee kepte for hym, hopinge after the tumulte
of the warre was ended, to bestowe conuenient tyme vpon her. The retracte
sounded, and the affaires of the Empire reduced to sure estate, remembring
him selfe of the beautie of Hyerenee, whiche had made a breache and
entrie into his harte, commaunded that shee should be brought
foorth vnto him, and hauing viewed her at his pleasure, hee felte
him selfe so surprised with that newe flame, that hee conceived none
other delight but to playe and dallie with her, in suche sorte as
his spirites being in loues full possession, loue dealt with hym
so cruellie, as he coulde take no reste daye nor night.

Who yelded him selfe suche a praie to his darling Hyerenee, that he
felte none other contentation in his mynde but that whiche he receiued
of her. And this amorous passion indured the space of three continuall
yeares, taking suche vigor and increase by litle and litle, that he
began to forget that whiche appertained to the ornament and honour of his
Empire, leauing the whole administration of publique causes to his
Baschats, he him selfe being so negligent, as he reposed in them all
matters concerning the state of the Empire. During this disorder, the
vulgar people began secretly to grudge, as well for the confusion and
disorder of the Empire, as for the il gouernment of the same, (and
specially, because the Baschats corrupted with auarice imployed them selues
to their particuler profite, and to inriche them selues with the spoile
of the people.) The Ianissaries on the other side, a warlike people, and
brought vp in continuall exercise of Armes, began with open voyce, to
detracte and slaunder their lorde, commonlie complaining howe hee
consumed his life like an effeminate persone, without inferring or doyng
anye profite to the Empire. To bee shorte, the matter came to suche
desolation, as it might rather haue bene called a sedition then a
murmure: and yet there was none so hardie as durst attempte to declare
the same to the Emperour, knowing him to be of nature terrible,
cruell, and rigorous, that with a woorde woulde put him to death that
went about to withdrawe him from his desire. Therewithall he was so
dronke with the beautie of the Greeke, that the leste matter, wherewith
they might geue occasion to withdrawe him from his negligent life, was
enough to driue him into rage and furie. This poore Emperour was so
bewitched, as not onely hee consumed dayes and nightes with her, but he
burned with continual ielousie, whose beautie was so liuelie painted
in the inward partes of his hart and minde, that he remained thus
ouerwhelmed in beastly pleasure, euery man in particuler and all in
generall conspired against him, with one determinate minde, to
yelde no more obedience vnto him in time to come, and purposed to
chose some Emperour, that were more marciall and warlike, through
whose succour and counsaile they might not onely conserue the thinges
gotten, but also amplifie the boundes and limites of their Empire.

Mustapha which was brought vp with the Emperour, a gentle personage, franke
of talke, and so nere to his maiestie that he might go into his chamber,
although the Greeke was present: when he perceiued conuenient time, suche
as he desired to haue, repaired to the Emperour vpon a daye, who liking
well his deuises, walked with him alone in his Gardeine, to whom after
he had made great reuerence, according to their custome, he sayde: "My
souereigne lorde and maister, if I might speake freely, without
seruile feare, which staieth mee, or if the terrour of your displeasure
might not abash me, I would willingly declare vnto your maiestie that
which concerneth not onely your securitie and saulfegarde, but (which is
more) the saulfetie of your whole Empire." Whom Mahomet aunswered with
merie countenance in these wordes. "Cast away such colde feare as staieth
thee, and speake hardly thy minde: Shewe me what it is that toucheth
me." "I doubt, and it shall please your maiestie, leste I shall seeme
ouer presumptuous and rashe, if I discouer the secretes of my hart:
but our auncient education, the dutie of my conscience, with the experience
that you haue alwayes had of my fidelitie, haue so much forced mee, as
being no longer able to rule my selfe, (I am constrained, by what vertuous
prouocation I know not) to manifest thinges vnto you, that both time
and necessitye will make you to thincke them good and necessarie:

althoughe (it may so be) that now your eyes be so bounde vppe, in the vaile
of your disordinate affection, that you cannot digeste, or take the
same in good part. The life (my lorde) which you haue ledde, sithens
the taking of Constantinople, and the excessiue pleasures wherin
you haue bin plunged these three yeares, is occassion that not onely
your Souldiours and the rest of your popular people, but the most
faithful Lords of your Empire, do murmure, conspire, and coniure
against you.

And pardon me (my lord) if I speake so vnreuerently, in thinges touching
your preseruation. For there is no man but doth very much marueile of this
great and newe alteration that appeareth in you, which doth so abase
you, and maketh you to degenerate from your auncient generositie
and valiaunce.

Your owne selfe hath giuen ouer your selfe to be a spoile and praye to a
simple woman: that you wholie depend vpon her flatteries and allurementes:
reason or counsaile can take no place in your passionate and afflicted
hart. But I humblie beseech your maiestie to enter a little into your
selfe, and make a suruey of your life, that you haue ledde these three
yeares paste. The glory of your auncestours and predecessours, acquired
and wonne by sheading of so much bloud, kepte by so great prudence, conserued
by so happy counsell, haue they no representation, or shew before
your face? The remembraunce of theyr memorable victories, doth it not
touche the depthe of your conscience?

The magnanimitie and valiaunce whereby they be immortalized, and their fame
regestred throughe the whole world, is it extinguished in you?

Their Trophees and Monumentes grauen and aduaunced to all the corners of
the earth, be they throwen downe and defaced from the siege of your
remembraunce? But where is now the ardent desire which boiled in you
from your infancie, to make Italie tributarie vnto you, and to cause your
selfe to be crowned at Rome, Emperour aswel of Thorient, as of the
Occidente? This is not the way to amplifie and inlarge your Empire, but
rather to restraine and diminish the same. This is not the meane to
preserue it, but to dispoile it and make it lesse. If Ottoman the first
tronke or stocke of your gentle familye and kinred, had thus giuen
himselfe to be corrupted in idlenes, you had not now inherited the
noble kingdom of Greece, nor gouerned the countries of Galatia and
Bithinia, and many other prouinces, which enuironne the greate sea.

Semblablie his sonne Orcan (a liuely Image of his father and a folower
of his valiaunt factes) had not triumphed ouer Licaonia, Phrigia, Caria,
nor dilated the boundes of his Empyre to Hellesponte. What shall I speake
of Amurates, the successour of Orcan, who was the first that inuaded
Europa, conquered Thracia, Syria, Rafia and Bulgaria? And Baiazet
likewyse, did not he cut of the head of the greate Tamburlain, which called
himselfe the scourge of God, and brought into the field foure hundred
thousande Scithians a horsebacke, and sixe hundred thousande
footmen? Shall I passe ouer with silence the vertuous exploites of your
grandfather Mahomet, who conquered Macedonia and made the Countries
to feele the edge of his sword, euen to the sea Ionicum, lettinge
passe many wonderfull expeditions and iourneis by him made against the
Lidians and Scicilians? But nowe I cannot reuiue the memorie of your
father Amurate, but to my great sorow and griefe, who by the space of XL.
yeres made the Sea and earth to tremble and quake, and with the
furie of his stronge hand vsed such cruell reuengment ouer the
Grekes, that the memorie of the woundes do remaine at this present,
euen to the mountaines of Thomao and Pindus: he subiugated the
Phocians, made tributarie Athenes, Beotia, Aetolia, Caramania, and
all the barbarous nations, from Morea to the straits of Corinthe.

What neede I here to bring in the cruel battell that he fought with
the Emperour Sigismunde and Philip Duke of Burgundia wherin he
ouerthrew the whole force of the Christians, toke the Emperour
prisoner, and the Duke of Burgundie also, whom he sent to
Andrionopolis?

or to remember other fierce armies which he sent into Hungarie,
wherof your maiesty is a faithfull witnes, your selfe being stil there
in your owne person. Iudge, then, my Lord, what diligence and intollerable
trauell he vsed in his manifolde glorious enterprises and famous
victories. Do you thincke that if hee had bin idle in his palace,
amonges the Ladyes, you had inherited your Empyre, or had nowe bin Lord
of so many excellent Prouinces: which he is not sufficient to rule, that
cannot prouide to confirme and establish the same. There be many of
your subiectes and vassals at this day, which do obey and honour your
maiestie (more for feare then good loue they beare you) that woulde rebell
against you, if Fortune would turne her backe. The Christians of longtime
(as you know) haue sworne your ruine and destruction. Moreouer they say
that their high bishop the pope of Rome hath conuocated all his prelates
to vnitie, and reconciled the Princes and Monarches of Christendome
together, to ouer run you, and to take the Scepter out of your hands,
and to dispoile you of your Empire. But what know we whither they wil ioyne
their force with the power of the Persian Sophi, your capital enemie,
or with the Souldan or Aegipt, your auncient aduersary:
which if they come to passe (as God forbid) your Empire wilbe consumed.
Gather your wits then together from henceforth my Lord, and call againe
reason, which so many yeres you haue banished from you. Awake out of
the deepe sleepe which hath sealed vp your eyes: imitate and folow the
trade of your auncestors, which euer loued better one day of honour then
a hundred liuing yeares of shame and reproch. Attend to the gouernment
of your Empire: leaue of this effeminate life; receiue againe the smell
of your generosity and vertue: and if you cannot at one time cutte
of and remoue all that amorous heate which vndermineth so your hart,
moderate the same by litle and litle, and giue some hope to your
people, which thincke you to be vtterlye loste and desperate of
recouerie.

Or if so be the Greeke do delighte you so much, who shall let you to
carye her with you in all your iourneis and expeditions?

Why cannot you together both enioy her beauty and vse the practise
of armes? Mee thincke that your pleasure shalbe greater after you haue
wonne some victory, and subdued some countrye to inioye her in your
armes, then to remaine in a house with eternal infamie and continuall
grudging of your subiectes. But proue I pray you, to separate your
selfe certaine dayes from her and you shall certainly iudge, how farre
more passing the pleasures be so differred, then those that be daily
vsed. Yet one thinge more, and it please your Maiestie, there resteth
to be saide, which is, that all the victories of your progenitours, or
the conquestes which your selfe hath made be to small purpose, if you doe
not keepe them and increase them, the keeping of a thing gotten
being of no lesse glory and praise then the conquest.

Be now then a conquerour of your selfe, humblie beseching your Maiestie,
that if I haue spoken any thing disagreable to your minde, according
to your wonted clemencie to pardon the same, and to impute the
faulte to my bounden duty and the care that I haue of your honour
and safetye."

Mahomet after he had heard the longe discourse of his slaue, stoode
as still as a blocke, and fixing his eyes vppon the grounde, with
sodaine chaunge of colour, declared by outward signes, the agitations
and vnquietnes of his minde in such wise, as the poore slaue Mustapha,
seing in him those alterations, was in doubt of his life:
whose woords so pricked the Emperour's harte, that he knew not what
to do, or whereupon to be resolued, and feeling his conscience
troubled with a furious battel: knowing euidentlye that Mustapha
had spoken the truth, and that he vttered the same like a trustie
seruaunt to his maister.

But on the other side the beautie of the Greeke, was still before
his eyes, and the minde he had to abandon her, gaue him suche alarme,
that he seemed at that instante as though his hart had been torne
out of his belly.

And thus moued with diuers tempestes, and disquieted with sundry thoughtes,
hauing his eyes inflamed with great rage and furie, he said vnto
him.

"Althoughe thou hast spoken vnreuerently inough, yet our education
together, and the fidelitie that I haue proued in thee in time
paste, shalbe thy pardon for this time.

To the purpose.

Before the Sunne doth compasse the Zodiacke, I will let it be knowen
to thee and other, what puissaunce and power I haue ouer my selfe:
whether I am able to bridle mine affection or not.

Take order in the meane time that all my noble men, the Baschats
and the principall of my men of warre, be assembled together to
morowe, in the middes of the greate halle of my palace."

This determination finished, the Emperour went into the Greeke,
with whom he reioysed all that day and night, and made more of her
than euer he did before.

And the more to flatter her, he dined with her, and commaunded that
after dinner, she should adorne herselfe with her most precious
Iewels, and decke her with the costliest apparell shee had.

Whereunto the poore wenche obeied, not knowinge that it was her funeral
garmentes. On the other side, Mustapha vncertaine of the Emperour's
minde, at the houre appointed caused all the nobilitie to be
assembled in the hall, euerye of theym marueilinge what moued the
Emperour so to do, sithens he had so long time shut vp himselfe,
without shewing his person abrode.

Being thus assembled, and euerye man talking diuerslye of this
matter, accordinge as their affection serued: beholde, the Emperour
entred the hall, leading the Greeke by the hand, who being adorned
otherwise then she was wont to be, was accompanied and garnished
with beautie, so rare and excellent as she resembled rather an
heauenly Goddesse then a humaine creature.

The Turke being come into the hall, after that the Lords had made
their reuerence, according to their wonted maner, he holding still
the faire Greeke by the left hande, and stoode still in the middest
of the same, loking furiously round about him, he said vnto them.

Leczel is
with him and gives him head. It 's about time for me to go back to him,
for there may be business.'

The baroness thought it improbable. She was hoping that with Alvan's
eruption the drop-scene would fall.

Tresten spoke of the possibility. He knew the contents of the letter, and
knew further that a copy of it, with none of the pregnant syllables
expunged, had been forwarded to Prince Marko. He counselled calm waiting
for a certain number of hours. The baroness committed herself to a
promise to wait. Now that Alvan had broken off from the baleful girl, the
worst must have been passed, she thought.

He had broken with the girl: she reviewed him under the light of that
sole fact. So the edge of the cloud obscuring him was lifted, and he
would again be the man she prized and hoped much of! How thickly he had
been obscured was visible to her through a retreating sensation of scorn
of him for his mad excesses, which she had not known herself to entertain
while he was writhing in the toils, and very bluntly and dismissingly
felt now that his madness was at its climax. An outrageous lunatic fit,
that promised to release him from his fatal passion, seemed, on the
contrary, respectable in essence if not in the display. Wives he should
have by fifties and hundreds if he wanted them, she thought in her
great-heartedness, reflecting on the one whose threatened pretensions to
be his mate were slain by the title flung at her, and merited. The word
(she could guess it) was an impassable gulf, a wound beyond healing. It
pronounced in a single breath the girl's right name and his pledge of a
return to sanity. For it was the insanest he could do; it uttered
anathema on his love of her; it painted his white glow of unreason and
fierce ire at the scorn which her behaviour flung upon every part of his
character that was tenderest with him. After speaking such things a man
comes to his senses or he dies. So thought the baroness, and she was not
more than commonly curious to hear how the Rudigers had taken the insult
they had brought on themselves, and not unwilling to wait to see Alvan
till he was cool. His vanity, when threatening to bleed to the death,
would not be civil to the surgeon before the second or third dressing of
his wound.


CHAPTER XVIII

In the house of the Rudigers there was commotion. Clotilde sat apart from
it, locked in her chamber. She had performed her crowning act of
obedience to her father by declining the interview with Alvan, and as a
consequence she was full of grovelling revolt.

Two things had helped her to carry out her engagement to submit in this
final instance of dutifulness--one was the sight of that hateful rigid
face and glacier eye of Tresten; the other was the loophole she left for
subsequent insurgency by engaging to write to Count Hollinger's envoy,
Dr. Storchel. She had gazed most earnestly at him, that he might not
mistake her meaning, and the little man's pair of spectacles had, she
fancied, been dim. He was touched. Here was a friend! Here was the friend
she required, the external aid, the fresh evasion, the link with Alvan!
Now to write to him to bind him to his beautiful human emotion. By
contrast with the treacherous Tresten, whose iciness roused her to
defiance, the nervous little advocate seemed an emissary of the skies,
and she invoked her treasure-stores of the craven's craftiness in revolt
to compose a letter that should move him, melt the good angel to espouse
her cause. He was to be taught to understand--nay, angelically he would
understand at once--why she had behaved apparently so contradictorily.
Fettered, cruelly constrained by threats and wily sermons upon her duty
to her family, terrorized, a prisoner 'beside this blue lake, in sight of
the sublimest scenery of earth,' and hating his associate--hating him,
she repeated and underscored--she had belied herself; she was willing to
meet Alvan, she wished to meet him. She could open her heart to Alvan's
true friend--his only true friend. He would instantly discern her unhappy
plight. In the presence of his associate she could explain nothing, do
nothing but what she had done. He had frozen her. She had good reason to
know that man for her enemy. She could prove him a traitor to Alvan.
Certain though she was from the first moment of Dr. Storchel's integrity
and kindness of heart, she had stood petrified before him, as if affected
by some wicked spell. She owned she had utterly belied herself; she
protested she had been no free agent.

The future labours in her cause were thrown upon Dr. Storchel's
shoulders, but with such compliments to him on his mission from above as
emissary angels are presumed to be sensibly affected by.

The letter was long, involved, rather eloquent when she forgot herself
and wrote herself, and intentionally very feminine, after the manner of
supplicatory ladies appealing to lawyers, whom they would sway by the
feeble artlessness of a sex that must confide in their possession of a
heart, their heads being too awful.

She was directing the letter when Marko Romaris gave his name outside her
door. He was her intimate, her trustiest ally; he was aware of her design
to communicate with Dr. Storchel, and came to tell her it would be a
waste of labour. He stood there singularly pale and grave, unlike the
sprightly slave she petted on her search for a tyrant. 'Too late,' he
said, pointing to the letter she held. 'Dr. Storchel has gone.'

She could not believe it, for Storchel had informed her that he would
remain three days. Her powers of belief were more heavily taxed when
Marko said: 'Alvan has challenged your father to fight him.' With that he
turned on his heel; he had to assist in the deliberations of the family.

She clasped her temples. The collision of ideas driven together by Alvan
and a duel--Alvan challengeing her father--Alvan, the contemner of the
senseless appeal to arms for the settlement 'of personal
disputes!--darkened her mind. She ran about the house plying all whom she
met for news and explanations; but her young brother was absent, her
sisters were ignorant, and her parents were closeted in consultation with
the gentleman. At night Marko sent her word that she might sleep in
peace, for things would soon be arranged and her father had left the
city.

She went to her solitude to study the hard riddle of her shattered
imagination of Alvan. The fragments would not suffer joining, they
assailed her in huge heaps; and she did not ask herself whether she had
ever known him, but what disruption it was that had unsettled the reason
of the strongest man alive. At times he came flashing through the scud of
her thoughts magnificently in person, and how to stamp that splendid
figure of manhood on a madman's conduct was the task she supposed herself
to be attempting while she shrank from it, and worshipped the figure,
abhorred the deed. She could not unite them. He was like some great
cathedral organ foully handled in the night by demons. He, whose lucent
reason was an unclouded sky over every complexity of our sphere, he to
crave to fight! to seek the life-blood of the father of his beloved! More
unintelligible than this was it to reflect that he must know the
challenge to be of itself a bar to his meeting his Clotilde ever again.
She led her senses round to weep, and produced a state of mental drowning
for a truce to the bitter riddle.

Quiet reigned in the household next day, and for the length of the day.
Her father had departed, her mother treated her vixenishly, snubbing her
for a word, but the ugly business of yesterday seemed a matter settled
and dismissed. Alvan, then, had been appeased. He was not a man of blood:
he was the humanest of men. She was able to reconstruct him under the
beams of his handsome features and his kingly smile. She could
occasionally conjure them up in their vividness; but had she not in truth
been silly to yield to spite and send him back the photographs of him
with his presents, so that he should have the uttermost remnant of the
gifts he asked for? Had he really asked to have anything back? She
inclined to doubt all that had been done and said since their
separation--if only it were granted her to look on a photograph showing
him as he was actually before their misunderstanding! The sun-tracing
would not deceive, as her own tricks of imageing might do: seeing him as
he was then, the hour would be revived,--she would certainly feel him as
he lived and breathed now. Thus she fancied, on the effort to get him to
her heart after the shock he had dealt it, for he had become almost a
stranger, as a god that has taken human shape and character.

In short, I know of no difference in the medical treatment of _mania_
and _melancholia_, merely as such; you must look to the state of vascular
action, both local and general, in order to lay down a proper plan
of cure.

_Hypochondriasis_ is a still slighter form of _mental derangement_, and
which is characterized by a preposterous anxiety and solicitude with
regard to the patient's own health, which in these cases is often little
if at all disturbed, with the exception of occasional uneasiness at the
stomach, arising from flatulency and other effects of indigestion. This
disorder in the state of the digestive function, is generally considered
by the patient as the real and primary disease, though 99 times
in 100 it is merely secondary, the result of torpor of the alimentary
canal altogether.The tightened
grasp of her hand confessed her understanding of the thing she pressed to
hear repeated, for the sake of seeming to herself to repudiate it under
an accumulating horror, at the same time that the repetition doubly and
trebly confirmed it, so as to exonerate her criminal sensations by
casting the whole burden on the material fact.

Marko, with her father's consent and the approval of the friends of the
family, had taken up Alvan's challenge! That was the tale. She saw him
dead in the act of telling it.

'What?' she cried: 'what?' and then: 'You?' and her fingers were bonier
in their clutch: 'Let me hear. It can't be!' She snapped at herself for
not pitying him more but a sword had flashed to cut her gordian knot: she
her saw him dead, the obstacle removed, the man whom her parents opposed
to Alvan swept away: she saw him as a black gate breaking to a flood of
light. She had never invoked it, never wished, never dreamed it, but if
it was to be? . . . 'Oh! impossible. One of us is crazy. You to fight?
. . . they put it upon you? You fight him? But it is cruel, it is
abominable. Incredible! You have accepted the challenge, you say?'

He answered that he had, and gazed into her eyes for love.

.

* * * * *

SYRIAN LOOKING GLASSES.

The Damascus blades are the handsomest and best of all Syria; and it
is curious to observe their manner of burnishing them. This operation
is performed before tempering, and they have for this purpose a
small piece of wood, in which is fixed an iron, which they run up
and down the blade, and thus clear off all inequalities, as a plane
does to wood:
they then temper and polish it.

This polish is so highly finished, that when any one wants to arrange his
turban, he uses his sword for a looking-glass. As to its temper it is
perfect, and I have nowhere seen swords that cut so excellently. There
are made at Damascus and in the adjoining country mirrors of steel,
that magnify objects like burning-glasses.'I have been practising for a couple of hours to-day,' he said.

Compassion thrilled her. 'A couple of hours! Unhappy boy! But do you not
know that he is a dead shot? He is famous for his aim. He never misses.
He can do all the duellist's wonders both with sword and pistol, and that
is why he was respected when he refused the duel because he--before these
parents of mine drove him . . . and me! I think we are both mad--he
despised duelling. He! He! Alvan! who has challenged my father! I have
heard him speak of duelling as cowardly. But what is he? what has he
changed to? And it would be cowardly to kill you, Marko.'

'I take my chance,' Marko said.

'You have no chance. His aim is unerring.' She insisted on the deadliness
of his aim, and dwelt on it with a gloating delight that her conscience
approved, for she was persuading the youth to shun his fatal aim.

If you stood against him he would not spare you--perhaps not; I fear he
would not, as far as I know him now. He can be terrible in wrath. I think
he would warn you; but two men face to face! and he suspecting that you
cross his path! Find some way of avoiding him. Do, I entreat you. By your
love of me! Oh! no blood. I do not want to lose you. I could not bear
it.'

'Would you regret me?' said he.

Her eyes fell on his, and the beauty of those great dark eyes made her
fondness for him legible. He caused her a spasm of anguish, foreknowing
him doomed. She thought that haply this devoted heart was predestined to
be the sacrifice which should bring her round to Alvan. She murmured
phrases of dissuasion until her hollow voice broke; she wept for being
speechless, and turned upon Providence and her parents, in railing at
whom a voice of no ominous empty sound was given her; and still she felt
more warmly than railing expressed, only her voice shrank back from a
tone of feeling. She consoled herself with the reflection that utterance
was inadequate. Besides, her active good sense echoed Marko ringingly
when he cited the usages of their world and the impossibility of his
withdrawing or wishing to withdraw from the line of a challenge accepted.
It was destiny. She bowed her head lower and lower, oppressed without and
within, unwilling to look at him. She did not look when he left her.

The silence of him encouraged her head to rise. She stared about: his
phantom seemed present, and for a time she beheld him both upright in
life and stretched in death. It could not be her fault that he should
die! it was the fatality. How strange it was! Providence, after bitterly
misusing her, offered this reparation through the death of Marko.

Possibly she ought to run out and beseech Alvan to spare the innocent
youth. She stood up trembling on her legs. She called to Alvan. 'Do not
put blood between us. Oh! I love you more than ever. Why did you let that
horrible man you take for a friend come here? I hate him, and cannot feel
my love of you when I see him. He chills me to the bone. He made me say
the reverse of what was in my heart. But spare poor Marko! You have no
cause for jealousy. You would be above it, if you had. Do not aim; fire
in the air. Do not let me kiss that hand and think . . .'

She sank to her chair, exclaiming: 'I am a prisoner!' She could not walk
two steps; she was imprisoned by the interdict of the house and the
paralysis of her limbs. Providence decreed that she must abide the
result. Dread Power! To be dragged to her happiness through a river of
blood was indeed dreadful, but the devotional sense of reliance upon
hidden wisdom in the direction of human affairs when it appears
considerate of our wishes, inspirited her to be ready for what Providence
was about to do, mysterious in its beneficence that it was! It is the
dark goddess Fortune to the craven. The craven with desires will offer up
bloody sacrifices to it submissively. The craven, with desires expecting
to be blest, is a zealot of the faith which ascribes the direction of
events to the outer world. Her soul was in full song to that contriving
agency, and she with the paralyzed limbs became practically active,
darting here and there over the room, burning letters, packing a portable
bundle of clothes, in preparation for the domestic confusion of the
morrow when the body of Marko would be driven to their door, and amid the
wailing and the hubbub she would escape unnoticed to Alvan,
Providence-guided! Out of the house would then signify assuredly to
Alvan's arms.

The prospect might have seemed too heavenly to be realizable had she not
been sensible of paying heavily for it; and thus, as he would wish to be,
was Marko of double service to her; for she was truly fond of the
beautiful and chivalrous youth, and far from wishing to lose him. His
blood was on the heads of those who permitted him to face the danger! She
would have felt for him still more tenderly if it were permitted to a
woman's heart to enfold two men at a time. This, it would seem, she
cannot do: she is compelled by the painful restriction sadly to consent
that one of them should be swept away.

Night passed dragging and galloping. In the very early light she thought
of adding some ornaments to her bundle of necessaries. She learnt of the
object of her present faith to be provident on her own behalf, and
dressed in two of certain garments which would have swollen her bundle
too much.

This was the day of Providence: she had strung herself to do her part in
it and gone through the pathos of her fatalism above stairs in her
bedroom before Marko took his final farewell of her, so she could speak
her 'Heaven be with you!' unshaken, though sadly. Her father had
returned. To be away from him, and close to her bundle, she hurried to
her chamber and awaited the catastrophe, like one expecting to be raised
from the vaults. Carriage, wheels would give her the first intimation of
it. Slow, very slow, would imply badly wounded, she thought: dead, if the
carriage stopped some steps from the house and one of the seconds of the
poor boy descended to make the melancholy announcement. She could not but
apprehend the remorselessness of the decree. Death, it would probably be!
Alvan had resolved to sweep him off the earth. She could not blame Alvan
for his desperate passion, though pitying the victim of it. In any case
the instant of the arrival of the carriage was her opportunity marked by
the finger of Providence rendered visible, and she sat rocking her parcel
on her lap. Her love of Alvan now was mixed with an alluring terror of
him as an immediate death-dealer who stood against red-streaked heavens,
more grandly satanic in his angry mightiness than she had ever realized
that figure, and she, trembled and shuddered, fearing to meet him,
yearning to be taken to him, to close her eyes on his breast in blindest
happiness. She gave the very sob for the occasion.

A carriage drove at full speed to the door. Full speed could not be the
pace for a funeral load. That was a visitor to her father on business.
She waited for fresh wheels, telling herself she would be patient and
must be ready.

Her pathos ways ready and scarcely controllable. Falkland island, which
seemed too remote and romantic an object for the grasp of national
ambition, is but a stage and resting-place in the progress of their
victorious industry.

Nor is the equinoctial heat more discouraging to them than the accumulated
winter of both the poles.

We know that whilst some of them draw the line and strike the harpoon on
the coast of Africa, others run the longitude, and pursue their
gigantic game along the coast of Brazil. No sea but what is vexed by
their fisheries. No climate that is not witness to their toils.
Neither the perseverance of Holland, nor the activity of France, nor the
dexterous and firm sagacity of English enterprise, ever carried
this most perilous mode of hardy industry to the extent to which
it has been pushed by this recent people; a people who are still,
as it were, but in the gristle, and not yet hardened into the bone
of manhood.

When I contemplate these things; when I know that the colonies in
general owe little or nothing to any care of ours, and that they
are not squeezed into this happy form by the constrains of watchful
and suspicious government, but that through a wise and salutary
neglect, a generous nature has been suffered to take her own way
to perfection; when I reflect upon these effects, when I see how
profitable they have been to us, I feel all the pride of power sink,
and all presumption in the wisdom of human contrivances melt and
die away within me.

My rigor relents. I pardon something to the spirit of liberty.
E. Burke.

CXLII.

THE RIGHT OF ENGLAND TO TAX AMERICA.

But Mr. Speaker, "we have a right to tax America." Oh, inestimable right!

Oh, wonderful, transcendent right!

the assertion of which has cost this country thirteen provinces, six
islands, one hundred thousand lives, and seventy millions of money. Oh,
invaluable right!

for the sake of which we have sacrificed our rank among nations, our
importance abroad, and our happiness at home! Oh, right! more dear
to us than our existence, which has already cost us so much, and which
seems likely to cost us our all.

Infatuated man! Miserable and undone country!

not to know that the claim of right, without the power of enforcing
it, is nugatory and idle. We have a right to tax America, the noble
lord tells us therefore we ought to tax America. This is the profound logic
which comprises the whole chain of his reasoning.

Not inferior to this was the wisdom of him who resolved to shear
the wolf.
What, shear a wolf! Have you considered the resistance, the difficulty,
the danger of the attempt? No, says the madman, I have considered
nothing but the right. Man has a right of dominion over the beasts of
the forest; and therefore I will shear the wolf.

How wonderful that a nation could be thus deluded! But the noble lord deals
in cheats and delusions. They are the daily traffic of his invention;
and he will continue to play to his cheats on this House, so long as
he thinks them necessary to his purpose, and so long as he has
money enough at command to bribe gentlemen to pretend that they
believe him.

But a black and bitter day of reckoning will surely come; and whenever
that day comes, I trust I shall be able, by a parliamentary
impeachment, to bring upon the heads of the authors of our calamities
the punishment they deserve.
E. Burke.

CXLIII.

DESCRIPTION OF JUNIUS.

Sir,--How comes this Junius to have broken through the cobwebs of the
law, and to range uncontrolled, unpunished, through the land? The
myrmidons of the court have been long, and are still pursuing
him in vain. They will not spend their time upon me, or you, or
you. No! they disdain such vermin, when the mighty boar of the forest,
that has broken through all their toils, is before them. But what
will all their efforts avail? No sooner has he wounded one than he lays
down another dead at his feet. For my part, when I saw his attack upon the
king, I own my blood ran cold. I thought he had ventured too far, and
there was an end of his triumphs. Not that he had not asserted many
truths:--Yes, sir, there are in that composition many bold truths, by which
a wise prince might profit. It was the rancor and venom, with which
I was struck. In these aspects the North-Briton is as much inferior
to him, as in strength, wit, and judgment.
But while I expected, in this daring flight, his final ruin and
fall, behold him rising still higher, and coming down souse upon
both Houses of Parliament. Yes, he did make you his quarry, and you
still bleed from the wounds of his talons.She
knew not in truth what to feel: the craven's dilemma when yet feeling
much. Anger at Providence--rose uppermost. She had so shifted and wound
about, and so pulled her heart to pieces, that she could no longer sanely
and with wholeness encounter a shock: she had no sensation firm enough to
be stamped by a signet.

Even on the fatal third day, when Marko, white as his shrouded
antagonist, led her to the garden of the house, and there said the word
of death, an execrating amazement, framing the thought 'Why is it not
Alvan who speaks?' rose beside her gaping conception of her loss. She
framed it as an earnest interrogation for the half minute before misery
had possession of her, coming down like a cloud. Providence then was too
shadowy a thing to upbraid. She could not blame herself, for the
intensity of her suffering testified to the bitter realness of her love
of the dead man. Her craven's instinct to make a sacrifice of others flew
with claws of hatred at her parents. These she offered up, and the spirit
presiding in her appears to have accepted them as proper substitutes for
her conscience.


CHAPTER XIX

Alvan was dead. The shot of his adversary, accidentally well-directed,
had struck him mortally. He died on the morning of the third day after
the duel. There had been no hope that he could survive, and his agonies
made a speedy dissolution desirable by those most wishing him to live.

The baroness had her summons to hurry to him after his first swoon. She
was his nurse and late confidante a tearless woman, rigid in service.
Death relaxed his hold in her hand. He met his fate like the valiant soul
he was. Haply if he had lingered without the sweats of bodily tortures to
stay reflectiveness, he, also, in the strangeness of his prostration,
might have cast a thought on the irony of the fates felling a man like
him by a youngster's hand and for a shallow girl! He might have fathered
some jest at life, with rueful relish of the flavour: for such is our
manner of commenting on ourselves when we come to shipwreck through
unseaworthy pretensions. There was no interval on his passage from
anguish to immobility.

Silent was that house of many chambers. That mass of humanity profusely
mixed of good and evil, of generous ire and mutinous, of the passion for
the future of mankind and vanity of person, magnanimity and sensualism,
high judgement, reckless indiscipline, chivalry, savagery, solidity,
fragmentariness, was dust.

The two men composing it, the untamed and the candidate for citizenship,
in mutual dissension pulled it down. He perished of his weakness, but it
was a strong man that fell. The Erle being offended in his conscience,
for that he was fled, innocent of the facte, made himself culpable therof,
and arriued at Callice with his children, dissembling what he was, and
sodainlye passed ouer into England, and in poore apparell, trauailed
vp to London.Yet they that pronounce over him the ordinary fatalistic
epitaph of the foregone and done, which is the wisdom of men measuring
the dead by the last word of a lamentable history, should pause to think
whether fool or madman is the title for one who was a zealous worker,
respected by great heads of his time, acknowledged the head of the
voluminous coil of the working people, and who, as we have seen,
insensibly though these wrought within him, was getting to purer fires
through his coarser when the final intemperateness drove him to ruin. As
little was he the vanished God whom his working people hailed deploringly
on the long procession of his remains from city to city under charge of
the baroness. That last word of his history ridicules the eulogy of
partisan and devotee, and to commit the excess of worshipping is to
conjure up by contrast a vulgar giant: for truth will have her just
proportions, and vindicates herself upon a figure over-idealized by
bidding it grimace, leaving appraisers to get the balance of the two
extremes. And then his wife Panthea tooke him vp, and laid him in her owne
wagon; conueighing him to a certayne place, by the ryuer Pactolus. And
(they say) that her Eunuches doe digge a graue to burie him. His
wife sitteth vpon the ground, apparelled with those furnitures that he did
weare, leaning her head vpon her knees." With whiche wordes, Cyrus was
driuen into greate sorowe, clapping him selfe vppon the thighe,
and by and by mounted on his horse, and taking with him M. horsemen,
he went to mourne for his frende Abradatas. Moreouer he commaunded
Gadatas and Gobryas, to carrie the fairest apparell they coulde get, to
his good and honest frende that was dead, and to assemble his oxen and
horse, and all his beastes and cattell, whersoeuer they were, that
they might be sacrificed to Abradatas.While for his devotees he lay still warm in the earth, that other, the
woman, poor Clotilde, astonished her compatriots by passing comedy and
tragic comedy with the gift of her hand to the hand which had slain
Alvan. In sooth, the explanation is not so hard when we recollect our
knowledge of her. It was a gentle youth; her parents urged her to it: a
particular letter, the letter of the challenge to her father, besliming
her, was shown;--a hideous provocation pushed to the foullest. Who can
blame Prince Marko? who had ever given sign of more noble bravery than
he? He had stood to defend her name and fame. He was very love, the never
extinguished torch of love. And he hung on her for the little of life
appearing to remain to him. Before heaven he was guiltless. He was good.
Her misery had shrunk her into nothingness, and she rose out of
nothingness cold and bloodless, bearing a thought that she might make a
good youth happy, or nurse him sinking--be of that use. And how have their
fortunes and their power increased, but as the commonwealth has been
ruined and impoverished?

To what are we to impute these disorders, and to what cause assign
the decay of a State so powerful and flourishing in past times?After a few months she buried him. From that
day, or it may be, on her marriage day, her heart was Alvan's. Years
later she wrote her version of the story, not sparing herself so much as
she supposed. Providence and her parents were not forgiven. But as we are
in her debt for some instruction, she may now be suffered to go.