On his fine, mild features, was impressed a calm and sacred intrepidity,
a religious abstraction from every terrestrial thought; from time to
time, he raised to heaven his large blue eyes, beaming with gratitude,
love, and serenity, as if to thank God for having called him to one of
those formidable trials in which the man of humanity and courage may
devote himself for his brethren, and, if not able to rescue them at all,
at least die with them, pointing to the sky. One might almost have taken
him for an angel, sent down to render less cruel the strokes of
inexorable fate.

Strange contrast! not far from this young man's angelic beauty, there was
another being, who resembled an evil spirit!

Boldly mounted on what was left of the bowsprit, to which he held on by
means of some remaining cordage, this man looked down upon the terrible
scene that was passing on the deck. A grim, wild joy lighted up his
countenance of a dead yellow, that tint peculiar to those who spring from
the union of the white race with the East. He wore only a shirt and linen
drawers; from his neck was suspended, by a cord, a cylindrical tin box,
similar to that in which soldiers carry their leave of absence.

The more the danger augmented, the nearer the ship came to the breakers,
or to a collision with the steamer, which she was now rapidly
approaching--a terrible collision, which would probably cause the two
vessels to founder before even they touched the rocks--the more did the
infernal joy of this passenger reveal itself in frightful transports. He
seemed to long, with ferocious impatience, for the moment when the work
of destruction should be accomplished. To see him thus feasting with
avidity on all the agony, the terror, and the despair of those around
him, one might have taken him for the apostle of one of those sanguinary
deities, who, in barbarous countries, preside over murder and carnage.

By this time the "Black Eagle," driven by the wind and waves, came so
near the "William Tell" that the passengers on the deck of the nearly
dismantled steamer were visible from the first-named vessel.

These passengers were no longer numerous. The heavy sea, which stove in
the paddle-box and broke one of the paddles, had also carried away nearly
the whole of the bulwarks on that side; the waves, entering every instant
by this large opening, swept the decks with irresistible violence, and
every time bore away with them some fresh victims.

Amongst the passengers, who seemed only to have escaped this danger to be
hurled against the rocks, or crushed in the encounter of the two vessels,
one group was especially worthy of the most tender and painful interest.
Taking refuge abaft, a tall old man, with bald forehead and gray
moustache, had lashed himself to a stanchion, by winding a piece of rope
round his body, whilst he clasped in his arms, and held fast to his
breast, two girls of fifteen or sixteen, half enveloped in a pelisse of
reindeer-skin. A large, fallow, Siberian dog, dripping with water, and
barking furiously at the waves, stood close to their feet.

These girls, clasped in the arms of the old man, also pressed close to
each other; but, far from being lost in terror, they raised their eyes to
heaven, full of confidence and ingenuous hope, as though they expected to
be saved by the intervention of some supernatural power.

A frightful shriek of horror and despair, raised by the passengers of
both vessels, was heard suddenly above the roar of the tempest. At the
moment when, plunging deeply between two waves, the broadside of the
steamer was turned towards the bows of the ship, the latter, lifted to a
prodigious height on a mountain of water, remained, as it were, suspended
over the "William Tell," during the second which preceded the shock of
the two vessels.

There are sights of so sublime a horror, that it is impossible to
describe them. Yet, in the midst of these catastrophes, swift as thought,
one catches sometimes a momentary glimpse of a picture, rapid and
fleeting, as if illumined by a flash of lightning.

Thus, when the "Black Eagle," poised aloft by the flood, was about to
crash down upon the "William Tell," the young man with the angelic
countenance and fair, waving locks bent over the prow of the ship, ready
to cast himself into the sea to save some victim. Suddenly, he perceived
on board the steamer, on which he looked down from the summit of the
immense wave, the two girls extending their arms towards him in
supplication. They appeared to recognize him, and gazed on him with a
sort of ecstacy and religious homage!

Lord Salisbury, the English Prime Minister, said that whether the war
indemnity be paid or not, the Turkish troops must at once leave Thessaly.
He declared firmly that he would permit no other settlement of the
question, and that rather than allow the Turks to remain longer on Greek
soil, England would break up the concert of the Powers, and take the
consequences.

These were very brave words, and highly pleasing to the national pride and
spirit of England, but the other Powers were indignant that England
should take such a stand. They pretended to forget the angry despatches
which they had sent on this very same subject, and the times they had
refused to carry on further negotiations unless the Sultan consented
to withdraw from Thessaly, and appeared to think that it was the
duty of England to agree with them, no matter how often they changed
their minds.

England alone seemed clearly to see that the consent of the Powers
to this infamous scheme was only the result of the Sultan's wearisome
delays, which after fourteen weeks of unprofitable haggling and
bargaining have made the ambassadors anxious to get the matter
settled one way or another, and be rid of the Sultan and his
diplomacy.

England stated her reasons for refusing to agree with the other Powers.

She said that the war indemnity demanded by Turkey was so large that Greece
could never pay it, and that the Turkish occupation of Thessaly until
the debt was settled really meant that Thessaly was to be ceded
to Turkey.

As we have said, the English were very pleased over the stand Lord
Salisbury had taken.

It seemed to have been done just at the right moment, when the
Powers, weary of the delay and anxious to have the Turkish army
disbanded, would be ready to threaten Turkey with war if she did
not immediately obey them.

This Turkish army is felt to be a very serious menace to Europe. The
Sultan has an enormous number of soldiers now under arms, and moreover
this army of his is a victorious army, proud of its strength, and anxious
to have fresh opportunity to show its mettle and courage.

An uneasy feeling therefore prevails while this large force is kept under
arms, as at any moment the Sultan may take it into his head to try and
reconquer the Balkan provinces which he lost in the war with
Russia.

Should he attempt such a thing Europe would be bound to go to the aid of
the province, and the much-dreaded European war would result. Until the
Turkish army is disbanded the peace of Europe cannot be assured.

It was felt, therefore, that Lord Salisbury had chosen a happy time for
his protest, and that the Sultan must now be forced into doing
what is right.

Unfortunately, Lord Salisbury, while he is a very clever statesman,
has not the courage of his own opinions.

He can think out a clever plan which would be of the greatest benefit
to his country, and though in the beginning he will try with great firmness
to enforce it, he cannot stand up against strong opposition. He has time
and again abandoned some excellent policy, and veered completely round,
when he has met strong opposition.

Much anxiety was felt in London on the present occasion lest he should
not be able to maintain the firm stand he had taken on the Greek question.

Once in the hands of our man at Roiville, I will answer for the result.
The course of all such gross and stupid women is traced beforehand: in
their youth, they serve the devil; in riper years, they make others serve
him; in their old age, they are horribly afraid of him; and this fear
must continue till she has left us the Chateau de Cardoville, which, from
its isolated position, will make us an excellent college. All then goes
well. As for the affair of the medals, the 13th of February approaches,
without news from Joshua--evidently, Prince Djalma is still kept prisoner
by the English in the heart of India, or I must have received letters
from Batavia. The daughters of General Simon will be detained at Leipsic
for at least a month longer. All our foreign relations are in the best
condition. As for our internal affairs--"

 Here M. Rodin was interrupted in the current of his reflections by the
entrance of Madame Dupont, who was zealously engaged in preparations to
give assistance in case of need.

"Now," said she to the servant, "light a fire in the next room; put this
warm wine there; your master may be in every minute."

"Well, my dear madam," said Rodin to her, "do they hope to save any of
these poor creatures?"

"Alas! I do not know, sir. My husband has been gone nearly two hours. I
am terribly uneasy on his account. He is so courageous, so imprudent, if
once he thinks he can be of any service."

"Courageous even to imprudence," said Rodin to himself, impatiently; "I
do not like that."

"Well," resumed Catherine, "I have here at hand my hot linen, my
cordials--heaven grant it may all be of use!"

"We may at least hope so, my dear madam. I very much regretted that my
age and weakness did not permit me to assist your excellent husband. I
also regret not being able to wait for the issue of his exertions, and to
wish him joy if successful--for I am unfortunately compelled to depart,
my moments are precious. I shall be much obliged if you will have the
carriage got ready."

"Yes, Sir; I will see about it directly."

"One word, my dear, good Madame Dupont. You are a woman of sense, and
excellent judgment. Now I have put your husband in the way to keep, if he
will, his situation as bailiff of the estate--"

"Is it possible? What gratitude do we not owe you! Without this place
what would become of us at our time of life?"

"I have only saddled my promise with two conditions--mere trifles--he
will explain all that to you."

"Ah, sir! we shall regard you as our deliverer."

"You are too good. Only, on two little conditions--"

"If there were a hundred, sir we should gladly accept them. Think what we
should be without this place--penniless--absolutely penniless!"

"I reckon upon you then; for the interest of your husband, you will try
to persuade him."

"Missus! I say, missus! here's master come back," cried a servant,
rushing into the chamber.

"Has he many with him?"

"No, missus; he is alone."

"Alone! alone?"

"Quite alone, missus."

A few moments after, M. Dupont entered the room; his clothes were
streaming with water; to keep his hat on in the midst of the storm, he
had tied it down to his head by means of his cravat, which was knotted
under his chin; his gaiters were covered with chalky stains.

"There I have thee, my dear love!" cried his wife, tenderly embracing
him. "I have been so uneasy!"

"Up to the present moment--THREE SAVED."

"God be praised, my dear M. Dupont!" said Rodin; "at least your efforts
will not have been all in vain."

"Three, only three?" said Catherine. "Gracious heaven!"

"I only speak of those I saw myself, near the little creek of Goelands.
Let us hope there may be more saved on other parts of the coast."

"Yes, indeed; happily, the shore is not equally steep in all parts."

"And where are these interesting sufferers, my dear sir?" asked Rodin,
who could not avoid remaining a few instants longer.

"They are mounting the cliffs, supported by our people. As they cannot
walk very fast, I ran on before to console my wife, and to take the
necessary measures for their reception. First of all, my dear, you must
get ready some women's clothes."

"There is then a woman amongst the persons saved?"

"There are two girls--fifteen or sixteen years of age at the most--mere
children--and so pretty!"

"Poor little things!" said Rodin, with an affectation of interest.

"The person to whom they owe their lives is with them. He is a real
hero!"

"A hero?"

"Yes; only fancy--"

"You can tell me all this by and by. Just slip on this dry warm
dressing-gown, and take some of this hot wine. You are wet through."

"I'll not refuse, for I am almost frozen to death. I was telling you that
the person who saved these young girls was a hero; and certainly his
courage was beyond anything one could have imagined. When I left here
with the men of the farm, we descended the little winding path, and
arrived at the foot of the cliff--near the little creek of Goelands,
fortunately somewhat sheltered from the waves by five or six enormous
masses of rock stretching out into the sea. Well, what should we find
there? Why, the two young girls I spoke of, in a swoon, with their feet
still in the water, and their bodies resting against a rock, as though
they had been placed there by some one, after being withdrawn from the
sea."

"Dear children! it is quite touching!" said M. Rodin, raising, as usual,
the tip of his little finger to the corner of his right eye, as though to
dry a tear, which was very seldom visible.

"What struck me was their great resemblance to each other," resumed the
bailiff; "only one in the habit of seeing them could tell the
difference."

"Twin--sisters, no doubt," said Madame Dupont.

"One of the poor things," continued the bailiff, "held between her
clasped hands a little bronze medal, which was suspended from her neck by
a chain of the same material."

Rodin generally maintained a very stooping posture; but at these last
words of the bailiff, he drew himself up suddenly, whilst a faint color
spread itself over his livid cheeks. In any other person, these symptoms
would have appeared of little consequence; but in Rodin, accustomed for
long years to control and dissimulate his emotions, they announced no
ordinary excitement. Approaching the bailiff, he said to him in a
slightly agitated voice, but still with an air of indifference: "It was
doubtless a pious relic. Did you see what was inscribed on this medal?"

"No, sir; I did not think of it."

"And the two young girls were like one another--very much like, you say?"

"So like, that one would hardly know which was which. Probably they are
orphans, for they are dressed in mourning."

"Oh! dressed in mourning?" said M. Rodin, with another start.

"Alas! orphans so young!" said Madame Dupont, wiping her eyes.

"As they had fainted away, we carried them further on to a place where
the sand was quite dry. While we were busy about this, we saw the head of
a man appear from behind one of the rocks, which he was trying to climb,
clinging to it by one hand; we ran to him, and luckily in the nick of
time, for he was clean worn out, and fell exhausted into the arms of our
men. It was of him I spoke when I talked of a hero; for, not content with
having saved the two young girls by his admirable courage, he had
attempted to rescue a third person, and had actually gone back amongst
the rocks and breakers--but his strength failed him, and, without the aid
of our men, he would certainly have been washed away from the ridge to
which he clung."

"He must indeed be a fine fellow!" said Catherine.

Rodin, with his head bowed upon his breast, seemed quite indifferent to
this conversation. The dismay and stupor, in which he had been plunged,
only increased upon reflection. The two girls, who had just been saved,
were fifteen years of age; were dressed in mourning; were so like, that
one might be taken for the other; one of them wore round her neck a chain
with a bronze medal; he could scarcely doubt that they were the daughters
of General Simon. But how could those sisters be amongst the number of
shipwrecked passengers? How could they have escaped from the prison at
Leipsic? How did it happen, that he had not been informed of it? Could
they have fled, or had they been set at liberty? How was it possible that
he should not be apprise of such an event? But these secondary thoughts,
which offered themselves in crowds to the mind of M. Rodin, were
swallowed up in the one fact: "the daughters of General Simon are
here!"--His plan, so laboriously laid, was thus entirely destroyed.

"When I speak of the deliverer of these young girls," resumed the
bailiff, addressing his wife, and without remarking M. Rodin's absence of
mind, "you are expecting no doubt to see a Hercules?--well, he is
altogether the reverse. He is almost a boy in look, with fair, sweet
face, and light, curling locks. I left him a cloak to cover him, for he
had nothing on but his shirt, black knee-breeches, and a pair of black
worsted stockings--which struck me as singular."

"Why, it was certainly not a sailor's dress."

"Besides, though the ship was English, I believe my hero is a Frenchman,
for he speaks our language as well as we do. What brought the tears to my
eyes, was to see the young girls, when they came to themselves. As soon
as they saw him, they threw themselves at his feet, and seemed to look up
to him and thank him, as one would pray. Then they cast their eyes around
them, as if in search of some other person, and, having exchanged a few
words, they fell sobbing into each other's arms."

"What a dreadful thing it is! How many poor creatures must have
perished!"

"When we quitted the rocks, the sea had already cast ashore seven dead
bodies, besides fragments of the wrecks, and packages. I spoke to some of
the coast-guard, and they will remain all day on the look-out; and if, as
I hope, any more should escape with life, they are to be brought here.
But surely that is the sound of voices!--yes, it is our shipwrecked
guests!"

The bailiff and his wife ran to the door of the room--that door, which
opened on the long gallery--whilst Rodin, biting convulsively his flat
nails, awaited with angry impatience the arrival of the strangers. A
touching picture soon presented itself to his view.

From the end of the dark some gallery, only lighted on one side by
several windows, three persons, conducted by a peasant, advanced slowly.
This group consisted of the two maidens, and the intrepid young man to
whom they owed their lives. Rose and Blanche were on either side of their
deliverer, who, walking with great difficulty, supported himself lightly
on their arms.

Though he was full twenty-five years of age, the juvenile countenance of
this man made him appear younger. His long, fair hair, parted on the
forehead, streamed wet and smooth over the collar of a large brown cloak,
with which he had been covered. It would be difficult to describe the
adorable expression of goodness in his pale, mild face, as pure as the
most ideal creations of Raphael's pencil--for that divine artist alone
could have caught the melancholy grace of those exquisite features, the
serenity of that celestial look, from eyes limpid and blue as those of an
archangel, or of a martyr ascended to the skies.

Yes, of a martyr! for a blood-red halo already encircled that beauteous
head. Piteous sight to see! just above his light eyebrows, and rendered
still more visible by the effect of the cold, a narrow cicatrix, from a
wound inflicted many months before, appeared to encompass his fair
forehead with a purple band; and (still more sad!) his hands had been
cruelly pierced by a crucifixion--his feet had suffered the same
injury--and, if he now walked with so much difficulty, it was that his
wounds had reopened, as he struggled over the sharp rocks.

This young man was Gabriel, the priest attached to the foreign mission,
the adopted son of Dagobert's wife. He was a priest and martyr--for, in
our days, there are still martyrs, as in the time when the Caesars flung
the early Christians to the lions and tigers of the circus.

Yes, in our days, the children of the people--for it is almost always
amongst them that heroic and disinterested devotion may still be
found--the children of the people, led by an honorable conviction,
because it is courageous and sincere, go to all parts of the world, to
try and propagate their faith, and brave both torture and death with the
most unpretending valor.

How many of them, victims of some barbarous tribe, have perished, obscure
and unknown, in the midst of the solitudes of the two worlds!--And for
these humble soldiers of the cross, who have nothing but their faith and
their intrepidity, there is never reserved on their return (and they
seldom do return) the rich and sumptuous dignities of the church. Never
does the purple or the mitre conceal their scarred brows and mutilated
limbs; like the great majority of other soldiers, they die forgotten.[8]

In their ingenuous gratitude, the daughters of General Simon, as soon as
they recovered their senses after the shipwreck, and felt themselves able
to ascend the cliffs, would not leave to any other person the care of
sustaining the faltering steps of him who had rescued them from certain
death.

The black garments of Rose and Blanche streamed with water; their faces
were deadly pale, and expressive of deep grief; the marks of recent tears
were on their cheeks, and, with sad, downcast eyes, they trembled both
from agitation and cold, as the agonizing thought recurred to them, that
they should never again see Dagobert, their friend and guide; for it was
to him that Gabriel had stretched forth a helping hand, to assist him to
climb the rocks. Unfortunately the strength of both had failed, and the
soldier had been carried away by a retreating wave.

The sight of Gabriel was a fresh surprise for Rodin, who had retired on
one side, in order to observe all; but this surprise was of so pleasant a
nature, and he felt so much joy in beholding the missionary safe after
such imminent peril, that the painful impression, caused by the view of
General Simon's daughters, was a little softened. It must not be
forgotten, that the presence of Gabriel in Paris, on the 13th of
February, was essential to the success of Rodin's projects.

The bailiff and his wife, who were greatly moved at sight of the orphans,
approached them with eagerness. Just then a farm-boy entered the room,
crying: "Sir! sir! good news--two more saved from the wreck!"

"Blessing and praise to God for it!" said the missionary.

"Where are they?" asked the bailiff, hastening towards the door.

"There is one who can walk, and is following behind me with Justin; the
other was wounded against the rocks, and they are carrying him on a
litter made of branches."

"I will run and have him placed in the room below," said the bailiff, as
he went out. "Catherine, you can look to the young ladies."

"And the shipwrecked man who can walk--where is he?" asked the bailiff's
wife.

"Here he is," said the peasant, pointing to some one who came rapidly
along the gallery; "when he heard that the two young ladies were safe in
the chateau--though he is old, and wounded in the head, he took such
great strides, that it was all I could do to get here before him."

Hardly had the peasant pronounced these words, when Rose and Blanche,
springing up by a common impulse, flew to the door. They arrived there at
the same moment as Dagobert.

The soldier, unable to utter a syllable, fell on his knees at the
threshold, and extended his arms to the daughters of General Simon; while
Spoil-sport, running to them licked their hands.

But the emotion was too much for Dagobert; and, when he had clasped the
orphans in his arms, his head fell backward, and he would have sunk down
altogether, but for the care of the peasants. In spite of the
observations of the bailiff's wife, on their state of weakness and
agitation, the two young girls insisted on accompanying Dagobert, who was
carried fainting into an adjoining apartment.

At sight of the soldier, Rodin's face was again violently contracted, for
he had till then believed that the guide of General Simon's daughters was
dead. The missionary, worn out with fatigue, was leaning upon a chair,
and had not yet perceived Rodin.

A new personage, a man with a dead yellow complexion, now entered the
room, accompanied by another peasant, who pointed out Gabriel to him.
This man, who had just borrowed a smock-frock and a pair of trousers,
approached the missionary, and said to him in French but with a foreign
accent: "Prince Djalma has just been brought in here. His first word was
to ask for you."

"What does that man say?" cried Rodin, in a voice of thunder; for, at the
name of Djalma, he had sprung with one bound to Gabriel's side.

"M. Rodin!" exclaimed the missionary, falling back in surprise.

"M. Rodin," cried the other shipwrecked person; and from that moment, he
kept his eye fixed on the correspondent of M. Van Dael.

"You here, sir?" said Gabriel, approaching Rodin with an air of
deference, not unmixed with fear.

"What did that man say to you?" repeated Rodin, in an excited tone. "Did
he not utter the name of Prince Djalma?"

"Yes, sir; Prince Djalma was one of the passengers on board the English
ship, which came from Alexandria, and in which we have just been wrecked.
This vessel touched at the Azores, where I then was; the ship that
brought me from Charlestown having been obliged to put in there, and
being likely to remain for some time, on account of serious damage, I
embarked on board the 'Black Eagle,' where I met Prince Djalma. We were
bound to Portsmouth, and from thence my intention was to proceed to
France."

Rodin did not care to interrupt Gabriel. This new shock had completely
paralyzed his thoughts. At length, like a man who catches at a last hope,
which he knows beforehand to be vain, he said to Gabriel: "Can you tell
me who this Prince Djalma is?"

"A young man as good as brave--the son of an East Indian king,
dispossessed of his territory by the English."

Then, turning towards the other shipwrecked man, the missionary said to
him with anxious interest: "How is the Prince? are his wounds dangerous?"

"They are serious contusions, but they will not be mortal," answered the
other.

"Heaven be praised!" said the missionary, addressing Rodin; "here, you
see, is another saved."

"So much the better," observed Rodin, in a quick, imperious tone.

"I will go see him," said Gabriel, submissively. "You have no orders to
give me?"

"Will you be able to leave this place in two or three hours,
notwithstanding your fatigue?"

"If it be necessary--yes."

"It is necessary. You will go with me."

Gabriel only bowed in reply, and Rodin sank confounded into a chair,
while the missionary went out with the peasant. The man with the sallow
complexion still lingered in a corner of the room, unperceived by Rodin.

This man was Faringhea, the half-caste, one of the three chiefs of the
Stranglers. Having escaped the pursuit of the soldiers in the ruins of
Tchandi, he had killed Mahal the Smuggler, and robbed him of the
despatches written by M. Joshua Van Dael to Rodin, as also of the letter
by which the smuggler was to have been received as passenger on board the
"Ruyter." When Faringhea left the hut in the ruins of Tchandi, he had not
been seen by Djalma; and the latter, when he met him on shipboard, after
his escape (which we shall explain by and by), not knowing that he
belonged to the sect of Phansegars, treated him during the voyage as a
fellow-countryman.

Rodin, with his eye fixed and haggard, his countenance of a livid hue,
biting his nails to the quick in silent rage, did not perceive the half
caste, who quietly approached him and laying his hand familiarly on his
shoulder, said to him: "Your name is Rodin?"

"What now?" asked the other, starting, and raising his head abruptly.

"Your name is Rodin?" repeated Faringhea.

"Yes. What do you want?"

"You live in the Rue du Milieu-des-Ursins, Paris?"

"Yes. But, once more, what do you want?"

"Nothing now, brother: hereafter, much!"

And Faringhea, retiring, with slow steps, left Rodin alarmed at what had
passed; for this man, who scarcely trembled at anything, had quailed
before the dark look and grim visage of the Strangler.

[8] We always remember with emotion the end of a letter written, two or
three years ago, by one of these young and valiant missionaries, the son
of poor parents in Beauce. He was writing to his mother from the heart of
Japan, and thus concluded his letter: "Adieu, my dear mother! they say
there is much danger where I am now sent to. Pray for me, and tell all
our good neighbors that I think of them very often." These few words,
addressed from the centre of Asia to poor peasants in a hamlet of France,
are only the more touching from their very simplicity--E. S.


CHAPTER XXVI.

THE DEPARTURE FOR PARIS.

The most profound silence reigns throughout Cardoville House. The tempest
has lulled by degrees, and nothing is heard from afar but the hoarse
murmur of the waves, as they wash heavily the shore.

Dagobert and the orphans have been lodged in warm and comfortable
apartments on the first-floor of the chateau. Djalma, too severely hurt
to be carried upstairs, has remained in a room below. At the moment of
the shipwreck, a weeping mother had placed her child in his arms. He had
failed in the attempt to snatch this unfortunate infant from certain
death, but his generous devotion had hampered his movements, and when
thrown upon the rocks, he was almost dashed to pieces. Faringhea, who has
been able to convince him of his affection, remains to watch over him.

Gabriel, after administering consolation to Djalma, has rescinded to the
chamber allotted to him; faithful to the promise he made to Rodin, to be
ready to set out in two hours, he has not gone to bed; but, having dried
his clothes, he has fallen asleep in a large, high-backed arm-chair,
placed in front of a bright coal-fire. His apartment is situated near
those occupied by Dagobert and the two sisters.

Spoil-sport, probably quite at his ease in so respectable a dwelling, has
quitted the door of Rose and Blanche's chamber, to lie down and warm
himself at the hearth, by the side of which the missionary is sleeping.
There, with his nose resting on his outstretched paws, he enjoys a
feeling of perfect comfort and repose, after so many perils by land and
sea. We will not venture to affirm, that he thinks habitually of poor old
Jovial; unless we recognize as a token of remembrance on his part, his
irresistible propensity to bite all the white horses he has met with,
ever since the death of his venerable companion, though before, he was
the most inoffensive of dogs with regard to horses of every color.

Presently one of the doors of the chamber opened, and the two sisters
entered timidly. Awake for some minutes, they had risen and dressed
themselves, feeling still some uneasiness with respect to Dagobert;
though the bailiff's wife, after showing them to their room, had returned
again to tell them that the village doctor found nothing serious in the
hurt of the old soldier, still they hoped to meet some one belonging to
the chateau, of whom they could make further inquiries about him.

The high back of the old-fashioned arm-chair, in which Gabriel was
sleeping, completely screened him from view; but the orphans, seeing
their canine friend lying quietly at his feet, thought it was Dagobert
reposing there, and hastened towards him on tip-toe. To their great
astonishment, they saw Gabriel fast asleep, and stood still in confusion,
not daring to advance or recede, for fear of waking him.

The long, light hair of the missionary was no longer wet, and now curled
naturally round his neck and shoulders; the paleness of his complexion
was the more striking, from the contrast afforded by the deep purple of
the damask covering of the arm-chair. His beautiful countenance expressed
a profound melancholy, either caused by the influence of some painful
dream, or else that he was in the habit of keeping down, when awake, some
sad regrets, which revealed themselves without his knowledge when he was
sleeping. Notwithstanding this appearance of bitter grief, his features
preserved their character of angelic sweetness, and seemed endowed with
an inexpressible charm, for nothing is more touching than suffering
goodness. The two young girls cast down their eyes, blushed
simultaneously, and exchanged anxious glances, as if to point out to each
other the slumbering missionary.

"He sleeps, sister," said Rose in a low voice.

"So much the better," replied Blanche, also in a whisper, making a sign
of caution; "we shall now be able to observe him well."

"Yes, for we durst not do so, in coming from the sea hither."

"Look! what a sweet countenance!"

"He is just the same as we saw him in our dreams."

"When he promised he would protect us."

"And he has not failed us."

"But here, at least, he is visible."

"Not as it was in the prison at Leipsic, during that dark night."

"And so--he has again rescued us."

"Without him, we should have perished this morning."

"And yet, sister, it seems to me, that in our dreams his countenance
shone with light."

"Yes, you know it dazzled us to look at him."

"And then he had not so sad a mien."

"That was because he came then from heaven; now he is upon earth."

"But, sister, had he then that bright red scar round his forehead?"

"Oh, no! we should have certainly perceived it."

"And these other marks on his hands?"

"If he has been wounded, how can he be an archangel?"

"Why not, sister? If he received those wounds in preventing evil, or in
helping the unfortunate, who, like us, were about to perish?"

"You are right. If he did not run any danger for those he protects, it
would be less noble."

"What a pity that he does not open his eye!"

"Their expression is so good, so tender!"

"Why did he not speak of our mother, by the way?"

"We were not alone with him; he did not like to do so."

"But now we are alone."

"If we were to pray to him to speak to us?"

The orphans looked doubtingly at each other, with charming simplicity; a
bright glow suffused their cheeks, and their young bosoms heaved gently
beneath their black dresses.

"You are right. Let us kneel down to him."

"Oh, sister! our hearts beat so!" said Blanche, believing rightly, that
Rose felt exactly as she did. "And yet it seems to do us good. It is as
if some happiness were going to befall us."

The sisters, having approached the arm-chair on tip-toe, knelt down with
clasped hands, one to the right the other to the left of the young
priest. It was a charming picture. Turning their lovely faces towards
him, they said in a low whisper, with a soft, sweet voice, well suited to
their youthful appearance: "Gabriel! speak to us of our mother!"

On this appeal, the missionary gave a slight start, half-opened his eyes,
and, still in a state of semi-consciousness, between sleep and waking,
beheld those two beauteous faces turned towards him, and heard two gentle
voices repeat his name.

"Who calls me?" said he, rousing himself, and raising his head.

"It is Blanche and Rose."

It was now Gabriel's turn to blush, for he recognized the young girls he
had saved. "Rise, my sisters!" said he to them; "you should kneel only
unto God."

The orphans obeyed, and were soon beside him, holding each other by the
hand. "You know my name, it seems," said the missionary with a smile.

"Oh, we have not forgotten it!"

"Who told it you?"

"Yourself."
"I?"

"Yes--when you came from our mother."

"I, my sisters?" said the missionary, unable to comprehend the words of
the orphans. "You are mistaken. I saw you to-day for the first time."

"But in our dreams?"

"Yes--do you not remember?--in our dreams."

"In Germany--three months ago, for the first time. Look at us well."

Gabriel could not help smiling at the simplicity of Rose and Blanche, who
expected him to remember a dream of theirs; growing more and more
perplexed, he repeated: "In your dreams?"

"Certainly; when you gave us such good advice."

"And when we were so sorrowful in prison, your words, which we
remembered, consoled us, and gave us courage."

"Was it not you, who delivered us from the prison at Leipsic, in that
dark night, when we were not able to see you?"

"I!"

"What other but you would thus have come to our help, and to that of our
old friend?"

"We told him, that you would love him, because he loved us, although he
would not believe in angels."

"And this morning, during the tempest, we had hardly any fear."

"Because we expected you."

"This morning--yes, my sisters--it pleased heaven to send me to your
assistance. I was coming from America, but I have never been in Leipsic.
I could not, therefore, have let you out of prison. Tell me, my sisters,"
added he, with a benevolent smile, "for whom do you take me?"

"For a good angel whom we have seen already in dreams, sent by our mother
from heaven to protect us."

"My dear sisters, I am only a poor priest. It is by mere chance, no
doubt, that I bear some resemblance to the angel you have seen in your
dreams, and whom you could not see in any other manner--for angels are
not visible to mortal eye.

"Angels are not visible?" said the orphans, looking sorrowfully at each
other.

"No matter, my dear sisters," said Gabriel, taking them affectionately by
the hand; "dreams, like everything else, come from above. Since the
remembrance of your mother was mixed up with this dream, it is twice
blessed."

At this moment a door opened, and Dagobert made his appearance. Up to
this time, the orphans, in their innocent ambition to be protected by an
archangel, had quite forgotten the circumstance that Dagobert's wife had
adopted a forsaken child, who was called Gabriel, and who was now a
priest and missionary.

The soldier, though obstinate in maintaining that his hurt was only a
blank wound (to use a term of General Simon's), had allowed it to be
carefully dressed by the surgeon of the village, and now wore a black
bandage, which concealed one half of his forehead, and added to the
natural grimness of his features. On entering the room, he was not a
little surprised to see a stranger holding the hands of Rose and Blanche
familiarly in his own. This surprise was natural, for Dagobert did not
know that the missionary had saved the lives of the orphans, and had
attempted to save his also.

In the midst of the storm, tossed about by the waves, and vainly striving
to cling to the rocks, the soldier had only seen Gabriel very
imperfectly, at the moment when, having snatched the sisters from certain
death, the young priest had fruitlessly endeavored to come to his aid.
And when, after the shipwreck, Dagobert had found the orphans in safety
beneath the roof of the Manor House, he fell, as we have already stated,
into a swoon, caused by fatigue, emotion, and the effects of his
wound--so that he had again no opportunity of observing the features of
the missionary.

The veteran began to frown from beneath his black bandage and thick, gray
brows, at beholding a stranger so familiar with Rose and Blanche; but the
sisters ran to throw themselves into his arms, and to cover him with
filial caresses. As in the affairs of men, so in those of nations,
there is a critical point when those who hope for success must seize the
winged moment as it flies and work steadily on with singleness
of aim and unchangeable, unfaltering devotion of purpose.

That moment, once past, will never return. Now is our golden opportunity,
and according as we improve or neglect it will our future be one
of greatness and power or one of utter nothingness among the nations
of the earth.

No subsequent time can repair the errors or failures of to-day.

Since the greater part of this article was written, the prospect of our
success has immeasurably brightened. But let us not by the fairness of the
sky be lulled into a false sense of security; let us not be again
deceived by the _ignis fatuus_ glare which plays around our banners, and
which has already so often lured us to forgetfulness and defeat.

For the storm may again break forth in a moment when we think not of it,
and from a quarter where we seemed the most secure.

A single week may reverse every move upon the great chess board of strategy.
There should be no relaxation of the sinews of war until the end is
accomplished. So should we be safest in our watchfulness and strength,
and, by the irresistible influence of overwhelming numbers and might,
render that permanent which is now but evanescent.

But, it will be asked, if there is between North and South an antipathy
so deep seated and of such long standing, how shall we ever succeed
in conquering a lasting peace?

how shall we ever persuade the people of the South to live in amity with
a race so cordially hated and despised?

The question has often been asked, but always by those faint-hearted
ones whose clamors for a disgraceful peace have added strength to
the cause of our opponents.

The answer is so plain that it requires no demonstration. There is but
one remedy for so sore a disease, and however severe it may be,
however revolting to the tender sensibilities of peace-loving men,
the inevitable and inexorable MUST urges it on to execution, and
stands like a giant, blocking up every other path.

It is like those dangerous remedies which the physician applies when the
patient's recovery is otherwise utterly hopeless, and which must result
either in recovery or in death by its own agency rather than that of the
disease. Concession has been tried in vain, 'moral suasion' has
been proved to be of no avail. The South must be shown how
entirely hopeless must be every effort, in all time, to overturn
such a government as ours.

They must be made to feel our immense superiority in power and resources;
they must be shown in unmistakable colors the unconquerable might of
nationality in strong contrast with the weakness of sectionalism, as well
as their own dependence upon the North; in a word, every atom of
resistance must be utterly and forever crushed out by brute force.

To no other argument will they listen, as experience has proved; and this
'last resort of kings' must be exerted in all its strength and
proclaimed in thunder tones, even though its reverberations should
shake the earth to its very core.

This done, and peace once more established, the South must be, _not_
abolitionized, not colonized, not Puritanized, nor yet oppressed, but
AMERICANIZED. They must be familiarized with those immortal principles of
justice and freedom, to which they have hitherto been strangers, which
lie at the heart of all national success among an enlightened and
Christian people.

They must be made acquainted with the all-important fact that we
are a nation of one blood, one common ancestry; that we can never
live at peace as separate nationalities, and that only in unity and
mutual concession and forbearance can a glorious destiny be wrought
out for our common country.

_Then_, not now, will be the time for conciliation on our part, but yet
conciliation never divided from the utmost vigilance and a firm
support of the doctrine of national supremacy, as opposed to, and
paramount to the iniquitous dogma of State rights.

The people of the North must first divest themselves of all prejudices,
all hereditary antipathies, and wipe away old scores in the dawn
of a golden future.

Then will our brethren of the South not be slow to respond to the proffered
peace and good will and brotherly kindness, and again we shall
become a prosperous, united, and happy people.

And what a future lies before our country!

What a wealth of uncultivated fields lies waiting for the plough
of the adventurous emigrant!

What unmeasured wilds wait but for the touch of enlightened and educated
labor, to blossom like the rose, to become the site of great cities
and smiling villages, the resting place of the wanderer from all
quarters of the globe, the residence of a great people, the component
parts of a mighty nation whose parallel earth has not seen since
the days of the creation!

It needs but ordinary human foresight to see that here is to be the
fountain head, the permanent abiding place, of four great interests,
with which we shall rule the world: manufactures, grain, cotton,
and wine.

The Great West is to feed all Europe with her harvests of yellow grain;
the South, with her cotton interest, is to clothe, not Europe only,
but the world; the Pacific States will be the 'vineland' of America,
furnishing the wherewithal to 'gladden the heart of man,' while the
manufactures of New England and the Middle States shall furnish the
implements of labor to the brethren all over the continent, and
turn the raw material both of the South and of their own sheep-feeding
hills into garments for the toiling millions of America.

Here, then, we shall produce, as no other country can, the great
staples of life; and when we add to them those considerable minor
interests which we share more equally with the rest of the world,
namely, wool-growing and _mining_, as well of the precious ores as
of coal and the baser metals, how stupendous seem our resources,
how tremendous the influence we are to wield among the great human
family!

And is it a necessity of social life that these great interests should
jar? that political and commercial antagonisms should spring up between
these cumulators of the world's great stock of wealth, for no
better reason than that their hands are engaged upon a different
work, or, rather, upon different branches of the same great work
of production?

Nay, verily!

So long as we are bound together by a common tie of country, living and
working under the same laws and institutions, such antagonisms can
only exist in the trains of designing demagogues.

So far from conflicting, these great interests will, from the very nature
of the law of exchange, work harmoniously together, blending the
one into the other as perfectly fitting parts of one concordant
whole.

One section will play into the hands of another, sustaining each
other from the very necessity of self-preservation; and each will
find in his brother the readiest consumer of the products of his
labor.

Only in the event of separation can jealousies, antipathies, and narrow-minded
prejudices spring up between the different sections, and healthy
competition be degraded into low and mercenary jobbing; only by
separation can the onward march of the American race be retarded
and the arm of American industry paralyzed.

Accursed, then, be the hand that aims a blow at the foundations of our
fair fabric of Liberty; thrice accursed he whose voice is raised
in the promulgation of those pernicious doctrines whose end is to lead
a great people astray.

GREAT HEART.

Great Heart is sitting beneath a tree:

Never a horse upon earth has he; But he sings to the wind a hearty
song, Leaves of the oak trees rustling along:
'Over the mountain and over the tide, Over the valley and on let
us ride!'

There's many a messenger riding past, And many a skipper whose ship
sails fast; But none of them all, though he rides or rows, Flies
as free as the heart of Great Heart goes, Free as the eagle and
full as the tide:
'And over the valley and on let us ride!'

Many a sorrow might Great Heart know, Thick as the oak leaves which over
him grow Many a trouble might Great Heart feel, Close as the grass
blades under his heel; But sorrow will never by Great Heart bide,
Singing 'Over the valley and on let us ride!'

'But tell me, good fellow, where Great Heart dwells?' In the wood, by
the sea, in the city's cells; Where the Honest, the Beautiful, and True
Are free to him as they are to you; Where the wild birds whistle
and waters glide, Singing 'Over the valley and on let us ride!'

Few of his fellows doth Great Heart see; Seldom he knows where their
homes may be; But the fays of the greenwood are still on earth--
To many a Great Heart they'll yet give birth; And thousands of
voices will sing in pride, 'All over the wide world and on let us
ride!'

LITERARY NOTICES

LIFE OF CHOPIN. By F. LISZT. Published by F.

Leypoldt:
Philadelphia.

Liszt's Life of Chopin!

What a combination of names to wing the imagination upward into the ethereal
regions of beauty, pure art, and lofty emotion! The imperial pianist
discourses upon the genius and peculiar gifts of his brother musician.
Before us arises a vision of the strong and fiery Hungarian, with clanger
of steel, flash of spur, and ring of hoof, compelling his audiences
to attention and enthusiastic admiration; and also of the
gentle-mannered and suffering, but no less fiery Pole, shrinking
from all rude contact, and weaving enchanted melodies and harmonies,
teeming with ever-varying pictures of tender love, hopeless despair,
chivalric daring, religious resignation, passionate pleading,
eloquent disdain, the ardor of battle with the thunder of artillery,
the hut of the peasant with its pastoral pleasures, and the assemblage
of the noble, the distinguished, the beautiful, with the nameless
fascinations of feminine loveliness, the witching caprices of
conscious power,--while through all and above all glows the memory
of the glorious past and mournful present of his beloved country.

The book, in fact, opens a vista into modes of life, manners of being,
and trains of thought little known among us, and hence is most deeply
interesting.

The style is eminently suited to the subject, and the translation
of Liszt's French is equal to the original.
This is saying much, but not too much; for when a cognate mind
becomes thoroughly imbued with the spirit of an author, the
transmutation of his ideas into another form of speech becomes a
simple and natural process.

To those who already know Chopin and are striving to play his music,
this book will be invaluable, as giving a deep insight into the
meaning and proper mode of rendering his compositions.

To those who know nothing of him, and who are still floundering
amid the _fade_ and flimsy productions that would fain hide their
emptiness and vulgarity under the noble name of music, this life
of a true musician will reveal a new world, a new purpose for the
drudgery of daily practice, and the expenditure of time, patience,
and money.

The work, however, is not alone useful for those especially interested in
music, but, being free from all repulsive technicalities, will be found
highly attractive to the general reader. It contains a subtle dissection
of a deeply interesting character, sketches of Heine, George Sand,
Eugene de la Croix, Mickiewicz, and other celebrities in the world
of literature and art, together with a most vivid portraiture of
social life in Poland, a land which has ever excited so much
admiration for its heroism, and compassion for its misfortunes.

Mr.

Leypoldt, the enterprising publisher of this work, merits the
encouragement of the American people, inasmuch as he has not feared
to risk the publication of a work deemed by many too excellent to
be generally appreciated by our reading community.

He however has faith in the good sense of that community, and so
have we.

Fragmentary portions of Liszt's 'Chopin,' about 60 pages out of 202, were
translated by Mr.

Dwight of Boston, and appeared in the 'Journal of Music.' Those
portions were favorably received, and all who thus formed a partial
acquaintance with the work will doubtless desire now to complete
their knowledge, especially as some of the most vivid and characteristic
chapters were omitted.

MY DIARY NORTH AND SOUTH. By WILLIAM HOWARD RUSSELL.
T. O. H. P. Burnham. New York: O. S. Felt, 36 Walker Street. 1863.
(Cloth, one dollar; paper covers, fifty cents.)

It is amusing to read over, at this stage of the war, these letters, in
which the Thunderer, as represented by Mr. Russell, dwindled down to a
very small squib indeed. Few men ever prophesied more brazenly as to the
war,--very few ever had their prophecies so pitiably falsified.

Other men have guessed right now and then, by chance; but poor Russell
contrived, by dint of conceit and natural obtuseness, to make himself
as thoroughly ridiculous to those who should review him in the future as
was well possible. It is, however, to be hoped that these letters
will be extensively read, that the public may now see who and _what_ the
correspondent really was, through whom England was to be specially
instructed as to the merits of this country and its war.

When we remember the advantages which poor Russell enjoyed for acquiring
information, his neglect of matters of importance seems amazing--until
we find, in scores of petty personal matters and silly egotisms, a
key to the whole.

He is a small-souled man, utterly incapable of mastering the great
principles involved in this war,--a man petrified in English
conceit, and at the end of his art when, like a twopenny reporter,
he has made a smart little sneer at something or somebody.

He writes on America as Sala wrote on Russia, in the same petty, frivolous
vein, with the same cockney smartness; but fails to be funny,
whereas Sala frequently succeeds.

He came here to write for England, not the truth, but something which
his readers _expected_.

His object was to supply a demand, and he did it. He learned nothing, and
returned as ignorant, so far as really _understanding_ the problems
he purposed to study, as he came.

Those who can penetrate the depths of such pitiful characters cannot
fail to feel true sorrow that men should exist to whom all life, all
duty, every opportunity to tell great truths and to do good, should
simply appear as opportunities to turn out a _pièce de manufacture_, and
earn salaries.

Mr. Russell could have done a great work in these letters--he leaves
the impression on our minds that in _his_ opinion his boots and
his breakfast were to him matters of much more importance than the
future of all North America.

WANDERINGS OF A BEAUTY: A Tale of the Real and Ideal.

By MRS. EDWIN JAMES.

New York: Carleton. 1863.

An entertaining little romance, which will be specially acceptable to
the 'regular English novel' devourers--a by no means inconsiderable
proportion of the public. Its heroine--a beauty--moves in English society,
is presented to the Queen, is victimized by a rascally husband or
two, and visits America, where she ends her adventures--_à la Marble
Faun_--rather more obscurely than we could have wished, by 'enduring and
suffering,' but on the whole happily, so far as sentiment is concerned.

As the story contains to perfection every element of the most popular
English novels of the day, yet in a more highly concentrated form
than they usually present, we have no doubt that its sale will be
very great.

The volume contains a very beautifully engraved portrait-vignette, 'after
a miniature by Thorburn,' which is worth the price of the book, and is
neatly bound.

Gentlemen wishing to make an acceptable gift to novel-reading friends
will find the 'Wanderings of a Beauty' well suited to the purpose.

THE PRISONER OF STATE. By D. H.

MAHONEY. New York:
Carleton. 1863.

We may well ask 'what sustains the hopes of the rebels?'

when such a mass of treason as this wretched volume contains is suffered
to be freely published and circulated. That the Administration can
find the force to oppose open foes in the field, and yet make no
exertion to suppress traitors at home who are doing far more than
any armed rebels to reduce our country to ruin, is a paradox for
whose solution we have for some time waited, _not_ by any means in
patience.

That a Copperhead, who from his own account richly deserves the halter,
should have the impudence to publish a complaint of being simply
_imprisoned_, is indeed amusing.

But could the mass of vindictiveness, sophistry, and vulgarity which
these pages contain be simply submitted to impartial and intelligent
men, we should have little dread of any great harm resulting from
them.

Unfortunately this Copperhead poison, with its subtle falsehoods
and detestable special pleading, its habeas corpus side-issues and
Golden-Circle slanders, is industriously circulated among many who
are still frightened by the old bugbear of 'Abolition,' and who,
like the majority in all wars whatever, have accustomed themselves
to grumble at those who conduct hostilities.

Such persons do not reflect that a great crisis requires great measures,
and that in a war involving such a tremendous issue as the preservation
of the Federal Union and the development of the grandest phase
which human progress has ever assumed, we are not to give up
everything to our foes because Mr.

Mahoney and a few congenial traitors have, justly or unjustly, been
kept on crackers and tough beef.

When a city burns and it is necessary to blow up houses with gunpowder, it
is no time to be talking of actions for trespass.

If we had ever had a doubt of the rightfulness of the course which
Government has taken in imprisoning Copperheads, it would have been
removed on reading this miserable book.

A man who holds on one page that every private soldier is to be guided
by his own will as regards obeying orders, and on another sneers at our
army as demoralized,--who calls himself a friend of the Union, and is yet
a sympathizer with the enemies of the Union,--who abuses in the vilest
manner our Government and its officers in a crisis like the present,
is one who, according to all precedents of justice, should be
richly punished under military law, if the civil arm be too weak
to grasp him.

It was such Democrats as Mahoney, who yelled out indignantly in the beginning
at every measure which was taken to protect us against the enemy, who,
when they had nearly ruined our cause by their efforts, attributed
the results of their treason to the Administration, and who now, changing
their cry, instead of clamoring for more vigor against the rebels, boldly
hurrah for the rebellion itself. It is strange that they cannot see
that they are now bringing themselves out distinctly as tories, and
men to be branded in history. Do they suppose that such a revolution as
this--a revolution of human rights and free labor against the last great
form of tyranny--is going _backward_?

Do the events of the last thirty years indicate that Southern aristocracy
and Copperhead ignorance and evil are to achieve a final victory over
republicanism? Yet it is in this faith, that demagoguism will be
stronger than a great principle, that such men as Mahoney write and
live.

WILD SCENES IN SOUTH AMERICA; or, Life in the Llanos of Venezuela. By DON
RAMON PAEZ. New York: Charles Scribner, 124 Grand Street.

The work before us takes the reader not only through all the adventures
and chances of the desperate life of the llaneros or herdsmen of South
America, but also gives many startling scenes from the revolutions
of Colombia, embracing an excellent biography of the truly great general
Paez, the friend and colleague of Bolivar. But when we remember that it
contains such a mass of valuable historical material, from the pen of a
son of General Paez, aide-de-camp to his father, and an eyewitness
of, or actor in, some of the bloody scenes of a civil war, and
that even the description of herdsman's life is filled with deeply
interesting scientific records of the natural history and botany
of our southern continent, it seems strange that such a volume could
appear under a title smacking of the veriest book-making for the
cheap Western market.

The writer, Don Ramon Paez, who was born among the people whom he
describes, and was afterward well educated in England, was probably
the best qualified man in South America to depict the life of the
llaneros, of whom his father was long the literal chief. Half of his pages
are occupied with the account of a grand cattle-hunt, involving
sufferings and adventures of a very varied and remarkable description,
giving the world, we believe, the best account of wild herdsman
American-Spanish life ever written. A very curious study of the character
of the writer himself is one of the many interesting traits of
this volume.

A love of literature, of science, of much that is beautiful and refined,
contrasts piquantly with occasional glimpses of true Creole character,
and of a son of 'the best horseman in South America,' who is too much at
home among the fierce people whom he describes to fully assume the tone
of a foreigner and amateur. In this latter respect Don Ramon seems to
have been influenced by regarding as models the works of European
travellers, as well as by a very commendable spirit of modesty; for modest
he certainly is when speaking of himself, when we consider the
temptations to self-glorification which his adventures would have
presented to any of the English adventurers of the present day!

The book cannot fail to be extensively read, since it is not only
entertaining, but instructive. Its sketches of the _causes_ of the continual
civil wars in South America are not only explanatory, but may serve
as a lesson to us in this country to give ourselves heart and soul
to the Union, and to crush out treason and faction by every means
in our power.

If the rebels and Copperheads triumph, we shall soon see the United States
reduced to the frightful anarchy of South America.

* * * * *

THE CONTINENTAL MONTHLY.

The readers of the CONTINENTAL are aware of the important position is
has assumed, of the influence which it exerts, and of the brilliant array
of political and literary talent of the highest order which supports it.
No publication of the kind has, in this country, so successfully
combined the energy and freedom of the daily newspaper with the higher
literary tone of the first-class monthly; and it is very certain that
no magazine has given wider range to its contributors, or preserved
itself so completely from the narrow influences of party or of
faction.

In times like the present, such a journal is either a power in the land or
it is nothing. That the CONTINENTAL is not the latter is abundantly
evidenced _by what it has done_--by the reflection of its counsels in
many important public events, and in the character and power of those
who are its staunchest supporters.

From her birth, ridicule had ever pursued her. We have said
that she was very deformed, and she was vulgarly called "Mother Bunch."
Indeed it was so usual to give her this grotesque name, which every
moment reminded her of her infirmity, that Frances and Agricola, though
they felt as much compassion as other people showed contempt for her,
never called her, however, by any other name.

Mother Bunch, as we shall therefore call her in future, was born in the
house in which Dagobert's wife had resided for more than twenty years;
and she had, as it were, been brought up with Agricola and Gabriel.

There are wretches fatally doomed to misery. Mother Bunch had a very
pretty sister, on whom Perrine Soliveau, their common mother, the widow
of a ruined tradesman, had concentrated all her affection, while she
treated her deformed child with contempt and unkindness. The latter would
often come, weeping, to Frances, on this account, who tried to console
her, and in the long evenings amused her by teaching her to read and sew.
Accustomed to pity her by their mother's example, instead of imitating
other children, who always taunted and sometimes even beat her, Agricola
and Gabriel liked her, and used to protect and defend her.

She was about fifteen, and her sister Cephyse was about seventeen, when
their mother died, leaving them both in utter poverty. Cephyse was
intelligent, active, clever, but different to her sister; she had the
lively, alert, hoydenish character which requires air, exercise and
pleasures--a good girl enough, but foolishly spoiled by her mother.
Cephyse, listening at first to Frances's good advice, resigned herself to
her lot; and, having learnt to sew, worked like her sister, for about a
year. But, unable to endure any longer the bitter privations her
insignificant earnings, notwithstanding her incessant toil, exposed her
to--privations which often bordered on starvation--Cephyse, young,
pretty, of warm temperament, and surrounded by brilliant offers and
seductions--brilliant, indeed, for her, since they offered food to
satisfy her hunger, shelter from the cold, and decent raiment, without
being obliged to work fifteen hours a day in an obscure and unwholesome
hovel--Cephyse listened to the vows of a young lawyer's clerk, who
forsook her soon after. She formed a connection with another clerk, whom
she (instructed by the examples set her), forsook in turn for a bagman,
whom she afterwards cast off for other favorites. In a word, what with
changing and being forsaken, Cephyse, in the course of one or two years,
was the idol of a set of grisettes, students and clerks; and acquired
such a reputation at the balls on the Hampstead Heaths of Paris, by her
decision of character, original turn of mind, and unwearied ardor in all
kinds of pleasures, and especially her wild, noisy gayety, that she was
termed the Bacchanal Queen, and proved herself in every way worthy of
this bewildering royalty.

From that time poor Mother Bunch only heard of her sister at rare
intervals. She still mourned for her, and continued to toil hard to gain
her three-and-six a week. The unfortunate girl, having been taught sewing
by Frances, made coarse shirts for the common people and the army. For
these she received half-a-crown a dozen. They had to be hemmed, stitched,
provided with collars and wristbands, buttons, and button holes; and at
the most, when at work twelve and fifteen hours a day, she rarely
succeeded in turning out more than fourteen or sixteen shirts a week--an
excessive amount of toil that brought her in about three shillings and
fourpence a week. And the case of this poor girl was neither accidental
nor uncommon. And this, because the remuneration given for women's work
is an example of revolting injustice and savage barbarism. They are paid
not half as much as men who are employed at the needle: such as tailors,
and makers of gloves, or waistcoats, etc.--no doubt because women can
work as well as men--because they are more weak and delicate--and because
their need may be twofold as great when they become mothers.

Well, Mother Bunch fagged on, with three-and-four a week. That is to say,
toiling hard for twelve or fifteen hours every day; she succeeded in
keeping herself alive, in spite of exposure to hunger, cold, and
poverty--so numerous were her privations. Privations? No! The word
privation expresses but weakly that constant and terrible want of all
that is necessary to preserve the existence God gives; namely, wholesome
air and shelter, sufficient and nourishing food and warm clothing.
Mortification would be a better word to describe that total want of all
that is essentially vital, which a justly organized state of society
ought--yes--ought necessarily to bestow on every active, honest workman
and workwoman, since civilization has dispossessed them of all
territorial right, and left them no other patrimony than their hands.

The savage does not enjoy the advantage of civilization; but he has, at
least, the beasts of the field, the fowls of the air, the fish of the
sea, and the fruits of the earth, to feed him, and his native woods for
shelter and for fuel. The civilized man, disinherited of these gifts,
considering the rights of property as sacred, may, in return for his hard
daily labor, which enriches his country, demand wages that will enable
him to live in the enjoyment of health: nothing more, and nothing less.
For is it living, to drag along on the extreme edge which separates life
from the grave, and even there continually struggle against cold, hunger,
and disease? And to show how far the mortification which society imposes
thus inexorably on its millions of honest, industrious laborers (by its
careless disregard of all the questions which concern the just
remuneration of labor), may extend, we will describe how this poor girl
contrived to live on three shillings and sixpence a week.

Society, perhaps, may then feel its obligation to so many unfortunate
wretches for supporting, with resignation, the horrible existence which
leaves them just sufficient life to feel the worst pangs of humanity.
Yes: to live at such a price is virtue! Yes, society thus organized,
whether it tolerates or imposes so much misery, loses all right to blame
the poor wretches who sell themselves not through debauchery, but because
they are cold and famishing. This poor girl spent her wages as follows:

    Six pounds of bread, second quality . . . . . . . .0 8 1/2
    Four pails of water . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .0 2
    Lard or dripping (butter being out of the question)0 5
    Coarse salt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .0 0 3/4
    A bushel of charcoal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .0 4
    A quart of dried vegetables . . . . . . . . . . . .0 3
    Three quarts of potatoes. . . . . . . . . . . . . .0 2
    Dips. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .0 3 1/4
    Thread and needles. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .0 2 1/2
                                                      ______
                                                       2 7

To save charcoal, Mother Bunch prepared soup only two or three times a
week at most, on a stove that stood on the landing of the fourth story.
On other days she ate it cold. There remained nine or ten pence a week
for clothes and lodging. By rare good fortune, her situation was in one
respect an exception to the lot of many others. Agricola, that he might
not wound her delicacy, had come to a secret arrangement with the
housekeeper, and hired a garret for her, just large enough to hold a
small bed, a chair, and a table; for which the sempstress had to pay five
shillings a year. But Agricola, in fulfilment of his agreement with the
porter, paid the balance, to make up the actual rent of the garret, which
was twelve and sixpence. The poor girl had thus about eighteenpence a
month left for her other expenses. But many workwomen, whose position is
less fortunate than hers, since they have neither home nor family, buy a
piece of bread and some other food to keep them through the day; and at
night patronize the "twopenny rope," one with another, in a wretched room
containing five or six beds, some of which are always engaged by men, as
male lodgers are by far the most abundant. Yes; and in spite of the
disgust that a poor and virtuous girl must feel at this arrangement, she
must submit to it; for a lodging-house keeper cannot have separate rooms
for females. To furnish a room, however meanly, the poor workwoman must
possess three or four shillings in ready money. But how save this sum,
out of weekly earnings of a couple of florins, which are scarcely
sufficient to keep her from starving, and are still less sufficient to
clothe her? No! no! The poor wretch must resign herself to this repugnant
cohabitation; and so, gradually, the instinct of modesty becomes
weakened; the natural sentiment of chastity, that saved her from the "gay
life," becomes extinct; vice appears to be the only means of improving
her intolerable condition; she yields; and the first "man made of money,"
who can afford a governess for his children, cries out against the
depravity of the lower orders! And yet, painful as the condition of the
working woman is, it is relatively fortunate. Should work fail her for
one day, two days, what then? Should sickness come--sickness almost
always occasioned by unwholesome food, want of fresh air, necessary
attention, and good rest; sickness, often so enervating as to render work
impossible; though not so dangerous as to procure the sufferer a bed in
an hospital--what becomes of the hapless wretches then? The mind
hesitates, and shrinks from dwelling on such gloomy pictures.

This inadequacy of wages, one terrible source only of so many evils, and
often of so many vices, is general, especially among women; and, again
this is not private wretchedness, but the wretchedness which afflicts
whole classes, the type of which we endeavor to develop in Mother Bunch.
It exhibits the moral and physical condition of thousands of human
creatures in Paris, obliged to subsist on a scanty four shillings a week.
This poor workwoman, then, notwithstanding the advantages she unknowingly
enjoyed through Agricola's generosity, lived very miserably; and her
health, already shattered, was now wholly undermined by these constant
hardships. Yet, with extreme delicacy, though ignorant of the little
sacrifice already made for her by Agricola, Mother Bunch pretended she
earned more than she really did, in order to avoid offers of service
which it would have pained her to accept, because she knew the limited
means of Frances and her son, and because it would have wounded her
natural delicacy, rendered still more sensitive by so many sorrows and
humiliations.

But, singular as it may appear, this deformed body contained a loving and
generous soul--a mind cultivated even to poetry; and let us add, that
this was owing to the example of Agricola Baudoin, with whom she had been
brought up, and who had naturally the gift. This poor girl was the first
confidant to whom our young mechanic imparted his literary essays; and
when he told her of the charm and extreme relief he found in poetic
reverie, after a day of hard toil, the workwoman, gifted with strong
natural intelligence, felt, in her turn, how great a resource this would
be to her in her lonely and despised condition.

One day, to Agricola's great surprise, who had just read some verses to
her, the sewing-girl, with smiles and blushes, timidly communicated to
him also a poetic composition. Her verses wanted rhythm and harmony,
perhaps; but they were simple and affecting, as a non-envenomed complaint
entrusted to a friendly hearer. From that day Agricola and she held
frequent consultations; they gave each other mutual encouragement: but
with this exception, no one else knew anything of the girl's poetical
essays, whose mild timidity made her often pass for a person of weak
intellect. This soul must have been great and beautiful, for in all her
unlettered strains there was not a word of murmuring respecting her hard
lot: her note was sad, but gentle--desponding, but resigned; it was
especially the language of deep tenderness--of mournful sympathy--of
angelic charity for all poor creatures consigned, like her, to bear the
double burden of poverty and deformity. Yet she often expressed a sincere
free-spoken admiration of beauty, free from all envy or bitterness; she
admired beauty as she admired the sun. But, alas! many were the verses of
hers that Agricola had never seen, and which he was never to see.

The young mechanic, though not strictly handsome, had an open masculine
face; was as courageous as kind; possessed a noble, glowing, generous
heart, a superior mind, and a frank, pleasing gayety of spirits. The
young girl, brought up with him, loved him as an unfortunate creature can
love, who, dreading cruel ridicule, is obliged to hide her affection in
the depths of her heart, and adopt reserve and deep dissimulation. She
did not seek to combat her love; to what purpose should she do so? No one
would ever know it. Her well known sisterly affection for Agricola
explained the interest she took in all that concerned him; so that no one
was surprised at the extreme grief of the young workwoman, when, in 1830,
Agricola, after fighting intrepidly for the people's flag, was brought
bleeding home to his mother. Dagobert's son, deceived, like others, on
this point, had never suspected, and was destined never to suspect, this
love for him.

Such was the poorly-clad girl who entered the room in which Frances was
preparing her son's supper.

"Is it you, my poor love," said she; "I have not seen you since morning:
have you been ill? Come and kiss me."

The young girl kissed Agricola's mother, and replied: "I was very busy
about some work, mother; I did not wish to lose a moment; I have only
just finished it. I am going down to fetch some charcoal--do you want
anything while I'm out?"

"No, no, my child, thank you. But I am very uneasy. It is half-past
eight, and Agricola is not come home." Then she added, after a sigh: "He
kills himself with work for me. Ah, I am very unhappy, my girl; my sight
is quite going. In a quarter of an hour after I begin working, I cannot
see at all--not even to sew sacks. The idea of being a burden to my son
drives me distracted."

"Oh, don't, ma'am, if Agricola heard you say that--"

"I know the poor boy thinks of nothing but me, and that augments my
vexation. Only I think that rather than leave me, he gives up the
advantages that his fellow-workmen enjoy at Hardy's, his good and worthy
master--instead of living in this dull garret, where it is scarcely light
at noon, he would enjoy, like the other workmen, at very little expense,
a good light room, warm in winter, airy in summer, with a view of the
garden. And he is so fond of trees! not to mention that this place is so
far from his work, that it is quite a toil to him to get to it."

"Oh, when he embraces you he forgets his fatigue, Mrs. Baudoin," said
Mother Bunch; "besides, he knows how you cling to the house in which he
was born. M. Hardy offered to settle you at Plessy with Agricola, in the
building put up for the workmen."

"Yes, my child; but then I must give up church. I can't do that."

"But--be easy, I hear him," said the hunchback, blushing.

A sonorous, joyous voice was heard singing on the stairs.

"At least, I'll not let him see that I have been crying," said the good
mother, drying her tears. "This is the only moment of rest and ease from
toil he has--I must not make it sad to him."


CHAPTER XXIX.

AGRICOLA BAUDOIN.

Our blacksmith poet, a tall young man, about four-and-twenty years of
age, was alert and robust, with ruddy complexion, dark hair and eyes, and
aquiline nose, and an open, expressive countenance. His resemblance to
Dagobert was rendered more striking by the thick brown moustache which he
wore according to the fashion; and a sharp-pointed imperial covered his
chin. His cheeks, however, were shaven, Olive color velveteen trousers, a
blue blouse, bronzed by the forge smoke, a black cravat, tied carelessly
round his muscular neck, a cloth cap with a narrow vizor, composed his
dress. The only thing which contrasted singularly with his working
habiliments was a handsome purple flower, with silvery pistils, which he
held in his hand.

"Good-evening, mother," said he, as he came to kiss Frances immediately.

Then, with a friendly nod, he added, "Good-evening, Mother Bunch."

"You are very late, my child," said Frances, approaching the little stove
on which her son's simple meal was simmering; "I was getting very
anxious."

"Anxious about me, or about my supper, dear mother?" said Agricola,
gayly. "The deuce! you won't excuse me for keeping the nice little supper
waiting that you get ready for me, for fear it should be spoilt, eh?"

So saying, the blacksmith tried to kiss his mother again.

"Have done, you naughty boy; you'll make me upset the pan."

"That would be a pity, mother; for it smells delightfully. Let's see what
it is."

"Wait half a moment."

"I'll swear, now, you have some of the fried potatoes and bacon I'm so
fond of."

"Being Saturday, of course!" said Frances, in a tone of mild reproach.

"True," rejoined Agricola, exchanging a smile of innocent cunning with
Mother Bunch; "but, talking of Saturday, mother, here are my wages."

"Thank ye, child; put the money in the cupboard."

"Yes, mother!"

"Oh, dear!" cried the young sempstress, just as Agricola was about to put
away the money, "what a handsome flower you have in your hand, Agricola.
I never saw a finer. In winter, too! Do look at it, Mrs. Baudoin."

"See there, mother," said Agricola, taking the flower to her; "look at
it, admire it, and especially smell it. You can't have a sweeter perfume;
a blending of vanilla and orange blossom."

"Indeed, it does smell nice, child. Goodness! how handsome!" said
Frances, admiringly; "where did you find it?"

"Find it, my good mother!" repeated Agricola, smilingly: "do you think
folks pick up such things between the Barriere du Maine and the Rue
Brise-Miche?"

"How did you get it then?" inquired the sewing girl, sharing in Frances's
curiosity.

"Oh! you would like to know? Well, I'll satisfy you, and explain why I
came home so late; for something else detained me. It has been an evening
of adventures, I promise you. I was hurrying home, when I heard a low,
gentle barking at the corner of the Rue de Babylone; it was just about
dusk, and I could see a very pretty little dog, scarce bigger than my
fist, black and tan, with long, silky hair, and ears that covered its
paws."

"Lost, poor thing, I warrant," said Frances.

"You've hit it. I took up the poor thing, and it began to lick my hands.
Round its neck was a red satin ribbon, tied in a large bow; but as that
did not bear the master's name, I looked beneath it, and saw a small
collar, made of a gold plate and small gold chains. So I took a Lucifer
match from my 'bacco-box, and striking a light, I read, 'FRISKY belongs
to Hon. Miss Adrienne de Cardoville, No. 7, Rue de Babylone.'"

"Why, you were just in the street," said Mother Bunch.

"Just so. Taking the little animal under my arm, I looked about me till I
came to a long garden wall, which seemed to have no end, and found a
small door of a summer-house, belonging no doubt to the large mansion at
the other end of the park; for this garden looked just like a park. So,
looking up I saw 'No. 7,' newly painted over a little door with a grated
slide. I rang; and in a few minutes, spent, no doubt, in observing me
through the bars (for I am sure I saw a pair of eyes peeping through),
the gate opened. And now, you'll not believe a word I have to say."

"Why not, my child?"

"Because it seems like a fairy tale."

"A fairy tale?" said Mother Bunch, as if she was really her namesake of
elfish history.

"For, all the world it does. I am quite astounded, even now, at my
adventure; it is like the remembrance of a dream."

"Well, let us have it," said the worthy mother, so deeply interested that
she did not perceive her son's supper was beginning to burn.

"First," said the blacksmith, smiling at the curiosity he had excited, "a
young lady opened the door to me, but so lovely, so beautifully and
gracefully dressed, that you would have taken her for a beautiful
portrait of past times. Before I could say a word, she exclaimed, 'Ah!
dear me, sir, you have brought back Frisky; how happy Miss Adrienne will
be! Come, pray come in instantly; she would so regret not having an
opportunity to thank you in person!' And without giving me time to reply,
she beckoned me to follow her. Oh, dear mother, it is quite out of my
power to tell you, the magnificence I saw, as I passed through a small
saloon, partially lighted, and full of perfume! It would be impossible.
The young woman walked too quickly. A door opened,--Oh, such a sight! I
was so dazzled I can remember nothing but a great glare of gold and
light, crystal and flowers; and, amidst all this brilliancy, a young lady
of extreme beauty--ideal beauty; but she had red hair, or rather hair
shining like gold! Oh! it was charming to look at! I never saw such hair
before. She had black eyes, ruddy lips, and her skin seemed white as
snow. This is all I can recollect: for, as I said before, I was so
dazzled, I seemed to be looking through a veil. 'Madame,' said the young
woman, whom I never should have taken for a lady's-maid, she was dressed
so elegantly, 'here is Frisky. This gentleman found him, and brought him
back.' 'Oh, sir,' said the young lady with the golden hair, in a sweet
silvery voice, 'what thanks I owe you! I am foolishly attached to
Frisky.' Then, no doubt, concluding from my dress that she ought to thank
me in some other way than by words, she took up a silk purse, and said to
me, though I must confess with some hesitation--'No doubt, sir, it gave
you some trouble to bring my pet back. You have, perhaps, lost some
valuable time--allow me--' She held forth her purse."

"Oh, Agricola," said Mother Bunch, sadly; "how people may be deceived!"

"Hear the end, and you will perhaps forgive the young lady. Seeing by my
looks that the offer of the purse hurt me, she took a magnificent
porcelain vase that contained this flower, and, addressing me in a tone
full of grace and kindness, that left me room to guess that she was vexed
at having wounded me, she said--'At least, sir, you will accept this
flower.'"

"You are right, Agricola," said the girl, smiling sadly; "an involuntary
error could not be repaired in a nicer way.

"Worthy young lady," said Frances, wiping her eyes; "how well she
understood my Agricola!"

"Did she not, mother? But just as I was taking the flower, without daring
to raise my eyes (for, notwithstanding the young lady's kind manner,
there was something very imposing about her) another handsome girl, tall
and dark, and dressed to the top of fashion, came in and said to the
red-haired young lady, 'He is here, Madame.' She immediately rose and
said to me, 'A thousand pardons, sir. I shall never forget that I am
indebted to you for a moment of much pleasure. Pray remember, on all
occasions, my address and name--Adrienne de Cardoville.' Thereupon she
disappeared. I could not find a word to say in reply. The same young
woman showed me to the door, and curtseyed to me very politely. And there
I stood in the Rue de Babylone, as dazzled and astonished as if I had
come out of an enchanted palace."

"Indeed, my child, it is like a fairy tale. Is it not, my poor girl?"

"Yes, ma'am," said Mother Bunch, in an absent manner that Agricola did
not observe.

"What affected me most," rejoined Agricola, "was, that the young lady, on
seeing her little dog, did not forget me for it, as many would have done
in her place, and took no notice of it before me. That shows delicacy and
feeling, does it not? Indeed, I believe this young lady to be so kind and
generous, that I should not hesitate to have recourse to her in any
important case."

"Yes, you are right," replied the sempstress, more and more absent.

The poor girl suffered extremely. She felt no jealousy, no hatred,
towards this young stranger, who, from her beauty, wealth, and delicacy,
seemed to belong to a sphere too splendid and elevated to be even within
the reach of a work, girl's vision; but, making an involuntary comparison
of this fortunate condition with her own, the poor thing had never felt
more cruelly her deformity and poverty. Yet such were the humility and
gentle resignation of this noble creature, that the only thing which made
her feel ill-disposed towards Adrienne de Cardoville was the offer of the
purse to Agricola; but then the charming way in which the young lady had
atoned for her error, affected the sempstress deeply. Yet her heart was
ready to break. She could not restrain her tears as she contemplated the
magnificent flower--so rich in color and perfume, which, given by a
charming hand, was doubtless very precious to Agricola.

"Now, mother," resumed the young man smilingly, and unaware of the
painful emotion of the other bystander, "you have had the cream of my
adventures first. I have told you one of the causes of my delay; and now
for the other. Just now, as I was coming in, I met the dyer at the foot
of the stairs, his arms a beautiful pea-green. Stopping me he said, with
an air full of importance, that he thought he had seen a chap sneaking
about the house like a spy, 'Well, what is that to you, Daddy Loriot?'
said I: 'are you afraid he will nose out the way to make the beautiful
green, with which you are dyed up to the very elbows?'"

"But who could that man be, Agricola?" said Frances.

"On my word, mother, I don't know and scarcely care; I tried to persuade
Daddy Loriot, who chatters like a magpie, to return to his cellar, since
it could signify as little to him as to me, whether a spy watched him or
not." So saying, Agricola went and placed the little leathern sack,
containing his wages, on a shelf, in the cupboard.

As Frances put down the saucepan on the end of the table, Mother Bunch,
recovering from her reverie, filled a basin with water, and, taking it to
the blacksmith, said to him in a gentle tone-"Agricola--for your hands."

"Thank you, little sister. How kind you are!" Then with a most unaffected
gesture and tone, he added, "There is my fine flower for your trouble."

"Do you give it me?" cried the sempstress, with emotion, while a vivid
blush colored her pale and interesting face. "Do you give me this
handsome flower, which a lovely rich young lady so kindly and graciously
gave you?" And the poor thing repeated, with growing astonishment, "Do
you give it to me?"

"What the deuce should I do with it? Wear it on my heart, have it set as
a pin?" said Agricola, smiling. "It is true I was very much impressed by
the charming way in which the young lady thanked me. I am delighted to
think I found her little dog, and very happy to be able to give you this
flower, since it pleases you. You see the day has been a happy one."

While Mother Bunch, trembling with pleasure, emotion, and surprise, took
the flower, the young blacksmith washed his hands, so black with smoke
and steel filings that the water became dark in an instant. Agricola,
pointing out this change to the sempstress, said to her in a whisper,
laughing,-"Here's cheap ink for us paper-stainers! I finished some verses
yesterday, which I am rather satisfied with. I will read them to you."

With this, Agricola wiped his hands naturally on the front of his blouse,
while Mother Bunch replaced the basin on the chest of drawers, and laid
the flower against the side of it.

"Can't you ask for a towel," said Frances, shrugging her shoulders,
"instead of wiping your hands on your blouse?"

"After being scorched all day long at the forge, it will be all the
better for a little cooling to-night, won't it? Am I disobedient, mother?
Scold me, then, if you dare! Come, let us see you."

Frances made no reply; but, placing her hands on either side of her son's
head, so beautiful in its candor, resolution and intelligence, she
surveyed him for a moment with maternal pride, and kissed him repeatedly
on the forehead.

"Come," said she, "sit down: you stand all day at your forge, and it is
late."

"So,--your arm-chair again!" said Agricola.--"Our usual quarrel every
evening--take it away, I shall be quite as much at ease on another."

"No, no! You ought at least to rest after your hard toil."

"What tyranny!" said Agricola gayly, sitting down. "Well, I preach like a
good apostle; but I am quite at ease in your arm-chair, after all. Since
I sat down on the throne in the Tuileries, I have never had a better
seat."

Frances Baudoin, standing on one side of the table, cut a slice of bread
for her son, while Mother Bunch, on the other, filled his silver mug.
There was something affecting in the attentive eagerness of the two
excellent creatures, for him whom they loved so tenderly.

"Won't you sup with me?" said Agricola to the girl.

"Thank you, Agricola," replied the sempstress, looking down, "I have only
just dined."

"Oh, I only ask you for form's sake--you have your whims--we can never
prevail on you to eat with us--just like mother; she prefers dining all
alone; and in that way she deprives herself without my knowing it."

"Goodness, child! It is better for my health to dine early. Well, do you
find it nice?"

"Nice!--call it excellent! Stockfish and parsnips. Oh, I am very fond of
stockfish; I should have been born a Newfoundland fisherman."

This worthy lad, on the contrary, was but poorly refreshed, after a hard
day's toil, with this paltry stew,--a little burnt as it had been, too,
during his story; but he knew he pleased his mother by observing the fast
without complaining. He affected to enjoy his meal; and the good woman
accordingly observed with satisfaction:

"Oh, I see you like it, my dear boy; Friday and Saturday next we'll have
some more."

"Thank you, mother,--only not two days together. One gets tired of
luxuries, you know! And now, let us talk of what we shall do
to-morrow--Sunday. We must be very merry, for the last few days you seem
very sad, dear mother, and I can't make it out--I fancy you are not
satisfied with me."

"Oh, my dear child!--you--the pattern of--"

"Well, well! Prove to me that you are happy, then, by taking a little
amusement. Perhaps you will do us the honor of accompanying us, as you
did last time," added Agricola, bowing to Mother Bunch.

The latter blushed and looked down; her face assumed an expression of
bitter grief, and she made no reply.

"I have the prayers to attend all day, you know, my dear child," said
Frances to her son.

"Well, in the evening, then? I don't propose the theatre; but they say
there is a conjurer to be seen whose tricks are very amusing.

"I am obliged to you, my son; but that is a kind of theatre."

"Dear mother, this is unreasonable!"

"My dear child, do I ever hinder others from doing what they like?"

"True, dear mother; forgive me. Well, then, if it should be fine, we will
simply take a walk with Mother Bunch on the Boulevards. It is nearly
three months since she went out with us; and she never goes out without
us."

"No, no; go alone, my child. Enjoy your Sunday, 'tis little enough."

"You know very well, Agricola," said the sempstress, blushing up to the
eyes, "that I ought not to go out with you and your mother again."

"Why not, madame? May I ask, without impropriety, the cause of this
refusal?" said Agricola gayly.

The poor girl smiled sadly, and replied, "Because I will not expose you
to a quarrel on my account, Agricola."

"Forgive me," said Agricola, in a tone of sincere grief, and he struck
his forehead vexedly.

To this Mother Bunch alluded sometimes, but very rarely, for she observed
punctilious discretion. The girl had gone out with Agricola and his
mother. Such occasions were, indeed, holidays for her. Many days and
nights had she toiled hard to procure a decent bonnet and shawl, that she
might not do discredit to her friends. The five or six days of holidays,
thus spent arm in arm with him whom she adored in secret, formed the sum
of her happy days.

Taking their last walk, a coarse, vulgar man elbowed her so rudely that
the poor girl could not refrain from a cry of terror, and the man
retorted it by saying,-"What are you rolling your hump in my way for,
stoopid?"

Agricola, like his father, had the patience which force and courage give
to the truly brave; but he was extremely quick when it became necessary
to avenge an insult. Irritated at the vulgarity of this man, Agricola
left his mother's arm to inflict on the brute, who was of his own age,
size, and force, two vigorous blows, such as the powerful arm and huge
fist of a blacksmith never before inflicted on human face. The villain
attempted to return it, and Agricola repeated the correction, to the
amusement of the crowd, and the fellow slunk away amidst a deluge of
hisses. This adventure made Mother Bunch say she would not go out with
Agricola again, in order to save him any occasion of quarrel. We may
conceive the blacksmith's regret at having thus unwittingly revived the
memory of this circumstance,--more painful, alas! for Mother Bunch than
Agricola could imagine, for she loved him passionately, and her infirmity
had been the cause of that quarrel. Notwithstanding his strength and
resolution, Agricola was childishly sensitive; and, thinking how painful
that thought must be to the poor girl, a large tear filled his eyes, and,
holding out his hands, he said, in a brotherly tone, "Forgive my
heedlessness! Come, kiss me." And he gave her thin, pale cheeks two
hearty kisses.

The poor girl's lips turned pale at this cordial caress; and her heart
beat so violently that she was obliged to lean against the corner of the
table.

"Come, you forgive me, do you not?" said Agricola.

"Yes! yes!" she said, trying to subdue her emotion; "but the recollection
of that quarrel pains me--I was so alarmed on your account; if the crowd
had sided with that man!"

"Alas!" said Frances, coming to the sewing-girl's relief, without knowing
it, "I was never so afraid in all my life!"

"Oh, mother," rejoined Agricola, trying to change a conversation which
had now become disagreeable for the sempstress, "for the wife of a horse
grenadier of the Imperial Guard, you have not much courage. Oh, my brave
father; I can't believe he is really coming! The very thought turns me
topsy-turvy!"

"Heaven grant he may come," said Frances, with a sigh.

"God grant it, mother. He will grant it, I should think. Lord knows, you
have had masses enough said for his return."

"Agricola, my child," said Frances, interrupting her son, and shaking her
head sadly, "do not speak in that way. Besides, you are talking of your
father."

"Well, I'm in for it this evening. 'Tis your turn now; positively, I am
growing stupid, or going crazy. Forgive me, mother! forgive! That's the
only word I can get out to-night. You know that, when I do let out on
certain subjects, it is because I can't help it; for I know well the pain
it gives you."

"You do not offend me, my poor, dear, misguided boy."

"It comes to the same thing; and there is nothing so bad as to offend
one's mother; and, with respect to what I said about father's return, I
do not see that we have any cause to doubt it."

"But we have not heard from him for four months."

"You know, mother, in his letter--that is, in the letter which he
dictated (for you remember that, with the candor of an old soldier, he
told us that, if he could read tolerably well, he could not write); well,
in that letter he said we were not to be anxious about him; that he
expected to be in Paris about the end of January, and would send us word,
three or four days before, by what road he expected to arrive, that I
might go and meet him."

"True, my child; and February is come, and no news yet."

"The greater reason why we should wait patiently. But I'll tell you more:
I should not be surprised if our good Gabriel were to come back about the
same time. His last letter from America makes me hope so. What pleasure,
mother, should all the family be together!"

"Oh, yes, my child! It would be a happy day for me."

"And that day will soon come, trust me."

"Do you remember your father, Agricola?" inquired Mother Bunch.

"To tell the truth, I remember most his great grenadier's shako and
moustache, which used to frighten me so, that nothing but the red ribbon
of his cross of honor, on the white facings of his uniform, and the
shining handle of his sabre, could pacify me; could it, mother? But what
is the matter? You are weeping!"

"Alas! poor Baudoin! What he must suffer at being separated from us at
his age--sixty and past! Alas! my child, my heart breaks, when I think
that he comes home only to change one kind of poverty for another."

"What do you mean?"

"Alas! I earn nothing now."

"Why, what's become of me? Isn't there a room here for you and for him;
and a table for you too? Only, my good mother, since we are talking of
domestic affairs," added the blacksmith, imparting increased tenderness
to his tone, that he might not shock his mother, "when he and Gabriel
come home, you won't want to have any more masses said, and tapers burned
for them, will you? Well, that saving will enable father to have tobacco
to smoke, and his bottle of wine every day. Then, on Sundays, we will
take a nice dinner at the eating-house."

A knocking at the door disturbed Agricola.

"Come in," said he. Instead of doing so, some one half-opened the door,
and, thrusting in an arm of a pea-green color, made signs to the
blacksmith.

"'Tis old Loriot, the pattern of dyers," said Agricola; "come in, Daddy,
no ceremony."

"Impossible, my lad; I am dripping with dye from head to foot; I should
cover missus's floor with green."

"So much the better. It will remind me of the fields I like so much."

"Without joking, Agricola, I must speak to you immediately."

"About the spy, eh? Oh, be easy; what's he to us?"

"No; I think he's gone; at any rate, the fog is so thick I can't see him.
But that's not it--come, come quickly! It is very important," said the
dyer, with a mysterious look; "and only concerns you."

"Me, only?" said Agricola, with surprise. "What can it be.

"Go and see, my child," said Frances.

"Yes, mother; but the deuce take me if I can make it out."

And the blacksmith left the room, leaving his mother with Mother Bunch.


CHAPTER XXX.

THE RETURN.

In five minutes Agricola returned; his face was pale and agitated--his
eyes glistened with tears, and his hands trembled; but his countenance
expressed extraordinary happiness and emotion. He stood at the door for a
moment, as if too much affected to accost his mother.

Frances's sight was so bad that she did not immediately perceive the
change her son's countenance had undergone.

"Well, my child--what is it?" she inquired.

Before the blacksmith could reply, Mother Bunch, who had more
discernment, exclaimed: "Goodness, Agricola--how pale you are! Whatever
is the matter?"

"Mother," said the artisan, hastening to Frances, without replying to the
sempstress,--"mother, expect news that will astonish you; but promise me
you will be calm."

"What do you mean? How you tremble! Look at me! Mother Bunch was
right--you are quite pale."

"My kind mother!" and Agricola, kneeling before Frances, took both her
hands in his--"you must--you do not know,--but--"

The blacksmith could not go on. Tears of joy interrupted his speech.

"You weep, my dear child! Your tears alarm me. 'What is the matter?--you
terrify me!"

"Oh, no, I would not terrify you; on the contrary," said Agricola, drying
his eyes--"you will be so happy. But, again, you must try and command
your feelings, for too much joy is as hurtful as too much grief."

"What?"

"Did I not say true, when I said he would come?"

"Father!" cried Frances. She rose from her seat; but her surprise and
emotion were so great that she put one hand to her heart to still its
beating, and then she felt her strength fail. Her son sustained her, and
assisted her to sit down.

Mother Bunch, till now, had stood discreetly apart, witnessing from a
distance the scene which completely engrossed Agricola and his mother.
But she now drew near timidly, thinking she might be useful; for Frances
changed color more and more.

"Come, courage, mother," said the blacksmith; "now the shock is over, you
have only to enjoy the pleasure of seeing my father."

"My poor man! after eighteen years' absence. Oh, I cannot believe it,"
said Frances, bursting into tears. "Is it true? Is it, indeed, true?"

"So true, that if you will promise me to keep as calm as you can, I will
tell you when you may see him."

"Soon--may I not?"

"Yes; soon."

"But when will he arrive?"

"He may arrive any minute--to-morrow--perhaps to-day."

"To-day!"

"Yes, mother! Well, I must tell you all--he has arrived."

"He--he is--" Frances could not articulate the word.

"He was downstairs just now. Before coming up, he sent the dyer to
apprise me that I might prepare you; for my brave father feared the
surprise might hurt you."

"Oh, heaven!"

"And now," cried the blacksmith, in an accent of indescribable joy--"he
is there, waiting! Oh, mother! for the last ten minutes I have scarcely
been able to contain myself--my heart is bursting with joy." And running
to the door, he threw it open.

Dagobert, holding Rose and Blanche by the hand, stood on the threshold.
Instead of rushing to her husband's arms, Frances fell on her knees in
prayer. She thanked heaven with profound gratitude for hearing her
prayers, and thus accepting her offerings. During a second, the actors of
this scene stood silent and motionless. Agricola, by a sentiment of
respect and delicacy, which struggled violently with his affection, did
not dare to fall on his father's neck. He waited with constrained
impatience till his mother had finished her prayer.

The soldier experienced the same feeling as the blacksmith; they
understood each other. The first glance exchanged by father and son
expressed their affection--their veneration for that excellent woman, who
in the fulness of her religious fervor, forgot, perhaps, too much the
creature for the Creator.

Rose and Blanche, confused and affected, looked with interest on the
kneeling woman; while Mother Bunch, shedding in silence tears of joy at
the thought of Agricola's happiness, withdrew into the most obscure
corner of the room, feeling that she was a stranger, and necessarily out
of place in that family meeting. Frances rose, and took a step towards
her husband, who received her in his arms. There was a moment of solemn
silence. Dagobert and Frances said not a word. Nothing could be heard but
a few sighs, mingled with sighs of joy. And, when the aged couple looked
up, their expression was calm, radiant, serene; for the full and complete
enjoyment of simple and pure sentiments never leaves behind a feverish
and violent agitation.

"My children," said the soldier, in tones of emotion, presenting the
orphans to Frances, who, after her first agitation, had surveyed them
with astonishment, "this is my good and worthy wife; she will be to the
daughters of General Simon what I have been to them."

"Then, madame, you will treat us as your children," said Rose,
approaching Frances with her sister.

"The daughters of General Simon!" cried Dagobert's wife, more and more
astonished.

"Yes, my dear Frances; I have brought them from afar not without some
difficulty; but I will tell you that by and by."

"Poor little things! One would take them for two angels, exactly alike!"
said Frances, contemplating the orphans with as much interest as
admiration.

"Now--for us," cried Dagobert, turning to his son.

"At last," rejoined the latter.

We must renounce all attempts to describe the wild joy of Dagobert and
his son, and the crushing grip of their hands, which Dagobert interrupted
only to look in Agricola's face; while he rested his hands on the young
blacksmith's broad shoulders that he might see to more advantage his
frank masculine countenance, and robust frame. Then he shook his hand
again, exclaiming, "He's a fine fellow--well built--what a good-hearted
look he has!"

From a corner of the room Mother Bunch enjoyed Agricola's happiness; but
she feared that her presence, till then unheeded, would be an intrusion.
She wished to withdraw unnoticed, but could not do so. Dagobert and his
son were between her and the door; and she stood unable to take her eyes
from the charming faces of Rose and Blanche. She had never seen anything
so winsome; and the extraordinary resemblance of the sisters increased
her surprise. Then, their humble mourning revealing that they were poor,
Mother Bunch involuntarily felt more sympathy towards them.

"Dear children! They are cold; their little hands are frozen, and,
unfortunately, the fire is out," said Frances, She tried to warm the
orphans' hands in hers, while Dagobert and his son gave themselves up to
the feelings of affection, so long restrained.

As soon as Frances said that the fire was out, Mother Bunch hastened to
make herself useful, as an excuse for her presence; and, going to the
cupboard, where the charcoal and wood were kept, she took some small
pieces, and, kneeling before the stove, succeeded, by the aid of a few
embers that remained, in relighting the fire, which soon began to draw
and blaze. Filling a coffee-pot with water, she placed it on the stove,
presuming that the orphans required some warm drink. The sempstress did
all this with so much dexterity and so little noise--she was naturally so
forgotten amidst the emotions of the scene--that Frances, entirely
occupied with Rose and Blanche, only perceived the fire when she felt its
warmth diffusing round, and heard the boiling water singing in the
coffee-pot. This phenomenon--fire rekindling of itself--did not astonish
Dagobert's wife then, so wholly was she taken up in devising how she
could lodge the maidens; for Dagobert as we have seen, had not given her
notice of their arrival.

Suddenly a loud bark was heard three or four times at the door.

"Hallo! there's Spoil-sport," said Dagobert, letting in his dog; "he
wants to come in to brush acquaintance with the family too."

The dog came in with a bound, and in a second was quite at home. After
having rubbed Dagobert's hand with his muzzle, he went in turns to greet
Rose and Blanche, and also Frances and Agricola; but seeing that they
took but little notice of him, he perceived Mother Bunch, who stood
apart, in an obscure corner of the room, and carrying out the popular
saying, "the friends of our friends are our friends," he went and licked
the hands of the young workwoman, who was just then forgotten by all. By
a singular impulse, this action affected the girl to tears; she patted
her long, thin, white hand several times on the head of the intelligent
dog. Then, finding that she could be no longer useful (for she had done
all the little services she deemed in her power), she took the handsome
flower Agricola had given her, opened the door gently, and went away so
discreetly that no one noticed her departure. After this exchange of
mutual affection, Dagobert, his wife, and son, began to think of the
realities of life.

"Poor Frances," said the soldier, glancing at Rose and Blanche, "you did
not expect such a pretty surprise!"

"I am only sorry, my friend," replied Frances, "that the daughters of
General Simon will not have a better lodging than this poor room; for
with Agricola's garret--"

"It composes our mansion," interrupted Dagobert; "there are handsomer, it
must be confessed. But be at ease; these young ladies are drilled into
not being hard to suit on that score. To-morrow, I and my boy will go arm
and arm, and I'll answer for it he won't walk the more upright and
straight of the two, and find out General Simon's father, at M. Hardy's
factory, to talk about business."

"To-morrow," said Agricola to Dagobert, "you will not find at the factory
either M. Hardy or Marshall Simon's father."

"What is that you say, my lad?" cried Dagobert, hastily, "the Marshal!"

"To be sure; since 1830, General Simon's friends have secured him the
title and rank which the emperor gave him at the battle of Ligny."

"Indeed!" cried Dagobert, with emotion, "but that ought not to surprise
me; for, after all, it is just; and when the emperor said a thing, the
least they can do is to let it abide. But it goes all the same to my
heart; it makes me jump again."

Addressing the sisters, he said: "Do you hear that, my children? During
the Afghan war this tribe held the Khyber Pass for the British, and did
them great service, as this pass is the main mountain route in
the north between Afghanistan and Hindustan.

A revolt of the Afridis was the event most to be feared by the
British, and it now appears to have taken place.

A large force of tribesmen entered into Khyber Pass, attacked the forts
which guarded it, and unfortunately were successful in capturing
them.
The force of British soldiers at hand was not strong enough to drive
them back, and they were able to swarm into the Pass in great numbers
and possess themselves of it.

The Pass once taken, they had the temerity to offer to treat with the
British for peace, and promise to go peaceably back to their homes
if the soldiers should be withdrawn from all the forts on the
frontier.

The British Government is incensed that the tribesmen should be so little
afraid of the power of the English arms, and has determined to
conquer this rebellious tribe, and give it a lesson in obedience
that will not soon be forgotten.

Now that the outbreak has assumed such a serious form, every one is trying
to discover a reason for the rebellion.

Some think that the Sultan of Turkey is at the root of the matter, and
that he has caused the news of his victory over the Greeks to be spread
broadcast throughout the whole Mohammedan race, thereby creating the
impression that the power of Europe has been shaken, and in this
way has given the natives of Hindustan an idea that it is an excellent
opportunity for them to try to throw off the hated European sovereignty.

Another rumor is that the Ameer of Afghanistan has incited the
tribes to rebel, and that he is secretly giving them his support
and assistance.

All the revolting tribes dwell on the borders of Afghanistan, and it
is known for a fact that the Ameer distributed among the native
Indian regiments a book of treasonable character, telling them all
about the Jehad or Holy War.

This war, according to the Mohammedan belief, is to be undertaken by the
Moslems against the Christians, and is to result in the spreading of the
Mohammedan faith throughout the world.

The circulation of these books excited the natives very much, and
it is thought had a great deal to do with their present restless
and rebellious spirit.

The Indian Government therefore sent a message to the Ameer protesting
against the further circulation of this book, and accusing him of
exciting the tribes to rebel, and then of allowing his subjects to
take part with them against the English.

The Ameer sent a prompt reply in which he denied that any of his subjects
had been concerned in the recent troubles.

He said that his soldiers should never be used to fight against the
British, and that if any of the tribes under his rule are guilty
of joining in a rebellion against his friend the Queen, it is without
his knowledge or consent.

He insisted that none of his people would have dared to join the
rebels openly, for fear of his severe displeasure.

In addition to this letter to the British Government, he has issued
an order to his subjects, forbidding them to join the rebels.

Notwithstanding this, the British officers in India place no reliance
on the Ameer's protestations, and still believe that he is directing
the operations of the troops on the frontier.

* * * * *
Spain is still sorrowing for the loss of her Prime Minister, Señor
Canovas.

This great statesman was buried with all the honors which his
patriotism merited.

The public buildings were all draped in black, all business was suspended
in Madrid during the ceremonies, and all honor was paid to his memory,
the Queen Regent sending personal messages of sympathy to his
widow, and ordering the court to go into mourning for him for three
days.

"You will take a little wine and water, sweetened, nice and hot, to warm
you a little, my dear young ladies," said Frances; "unfortunately, I have
nothing else to offer you."

"You are right, Frances; the dear children are tired, and want to go to
bed; while they do so, I'll go to my boy's room, and, before Rose and
Blanche are awake, I will come down and converse with you, just to give
Agricola a respite."

A knock was now heard at the door.

"It is good Mother Bunch come to see if we want her," said Agricola.

"But I think she was here when my husband came in," added Frances.

"Right, mother; and the good girl left lest she should be an intruder:
she is so thoughtful. But no--no--it is not she who knocks so loud."

"Go and see who it is, then, Agricola."

Before the blacksmith could reach the door, a man decently dressed, with
a respectable air, entered the room, and glanced rapidly round, looking
for a moment at Rose and Blanche.

"Allow me to observe, sir," said Agricola, "that after knocking, you
might have waited till the door was opened, before you entered. Pray,
what is your business?"

"Pray excuse me, sir," said the man, very politely, and speaking slowly,
perhaps to prolong his stay in the room: "I beg a thousand pardons--I
regret my intrusion--I am ashamed--"

"Well, you ought to be, sir," said Agricola, with impatience, "what do
you want?"

"Pray, sir, does not Miss Soliveau, a deformed needlewoman, live here?"

"No, sir; upstairs," said Agricola.

"Really, sir," cried the polite man, with low bows, "I am quite abroad at
my blunder: I thought this was the room of that young person. I brought
her proposals for work from a very respectable party."

"It is very late, sir," said Agricola, with surprise. "But that young
person is as one of our family. Call to-morrow; you cannot see her to
night; she is gone to bed."

"Then, sir, I again beg you to excuse--"

"Enough, sir," said Agricola, taking a step towards the door.

"I hope, madame and the young ladies, as well as this gent, will be
assured that--"

"If you go on much longer making excuses, sir, you will have to excuse
the length of your excuses; and it is time this came to an end!"

Rose and Blanche smiled at these words of Agricola; while Dagobert rubbed
his moustache with pride.

"What wit the boy has!" said he aside to his wife. "But that does not
astonish you--you are used to it."

During this speech, the ceremonious person withdrew, having again
directed a long inquiring glance to the sisters, and to Agricola and
Dagobert.

In a few minutes after, Frances having spread a mattress on the ground
for herself, and put the whitest sheets on her bed for the orphans,
assisted them to undress with maternal solicitude, Dagobert and Agricola
having previously withdrawn to their garret. Just as the blacksmith, who
preceded his father with a light, passed before the door of Mother
Bunch's room, the latter, half concealed in the shade, said to him
rapidly, in a low tone:

"Agricola, great danger threatens you: I must speak to you."

These words were uttered in so hasty and low a voice that Dagobert did
not hear them; but as Agricola stopped suddenly, with a start, the old
soldier said to him,

"Well, boy, what is it?"

"Nothing, father," said the blacksmith, turning round; "I feared I did
not light you well."

"Oh, stand at ease about that; I have the legs and eyes of fifteen to
night;" and the soldier, not noticing his son's surprise, went into the
little room where they were both to pass the night.

On leaving the house, after his inquiries about Mother Bunch, the over
polite Paul Pry slunk along to the end of Brise-Miche Street. He advanced
towards a hackney-coach drawn up on the Cloitre Saint-Merry Square.

In this carriage lounged Rodin, wrapped in a cloak.

"Well?" said he, in an inquiring tone.

"The two girls and the man with gray moustache went directly to Frances
Baudoin's; by listening at the door, I learnt that the sisters will sleep
with her, in that room, to-night; the old man with gray moustache will
share the young blacksmith's room."

"Very well," said Rodin.

"I did not dare insist on seeing the deformed workwoman this evening on
the subject of the Bacchanal Queen; I intend returning to-morrow, to
learn the effect of the letter she must have received this evening by the
post about the young blacksmith."

"Do not fail! And now you will call, for me, on Frances Baudoin's
confessor, late as it is; you will tell him that I am waiting for him at
Rue du Milieu des Ursins--he must not lose a moment. Do you come with
him. Should I not be returned, he will wait for me. You will tell him it
is on a matter of great moment."

"All shall be faithfully executed," said the ceremonious man, cringing to
Rodin, as the coach drove quickly away.


CHAPTER XXXI.

AGRICOLA AND MOTHER BUNCH.

Within one hour after the different scenes which have just been described
the most profound silence reigned in the soldier's humble dwelling. A
flickering light, which played through two panes of glass in a door,
betrayed that Mother Bunch had not yet gone to sleep; for her gloomy
recess, without air or light, was impenetrable to the rays of day, except
by this door, opening upon a narrow and obscure passage, connected with
the roof. A sorry bed, a table, an old portmanteau, and a chair, so
nearly filled this chilling abode, that two persons could not possibly be
seated within it, unless one of them sat upon the side of the bed.

The magnificent and precious flower that Agricola had given to the girl
was carefully stood up in a vessel of water, placed upon the table on a
linen cloth, diffusing its sweet odor around, and expanding its purple
calix in the very closet, whose plastered walls, gray and damp, were
feebly lighted by the rays of an attenuated candle. The sempstress, who
had taken off no part of her dress, was seated upon her bed--her looks
were downcast, and her eyes full of tears. She supported herself with one
hand resting on the bolster; and, inclining towards the door, listened
with painful eagerness, every instant hoping to hear the footsteps of
Agricola. The heart of the young sempstress beat violently; her face,
usually very pale, was now partially flushed--so exciting was the emotion
by which she was agitated. Sometimes she cast her eyes with terror upon a
letter which she held in her hand, a letter that had been delivered by
post in the course of the evening, and which had been placed by the
housekeeper (the dyer) upon the table, while she was rendering some
trivial domestic services during the recognitions of Dagobert and his
family.

After some seconds, Mother Bunch heard a door, very near her own, softly
opened.

"There he is at last!" she exclaimed, and Agricola immediately entered.

"I waited till my father went to sleep," said the blacksmith, in a low
voice, his physiognomy evincing much more curiosity than uneasiness. "But
what is the matter, my good sister? How your countenance is changed! You
weep! What has happened? About what danger would you speak to me?"

"Hush! Read this!" said she, her voice trembling with emotion, while she
hastily presented to him the open letter. Agricola held it towards the
light, and read what follows:

"A person who has reasons for concealing himself, but who knows the
sisterly interest you take in the welfare of Agricola Baudoin, warns you.
That young and worthy workman will probably be arrested in the course of
to-morrow."

"I!" exclaimed Agricola, looking at Mother Bunch with an air of stupefied
amazement. "What is the meaning of all this?"

"Read on!" quickly replied the sempstress, clasping her hands.

Agricola resumed reading, scarcely believing the evidence of his
eyes:-"The song, entitled 'Working-men Freed,' has been declared
libellous. Numerous copies of it have been found among the papers of a
secret society, the leaders of which are about to be incarcerated, as
being concerned in the Rue des Prouvaires conspiracy."

"Alas!" said the girl, melting into tears, "now I see it all. The man who
was lurking about below, this evening, who was observed by the dyer, was,
doubtless, a spy, lying in wait for you coming home."

"Nonsense!" exclaimed Agricola. "This accusation is quite ridiculous! Do
not torment yourself. I never trouble myself with politics. My verses
breathe nothing but philanthropy. Am I to blame, if they have been found
among the papers of a secret society?" Agricola disdainfully threw the
letter upon the table.

"Read! pray read!" said the other; "read on."

"If you wish it," said Agricola, "I will; no time is lost."

He resumed the reading of the letter:

"A warrant is about to be issued against Agricola Baudoin. There is mo
doubt of his innocence being sooner or later made clear; but it will be
well if he screen himself for a time as much as possible from pursuit, in
order that he may escape a confinement of two or three months previous to
trial--an imprisonment which would be a terrible blow for his mother,
whose sole support he is.

"A SINCERE FRIEND, who is compelled to remain unknown."

After a moment's silence, the blacksmith raised his head; his countenance
resumed its serenity; and laughing, he said: "Reassure yourself, good
Mother Bunch, these jokers have made a mistake by trying their games on
me. It is plainly an attempt at making an April-fool of me before the
time."

"Agricola, for the love of heaven!" said the girl, in a supplicating
tone; "treat not the warning thus lightly. Believe in my forebodings, and
listen to my advice."

"I tell you again, my good girl," replied Agricola, "that it is two
months since my song was published. It is not in any way political;
indeed, if it were, they would not have waited till now before coming
down on me."

"But," said the other, "you forget that new events have arisen. It is
scarcely two days since the conspiracy was discovered, in this very
neighborhood, in the Rue des Prouvaires. And," continued she, "if the
verses, though perhaps hitherto unnoticed, have now been found in the
possession of the persons apprehended for this conspiracy, nothing more
is necessary to compromise you in the plot."

"Compromise me!" said Agricola; "my verses! in which I only praise the
love of labor and of goodness! To arrest me for that! If so, justice
would be but a blind noodle. That she might grope her way, it would be
necessary to furnish her with a dog and a pilgrim's staff to guide her
steps."

"Agricola," resumed Mother Bunch; overwhelmed with anxiety and terror on
hearing the blacksmith jest at such a moment, "I conjure you to listen to
me! No doubt you uphold in the verses the sacred love of labor; but you
do also grievously deplore and deprecate the unjust lot of the poor
laborers, devoted as they are, without hope, to all the miseries of life;
you recommend, indeed, only fraternity among men; but your good and noble
heart vents its indignation, at the same time, against the selfish and
the wicked. In fine, you fervently hasten on, with the ardor of your
wishes, the emancipation of all the artisans who, less fortunate than
you, have not generous M. Hardy for employer. Say, Agricola, in these
times of trouble, is there anything more necessary to compromise you than
that numerous copies of your song have been found in possession of the
persons who have been apprehended?"

Agricola was moved by these affectionate and judicious expressions of an
excellent creature, who reasoned from her heart; and he began to view
with more seriousness the advice which she had given him.

Perceiving that she had shaken him, the sewing-girl went on to say: "And
then, bear your fellow-workman, Remi, in recollection."

"Remi!" said Agricola, anxiously.

"Yes," resumed the sempstress; "a letter of his, a letter in itself quite
insignificant, was found in the house of a person arrested last year for
conspiracy; and Remi, in consequence, remained a month in prison."

"That is true, but the injustice of his implication was easily shown, and
he was set at liberty."

"Yes, Agricola: but not till he had lain a month in prison; and that has
furnished the motive of the person who advised you to conceal yourself! A
month in prison! Good heavens! Agricola, think of that! and your mother."

These words made a powerful impression upon Agricola. He took up the
letter and again read it attentively.

"And the man who has been lurking all this evening about the house?"
proceeded she. "I constantly recall that circumstance, which cannot be
naturally accounted for. Alas! what a blow it would be for your father,
and poor mother, who is incapable of earning anything. Are you not now
their only resource? Oh! consider, then, what would become of them
without you--without your labor!"

"It would indeed be terrible," said Agricola, impatiently casting the
letter upon the table. "What you have said concerning Remi is too true.
He was as innocent as I am: yet an error of justice, an involuntary error
though it be, is not the less cruel. But they don't commit a man without
hearing him."

"But they arrest him first, and hear him afterwards," said Mother Bunch,
bitterly; "and then, after a month or two, they restore him his liberty.
And if he have a wife and children, whose only means of living is his
daily labor, what becomes of them while their only supporter is in
prison? They suffer hunger, they endure cold, and they weep!"

At these simple and pathetic words, Agricola trembled.

"A month without work," he said, with a sad and thoughtful air. "And my
mother, and father, and the two young ladies who make part of our family
until the arrival in Paris of their father, Marshal Simon. Oh! you are
right. That thought, in spite of myself, affrights me!"

"Agricola!" exclaimed the girl impetuously; "suppose you apply to M.
A skeleton bull-fight.

A duel between skeletons.

A tournament on skeleton horses.

A woman recently deceased, surrounded by skeletons offering their
compliments. They are presented by one of then number, with hat in
hand.

A balcony courting scene between skeleton lovers.

The word _FIN_ in bones concludes the series of grotesque and uncanny
sketches, which but emphasize a fact ever present in the poet's
mind--that while we are in life we _are_ in death.]

Finding his devotion to Julia unrequited, Becquer, in a rebellious mood,
and having come under the influence of the charms and blandishments of
a woman of Soria, a certain Casta Estéban y Navarro, contracted,
in or about the year 1861, an unfortunate marriage, which embittered
the rest of his life and added cares and expenses which he could
ill support.

He lived with his wife but a short time, during which period two sons
were born to them--Gustavo, whose later career was unfortunately not such
as to bring credit to the memory of his illustrious father, and, Jorge,
who died young. Becquer was passionately fond of his children, and
succeeded in keeping them with him after the separation from his
wife.

They were constantly the objects of his affectionate solicitude, and his
last thoughts were for them.

About 1858 the newspaper _El Contemporáneo_ had been founded by the
able and broad-minded Jose Luis Albareda, and Correa, who was
associated with the management, succeeded in obtaining for his
friend a position on its staff.

Becquer entered upon his new labors in 1861, and was a fairly regular
contributor until the suppression of the paper.

Here he published the greater part of his legends and tales, as well as
his remarkable collection of letters _Desde mi Celda_ ("From my Cell").
The following year his brother Valeriano, who up to that time had
exercised his talents as a genre painter in Seville, came to join
him in Madrid.

He too had been unfortunate in his domestic relations, and the brothers
joined in sympathy to form a new household. A period of comparative
comfort seemed to open up before them. This period was of short duration,
however; for Gustavo (who was never strong) soon fell ill, and was obliged
to withdraw from the capital, in search of purer air, to the
historic monastery of Veruela, situated on the Moncayo, a mountain
in northern Spain.

His brother Valeriano accompanied him, and there they passed a year in
complete isolation from the rest of the world.

The spur of necessity, however, compelled them both to keep to their work,
and while Gustavo was writing such legends as that of _Maese Pérez_,
and composing his fascinating _Cartas desde mi Celda_, Valeriano
was painting Aragonese scenes such as La _Vendimia_ ("The Vintage")
or fanciful creations such as _El Barco del Diablo_ or La
_Pecadora_.

The next year the two brothers returned to the capital, and Gustavo,
together with his friend D.

Felipe Vallarino, began the publication of _La Gaceta literaria_,
of brief but brilliant memory. During this same year and during 1863
Gustavo continued on the staff of _El Contemporáneo_, enriching its
pages with an occasional legend of singular beauty.

At the Baths of Fitero in Navarre, whither, with his inseparable
brother, he had gone to recuperate his health in the summer of 1864,
Gustavo composed the fantastic legend of the _Miserere_, and others
no less interesting.

On his return from Fitero he continued in _El Contemporáneo_, and shortly
after entered a ministerial daily, the irksome duties of which charge he
bore with resignation.

At this time Luis Gonzalez Bravo, a man of _fine_ literary
discrimination, whatever may be thought of him politically, was
prime minister under Isabel II.

He had become interested in the work of Gustavo, and, knowing the dire
financial straits in which the young poet labored, he thought to
diminish these anxieties and thus give him more time to devote to
creative work by making him censor of novels.

A new period of calm and comparative comfort began, and for the first time
in his life Becquer had the leisure to carry out a long-cherished
project, at once his own desire and the desire of his friends: that of
gathering together in one volume all his scattered verse and of adding
to the collection other poems as well that had not yet seen the
light.
This he did, and the completed volume so charmed his friend and patron,
Gonzalez Bravo, that he offered of his own accord to write a
prologue for the work and to print it at his own expense. But in 1868
came the revolution which dethroned Isabel II, and in the confusion that
followed the downfall of the ministry and the hasty withdrawal of
Gonzalez Bravo to the French frontier the volume of poems was lost.

This was a sad blow to Becquer, but he courageously set to work
to repair the loss, and with painful effort succeeded in recalling and
rewriting his _Rimas_, which were published after his death in the third
volume of his works by his friend Correa.

Becquer, with extreme punctiliousness, tendered his resignation as
censor of novels.

A pension of 10,000 reals that the government had assigned to Valeriano
for the study of national customs was withdrawn, and both brothers were
again deprived of permanent employment. They joined forces, and while
the one sketched admirable woodcuts for the _Almanac Anual_ of Gaspar
y Roig, the other wrote such original articles as _Las Hojas Secas_,
or chafed under such hack work as the translation of popular novels from
the French, which language he read with ease, though he did not speak
it well. Gustavo had already felt and described the charm of the old
Moorish city of Toledo in his _Historia de los Templos de España_, and
in 1869 he and Valeriano moved their little household temporarily
to the city of their dreams, with a view to finding inspiration
for their pens and brushes, and thus subsistence for their joint
families.[1]
[Footnote 1: It was at this time that Gustavo wrote the letter which
is published for the first time on page xxxix.]

An amusing account is given by Correa of an adventure that befell the two
brothers one night in Toledo as they were wandering about its streets.
He says: "One magnificent moonlight night both artists decided to
contemplate their beloved city bathed in the fantastic light of the chilly
orb. The painter armed with pencils and the writer with his souvenirs had
abandoned the old city and on a ruined wall had given themselves up for
hours to their artistic chatter ... when a couple of _Guardias
civiles_, who had doubtless those days been looking for marauders,
approached them.

They heard something of apses, squinches, ogives, and other terms
as suspicious or as dangerous ...
and observing the disarray of those who thus discoursed, their long
beards, their excited mien, the lateness of the hour, the solitude
of the place, and obeying especially that axiomatic certainty of
the Spanish police to blunder, they angrily swooped down upon those
night birds, and, in spite of protests and unheard explanations,
took them to continue their artistic themes in the dim and horrid
light of a dungeon in the Toledo jail....

We learned all this in the office of _EC Contemporáneo_, on receiving from
Gustavo an explanatory letter full of sketches representing the probable
passion and death of both innocents. The staff _en masse_ wrote to the
mistaken jailer, and at last we saw the prisoners return safe and
sound, parodying in our presence with words and pencils the famous
prisons of Silvio Pellico

."[1]
[Footnote 1: Correa, _op. cit._, pp. xxi-xxiii.]
In this same year, 1869, we find the brothers housed in modest quarters
in the Barrio de la Concepción in the outskirts of Madrid.
Here Adolfo wrote some new poems and began a translation of Dante for a
_Biblioteca de grandes autores_ which had been planned and organized
by _La Ilustración de Madrid_, founded by Gasset in 1870. The first
number of this noteworthy paper appeared on January 12 of that year, and
from its inception to the time of his death Gustavo was its director and
a regular contributor.[1] His brother Valeriano illustrated many
of its pages, and here one can form some idea of his skill as a
portrayer of Spanish types and customs.

"But who could foretell," says their friend Campillo, "that within so
short a time his necrology and that of his beloved brother were to
appear in this same paper?"[2]
[Footnote 1: These articles of Gustavo's have not, for the most part,
been published elsewhere.

There remains for the future editor of his complete works a large
number of such articles, which it would be well worth while to
collect.]

[Footnote 2: _La Ilustración Artística_, p. 360.]
Their life of hardship and anxiety was tearing to shreds the delicate health
of the two young artists, and on September 23, 1870, Valeriano breathed
his last in the arms of Gustavo.

His death was a blow from which Gustavo never recovered.

It was as though the mainspring was broken in a watch; and, though the
wheels still turned of their own momentum, the revolutions were
few in number and soon ceased.

"A strange illness," says Correa, "and a strange manner of death was
that!

Without any precise symptom, that which was diagnosed as pneumonia
turned to hepatitis, becoming in the judgment of others pericarditis, and
meanwhile the patient, with his brain as clear as ever and his
natural gentleness, went on submitting himself to every experiment,
accepting every medicine, and dying inch by inch

."[1]

[Footnote 1: Correa, _op. cit._, p. xix.]
Shortly before the end he turned to his friends who surrounded his
bed, and said to them, "Acordaos de mis niños

."[1] He realized that he had extended his arm for the last time in their
behalf, and that now that frail support had been withdrawn.

"At last the fatal moment came, and, pronouncing clearly with his
trembling lips the words 'Todo mortal!', his pure and loving soul rose
to its Creator."[2] He died December 22, 1870.

[Footnote 1: This fact was learned from a conversation with Don
Francisco de Laiglesia, who, with Correa, Ferrán and others, was
present when the poet breathed his last.]

[Footnote 2: Correa, _op. cit._, p. xx.]
Thanks to the initiative of Ramón Rodriguez Correa and to the aid of other
friends, most of the scattered tales, legends, and poems of Becquer were
gathered together and published by Fernando Fe, Madrid, in three
small volumes.

In the Prologue of the first edition Correa relates the life of his friend
with sympathy and enthusiasm, and it is from this source that we glean
most of the facts that are to be known regarding the poet's life. The
appearance of these volumes caused a marked effect, and their author was
placed by popular edict in the front rank of contemporary
writers.

Becquer may be said to belong to the Romantic School, chief of whose
exponents in Spain were Zorilla and Espronceda. The choice of mediaeval
times as the scene of his stories, their style and treatment, as well as
the personal note and the freedom of his verse, all stamp him as a
Romanticist.

His legends, with one or two exceptions, are genuinely Spanish in
subject, though infused with a tender melancholy that recalls the
northern ballads rather than the writings of his native land.

His love for old ruins and monuments, his archaeological instinct,
is evident in every line.

So, too, is his artistic nature, which finds a greater field for its
expression in his prose than in his verse. Add to this a certain
bent toward the mysterious and supernatural, and we have the principal
elements that enter into the composition of these legends, whose
quaint, weird beauty not only manifests the charm that naturally
attaches to popular or folk tales, but is due especially to the way
in which they are told by one who was at once an artist and a poet.

Zorilla has been said to be Becquer's most immediate precursor, in
that he possesses the same instinct for the mysterious. But, as Blanco
Garcia observes, "Becquer is less ardent than Zorilla, and preferred
the strange traditions in which some unknown supernatural power hovers
to those others, more probable, in which only human passions with their
caprices and outbursts are involved."[1] Correa says of his legends
that they "can compete with the tales of Hoffmann and of Grimm,
and with the ballads of Rückert and of Uhland," and that "however
fantastic they may be, however imaginary they may appear, they
always contain such a foundation of truth, a thought so real, that
in the midst of their extraordinary form and contexture a fact
appears spontaneously to have taken place or to be able to take
place without the slightest difficulty, if you but analyze the
situation of the personages, the time in which they live, or the
circumstances that surround them

."[2]
[Footnote 1: _La Literatura Espanola en el Siglo XIX_, Madrid, 1891,
vol. II, p. 275.]

[Footnote 2: Correa, _op. cit._, p. xxx.]
The subtle charm of such legends as _Los Ojos Verdes_, _La Corza
Blanca_, _Maese Pérez el Organista_, etc., full of local color
as they are, and of an atmosphere of old Spain, is hard to describe, but
none the less real. One is caught by the music of the prose at the
first lines, enraptured by the weird charm of the story, and held in
breathless interest until the last words die away. If Becquer's phrase
is not always classic, it is, on the other hand, vigorous and picturesque;
and when one reflects upon the difficult conditions under which his
writings were produced, in the confusion of the printing-office,
or hurriedly in a miserable attic to procure food for the immediate
necessities of his little family, and when one likewise recalls the
fact that they were published in final book form only after the
author's death, and without retouching, the wonder grows that they
are written in a style so pleasing and so free from harshness.

Becquer's prose is doubtless at its best in his letters entitled _Desde
mi Celda_, written, as has been said, from the monastery of Veruela,
in 1864. Read his description of his journey to the ancient Aragonese
town of Tarazona, picturesquely situated on the River Queiles, of
his mule trip over the glorious Moncayo, of the peacefulness and quiet of
the old fortified monastery of Veruela, and you will surely feel
inspired to follow him in his wanderings.

Writing of his life in the seclusion of Veruela, Becquer says:
"Every afternoon, as the sun is about to set, I sally forth upon
the road that runs in front of the monastery doors to wait for the
postman, who brings me the Madrid newspapers.

In front of the archway that gives entrance to the first inclosure of the
abbey stretches a long avenue of poplars so tall that when their branches
are stirred by the evening breeze their summits touch and form an
immense arch of verdure.

On both sides of the road, leaping and tumbling with a pleasant murmur
among the twisted roots of the trees, run two rivulets of crystalline
transparent water, as cold as the blade of a sword and as gleaming
as its edge.

The ground, over which float the shadows of the poplars, mottled with
restless spots of light, is covered at intervals with the thickest and
finest of grass, in which grow so many white daisies that they look
at first sight like that rain of petals with which the fruit-trees
carpet the ground on warm April days. On the banks of the stream, amid
the brambles and the reeds, grow wild violets, which, though well-nigh
hidden amongst their creeping leaves, proclaim themselves afar by their
penetrating perfume.

Hardy. But I'll soon be at liberty."

"That alters the case," said Dagobert, with a sigh of regret. "I thought
to make my first parade through Paris with you this morning; but it must
be deferred in favor of your work. It is sacred: since it is that which
sustains your mother. Nevertheless, it is vexatious, devilish vexatious.
And yet no--I am unjust. See how quickly one gets habituated to and
spoilt by happiness. I growl like a true grumbler, at a walk being put
off for a few hours! I do this! I who, during eighteen years, have only
hoped to see you once more, without daring to reckon very much upon it!
Oh! I am but a silly old fool! Vive l'amour et cogni--I mean--my
Agricola!" And, to console himself, the old soldier gayly slapped his
son's shoulder.

This seemed another omen of evil to the blacksmith; for he dreaded one
moment to another lest the fears of Mother Bunch should be realized. "Now
that I have recovered myself," said Dagobert, laughing, "let us speak of
business. Know you where I find the addresses of all the notaries in
Paris?"

"I don't know; but nothing is more easy than to discover it."

"My reason is," resumed Dagobert, "that I sent from Russia by post, and
by order of the mother of the two children that I have brought here, some
important papers to a Parisian notary. As it was my duty to see this
notary immediately upon my arrival, I had written his name and his
address in a portfolio, of which however, I have been robbed during my
journey; and as I have forgotten his devil of a name, it seems to me,
that if I should see it again in the list of notaries, I might recollect
it."

Two knocks at the door of the garret made Agricola start. He
involuntarily thought of a warrant for his apprehension.

His father, who, at the sound of the knocking turned round his head, had
not perceived his emotion, and said with a loud voice: "Come in!" The
door opened. It was Gabriel. He wore a black cassock and a broad brimmed
hat.

To recognize his brother by adoption, and to throw himself into his arms,
were two movements performed at once by Agricola--as quick as
thought.--"My brother!" exclaimed Agricola.

"Agricola!" cried Gabriel.

"Gabriel!" responded the blacksmith.

"After so long an absence!" said the one.

"To behold you again!" rejoined the other.

Such were the words exchanged between the blacksmith and the missionary,
while they were locked in a close embrace.

Dagobert, moved and charmed by these fraternal endearments, felt his eyes
become moist. There was something truly touching in the affection of the
young men--in their hearts so much alike, and yet of characters and
aspects so very different--for the manly countenance of Agricola
contrasted strongly with the delicacy and angelic physiognomy of Gabriel.

"I was forewarned by my father of your arrival," said the blacksmith at
length. "I have been expecting to see you; and my happiness has been a
hundred times the greater, because I have had all the pleasures of hoping
for it."

"And my good mother?" asked Gabriel, in affectionately grasping the hands
of Dagobert. "I trust that you have found her in good health."

"Yes, my brave boy!" replied Dagobert; "and her health will have become a
hundred times better, now that we are all together. Nothing is so
healthful as joy." Then addressing himself to Agricola, who, forgetting
his fear of being arrested, regarded the missionary with an expression of
ineffable affection, Dagobert added:

"Let it be remembered, that, with the soft cheek of a young girl, Gabriel
has the courage of a lion; I have already told with what intrepidity he
saved the lives of Marshal Simon's daughters, and tried to save mine
also."

"But, Gabriel! what has happened to your forehead?" suddenly exclaimed
Agricola, who for a few seconds had been attentively examining the
missionary.

Gabriel, having thrown aside his hat on entering, was now directly
beneath the skylight of the garret apartment, the bright light through
which shone upon his sweet, pale countenance: and the round scar, which
extended from one eyebrow to the other, was therefore distinctly visible.

In the midst of the powerful and diversified emotion, and of the exciting
events which so rapidly followed the shipwreck on the rocky coast near
Cardoville House, Dagobert, during the short interview he then had with
Gabriel, had not perceived the scar which seamed the forehead of the
young missionary. Now, partaking, however, of the surprise of his son,
Dagobert said:

"Aye, indeed! how came this scar upon your brow?"

"And on his hands, too; see, dear father!" exclaimed the blacksmith, with
renewed surprise, while he seized one of the hands which the young priest
held out towards him in order to tranquillize his fears.

"Gabriel, my brave boy, explain this to us!" added Dagobert; "who has
wounded you thus?" and in his turn, taking the other hand of the
missionary, he examined the scar upon it with the eye of a judge of
wounds, and then added, "In Spain, one of my comrades was found and taken
down alive from a cross, erected at the junction of several roads, upon
which the monks had crucified, and left him to die of hunger, thirst, and
agony. Ever afterwards he bore scars upon his hands, exactly similar to
this upon your hand."

"My father is right!" exclaimed Agricola. "It is evident that your hands
have been pierced through! My poor brother!" and Agricola became
grievously agitated.

"Do not think about it," said Gabriel, reddening with the embarrassment
of modesty. "Having gone as a missionary amongst the savages of the Rocky
Mountains, they crucified me, and they had begun to scalp me, when
Providence snatched me from their hands."

"Unfortunate youth," said Dagobert; "without arms then? You had not a
sufficient escort for your protection?"

"It is not for such as me to carry arms." said Gabriel, sweetly smiling;
"and we are never accompanied by any escort."

"Well, but your companions, those who were along with you, how came it
that they did not defend you?" impetuously asked Agricola.

"I was alone, my dear brother."

"Alone!"

"Yes, alone; without even a guide."

"You alone! unarmed! in a barbarous country!" exclaimed Dagobert,
scarcely crediting a step so unmilitary, and almost distrusting his own
sense of hearing.

"It was sublime!" said the young blacksmith and poet.

"The Christian faith," said Gabriel, with mild simplicity, "cannot be
implanted by force or violence. It is only by the power of persuasion
that the gospel can be spread amongst poor savages."

"But when persuasions fail!" said Agricola.

"Why, then, dear brother, one has but to die for the belief that is in
him, pitying those who have rejected it, and who have refused the
blessings it offers to mankind."

There was a period of profound silence after the reply of Gabriel, which
was uttered with simple and touching pathos.

Dagobert was in his own nature too courageous not to comprehend a heroism
thus calm and resigned; and the old soldier, as well as his son, now
contemplated Gabriel with the most earnest feelings of mingled admiration
and respect.

Gabriel, entirely free from the affection of false modesty, seemed quite
unconscious of the emotions which he had excited in the breasts of his
two friends; and he therefore said to Dagobert, "What ails you?"

"What ails me!" exclaimed the brave old soldier, with great emotion:
"After having been for thirty years in the wars, I had imagined myself to
be about as courageous as any man. And now I find I have a master! And
that master is yourself!"

"I!" said Gabriel; "what do you mean? What have I done?"

"Thunder, don't you know that the brave wounds there" (the veteran took
with transport both of Gabriel's hands), "that these wounds are as
glorious--are more glorious than our--than all ours, as warriors by
profession!"

"Yes! yes, my father speaks truth!" exclaimed Agricola; and he added,
with enthusiasm, "Oh, for such priests! How I love them! How I venerate
them! How I am elevated by their charity, their courage, their
resignation!"

"I entreat you not to extol me thus," said Gabriel with embarrassment.

"Not extol you!" replied Dagobert. "Hanged if I shouldn't. When I have
gone into the heat of action, did I rush into it alone? Was I not under
the eyes of my commanding officer? Were not my comrades there along with
me? In default of true courage, had I not the instinct of self
preservation to spur me on, without reckoning the excitement of the
shouts and tumult of battle, the smell of the gunpowder, the flourishes
of the trumpets, the thundering of the cannon, the ardor of my horse,
which bounded beneath me as if the devil were at his tail? Need I state
that I also knew that the emperor was present, with his eye upon every
one--the emperor, who, in recompense for a hole being made in my tough
hide, would give me a bit of lace or a ribbon, as plaster for the wound.
Thanks to all these causes, I passed for game. Fair enough! But are you
not a thousand times more game than I, my brave boy; going alone,
unarmed, to confront enemies a hundred times more ferocious than those
whom we attacked--we, who fought in whole squadrons, supported by
artillery, bomb-shells, and case-shot?"

"Excellent father!" cried Agricola, "how noble of you to render to
Gabriel this justice!"

"Oh, dear brother," said Gabriel, "his kindness to me makes him magnify
what was quite natural and simple!"

"Natural!" said the veteran soldier; "yes, natural for gallants who have
hearts of the true temper: but that temper is rare."

"Oh, yes, very rare," said Agricola; "for that kind of courage is the
most admirable of all. Most bravely did you seek almost certain death,
alone, bearing the cross in hand as your only weapon, to preach charity
and Christian brotherhood. They seized you, tortured you; and you await
death and partly endure it, without complaint, without remonstrance,
without hatred, without anger, without a wish for vengeance; forgiveness
issuing from your mouth, and a smile of pity beaming upon your lips; and
this in the depths of forests, where no one could witness your
magnanimity,--none could behold you--and without other desire, after you
were rescued than modestly to conceal blessed wounds under your black
robe! My father is right, by Jove! can you still contend that you are not
as brave as he?"

"And besides, too," resumed Dagobert, "the dear boy did all that for a
thankless paymaster; for it is true, Agricola, that his wounds will never
change his humble black robe of a priest into the rich robe of a bishop!"

"I am not so disinterested as I may seem to be," said Gabriel to
Dagobert, smiling meekly. "If I am deemed worthy, a great recompense
awaits me on high."

"As to all that, my boy," said Dagobert, "I do not understand it; and I
will not argue about it. I maintain it, that my old cross of honor would
be at least as deservedly affixed to your cassock as upon my uniform."

"But these recompenses are never conferred upon humble priests like
Gabriel," said Agricola, "and if you did know, dear father, how much
virtue and valor is among those whom the highest orders in the priesthood
insolently call the inferior clergy,--the unseen merit and the blind
devotedness to be found amongst worthy, but obscure, country curates, who
are inhumanly treated and subjugated to a pitiless yoke by the lordly
lawnsleeves! Like us, those poor priests are worthy laborers in their
vocation; and for them, also, all generous hearts ought to demand
enfranchisement! Sons of common people, like ourselves, and useful as we
are, justice ought to be rendered both to them and to us. Do I say right,
Gabriel? You will not contradict it; for you have told me, that your
ambition would have been to obtain a small country curacy; because you
understand the good that you could work within it."

"My desire is still the same," said Gabriel sadly: "but unfortunately--"
and then, as if he wished to escape from a painful thought, and to change
the conversation, he, addressing himself to Dagobert, added: "Believe me:
be more just than to undervalue your own courage by exalting mine. Your
courage must be very great--very great; for, after a battle, the
spectacle of the carnage must be truly terrible to a generous and feeling
heart. We, at least, though we may be killed, do not kill."

At these words of the missionary, the soldier drew himself up erect,
looked upon Gabriel with astonishment, and said, "This is most
surprising!"

"What is?" inquired Agricola.

"What Gabriel has just told us," replied Dagobert, "brings to my mind
what I experienced in warfare on the battlefield in proportion as I
advanced in years. Listen, my children: more than once, on the night
after a general engagement, I have been mounted as a vidette,--alone,--by
night,--amid the moonlight, on the field of battle which remained in our
possession, and upon which lay the bodies of seven or eight thousand of
the slain, amongst whom were mingled the slaughtered remains of some of
my old comrades: and then this sad scene, when the profound silence has
restored me to my senses from the thirst for bloodshed and the delirious
whirling of my sword (intoxicated like the rest), I have said to myself,
'for what have these men been killed?--FOR WHAT--FOR WHAT?' But this
feeling, well understood as it was, hindered me not, on the following
morning, when the trumpets again sounded the charge, from rushing once
more to the slaughter. But the same thought always recurred when my arm
became weary with carnage; and after wiping my sabre upon the mane of my
horse, I have said to myself, 'I have killed!--killed!!--killed!!! and,
FOR WHAT!!!'"

The missionary and the blacksmith exchanged looks on hearing the old
soldier give utterance to this singular retrospection of the past.

"Alas!" said Gabriel to him, "all generous hearts feel as you did during
the solemn moments, when the intoxication of glory has subsided, and man
is left alone to the influence of the good instincts planted in his
bosom."

"And that should prove, my brave boy," rejoined Dagobert, "that you are
greatly better than I; for those noble instincts, as you call them, have
never abandoned you. * * * * But how the deuce did you escape from the
claws of the infuriated savages who had already crucified you?"

At this question of Dagobert, Gabriel started and reddened so visibly,
that the soldier said to him: "If you ought not or cannot answer my
request, let us say no more about it."

"I have nothing to conceal, either from you or from my brother," replied
the missionary with altered voice. "Only; it will be difficult for me to
make you comprehend what I cannot comprehend myself."

"How is that?" asked Agricola with surprise.

"Surely," said Gabriel, reddening more deeply, "I must have been deceived
by a fallacy of my senses, during that abstracted moment in which I
awaited death with resignation. My enfeebled mind, in spite of me, must
have been cheated by an illusion; or that, which to the present hour has
remained inexplicable, would have been more slowly developed; and I
should have known with greater certainty that it was the strange woman--"

Dagobert, while listening to the missionary, was perfectly amazed; for he
also had vainly tried to account for the unexpected succor which had
freed him and the two orphans from the prison at Leipsic.

"Of what woman do you speak?" asked Agricola.

"Of her who saved me," was the reply.

"A woman saved you from the hands of the savages?" said Dagobert.

"Yes," replied Gabriel, though absorbed in his reflections, "a woman,
young and beautiful!"

"And who was this woman?" asked Agricola.

"I know not. When I asked her, she replied, 'I am the sister of the
distressed!'"

"And whence came she? Whither went she?" asked Dagobert, singularly
interested.

"'I go wheresoever there is suffering,' she replied," answered
the missionary; "and she departed, going towards the north of
America--towards those desolate regions in which there is eternal snow,
where the nights are without end."

"As in Siberia," said Dagobert, who had become very thoughtful.

"But," resumed Agricola, addressing himself to Gabriel, who seemed also
to have become more and more absorbed, "in what manner or by what means
did this woman come to your assistance?"

The missionary was about to reply to the last question, when there was
heard a gentle tap at the door of the garret apartment, which renewed the
fears that Agricola had forgotten since the arrival of his adopted
brother. "Agricola," said a sweet voice outside the door, "I wish to
speak with you as soon as possible."

The blacksmith recognized Mother Bunch's voice, and opened the door. But
the young sempstress, instead of entering, drew back into the dark
passage, and said, with a voice of anxiety: "Agricola, it is an hour
since broad day, and you have not yet departed! How imprudent! I have
been watching below, in the street, until now, and have seen nothing
alarming; but they may come any instant to arrest you. Hasten, I conjure
you, your departure for the abode of Miss de Cardoville. Not a minute
should be lost."

"Had it not been for the arrival of Gabriel, I should have been gone. But
I could not resist the happiness of remaining some little time with him."

"Gabriel here!" said Mother Bunch, with sweet surprise; for, as has been
stated, she had been brought up with him and Agricola.

"Yes," answered Agricola, "for half an hour he has been with my father
and me."

"What happiness I shall have in seeing him again," said the sewing-girl.
"He doubtless came upstairs while I had gone for a brief space to your
mother, to ask if I could be useful in any way on account of the young
ladies; but they have been so fatigued that they still sleep. Your mother
has requested me to give you this letter for your father. She has just
received it."

"Thanks."

"Well," resumed Mother Bunch, "now that you have seen Gabriel, do not
delay long. Think what a blow it would be for your father, if they came
to arrest you in his very presence mon Dieu!"

"You are right," said Agricola; "it is indispensable that I should
depart--while near Gabriel in spite of my anxiety, my fears were
forgotten."

"Go quickly, then; and if Miss de Cardoville should grant this favor,
perhaps in a couple of hours you will return, quite at ease both as to
yourself and us."

"True! a very few minutes more; and I'll come down."

"I return to watch at the door. If I perceive anything. I'll come up
again to apprise you. But pray, do not delay."

"Be easy, good sister." Mother Bunch hurriedly descended the staircase,
to resume her watch at the street door, and Agricola re-entered his
garret. "Dear father," he said to Dagobert, "my mother has just received
this letter, and she requests you to read it."

"Very well; read it for me, my boy." And Agricola read as follows:

"MADAME.--I understand that your husband has been charged by General Simon
with an affair of very great importance. Will you, as soon as your
husband arrives in Paris, request him to come to my office at Chartres
without a moment's delay. I am instructed to deliver to himself, and to
no other person, some documents indispensable to the interests of General
Simon.

             "DURAND, Notary at Chartres."

Dagobert looked at his son with astonishment, and said to him, "Who can
have told this gentleman already of my arrival in Paris?"

"Perhaps, father," said Agricola, "this is the notary to whom you
transmitted some papers, and whose address you have lost."

"But his name was not Durand; and I distinctly recollect that his address
was Paris, not Chartres. And, besides," said the soldier, thoughtfully,
"if he has some important documents, why didn't he transmit them to me?"

"It seems to me that you ought not to neglect going to him as soon as
possible," said Agricola, secretly rejoiced that this circumstance would
withdraw his father for about two days, during which time his
(Agricola's) fate would be decided in one way or other.

"Your counsel is good," replied his father.

"This thwarts your intentions in some degree?" asked Gabriel.

"Rather, my lads; for I counted upon passing the day with you. However,
'duty before everything.' Having come happily from Siberia to Paris, it
is not for me to fear a journey from Paris to Chartres, when it is
required on an affair of importance. In twice twenty-four hours I shall
be back again. But the deuce take me if I expected to leave Paris for
Chartres to-day. Luckily, I leave Rose and Blanche with my good wife; and
Gabriel, their angel, as they call him, will be here to keep them
company."

"That is, unfortunately, impossible," said the missionary, sadly. "This
visit on my arrival is also a farewell visit."

"A farewell visit! Now!" exclaimed Dagobert and Agricola both at once.

"Alas, yes!"

"You start already on another mission?" said Dagobert; "surely it is not
possible?"

"I must answer no question upon this subject," said Gabriel, suppressing
a sigh: "but from now, for some time, I cannot, and ought not, come again
into this house."

"Why, my brave boy," resumed Dagobert with emotion, "there is something
in thy conduct that savors of constraint, of oppression. I know something
of men. He you call superior, whom I saw for some moments after the
shipwreck at Cardoville Castle, has a bad look; and I am sorry to see you
enrolled under such a commander."

"At Cardoville Castle!" exclaimed Agricola, struck with the identity of
the name with that of the young lady of the golden hair; "was it in
Cardoville Castle that you were received after your shipwreck?"

"Yes, my boy; why, does that astonish you?" asked Dagobert.

"Nothing father; but were the owners of the castle there at the time?"

"No; for the steward, when I applied to him for an opportunity to return
thanks for the kind hospitality we had experienced, informed me that the
person to whom the house belonged was resident at Paris."

"What a singular coincidence," thought Agricola, "if the young lady
should be the proprietor of the dwelling which bears her name!"

This reflection having recalled to Agricola the promise which he had made
to Mother Bunch, he said to Dagobert; "Dear father, excuse me; but it is
already late, and I ought to be in the workshop by eight o'clock."

"That is too true, my boy. Let us go. This party is adjourned till my
return from Chartres. Embrace me once more, and take care of yourself."

Since Dagobert had spoken of constraint and oppression to Gabriel, the
latter had continued pensive. At the moment when Agricola approached him
to shake hands, and to bid him adieu, the missionary said to him
solemnly, with a grave voice, and in a tone of decision that astonished
both the blacksmith and the soldier: "My dear brother, one word more. I
have come here to say to you also that within a few days hence I shall
have need of you; and of you also, my father (permit me so to call you),"
added Gabriel, with emotion, as he turned round to Dagobert.

"How! you speak thus to us!" exclaimed Agricola; "what is the matter?"

"Yes," replied Gabriel, "I need the advice and assistance of two men of
honor--of two men of resolution;--and I can reckon upon you two--can I
not? At any hour, on whatever day it may be, upon a word from me, will
you come?"

Dagobert and his son regarded each other in silence, astonished at the
accents of the missionary. Agricola felt an oppression of the heart. If
he should be a prisoner when his brother should require his assistance,
what could be done?

"At every hour, by night or by day, my brave boy, you may depend upon
us," said Dagobert, as much surprised as interested--"You have a father
and a brother; make your own use of them."

"Thanks, thanks," said Gabriel, "you set me quite at ease."

"I'll tell you what," resumed the soldier, "were it not for your priest's
robe, I should believe, from the manner in which you have spoken to us,
that you are about to be engaged in a duel--in a mortal combat."

"In a duel?" said Gabriel, starting. "Yes; it may be a duel--uncommon and
fearful--at which it is necessary to have two witnesses such as you--A
FATHER and A BROTHER!"

Some instants afterwards, Agricola, whose anxiety was continually
increasing, set off in haste for the dwelling of Mademoiselle de
Cardoville, to which we now beg leave to take the reader.


CHAPTER XXXIII.

THE PAVILION.

Dizier House was one of the largest and handsomest in the Rue Babylone,
in Paris. Nothing could be more severe, more imposing, or more depressing
than the aspect of this old mansion. Several immense windows, filled with
small squares of glass, painted a grayish white, increased the sombre
effect of the massive layers of huge stones, blackened by time, of which
the fabric was composed.

This dwelling bore a resemblance to all the others that had been erected
in the same quarter towards the middle of the last century. It was
surmounted in front by a pediment; it had an elevated ground floor, which
was reached from the outside by a circular flight of broad stone steps.
One of the fronts looked on an immense court-yard, on each side of which
an arcade led to the vast interior departments. The other front
overlooked the garden, or rather park, of twelve or fifteen roods; and,
on this side, wings, approaching the principal part of the structure,
formed a couple of lateral galleries. Like nearly all the other great
habitations of this quarter, there might be seen at the extremity of the
garden, what the owners and occupiers of each called the lesser mansion.

This extension was a Pompadour summer-house, built in the form of a
rotunda, with the charming though incorrect taste of the era of its
erection. It presented, in every part where it was possible for the
stones to be cut, a profusion of endives, knots of ribbons, garlands of
flowers, and chubby cupids. This pavilion, inhabited by Adrienne de
Cardoville was composed of a ground floor, which was reached by a
peristyle of several steps. A small vestibule led to a circular hall,
lighted from the roof. Four principal apartments met here; and ranges of
smaller rooms, concealed in the upper story, served for minor purposes.

These dependencies of great habitations are in our days disused, or
transformed into irregular conservatories; but by an uncommon exception,
the black exterior of the pavilion had been scraped and renewed, and the
entire structure repaired. The white stones of which it was built
glistened like Parian marble; and its renovated, coquettish aspect
contrasted singularly with the gloomy mansion seen at the other extremity
of an extensive lawn, on which were planted here and there gigantic
clumps of verdant trees.

The following scene occurred at this residence on the morning following
that of the arrival of Dagobert, with the daughters of Marshal Simon, in
the Rue Brise-Miche. The hour of eight had sounded from the steeple of a
neighboring church; a brilliant winter sun arose to brighten a pure blue
sky behind the tall leafless trees, which in summer formed a dome of
verdure over the summer-house. The door in the vestibule opened, and the
rays of the morning sun beamed upon a charming creature, or rather upon
two charming creatures, for the second one, though filling a modest place
in the scale of creation, was not less distinguished by beauty of its
own, which was very striking. In plain terms two individuals, one of them
a young girl, and the other a tiny English dog, of great beauty, of that
breed of spaniels called King Charles's, made their appearance under the
peristyle of the rotunda. The name of the young girl was Georgette; the
beautiful little spaniel's was Frisky. Georgette was in her eighteenth
year. Never had Florine or Manton, never had a lady's maid of Marivaux, a
more mischievous face, an eye more quick, a smile more roguish, teeth
more white, cheeks more roseate, figure more coquettish, feet smaller, or
form smarter, attractive, and enticing. Though it was yet very early,
Georgette was carefully and tastefully dressed. A tiny Valenciennes cap,
with flaps and flap-band, of half peasant fashion, decked with
rose-colored ribbons, and stuck a little backward upon bands of beautiful
fair hair, surrounded her fresh and piquant face; a robe of gray
levantine, and a cambric neck-kerchief, fastened to her bosom by a large
tuft of rose-colored ribbons, displayed her figure elegantly rounded; a
hollands apron, white as snow, trimmed below by three large hems,
surmounted by a Vandyke-row, encircled her waist, which was as round and
flexible as a reed; her short, plain sleeves, edged with bone lace,
allowed her plump arms to be seen, which her long Swedish gloves,
reaching to the elbow, defended from the rigor of the cold. When
Georgette raised the bottom of her dress, in order to descend more
quickly the steps, she exhibited to Frisky's indifferent eyes a beautiful
ankle, and the beginning of the plump calf of a fine leg, encased in
white silk, and a charming little foot, in a laced half-boot of Turkish
satin. When a blonde like Georgette sets herself to be ensnaring; when
vivid glances sparkle from her eyes of bright yet tender blue; when a
joyous excitement suffuses her transparent skin, she is more resistless
for the conquest of everything before her than a brunette.

This bewitching and nimble lady's-maid, who on the previous evening had
introduced Agricola to the pavilion, was first waiting woman to the
Honorable Miss Adrienne de Cardoville, niece of the Princess Saint
Dizier.

Frisky, so happily found and brought back by the blacksmith, uttered weak
but joyful barks, and bounded, ran, and frolicked upon the turf. She was
not much bigger than one's fist; her curled hair, of lustrous black,
shone like ebony, under the broad, red satin ribbon which encircled her
neck; her paws, fringed with long silken fur, were of a bright and fiery
tan, as well as her muzzle, the nose of which was inconceivably pug; her
large eyes were full of intelligence; and her curly ears so long that
they trailed upon the ground. Georgette seemed to be as brisk and
petulant as Frisky, and shared her sportiveness,--now scampering after
the happy little spaniel, and now retreating, in order to be pursued upon
the greensward in her turn. All at once, at the sight of a second person,
who advanced with deliberate gravity, Georgette and Frisky were suddenly
stopped in their diversion. The little King Charles, some steps in
advance of Georgette, faithful to her name, and bold as the devil, held
herself firmly upon her nervous paws, and fiercely awaited the coming up
of the enemy, displaying at the same time rows of little teeth, which,
though of ivory, were none the less pointed and sharp. The enemy
consisted of a woman of mature age, accompanied by a very fat dog, of the
color of coffee and milk; his tail was twisted like a corkscrew; he was
pot-bellied; his skin was sleek; his neck was turned little to one side;
he walked with his legs inordinately spread out, and stepped with the air
of a doctor. His black muzzle, quarrelsome and scowling showed two fangs
sallying forth, and turning up from the left side of the mouth, and
altogether he had an expression singularly forbidding and vindictive.
This disagreeable animal, a perfect type of what might be called a
"church-goer's pug," answered to the name of "My Lord." His mistress, a
woman of about fifty years of age, corpulent and of middle size, was
dressed in a costume as gloomy and severe as that of Georgette was gay
and showy. It consisted of a brown robe, a black silk mantle, and a hat
of the same dye. The features of this woman might have been agreeable in
her youth; and her florid cheeks, her correct eyebrows, her black eyes,
which were still very lively, scarcely accorded with the peevish and
austere physiognomy which she tried to assume. This matron, of slow and
discreet gait, was Madame Augustine Grivois, first woman to the Princess
Saint-Dizier. Not only did the age, the face, and the dress of these two
women present a striking contrast; but the contrast extended itself even
to the animals which attended them. There were similar differences
between Frisky and My Lord, as between Georgette and Mrs. Grivois. When
the latter perceived the little King Charles, she could not restrain a
movement of surprise and repugnance, which escaped not the notice of the
young lady's maid. Frisky, who had not retreated one inch, since the
apparition of My Lord, regarded him valiantly, with a look of defiance,
and even advanced towards him with an air so decidedly hostile, that the
cur, though thrice as big as the little King Charles, uttered a howl of
distress and terror, and sought refuge behind Mrs. Grivois, who bitterly
said to Georgette:

"It seems to me, miss, that you might dispense with exciting your dog
thus, and setting him upon mine."

"It was doubtless for the purpose of protecting this respectable but ugly
animal from similar alarms, that you tried to make us lose Frisky
yesterday, by driving her into the street through the little garden gate.
But fortunately an honest young man found Frisky in the Rue de Babylone,
and brought her back to my mistress. However," continued Georgette, "to
what, madame, do I owe the pleasure of seeing you this morning?"

"I am commanded by the Princess," replied Mrs. Grivois, unable to conceal
a smile of triumphant satisfaction, "immediately to see Miss Adrienne. It
regards a very important affair, which I am to communicate only to
herself."

At these words Georgette became purple, and could not repress a slight
start of disquietude, which happily escaped Grivois, who was occupied
with watching over the safety of her pet, whom Frisky continued to snarl
at with a very menacing aspect; and Georgette, having quickly overcome
her temporary emotion, firmly answered: "Miss Adrienne went to rest very
late last night. She has forbidden me to enter her apartment before mid
day."

"That is very possible: but as the present business is to obey an order
of the Princess her aunt, you will do well if you please, miss, to awaken
your mistress immediately."

"My mistress is subject to no one's orders in her own house; and I will
not disturb her till mid-day, in pursuance of her commands," replied
Georgette.

"Then I shall go myself," said Mrs. Grivois.

"Florine and Hebe will not admit you. Indeed, here is the key of the
saloon; and through the saloon only can the apartments of Miss Adrienne
be entered."

"How! do you dare refuse me permission to execute the orders of the
Princess?"

"Yes; I dare to commit the great crime of being unwilling to awaken my
mistress!"

"Ah! such are the results of the blind affection of the Princess for her
niece," said the matron, with affected grief: "Miss Adrienne no longer
respects her aunt's orders; and she is surrounded by young hare-brained
persons, who, from the first dawn of morning, dress themselves out as if
for ball-going."

"Oh, madame! how came you to revile dress, who were formerly the greatest
coquette and the most frisky and fluttering of all the Princess's women.
At least, that is what is still spoken of you in the hotel, as having
been handed down from time out of mind, by generation to generation, even
unto ours!"

"How! from generation to generation! do you mean to insinuate that I am a
hundred years old, Miss Impertinence?"

"I speak of the generations of waiting-women; for, except you, it is the
utmost if they remain two or three years in the Princess's house, who has
too many tempers for the poor girls!"

"I forbid you to speak thus of my mistress, whose name some people ought
not to pronounce but on their knees."

"However," said Georgette, "if one wished to speak ill of--"

"Do you dare!"

"No longer ago than last night, at half past eleven o'clock--"

"Last night?"

"A four-wheeler," continued Georgette, "stopped at a few paces from the
house. A mysterious personage, wrapped up in a cloak, alighted from it,
and directly tapped, not at the door, but on the glass of the porter's
lodge window; and at one o'clock in the morning, the cab was still
stationed in the street, waiting for the mysterious personage in the
cloak, who, doubtless, during all that time, was, as you say, pronouncing
the name of her Highness the Princess on his knees."

Whether Mrs. Grivois had not been instructed as to a visit made to the
Princess Saint-Dizier by Rodin (for he was the man in the cloak), in the
middle of the night, after he had become certain of the arrival in Paris
of General Simon's daughters; or whether Mrs. Grivois thought it
necessary to appear ignorant of the visit, she replied, shrugging her
shoulders disdainfully: "I know not what you, mean, madame. I have not
come here to listen to your impertinent stuff. Once again I ask you--will
you, or will you not, introduce me to the presence of Miss Adrienne?"

"I repeat, madame, that my mistress sleeps, and that she has forbidden me
to enter her bed-chamber before mid-day."

This conversation took place at some distance from the summer-house, at a
spot from which the peristyle could be seen at the end of a grand avenue,
terminating in trees arranged in form of a V. All at once Mrs. Grivois,
extending her hand in that direction, exclaimed: "Great heavens! is it
possible? what have I seen?"

"What have you seen?" said Georgette, turning round.

"What have I seen?" repeated Mrs. Grivois, with amazement.

"Yes: what was it?"

"Miss Adrienne."

"Where?" asked Georgette.

"I saw her run up the porch steps. I perfectly recognized her by her
gait, by her hat, and by her mantle. To come home at eight o'clock in the
morning!" cried Mrs. Grivois: "it is perfectly incredible!"

"See my lady? Why, you came to see her!" and Georgette burst out into
fits of laughter: and then said: "Oh! I understand! you wish to out-do my
story of the four-wheeler last night! It is very neat of you!"

"I repeat," said Mrs. Grivois, "that I have this moment seen--"

"Oh! adone, Mrs. Grivois: if you speak seriously, you are mad!"

"I am mad, am I? because I have a pair of good eyes! The little gate that
open's on the street lets one into the quincunx near the pavilion. It is
by that door, doubtless, that mademoiselle has re-entered. Oh, what
shameful conduct! what will the Princess say to it! Ah! her presentiments
have not yet been mistaken. See to what her weak indulgence of her
niece's caprices has led her! It is monstrous!--so monstrous, that,
though I have seen her with my own eyes, still I can scarcely believe
it!"

"Since you've gone so far, ma'am, I now insist upon conducting you into
the apartment of my lady, in order that you may convince yourself, by
your own senses, that your eyes have deceived you!"

"Oh, you are very cunning, my dear, but not more cunning than I! You
propose my going now! Yes, yes, I believe you: you are certain that by
this time I shall find her in her apartment!"

"But, madame, I assure you--"

"All that I can say to you is this: that neither you, nor Florine, nor
Hebe, shall remain here twenty-four hours. The Princess will put an end
to this horrible scandal; for I shall immediately inform her of what has
passed. To go out in the night! Re-enter at eight o'clock in the morning!
Why, I am all in a whirl! Certainly, if I had not seen it with my own
eyes, I could not have believed it! Still, it is only what was to be
expected. It will astonish nobody. Assuredly not! All those to whom I am
going to relate it, will say, I am quite sure, that it is not at all
astonishing! Oh! what a blow to our respectable Princess! What a blow for
her!"

Mrs. Grivois returned precipitately towards the mansion, followed by her
fat pug, who appeared to be as embittered as herself.

Georgette, active and light, ran, on her part, towards the pavilion, in
order to apprise Miss de Cardoville that Mrs. Grivois had seen her, or
fancied she had seen her, furtively enter by the little garden gate.


CHAPTER XXXIV.

ADRIENNE AT HER TOILET.

About an hour had elapsed since Mrs. Grivois had seen or pretended to
have seen Adrienne de Cardoville re-enter in the morning the extension of
Saint-Dizier House.

It is for the purpose, not of excusing, but of rendering intelligible,
the following scenes, that it is deemed necessary to bring out into the
light some striking peculiarities in the truly original character of Miss
de Cardoville.

His party and his friends did their best to persuade him to remain firm,
and for a time it seemed as though nothing could shake his resolution.
At last the unwelcome news was given out that the British ambassador
in Constantinople had received instructions from Lord Salisbury to
accept the peace proposals of the Turks, and allow them to remain in
Thessaly until the debt should be paid off.

Lord Salisbury's reason for yielding is rumored to be that the five
ambassadors, representing France, Germany, Russia, Austria, and Italy,
were ready to sign the first treaty without waiting for the consent of
England.

This is said to have alarmed the British Prime Minister, and made him fear
that the other Powers would combine against England if he persisted
in his determination, and so he weakly deserted Greece; and the Turks
will remain in Thessaly until the war indemnity is paid.

It is, however, stated that the British, French, and Russian ambassadors
have all sent word to their governments that it is quite impossible
for Greece to pay the sum demanded by Turkey.

Steps are therefore being taken to induce the Sultan to accept a smaller
sum, but the chances are that his success in securing Thessaly will
make Abdul Hamid refuse to take a piaster less. He will be sure to
think that if he only holds out long enough he will get everything he
asks for.

In Athens the people are not at all willing to accept the proposed
treaty.

At a mass-meeting the other night a resolution was prepared and sent
to the King, asking him to reject the treaty and resume the war.

The general feeling throughout Greece is, however, against a
continuance of war.

* * * * *
The news from India is of a gloomy character.
Fresh revolts have occurred on the frontier of Afghanistan. A tribe,
the Afridis, has joined the rebellion against the British rule.
The disaffection of this tribe, which numbers about twenty thousand
first-class hill-fighters, is most serious to the British cause.In a word, Adrienne was the most complete, the most ideal personification
of SENSUALITY--not of vulgar, ignorant, non intelligent, mistaken
sensuousness which is always deceit ful and corrupted by habit or by the
necessity for gross and ill-regulated enjoyments, but that exquisite
sensuality which is to the senses what intelligence is to the soul.

The independence of this young lady's character was extreme. Certain
humiliating subjections imposed upon her success by its social position,
above all things were revolting to her, and she had the hardihood to
resolve to withdraw herself from them. She was a woman, the most womanish
that it is possible to imagine--a woman in her timidity as well as in her
audacity--a woman in her hatred of the brutal despotism of men, as well
as in her intense disposition to self-devoting herself, madly even and
blindly, to him who should merit such a devotion from her--a woman whose
piquant wit was occasionally paradoxical--a superior woman, in brief, who
entertained a well-grounded disdain and contempt for certain men either
placed very high or greatly adulated, whom she had from time to time met
in the drawing-room of her aunt, the Princess Saint-Dizier, when she
resided with her.

These indispensable explanations being given, we usher, the reader into
the presence of Adrienne de Cardoville, who had just come out of the
bath.

It would require all the brilliant colorings of the Venetian school to
represent that charming scene, which would rather seem to have occurred
in the sixteenth century, in some palace of Florence or Bologna, than in
Paris, in the Faubourg Saint-Germain, in the month of February, 1832.

Adrienne's dressing-room was a kind of miniature temple seemingly one
erected and dedicated to the worship of beauty, in gratitude to the Maker
who has lavished so many charms upon woman, not to be neglected by her,
or to cover and conceal them with ashes, or to destroy them by the
contact of her person with sordid and harsh haircloth; but in order that,
with fervent gratitude for the divine gifts wherewith she is endowed, she
may enhance her charms with all the illusions of grace and all the
splendors of apparel, so as to glorify the divine work of her own
perfections in the eyes of all. Daylight was admitted into this
semicircular apartment, through one of those double windows, contrived
for the preservation of heat, so happily imported from Germany. The walls
of the pavilion being constructed of stone of great thickness, the depth
of the aperture for the windows was therefore very great. That of
Adrienne's dressing-room was closed on the outside by a sash containing a
single large pane of plate glass, and within, by another large plate of
ground glass. In the interval or space of about three feet left between
these two transparent enclosures, there was a case or box filled with
furze mould, whence sprung forth climbing plants, which, directed round
the ground glass, formed a rich garland of leaves and flowers. A garnet
damask tapestry, rich with harmoniously blended arabesques, in the purest
style, covered the walls and a thick carpet of similar color was extended
over the floor: and this sombre ground, presented by the floor and walls,
marvellously enhanced the effects of all the harmonious ornaments and
decorations of the chamber.

Under the window, opposite to the south, was placed Adrienne's dressing
case, a real masterpiece of the skill of the goldsmith. Upon a large
tablet of lapis-lazuli, there were scattered boxes of jewels, their lids
precisely enamelled; several scent boxes of rock crystal, and other
implements and utensils of the toilet, some formed of shells, some of
mother-of-pearl, and others of ivory, covered with ornaments of gold in
extraordinary taste. Two large figures, modelled in silver with antique
purity; supported an oval swing mirror, which had for its rim, in place
of a frame curiously carved, a fresh garland of natural flowers, renewed
every day like a nosegay for a ball.

Two enormous Japanese vases, of purple and gold, three feet each in
diameter, were placed upon the carpet on each side of the toilet, and,
filled with camellias, ibiscures, and cape jasmine, in full flower formed
a sort of grove, diversified with the most brilliant colors. At the
farther end of the apartment, opposite the casement, was to be seen,
surrounded by another mass of flowers, a reduction in white marble of the
enchanting group of Daphnis and Chloe, the more chaste ideal of graceful
modesty and youthful beauty.

Two golden lamps burned perfumes upon the same pedestal which supported
those two charming figures. A coffer of frosted silver, set off with
small figures in jewelry and precious stones, and supported on four feet
of gilt bronze, contained various necessaries for the toilette; two
frosted Psyches, decorated with diamond ear-rings; some excellent
drawings from Raphael and Titian, painted by Adrienne herself, consisting
of portraits of both men and women of exquisite beauty; several consoles
of oriental jasper, supporting ewers and basins of silver and of silver
gilt, richly chased and filled with scented waters; a voluptuously rich
divan, some seats, and an illuminated gilt fable, completed the furniture
of this chamber, the atmosphere of which was impregnated with the
sweetest perfumes.

Adrienne, whom her attendants had just helped from the bath, was seated
before her toilette, her three women surrounding her. By a caprice, or
rather by a necessary and logical impulse of her soul, filled as it was
with the love of beauty and of harmony in all things, Adrienne had wished
the young women who served her to be very pretty, and be dressed with
attention and with a charming originality. We have already seen
Georgette, a piquante blonde, attired in her attractive costume of an
intriguing lady's maid of Marivaux; and her two companions were quite
equal to her both in gracefulness and gentility.

One of them, named Florine, a tall, delicately slender, and elegant girl,
with the air and form of Diana Huntress, was of a pale brown complexion.
Her thick black hair was turned up behind, where it was fastened with a
long golden pin. Like the two other girls, her arms were uncovered to
facilitate the performance of her duties about and upon the person of her
charming mistress. She wore a dress of that gay green so familiar to the
Venetian painters. Her petticoat was very ample. Her slender waist curved
in from under the plaits of a tucker of white cambric, plaited in five
minute folds, and fastened by five gold buttons. The third of Adrienne's
women had a face so fresh and ingenuous, a waist so delicate, so
pleasing, and so finished, that her mistress had given her the name of
Hebe. Her dress of a delicate rose color, and Grecian cut, displayed her
charming neck, and her beautiful arms up to the very shoulders. The
physiognomy of these three young women was laughter loving and happy. On
their features there was no expression of that bitter sullenness, willing
and hated obedience, or offensive familiarity, or base and degraded
deference, which are the ordinary results of a state of servitude. The
strength of the Cromwellian party lay in the fact that it was composed
almost entirely of the laboring and the middle classes, the bone
and sinew of the land. Then for the first time in English history the
world saw the plebeian pitted against the aristocrat, and the strife which
ensued involved not so much the question of kingly prerogative and
the 'divine right' of monarchs, as the pent-up feuds of ages--feuds
arising from the most flagrant injustice and wrong on the one hand and
forced submission on the other.

This of itself was enough to lend to the contest a character of ferocity
which well might make civilization turn pale. But even this bitterness
was slight compared with that engendered by the _religious_ element
of the war. The history of the world has shown no wars so cruel and bloody,
no crimes so heinous, no hatred so deep seated and abiding as those
produced by religious differences. Strange that it should be so! Strange
that the sacred cause whose province is to develop the purest and holiest
emotions of the soul, should call forth and develop the fiercest,
the darkest, and most unrelenting passions of the human heart!
Yet so it proved in this instance. Their fierce, fanatical enthusiasm was
a powerful element of strength to the Roundheads, which was lacking to
the effeminate, corrupt, and godless Cavaliers. With such an auxiliary the
struggle could not be doubtful; religious fanaticism carried the
day.

In the years succeeding the Restoration, the evil effects of this religious
antagonism were modified by mutual concessions, and in time almost
disappeared under the impartial administration of a government founded
upon a firmer basis than ever before, and more consonant to Saxon
ideas of justice and social equality. But with us of America there was
no such modification, for from the midst of this time of war and
tumult, of savage hatred and unrelenting persecution, American society
sprang. Our country was settled by representatives of these two extremes
of English society, and in their choice of abode the hand of Providence
is distinctly seen laying the foundations of our struggle of to-day,
which is to prove the refining fire, the purification and regeneration of
our race. Had the Cavaliers landed upon the shores of New England, the
bracing winds of that northern clime, the rugged and intractable
nature of the soil, the constant presence of dangers from the fiercer
Indian tribes of the north, and the absolute necessity of severe and
incessant toil to support existence, would have awakened and developed
in them those manly qualities which for centuries had lain dormant in
their souls--would have imparted new strength to their frames, new vigor
and energy to their modes of thought; their indolence and effeminacy
would soon have passed away, and they would have constantly approached,
instead of departing from the true Puritan type. While, on the other hand,
the stern, rough, almost savage peculiarities of the Puritan would in like
manner have been modified by the genial influences of a southern sun and
a teeming soil, and while the severe training and rough experiences
of centuries, as well as their peculiar mental constitution, would
have prevented their entirely lapsing into the indolence and effeminacy
of the Cavalier, the whole race would nevertheless have undergone a softening
change, bringing them in their turn nearer the type of their old antagonists;
and thus each succeeding year would have seen these two extremes
of social life drawing nearer and nearer together, and at last blending
in dull, contented, plodding harmony. And the result would doubtless
have been the degeneration of the entire race, and our fate that
of the Spanish American colonies.

But this did not suit the designs of Providence. It was His purpose that
there should be here those manifold social and political conflicts which
are the life of a great nation--which are, indeed, the motive power to
the wheels of human progress. A great problem in human destiny was here
to be wrought out; a powerful nation was to arise, bearing within itself
the elements of its own continual purification. The Cavalier landed
upon the shores of Virginia, and spread his settlements southward. The
influence of climate upon both the physical and mental constitution of
man is well known. The enervating climate of the 'sunny South,' the
soil fruitful beyond a parallel, pouring forth its products almost
spontaneously, and, above all, the 'peculiar institution,' which released
the planter from the necessity of toil, all tended to aggravate
the peculiarities of mind and body which the settlers inherited
from their ancestors; and the result has been a race which, while
it presents here and there an example of brilliant, meteoric genius,
is, in the main, both intellectually and physically inferior to the
hardy denizens of the North and West.Florine, a little farther back, presented to her mistress, in a jeweled
box, a perfumed paste, with which Adrienne slightly rubbed her dazzling
hands and outspread fingers, which seemed tinted with carmine to their
extremities. Let us not forget Frisky, who, couched in the lap of her
mistress, opened her great eyes with all her might, and seemed to observe
the different operations of Adrienne's toilette with grave and reflective
attention. A silver bell being sounded from without, Florine, at a sign
from her mistress, went out and presently returned, bearing a letter upon
a small silver-gilt salve. Adrienne, while her women continued fitting on
her shoes, dressing her hair, and arranging her in her habiliments, took
the letter, which was written by the steward of the estate of Cardoville,
and read aloud as follows:

"HONORED MADAME,

"Knowing your goodness of heart and generosity, I venture to address you
with respectful confidence. During twenty years I served the late Count
and Duke of Cardoville, your noble father, I believe I may truly say,
with probity and zeal. The castle is now sold; so that I and my wife, in
our old age, behold ourselves about to be dismissed, and left destitute
of all resources: which, alas! is very hard at our time of life."

"Poor creature!" said Adrienne, interrupting herself in reading: "my
father, certainly, always prided himself upon their devotion to him, and
their probity." She continued:

"There does, indeed, remain to us a means of retaining our place here;
but it would constrain us to be guilty of baseness; and, be the
consequences to us what they may, neither I nor my wife wish to purchase
our bread at such a price."

"Good, very good," said Adrienne, "always the same--dignity even in
poverty--it is the sweet perfume of a flower, not the less sweet because
it has bloomed in a meadow."

"In order to explain to you, honored madame, the unworthy task exacted
from us, it is necessary to inform you, in the first place, that M. Rodin
came here from Paris two days ago."

"Ah! M. Rodin!" said Mademoiselle de Cardoville, interrupting herself
anew; "the secretary of Abbe d'Aigrigny! I am not at all surprised at him
being engaged in a perfidious or black intrigue. But let us see."

"M. Rodin came from Paris to announce to us that the estate was sold, and
that he was sure of being able to obtain our continuance in our place, if
we would assist him in imposing a priest not of good character upon the
new proprietress as her future confessor; and if, the better to attain
this end, we would consent to calumniate another priest, a deserving and
excellent man, much loved and much respected in the country. Even that is
not all. I was required to write twice or thrice a week to M. Rodin, and
to relate to him everything that should occur in the house. I ought to
acknowledge, honored madame, that these infamous proposals were as much
as possible disguised and dissimulated under sufficiently specious
pretexts; but, notwithstanding the aspect which with more or less skill
it was attempted to give to the affair, it was precisely and
substantially what I have now had the honor of stating to you."

"Corruption, calumny, and false and treacherous impeachment!" said
Adrienne, with disgust: "I cannot think of such wretches without
involuntarily feeling my mind shocked by dismal ideas of black, venomous,
and vile reptiles, of aspects most hideous indeed. How much more do I
love to dwell upon the consoling thought of honest Dupont and his wife!"
Adrienne proceeded:

"Believe me, we hesitated not an instant. We quit Cardoville, which has
been our home for the last twenty years;--but we shall quit it like
honest people, and with the consciousness of our integrity. And now,
honored madame, if, in the brilliant circle in which you move--you, who
are so benevolent and amiable--could find a place for us by your
recommendation, then, with endless gratitude to you, we shall escape from
a position of most cruel embarrassment."

"Surely, surely," said Adrienne, "they shall not in vain appeal to me. To
wrest excellent persons from the grip of M. Rodin, is not only a duty but
a pleasure: for it is at once a righteous and a dangerous enterprise; and
dearly do I love to brave powerful oppressors!" Adrienne again went on
reading:

"After having thus spoken to you of ourselves, honored madame, permit us
to implore your protection for other unfortunates; for it would be wicked
to think only of one's self. Three days ago, two shipwrecks took place
upon our ironbound coast. A few passengers only were saved, and were
conducted hither, where I and my wife gave them all necessary attentions.
All these passengers have departed for Paris, except one, who still
remains, his wounds having hitherto prevented him from leaving the house,
and, indeed, they will constrain him to remain for some days to come. He
is a young East Indian prince, of about twenty years of age, and he
appears to be as amiable and good as he is handsome, which is not a
little to say, though he has a tawny skin, like the rest of his
countrymen, as I understand."

"An Indian prince! twenty years of age! young, amiable, and handsome!"
exclaimed Adrienne, gayly; "this is quite delightful, and not at all of
an ordinary or vulgar nature! Oh! this Indian prince has already awakened
all my sympathies! But what can I do with this Adonis from the banks of
the Ganges, who has come to wreck himself upon the Picardy coast?"

Adrienne's three women looked at her with much astonishment, though they
were accustomed to the singular eccentricities of her character.

Georgette and Hebe even indulged in discreet and restrained smiles.
Florine, the tall and beautiful pale brown girl, also smiled like her
pretty companions; but it was after a short pause of seeming reflection,
as if she had previously been entirely engrossed in listening to and
recollecting the minutest words of her mistress, who, though powerfully
interested by the situation of the "Adonis from Ganges banks," as she had
called him, continued to read Dupont's letter:

"One of the countrymen of the Indian prince, who has also remained to
attend upon him, has given me to understand that the youthful prince has
lost in the shipwreck all he possessed, and knows not how to get to
Paris, where his speedy presence is required by some affairs of the very
greatest importance. It is not from the prince himself that I have
obtained this information: no; he appears to be too dignified and proud
to proclaim of his fate: but his countryman, more communicative,
confidentially told me what I have stated, adding, that his young
compatriot has already been subjected to great calamities, and that his
father, who was the sovereign of an Indian kingdom, has been killed by
the English, who have also dispossessed his son of his crown."

"This is very singular," said Adrienne, thoughtfully. "These
circumstances recall to my mind that my father often mentioned that one
of our relations was espoused in India by a native monarch; and that
General Simon: (whom they have created a marshal) had entered into his
service." Then interrupting herself to indulge in a smile, she added,
"Gracious! this affair will be quite odd and fantastical! Such things
happen to nobody but me; and then people say that I am the uncommon
creature! But it seems to me that it is not I, but Providence, which, in
truth, sometimes shows itself very eccentric! But let us see if worthy
Dupont gives the name of this handsome prince?"

"We trust, honored madame, that you will pardon our boldness: but we
should have thought ourselves very selfish, if, while stating to you our
own griefs, we had not also informed you that there is with us a brave
and estimable prince involved in so much distress. In fine, lady, trust
to me; I am old; and I have had much experience of men; and it was only
necessary to see the nobleness of expression and the sweetness of
countenance of this young Indian, to enable me to judge that he is worthy
of the interest which I have taken the liberty to request in his behalf.
It would be sufficient to transmit to him a small sum of money for the
purchase of some European clothing; for he has lost all his Indian
vestments in the shipwreck."

"Good heavens! European clothing!" exclaimed Adrienne, gayly. "Poor young
prince! Heaven preserve him from that; and me also! Chance has sent
hither from the heart of India, a mortal so far favored as never to have
worn the abominable European costume--those hideous habits, and frightful
hats, which render the men so ridiculous, so ugly, that in truth there is
not a single good quality to be discovered in them, nor one spark of what
can either captivate or attract! There comes to me at last a handsome
young prince from the East, where the men are clothed in silk and
cashmere. Most assuredly I'll not miss this rare and unique opportunity
of exposing myself to a very serious and formidable temptation! No, no!
not a European dress for me, though poor Dupont requests it! But the
name--the name of this dear prince! Once more, what a singular event is
this! If it should turn out to be that cousin from beyond the Ganges!
During my childhood, I have heard so much in praise of his royal father!
Oh! I shall be quite ravished to give his son the kind reception which he
merits!" And then she read on:

"If, besides this small sum, honored madame, you are so kind as to give
him, and also his companion, the means of reaching Paris, you will confer
a very great service upon this poor young prince, who is at present so
unfortunate.

"To conclude, I know enough of your delicacy to be aware that it would
perhaps be agreeable to you to afford this succor to the prince without
being known as his benefactress; in which case, I beg that you will be
pleased to command me; and you may rely upon my discretion. If, on the
contrary, you wish to address it directly to himself, his name is, as it
has been written for me by his countrymen, Prince Djalma, son of Radja
sing, King of Mundi."

"Djalma!" said Adrienne, quickly, and appearing to call up her
recollections, "Radja-sing! Yes--that is it! These are the very names
that my father so often repeated, while telling me that there was nothing
more chivalric or heroic in the world than the old king, our relation by
marriage; and the son has not derogated, it would seem, from that
character. Yes, Djalma, Radja-sing--once more, that is it--such names are
not so common," she added, smiling, "that one should either forget or
confound them with others. This Djalma is my cousin! Brave and
good--young and charming! above all, he has never worn the horrid
European dress! And destitute of every resource! This is quite ravishing!
It is too much happiness at once! Quick, quick let us improvise a pretty
fairy tale, of which the handsome and beloved prince shall be the hero!
The poor bird of the golden and azure plumage has wandered into our
dismal climate; but he will find here, at least, something to remind him
of his native region of sunshine and perfumes!" Then, addressing one of
her women, she said: "Georgette, take paper and write, my child!" The
young girl went to the gilt, illuminated table, which contained materials
for writing; and, having seated herself, she said to her mistress: "I
await orders."

Adrienne de Cardoville, whose charming countenance was radiant with the
gayety of happiness and joy, proceeded to dictate the following letter to
a meritorious old painter, who had long since taught her the arts of
drawing and designing; in which arts she excelled, as indeed she did in
all others:

"MY DEAR TITIAN, MY GOOD VERONESE, MY WORTHY RAPHAEL.

"You can render me a very great service,--and you will do it, I am sure,
with that perfect and obliging complaisance by which you are ever
distinguished.

"It is to go immediately and apply yourself to the skillful hand who
designed my last costumes of the fifteenth century. As soon as the
appointed time is passed, the mourning garments are laid aside, and
the gaieties are resumed as if nothing had happened to interrupt them.

As a rule, a court only goes into mourning for a relative of the
sovereign or a member of the reigning family."It is necessary that these vestments be at once of perfect propriety and
correctness, magnificently rich, and of the greatest elegance. You will
choose the most beautiful stuffs possible; and endeavor, above all
things, that they be, or resemble, tissues of Indian manufacture; and you
will add to them, for turbans and sashes, six splendid long cashmere
shawls, two of them white, two red, and two orange; as nothing suits
brown complexions better than those colors.

"This done (and I allow you at the utmost only two or three days), you
will depart post in my carriage for Cardoville Manor House, which you
know so well. The steward, the excellent Dupont, one of your old friends,
will there introduce you to a young Indian Prince, named Djalma; and you
will tell that most potent grave, and reverend signior, of another
quarter of the globe, that you have come on the part of an unknown
friend, who, taking upon himself the duty of a brother, sends him what is
necessary to preserve him from the odious fashions of Europe. When a
member of a royal family dies, the sovereign orders that a certain number
of days or weeks shall be observed as days of mourning.
During this time the whole court is dressed in black or the color that
is used as mourning in that special country.
Remember to make very humble excuses for the
unknown friend not sending to the prince either rich palanquins, or even,
modestly, a single elephant; for alas! palanquins are only to be seen at
the opera; and there are no elephants but those in the menagerie,--though
this must make us seem strangely barbarous in his eyes.

"As soon as you shall have decided on your departure, perform the journey
as rapidly as possible, and bring here, into my house, in the Rue de
Babylone (what predestination! that I should dwell in the street of
BABYLON,--a name which must at least accord with the ear of an
Oriental),--you will bring hither, I say, this dear prince, who is so
happy as to have been born in a country of flowers, diamonds, and sun!

"Above all, you will have the kindness, my old and worthy friend, not to
be at all astonished at this new freak, and refrain from indulging in
extravagant conjectures. Seriously, the choice which I have made of you
in this affair,--of you, whom I esteem and most sincerely honor,--is
because it is sufficient to say to you that, at the bottom of all this,
there is something more than a seeming act of folly."

In uttering these last words, the tone of Adrienne was as serious and
dignified as it had been previously comic and jocose. But she quickly
resumed, more gayly, dictating to Georgette.

"Adieu, my old friend. I am something like that commander of ancient
days, whose heroic nose and conquering chin you have so often made me
draw: I jest with the utmost freedom of spirit even in the moment of
battle: yes, for within an hour I shall give battle, a pitched battle--to
my dear pew-dwelling aunt. Fortunately, audacity and courage never failed
me, and I burn with impatience for the engagement with my austere
princess.

"A kiss, and a thousand heartfelt recollections to your excellent wife.
If I speak of her here, who is so justly respected, you will please to
understand, it is to make you quite at ease as to the consequences of
this running away with, for my sake, a charming young prince,--for it is
proper to finish well where I should have begun, by avowing to you that
he is charming indeed!

"Once more, adieu!"

Then, addressing Georgette, said she, "Have you done writing, chit?"

"Yes, madame."

"Oh, add this postscript."

"P.S.--I send you draft on sight on my banker for all expenses. Spare
nothing. You know I am quite a grand seigneur. I must use this masculine
expression, since your sex have exclusively appropriated to yourselves
(tyrants as you are) a term, so significant as it is of noble
generosity."

"Now, Georgette," said Adrienne; "bring me an envelope, and the letter,
that I may sign it." Mademoiselle de Cardoville took the pen that
Georgette presented to her, signed the letter, and enclosed in it an
order upon her banker, which was expressed thus:

"Please pay M. Norval, on demand without grace, the sum of money he may
require for expenses incurred on my account.

                  "ADRIENNE DE CARDOVILLE."

During all this scene, while Georgette wrote, Florine and Hebe had
continued to busy themselves with the duties of their mistress's
toilette, who had put off her morning gown, and was now in full dress, in
order to wait upon the princess, her aunt. From the sustained and
immovably fixed attention with which Florine had listened to Adrienne's
dictating to Georgette her letter to M. Norval, it might easily have been
seen that, as was her habit indeed, she endeavored to retain in her
memory even the slightest words of her mistress.

"Now, chit," said Adrienne to Hebe, "send this letter immediately to M.
Norval."

The same silver bell was again rung from without. Nature herself seemed
pitted against him to contest every inch of his progress. But his
nature was as stern and rough as that of the land he had come
to tame. Accustomed to move steadily on in the pursuit of some one great
purpose, to surmount every obstacle and crush every impediment,
looking neither to the right nor the left, nor even pausing to pluck
the flowrets that bloomed by the wayside, there was for him no such
word as fail.

Here the unbounded resources and exhaustless energy of body and mind found
fitting scope.

What to ordinary men would seem but hopeless, cheerless toil, was to him
but pastime.

The Puritan was just the man for New England, and New England the land
for the Puritan.

How he succeeded let all Christendom proclaim, for his works were not for
himself nor his immediate posterity, but for the whole world.

But it is not so much with the results of his labors that we have to do
as with their effects upon himself and his posterity. Here, as in the
case of the Cavalier, every circumstance of his life tended to
aggravate the hereditary peculiarities of his class.

The success of his enterprise, the crowning of those hopes which had
led him to cast off all ties of the old world, the lofty spirit
which induced him to reject all external aid, and, above all, the
crisp, free mountain air he breathed, begot in him a feeling of
independence and superiority, and, at the same time, ideas of social
equality, which have made themselves manifest to all time.

Where all were toilful laborers, and few possessed more than a
sufficiency of worldly goods to provide for the necessities of the
day, there was no room for the distinctions of rank.

Power, with them, resided in the masses; the results of their labor
were common stock; their interests were one and the same.

Hardy, had been
obliged to array himself in his working dress; he had put on a new blouse
though, and the collar of his shirt, of stout linen, very white, fell
over upon a black cravat, negligently tied; his gray trousers allowed his
well polished boots to be seen; and he held between his muscular hands a
cap of fine woolen cloth, quite new. To sum up, his blue blouse,
embroidered with red, showing off the nervous chest of the young
blacksmith, and indicating his robust shoulders, falling down in graceful
folds, put not the least constraint upon his free and easy gait, and
became him much better than either frock-coat or dress-coat would have
done. While awaiting Miss de Cardoville, Agricola mechanically examined a
magnificent silver vase, admirably graven. A small tablet, of the same
metal, fitted into a cavity of its antique stand, bore the words--"Chased
by JEAN MARIE, working chaser, 1831."

Adrienne had stepped so lightly upon the carpet of her saloon, only
separated from another apartment by the doors, that Agricola had not
perceived the young lady's entrance. He started, and turned quickly
round, upon hearing a silver and brilliant voice say to him-"That is a
beautiful vase, is it not, sir?"

"Very beautiful, madame," answered Agricola greatly embarrassed.

"You may see from it that I like what is equitable." added Miss de
Cardoville, pointing with her finger to the little silver tablet;--"an
artist puts his name upon his painting; an author publishes his on the
title-page of his book; and I contend that an artisan ought also to have
his name connected with his workmanship."

"Oh, madame, so this name?"

"Is that of the poor chaser who executed this masterpiece, at the order
of a rich goldsmith. When the latter sold me the vase, he was amazed at
my eccentricity, he would have almost said at my injustice, when, after
having made him tell me the name of the author of this production, I
ordered his name to be inscribed upon it, instead of that of the
goldsmith, which had already been affixed to the stand. In the absence of
the rich profits, let the artisan enjoy the fame of his skill. Is it not
just, sir?"

It would have been impossible for Adrienne to commence the conversation
more graciously: so that the blacksmith, already beginning to feel a
little more at ease, answered:

"Being a mechanic myself, madame, I cannot but be doubly affected by such
a proof of your sense of equity and justice."

"Since you are a mechanic, sir," resumed Adrienne, "I cannot but
felicitate myself on having so suitable a hearer. But please to be
seated."

With a gesture full of affability, she pointed to an armchair of purple
silk embroidered with gold, sitting down herself upon a tete-a-tete of
the same materials.

Seeing Agricola's hesitation, who again cast down his eyes with
embarrassment, Adrienne, to encourage him, showed him Frisky, and said to
him gayly: "This poor little animal, to which I am very much attached,
will always afford me a lively remembrance of your obliging complaisance,
sir. And this visit seems to me to be of happy augury; I know not what
good presentiment whispers to me, that perhaps I shall have the pleasure
of being useful to you in some affair."

"Madame," said Agricola, resolutely, "my name is Baudoin: a blacksmith in
the employment of M. Hardy, at Pressy, near the city. Yesterday you
offered me your purse and I refused it: to-day, I have come to request of
you perhaps ten or twenty times the sum that you had generously proposed.
I have said thus much all at once, madame, because it causes me the
greatest effort. The words blistered my lips, but now I shall be more at
ease."

"I appreciate the delicacy of your scruples, sir," said Adrienne; "but if
you knew me, you would address me without fear. How much do you require?"

"I do not know, madame," answered Agricola.

"I beg your pardon. You don't know what sum?"

"No madame; and I come to you to request, not only the sum necessary to
me, but also information as to what that sum is."

"Let us see, sir," said Adrienne, smiling, "explain this to me. In spite
of my good will, you feel that I cannot divine, all at once, what it is
that is required."

"Madame, in two words, I can state the truth. I have a food old mother,
who in her youth, broke her health by excessive labor, to enable her to
bring me up; and not only me, but a poor abandoned child whom she had
picked up. It is my turn now to maintain her; and that I have the
happiness of doing. But in order to do so, I have only my labor. If I am
dragged from my employment, my mother will be without support."

"Your mother cannot want for anything now, sir, since I interest myself
for her."

"You will interest yourself for her, madame?" said Agricola.

"Certainly," replied Adrienne.

"But you don't know her," exclaimed the blacksmith.

"Now I do; yes."

"Oh, madame!" said Agricola, with emotion, after a moment's silence. "I
understand you. But indeed you have a noble heart. Mother Bunch was
right."

"Mother Bunch?" said Adrienne, looking at Agricola with a very surprised
air; for what he said to her was an enigma.

The blacksmith, who blushed not for his friends, replied frankly.

"Madame, permit me to explain, to you. Mother Bunch is a poor and very
industrious young workwoman, with whom I have been brought up. She is
deformed, which is the reason why she is called Mother Bunch. But though,
on the one hand, she is sunk, as low as you are highly elevated on the
other, yet as regards the heart--as to delicacy--oh, lady, I am certain
that your heart is of equal worth with hers! That was at once her own
thought, after I had related to her in what manner, yesterday, you had
presented me with that beautiful flower."

"I can assure you, sir," said Adrienne, sincerely touched, "that this
comparison flatters and honors me more than anything else that you could
say to me,--a heart that remains good and delicate, in spite of cruel
misfortunes, is so rare a treasure; while it is very easy to be good,
when we have youth and beauty, and to be delicate and generous, when we
are rich. I accept, then, your comparison; but on condition that you will
quickly put me in a situation to deserve it. Pray go on, therefore."

In spite of the gracious cordiality of Miss de Cardoville, there was
always observable in her so much of that natural dignity which arises
from independence of character, so much elevation of soul and nobleness
of sentiment that Agricola, forgetting the ideal physical beauty of his
protectress, rather experienced for her the emotions of an affectionate
and kindly, though profound respect, which offered a singular and
striking contrast with the youth and gayety of the lovely being who
inspired him with this sentiment.

"If my mother alone, madame, were exposed to the rigor which I dread. I
should not be so greatly disquieted with the fear of a compulsory
suspension of my employment. Among poor people, the poor help one
another; and my mother is worshipped by all the inmates of our house, our
excellent neighbors, who would willingly succor her. But, they themselves
are far from being well off; and as they would incur privations by
assisting her, their little benefit would still be more painful to my
mother than the endurance even of misery by herself. And besides, it is
not only for my mother that my exertions are required, but for my father,
whom we have not seen for eighteen years, and who has just arrived from
Siberia, where he remained during all that time, from zealous devotion to
his former general, now Marshal Simon."

"Marshal Simon!" said Adrienne, quickly, with an expression of much
surprise.

"Do you know the marshal, madame?"

"I do not personally know him, but he married a lady of our family."

"What joy!" exclaimed the blacksmith, "then the two young ladies, his
daughters, whom my father has brought from Russia, are your relations!"

But what in the other event? The evils would be legion--countless
in number and direful in effect, not to us alone, but to the whole
American race.

First and foremost is that hydra _precedent_. We are fighting, not alone
for the stability of any particular form of government, not alone
for the sustaining of an administration, not alone for the upholding of
those God-given ideas which have made America the most favored land on
earth; but against a PRECEDENT, which involves and would destroy them
all. Precedent which is, and ever has been, all powerful to overturn
theories and systems, to topple kings from their thrones, and plunge nations
into slavery.

Of all dangers which every liberal form of government has to shun,
none is so deadly as this.

Grave and venerable judges, sages though they may be, rest upon it, and
thereon base decisions involving millions of property, and sometimes
life itself. And though, as Blackstone has declared, a bad precedent in
law is comparatively harmless, inasmuch as succeeding judges are
in no wise bound by it, but free, and in fact bound to decide the
law as it was before the evil precedent was established, and to
interpret it as it ought to be, yet in national affairs this is not
so.

No matter how bad or absurd a precedent may be, designing men will
be found in all ages and climes to avail themselves of it, honestly
or dishonestly.

Men's minds are not constructed alike, and that which seems evil to one is
to another good.

The foulest of all theories, the basest of systems, the most suicidal of
policies, will at all times find sincerely honest adherents and
supporters.

Individuality of mind admits a million of shades and degrees of right
and wrong.

Moreover, an idea once broached before the people, no matter how detestable
it may at first appear, is already halfway advanced upon the road to
execution. Thousands of criminals have been executed for crimes their
minds would never have conceived save for the suggestion of some
artful apostle of evil.

Give me but a precedent once firmly established, I care not how bad it
may be, and I shall revolutionize the world.

And what is the precedent against which we have to contend? It is that
of separation. If secession would stop where it has begun, if the result
of our defeat were to be but two great republics of the North and South
upon our continent, there would still be room for the development
of both, and we might even look forward to such a peace with some degree
of complacency, and with hope for a future of happiness and prosperity.
But it will not stop here. As surely as that an overruling Providence
directs the affairs of men, the movement will go on until there are as
many separate and hostile republics as there are States in our Union.

"Thank the stars!" said Adrienne, gayly, "this affair will arrange itself
quite easily. Henceforth, Mr. Poet, you shall draw your inspirations in
the midst of good fortune instead of adversity. Sad muse! But first of
all, bonds shall be given for you."

"Oh, madame, you have saved us!"

"To continue," said Adrienne, "the physician of our family is intimately
connected with a very important minister (understand that, as you like,"
said she, smiling, "you will not deceive yourself much). The doctor
exercises very great influence over this great statesman; for he has
always had the happiness of recommending to him, on account of his
health; the sweets and repose of private life, to the very eve of the day
on which his portfolio was taken from him. Keep yourself, then, perfectly
at ease. If the surety be insufficient, we shall be able to devise some
other means.

"Madame," said Agricola, with great emotion, "I am indebted to you for
the repose, perhaps for the life of my mother. Believe that I shall ever
be grateful."

"That is all quite simple. Now for another thing. It is proper that those
who have too much should have the right of coming to the aid of those who
have too little. Marshal Simon's daughters are members of my family, and
they will reside here with me, which will be more suitable. You will
apprise your worthy mother of this; and in the evening, besides going to
thank her for the hospitality which she has shown to my young relations,
I shall fetch them home."

At this moment Georgette, throwing open the door which separated the room
from an adjacent apartment, hurriedly entered, with an affrighted look,
exclaiming:

"Oh, madame, something extraordinary is going on in the street."

"How so? Explain yourself," said Adrienne.

"I went to conduct my dressmaker to the little garden-gate," said
Georgette; "where I saw some ill-looking men, attentively examining the
walls and windows of the little out-building belonging to the pavilion,
as if they wished to spy out some one."

"Madame," said Agricola, with chagrin, "I have not been deceived. They
are after me."

"What say you?"

"I thought I was followed, from the moment when I left the Rue St. Merry:
and now it is beyond doubt. They must have seen me enter your house; and
are on the watch to arrest me. Well, now that your interest has been
acquired for my mother,--now that I have no farther uneasiness for
Marshal Simon's daughters,--rather than hazard your exposure to anything
the least unpleasant, I run to deliver myself up."

"Beware of that sir," said Adrienne, quickly. "Liberty is too precious to
be voluntarily sacrificed. Besides, Georgette may have been mistaken. But
in any case, I entreat you not to surrender yourself. Take my advice, and
escape being arrested. That, I think, will greatly facilitate my
measures; for I am of opinion that justice evinces a great desire to keep
possession of those upon whom she has once pounced."

"Madame," said Hebe, now also entering with a terrified look, "a man
knocked at the little door, and inquired if a young man in a blue blouse
has not entered here. The petty vengeance which the disunionists of
to-day are attempting to wreak upon her will recoil upon their
own heads, and they themselves may yet be forced some day to look
to little New England as their redeemer from anarchy.

A purely commercial people, her interests are not circumscribed by her
narrow geographical limits, but are, as well as her tastes and
sympathies, cosmopolitan.

She stretches out her feelers to all parts of the earth, wherever her
wandering sons may have betaken themselves, and fastens there a little
vine or creeper whose roots are still in her own bosom.

It is a part and a necessity of her very existence, to handle and
direct catholic interests.

This, as well as her position in other respects, has made her the
arbiter of this nation and country, and you can no more shut her
out from participation in the affairs of this continent than you
can shut in the mighty river from its outlet to the ocean.

And if you cut her off, see to it that she does not become the
little Rome whose conquering arms shall reduce all the nations of
the continent to her sway.

No!

New England has planted herself too deeply in the hearts of the
American people--she has sprinkled too many of her scions among the
population of the West and South--to allow of a moment's serious thought
of cutting her off from our communion. The cry is but the party cry of
the designing and evil disposed, the traitors to our name and nation;
and with the crushing out of the rebellion and the restoration of our
nationality; it will pass away forever.

But to return to the direct results of the war. Having shown the threatened
evils of separation, our province leads us no farther, for this
comprises _all_ the evils within the scope of man's imagination.

See, then, the issue involved: in our success lie all our hopes of
future stability and prosperity; in our failure lies simply--inevitable
ruin.

With such a prospect before them--with existence itself hanging in the
balance--why are the people of the North asleep? Why will they not see
the true bearings of the war in this light, and arise in all their power
and strength, determined to crush out this infamous rebellion,
even at the cost of the last dollar and the last drop of blood!

Shall we grumble at the cost of the war? Shall we growl over the
paltry taxes which, even yet, are scarcely felt? Shall the father grieve
for the loss of half his wealth which goes to redeem his only son from
death--his 'darling from the power of the lions'? Shall the house-holder
grumble over the reward he has offered for the rescue of his wife
and little ones from the burning house? Shall the felon begrudge
the last cent of his earthly possessions that purchases his relief
from the gallows?

Better that we should all be ruined--better that the land should be
entirely depleted of its youth, and the country irretrievably in
debt, with a prospect of a future and lasting peace, than a compromise
now, with the inevitable certainty of everlasting war and tumult
and bloodshed, worse, a thousand times worse than that of the South
American States.

Shall we make a peace now, only that we may again go to war among ourselves?
Would this not be literally 'jumping out of the frying pan into the
fire'?
While Georgette conducted the blacksmith to the hiding-place, Hebe
brought her mistress a small gray beaver hat with a gray feather; for
Adrienne had to cross the park to reach the house occupied by the
Princess Saint-Dizier.

A quarter of an hour after this scene, Florine entered mysteriously the
apartment of Mrs. Grivois, the first woman of the princess.

"Well?" demanded Mrs. Grivois of the young woman.

"Here are the notes which I have taken this morning," said Florine,
putting a paper into the duenna's hand. "Happily, I have a good memory."

"At what time exactly did she return home this morning?" asked the
duenna, quickly.

"Who, madame?"

"Miss Adrienne."

"She did not go out, madame. We put her in the bath at nine o'clock."

"But before nine o'clock she came home, after having passed the night out
of her house. Eight o'clock was the time at which she returned, however."

Florine looked at Mrs. Grivois with profound astonishment, and said-"I do
not understand you, madame."

"What's that? Madame did not come home this morning at eight o'clock?
Dare you lie?"

"I was ill yesterday, and did not come down till nine this morning, in
order to assist Georgette and Hebe help our young lady from the bath. I
know nothing of what passed previously, I swear to you, madame."

"That alters the case. You must ferret out what I allude to from your
companions. They don't distrust you, and will tell you all."

"Yes, madame."

"What has your mistress done this morning since you saw her?"

"Madame dictated a letter to Georgette for M. Norval, I requested
permission to send it off, as a pretext for going out, and for writing
down all I recollected."

"Very well. And this letter?"

"Jerome had to go out, and I gave it him to put in the post-office."

"Idiot!" exclaimed Mrs. Grivois: "couldn't you bring it to me?"

"But, as madame dictated it aloud to Georgette, as is her custom, I knew
the contents of the letter; and I have written it in my notes."

"That's not the same thing. It is likely there was need to delay sending
off this letter; the princess will be very much displeased."

"I thought I did right, madame."

"I know that it is not good will that fails you. For these six months I
have been satisfied with you. But this time you have committed a very
great mistake."

"Be indulgent, madame! what I do is sufficiently painful!" The girl
stifled a sigh.

Mrs. Grivois looked fixedly at her, and said in a sardonic tone:

"Very well, my dear, do not continue it. If you have scruples, you are
free. Go your way."

"You well know that I am not free, madame," said Florine, reddening; and
with tears in her eyes she added: "I am dependent upon M. Rodin, who
placed me here."

"Wherefore these regrets, then?"

"In spite of one's self, one feels remorse. Madame is so good, and so
confiding."

"She is all perfection, certainly! But you are not here to sing her
praises. What occurred afterwards?"

"The working-man who yesterday found and brought back Frisky, came early
this morning and requested permission to speak with my young lady."

"And is this working-man still in her house?"

"I don't know. He came in when I was going out with the letter."

"You must contrive to learn what it was this workingman came about."

"Yes, madame."

"Has your mistress seemed preoccupied, uneasy, or afraid of the interview
which she is to have to-day with the princess? She conceals so little of
what she thinks, that you ought to know."

"She has been as gay as usual. She has even jested about the interview!"

"Oh! jested, has she?" said the tire-woman, muttering between her teeth,
without Florine being able to hear her: "'They laugh most who laugh
last.' In spite of her audacious and diabolical character, she would
tremble, and would pray for mercy, if she knew what awaits her this day."
Then addressing Florine, she continued-"Return, and keep yourself, I
advise you, from those fine scruples, which will be quite enough to do
you a bad turn. Do not forget!"

"I cannot forget that I belong not to myself, madame."

"Anyway, let it be so. Farewell."

Florine quitted the mansion and crossed the park to regain the summer
house, while Mrs Grivois went immediately to the Princess Saint-Dizier.


THE WANDERING JEW

By Eugene Sue


BOOK III.


XXXVI.    A Female Jesuit
XXXVII.   The Plot
XXXVIII.  Adrienne's  Enemies
XXXIX.    The Skirmish
XL.       The Revolt
XLI.      Treachery
XLII.     The Snare
XLIII.    A False Friend
XLIV.     The Minister's Cabinet
XLV.      The Visit
XLVI.     Presentiments
XLVII.    The Letter
XLVIII.   The Confessional
XLIX.     My Lord and Spoil-sport
L.        Appearances
LI.       The Convent
LII.      The Influence of a Confessor
LIII.     The Examination


CHAPTER XXXVI.

A FEMALE JESUIT.

During the preceding scenes which occurred in the Pompadour rotunda,
occupied by Miss de Cardoville, other events took place in the residence
of the Princess Saint-Dizier. The elegance and sumptuousness of the
former dwelling presented a strong contrast to the gloomy interior of the
latter, the first floor of which was inhabited by the princess, for the
plan of the ground floor rendered it only fit for giving parties; and,
for a long time past, Madame de Saint-Dizier had renounced all worldly
splendors. The gravity of her domestics, all aged and dressed in black;
the profound silence which reigned in her abode, where everything was
spoken, if it could be called speaking, in an undertone; and the almost
monastic regularity and order of this immense mansion, communicated to
everything around the princess a sad and chilling character. A man of the
world, who joined great courage to rare independence of spirit, speaking
of the princess (to whom Adrienne de Cardoville went, according to her
expression, to fight a pitched battle), said of her as follows: "In order
to avoid having Madame de Saint-Dizier for an enemy, I, who am neither
bashful nor cowardly, have, for the first time in my life, been both a
noodle and a coward." This man spoke sincerely. But Madame de
Saint-Dizier had not all at once arrived at this high degree of
importance.

Some words are necessary for the purpose of exhibiting distinctly some
phases in the life of this dangerous and implacable woman who, by her
affiliation with the Order of Jesuits, had acquired an occult and
formidable power. For there is something even more menacing than a
Jesuit: it is a Jesuits; and, when one has seen certain circles, it
becomes evident that there exist, unhappily, many of those affiliated,
who, more or less, uniformly dress (for the lay members of the Order call
themselves "Jesuits of the short robe").

Madame de Saint-Dizier, once very beautiful, had been, during the last
years of the Empire, and the early years of the Restoration, one of the
most fashionable women of Paris, of a stirring, active, adventurous, and
commanding spirit, of cold heart, but lively imagination. She was greatly
given to amorous adventures, not from tenderness of heart, but from a
passion for intrigue, which she loved as men love play--for the sake of
the emotions it excites. Unhappily, such had always been the blindness or
the carelessness of her husband, the Prince of Saint-Dizier (eldest
brother of the Count of Rennepont and Duke of Cardoville, father of
Adrienne), that during his life he had never said one word that could
make it be thought that he suspected the actions of his wife. Attaching
herself to Napoleon, to dig a mine under the feet of the Colossus, that
design at least afforded emotions sufficient to gratify the humor of the
most insatiable. During some time, all went well. The princess was
beautiful and spirited, dexterous and false, perfidious and seductive.
She was surrounded by fanatical adorers, upon whom she played off a kind
of ferocious coquetry, to induce them to run their heads into grave
conspiracies. They hoped to resuscitate the Fonder party, and carried on
a very active secret correspondence with some influential personages
abroad, well known for their hatred against the emperor and France. Hence
arose her first epistolary relations with the Marquis d'Aigrigny, then
colonel in the Russian service and aide-de-camp to General Moreau. But
one day all these petty intrigues were discovered. Many knights of Madame
de Saint-Dizier were sent to Vincennes; but the emperor, who might have
punished her terribly, contented himself with exiling the princess to one
of her estates near Dunkirk.

Upon the Restoration, the persecutions which Madame de Saint-Dizier had
suffered for the Good Cause were entered to her credit, and she acquired
even then very considerable influence, in spite of the lightness of her
behavior. The Marquis d'Aigrigny, having entered the military service of
France, remained there. The Puritan race has ever been republican to the
core, and this is one great and vital respect in which they have
continually diverged from their Southern brethren.

Yet with, all their virtues, with all their sublime heroism, was
blended an inordinate, morbid selfishness.Excessive self-love, a taste for exciting pleasures, aspirations of
hatred, pride, and lordliness, a species of evil sympathy, the perfidious
attraction of which brings together perverse natures without mingling
them, had made of the princess and the Marquis accomplices rather than
lovers. This connection, based upon selfish and bitter feelings, and upon
the support which two characters of this dangerous temper could lend to
each other against a world in which their spirit of intrigue, of
gallantry, and of contempt had made them many enemies, this connection
endured till the moment when, after his duel with General Simon, the
Marquis entered a religious house, without any one understanding the
cause of his unexpected and sudden resolution.

