Produced by Dave Morgan, Chris Logan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


[Illustration: A HIGH SEA ON THE NORTH CORNWALL COAST.

From a photograph by Mr. Alexander Old, Padstow.]


The Cornwall

Coast


_By Arthur L. Salmon_


_Illustrated_

[Illustration: 1 Adelphi Terrace, W.C.]


_T. Fisher Unwin_

_London: Adelphi Terrace_

_Leipsic: Inselstrasse 20_

_1910_


[_All rights reserved._]


ROAD MAPS FOR THE CORNWALL COAST


Those who travel through Cornwall by cycle or motor-car will usually
find very good roads, but for the most part these only touch the coast
at special points; and in some cases it will be wise to leave bicycle
or car at hotel or farm if the coast is to be fitly explored. The
study of a map will show the tourist what to expect, and he may note
the parts where, if he thinks of easy travelling alone, he will have
to desert the sea. But by a judicious use of high-road and by-road he
need never be far from the shore, and in some places the road that is
actually best for him gives fine views of the coast. There are many
excellent maps issued, but it is best to go to the fountainhead, to
the publications of the Ordnance Survey. For the pedestrian those of
one inch to a mile are admirable; but the cyclist or motorist will
find the two miles to an inch more handy, as covering a wider range;
and even those of four miles to the inch are sufficiently full for the
motorist. If any special district is to be carefully explored, the one
mile to an inch should be carried, but the wise rider will not content
himself with a map of a single scale; he should at least carry one for
the entire Duchy and others for the sections.

The maps of the Ordnance Survey for Cornwall are as follow:--

       One mile to the inch, large series, in sheets about 27 × 18
       inches, paper (flat or folded), 1s. 6d. net; mounted, 2s.; cut
       into sections and mounted to fold, 2s. 6d., Nos. 139, 146-7-8,
       151-2.

       One mile to the inch, small series, in contoured outline, with
       hills shaded or coloured, Nos. 347, 353, 1s. 6d. and 2s.; 348,
       354, 1s. and 1s. 6d.; 322, 336, 1s. 6d. and 2s.; 335, 346, 1s.
       and 1s. 6d.; 351, 359, 1s. and 1s. 6d.; 352, 360, 1s. 6d. and
       2s. These may be had flat or folded.

       Two miles to an inch (flat or folded, or on the new layer
       system), Nos. 35-6, 1s. 6d., 2s., 2s. 6d.

       Four miles to the inch, Cornwall, 1s. (flat or folded).

       Four miles to the inch, Nos. 21, 22, 1s. 6d., 2s. (flat or
       folded).

       Ten miles to the inch, No. II. (flat or folded), 1s., 1s. 6d.

It should be mentioned that Mr. T. Fisher Unwin is sole wholesale
agent for these maps, which may be procured from any bookseller.
Fuller details of the maps are given in a special Catalogue issued by
Mr. Unwin.

                                                              A. L. S.


CONTENTS


    CHAPTER                                                       PAGE

    I.      THE PLYMOUTH DISTRICT                                   13

    II.     LOOE AND POLPERRO                                       29

    III.    FOWEY                                                   48

    IV.     ST. AUSTELL TO ST. MAWES                                66

    V.      FALMOUTH AND TRURO                                      81

    VI.     FROM FALMOUTH TO THE LIZARD                            106

    VII.    THE LIZARD TO HELSTON                                  126

    VIII.   MOUNT'S BAY                                            150

    IX.     THE PENZANCE DISTRICT                                  167

    X.      THE SCILLY ISLANDS                                     190

    XI.     FROM LAND'S END TO ZENNOR                              211

    XII.    ST. IVES                                               231

    XIII.   FROM HAYLE TO PERRAN                                   253

    XIV.    CRANTOCK, NEWQUAY, MAWGAN                              271

    XV.     THE PADSTOW DISTRICT                                   301

    XVI.    TINTAGEL AND BOSCASTLE                                 335

    XVII.   BUDE                                                   354

    XVIII.  MORWENSTOW                                             363

    INDEX                                                          381


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                                  PAGE

    LOOE                                                            33
    _Photo by Gibson & Sons_

    FOWEY                                                           55
    _Photo by Gibson, Penzance_

    ON THE RIVER FAL                                                83
    _Photo by Gibson & Sons_

    COVERACK                                                       119
    _Photo by Gibson & Sons_

    THE LIZARD LIGHTHOUSE                                          129
    _Photo by Gibson & Sons_

    BENCH-ENDS IN MULLION CHURCH                                   133
    _Photo by Gibson & Sons_

    MARCONI STATION, POLDHU                                        139
    _Photo by Gibson & Sons_

    PRUSSIA COVE                                                   155
    _Photo by Gibson & Sons_

    ST. MICHAEL'S MOUNT, FROM MARAZION                             161
    _Photo by Gibson & Sons_

    PENZANCE                                                       171
    _Photo by Gibson & Sons_

    LANYON CROMLECH                                                181
    _Photo by Gibson & Sons_

    SHIPMAN HEAD, SCILLY                                           191
    _Photo by Gibson & Sons_

    A SCILLY FLOWER GARDEN                                         201
    _Photo by Alex. Old_

    CAVERN AT LAND'S END                                           213
    _Photo by Gibson, Penzance_

    SENNEN COVE                                                    219
    _Photo by Gibson & Sons_

    GURNARD'S HEAD                                                 227
    _Photo by Gibson & Sons_

    ST. IVES                                                       233
    _Photo by Gibson & Sons_

    CHURCH OF ST. PIRAN                                            267
    _Photo by Gibson & Sons_

    CRANTOCK CHURCH                                                283
    _Photo by Alex. Old_

    BEDRUTHAN STEPS                                                293
    _Photo by Alex. Old_

    MAWGAN CHURCH                                                  297
    _Photo by Alex. Old_

    PORTHCOTHAN BAY                                                303
    _Photo by Alex. Old_

    RUINS OF CONSTANTINE CHURCH                                    307
    _Photo by Alex. Old_

    TREVOSE LIGHTHOUSE                                             311
    _Photo by Alex. Old_

    CLIFFS NEAR PADSTOW                                            317
    _Photo by Alex. Old_

    A ROUGH CORNISH SEA                                            323
    _Photo by Alex. Old_

    WADEBRIDGE                                                     327
    _Photo by Alex. Old_

    PORT ISAAC                                                     331
    _Photo by Gibson & Sons_

    TINTAGEL                                                       337
    _Photo by Gibson & Sons_

    KING ARTHUR'S CASTLE                                           343
    _Photo by Alex. Old_

    ST. KNIGHTON'S KIEVE                                           349
    _Photo by Alex. Old_

    MORWENSTOW                                                     367
    _Photo by Gibson & Sons_


The Cornwall Coast


CHAPTER I

THE PLYMOUTH DISTRICT


Britain is an emergent mass of land rising from a submarine platform
that attaches it to the Continent of Europe. The shallowness of its
waters--shallow relatively to the profundity of ocean deeps--is most
pronounced off the eastern and south-eastern coasts; but it extends
westward as far as the isles of Scilly, which are isolated
mountain-peaks of the submerged plateau. The seas that wash the long
Cornish peninsula, therefore, though they are thoroughly oceanic in
character, especially on the north, are not oceanic in depth; we have
to pass far beyond Scilly to cross the hundred-fathom line. From the
Dover strait westward there is a gradual lowering of the incline,
though of course with such variations and undulations as we find on
the emerged plains; but the existence of this vast submarine basis
must cause us to think of our island, naturally and geologically, as a
true part of the great European continent, rendered insular by the
comparatively recent intrusion of shallow and narrow waters. With some
developments and some limits, our flora and fauna are absolutely
Continental, the limits being even more noticeable as regards Ireland.
The extensive coast-line has played a most important part in
influencing national history and characteristics. The greater or less
resistance of different rocks and soils has affected not only
coast-configurations, but therewith also the very existence and
well-being of the inhabitants.

The very appearance of Cornwall is eloquent of its granitic structure;
nothing less enduring could have survived the stress to which it is
daily exposed. All softer measures have been eroded by the fierce wash
of Atlantic seas; what we may consider a gaunt, bare backbone has
stood the test, and the Cornish coast to-day confronts forces that
would play havoc with the more yielding and gentle curves of east and
south-east England. We know what the narrow seas can do on
East-Anglian and Kentish shores; and the same work of coast-erosion
that we there see proceeding before our very eyes must have taken
place in Cornwall before the days when historians could note it. The
denudations that left our stark Cornish coasts as we know them now for
the most part occurred in times that are dim and legendary. We hear of
the havoc by an uncertain voice of tradition; we dream of a lost land
of Lyonesse, of which only the Scillies remain; but the underlying
truth of such romantic rumour must be carried back to Neolithic or
earlier times. Though inaccurate in detail, such legends are rarely
baseless. In places, such as Mount's Bay, there is still evidence of
what the sea has taken; in other parts the evidence has been washed
far from sight. The fact that the shallow seas extend far westward
cannot be ignored; when we speak of a lost Lyonesse we are not
dealing with absurdities. We must only be careful to date it far
enough backward, or rather to leave it without date, which is a matter
for the geologist rather than the historian to settle. It is an
alluring vision on which we can linger without the sense of being
actually unhistoric. We may even carry our thought further still, if
we choose, and dream of some old Atlantis, now lying submerged in far
greater depths beneath the waters of the ocean that perpetuates its
name.

It will be seen that the peculiar shape of Cornwall has not been
attained by chance, but has been the result of natural forces. In its
appearance on a map there is a certain resemblance to Italy; while
some etymologists, taking this appearance as a guide, have imagined
that the origin of its name may be found in its horn-like figure. No
other British division--using the word "division" advisedly, for
Cornwall is not strictly a county--has such an extent of coast-line.
Its greatest direct length is 80 miles, but the broken nature of the
shore increases this very considerably; even at its juncture with
Devon the Duchy is not more than 46 miles in breadth, and at its
narrowest it is only six miles. Both the most western and the most
southern points in England are to be found in Cornwall, at Land's End
and the Lizard. The climate is delightfully equable, without extremes
of heat or cold, but it is naturally humid, as Cornwall has to bear
the first brunt of rain-storms that drive in from the Atlantic. To
find a fitting point of departure for a pilgrimage round these coasts
we have to step into Devonshire. In some sense Plymouth is the gateway
of Cornwall, and a very appropriate gateway it is. Of the three
rivers that give Plymouth its noble estuary the Lynher is purely
Cornish, and the Tamar is as much Cornish as it is Devonian, except
that it rises just over the Devon border. The population of Plymouth,
Stonehouse, and Devonport is so largely Cornish that the three towns,
which we conveniently but incorrectly group under the name of
Plymouth, have been styled the "capital of Cornwall"; and certainly no
single Cornish town contains so many Cornish folk as have gathered
together to assist and share in the prosperity of this Devonshire
locality. The majority of visitors to the Duchy approach it by this
avenue, and the old stage-coaches followed very much the same route as
the present railway, but conveyed their passengers to Saltash by ferry
instead of by bridge. The rail is the successor of an immemorial
trackway that linked Devon and Cornwall in days when they had not been
subdivided. Even in times long before shires had been dreamed of, it
is certain that the river must have been an important tribal boundary.
There was a British track by which Cornish tin was carried eastward to
a point of nearer contact with the Continent; that point may have been
the Isle of Wight, but was more probably Thanet. This track passed the
Tamar at Saltash and ran to Liskeard, where it joined a tributary path
from the Fosseway; after which junction it crossed the Bodmin Moors
and pushed on to Truro and Mount's Bay. This has been spoken of as a
Roman road, but it was certainly not of Roman construction, being far
earlier in date. There is no proof that the Legions ever entered
Cornwall at all, and such Roman remains as Cornwall has yielded may be
attributed to British residents of Roman culture and taste. Cornwall
was never conquered, in the sense of occupation, either by Roman or
Teuton; and the conquest of the Ivernians, or Iberians, by the Celts
must have been very partial and chiefly in the nature of a military
predominance, if we may judge by the comparatively short stature, dark
skin and hair, that are still largely characteristic of Cornish folk.

