[NOTE: There is a short list of bookmarks, or pointers, at the end of the
file for those who may wish to sample the author's ideas before making an
entire meal of them.  D.W.]


COSMOPOLIS

By PAUL BOURGET


BOOK 3.


CHAPTER VII

A LITTLE RELATIVE OF IAGO

The remorse which Montfanon expressed so naively, once acknowledged to
himself, increased rapidly in the honest man's heart.  He had reason to
say from the beginning that the affair looked bad.  A quarrel, together
with assault, or an attempt at assault, would not be easily set right.
It required a diplomatic miracle.  The slightest lack of self-possession
on the part of the seconds is equivalent to a catastrophe.  As happens in
such circumstances, events are hurried, and the pessimistic anticipations
of the irritable Marquis were verified almost as soon as he uttered them.
Dorsenne and he had barely left the Palais Savorelli when Gorka arrived.
The energy with which he repulsed the proposition of an arrangement which
would admit of excuses on his part, served prudent Hafner, and the not
less prudent Ardea, as a signal for withdrawal.  It was too evident to
the two men that no reconciliation would result from a collision of such
a madman with a personage so difficult as the most authorized of
Florent's proxies had shown himself to be.  They then asked Gorka to
relieve them from their duty.  They had too plausible an excuse in
Fanny's betrothal for Boleslas to refuse to release them.  That
retirement was a second catastrophe.  In his impatience to find other
seconds who would be firm, Gorka hastened to the Cercle de la Chasse.
Chance willed that he should meet with two of his comrades--a Marquis
Cibo, Roman, and a Prince Pietrapertoso, Neapolitan, who were assuredly
the best he could have chosen to hasten the simplest affair to its worst
consequences.

Those two young men of the best Italian families, both very intelligent,
very loyal and very good, belonged to that particular class which is to
be met with in Vienna, Madrid, St. Petersburg, as in Milan and in Rome,
of foreign club-men hypnotized by Paris.  And what a Paris!  That of
showy and noisy fetes, that which passes the morning in practising the
sports in fashion, the afternoons in racing, in frequenting fencing-
schools, the evening at the theatre and the night at the gaming-table!
That Paris which emigrates by turns, according to the season, to Monte
Carlo for the 'Tir aux Pigeons', to Deauville for the race week, to Aix-
les-Bains for the baccarat season; that Paris which has its own customs,
its own language, its own history, even its own cosmopolitanism, for it
exercises over certain minds, throughout Europe, so despotic a rule that
Cibo, for example, and his friend Pietrapertoso never opened a French
journal that was not Parisian.

They sought the short paragraphs in which were related, in detail, the
doings of the demi-monde, the last supper given by some well-known
viveur, the details of some large party in such and such a fashionable
club, the result of a shooting match, or of a fencing match between
celebrated fencers!  There were between them subjects of conversation of
which they never wearied; to know if spirituelle Gladys Harvey was more
elegant than Leona d'Astri, if Machault made "counters" as rapid as those
of General Garnier, if little Lautrec would adhere or would not adhere to
the game he was playing.  Imprisoned in Rome by the scantiness of their
means, and also by the wishes, the one of his uncle, the other of his
grandfather, whose heirs they were, their entire year was summed up in
the months which they spent at Nice in the winter, and in the trip they
took to Paris at the time of the Grand Prix for six weeks.  Jealous one
of the other, with the most comical rivalry, of the least occurrence at
the 'Cercle des Champs-Elysees' or of the Rue Royale in the Eternal City,
they affected, in the presence of their colleagues of la chasse, the
impassive manner of augurs when the telegraph brought them the news of
some Parisian scandal.  That inoffensive mania which had made of stout,
ruddy Cibo, and of thin, pale Pietrapertoso two delightful studies for
Dorsenne during his Roman winter, made of them terrible proxies in the
service of Gorka's vengeance.

With what joy and what gravity they accepted that mission all those who
have studied swordsmen will understand after this simple sketch, and with
what promptness they presented themselves to confer at nine o'clock in
the morning with their client's adversary!  In short, at half-past twelve
the duel was arranged in its slightest detail.  The energy employed by
Montfanon had only ended in somewhat tempering the conditions--four balls
to be exchanged at twenty-five paces at the word of command.  The duel
was fixed for the following morning, in the inclosure which Cibo owned,
with an inn adjoining, not very far distant from the classical tomb of
Cecilia Metella.  To obtain that distance and the use of new weapons it
required the prestige with which the Marquis suddenly clothed himself in
the eyes of Gorka's seconds by pronouncing the name, still legendary in
the provinces and to the foreigner, of Gramont-Caderousse--'Sic transit
gloria mundi'! On leaving that rendezvous the excellent man really had
tears in his eyes.

"It is my fault," he moaned, "it is my fault.  With that Hafner we
should have obtained such a fine official plan by mixing in a little of
ours.  He offered it to us himself....  Brave Chapron!  It is I who have
brought him into this dilemma!....  I owe it to him not to abandon him,
but to follow him to the end....  Here I shall be assisting at a duel, at
my age!....  Did you see how those young snobs lowered their voices when
I mentioned my encounter with poor Caderousse?....  Fifty-two years and a
month, and not to know yet how to conduct one's self!  Let us go to the
Rue Leopardi.  I wish to ask pardon of our client, and to give him some
advice.  We will take him to one of my old friends who has a garden near
the Villa Pamphili, very secluded.  We will spend the rest of the
afternoon practising....  Ah!  Accursed choler!  Yes, it would have been
so simple to accept the other's plan yesterday.  By the exchange of two
or three words, I am sure it could have been arranged."

"Console yourself, Marquis," replied Florent, when the unhappy nobleman
had described to him the deplorable result of his negotiations.  "I like
that better.  Monsieur Gorka needs correction.  I have only one regret,
that of not having given it to him more thoroughly....  Since I shall
have to fight a duel, I would at least have had my money's worth!"

"And you have never used a pistol?"  asked Montfanon.

"Bah!  I have hunted a great deal and I believe I can shoot."

"That is like night and day," interrupted the Marquis.  "Hold yourself in
readiness.  At three o'clock come for me and I will give you a lesson.
And remember there is a merciful God for the brave!"

Although Florent deserved praise for the cheerfulness of which his reply
was proof, the first moments which he spent alone after the departure of
his two witnesses were very painful.

That which Chapron experienced during those few moments was simply very
natural anxiety, the enervation caused by looking at the clock, and
saying:

"In twenty-four hours the hand will be on this point of the dial.  And
shall I still be living?"....  He was, however, manly, and knew how to
control himself.  He struggled against the feeling of weakness, and,
while awaiting the time to rejoin his friends, he resolved to write his
last wishes.  For years his intention had been to leave his entire
fortune to his brother-in-law.  He, therefore, made a rough draft of his
will in that sense, with a pen at first rather unsteady, then quite firm.
His will completed, he had courage enough to write two letters, addressed
the one to that brother-in-law, the other to his sister.  When he had
finished his work the hands of the clock pointed to ten minutes of three.

"Still seventeen hours and a half to wait," said he, "but I think I have
conquered my nerves.  A short walk, too, will benefit me."

So he decided to go on foot to the rendezvous named by Montfanon.  He
carefully locked the three envelopes in the drawer of his desk.  He saw,
on passing, that Lincoln was not in his studio.  He asked the footman if
Madame Maitland was at home.  The reply received was that she was
dressing, and that she had ordered her carriage for three o'clock.

"Good," said he, "neither of them will have the slightest suspicion; I am
saved."

How astonished he would have been could he, while walking leisurely
toward his destination, have returned in thought to the smoking-room he
had just left!  He would have seen a woman glide noiselessly through the
open door, with the precaution of a malefactor!  He would have seen her
examine, without disarranging, all the papers on the table.  She frowned
on seeing Dorsenne's and the Marquis's cards.  She took from the
blotting-case some loose leaves and held them in front of the glass,
trying to read there the imprint left upon them.  He would have seen
finally the woman draw from her pocket a bunch of keys.  She inserted one
of them in the lock of the drawer which Florent had so carefully turned,
and took from that drawer the three unsealed envelopes he had placed
within it.  And the woman who thus read, with a face contracted by
anguish, the papers discovered in such a manner, thanks to a ruse the
abominable indelicacy of which gave proof of shameful habits of
espionage, was his own sister, the Lydia whom he believed so gentle and
so simple, to whom he had penned an adieu so tender in case he should be
killed--the Lydia who would have terrified him had he seen her thus, with
passion distorting the face which was considered insignificant!  She
herself, the audacious spy, trembled as if she would fall, her eyes
dilated, her bosom heaved, her teeth chattered, so greatly was she
unnerved by what she had discovered, by the terrible consequences which
she had brought about.

Had she not written the anonymous letters to Gorka, denouncing to him
the intrigue between Maitland and Madame Steno?  Was it not she who had
chosen, the better to poison those terrible letters, phrases the most
likely to strike the betrayed lover in the most sensitive part of his
'amour propre'?  Was it not she who had hastened the return of the
jealous man with the certain hope of drawing thus a tragical vengeance
upon the hated heads of her husband and the Venetian?  That vengeance,
indeed, had broken.  But upon whom?  Upon the only person Lydia loved in
the world, upon the brother whom she saw endangered through her fault;
and that thought was to her so overwhelming that she sank into the
armchair in which Florent had been seated fifteen minutes before,
repeating, with an accent of despair: "He is going to fight a duel.  He
is going to fight instead of the other!"

All the moral history of that obscure and violent soul was summed up in
the cry in which passionate anxiety for her brother was coupled with a
fierce hatred of her husband.  That hatred was the result of a youth and
a childhood without the story of which a duplicity so criminal in a being
so young would be unintelligible.  That youth and that childhood had
presaged what Lydia would one day be.  But who was there to train the
nature in which the heredity of an oppressed race manifested itself, as
has been already remarked, by the two most detestable characteristics--
hypocrisy and perfidy?  Who, moreover, observes in children the truth, as
much neglected in practise as it is common in theory, that the defects of
the tenth year become vices in the thirtieth?  When quite a child Lydia
invented falsehoods as naturally as her brother spoke the truth....
Whosoever observed her would have perceived that those lies were all told
to paint herself in a favorable light.  The germ, too, of another defect
was springing up within her--a jealousy instinctive, irrational, almost
wicked.  She could not see a new plaything in Florent's hands without
sulking immediately.  She could not bear to see her brother embrace her
father without casting herself between them, nor could she see him amuse
himself with other comrades.

Had Napoleon Chapron been interested in the study of character as deeply
as he was in his cotton and his sugarcane, he would have perceived, with
affright, the early traces of a sinful nature.  But, on that point, like
his son, he was one of those trustful men who did not judge when they
loved.  Moreover, Lydia and Florent, to his wounded sensibility of a
demi-pariah, formed the only pleasant corner in his life--were the fresh
and youthful comforters of his widowerhood and of his misanthropy.  He
cherished them with the idolatry which all great workers entertain for
their children, which is one of the most dangerous forms of paternal
tenderness; Lydia's incipient vices were to the planter delightful
fancies!  Did she lie?  The excellent man exclaimed: What an imagination
she has!  Was she jealous?  He would sigh, pressing to his broad breast
the tiny form: How sensitive she is!....  The result of that selfish
blindness--for to love children thus is to love them for one's self and
not for them--was that the girl, at the time of her entrance at
Roehampton, was spoiled in the essential traits of her character.  But
she was so pretty, she owed to the singular mixture of three races an
originality of grace so seductive that only the keen glance of a
governess of genius could have discerned, beneath that exquisite
exterior, the already marked lines of her character.  Such governesses
are rare, still more so at convents than elsewhere.  There was none at
Roehampton when Lydia entered that pious haven which was to prove fatal
to her, for a reason precisely contrary to that which transformed for
Florent the lawns of peaceful Beaumont into a radiant paradise of
friendship.

Among the pupils with whom Lydia was to be educated were four young girls
from Philadelphia, older than the newcomer by two years, and who, also,
had left America for the first time.  They brought with them the
unconquerable aversion to negro blood and that wonderful keenness in
discovering it, even in the most infinitesimal degree, which
distinguishes real Yankees.  Little Lydia Chapron, having been entered as
French, they at first hesitated in the face of a suspicion speedily
converted into a certainty and that certainty into an aversion, which
they could not conceal.  They would not have been children had they not
been unfeeling.  They, therefore, began to offer poor Lydia petty
affronts.  Convents and colleges resemble other society.  There, too,
unjust contempt is like that "ferret of the woods," which runs from hand
to hand and which always returns to its point of setting out.  All the
scornful are themselves scorned by some one--a merited punishment, which
does not correct our pride any more than the other punishments which
abound in life cure our other faults.  Lydia's persecutors were
themselves the objects of outrages practised by their comrades born in
England, on account of certain peculiarities in their language and for
the nasal quality of their voices.  The drama was limited, as we can
imagine, to a series of insignificant episodes and of which the
superintendents only surprised a demi-echo.

Children nurse passions as strong as ours, but so much interrupted by
playfulness that it is impossible to measure their exact strength.
Lydia's 'amour propre' was wounded in an incurable manner by that
revelation of her own peculiarity.  Certain incidents of her American
life recurred to her, which she comprehended more clearly.  She recalled
the portrait of her grandmother, the complexion, the hands, the hair of
her father, and she experienced that shame of her birth and of her family
much more common with children than our optimism imagines.  Parents of
humble origin give their sons a liberal education, expose them to the
demoralization which it brings with it in their positions, and what
social hatreds date from the moment when the boy of twelve blushes in
secret at the condition of his relatives!  With Lydia, so instinctively
jealous and untruthful, those first wounds induced falsehood and
jealousy.  The slightest superiority even, noticed in one of her
companions, became to her a cause for suffering, and she undertook to
compensate by personal triumphs the difference of blood, which, once
discovered, wounds a vain nature.  In order to assure herself those
triumphs she tried to win all the persons who approached her, mistresses
and comrades, and she began to practise that continued comedy of attitude
and of sentiment to which the fatal desire to please, so quickly leads-
that charming and dangerous tendency which borders much less on goodness
than falseness.  At eighteen, submitted to a sort of continual
cabotinage, Lydia was, beneath the most attractive exterior, a being
profoundly, though unconsciously, wicked, capable of very little
affection--she loved no one truly but her brother--open to the invasion
of the passions of hatred which are the natural products of proud and
false minds.  It was one of these passions, the most fatal of all, which
marriage was to develop within her--envy.

That hideous vice, one of those which govern the world, has been so
little studied by moralists, as all too dishonorable for the heart of
man, no doubt, that this statement may appear improbable.  Madame
Maitland, for years, had been envious of her husband, but envious as one
of the rivals of an artist would be, envious as one pretty woman is of
another, as one banker is of his opponent, as a politician of his
adversary, with the fierce, implacable envy which writhes with physical
pain in the face of success, which is transported with a sensual joy in
the face of disaster.  It is a great mistake to limit the ravages of that
guilty passion to the domain of professional emulation.  When it is deep,
it does not alone attack the qualities of the person, but the person
himself, and it was thus that Lydia envied Lincoln.  Perhaps the analysis
of this sentiment, very subtle in its ugliness, will explain to some a
few of the antipathies against which they have struck in their relatives.
For it is not only between husband and wife that these unavowed envies
are met, it is between lover and mistress, friend and friend, brother and
brother, sometimes, alas, father and son, mother and daughter!  Lydia had
married Lincoln Maitland partly out of obedience to her brother's wishes,
partly from vanity, because the young man was an American, and because it
was a sort of victory over the prejudices of race, of which she thought
constantly, but of which she never spoke.

It required only three months of married life to perceive that Maitland
could not forgive himself for that marriage.  Although he affected to
scorn his compatriots, and although at heart he did not share any of the
views of the country in which he had not set foot since his fifth year,
he could not hear remarks made in New York upon that marriage without a
pang.  He disliked Lydia for the humiliation, and she felt it.  The birth
of a child would no doubt have modified that feeling, and, if it would
not have removed it, would at least have softened the embittered heart of
the young wife.  But no child was born to them.  They had not returned
from their wedding tour, upon which Florent accompanied them, before
their lives rolled along in that silence which forms the base of all
those households in which husband and wife, according to a simple and
grand expression of the people, do not live heart against heart.

After the journey through Spain, which should have been one continued
enchantment, the wife became jealous of the evident preference which
Florent showed for Maitland.  For the first time she perceived the hold
which that impassioned friendship had taken upon her brother's heart.
He loved her, too, but with a secondary love.  The comparison annoyed her
daily, hourly, and it did not fail to become a real wound.  Returned to
Paris, where they spent almost three years, that wound was increased by
the sole fact that the puissant individuality of the painter speedily
relegated to the shade the individuality of his wife, simply, almost
mechanically, like a large tree which pushes a smaller one into the
background.  The composite society of artists, amateurs, and writers who
visited Lincoln came there only for him.  The house they had rented was
rented only for him.  The journeys they made were for him.  In short,
Lydia was borne away, like Florent, in the orbit of the most despotic
force in the world--that of a celebrated talent.  An entire book would be
required to paint in their daily truth the continued humiliations which
brought the young wife to detest that talent and that celebrity with as
much ardor as Florent worshipped them.  She remained, however, an honest
woman, in the sense in which the word is construed by the world, which
sums up woman's entire dishonor in errors of love.

But within Lydia's breast grew a rooted aversion toward Lincoln.  She
detested him for the pure blood which made of that large, fair, and
robust man so admirable a type of Anglo-Saxon beauty, by the side of her,
so thin, so insignificant indeed, in spite of the grace of her pretty,
dark face.  She detested him for his taste, for the original elegance
with which he understood how to adorn the places in which he lived,
while she maintained within her a barbarous lack of taste for the least
arrangement of materials and of colors.  When she was forced to
acknowledge progress in the painter, bitter hatred entered her heart.
When he lamented over his work, and when she saw him a prey to the
dolorous anxiety of an artist who doubts himself, she experienced a
profound joy, marred only by the evident sadness into which Lincoln's
struggles plunged Florent.  Never had she met the eyes of Chapron fixed
upon Maitland with that look of a faithful dog which rejoices in the joy
of its master, or which suffers in his sadness, without enduring, like
Alba Steno, the sensation of a "needle in the heart."

The idolatrous worship of her brother for the painter caused her to
suffer still more as she comprehended, with the infallible perspicacity
of antipathy, the immense dupery.  She read the very depths of the souls
of the two old comrades of Beaumont.  She knew that in that friendship,
as is almost always the case, one alone gave all to receive in exchange
only the most brutal recognition, that with which a huntsman or a master
gratifies a faithful dog!  As for enlightening Florent with regard to
Lincoln's character, she had vainly tried to do so by those fine and
perfidious insinuations in which women excel.  She only recognized her
impotence, and myriads of hateful impressions were thus accumulated in
her heart, to be summed up in one of those frenzies of taciturn rancor
which bursts on the first opportunity with terrifying energy.  Crime
itself has its laws of development.  Between the pretty little girl who
wept on seeing a new toy in her brother's hand and the Lydia Maitland,
forcer of locks, author of anonymous letters, driven by the thirst for
vengeance, even to villainy, no dramatic revolution of character had
taken place.  The logical succession of days had sufficed.

The occasion to gratify that deep and mortal longing to touch Lincoln on
some point truly sensitive, how often Lydia had sought it in vain, before
Madame Steno obtained an ascendancy over the painter.  She had been
reduced by it to those meannesses of feminine animosity to manage, as if
accidentally, that her husband might read all the disagreeable articles
written about his paintings, innocently to praise before him the rivals
who had given him offense, to repeat to him with an air of embarrassment
the slightest criticisms pronounced on one of his exhibits--all the
unpleasantnesses which had the result of irritating Florent, above all,
for Maitland was one of those artists too well satisfied with the results
of his own work for the opinion of others to annoy him very much.  On the
other hand, before the passion for the dogaresse had possessed him, he
had never loved.  Many painters are thus, satisfying with magnificent
models an impetuosity of temperament which does not mount from the senses
to the heart.  Accustomed to regard the human form from a certain point,
they find in beauty, which would appear to us simply animal, principles
of plastic emotion which at times suffice for their amorous requirements.
They are only more deeply touched by it, when to that rather coarse
intoxication is joined, in the woman who inspires them, the refined
graces of mind, the delicacy of elegance and the subtleties of sentiment.

Such was Madame Steno, who at once inspired the painter with a passion as
complete as a first love.  It was really such.  The Countess, who was
possessed of the penetration of voluptuousness, was not mistaken there.
Lydia, who was possessed of the penetration of hatred, was not mistaken
either.  She knew from the first day how matters stood in the beginning,
because she was as observing as she was dissimulating; then, thanks to
means less hypothetic, she had always had the habit of making those
abominable inquiries which are natural, we venture to avow, to nine women
out of ten!  And how many men are women, too, on this point, as said the
fabulist.  At school Lydia was one of those who ascended to the
dormitory, or who reentered the study to rummage in the cupboards and
open trunks of her companions.  When mature, never had a sealed letter
passed through her hands without her having ingeniously managed to read
through the envelope, or at least to guess from the postmark, the seal,
the handwriting of the address, who was the author of it.  The instinct
of curiosity was so strong that she could not refrain, at a telegraph
office, from glancing over the shoulders of the persons before her, to
learn the contents of their despatches.  She never had her hair dressed
or made her toilette without minutely questioning her maid as to the
goings-on in the pantry and the antechamber.  It was through a story of
that kind that she learned the altercation between Florent and Gorka in
the vestibule, which proves, between parentheses, that these espionages
by the aid of servants are often efficacious.  But they reveal a native
baseness, which will not recoil before any piece of villainy.

When Madame Maitland suspected the liaison of Madame Steno and her
husband, she no more hesitated to open the latter's secretary than she
later hesitated to open the desk of her brother.  The correspondence
which she read in that way was of a nature which exasperated her desire
for vengeance almost to frenzy.  For not only did she acquire the
evidence of a happiness shared by them which humiliated in her the woman
barren in all senses of the word, a stranger to voluptuousness as well as
to maternity, but she gathered from it numerous proofs that the Countess
cherished, with regard to her, a scorn of race as absolute as if Venice
had been a city of the United States....  That part of the Adriatic
abounds in prejudices of blood, as do all countries which serve as
confluents for every nation.  It is sufficient to convince one's self of
it, to have heard a Venetian treat of the Slavs as 'Cziavoni', and the
Levantines as 'Gregugni'.

Madame Steno, in those letters she had written with all the familiarity
and all the liberty of passion, never called Lydia anything but La
Morettina, and by a very strange illogicalness never was the name of the
brother of La Morettina mentioned without a formula of friendship.  As
the mistress treated Florent in that manner, it must be that she
apprehended no hostility on the part of her lover's brother-in-law.
Lydia understood it only too well, as well as the fresh proof of
Florent's sentiments for Lincoln.  Once more he gave precedence to the
friend over the sister, and on what an occasion!  The most secret wounds
in her inmost being bled as she read.  The success of Alba's portrait,
which promised to be a masterpiece, ended by precipitating her into a
fierce and abominable action.  She resolved to denounce Madame Steno's
new love to the betrayed lover, and she wrote the twelve letters, wisely
calculated and graduated, which had indeed determined Gorka's return.
His return had even been delayed too long to suit the relative of Iago,
who had decided to aim at Madame Steno through Alba by a still more
criminal denunciation.  Lydia was in that state of exasperation in which
the vilest weapons seem the best, and she included innocent Alba in her
hatred for Maitland, on account of the portrait, a turn of sentiment
which will show that it was envy by which that soul was poisoned above
all.  Ah, what bitter delight the simultaneous success of that double
infamy had procured for her!  What savage joy, mingled with bitterness
and ecstacy, had been hers the day before, on witnessing the nervousness
of poor Alba and the suppressed fury of Boleslas!

In her mind she had seen Maitland provoked by the rival whom she knew to
be as adroit with the sword as with the pistol.  She would not have been
the great-grandchild of a slave of Louisiana, if she had not combined
with the natural energy of her hatreds a considerable amount of
superstition.  A fortune-teller had once foretold, from the lines in her
palm, that she would cause the violent death of some person.  "It will be
he," she had thought, glancing at her husband with a horrible tremor of
hope....  And now she had the proof, the indisputable proof, that her
plot for vengeance was to terminate in the danger of another.  Of what
other?

The letter and will made by Florent disclosed to her the threat of a
fatal duel suspended over the head which was the dearest to her.  So she
had driven to a tragical encounter the only being whom she loved....  The
disappointment of the heart in which palpitated the wild energies of a
bestial atavism was so sudden, so acute, so dolorous, that she uttered an
inarticulate cry, leaning upon her brother's desk, and, in the face of
those sheets of paper which had revealed so much, she repeated:

"He is going to fight a duel!  He!.... And I am the cause!".... Then,
returning the letters and the will to the drawer, she closed it and rose,
saying aloud:

"No.  It shall not be.  I will prevent it, if I have to cast myself
between them.  I do not wish it!  I do not wish it!"

It was easy to utter such words.  But the execution of them was less
easy.  Lydia knew it, for she had no sooner uttered that vow than she
wrung her hands in despair--those weak hands which Madame Steno compared
in one of her letters to the paws of a monkey, the fingers were so supple
and so long--and she uttered this despairing cry: "But how?".... which so
many criminals have uttered before the issue, unexpected and fatal to
them, of their shrewdest calculations.  The poet has sung it in the words
which relate the story of all our faults, great and small:

         "The gods are just, and of our pleasant vices
          Make instruments to plague us."

It is necessary that the belief in the equity of an incomprehensible
judge be well grounded in us, for the strongest minds are struck by a
sinister apprehension when they have to brave the chance of a misfortune
absolutely merited.  The remembrance of the soothsayer's prediction
suddenly occurred to Lydia.  She uttered another cry, rubbing her hands
like a somnambulist.  She saw her brother's blood flowing....  No, the
duel should not take place!  But how to prevent it?  How-how?  she
repeated.  Florent was not at home.  She could, therefore, not implore
him.  If he should return, would there still be time?  Lincoln was not at
home.  Where was he?  Perhaps at a rendezvous with Madame Steno.

The image of that handsome idol of love clasped in the painter's arms,
plunged in the abyss of intoxication which her ardent letters described,
was presented to the mind of the jealous wife.  What irony to perceive
thus those two lovers, whom she had wished to strike, with the ecstacy of
bliss in their eyes!  Lydia would have liked to tear out their eyes, his
as well as hers, and to trample them beneath her heel.  A fresh flood of
hatred filled her heart.  God!  how she hated them, and with what a
powerless hatred!  But her time would come; another need pressed sorely
--to prevent the meeting of the following day, to save her brother.  To
whom should she turn, however?  To Dorsenne?  To Montfanon?  To Baron
Hafner?  To Peppino Ardea?  She thought by turns of the four personages
whose almost simultaneous visits had caused her to believe that they were
the seconds of the two champions.  She rejected them, one after the
other, comprehending that none of them possessed enough authority to
arrange the affair.  Her thoughts finally reverted to Florent's
adversary, to Boleslas Gorka, whose wife was her friend and whom she had
always found so courteous.  What if she should ask him to spare her
brother?  It was not Florent against whom the discarded lover bore a
grudge.  Would he not be touched by her tears?  Would he not tell her
what had led to the quarrel and what she should ask of her brother that
the quarrel might be conciliated?  Could she not obtain from him the
promise to discharge his weapon in the air, if the duel was with pistols,
or, if it was with swords, simply to disarm his enemy?

Like nearly all persons unversed in the art, she believed in infallible
fencers, in marksmen who never missed their aim, and she had also ideas
profoundly, absolutely inexact on the relations of one man with another
in the matter of an insult.  But how can women admit that inflexible
rigor in certain cases, which forms the foundation of manly relations,
when they themselves allow of a similar rigor neither in their arguments
with men, nor in their discussions among themselves?  Accustomed always
to appeal from convention to instinct and from reason to sentiment, they
are, in the face of certain laws, be they those of justice or of honor,
in a state of incomprehension worse than ignorance.  A duel, for example,
appears to them like an arbitrary drama, which the wish of one of those
concerned can change at his fancy.  Ninety-nine women out of a hundred
would think like Lydia Maitland of hastening to the adversary of the man
they love, to demand, to beg for his life.  Let us add, however, that the
majority would not carry out that thought.  They would confine themselves
to sewing in the vest of their beloved some blessed medal, in
recommending him to the Providence, which, for them, is still the
favoritism of heaven.  Lydia felt that if ever Florent should learn of
her step with regard to Gorka, he would be very indignant.  But who would
tell him?  "Come then," said Wonderwings. She took the little fairy's hand,
and up they all rose into the clear air, flying far and far away till
they left their fairyland behind and came at last to the sadder lands
where humans lived. There Wonderwings showed them where hunger and sorrow
and death trampled the city streets, and the band of fairies flew
lower and lower to look.

"The children tumble and fight in the dirty lanes, and cry for bread," cried
Poppypink. "The little ones, I cannot bear to hear them sob."
"Perhaps you can help them," said Wonderwings.

"I am only a little fairy. What can I do?" asked Poppypink. "I have no
bread to give them."
She flew a little lower, to gaze at them more nearly. "What can I do?" she
asked again.

No answer came. She looked around, and found herself alone. Wonderwings
and the older fairies had in a moment gone from sight.

Below, a crippled child sat among rags in a dark corner of a dreary room,
and tears ran down her cheeks.

"The sunshine, the pretty yellow sunshine!" she wailed. "If only
I could run and play in the pretty sunshine!"
"Here is something I can do," thought Poppypink. She gathered armfuls
of the golden sunbeams, and flying with them through the glass as
only a fairy can fly, herself unseen, she heaped them over the
twisted hands and pale thin face of the child, and left her playing
with them and smiling happily.

[Illustration: Poppypink laughed with joy. "I am so glad, so very
glad!" she said. "I had forgotten all about my wings."]

Lower she flew to help the little ones who cried about the gutters. She
led the starving and shelterless to comfort, the toddlers to safety; she
brought a flower to the hopeless, ease to sick ones racked with pain;
at night she flew with glittering dreams from room to room, so that
even sad-eyed feeble babies laughed for pleasure in their sleep. Day
after day, night after night she toiled, for weeks and months and years.
There was so much to do! The time passed like a moment. So busy was she
that she had forgotten all about her wings.

One day there came a flash of colour in the air beside her, and Wonderwings
and all the older fairies stood around her. "Dear Poppypink," cried one,
"how your wings have grown! And how beautiful they are! They are so
tall that they reach above your head and almost to the ground,
and they glow with so many colours that it seems as if a million jewels
had been flung upon them and had stuck, growing into a million flashing
stars that make a million little rainbows with every sway and
movement of your body."

Poppypink laughed with joy. "I am so glad, so very glad!" she said. "I
had forgotten all about my wings."
"Yet they have grown with use," said Wonderwings; "and for every deed of
kindness done a star has sprung, to shine in beauty there for evermore."

[Illustration]
[Illustration: The Queen-mother looked over the garden wall. There an old
woman hobbled, muttering to herself.]

The Magic Mirror

There was once a wise old king in a far-off land who said to himself, "I
have a daughter as well as a son; why should she not have a kingdom too?

I will see to it at once."
He called the chief map-maker to him, and said: "Make a map of my
kingdom and divide it by a line so evenly that each part shall be exactly
half. There must not be one hair's breadth more on the east of the line
than on the west."
The chief map-maker worked hard, and soon had the map ready, and it
was divided so evenly that there was not a hair's breadth more on the
east of the line than on the west. Then the king made a law that when he
died the Prince should rule over all the country on one side of
the line, and the Princess should rule over all the country on the other
side.

The Prince's land he called Eastroyal, and the Princess's land he called
Westroyal, and from that day to this there have always been kings over
Eastroyal and queens over Westroyal.

But it was soon noticed that in Eastroyal the people became
discontented and quarrelsome and poor, and were always finding fault
with the government; whereas in the west country over the border
they were so happy and kindly that they praised each queen from the
beginning of her reign to the end.

Nobody knew why there should be so great a difference, but a great
difference there was. Things grew worse and worse in Eastroyal, until at
last the people rose and turned the reigning king off his throne and
set his little son in his place. "Perhaps we shall be better satisfied
now!" they said.

The new king's mother walked alone, deep in thought; and she was very
troubled. "How can I teach my little son to please his people better
than his father did?" she wondered. "It would break my heart if he too
angered them and lost his crown, yet already he is showing a haughty
temper in his treatment of his lords, and I know not what to do."
"I know! I know!"

said a voice.

The Queen-mother was much startled; though she had not spoken aloud,
the words seemed an answer to her thought. She looked over the low wall
of the garden into the road. There an old woman hobbled, leaning on a
stick, and muttering to herself.

She was poor and ragged, and bent with age. "I know, I know!" she said
again.

"What do you know?" asked the Queen-mother gently.

The old woman looked up at her.

"Go to Westroyal," she said; and she hobbled away.

"Ah, a witch!" thought the Queen-mother; "and she is right. The Queens of
the West have undoubtedly some secret means of making their people
love them. I will find out what it is."
She prepared for a visit to Westroyal, and arrived a few days later
at the palace of the reigning queen. Here she was welcomed and feasted
and treated right lovingly, but though she kept her eyes and her
ears as wide open as it was possible for eyes and ears to be, she
could not discover the secret.

She grew sad with disappointment.

The young queen saw that she was sorrowful. "You are not happy here.
What is the matter?" she asked.

"What can I do to make you glad?"

The Queen-mother held out her hands imploringly. "Only give me your
secret," she begged. "Tell me how you gain the love of your people
and keep it through all the years. Tell me so that I may teach my young
son how to hold his throne?"
"Is that all?" exclaimed the Queen. "Come, I will show you."
[Illustration: "She led the way to her own lovely sleeping-chamber."]

She led the way to her own lovely sleeping-chamber, hung with rose silk
and panelled with polished silver and amethyst, and she pointed to
a great mirror set strongly into the wall. "Look within!" she said.

Wonderingly, the Queen-mother obeyed. On the surface of the mirror the
faces and forms of herself and the young queen were reflected; but
after a few moments, as she gazed, these faded away, and in their
places came a picture of a mine, with blackened toilers filling
tracks with coal.

That, too, faded, and a golden cornfield showed upon the polished
glass; under the hot summer sun the busy reapers moved, wiping the sweat
from their brows when they stopped a moment to rest. A third picture
was of weavers making cloth. A cottage home came next, and a lordly
mansion of the rich, and a homeless child seeking shelter under a city
bridge.
So scene followed scene, beautiful, or sad, or sordid, sometimes wild
and violent, and sometimes gay and peaceful, showing in the main a
people happy and content.

"What is it?" asked the amazed Queen-mother at last.

"How come these pictures here?"
"They are the life of my state reflected on this magic mirror for
my help," replied the Queen.

"Long ago, when the first queen came to rule the new kingdom of Westroyal,
the fairies brought this mirror and set it in the wall as here you
see it.

Faithfully ever since it has reflected the daily happenings through-out
the land, the people's toil and pleasures, their dangers and their
comforts and rewards.

So each queen has known her country.

Your son, looking in his mirror, sees but himself; I see the
sufferings of my people and know what things they need, and so
plainly are these pictures set before me that I cannot rest till I
have used my power to give relief."

"Oh!" cried the Queen-mother, "now I see why you are loved. How can I
get such a mirror for my son?"

"That I know not," replied the Queen.

Then the Queen-mother returned sad at heart to the kingdom of her son,
pondering on what she had seen.

Once again she walked in her garden alone.

"How shall I get such a mirror?" she wondered. "What should I do?"
As once before, a voice replied "I know! I know!"
The Queen-mother looked over the garden wall.

Hobbling along the road was the old woman who had bade her go to Westroyal.
"You who helped me before, help me again!" cried the Queen-mother. "I
have obeyed you. How now shall I get a magic mirror for my son?"
The old woman looked up at her. "Go to the Deeps," she said, and she
hobbled off.

Now this was a dreadful command to the Queen-mother, for the Deeps was
a horrible black pool in the roughest and most dangerous part of the
country. It was said to be formed of the country's tears and to be also
bottomless, and to be haunted by beings of strange shape. There were
stories of their mysterious power and evil ways. Yet go she must, if
going meant the gaining of a magic mirror for her son.

And she must go alone, for only so could any seeker find the pathway to
the pool, so it was said.

"I will go at once, before my courage fails," she said, and she left her
sheltered garden and set off across the land.

She had many weary miles to travel, past villages and towns and fields,
and she was footsore and faint when at last she reached the winding
track that led between the darkening hills.

Yet on she went, following the murmur of a tiny stream that dropped through
thick-set bushes into a shadowed valley.

On she went still, and now the darkness came, and she had lost her way. She
stumbled over fallen logs, pushed with bleeding hands and torn clothes
through bramble wildernesses, and found at last her way again to the
narrow track beside the little stream that murmured in the dark.

On she went, and down. The stream suddenly widened into a round
blackness open to the sky, but walled in by jagged rocks. It was
the pool. Utterly spent through weariness and fear, she sank down
among the rocks to rest, and waited there for what might come to
her.

Strange rustlings sounded round the rocks, strange forms loomed close
beside her, strange voices asked her: "What are you? Why come you to
our haunts?"

Though her heart was sick with dread she answered boldly in a firm
clear voice. "Give me a magic mirror for my son, that he may learn to
rule."
There was a flash, and the pool and all the rocks were lit by a light
brighter and softer than that of moon or stars. All round her stood the
beings who had loomed so strangely in the darkness. They were fairies,
exquisite in shape and fineness, robed in flowing gossamer of many colours.
They smiled at her, and touched her with their gentle hands, and
immediately she was well. "Your love has brought you nobly through much
fear and hurt," they said. "You shall have your due reward. Look
into the Deeps."
[Illustration: She rose into the air a shining queen of fairies, holding
in her hands a tiny gleaming mirror.]
One took her hand and led her to the edge, and the Queen-mother, fearless
and smiling now, looked down into the fathomless water of the pool. As
she gazed, ripples came upon its surface. They broke away into shining
cascades of diamonds and pearls, and between them appeared the face and
shoulders of the old woman of the road. "I have your magic mirror," she
cried.

"It is formed of the lowest teardrops of the Deeps."
She sprang out and trod the water to the shore, and as she went her rags
fell from her and she rose into the air a shining queen of fairies, more
beautiful than any other there, holding in her hand a tiny gleaming
mirror. "Come," she said, "let us set it in its place."
She touched the Queen-mother's hand, and in a flash they were all at
the palace, within the young king's sleeping chamber of turquoise and
gold.
There as he lay asleep the fairies set the mirror in its place with magic
words, and as it touched the wall it lengthened out and widened
till it stood as large as that of the young queen across the border
line.

Over the polished glass began to float the pictures of the country's
life. "How can I show my gratitude?" the Queen-mother asked; but the
fairies were gone.

Next morning when the little king awoke he ran to see the fine new mirror
in his room. He gazed and gazed upon the strange entrancing pictures
that came on it, and every day he spent long hours at the mirror. And
as he learned to recognise the hardships and the sufferings of his
people his heart grew hot to give relief, and he was no more haughty,
but used his power to ease their woes.

So in Eastroyal as in Westroyal there was content, and the people loved
their king and praised him through all his days until the end. And
all the kings who followed after him ruled wisely and were loved.

[Illustration]
[Illustration: "Look closely at my flowers," she said, "and tell me which
you think most beautiful."]

Fairy Tenderheart.

Little Fairy Tenderheart was weeping. She sat on a ledge that overlooked
the world, and her tears fell fast. In twos and threes her sisters flew
from Fairyland to put their arms about her, but none could comfort
her.
"Come, dance and sing with us and forget your grief," they said.

She shook her head. "The terrible fighting!" she said. "See where far below
men rage, killing each other. Rivers run red with blood, and the sorrow
of weeping women rises through the air to where I sit. How can I dance and
sing?"
"It is the world at war," said an older fairy sadly. "I too have wept in
earlier days when men have fought. But our tears are wasted, little sister.
Come away."
Fairy Tenderheart looked eagerly at her. "You who have watched the
world so many years," she said, "tell me why such dreadful deeds are done
down there."

The older fairy bent her eyes on the blackened plains of earth. "I cannot
tell you that," she slowly said. "We watch and pity, but we cannot know
what works in the hearts of men that they should gather in their millions
to destroy their brothers and themselves. No other creature turns on
its own kind and kills so terribly as man."
[Illustration: In twos and threes her sisters flew from Fairyland to put
their arms about her, but none could comfort her.]
"What can we do? It must be stopped. What can we do?"
"We can do nothing, little sister.

See where the women of the world stretch out their hands, imploring
men to live in peace. They beg the lives of fathers, husbands, sons; they
point to ruined homes and desolated lands. 'War wrecks our lives!'
they cry. Yet even for those they love men will not give up battle.

What, then, can fairies do?

Tears are useless.

Come away."
"I must stay here. I must think of something I can do," said Fairy
Tenderheart; and she would not go.

Her tears had stopped. She searched with anxious eyes across the world
to find some means of helping men to better things, but no way could
she find. And still the fighters shot and stabbed, and the dying and
the dead lay piled upon the fields.

Another fairy flew to her. "Come away, little sister!" she
said. "I cannot bear to see you sorrowing. Come, or you will
forget the merry ways of Fairyland and grow like the Oldest Fairy
of All, who spends her life brooding over this dreary earth."
Fairy Tenderheart sprang up. "Where is she? Tell me where to find her.

Why did I not know of her before? I will go to her that we may be
companions in our sorrow. Perhaps together we may find a way to
help."
"Ah, do not go. Listen! She is so old that she has watched the world
since the beginning of wars, yet, as you see, she has found no way
of stopping them. How then can you?" 
"I must go."
"She left our joyful Fairyland for a Magic Garden, and whoever
enters that Garden can never come back to us. There she dwells for
ever alone, at work or in thought, or preparing for her mysterious
journeys to the earth. Do not go, or you too will be cut off from
our life of dance and song, never to return."
"I will go. Tell me the way."
The fairy flew off. "I will not tell you," she said. "You shall not
go."
"I will go," said Fairy Tenderheart again. With steadfast steps she
searched through Fairyland until she found a narrow track that led
between the winding mountains and far out across wide, shimmering
plains. This track she followed till she came upon the Magic
Garden.
The Oldest Fairy of All sat thinking among her flowers, and her
eyes were filled with peace. She looked at Fairy Tenderheart standing
at the gate. "Who enters here can never return to Fairyland," she
said, and her voice was sweeter than the songs of birds.
Fairy Tenderheart pushed open the gate and stepped within the
Garden.
"Who enters here finds joy," said the Oldest Fairy of All, and a
crown of happiness sat on her hair.
"You come to work?" she asked.
"I come to learn what I may do to help the suffering earth," said
Fairy Tenderheart. "Its cries of agony have beaten on my heart until
there was no rest for me in Fairyland. Is there no way to make war
cease? I come to you for wisdom."
The Oldest Fairy of All rose up and smiled, and her face was brighter
than the moon and stars. "Look closely at my flowers," she said,
"and tell me which you think most beautiful."
The flowers bloomed on every side, in every lovely hue--crimson and
gold and orange, blue and purple and pink and softest lavender. All
were scented, and all were beautiful; but there was one plant that
pleased the little fairy more than any other. It grew no taller
than the rest, made no great show of colour, yet through its stems
and leaves there shone a radiance as if a light hid in them. Its
flowers were clear as crystal--one could see quite through them--but
the sunlight falling on them was broken into glowing colours, so
that every blossom was a little bunch of flashing rainbows. And
where the flowers had closed and grown to fruit they hung golden
as the sun and fragrant with a scent that stole upon the wind and
made the heart heat high with happiness.Peter's.  How had she gone that far?  She did not
know herself precisely.  She remembered vaguely that she had wandered
through a labyrinth of small streets, had crossed the Tiber--no doubt by
the Garibaldi bridge--had passed through a large garden--doubtless the
Janicule, since she had walked along a portion of the ramparts.  She had
left the city by the Porte de Saint-Pancrace, to follow by that of
Cavallegieri the sinuous line of the Urban walls.

That corner of Rome, with a view of the pines of the Villa Pamfili on one
side, and on the other the back part of the Vatican, serves as a
promenade during the winter for the few cardinals who go in search of the
afternoon sun, certain there of meeting only a few strangers.  In the
month of May it is a desert, scorched by the sun, which glows upon the
brick, discolored by two centuries of that implacable heat which caresses
the scales of the green and gray lizards about to crawl between the bees
of Pope Urbain VIII's escutcheon of the Barberini family.  Madame Gorka's
instinct had at least served her in leading her upon a route on which she
met no one.  Now the sense of reality returned.  She recognized the
objects around her, and that framework, so familiar to her piety of
fervent Catholicism, the enormous square, the obelisk of Sixte-Quint in
the centre, the fountains, the circular portico crowned with bishops and
martyrs, the palace of the Vatican at the corner, and yonder the facade
of the large papal cathedral, with the Saviour and the apostles erect
upon the august pediment.

On any other occasion in life the pious young woman would have seen in
the chance which led her thither, almost unconsciously, an influence from
above, an invitation to enter the church, there to ask the strength to
suffer of the God who said: "Let him who wishes follow me, let him
renounce all, let him take up his cross and follow me!"  But she was
passing through that first bitter paroxysm of grief in which it is
impossible to pray, so greatly does the revolt of nature cry out within
us.  Later, we may recognize the hand of Providence in the trial imposed
upon us.  We see at first only the terrible injustice of fate, and we
tremble in the deepest recesses of our souls with rebellion at the blow
from which we bleed.  That which rendered the rebellion more invincible
and more fierce in Maud, was the suddenness of the mortal blow.

Daily some pure, honest woman, like her, acquires the proof of the
treason of a husband whom she has not ceased to love.  Ordinarily, the
indisputable proof is preceded by a long period of suspicion.  The
faithless one neglects his hearth.  A change takes place in his daily
habits.  Various hints reveal to the outraged wife the trace of a rival,
which woman's jealousy distinguishes with a scent as certain as that of a
dog which finds a stranger in the house.  And, finally, although there is
in the transition from doubt to certainty a laceration of the heart, it
is at least the laceration of a heart prepared.  That preparation, that
adaptation, so to speak, of her soul to the truth, Maud had been deprived
of.  The care taken by Madame Steno to strengthen the friendship between
her and Alba had suppressed the slightest signs.  Boleslas had no need to
change his domestic life in order to see his mistress at his convenience
and in an intimacy entertained, provoked, by his wife herself.  The wife,
too, had been totally, absolutely deceived.  She had assisted in her
husband's adultery with one of those illusions so complete that it seemed
improbable to the indifferent and to strangers.  The awakening from such
illusions is the most terrible.  That man whom society considered a
complaisant husband, that woman who seemed so indulgent a wife, suddenly
find that they have committed a murder or a suicide, to the great
astonishment of the world which, even then, hesitates to recognize in
that access of folly the proof, the blow, more formidable, more
instantaneous in its ravages, than those of love-sudden disillusion.
When the disaster is not interrupted by acts of violence, it causes an
irreparable destruction of the youthfulness of the soul, it is the idea
instilled in us forever that all can betray, since we have been betrayed
in that manner.  It is for years, for life, sometimes, that powerlessness
to be affected, to hope, to believe, which caused Maud Gorka to remain,
on that afternoon, leaning against the pedestal of a column, watching the
rain fall, instead of ascending to the Basilica, where the confessional
offers pardon for all sins and the remedy for all sorrows.  Alas!  It was
consolation simply to kneel there, and the poor woman was only in the
first stage of Calvary.

She watched the rain fall, and she found a savage comfort in the
formidable character of the storm, which seemed like a cataclysm of
nature, to such degree did the flash of the lightning and the roar of the
thunder mingle with the echoes of the vast palace beneath the lash of the
wind.  Forms began to take shape in her mind, after the whirlwind of
blind suffering in which she felt herself borne away after the first
glance cast upon that fatal letter.  Each word rose before her eyes, so
feverish that she closed them with pain.  The last two years of her life,
those which had bound her to Countess Steno, returned to her thoughts,
illuminated by a brilliance which drew from her constantly these words,
uttered with a moan: How could he?  She saw Venice and their sojourn in
the villa to which Boleslas had conducted her after the death of their
little girl, in order that there, in the restful atmosphere of the
lagoon, she might overcome the keen paroxysm of pain.

How very kind and delicate Madame Steno had been at that time; at least
how kind she had seemed, and how delicate likewise, comprehending her
grief and sympathizing with it....  Their superficial relations had
gradually ripened into friendship.  Then, no doubt, the treason had
begun.  The purloiner of love had introduced herself under cover of the
pity in which Maud had believed.  Seeing the Countess so generous, she
had treated as calumny the slander of the world relative to a person
capable of such touching kindness of heart.  And it was at that moment
that the false woman took Boleslas from her!  A thousand details recurred
to her which at the time she had not understood; the sails of the two
lovers in the gondola, which she had not even thought of suspecting; a
visit which Boleslas had made to Piove and from which he only returned
the following day, giving as a pretext a missed train; words uttered
aside on the balcony of the Palais Steno at night, while she talked with
Alba.  Yes, it was at Venice that their adultery began, before her who
had divined nothing, her whose heart was filled with inconsolable regret
for her lost darling!  Ah, how could he?  she moaned again, and the
visions multiplied.

In her mind were then opened all the windows which Gorka's perfidity and
the Countess's as well, had sealed with such care.  She saw again the
months which followed their return to Rome, and that mode of life so
convenient for both.  How often had she walked out with Alba, thus
freeing the mother and the husband from the only surveillance annoying to
them.  What did the lovers do during those hours?  How many times on
returning to the Palazzetto Doria had she found Catherine Steno in the
library, seated on the divan beside Boleslas, and she had not mistrusted
that the woman had come, during her absence, to embrace that man, to talk
to him of love, to give herself to him, without doubt, with the charm of
villainy and of danger!  She remembered the episode of their meeting at
Bayreuth the previous summer, when she went to England alone with her
son, and when her husband undertook to conduct Alba and the Countess from
Rome to Bavaria.  They had all met at Nuremberg.  The apartments of the
hotel in which the meeting took place became again very vivid in Maud's
memory, with Madame Steno's bedroom adjoining that of Boleslas's.

The vision of their caresses, enjoyed in the liberty of the night, while
innocent Alba slept near by, and when she rolled away in a carriage with
little Luc, drew from her this cry once more: "Ah, how could he!"....
And immediately that vision awoke in her the remembrance of her husband's
recent return.  She saw him traversing Europe on the receipt of an
anonymous letter, to reach that woman's side twenty-four hours sooner.
What a proof of passion was the frenzy which had not allowed him any
longer to bear doubt and absence!....  Did he love the mistress who did
not even love him, since she had deceived him with Maitland?  And he was
going to fight a duel on her account!....  Jealousy, at that moment,
wrung the wife's heart with a pang still stronger than that of
indignation.  She, the strong Englishwoman, so large, so robust, almost
masculine in form, mentally compared herself with the supple Italian with
her form so round, with her gestures so graceful, her hands so delicate,
her feet so dainty; compared herself with the creature of desire, whose
every movement implied a secret wave of passion, and she ceased her cry--
"Ah, how could he?"--at once.  She had a clear knowledge of the power of
her rival.

It is indeed a supreme agony for an honorable woman, who loves, to feel
herself thus degraded by the mere thought of the intoxication her husband
has tasted in arms more beautiful, more caressing, more entwining than
hers.  It was, too, a signal for the return of will to the tortured but
proud soul.  Disgust possessed her, so violent, so complete, for the
atmosphere of falsehood and of sensuality in which Boleslas had lived two
years, that she drew herself up, becoming again strong and implacable.
Braving the storm, she turned in the direction of her home, with this
resolution as firmly rooted in her mind as if she had deliberated for
months and months.

"I will not remain with that man another day.  Tomorrow I will leave for
England with my son."

How many, in a similar situation, have uttered such vows, to abjure them
when they find themselves face to face with the man who has betrayed
them, and whom they love.  Maud was not of that order.  Certainly she
loved dearly the seductive Boleslas, wedded against her parents' will the
perfidious one for whom she had sacrificed all, living far from her
native land and her family for years, because it pleased him, breathing,
living, only for him and for their boy.  But there was within her--as her
long, square chin, her short nose and the strength of her brow revealed--
the force of inflexibility--which is met with in characters of an
absolute uprightness.  Love, with her, could be stifled by disgust, or,
rather, she considered it degrading to continue to love one whom she
scorned, and, at that moment, it was supreme scorn which reigned in her
heart.  She had, in the highest degree, the great virtue which is found
wherever there is nobility, and of which the English have made the basis
of their moral education--the religion, the fanaticism of loyalty.  She
had always grieved on discovering the wavering nature of Boleslas.  But
if she had observed in him, with sorrow, any exaggerations of language,
any artificial sentiment, a dangerous suppleness of mind, she had
pardoned him those defects with the magnanimity of love, attributing them
to a defective training.  Gorka at a very early age had witnessed a
stirring family drama--his mother and his father lived apart, while
neither the one nor the other had the exclusive guidance of the child.
How could she find indulgence for the shameful hypocrisy of two years'
standing, for the villainy of that treachery practised at the domestic
hearth, for the continued, voluntary disloyalty of every day, every hour?
Though Maud experienced, in the midst of her despair, the sort of
calmness which proves a firm and just resolution, when she reentered the
Palazzetto Doria--what a drama had been enacted in her heart since her
going out!--and it was in a voice almost as calm as usual that she asked:
"Is the Count at home?"

What did she experience when the servant, after answering her in the
affirmative, added: "Madame and Mademoiselle Steno, too, are awaiting
Madame in the salon."  At the thought that the woman who had stolen from
her her husband was there, the betrayed wife felt her blood boil, to use
a common but expressive phrase.  It was very natural that Alba's mother
should call upon her, as was her custom.  It was still more natural for
her to come there that day.  For very probably a report of the duel the
following day had reached her.  Her presence, however, and at that
moment, aroused in Maud a feeling of indignation so impassioned that her
first impulse was to enter, to drive out Boleslas's mistress as one would
drive out a servant surprised thieving.  Suddenly the thought of Alba
presented itself to her mind, of that sweet and pure Alba, of that soul
as pure as her name, of her whose dearest friend she was.  Since the
dread revelation she had thought several times of the young girl.  But
her deep sorrow having absorbed all the power of her soul, she had not
been able to feel such friendship for the delicate and pretty child.
At the thought of ejecting her rival, as she had the right to do, that
sentiment stirred within her.  A strange pity flooded her soul, which
caused her to pause in the centre of the large hall, ornamented with
statues and columns, which she was in the act of crossing.  She called
the servant just as he was about to put his hand on the knob of the door.
The analogy between her situation and that of Alba struck her very
forcibly.  She experienced the sensation which Alba had so often
experienced in connection with Fanny, sympathy with a sorrow so like her
own.  She could not give her hand to Madame Steno after what she had
discovered, nor could she speak to her otherwise than to order her from
her house.  And to utter before Alba one single phrase, to make one
single gesture which would arouse her suspicions, would be too
implacable, too iniquitous a vengeance!  She turned toward the door which
led to her own room, bidding the servant ask his master to come thither.
She had devised a means of satisfying her just indignation without
wounding her dear friend, who was not responsible for the fact that the
two culprits had taken shelter behind her innocence.

Having entered the small, pretty boudoir which led into her bedroom, she
seated herself at her desk, on which was a photograph of Madame Steno, in
a group consisting of Boleslas, Alba, and herself.  The photograph smiled
with a smile of superb insolence, which suddenly reawakened in the
outraged woman her frenzy of rancor, interrupted or rather suspended for
several moments by pity.  She took the frame in her hands, she cast it
upon the ground, trampling the glass beneath her feet, then she began to
write, on the first blank sheet, one of those notes which passion alone
dares to pen, which does not draw back at every word:

"I know all.  For two years you have been my husband's mistress.  Do not
deny it.  I have read the confession written by your own hand.  I do not
wish to see nor to speak to you again.  Never again set foot in my house.
On account of your daughter I have not driven you out to-day.  A second
time I shall not hesitate."

She was just about to sign Maud Gorka, when the sound of the door opening
and shutting caused her to turn.  Boleslas was before her.  Upon his face
was an ambiguous expression, which exasperated the unhappy wife still
more.  Having returned more than an hour before, he had learned that Maud
had accompanied to the Rue Leopardi Madame Maitland, who was ill, and he
awaited her return with impatience, agitated by the thought that
Florent's sister was no doubt ill owing to the duel of the morrow, and in
that case, Maud, too, would know all.  There are conversations and, above
all, adieux which a man who is about to fight a duel always likes to
avoid.  Although he forced a smile, he no longer doubted.  His wife's
evident agitation could not be explained by any other cause.  Could he
divine that she had learned not only of the duel, but, too, of an
intrigue that day ended and of which she had known nothing for two years?
As she was silent, and as that silence embarrassed him, he tried, in
order to keep him in countenance, to take her hand and kiss it, as was
his custom.  She repelled him with a look which he had never seen upon
her face and said to him, handing him the sheet of paper lying before
her:

"Do you wish to read this note before I send it to Madame Steno, who is
in the salon with her daughter?"

Boleslas took the letter.  He read the terrible lines, and he became
livid.  His agitation was so great that he returned the paper to his wife
without replying, without attempting to prevent, as was his duty, the
insult offered to his former mistress, whom he still loved to the point
of risking his life for her.  That man, so brave and so yielding at once,
was overwhelmed by one of those surprises which put to flight all the
powers of the mind, and he watched Maud slip the note into an envelope,
write the address and ring.  He heard her say to the servant:

"You will take this note to Countess Steno and you will excuse me to the
ladies....  I feel too indisposed to receive any one.  If they insist,
you will reply that I have forbidden you to admit any one.  You
understand--any one."

The man took the note.  He left the room and he had no doubt fulfilled
his errand while the husband and wife stood there, face to face, neither
of them breaking the formidable silence.  They felt that the hour was a
solemn one.

Never, since the day on which Cardinal Manning had united their destinies
in the chapel of Ardrahan Castle, had they been engaged in a crisis so
tragical.  Such moments lay bare the very depths of the character.
Courageous and noble, Maud did not think of weighing her words.  She did
not try to feed her jealousy, nor to accentuate the cruelty of the cause
of the insult which she had the right to launch at the man toward whom
that very morning she had been so confiding, so tender.  The baseness and
the cruelty were to remain forever unknown to the woman who no longer
hesitated as to the bold resolution she had made.  No.  That which she
expected of the man whom she had loved so dearly, of whom she had
entertained so exalted an opinion, whom she had just seen fall so low,
was a cry of truth, an avowal in which she would find the throb of a last
remnant of honor.  If he were silent it was not because he was preparing
a denial.  The tenor of Maud's letter left no doubt as to the nature of
the proofs she had in her hand, which she had there no doubt.  How?
He did not ask himself that question, governed as he was by a phenomenon
in which was revealed to the full the singular complexity of his nature.
The Slav's especial characteristic is a prodigious, instantaneous
nervousness.  It seems that those beings with the uncertain hearts have a
faculty of amplifying in themselves, to the point of absorbing the heart
altogether, states of partial, passing, and yet sincere emotion.
The intensity of their momentary excitement thus makes of them sincere
comedians, who speak to you as if they felt certain sentiments of an
exclusive order, to feel contradictory ones the day after, with the same
ardor, with the same untruthfulness, unjustly say the victims of those
natures, so much the more deceitful as they are more vibrating.

He suffered, indeed, on discovering that Maud had been initiated into his
criminal intrigue, but he suffered more for her than for himself.  It was
sufficient for that suffering to occupy a few moments, a few hours.  It
reinvested the personality of the impassioned and weak husband who loved
his wife while betraying her.  There was, indeed, a shade of it in his
adventure, but a very slight shade.  And yet, he did not think he was
telling an untruth, when he finally broke the silence to say to her whom
he had so long deceived:

"You have avenged yourself with much severity, Maud, but you had the
right....  I do not know who has informed you of an error which was very
culpable, very wrong, very unfortunate, too....  I know that I have in
Rome enemies bent upon my ruin, and I am sure they have left me no means
of defending myself.  I have deceived you, and I have suffered."

He paused after those words, uttered with a tremor of conviction which
was not assumed.  He had forgotten that ten minutes before he had entered
the room with the firm determination to hide his duel and its cause from
the woman for whose pardon he would at that moment have sacrificed his
life without hesitation.  He continued, in a voice softened by affection:
"Whatever they have told you, whatever you have read, I swear to you, you
do not know all."

"I know enough," interrupted Maud, "since I know that you have been the
lover of that woman, of the mother of my intimate friend, at my side,
under my very eyes....  If you had suffered by that deception, as you
say, you would not have waited to avow all to me until I held in my hands
the undeniable proof of your infamy....  You have cast aside the mask,
or, rather, I have wrested it from you....  I desire no more....  As for
the details of the shameful story, spare me them.  It was not to hear
them that I reentered a house every corner of which reminds me that I
believed in you implicitly, and that you have betrayed me, not one day,
but every day; that you betrayed me the day before yesterday, yesterday,
this morning, an hour ago....  I repeat, that is sufficient."

"But it is not sufficient for me!"  exclaimed Boleslas.  "Yes, all you
have just said is true, and I deserve to have you tell it to me.  But
that which you could not read in those letters shown to you, that which I
have kept for two years in the depths of my heart, and which must now be
told--is that, through all these fatal impulses, I have never ceased to
love you....  Ah, do not recoil from me, do not look at me thus....
I feel it once more in the agony I have suffered since you are speaking
to me; there is something within me that has never ceased being yours.
That woman has been my aberration.  She has had my madness, my senses,
my passion, all the evil instincts of my being....  You have remained my
idol, my affection, my religion....  If I lied to you it was because I
knew that the day on which you would find out my fault I should see you
before me, despairing and implacable as you now are, as I can not bear to
have you be.  Ah, judge me, condemn me, curse me; but know, but feel,
that in spite of all I have loved you, I still love you."

Again he spoke with an enthusiasm which was not feigned.  Though he had
deceived her, he recognized only too well the value of the loyal creature
before him, whom he feared he should lose.  If he could not move her at
the moment when he was about to fight a duel, when could he move her?
So he approached her with the same gesture of suppliant and impassioned
adoration which he employed in the early days of their marriage, and
before his treason, when he had told her of his love.  No doubt that
remembrance thrust itself upon Maud and disgusted her, for it was with
veritable horror that she again recoiled, replying:

"Be silent!  That lie is the worst of all.  It pains me.  I blush for
you, in seeing that you have not even the courage to acknowledge your
fault.  God is my witness, I should have respected you more, had you
said: 'I have ceased loving you.  I have taken a mistress.  It was
convenient for me to lie to you.  I have lied.  I have sacrificed all to
my passion, my honor, my duties, my vows and you.'....  Ah, speak to me
like that, that I may have with you the sentiment of truth....  But that
you dare to repeat to me words of tenderness after what you have done to
me, inspires me with repulsion.  It is too bitter."

"Yes," said Boleslas, "you think thus.  True and simple as you are, how
could you have learned to understand what a weak will is--a will which
wishes and which does not, which rises and which falls?....  And yet,
if I had not loved you, what interest would I have in lying to you?
Have I anything to conceal now?  Ah, if you knew in what a position I am,
on the eve of what day, I beseech you to believe that at least the best
part of my being has never ceased to be yours!"

It was the strongest effort he could make to bring back the heart of his
wife so deeply wounded--the allusion to his duel.  For since she had not
mentioned it to him, it was no doubt because she was still ignorant of
it.  He was once more startled by the reply she made, and which proved to
him to what a degree indignation had paralyzed even her love.  He
resumed:

"Do you know it?"

"I know that you fight a duel to-morrow," said she, "and for your
mistress, I know, too."

"It is not true," he exclaimed; "it is not for her."

"What?"  asked Maud, energetically.  "Was it not on her account that you
went to the Rue Leopardi to provoke your rival?  For she is not even true
to you, and it is justice.  Was it not on her account that you wished to
enter the house, in spite of that rival's brother-in-law, and that a
dispute arose between you, followed by this challenge?  Was it not on her
account, and to revenge yourself, that you returned from Poland, because
you had received anonymous letters which told you all?  And to know all
has not disgusted you forever with that creature?....  But if she had
deigned to lie to you, she would have you still at her feet, and you dare
to tell me that you love me when you have not even cared to spare me the
affront of learning all that villainy--all that baseness, all that
disgrace--through some one else?"

"Who was it?"  he asked.  "Name that Judas to me, at least?"

"Do not speak thus," interrupted Maud, bitterly; "you have lost the
right....  And then do not seek too far....  I have seen Madame Maitland
to-day."

"Madame Maitland?"  repeated Boleslas.  "Did Madame Maitland denounce me
to you?  Did Madame Maitland write those anonymous letters?"

"She desired to be avenged," replied Maud, adding: "She has the right,
since your mistress robbed her of her husband."

"Well, I, too, will be avenged!"  exclaimed the young man.  "I will kill
that husband for her, after I have killed her brother.  I will kill them
both, one after the other."....  His mobile countenance, which had just
expressed the most impassioned of supplications, now expressed only
hatred and rage, and the same change took place in his immoderate
sensibility.  "Of what use is it to try to settle matters?"  he
continued.  "I see only too well all is ended between us.  Your pride and
your rancor are stronger than your love.  If it had been otherwise, you
would have begged me not to fight, and you would only have reproached me,
as you have the right to do, I do not deny....  But from the moment that
you no longer love me, woe to him whom I find in my path!  Woe to Madame
Maitland and to those she loves!"

"This time at least you are sincere," replied Maud, with renewed
bitterness.  "Do you think I have not suffered sufficient humiliation?
Would you like me to supplicate you not to fight for that creature?
And do you not feel the supreme outrage which that encounter is to me?
Moreover," she continued with tragical solemnity, "I did not summon you
to have with you a conversation as sad as it is useless, but to tell you
my resolution....  I hope that you will not oblige me to resort for its
execution to the means which the law puts in my power?"

"I don't deserve to be spoken to thus," said Boleslas, haughtily.

"I will remain here to-night," resumed Maud, without heeding that reply,
"for the last time.  To-morrow evening I shall leave for England."

"You are free," said he, with a bow.

"And I shall take my son with me," she added.

"Our son!"  he replied, with the composure of a man overcome by an access
of tenderness and who controls himself.  "That?  No. I forbid it."

"You forbid it?"  said she.  "Very well, we will appeal it.  I knew that
you would force me," she continued, haughtily, in her turn, "to have
recourse to the law....  But I shall not recoil before anything.
In betraying me as you have done, you have also betrayed our child.
I will not leave him to you.  You are not worthy of him."

"Listen, Maud," said Boleslas, sadly, after a pause, "remember that it is
perhaps the last time we shall meet....  To-morrow, if I am killed, you
shall do as you like....  If I live, I promise to consent to any
arrangement that will be just....  What I ask of you is--and I have the
right, notwithstanding my faults--in the name of our early years of
wedded life, in the name of that son himself, to leave me in a different
way, to have a feeling, I don't say of pardon, but of pity."

"Did you have it for me," she replied, "when you were following your
passion by way of my heart?  No!"....  And she walked before him in order
to reach the door, fixing upon him eyes so haughty that he involuntarily
lowered his.  "You have no longer a wife and I have no longer a
husband....  I am no Madame Maitland; I do not avenge myself by means of
anonymous letters nor by denunciation....  But to pardon you?.... Never,
do you hear, never!"

With those words she left the room, with those words into which she put
all the indomitable energy of her character....  Boleslas did not essay
to detain her.  When, an hour after that horrible conversation, his valet
came to inform him that dinner was served, the wretched man was still in
the same place, his elbow on the mantelpiece and his forehead in his
hand.  He knew Maud too well to hope that she would change her
determination, and there was in him, in spite of his faults, his folly
and his complications, too much of the real gentleman to employ means of
violence and to detain her forcibly, when he had erred so gravely.  I
must tell you that a republic is a free state, without any king. You will
go first to the Hague, which is the most beautiful village in the world,
for it is not a town. Amsterdam, reckoned the capital of the United
Provinces, is a very fine, rich city.
There are besides in Holland several considerable towns--such as
Dort, Haerlem, Leyden, Delft, and Rotterdam.

You will observe throughout Holland the greatest cleanliness: the very
streets are cleaner than our houses are here. Holland carries on a very
great trade, particularly to China, Japan, and all over the East Indies."

P.T.W.

* * * * *

THE HAWTHORN WELL.

[The following lines are associated with a singular species of popular
superstition which may in some measure, explain the "pale cast of
thought" that pervades them. They are written by a native of Northumberland.
"The Hawthorn Well," was a _Rag Well_, and so called from persons
formerly leaving rags there for the cure of certain diseases. Bishop Hall,
in his Triumphs of Rome, ridicules a superstitious prayer of the Popish
Church for the "blessing of clouts in the way of cure of diseases;"
and Mr. Brand asks, "Can it have originated thence?" He further
observes:--"this absurd custom is not extinct even at this day: I have
formerly frequently observed shreds or bits of rag upon the bushes
that overhang a well in the road to Benton, a village in the vicinity
of Newcastle-upon-Tyne, which, from that circumstance, is now or
was very lately called _The Rag Well_.

This name is undoubtedly of long standing: probably it has been visited
for some disease or other, and these rag-offerings are the relics
of the then prevailing popular superstition."--_Brand's Popular Antiquities_,
vol. ii. p. 270.]

"From hill, from dale, each charm is fled; Groves, flocks, and fountains,
please no more."

No joy, nor hope, no pleasure, nor its dream, Now cheers my heart. The
current of my life Seems settled to a dull, unruffled lake, Deep
sunk 'midst gloomy rocks and barren hills; Which tempests only stir
and clouds obscure; Unbrightened by the cheerful beam of day, Unbreathed
on by the gentle western breeze, Which sweeps o'er pleasant meads and
through the woods, Stirring the leaves which seem to dance with joy.

No more the beauteous landscape in its pride Of summer loveliness--when
every tree Is crowned with foliage, and each blooming flower Speaks
by its breath its presence though unseen-- For me has charms; although
in early days, Ere care and grief had dulled the sense of joy, No
eye more raptured gazed upon the scene Of woody dell, green slope,
or heath-clad hill; Nor ear with more delight drank in the strains
Warbled by cheerful birds from every grove, Or thrilled by larks
up-springing to the sky.

From the hill side--where oft in tender youth I strayed, when hope, the
sunshine of the mind, Lent to each lovely scene, a double charm
And tinged all objects with its golden hues-- There gushed a spring,
whose waters found their way Into a basin of rude stone below.

A thorn, the largest of its kind, still green And flourishing, though
old, the well o'erhung; Receiving friendly nurture at its roots
From what its branches shaded; and around The love-lorn primrose
and wild violet grew, With the faint bubbling of that limpid fount.

Here oft the shepherd came at noon-tide heat And sat him down upon the
bank of turf Beneath the thorn, to eat his humble meal And drink
the crystal from that cooling spring.

Here oft at evening, in that placid hour When first the stars appear,
would maidens come To fill their pitchers at the Hawthorn Well, Attended
by their swains; and often here Were heard the cheerful song and
jocund laugh Which told of heart-born gladness, and awoke The slumbering
echoes in the distant wood.

But now the place is changed. The pleasant path, Which wound so gently up
the mountain side Is overgrown with bent and russet heath; The
thorn is withered to a moss-clad stump, And the fox kennels where
the turf-bank rose!

The primrose and wild violet now no more Spread their soft fragrance
round.

The hollow stone Is rent and broken; and the spring is dry!

* * * * *
But yesterday I passed the spot, in thought Enwrapped--unlike the
fancies which played round My heart in life's sweet morning, bright
and brief:
And as I stood and gazed upon the change, Methought a voice low
whispered in my ear:
"Thy destiny is linked with that low spring; Its course is changed,
and so for aye shall be The tenor of thy life; and anxious cares,
And fruitless wishes, springing without hope, Shall rankle round
thy heart, like those foul weeds Which now grow thick where flow'rets
bloomed anew:-- Like to that spring, thy fount of joy is dry!"

"And which I shall not follow," said Boleslas, adding: "I give you my
word that if I had no other cause for care than this duel, you would not
see me in this condition."  He uttered that phrase in a tragical voice,
the sincerity of which the two Italians felt.  They looked at each other
without speaking.  They were too shrewd and too well aware of the
simplest scandals of Rome not to have divined the veritable cause of the
encounter between Florent and Boleslas.  On the other hand, they knew the
latter too well not to mistrust somewhat his attitudes.  However, there
was such simple emotion in his accent that they spontaneously pitied him,
and, without another word, they no longer opposed the caprices of their
strange client, whom they did not leave until two o'clock in the morning
--and fortune favored them.  For they found themselves at the end of a
game, recklessly played, each the richer by two or three hundred louis
apiece.  That meant a few days more in Paris on the next visit.  They,
too, truly regretted their friend's luck, saying, on separating:

"I very much fear for him," said Cibo.  "Such luck at gaming, the night
before a duel--bad sign, very bad sign."

"So much the more so that some one was there," replied Pietrapertosa,
making with his fingers the sign which conjures the jettutura.  For
nothing in the world would he have named the personages against whose
evil eye he provided in that manner.  But Cibo understood him, and,
drawing from his trousers pocket his watch, which he fastened a
l'anglaise by a safety chain to his belt, he pointed out among the charms
a golden horn:

"I have not let it go this evening," said he.  "The worst is, that Gorka
will not sleep, and then, his hand!"

Only the first of those two prognostics was to be verified.  Returning
home at that late hour, Boleslas did not even retire.  He employed the
remainder of the night in writing a long letter to his wife, one to his
son, to be given to him on his eighteenth birthday, all in case of an
accident.  Then he examined his papers and he came upon the package of
letters he had received from Madame Steno.  Merely to reread a few of
them, and to glance at the portraits of that faithless mistress again,
heightened his anger to such a degree that he enclosed the whole in a
large envelope, which he addressed to Lincoln Maitland.  He had no sooner
sealed it than he shrugged his shoulders, saying: "Of what use?"  He
raised the piece of material which stopped up the chimney, and, placing
the envelope on the fire-dogs, he set it on fire.  He shook with the
tongs the remains of that which had been the most ardent, the most
complete passion of his life, and he relighted the flames under the
pieces of paper still intact.  The unreasonable employment of a night
which might be his last had scarcely paled his face.  But his friends,
who knew him well, started on seeing him with that impassively sinister
countenance when he alighted from his phaeton, at about eight o'clock,
at the inn selected for the meeting.  He had ordered the carriage the day
before to allay his wife's suspicions by the pretense of taking one of
his usual morning drives.  In his mental confusion he had forgotten to
give a counter order, and that accident caused him to escape the two
policemen charged by the questorship to watch the Palazzetto Doria, on
Lydia Maitland's denunciation.  The hired victoria, which those agents
took, soon lost track of the swift English horses, driven as a man of his
character and of his mental condition could drive.

The precaution of Chapron's sister was, therefore, baffled in that
direction, and she succeeded no better with regard to her brother, who,
to avoid all explanation with Lincoln, had gone, under the pretext of a
visit to the country, to dine and sleep at the hotel.  It was there that
Montfanon and Dorsenne met him to conduct him to the rendezvous in the
classical landau.  Hardly had they reached the eminence of the circus of
Maxence, on the Appian Way, when they were passed by Boleslas's phaeton.

"You can rest very easy," said Montfanon to Florent.  "How can one aim
correctly when one tires one's arm in that way?"

That had been the only allusion to the duel made between the three men
during the journey, which had taken about an hour.  Florent talked as he
usually did, asking all sorts of questions which attested his care for
minute information--the most of which might be utilized by his brother-
in-law-and the Marquis had replied by evoking, with his habitual
erudition, several of the souvenirs which peopled that vast country,
strewn with tombs, aqueducts, ruined villas, with the line of the Monts
Albains enclosing them beyond.

Dorsenne was silent.  It was the first affair at which he had assisted,
and his nervous anxiety was extreme.

Tragical presentiments oppressed him, and at the same time he apprehended
momentarily that, Montfanon's religious scruples reawakening, he would
not only have to seek another second, but would have to defer a solution
so near.  However, the struggle which was taking place in the heart of
the "old leaguer" between the gentleman and the Christian, was displayed
during the drive only by an almost imperceptible gesture.  As the
carriage passed the entrance to the catacomb of St. Calixtus, the former
soldier of the Pope turned away his head.  Then he resumed the
conversation with redoubled energy, to pause in his turn, however, when
the landau took, a little beyond the Tomb of Caecilia, a transverse road
in the direction of the Ardeatine Way.  It was there that 'l'Osteria del
tempo perso' was built, upon the ground belonging to Cibo, on which the
duel was to take place.

Before l'Osteria, whose signboard was surmounted by the arms of Pope
Innocent VIII, three carriages were already waiting--Gorka's phaeton, a
landau which had brought Cibo, Pietrapertosa and the doctor, and a simple
botte, in which a porter had come.  That unusual number of vehicles
seemed likely to attract the attention of riflemen out for a stroll, but
Cibo answered for the discretion of the innkeeper, who indeed cherished
for his master the devotion of vassal to lord, still common in Italy.
The three newcomers had no need to make the slightest explanation.
Hardly had they alighted from the carriage, when the maid conducted them
through the hall, where at that moment two huntsmen were breakfasting,
their guns between their knees, and who, like true Romans, scarcely
deigned to glance at the strangers, who passed from the common hall into
a small court, from that court, through a shed, into a large field
enclosed by boards, with here and there a few pine-trees.

That rather odd duelling-ground had formerly served Cibo as a paddock.
He had essayed to increase his slender income by buying at a bargain some
jaded horses, which he intended fattening by means of rest and good
fodder, and then selling to cabmen, averaging a small profit.  The
speculation having miscarried, the place was neglected and unused, save
under circumstances similar to those of this particular morning.

"We have arrived last," said Montfanon, looking at his watch; "we are,
however, five minutes ahead of time.  Remember," he added in a low voice,
turning to Florent, "to keep the body well in the background," these
words being followed by other directions.

"Thanks," replied Florent, who looked at the Marquis and Dorsenne with a
glance which he ordinarily had only for Lincoln, "and you know that,
whatever may come, I thank you for all from the depths of my heart."

The young man put so much grace in that adieu, his courage was so simple,
his sacrifice for his brother-in-law so magnanimous and natural--in fact,
for two days both seconds had so fully appreciated the charm of that
disposition, absolutely free from thoughts of self--that they pressed his
hand with the emotion of true friends.  They were themselves, moreover,
interested, and at once began the series of preparations without which
the role of assistant would be physically insupportable to persons
endowed with a little sensibility.  In experienced hands like those of
Montfanon, Cibo and Pietrapertosa, such preliminaries are speedily
arranged.  The code is as exact as the step of a ballet.  Twenty minutes
after the entrance of the last arrivals, the two adversaries were face to
face.  The signal was given.  The two shots were fired simultaneously,
and Florent sank upon the grass which covered the enclosure.  He had a
bullet in his thigh.

Dorsenne has often related since, as a singular trait of literary mania,
that at the moment the wounded man fell he, himself, notwithstanding the
anxiety which possessed him, had watched Montfanon, to study him.  He
adds that never had he seen a face express such sorrowful piety as that
of the man who, scorning all human respect, made the sign of the cross.
It was the devotee of the catacombs, who had left the altar of the
martyrs to accomplish a work of charity, then carried away by anger so
far as to place himself under the necessity of participating in a duel,
who was, no doubt, asking pardon of God.  What remorse was stirring
within the heart of the fervent, almost mystical Christian, so strangely
mixed up in an adventure of that kind?  He had at least this comfort,
that after the first examination, and when they had borne Florent into a
room prepared hastily by the care of Cibo, the doctor declared himself
satisfied.  The ball could even be removed at once, and as neither the
bone nor the muscles had been injured it was a matter of a few weeks at
the most.

"All that now remains for us," concluded Cibo, who had brought back the
news, "is to draw up our official report."

At that instant, and as the witnesses were preparing to reenter the house
for the last formality, an incident occurred, very unexpected, which was
to transform the encounter, up to that time so simple, into one of those
memorable duels which are talked over at clubs and in armories.  If
Pietrapertosa and Cibo had ceased since morning to believe in the
jettatura of the "some one" whom neither had named, it must be
acknowledged that they were very unjust, for the good fortune of having
gained something wherewith to swell their Parisian purses was surely
naught by the side of this--to have to discuss with the Cavals, the
Machaults and other professionals the case, almost unprecedented, in
which they were participants.

Boleslas Gorka, who, when once his adversary had fallen, paced to and fro
without seeming to care as to the gravity of the wound, suddenly
approached the group formed by the four men, and in a tone of voice which
did not predict the terrible aggression in which he was about to indulge,
he said:

"One moment, gentlemen.  I desire to say a few words in your presence to
Monsieur Dorsenne."

"I am at your service, Gorka," replied Julien, who did not suspect the
hostile intention of his old friend.  He did not divine the form which
that hostility was about to take, but he had always upon his mind his
word of honor falsely given, and he was prepared to answer for it.

"It will not take much time, sir," continued Boleslas, still with the
same insolently formal politeness, "you know we have an account to
settle....  But as I have some cause not to believe in the validity of
your honor, I should like to remove all cause of evasion."  And before
any one could interfere in the unheard-of proceedings he had raised his
glove and struck Dorsenne in the face.  As Gorka spoke, the writer turned
pale.  The ferocious spirit exhibited from the first by the Secessionists
towards all dissentients, the invasion of Western Virginia by Eastern,
the threats to put down loyal Kentucky, the foray in Missouri, the
plan for capturing Washington, which was part of the original
scheme, are convincing proofs, that if by any pacification whatever
our troops were disbanded to-day, to-morrow a Southern army would
be on the march for Washington, Philadelphia, New York, and perhaps
Chicago.

The South has sufficiently declared the cause of this trouble to be
the irreconcilable conflict between their institutions and the fundamental
principles of this government. While the cause remains in full
strength, and after it has once burst forth in bloody and final
collision, nothing will ever check that strife, whether in or out
of the Union.

The cause must be eradicated. Meanwhile, our own position, both before the
world and in our own struggle at home, is a false one, so long as
we blink the real issue.

Many indications are hopeful. Gen. Butler's letter to the Secretary
of War, and the Secretary's reply, look in the right direction. The
Confiscation Act is pregnant with great consequences, and may yet be
so used as to become an emancipation act in all the rebel States. It is
high time it were so used. We have serious doubts whether the rebellion
will ever be suppressed till that trenchant weapon is wielded. We
reverently doubt whether the Lord means it shall be.

The quiet passage of the Confiscation Act was an immense step of governmental
progress. Perhaps it was all that the nation as a whole and the government
were ready for. It may answer as a keen wedge.

But we trust that, in December, Congress will make clean work by
the full emancipation of all slaves in the rebel States, and by
provision in some way for the speedy and certain extinction of
slavery in the loyal States.

To accomplish the latter event, we would ourselves willingly submit to
any proper amount of pecuniary burden, provided it could be so
arranged as not to recognize a right of property in man.--Chicago
Congregational Herald.

PROCLAMATION OF GEN. FREMONT.

HEADQUARTERS, WESTERN DIVISION, St. Louis, Aug. 30, 1861.

Circumstances; in my judgment, are of sufficient urgency to render it
necessary that the Commanding General of this Department should assume
administrative powers of the State. Its disorganized condition,
helplessness of civil authority, and the total insecurity of life
and devastation of property by bands of murderers and marauders,
who infest nearly every county in the State, and avail themselves
of public misfortunes and the vicinity of a hostile force to gratify
private and neighborhood vengeance, and who find an enemy wherever
they find plunder, finally demand the severest measures to repress
the daily increasing crimes and outrages which are driving off the
inhabitants and ruining the State.

In this condition, the public safety and the success of our arms require
unity of purpose, without let or hindrance, to the prompt administration
of affairs
To divert his impatience, Montfanon bade the
innkeeper point out to him whither they had carried Florent, and he
ascended to the tiny room, where the doctor was dressing the wounded
man's leg.

"You see,"  said the latter, with a smile, "I shall have to limp a little
for a month....  And Dorsenne?"

"He is all right, I hope," replied Montfanon, adding, with ill-humor:
"Dorsenne is a fool; that is what Dorsenne is.  And Gorka is a wild
beast; that is what Gorka is."  And he related the episode which had just
taken place to the two men, who were so surprised that the doctor,
bandage in hand, paused in his work.  "And they wish to fight there at
once, like redskins.  Why not scalp one another?....  And that Cibo and
that Pietrapertosa would have consented to the duel if I had not opposed
it!  Fortunately they lack two seconds, and it is not easy to find in
this district two men who can sign an official report, for it is the mode
nowadays to have those paltry scraps of paper.  One of my friends and
myself had two such witnesses at twenty francs apiece.  But that was in
Paris in 'sixty-two."  And he entered upon the recital of the old-time
duel, to calm his anxiety, which burst forth again in these words: "It
seems they do not decide to separate so quickly.  It is not, however,
possible that they will fight....  Can we see them from here?"  He
approached the window, which indeed looked upon the enclosure.  The sight
which met his eyes caused the excellent man to stammer....  "The
miserable men!....  It is monstrous....  They are mad....  They have
found seconds....  Whom have they taken?....  Those two huntsmen!....
Ali, my God!  My God!"....  He could say no more.  The doctor had
hastened to the window to see what was passing, regardless of the fact
that Florent dragged himself thither as well.  Even the compromising
Everett has boldly told the South, "To be let alone is not all you
ask--but you demand a great deal more."

And in his late oration, he has most powerfully portrayed the
impossibility of a peaceful disunion.For Pietrapertosa, who seemed to direct the combat, after having measured
a space sufficiently long, of about fifty feet, was in the act of tracing
in the centre two lines scarcely ten or twelve metres apart.

"They have chosen the duel a 'marche interrompue'," groaned the veteran
duellist, whose knowledge of the ground did not deceive him.  Dorsenne
and Gorka, once placed, face to face, commenced indeed to advance, now
raising, now lowering their weapons with the terrible slowness of two
adversaries resolved not to miss their mark.

A shot was fired.  It was by Boleslas.  Dorsenne was unharmed.  Several
steps had still to be taken in order to reach the limit.  "See where a
group of children gathers round your precious plant!" she said. "How
eagerly they stretch their hands towards it, and how they look
into its flashing flowers.

They will never tread it in the mud, for they have seen its splendour.

The weapon was discharged, and the
three spectators at the window of the bedroom uttered three simultaneous
exclamations on seeing Gorka's arm fall and his hand drop the pistol.

"It is nothing," cried the doctor, "but a broken arm."

"The good Lord has been better to us than we deserve," said the Marquis.

"Now, at least, the madman will be quieted....  Brave Dorsenne!"  cried
Florent, who thought of his brother-in-law and who added gayly, leaning
on Montfanon and the doctor in order to reach the couch: "Finish quickly,
doctor, they will need you below immediately."




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

One of those trustful men who did not judge when they loved
That suffering which curses but does not pardon