Presently espying a certain rising ground, across which the Arcadians
had drawn their outer line of circumvallation, Archidamus proposed
to himself to take it. If he were once in command of that knoll, the
besiegers at its foot would be forced to retire. Accordingly he set
about leading a body of troops round to the point in question, and
during this movement the light infantry in advance of Archidamus,
advancing at the double, caught sight of the Arcadian Eparitoi (20)
outside the stockade and attacked them, while the cavalry made an
attempt to enforce their attack simultaneously. The Arcadians did not
swerve: in compact order they waited impassively. The Lacedaemonians
charged a second time: a second time they swerved not, but on the
contrary began advancing. Then, as the hoarse roar and shouting
deepened, Archidamus himself advanced in support of his troops. To do
so he turned aside along the carriage-road leading to Cromnus, and moved
onward in column two abreast, (21) which was his natural order. When
they came into close proximity to one another--Archidamus's troops in
column, seeing they were marching along a road; the Arcadians in compact
order with shields interlinked--at this conjuncture the Lacedaemonians
were not able to hold out for any length of time against the numbers of
the Arcadians. Before long Archidamus had received a wound which pierced
through his thigh, whilst death was busy with those who fought in
front of him, Polyaenidas and Chilon, who was wedded to the sister of
Archidamus, included. The whole of these, numbering no less than thirty,
perished in this action. Presently, falling back along the road,
they emerged into the open ground, and now with a sense of relief the
Lacedaemonians got themselves into battle order, facing the foe. The
Arcadians, without altering their position, stood in compact line, and
though falling short in actual numbers, were in far better heart--the
moral result of an attack on a retreating enemy and the severe loss
inflicted on him. The Lacedaemonians, on the other hand, were sorely
down-hearted: Archidamus lay wounded before their eyes; in their ears
rang the names of those who had died, the fallen being not only brave
men, but, one may say, the flower of Spartan chivalry. The two armies
were now close together, when one of the older men lifted up his voice
and cried: "Why need we fight, sirs? Why not rather make truce and part
friends?" Joyously the words fell on the ears of either host, and they
made a truce. The Lacedaemonians picked up their dead and retired; the
Arcadians withdrew to the point where their advance originally began,
and set up a trophy of victory.

 (20) So the troops of the Arcadian Federation were named. Diodorus
    (xv. 62) calls them "the select troops," {tous kaloumenous
    epilektous}.

 (21) See above, III. i. 22.

Now, as the Arcadians lay at Cromnus, the Eleians from the capital,
advancing in the first instance upon Pylus, fell in with the men of that
place, who had been beaten back from Thalamae. (22) Galloping along the
road, the cavalry of the Eleians, when they caught sight of them, did
not hesitate, but dashed at them at once, and put some to the sword,
while others of them fled for safety to a rising knoll. Ere long the
Eleian infantry arrived, and succeeded in dislodging this remnant on the
hillock also; some they slew, and others, nearly two hundred in number,
they took alive, all of whom where either sold, if foreigners, or, if
Eleian exiles, put to death. After this the Eleians captured the men
of Pylus and the place itself, as no one came to their rescue, and
recovered the Marganians.

 (22) A strong fortress in an unfrequented situation, defended by
    narrow passes (Leake, "Morea," ii. 204); it lay probably in the
    rocky recesses of Mount Scollis (modern Santameri), on the
    frontier of Achaea, near the modern village of Santameri. See
    Polyb. iv. 75. See Busolt, op. cit. p. 179.

The Lacedaemonians presently made a second attempt on Cromnus by a night
attack, got possession of the part of the palisading facing the Argives,
and at once began summoning their besieged fellow-citizens to come out.
Out accordingly came all who happened to be within easy distance, and
who took time by the forelock. The rest were not quick enough; a strong
Arcadian reinforcement cut them off, and they remained shut up inside,
and were eventually taken prisoners and distributed. One portion of
them fell to the lot of the Argives, one to the Thebans, (23) one to the
Arcadians, and one to the Messenians. The whole number taken, whether
true-born Spartans or Perioeci, amounted to more than one hundred.

 (23) "The Thebans must have been soldiers in garrison at Tegea,
    Megalopolis, or Messene."--Grote, "H. G." x. 433.

B.C. 364. And now that the Arcadians had leisure on the side of Cromnus,
they were again able to occupy themselves with the Eleians, and to
keep Olympia still more strongly garrisoned. In anticipation of the
approaching Olympic year, (24) they began preparations to celebrate the
Olympian games in conjunction with the men of Pisa, who claim to be
the original presidents of the Temple. (25) Now, when the month of the
Olympic Festival--and not the month only, but the very days, during
which the solemn assembly is wont to meet, were come, the Eleians, in
pursuance of preparations and invitations to the Achaeans, of which they
made no secret, at length proceeded to march along the road to Olympia.
The Arcadians had never imagined that they would really attack them; and
they were themselves just now engaged with the men of Pisa in carrying
out the details of the solemn assembly. They had already completed the
chariot-race, and the foot-race of the pentathlon. (26) The competitors
entitled to enter for the wrestling match had left the racecourse, and
were getting through their bouts in the space between the racecourse and
the great altar.

 (24) I.e. "Ol. 104. 1" (July B.C. 364).

 (25) For this claim on the part of the Pisatans (as the old
    inhabitants), see above, III. ii. 31; Paus. VI. xxii. 2; Diod. xv.
    78; Busolt, op. cit. p. 154.

 (26) As to the pentathlon, see above, IV. vii. 5. Whether the
    preceding {ippodromia} was, at this date, a horse or chariot race,
    or both, I am unable to say.

It must be understood that the Eleians under arms were already close at
hand within the sacred enclosure. (27) The Arcadians, without advancing
farther to meet them, drew up their troops on the river Cladaus, which
flows past the Altis and discharges itself into the Alpheus. Their
allies, consisting of two hundred Argive hoplites and about four hundred
Athenian cavalry, were there to support them. Presently the Eleians
formed into line on the opposite side of the stream, and, having
sacrificed, at once began advancing. Though heretofore in matters of
war despised by Arcadians and Argives, by Achaeans and Athenians alike,
still on this day they led the van of the allied force like the bravest
of the brave. Coming into collision with the Arcadians first, they at
once put them to flight, and next receiving the attack of the Argive
supports, mastered these also. Then having pursued them into the space
between the senate-house, the temple of Hestia, and the theatre thereto
adjoining, they still kept up the fighting as fiercely as ever, pushing
the retreating foe towards the great altar. But now being exposed to
missiles from the porticoes and the senate-house and the great temple,
(28) while battling with their opponents on the level, some of the
Eleians were slain, and amongst others the commander of the Three
Hundred himself, Stratolas. At this state of the proceedings they
retired to their camp.

 (27) "The {temenos} must here be distinguished from the Altis, as
    meaning the entire breadth of consecrated ground at Olympia, of
    which the Altis formed a smaller interior portion enclosed with a
    wall. The Eleians entered into a {temenos} before they crossed the
    river Kladeus, which flowed through the {temenos}, but alongside
    the Altis. The tomb of Oenomaus, which was doubtless included in
    the {temenos}, was on the right bank of the Kladeus (Paus. VI.
    xxi. 3); while the Altis was on the left bank of the river."--
    Grote, "H. G." x. 438, note 1. For the position of the Altis
    (Paus. V. x. 1) and several of the buildings here mentioned, and
    the topography of Olympia in general, see Baedeker's "Greece," p.
    322 foll.; and Dorpfeld's Plan ("Olympia und Umgegend," Berlin,
    1882), there reproduced.

 (28) Or, "from the porticoes of the senate-house and the great
    temple."

The Arcadians and those with them were so terrified at the thought of
the coming day that they gave themselves neither respite nor repose
that night, but fell to chopping up the carefully-compacted booths and
constructing them into palisades; so that when the Eleians did again
advance the next day and saw the strength of the barriers and the number
mounted on the temples, they withdrew to their city. They had proved
themselves to be warriors of such mettle as a god indeed by the breath
of his spirit may raise up and bring to perfection in a single day, but
into which it were impossible for mortal men to convert a coward even in
a lifetime.

B.C. 363. The employment of the sacred treasures of the temple by the
Arcadian magistrates (29) as a means of maintaining the Eparitoi (30)
aroused protest. The Mantineans were the first to pass a resolution
forbidding such use of the sacred property. They set the example
themselves of providing the necessary quota for the Troop in question
from their state exchequer, and this sum they sent to the federal
government. The latter, affirming that the Mantineans were undermining
the Arcadian league, retaliated by citing their leading statesmen to
appear before the assembly of Ten Thousand; and on their refusal to
obey the summons, passed sentence upon them, and sent the Eparitoi to
apprehend them as convicted persons. The Mantineans, however, closed
their gates, and would not admit the Troop within their walls. Their
example was speedily followed: others among the Ten Thousand began to
protest against the enormity of so applying the sacred treasures; it
was doubly wrong to leave as a perpetual heirloom to their children the
imputation of a crime so heinous against the gods. But no sooner was a
resolution passed in the general assembly (31) forbidding the use of the
sacred moneys for profane purposes than those (members of the league)
who could not have afforded to serve as Eparitoi without pay began
speedily to melt away; while those of more independent means, with
mutual encouragement, began to enrol themselves in the ranks of the
Eparitoi--the feeling being that they ought not to be a mere tool in
the hands of the corps, but rather that the corps itself should be their
instrument. Those members of the government who had manipulated the
sacred money soon saw that when they came to render an account of
their stewardship, in all likelihood they would lose their heads. They
therefore sent an embassy to Thebes, with instructions to the Theban
authorities warning them that, if they did not open a campaign, the
Arcadians would in all probability again veer round to Lacedaemon.

 (29) See above, VII. i. 24. "Were these magistrates, or merely popular
    leaders?"--Freeman, "Hist. Fed. Gov." p. 203, note 3.

 (30) Or, "Select Troop." See above.

 (31) "The common formula for a Greek confederation, {to koinon ton
    'Arkadon}, is used as an equivalent of {oi mupioi}" (here and
    below, SS. 35, 38)--Freeman, op. cit. 202, note 4.

The Thebans, therefore, began making preparations for opening a
campaign, but the party who consulted the best interests of Peloponnese
(32) persuaded the general assembly of the Arcadians to send an embassy
and tell the Thebans not to advance with an army into Arcadia, unless
they sent for them; and whilst this was the language they addressed to
Thebes, they reasoned among themselves that they could dispense with war
altogether. The presidency over the temple of Zeus, they were persuaded,
they might easily dispense with; indeed, it would at once be a more
upright and a holier proceeding on their parts to give it back, and with
such conduct the god, they thought, might be better pleased. As these
were also the views and wishes of the Eleians, both parties agreed to
make peace, and a truce was established.

 (32) See below, VII. v. 1, {oi kedouenoi tes Peloponnesou}. I regard
    these phrases as self-laudatory political catchwords.

B.C. 362. The oaths were ratified; and amongst those who swore to them
were included not only the parties immediately concerned, but the men of
Tegea, and the Theban general himself, who was inside Tegea with three
hundred heavy infantry of the Boeotians. Under these circumstances the
Arcadians in Tegea remained behind feasting and keeping holy day,
with outpouring of libations and songs of victory, to celebrate the
establishment of peace. Here was an opportunity for the Theban and
those of the government who regarded the forthcoming inquiry with
apprehension. Aided by the Boeotians and those of the Eparitoi who
shared their sentiments, they first closed the gates of the fortress of
Tegea, and then set about sending to the various quarters to apprehend
those of the better class. But, inasmuch as there were Arcadians present
from all the cities, and there was a general desire for peace, those
apprehended must needs be many. So much so, that the prison-house was
eventually full to overflowing, and the town-hall was full also. Besides
the number lodged in prison, a number had escaped by leaping down the
walls, and there were others who were suffered to pass through the
gates (a laxity easily explained, since no one, excepting those who were
anticipating their own downfall, cherished any wrathful feeling against
anybody). But what was a source of still graver perplexity to the Theban
commander and those acting with him--of the Mantineans, the very people
whom they had set their hearts on catching, they had got but very few.
Nearly all of them, owing to the proximity of their city, had, in fact,
betaken themselves home. Now, when day came and the Mantineans learned
what had happened, they immediately sent and forewarned the other
Arcadian states to be ready in arms, and to guard the passes; and they
set the example themselves by so doing. They sent at the same time to
Tegea and demanded the release of all Mantineans there detained. With
regard to the rest of the Arcadians they further claimed that no one
should be imprisoned or put to death without trial. If any one had any
accusation to bring against any, than by the mouth of their messengers
there present they gave notice that the state of Mantinea was ready to
offer bail, "Verily and indeed to produce before the general assembly
of the Arcadians all who might be summoned into court." The Theban
accordingly, on hearing this, was at a loss what to make of the affair,
and released his prisoners. Next day, summoning a congress of all the
Arcadians who chose to come, he explained, with some show of apology,
that he had been altogether deceived; he had heard, he said, that "the
Lacedaemonians were under arms on the frontier, and that some of the
Arcadians were about to betray Tegea into their hands." His auditors
acquitted him for the moment, albeit they knew that as touching
themselves he was lying. They sent, however, an embassy to Thebes and
there accused him as deserving of death. Epaminondas (who was at that
time the general at the head of the war department) is reported to have
maintained that the Theban commander had acted far more rightly when he
seized than when he let go the prisoners. "Thanks to you," he argued,
"we have been brought into a state of war, and then you, without our
advice or opinion asked, make peace on your own account; would it not
be reasonable to retort upon you the charge of treason in such conduct?
Anyhow, be assured," he added, "we shall bring an army into Arcadia,
and along with those who share our views carry on the war which we have
undertaken."


V

B.C. 362. This answer was duly reported to the general assembly of the
Arcadians, and throughout the several states of the league. Consequently
the Mantineans, along with those of the Arcadians who had the interests
of Peloponnesus at heart, as also the Eleians and the Achaeans, came
to the conclusion that the policy of the Thebans was plain. They wished
Peloponnesus to be reduced to such an extremity of weakness that it
might fall an easy prey into their hands who were minded to enslave it.
"Why else," they asked, "should they wish us to fight, except that we
may tear each other to pieces, and both sides be driven to look to them
for support? or why, when we tell them that we have no need of them at
present, do they insist on preparing for a foreign campaign? Is it not
plain that these preparations are for an expedition which will do us
some mischief?"

In this mood they sent to Athens, (1) calling on the Athenians for
military aid. Ambassadors also went to Lacedaemon on behalf of the
Eparitoi, summoning the Lacedaemonians, if they wished to give a helping
hand, to put a stop to the proceedings of any power approaching
to enslave Peloponnesus. As regards the headship, they came to an
arrangement at once, on the principle that each of the allied states
should exercise the generalship within its own territory.

 (1) For a treaty of alliance between Athens, the Arkadians, Achaeans,
    Eleians, and Phliasians, immediately before Mantinea, B.C. 362,
    {epi Molonos arkhontos}, see Hicks, 94; Kohler, "C. I. A." ii. p.
    405. It is preserved on a stele ("broken at bottom; but the top is
    surmounted by a relief representing Zeus enthroned, with a
    thunderbolt; a female figure  (= the {Summakhia}?) approaches
    lifting her veil, while Athena stands by") now standing among the
    sculptures from the Asklepieion on the Acropolis at Athens. See
    Milchhofer, p. 47, no. 7, "Die Museum," Athens, 1881. For the
    date, see Demosth. "c. Polycl." 1207.

While these matters were in progress, Epaminondas was prosecuting his
march at the head of all the Boeotians, with the Euboeans, and a
large body of Thessalians, furnished both by Alexander (2) and by his
opponents. The Phocians were not represented. Their special agreement
only required them to render assistance in case of an attack on Thebes;
to assist in a hostile expedition against others was not in the bond.
Epaminondas, however, reflected that inside Peloponnesus itself they
might count upon the Argives and the Messenians, with that section of
the Arcadians which shared their views. These latter were the men of
Tegea and Megalopolis, of Asea and Pallantium, with any townships which
owing to their small size or their position in the midst of these larger
cities were forced to follow their lead.

 (2) For Alexander of Pherae, see above, VI. iv. 34. In B.C. 363 the
    Thebans had sent an army under Pelopidas into Thessaly to assist
    their allies among the Thessalians with the Phthiot Achaeans and
    the Magnetes against Alexander. At Kynos Kephelae Alexander was
    defeated, but Pelopidas was slain (see Grote, "H. G." x. 420
    foll.). "His death, as it brought grief, so likewise it produced
    advantage to the allies; for the Thebans, as soon as they heard of
    his fall, delayed not their revenge, but presently sent seven
    thousand foot and seven hundred horse, under the command of
    Malcitas and Diogiton. And they, finding Alexander weak and
    without forces, compelled him to restore the cities he had taken,
    to withdraw his garrisons from the Magnesians and Achaeans of
    Phthiotos and swear to assist the Thebans against whatsoever
    enemies they should require."--Plut. "Pelop." 35 (Clough, ii.
    236).

Epaminondas advanced with rapid strides; but on reaching Nemea he
slackened speed, hoping to catch the Athenians as they passed,
and reflecting on the magnitude of such an achievement, whether in
stimulating the courage of his own allies, or in plunging his foes into
despondency; since, to state the matter concisely, any blow to Athens
would be a gain to Thebes. But during his pause at Nemea those who
shared the opposite policy had time to converge on Mantinea. Presently
the news reached Epaminondas that the Athenians had abandoned the idea
of marching by land, and were preparing to bring their supports to
Arcadia by sea through Lacedaemon. This being so, he abandoned his base
of Nemea and pushed on to Tegea.

That the strategy of the Theban general was fortunate I will not pretend
to assert, but in the particular combination of prudence and daring
which stamps these exploits, I look upon him as consummate. In the first
place, I cannot but admire the sagacity which led him to form his camp
within the walls of Tegea, where he was in greater security that he
would have been if entrenched outside, and where his future movements
were more completely concealed from the enemy. Again, the means to
collect material and furnish himself with other necessaries were readier
to his hand inside the city; while, thirdly, he was able to keep an eye
on the movements of his opponents marching outside, and to watch their
successful dispositions as well as their mistakes. More than this: in
spite of his sense of superiority to his antagonists, over and over
again, when he saw them gaining some advantage in position, he refused
to be drawn out to attack them. It was only when he saw plainly that no
city was going to give him its adhesion, and that time was slipping by,
that he made up his mind that a blow must be struck, failing which, he
had nothing to expect save a vast ingloriousness, in place of his former
fame. (3) He had ascertained that his antagonists held a strong position
round Mantinea, and that they had sent to fetch Agesilaus and the whole
Lacedaemonian army. He was further aware that Agesilaus had commenced
his advance and was already at Pellene. (4) Accordingly he passed
the word of command (5) to his troops to take their evening meal, put
himself at their head and advanced straight upon Sparta. Had it not been
for the arrival (by some providential chance) of a Cretan, who brought
the news to Agesilaus of the enemy's advance, he would have captured
the city of Sparta like a nest of young birds absolutely bereft of its
natural defenders. As it was, Agesilaus, being forewarned, had time to
return to the city before the Thebans came, and here the Spartans made
distribution of their scanty force and maintained watch and ward, albeit
few enough in numbers, since the whole of their cavalry were away in
Arcadia, and so was their foreign brigade, and so were three out of
their twelve regiments. (6)

 (3) Or, "dull obscurity in place of renown."

 (4) Pellene (or Pellana), a town of Laconia on the Eurotas, and on the
    road from Sparta to Arcadia; in fact the frontier fortress on the
    Eurotas, as Sellasia on the Oenus; "Dict. of Anct. Geog." s.v.;
    see Paus. iii. 20, S. 2; Strab. viii. 386; Polyb. iv. 81, xvi. 37;
    Plut. "Agis," 8; Leake, "Morea," iii. 14 foll.

 (5) Cf. "Hipparch." iv. 9.

 (6) Lit. "lochi." See above, VII. iv. 20; "Pol. Lac." xi. 4.

Arrived within the city of Sparta, (7) Epaminondas abstained from
gaining an entry at a point where his troops would have to fight on
level ground and under attack from the houses above; where also their
large numbers would give them no superiority over the small numbers of
the foemen. But, singling out a position which he conceived would give
him the advantage, he occupied it and began his advance against the city
upon a downward instead of an upward incline.

 (7) Grote ("H. G." x. 455) says: "Though he crossed the Eurotas and
    actually entered into the city of Sparta," as the words {epei de
    egeneto en te polei ton Spartiaton} certainly seem to me to imply.
    Others interpret "in the close neighbourhood of."

With regard to what subsequently took place, two possible explanations
suggest themselves: either it was miraculous, or it may be maintained
that there is no resisting the fury of desperation. Archidamus,
advancing at the head of but a hundred men, and crossing the one thing
which might have been expected to form an obstacle to the enemy, (8)
began marching uphill against his antagonists. At this crisis these
fire-breathing warriors, these victorious heroes of Leuctra, (9) with
their superiority at every point, aided, moreover, by the advantage of
their position, did not withstand the attack of Archidamus and those
with him, but swerved in flight.

 (8) Or, "to serve as his defence"; or, "the one obstacle to his
    progress," i.e. Archidamus's. It was a miraculous thing that the
    Thebans did not stop him.

 (9) See Mahaffy, "Hist. Gk. Lit." vol. ii. p. 268, 1st ed. See above,
    "Hell." VI. iv. 24; Diod. xv. 39, 56.

The vanguard of Epaminondas's troops were cut down; when, however,
flushed with the glory of their victory, the citizens followed up their
pursuit beyond the right point, they in turn were cut down--so plainly
was the demarking line of victory drawn by the finger of God. So then
Archidamus set up a trophy to note the limit of his success, and gave
back those who had there fallen of the enemy under a truce. Epaminondas,
on his side, reflecting that the Arcadians must already be hastening
to the relief of Lacedaemon, and being unwilling to engage them in
conjunction with the whole of the Lacedaemonian force, especially now
that the star of Sparta's fortune shone, whilst theirs had suffered some
eclipse, turned and marched back the way he came with all speed possible
into Tegea. There he gave his heavy infantry pause and refreshment, but
his cavalry he sent on to Mantinea; he begged them to "have courage and
hold on," instructing them that in all likelihood they would find the
flocks and herds of the Mantineans and the entire population itself
outside their walls, especially as it was the moment for carrying the
corn. So they set off.

The Athenian cavalry, started from Eleusis, had made their evening
meal at the Isthmus, and passing through Cleonae, as chance befell, had
arrived at Mantinea and had encamped within the walls in the houses. As
soon as the enemy were seen galloping up with evidently hostile intent,
the Mantineans fell to praying the Athenian knights to lend them all the
succour they could, and they showed them all their cattle outside, and
all their labourers, and among them were many children and graybeards
who were free-born citizens. The Athenians were touched by this appeal,
and, though they had not yet broken fast, neither the men themselves
nor their horses, went out eagerly to the rescue. And here we must needs
pause to admire the valour of these men also. The enemy whom they had
to cope with far outnumbered them, as was plain to see, and the former
misadventure of the cavalry in Corinth was not forgotten. (10) But none
of these things entered into their calculations now--nor yet the fact
that they were on the point of engaging Thebans and Thessalians, the
finest cavalry in the world by all repute. The only thing they thought
of was the shame and the dishonour, if, being there, they did not lend a
helping hand to their allies. In this mood, so soon as they caught sight
of the enemy, they fell with a crash upon him in passionate longing to
recover the old ancestral glory. Nor did they fight in vain--the
blows they struck enabled the Mantineans to recover all their property
outside, but among those who dealt them died some brave heroes; (11)
brave heroes also, it is evident, were those whom they slew, since on
either side the weapons wielded were not so short but that they could
lunge at one another with effect. The dead bodies of their own men they
refused to abandon; and there were some of the enemy's slain whom they
restored to him under a flag of truce.

 (10) Or, "and in Corinth an untoward incident had been experienced by
    the cavalry." See Grote, "H. G." x. 458, note 2. Possibly in
    reference to "Hell." VI. v. 51, 52.

 (11) Probably Xenophon's own son Gryllus was among them.

The thoughts now working in the mind of Epaminondas were such as these:
that within a few days he would be forced to retire, as the period of
the campaign was drawing to a close; if it ended in his leaving in the
lurch those allies whom he came out to assist, they would be besieged
by their antagonists. What a blow would that be to his own fair fame,
already somewhat tarnished! Had he not been defeated in Lacedaemon, with
a large body of heavy infantry, by a handful of men? defeated again at
Mantinea, in the cavalry engagement, and himself the main cause
finally of a coalition between five great powers--that is to say,
the Lacedaemonians, the Arcadians, the Achaeans, the Eleians, and the
Athenians? On all grounds it seemed to him impossible to steal past
without a battle. And the more so as he computed the alternatives of
victory or death. If the former were his fortune, it would resolve all
his perplexities; if death, his end would be noble. How glorious a thing
to die in the endeavour to leave behind him, as his last legacy to his
fatherland, the empire of Peloponnesus! That such thoughts should pass
through his brain strikes me as by no means wonderful, as these are
thoughts distinctive to all men of high ambition. Far more wonderful to
my mind was the pitch of perfection to which he had brought his army.
There was no labour which his troops would shrink from, either by night
or by day; there was no danger they would flinch from; and, with the
scantiest provisions, their discipline never failed them.

