"Who can it be?" wondered Sibylla. "He appears to be watching us. How
foolish of any of them to go out! _I_ should not feel safe under a tree,
although that lightning is only sheet-lightning."

Every perceptive faculty that Lionel Verner possessed was strained upon
the spot. He could make out a tall man; a man whose figure bore--unless
his eyes and his imagination combined to deceive him--a strong
resemblance to Frederick Massingbird's. Had it come to it? Were he and
his rival face to face; was she, by his own side now, about to be
bandied between them?--belonging, save by the priority of the first
marriage ceremony, no more to one than to the other? A stifled cry,
suppressed instantly, escaped his lips; his pulses stood still, and then
throbbed on with painful violence.

"Can you discern him, Lionel?" she asked. "He is going away--going back
amidst the trees. Perhaps because he can't see us any longer, now you
have put the light out. Who is it? Why should he have stood there,
watching us?"

Lionel snatched her to him with an impulsive gesture. He would have
sacrificed his life willingly, to save Sibylla from the terrible
misfortune that appeared to be falling upon her.


CHAPTER LIX.

A CASUAL MEETING ON THE RIVER.


A merry breakfast-table. Sibylla, for a wonder, up, and present at it.
The rain of the preceding day, the storm of the night had entirely
passed away, and as fine a morning as could be wished was smiling on the
earth.

"Which of you went out before the storm was over, and ventured under the
great yew-tree?"

It was Mrs. Verner who spoke. She looked at the different gentlemen
present, and they looked at her. They did not know what she meant.

"You _were_ under it, one of you," persisted Sibylla.

All, save one, protested that they had neither been out nor under the
tree. That one--it happened to be Mr. Gordon, of whom casual mention has
been made--confessed to having been on the lawn, so far as crossing it
went; but he did not go near the tree.

"I went out with my cigar," he observed, "and had strolled some distance
from the house when the storm came on. I stood in the middle of a field
and watched it. It was grandly beautiful."

"I wonder you were not brought home dead!" ejaculated Sibylla.

Mr. Gordon laughed. "If you once witnessed the thunder-storms that we
get in the tropics, Mrs. Verner, you would not associate these with
danger."

"I have seen dreadful thunder-storms, apart from what we get here, as
well as you, Mr. Gordon," returned Sibylla.

"Perhaps you will deny that anybody's ever killed by them in this
country. But why did you halt underneath the yew-tree?"

"I did not," he repeated. "I crossed the lawn, straight on to the upper
end of the terrace. I did not go near the tree."

"Some one did, if you did not. They were staring right up at my
dressing-room window. I was standing at it with Mr. Verner."

Mr. Gordon shook his head. "Not guilty, so far as I am concerned, Mrs.
Verner. I met some man, when I was coming home, plunging into the
thicket of trees as I emerged from them. It was he, possibly."

"What man?" questioned Sibylla.

"I did not know him. He was a stranger. A tall, dark man with stooping
shoulders, and something black upon his cheek."

"Something black upon his cheek;" repeated Sibylla, thinking the words
bore an odd sound.

"A large black mark it looked like. His cheek was white--sallow would be
the better term--and he wore no whiskers, so it was a conspicuous
looking brand. In the moment he passed me, the lightning rendered the
atmosphere as light as----"

"Sibylla!" almost shouted Lionel, "we are waiting for more tea in this
quarter. Never mind, Gordon."

They looked at him with surprise. He was leaning towards his wife; his
face crimson, his tones agitated. Sibylla stared at him, and said, if he
called out like that, she would not get up another morning. Lionel
replied, talking fast; and just then the letters were brought in.
Altogether, the subject of the man with the mark upon his cheek dropped
out of the discussion.

Bread fast over, Lionel put his arm within Mr. Gordon's and drew him
outside upon the terrace. Not to question him upon the man he had
seen--Lionel would have been glad that that encounter should pass out of
Mr. Gordon's remembrance, as affording less chance of Sibylla's hearing
of it again--but to get information on another topic. He had been
rapidly making up his mind during the latter half of breakfast, and had
come to a decision.

"Gordon, can you inform me where Captain Cannonby is to be found?"

"Can you inform me where the comet that visited us last year may be met
with this?" returned Mr. Gordon. "I'd nearly as soon undertake to find
out the locality of the one as of the other. Cannonby did go to Paris;
but where he may be now, is quite another affair."

"Was he going there for any length of time?"

"I fancy not. Most likely he is back in London by this time. Had he told
me he was coming back, I should have paid no attention to it. He never
knows his own mind two hours together."

"I particularly wish to see him," observed Lionel. "Can you give me any
address where he may be found in London?--if he has returned?"

"Yes. His brother's in Westminster. I can give you the exact number and
address by referring to my notebook. When Cannonby's in London, he makes
it his headquarters. If he is away, his brother may know where he is."

"His brother may be out of town also. Few men are in it at this season."

"If they can get out. But Dr. Cannonby can't. He is a physician, and
must stop at his post, season or no season."

"I am going up to town to-day," remarked Lionel, "and----"

"You are! For long?"

"Back to-morrow, I hope; perhaps to-night. If you will give me the
address, I'll copy it down."

Lionel wrote it down; but Mr. Gordon told him there was no necessity;
any little ragged boy in the street could direct him to Dr. Cannonby's.
Then he went to make his proposed journey known to Sibylla. She was
standing near one of the terrace pillars, looking up at the sky, her
eyes shaded with her hand. Lionel drew her inside an unoccupied room.

"Sibylla, a little matter of business is calling me to London," he said.
"If I can catch the half-past ten train, I may be home again to-night,
late."

"How sudden!" cried Sibylla. "Why didn't you tell me? What weather shall
we have to-day, do you think?"

"Fine. But it is of little consequence to me whether it be fine or wet."

"Oh! I was not thinking of you," was the careless reply. "I want it to
be fine for our archery."

"Good-bye," he said, stooping to kiss her. "Take care of yourself."

"Lionel, mind, I shall have the ponies," was her answer, given in a
pouting, pretty, affected manner.

Lionel smiled, shook his head, took another kiss, and left her. Oh, if
he could but shield her from the tribulation that too surely seemed to
be ominously looming!

The lightest and fleetest carriage he possessed had been made ready, and
was waiting for him at the stables. He got in there, and drove off with
his groom, saying farewell to none, and taking nothing with him but an
overcoat. As he drove past Mrs. Duff's shop, the remembrance of the bill
came over him. He had forwarded the money to her the previous night in
his wife's name.

He caught the train; was too soon for it; it was five minutes behind
time. If those who saw him depart could but have divined the errand he
was bent on, what a commotion would have spread over Deerham! If the
handsome lady, seated opposite to him, the only other passenger in that
compartment, could but have read the cause which rendered him so
self-absorbed, so insensible to her attractions, she would have gazed at
him with far more interest.

"Who is that gentleman?" she privately asked of the guard when she got
the opportunity.

"Mr. Verner, of Verner's Pride."

He sat back on his seat, heeding nothing. Had all the pretty women of
the kingdom been ranged before him, in a row, they had been nothing to
Mr. Verner then. Had Lucy Tempest been there, he had been equally
regardless of her. If Frederick Massingbird were indeed in life,
Verner's Pride was no longer his. But it was not of that he thought; it
was of the calamity that would involve his wife. A calamity which, to
the refined, sensitive mind of Lionel Verner, was almost worse than
death itself.

What would the journey bring forth for him? Should he succeed in seeing
Captain Cannonby? He awaited the fiat with feverish heat; and wished the
fast express engine would travel faster.

The terminus gained at last, a hansom took him to Dr. Cannonby's. It was
half-past two o'clock. He leaped out of the cab and rang, entering the
hall when the door was opened.

"Can I see Dr. Cannonby?"

"The doctor's just gone out, sir. He will be home at five."

It was a sort of checkmate, and Lionel stood looking at the servant--as
if the man could telegraph some impossible aerial message to his master
to bring him back then.

"Is Captain Cannonby staying here?" was his next question.

"No, sir. He was staying here, but he went away this morning."

"He is home from Paris then?"

"He came back two or three days ago, sir," replied the servant.

"Do you know where he is gone?"

"I don't, sir. I fancy it's somewhere in the country."

"Dr. Cannonby would know?"

"I dare say he would, sir. I should think so."

Lionel turned to the door. Where was the use of his lingering? He looked
back to ask a question.

"You are sure that Captain Cannonby has gone out of town?"

"Oh, yes, sir."

He descended the steps, and the man closed the door upon him. Where
should he go? What should he do with himself for the next two and a half
mortal hours? Go to his club? Or to any of the old spots of his London
life? Not he; some familiar faces might be in town; and he was in no
mood for familiar faces then.

Sauntering hither, sauntering thither, he came to Westminster Bridge.
One of the steamers was approaching the pier to take in passengers, on
its way down the river. The imposing ceremonial, the Latin chants, the
lighted tapers, the solemnity of the Sunday mass never failed to
fill Urn with exaltation.

In a little he began to sing:--
J'irai la voir un jour, M'asseoir pres de son trone, Recevoir ma
couronne Et regner a mon tour ...

His voice was strong and true, and he used the full volume of it,
singing with deep fervour; but ere long his eyes began to close and
his chin to drop toward his breast.

Driving always made him sleepy, and the horse, aware that the usual
drowsiness had possession of his master, slackened his pace and
at length fell to a walk.

"Get up there, Charles Eugene!"
He had suddenly waked and put his hand out for the whip. Charles Eugene
resigned himself and began to trot again.

Many generations ago a Chapdelaine cherished a long feud with a
neighbour who bore these names, and had forthwith bestowed them upon an
old, tired, lame horse of his, that he might give himself the pleasure
every day when passing the enemy's house of calling out very loudly:--
"Charles Eugene, ill-favoured beast that you are! Wretched, badly brought
up creature! Get along, Charles Eugene!" For a whole century the quarrel
was dead and buried; but the Chapdelaines ever since had named
their successive horses Charles Eugene.

Once again the hymn rose in clear ringing tones, intense with
feeling:--
Au ciel, au ciel, au ciel, J'irai la voir un jour . .

And again sleep was master, the voice died away, and Maria gathered
up the reins dropped from her father's hand.

The icy road held alongside the frozen river. The houses on the other
shore, each surrounded with its patch of cleared land, were sadly
distant from one another.

Behind the clearings, and on either side of them to the river's bank, it
was always forest: a dark green background of cypress against which a
lonely birch tree stood out here and there, its bole naked and white as
the column of a ruined temple.

On the other side of the road the strip of cleared land was continuous
and broader; the houses, set closer together, seemed an outpost of the
village; but ever behind the bare fields marched the forest,
following like a shadow, a gloomy frieze without end between white
ground and gray sky.

"Charles Eugene, get on there!"

Chapdelaine woke and made his usual good-humoured feint toward the
whip; but by the time the horse slowed down, after a few livelier paces,
he had dropped off again, his hands lying open upon his knees showing
the worn palms of the horse-hide mittens, his chin resting upon the
coat's thick fur.

After a couple of miles the road climbed a steep hill and entered the
unbroken woods.

The houses standing at intervals in the flat country all the way
from the village came abruptly to an end, and there was no longer
anything for the eye to rest upon but a wilderness of bare trunks rising
out of the universal whiteness.
Even the incessant dark green of balsam, spruce and gray pine was
rare; the few young and living trees were lost among the endless
dead, either lying on the ground and buried in snow, or still erect
but stripped and blackened.

Twenty years before great forest fires had swept through, and the
new growth was only pushing its way amid the standing skeletons and the
charred down-timber. Little hills followed one upon the other, and the
road was a succession of ups and downs scarcely more considerable
than the slopes of an ocean swell, from trough to crest, from crest
to trough.

Maria Chapdelaine drew the cloak about her, slipped her hands under the
warm robe of gray goat-skin and half closed her eyes. There was nothing
to look at; in the settlements new houses and barns might go up from year
to year, or be deserted and tumble into ruin; but the life of the
woods is so unhurried that one must needs have more than the
patience of a human being to await and mark its advance.Every word was as fresh testimony to the suspicion that it was Frederick
Massingbird. "Had he a black mark upon his cheek?" inquired Lionel.

"Likely he might have had, sir, but I couldn't see his cheeks. He wore a
sort of fur cap with the ears tied down. My husband saw a good bit of
him on the voyage, though he was only a middle-deck passenger, and the
gentleman was a cabin. His friends have had a surprise before this," she
continued, after a pause. "He told my husband that they all supposed him
dead; had thought he had been dead these two years past and more; and he
had never sent home to contradict it."

Then it _was_ Frederick Massingbird! Lionel Verner quitted the woman's
side, and leaned over the rail of the steamer, apparently watching the
water. He could not, by any dint of reasoning or supposition, make out
the mystery. How Frederick Massingbird could be alive; or, being alive,
why he had not come home before to claim Sibylla--why he had not claimed
her before she left Australia--why he did not claim her now he was come.
A man without a wife might go roving where he would and as long as he
would, letting his friends think him dead if it pleased him; but a man
with a wife could not in his sane senses be supposed to act so. It was a
strange thing, his meeting with this woman--a singular coincidence; one
that he would hardly have believed, if related to him, as happening to
another.

It was striking five when he again knocked at Dr. Cannonby's. He wished
to see Captain Cannonby still; it would be the crowning confirmation.
But he had no doubt whatever that that gentleman's report would be: "I
saw Frederick Massingbird die--as I believed--and I quitted him
immediately. I conclude that I must have been in error in supposing he
was dead."

Dr. Cannonby had returned, the servant said. He desired Lionel to walk
in, and threw open the door of the room. Seven or eight people were
sitting in it, waiting. The servant had evidently mistaken him for a
patient, and placed him there to wait his turn with the rest. He took
his card from his pocket, wrote on it a few words, and desired the
servant to carry it to his master.

The man came back with an apology. "I beg your pardon, sir. Will you
step this way?"

The physician was bowing a lady out as he entered the room--a room lined
with books, and containing casts of heads. He came forward to shake
hands, a cordial-mannered man. He knew Lionel by reputation, but had
never seen him.

"My visit was not to you, but to your brother," explained Lionel. "I was
in hopes to have found him here."

"Then he and you have been playing at cross-purposes to-day," remarked
the doctor, with a smile. "Lawrence started this morning for Verner's
Pride."

"Indeed," exclaimed Lionel. "Cross-purposes indeed!" he muttered to
himself.

"He heard some news in Paris which concerned you, I believe, and
hastened home to pay you a visit."

"Which concerned me!" repeated Lionel.

"Or rather Mrs. Massingbird--Mrs. Verner, I should say."

A sickly smile crossed Lionel's lips. Mrs. Massingbird! Was it already
known? "Why," he asked, "did you call her Mrs. Massingbird?"

"I beg your pardon for my inadvertence, Mr. Verner," was the reply of
Dr. Cannonby. "Lawrence knew her as Mrs. Massingbird, and on his return
from Australia he frequently spoke of her to me as Mrs. Massingbird, so
that I got into the habit of thinking of her as such. It was not until
he went to Paris that he heard she had exchanged the name for that of
Verner."

A thought crossed Lionel that _this_ was the news which had taken
Captain Cannonby down to him. He might know of the existence of
Frederick Massingbird, and had gone to break the news to him, Lionel;
to tell him that his wife was not his wife.

"You do not know precisely what his business was with me?" he inquired,
quite wistfully.

"No, I don't. I don't know that it was much beyond the pleasure of
seeing you and Mrs. Verner."

Lionel rose. "If I----"

"But you will stay and dine with me, Mr. Verner?"

"Thank you, I am going back at once. I wished to be home this evening if
possible, and there's nothing to hinder it now."

"A letter or two has come for Lawrence since the morning," observed the
doctor, as he shook hands. "Will you take charge of them for him?"

"With pleasure."

Dr. Cannonby turned to a letter rack over the mantel-piece, selected
three letters from it, and handed them to Lionel.

Back again all the weary way. His strong suspicions were no longer
suspicions now, but confirmed certainties. The night grew dark; it was
not darker than the cloud which had fallen upon his spirit.

Thought was busy in his brain. How could it be otherwise? Should he get
home to find the news public property? Had Captain Cannonby made it
known to Sybilla? Most fervently did he hope not. Better that he,
Lionel, should be by her side to help her to bear it when the dreadful
news came out. Next came another thought. Suppose Frederick Massingbird
should have discovered himself? should have gone to Verner's Pride to
take possession? _his_ home now; his wife. Lionel might get back to find
that he had no longer a place there.

Lionel found his carriage waiting at the station. He had ordered it to
be so. Wigham was with it. A very coward now, he scarcely dared ask
questions.

"Has Captain Cannonby arrived at the house to-day, do you know, Wigham?"

"Who, sir?"

"A strange gentleman from London. Captain Cannonby."

"I can't rightly say, sir. I have been about in the stables all day. I
saw a strange gentleman cross the yard just at dinner-time, one I'd
never seen afore. May be it was him."

A feeling came over Lionel that he could not see Captain Cannonby before
them all. Better send for him to a private room, and get the
communication over. What his after course would be was another matter.
Yes; better in all ways.

"Drive round to the yard, Wigham," he said, as the coachman was about to
turn on to the terrace. And Wigham obeyed.

He stepped out. He went in at the back door, almost as if he were
slinking into the house, stealthily traversed the passages, and gained
the lighted hall. At the very moment that he put his feet on its
tessellated floor, a sudden commotion was heard up the stairs. A door
was flung open, and Sibylla, with cheeks inflamed and breath panting,
flew down, her convulsive cries echoing through the house. She saw
Lionel, and threw herself into his arms.

"Oh, Lionel, what is this wicked story?" she sobbed. "It is not true! It
cannot be true that I am not your wife, that----"

"Hush, my darling!" he whispered, placing his hand across her mouth. "We
are not alone!"

They certainly were not! Out of the drawing-rooms, out of the
dining-room, had poured the guests; out of the kitchen came peeping the
servants. Deborah West stood on the stair like a statue, her hands
clasped; and Mademoiselle Benoite frantically inquired what anybody had
been doing to her mistress. All stared in amazement. She, in that
terrible state of agitation; Lionel supporting her with his white and
haughty face.

"It is nothing," he said, waving them off. "Mrs. Verner is not well.
Come with me, Sibylla."

Waving them off still, he drew her into the study, closed the door, and
bolted it. She clung to him like one in the extremity of terror, her
throat heaving convulsively.

"Oh, Lionel! is it true that he is come back? That he did not die? What
will become of me? Tell me that they have been deceiving me; that it is
not true!"

[Illustration: "Tell me that it is not true!"]

He could not tell her so. He wound his arms tenderly round her and held
her face to his breast, and laid his own down upon it. "Strive for
calmness," he murmured, his heart aching for her. "I will protect you so
long as I shall have the power."


CHAPTER LX.

MISS DEB'S DISBELIEF.


Miss Deborah West did not believe in ghosts. Miss Deb, setting aside a
few personal weaknesses and vanities, was a strong-minded female, and no
more believed in ghosts than she did in Master Cheese's delicate
constitution, which required to be supplied with an unlimited quantity
of tarts and other dainties to keep up his strength between meals. The
commotion respecting Frederick Massingbird, that his ghost had arrived
from Australia, and "walked," reached the ears of Miss Deb. It reached
them in this way.

Miss Deb and her sister, compelled to economy by the scanty allowance
afforded by Dr. West, had no more helpmates in the household department
than were absolutely necessary, and the surgery boy, Bob, found himself
sometimes pressed into aiding in the domestic service. One evening Miss
Deb entered the surgery, and caught Master Cheese revelling in a hatful
of walnuts by gaslight. This was the evening of the storm, previously
mentioned.

"Where's Bob?" asked she. "I want a message taken to Mrs. Broom's about
those pickled mushrooms that she is doing for me."

"Bob's out," responded Master Cheese. "Have a walnut, Miss Deb?"

"I don't mind. Are they ripe?" answered Miss Deb.

Master Cheese, the greediest chap alive, picked out the smallest he
could find, politely cracked it with his teeth, and handed it to her.

"You'll not get Bob over to Broom's at this hour," cried he. "Jan can't
get him to Mother Hook's with her medicine after dark. Unless it's made
up so that he can take it by daylight, they have to send for it."

"What's that for?" asked Miss Deb.

Master Cheese cracked on at his walnuts. "You have not heard the tale
that's going about, I suppose, Miss Deb?" he presently said.

"I have not heard any tale," she answered.

"And I don't know that I must tell it you," continued Master Cheese,
filling his mouth with five or six quarters at once, unpeeled. "Jan
ordered me to hold my tongue indoors."

"It would be more respectful, Master Cheese, if you said Mr. Jan,"
rebuked Miss Deborah. "I have told you so often."

"Who cares?" returned Master Cheese. "Jan doesn't. The fact is, Miss
Deb, that there's a ghost about at night just now."

"Have they got up that folly again? Rachel Frost rests a great deal
quieter in her grave than some of you do in your beds."

"Ah, but it's not Rachel's this time," significantly responded Master
Cheese. "It's somebody else's."

"Whose is it, then?" asked Miss Deb, struck with his manner.

"I'll tell you if you won't tell Jan. It's--don't start, Miss Deb--it's
Fred Massingbird's."

Miss Deb did not start. She looked keenly at Master Cheese, believing he
might be playing a joke upon her. But there were no signs of joking in
his countenance. It looked, on the contrary, singularly serious, not to
say awe-struck, as he leaned forward to bring it nearer Miss Deborah's.

"It is a fact that Fred Massingbird's ghost is walking," he continued.
"Lots have seen it. I have seen it. You'd have heard of it, as everybody
else has, if you had not been Mrs. Verner's sister. It's an unpleasantly
queer thing for her, you know, Miss Deb."

"What utter absurdity!" cried Deborah.

"Wait till you see it, before you say it's absurdity," replied Master
Cheese. "If it's not Fred Massingbird's ghost, it is somebody's that's
the exact image of him."

Miss Deborah sat down on a stone jar, and got Master Cheese to tell her
the whole story. That he should put in a few exaggerations, and so
increase the marvel, was only natural. But Deborah West heard sufficient
to send her mind into a state of uneasy perplexity.

"You say Mr. Jan knows of this?" she asked.

"There's nobody about that doesn't know of it except you and the folks
at Verner's Pride," responded Master Cheese. "I say, don't you go and
tell Jan that you made me betray it to you, Miss Deb! You'll get me into
a row if you do."

But this was the very thing that Miss Deb resolved to do. Not to get
Master Cheese into a "row," but that she saw no other way of allaying
her uncertainty. Ghosts were utterly excluded from Deborah West's creed;
and why so many people should be suddenly testifying that Frederick
Massingbird's was to be seen, she could not understand. That there must
be something in it more than the common absurdity of such tales, the
state of Alice Hook appeared to testify.

"Can Bob be spared to go over to Broom's in the morning?" she asked,
after a long pause of silence, given apparently to the contemplation of
Master Cheese's intense enjoyment of his walnuts; in reality, to deep
thought.

"Well, I don't know," answered the young gentleman, who never was ready
to accord the services of Bob indoors, lest it might involve any little
extra amount of exertion for himself. "There's a sight of medicine to be
taken out just now. Jan's got a great deal to do, and _I_ am nearly
worked off my legs."

"It looks like it," retorted Miss Deborah. "Your legs will never be much
the worse for the amount of work _you_ do. Where's Mr. Jan?"

"He went out to go to Hook's," replied Master Cheese, a desperately hard
walnut proving nearly too much for his teeth. "He'll take a round, I
dare say, before he comes in."

Deborah returned indoors. Though not much inclined to reticence in
general, she observed it now, saying nothing to Amilly. The storm came
on, and they sat and watched it. Supper time approached, and Master
Cheese was punctual. He found some pickled herrings on the table, of
which he was uncommonly fond, and ate them as long as Miss West would
supply his plate. The meal was over when Jan came in.

"Don't trouble to have anything brought back for me," said he. "I'll eat
a bit of bread and cheese." He was not like his assistant; his growing
days were over.

Master Cheese went straight up to bed. He liked to do so as soon as
supper was over, lest any summons came, and he should have to go out.
Easy Jan, no matter how tired he might be, would attend himself, sooner
than wake up Master Cheese--a ceremony more easy to attempt than to
accomplish. Fortifying himself with about a pound of sweet cake, which
he kept in his box, as dessert to the herrings, and to refresh his
dreams, Master Cheese put himself into bed.

Jan meanwhile finished his bread and cheese, and rose. "I wonder whether
I shall get a whole night of it tonight?" said he, stretching himself.
"I didn't have much bed last night."

"Have you to go out again, Mr. Jan?"

"No. I shall look to the books a bit, and then turn in. Good night, Miss
Deborah; good-night, Miss Amilly."

"Good-night," they answered.

Amilly drew to the fire. The chilly rain of the afternoon had caused
them to have one lighted. She put her feet on the fender, feeling the
warmth comfortable. Deborah sent the supper-tray away, and then left the
room. Stealing out of the side door quietly, she tripped across the
narrow path of wet gravel, and entered the surgery. Jan had got an
account-book open on the counter, and was leaning over it, a pen in his
hand.

"Don't be frightened, Mr. Jan; it's only me," said Deborah, who did not
at all times confine herself to the rules of severe grammar. "I'll shut
the door, if you please, for I want to say a word to yourself alone."

"Is it more physic that you want?" asked Jan. "Has the pain in the side
come again?"

"It is not about pains or physic," she answered, drawing nearer to the
counter. "Mr. Jan"--dropping her voice to a confidential whisper--"would
you be so good as to tell me the truth of this story that is going
about?"

Jan paused. "What story?" he rejoined.

"This ghost story. They are saying, I understand, that--that--they are
saying something about Frederick Massingbird."

"Did Cheese supply you with the information?" cried Jan, imperturbable
as ever.

"He did. But I must beg you not to scold him for it--as he thought you
might do. It was I who drew the story from him. He said you cautioned
him not to speak of it to me or Amilly. I quite appreciate your motives,
Mr. Jan, and feel that it was very considerate of you. But now that I
have heard it, I want to know particulars from somebody more reliable
than Master Cheese."

"I told Lionel I'd say nothing to any soul in the parish," said Jan,
open and single-minded as though he had been made of glass. "But he'd
not mind my making you an exception--as you have heard it. You are
Sibylla's sister."

"_You_ don't believe in its being a ghost?"

Jan grinned. "I!" cried he. "No, I don't."

"Then what do you suppose it is that's frightening people? And why
should they be frightened?"

Jan sat himself down on the counter, and whirled his legs over to the
other side, clearing the gallipots; so that he faced Miss Deborah. Not
to waste time, he took the mortar before him. And there he was at his
ease; his legs hanging, and his hands pounding.

"What should you think it is?" inquired he.

"How can I think, Mr. Jan? Until an hour or two ago, I had not heard of
the rumour. I suppose it is somebody who walks about at night to
frighten people. But it is curious that he should look like Frederick
Massingbird. Can you understand it?"

"I am afraid I can," replied Jan, pounding away.

"Will you tell me, please, what you think."

"Can't you guess at it, Miss Deb?"

Miss Deb looked at him, beginning to think his manner as mysterious as
Master Cheese's had been.

"I can't guess at it at all," she presently said. "Please to tell me."

"Then don't you go and drop down in a fit when you hear it," was the
rejoinder of Jan. "I suppose it is Fred himself."

The words took her utterly by surprise. Not at first did she understand
their meaning. She stared at Jan, her eyes and her mouth gradually
opening.

"Fred himself?" she mechanically uttered.

"I suppose so. Fred himself. Not his ghost."

"Do you mean that he has come to life again?" she rapidly rejoined.

"Well, you can call it so if you like," said Jan. "I expect that, in
point of fact, he has never been dead. The report of his death must have
been erroneous; one of those unaccountable mistakes that do sometimes
happen to astonish the world."

Deborah West took in the full sense of the words, and sunk down on the
big stone jar. She turned all over of a burning heat; she felt her hands
beginning to twitch with emotion.

"You mean that he is alive?--that he has never been dead?" she gasped.

Jan nodded.

"Oh, Mr. Jan! Then, what is--what is Sibylla?"

"Ah," said Jan, "that's just it. She's the wife of both of 'em--as you
may say."

For any petty surprise or evil, Miss Deborah would have gone off in a
succession of screams, of pseudo-faints. _This_ evil was all too real,
too terrible. She sat with her trembling hands clasped to pain, looking
hopelessly at Jan.

He told her all he knew; all that was said by others.

"Dan Duff's nothing," remarked he; "and Cheese is nothing; and others,
who confess to have seen it, are nothing: and old Frost's not much. But
I'd back Bourne's calmness and sound sense against the world, and I'd
back Broom's."

"And they have both seen it?"

"Both," replied Jan. "Both are sure that it is Frederick Massingbird."

"What will Mr. Verner do?" she asked, looking round with a shudder, and
not speaking above her breath.

"Oh, that's his affair," said Jan. "It's hard to guess what he may do;
he is one that won't be dictated to. If it were some people's case,
they'd say to Sibylla, 'Now you have got two husbands, choose which
you'll have, and keep to him.'"

"Good heavens, Mr. Jan!" exclaimed Miss Deb, shocked at the loose
sentiments the words appeared to indicate. "And suppose she should
choose the second? Have you thought of the sin? The second _can't_ be
her husband; it would be as bad as those Mormons."

"Looking at it in a practical point of view, I can't see much
difference, which of the two she chooses," returned Jan. "If Fred was
her husband once, Lionel's her husband now; practically I say you know,
Miss Deb."

Miss Deb thought the question was going rather into metaphysics, a
branch of science which she did not understand, and so was content to
leave the controversy.

"Any way, it is dreadful for her," she said, with another shiver. "Oh,
Mr. Jan, do you think it can really be true?"

"_I_ think that there's not a doubt of it," he answered, stopping in his
pounding. "But you need not think so, Miss Deb."

"How am I to help thinking so?" she simply asked.

"You needn't think either way until it is proved. As I suppose it must
be, shortly. Let it rest till then."

"No, Mr. Jan, I differ from you. It is a question that ought to be
sought out and probed; not left to rest. Does Sibylla know it?"

"Not she. Who'd tell her? Lionel won't, I know. It was for her sake that
he bound me to silence."

"She ought to be told, Mr. Jan. She ought to leave her husband--I mean,
Mr. Lionel--this very hour, and shut herself up until the doubt is
settled."

"Where should she shut herself?" inquired Jan, opening his eyes. "In a
convent? Law, Miss Deb! If somebody came and told me I had got two
wives, should you say I ought to make a start for the nearest monastery?
How would my patients get on?"

Rather metaphysical again. Miss Deb drew Jan back to plain details--to
the histories of the various ghostly encounters. Jan talked and pounded;
she sat on her hard seat and listened, her brain more perplexed than it
could have been with any metaphysics known to science. Eleven o'clock
disturbed them, and Miss Deborah started as if she had been shot.

"How could I keep you until this time!" she exclaimed. "And you scarcely
in bed for some nights!"

"Never mind, Miss Deb," answered good-natured Jan. "It's all in the
day's work."

He opened the door for her, and then bolted himself in for the night.
For the night, that is, if Deerham would allow it to him. Hook's
daughter was slowly progressing towards recovery, and Jan would not need
to go to her.

Amilly was nodding over the fire, or, rather, where the fire had been,
for it had gone out. She inquired with wonder what her sister had been
doing, and where she had been. Deborah replied that she had been busy;
and they went upstairs to bed.

But not to sleep--for one of them. Deborah West lay awake through the
live-long night, tossing from side to side in her perplexity and
thought. Somewhat strict in her notions, she deemed it a matter of stern
necessity, of positive duty, that Sibylla should retire, at any rate for
a time, from the scenes of busy life. To enable her to do this, the news
must be broken to her. But how?

Ay, how? Deborah West rose in the morning with the difficulty unsolved.
She supposed she must do it herself. She believed it was as much a duty
laid upon her, the imparting these tidings to Sibylla, as the separating
herself from all social ties, the instant it was so imparted, would be
the duty of Sibylla herself. Deborah West went about her occupations
that morning, one imperative sentence ever in her thoughts: "It must be
done! it must be done!"

She carried it about with her, ever saying it, through the whole day.
She shrank, both for Sibylla's sake and her own, from the task she was
imposing upon herself; and, as we all do when we have an unpleasant
office to perform, she put it off to the last. Early in the morning she
had said, I will go to Verner's Pride after breakfast and tell her;
breakfast over, she said, I will have my dinner first and go then.

But the afternoon passed on, and she did not go. Every little trivial
domestic duty was made an excuse for delaying it. Miss Amilly, finding
her sister unusually bad company, went out to drink tea with some
friends. The time came for ordering in tea at home, and still Deborah
had not gone.

She made the tea and presided at the table. But she could eat
nothing--to the inward gratification of Master Cheese. There happened to
be shrimps--a dish which that gentleman preferred, if anything, to
pickled herrings; and by Miss Deborah's want of appetite he was able to
secure her share and his own, including the heads and tails. He would
uncommonly have liked to secure Jan's share also; but Miss Deborah
filled a plate and put them aside, against Jan came in. Jan's pressure
of work caused him of late to be irregular at his meals.

Scarcely was the tea over, and Master Cheese gone, when Mr. Bourne
called. Deborah, the one thought uppermost in her mind, closed the door,
and spoke out what she had heard. The terrible fear, her own distress,
Jan's belief that it was Fred himself, Jan's representation that Mr.
Bourne also believed it. Mr. Bourne, leaning forward until his pale face
and his iron-gray hair nearly touched hers, whispered in answer that he
did not think there was a doubt of it.

Then Deborah did nerve herself to the task. On the departure of the
vicar, she started for Verner's Pride and asked to see Sibylla. The
servants would have shown her to the drawing-room, but she preferred to
go up to Sibylla's chamber. The company were yet in the dining-room.

How long Sibylla kept her waiting there, she scarcely knew. Sibylla was
not in the habit of putting herself to inconvenience for her sisters.
The message was taken to her--that Miss West waited in her chamber--as
she entered the drawing-room. And there Sibylla let her wait. One or two
more messages to the same effect were subsequently delivered. They
produced no impression, and Deborah began to think she should not get to
see her that night.

But Sibylla came up at length, and Deborah entered upon her task.
Whether she accomplished it clumsily, or whether Sibylla's
ill-disciplined mind was wholly in fault, certain it is that there
ensued a loud and unpleasant scene. The scene to which you were a
witness. Scarcely giving herself time to take in more than the bare fact
hinted at by Deborah--that her first husband was believed to be
alive--not waiting to inquire a single particular, she burst out of the
room and went shrieking down the stairs, flying into the arms of Lionel,
who at that moment had entered.


CHAPTER LXI.

MEETING THE NEWS.


Lionel Verner could not speak comfort to his wife; or, at the best,
comfort of a most negative nature. He held her to him in the study, the
door locked against intruders. They were somewhat at cross-purposes.
Lionel supposed that the information had been imparted to her by Captain
Cannonby; he never doubted but that she had been told Frederick
Massingbird had returned and was on the scene; that he might come in any
moment--even that very present one as they spoke--to put in his claim
to her. Sibylla, on the contrary, did not think (what little she was
capable of thinking) that Lionel had had previous information of the
matter.

"What am I to do?" she cried, her emotion becoming hysterical. "Oh,
Lionel! don't you give me up!"

"I would have got here earlier had there been means," he soothingly
said, wisely evading all answer to the last suggestion. "I feared he
would be telling you in my I absence; better that you should have heard
of it from me."

She lifted her face to look at him. "Then you know it!"

"I have known it this clay or two. My journey to-day--"

She broke out into a most violent fit of emotion, shrieking, trembling,
clinging to Lionel, calling out at the top of her voice that she would
not leave him. All his efforts were directed to stilling the noise. He
implored her to be tranquil, to remember there were listeners around; he
pointed out that, until the blow actually fell, there was no necessity
for those listeners to be made cognisant of it. All that he _could_ do
for her protection and comfort, he would do, he earnestly said. And
Sibylla subsided into a softer mood, and cried quietly.

"I'd rather die," she sobbed, "than have this disgrace brought upon me."

Lionel put her into the large arm-chair, which remained in the study
still, the old arm-chair of Mr. Verner. He stood by her and held her
hands, his pale face grave, sad, loving, bent towards her with the most
earnest sympathy. She lifted her eyes to it, whispering--

"Will they say you are not my husband?"

"Hush, Sibylla! There are moments, even yet, when I deceive myself into
a fancy that it may be somewhat averted. _I cannot_ understand how he
can be alive. Has Cannonby told you whence the error arose?"

She did not answer. She began to shake again; she tossed back her golden
hair. Some blue ribbons had been wreathed in it for dinner; she pulled
them out and threw them on the ground, her hair partially falling with
their departure.

"I wish I could have some wine?"

He moved to the door to get it for her. "Don't you let _her_ in,
Lionel," she called out as he unlocked it.

"Who?"

"That Deborah. I hate her now," was the ungenerous remark.

Lionel opened the door, called to Tynn, and desired him to bring wine.
"What time did Captain Cannonby get here?" he whispered, as he took it
from the butler.

"Who, sir?" asked Tynn.

"Captain Cannonby."

Tynn paused, like one who does not understand. "There's no gentleman
here of that name, sir. A Mr. Rushworth called to-day, and my mistress
asked him to stay dinner. He is in the drawing-room now. There is no
other stranger."

"Has Captain Cannonby not been here at all?" reiterated Lionel. "He left
London this morning to come."

Tynn shook his head to express a negative. "He has not arrived, sir."

Lionel went in again, his feelings undergoing a sort of revulsion, for
there now peeped out a glimmer of hope. So long as the nearly certain
conviction on Lionel's mind was not confirmed by positive testimony--as
he expected Captain Cannonby's would be--he could not entirely lose
sight of all hope. That he most fervently prayed the blow might not
fall, might even now be averted, you will readily believe. Sibylla had
not been to him the wife he had fondly hoped for; she provoked him every
hour in the day; she appeared to do what she could, wilfully to estrange
his affection. He was conscious of all this; he was all too conscious
that his inmost love was another's, not hers. But he lost sight of
himself in anxiety for her; it was for her sake he prayed and hoped.
Whether she was his wife by law or not; whether she was loved or hated,
Lionel's course of duty lay plain before him now--to shield her, so far
as he might be allowed, in all care and tenderness. He would have shed
his last drop of blood to promote her comfort; he would have sacrificed
every feeling of his heart for her sake.

The wine in his hand, he turned into the room again. A change had taken
place in her aspect. She had left the chair, and was standing against
the wall opposite the door, her tears dried, her eyes unnaturally
bright, her cheeks burning.

"Lionel," she uttered, a catching of the breath betraying her emotion,
"if _he_ is alive, whose is Verner's Pride?"

"His," replied Lionel, in a low tone.

She shrieked out, very much after the manner of a petulant child. "I
won't leave it!--I won't leave Verner's Pride! You could not be so cruel
as to wish me. Who says he is alive? Lionel, I ask you who it is that
says he is alive?"

"Hush, my dear! This excitement will do you a world of harm, and it
cannot mend the matter, however it may be. I want to know who told you
of this, Sibylla. I supposed it to be Cannonby; but Tynn says Cannonby
has not been here."

The question appeared to divert her thoughts into another channel.
"Cannonby! What should bring him here? Did you expect him to come?"

"Drink your wine, and then I will tell you," he said, holding the glass
towards her.

She pushed the wine from her capriciously. "I don't want wine now. I am
hot. I should like some water."

"I will get it for you directly. Tell me, first of all, how you came to
know of this?"

"Deborah told me. She sent for me out of the drawing-room where I was so
happy, to tell me this horrid tale. Lionel"--sinking her voice again to
a whisper--"is--he--here?"

"I cannot tell you--"

"But you must tell me," she passionately interrupted. "I will know. I
have a right to know it, Lionel."

"When I say I cannot tell you, Sibylla, I mean that I cannot tell you
with any certainty. I will tell you all I do know. Some one is in the
neighbourhood who bears a great resemblance to him. He is seen sometimes
at night; and--and--I have other testimony that he has returned from
Australia."

"What will be done if he comes here?"

Lionel was silent.

"Shall you fight him?"

"Fight him!" echoed Lionel. "No."

"You will give up Verner's Pride without a struggle! You will give up
me! Then, are you a coward, Lionel Verner?"

"You know that I would give up neither willingly, Sibylla."

Grievously pained was his tone as he replied to her. She was meeting
this as she did most other things--without sense or reason; not as a
thinking, rational being. Her manner was loud, her emotion violent; but
deep and true her grief was _not_. Depth of feeling, truth of nature,
were qualities that never yet had place in Sibylla Verner. Not once,
throughout all their married life, had Lionel been so painfully
impressed with the fact as he was now.

"Am I to die for the want of that water?" she resumed. "If you don't
get it for me I shall ring for the servants to bring it."

He opened the door again without a word. He knew quite well that she had
thrown in that little shaft about ringing for the servants, because it
would not be pleasant to him that the servants should intrude upon them
then. Outside the door, about to knock at it, was Deborah West.

"I must go home," she whispered. "Mr. Verner, how sadly she is meeting
this!"

The very thought that was in Lionel's heart. But not to another would he
cast a shade of reflection on his wife.

"It is a terrible thing for any one to meet," he answered. "I could have
wished, Miss West, that you had not imparted it to her. Better that I
should have done it, when it must have been done."

"I did it from a good motive," was the reply of Deborah, who was looking
sadly down-hearted, and had evidently been crying. "She ought to leave
you until some certainty shall be arrived at."

"Nonsense! No!" said Lionel. "I beg you--I _beg_ you, Miss West, not
to say anything more that can distress or disturb her. If
the--the--explosion comes, of course it must come; and we must all meet
it as we best may, and see then what is best to be done."

"But it is not right that she should remain with you in this
uncertainty," urged Deborah, who could be obstinate when she thought she
had cause. "The world will not deem it to be right. You should remember
this."

"I do not act to please the world. I am responsible to God and my
conscience."

"Responsible to--Good gracious, Mr. Verner!" returned Deborah, every
line in her face expressing astonishment. "You call keeping her with you
acting as a responsible man ought! If Sibylla's husband is living, you
must put her away from your side."

"When the time shall come. Until then, my duty--as I judge it--is to
keep her by my side; to shelter her from harm and annoyance, petty as
well as great."

"You deem _that_ your duty!"

"I do," he firmly answered. "My duty to her and to God."

Deborah shook her head and her hands. "It ought not to be let go on,"
she said, moving nearer to the study door. "I shall urge the leaving you
upon her."

Lionel calmly laid his hand upon the lock. "Pardon me, Miss West. I
cannot allow my wife to be subjected to it."

"But if she is not your wife?"

A streak of red came into his pale face. "It has yet to be proved that
she is not. Until that time shall come, Miss West, she _is_ my wife, and
I shall protect her as such."

"You will not let me see her?" asked Deborah, for his hand was not
lifted from the handle.

"No. Not if your object be the motives you avow. Sleep a night upon it,
Miss West, and see if you do not change your mode of thinking and come
over to mine. Return here in the morning with words of love and comfort
for her, and none will welcome you more sincerely than I."

"Answer me one thing, Mr. Verner. Do you believe in your heart that
Frederick Massingbird is alive and has returned?"

"Unfortunately I have no resource but to believe it," he replied.

"Then, to your way of thinking I can never come," returned Deborah in
some agitation. "It is just sin, Mr. Verner, in the sight of Heaven."

"I think not," he quietly answered. "I am content to let Heaven judge
me, and the motives that actuate me; a judgment more merciful than
man's."

Deborah West, in her conscientious, but severe rectitude, turned to the
hall door and departed, her hands uplifted still. Lionel ordered Tynn to
attend Miss West home. He then procured some water for his wife and
carried it in, as he had previously carried in the wine.

A fruitless service. Sibylla rejected it. She wanted neither water nor
anything else, were all the thanks Lionel received, querulously spoken.
He laid the glass upon the table, and, sitting down by her side in all
patience, he set himself to the work of soothing her, gently and
lovingly as though she had been what she was showing herself--a wayward
child.


CHAPTER LXII.

TYNN PUMPED DRY.


Miss West and Tynn proceeded on their way. The side path was dirty, and
she chose the middle of the road, Tynn walking a step behind her.
Deborah was of an affable nature, Tynn a long-attached and valued
servant, and she chatted with him familiarly. Deborah, in her simple
good heart, could not have been brought to understand why she should not
chat with him. Because he was a servant and she a lady, she thought
there was only the more reason why she should, that the man might not be
unpleasantly reminded of the social distinction between them.

She pressed down, so far as she could, the heavy affliction that was
weighing upon her mind. She spoke of the weather, the harvest, of Mrs.
Bitterworth's recent dangerous attack, of other trifling topics patent
at the moment to Deerham. Tynn chatted in his turn, never losing his
respect of words and manner; a servant worth anything never does. Thus
they progressed towards the village, utterly unconscious that a pair of
eager eyes were following, and an evil tongue was casting anathemas
towards them.

The owner of the eyes and tongue was wanting to hold a few words of
private colloquy with Tynn. Could Tynn have seen right round the corner
of the pillar of the outer gate when he went out, he would have detected
the man waiting there in ambush. It was Giles Roy. Roy was aware that
Tynn sometimes attended departing visitors to the outer gate. Roy had
come up, hoping that he might so attend them on this night. Tynn did
appear, with Miss West, and Roy began to hug himself that fortune had so
far favoured him; but when he saw that Tynn departed with the lady,
instead of only standing politely to watch her off, Roy growled out
vengeance against the unconscious offenders.

"He's a-going to see her home belike," snarled Roy in soliloquy,
following them with angry eyes and slow footsteps. "I must wait till he
comes back--and be shot to both of 'em!"

Tynn left Miss West at her own door, declining the invitation to go in
and take a bit of supper with the maids, or a glass of beer. He was
trudging back again, his arms behind his back, and wishing himself at
home, for Tynn, fat and of short breath, did not like much walking,
when, in a lonely part of the road, he came upon a man sitting astride
upon a gate.

"Hollo! is that you, Mr. Tynn? Who'd ha' thought of seeing you out
to-night?"

For it was Mr. Roy's wish, from private motives of his own, that Tynn
should not know he had been looked for, but should believe the
encounter to be accidental. Tynn turned off the road, and leaned his
elbow upon the gate, rather glad of the opportunity to stand a minute
and get his breath. It was somewhat up-hill to Verner's Pride, the whole
of the way from Deerham.

"Are you sitting here for pleasure?" asked he of Roy.

"I'm sitting here for grief," returned Roy; and Tynn was not sharp
enough to detect the hollow falseness of his tone. "I had to go up the
road to-night on a matter of business, and, walking back by Verner's
Pride, it so overcame me that I was glad to bring myself to a anchor."

"How should walking by Verner's Pride overcome you?" demanded Tynn.

"Well," said Roy, "it was the thoughts of poor Mr. and Mrs. Verner did
it. He didn't behave to me over liberal in turning me from the place I'd
held so long under his uncle, but I've overgot that smart; it's past and
gone. My heart bleeds for him now, and that's the truth."

For Roy's heart to "bleed" for any fellow-creature was a marvel that
even Tynn, unsuspicious as he was, could not take in. Mrs. Tynn
repeatedly assured him that he had been born into the world with one
sole quality--credulity. Certainly Tynn was unusually inclined to put
faith in fair outsides. Not that Roy could boast much of the latter
advantage.

"What's the matter with Mr. Verner?" he asked of Roy.

Roy groaned dismally. "It's a thing that is come to my knowledge," said
he--"a awful misfortin that is a-going to drop upon him. I'd not say a
word to another soul but you, Mr. Tynn; but you be his friend if anybody
be, and I feel that I must either speak or bust."

Tynn peered at Roy's face. As much as he could see of it, for the night
was not a very clear one.

"It seems quite a providence that I happened to meet you," went on Roy,
as if any meeting with the butler had been as far from his thoughts as
an encounter with somebody at the North Pole. "Things does turn out
lucky sometimes."

"I must be getting home," interposed Tynn. "If you have anything to say
to me, Roy, you had better say it. I may be wanted."

Roy--who was standing now, his elbow leaning on the gate--brought his
face nearer to Tynn's. Tynn was also leaning on the gate.

"Have you heered of this ghost that's said to be walking about Deerham?"
he asked, lowering his voice to a whisper. "Have you heered whose they
say it is?"

Now, Tynn had heard. All the retainers, male and female, at Verner's
Pride had heard. And Tynn, though not much inclined to give credence to
ghosts in a general way, had felt somewhat uneasy at the ale. More on
his mistress's account than on any other score; for Tynn had the sense
to know that such a report could not be pleasing to Mrs. Verner, should
it reach her ears.

"I can't think why they do say it," replied Tynn, answering the man's
concluding question. "For my own part, I don't believe there's anything
in it. I don't believe in ghosts."

"Neither didn't a good many more, till now that they have got orakelar
demonstration of it," returned Roy. "Dan Duff see it, and a'most lost
his senses; that girl of Hook's see it, and you know, I suppose, what it
did for _her_; Broom see it; the parson see it; old Frost see it; and
lots more. Not one on 'em but 'ud take their Bible oath, if put to it,
that it is Fred Massingbird's ghost."

"But it is not," said Tynn. "It can't be. Leastways I'll never believe
it till I see it with my own eyes. There'd be no reason in its coming
now. If it wanted to come at all, why didn't it come when it was first
buried, and not wait till over two years had gone by?"

"That's the point that I stuck at," was Roy's answer. "When my wife came
home with the tales, day after day, that Fred Massingbird's spirit was
walking--that this person had seen it, and that person had seen
it--'Yah! Rubbish!' I says to her. 'If his ghost had been a-coming, it
'ud have come afore now.' And so it would."

"Of course," answered Tynn. "_If_ it had been coming. But I have not
lived to these years to believe in ghosts at last."

"Then, what do you think of the parson, Mr. Tynn?" continued Roy, in a
strangely significant tone. "And Broom--he have got his senses about
him? How d'ye account for their believing it?"

"I have not heard them say that they do believe it," responded Tynn,
with a knowing nod. "Folks may go about and say that I believe it,
perhaps; but that wouldn't make it any nearer the fact. And what has
all this to do with Mr. Verner?"

"I am coming to it," said Roy. He took a step backward, looked carefully
up and down the road, lest listeners might be in ambush; stretched his
neck forward, and in like manner surveyed the field On either side the
hedge. Apparently it satisfied him, and he resumed his close proximity
to Tynn and his meaning whisper. "Can't you guess the riddle, Mr. Tynn?"

"I can't in the least guess what you mean, or what you are driving at,"
was Tynn's response. "I think you must have been having a drop of drink,
Roy. I ask what this is to my master, Mr. Verner?"

"Drink be bothered! I've not had a sup inside my mouth since midday,"
was Roy's retort. "This secret has been enough drink for me, and meat,
too. You'll keep counsel, if I tell it you, Mr. Tynn? Not but what it
must soon come out."

"Well?" returned Tynn, in some surprise.

"It's Fred Massingbird fast enough. But it's not his ghost."

"What on earth do you mean?" asked Tynn, never for a moment glancing at
the fact of what Roy tried to imply.

"_He_ is come back: Frederick Massingbird. He didn't die, over there."

A pause, devoted by Tynn to staring and thinking. When the full sense of
the words broke upon him, he staggered a step or two away from the
ex-bailiff.

"Heaven help us, if it's true!" he uttered. "Roy! it _can't_ be!"

"It _is_," said Roy.

They stood looking at each other by starlight. Tynn's face had grown hot
and wet, and he wiped it. "It can't be," he mechanically repeated.

"I tell you it _is_, Mr. Tynn. Now never you mind asking me how I came
to the bottom of it," went on Roy in a sort of defiant tone. "I did come
to the bottom of it, and I do know it; and Mr. Fred, he knows that I
know it. It's as sure that he is back, and in the neighbourhood, as that
you and me is here at this gate. He is alive and he is among us--as
certain as that you are Mr. Tynn, and I be Giles Roy."

There came flashing over Tynn's thoughts the scene of that very evening.
His mistress's shrieks and agitation when she broke from Miss West; the
cries and sobs which had penetrated to their ears when she was shut
afterwards in the study with her husband. The unusual scene had been
productive of gossiping comment among the servants and Tynn had believed
something distressing must have occurred. Not this; he had never glanced
a suspicion at this. He remembered the lines of pain which shone out at
the moment from his master's pale face, in spite of its impassiveness;
and somehow that very face brought conviction to Tynn now, that Roy's
news was true. Tynn let his arms fall on the gate again with a groan.

"Whatever will become of my poor mistress?" he uttered.

"She!" slightingly returned Roy. "She'll be better off than him."

"Better off than who?"

"Than Mr. Verner. She needn't leave Verner's Pride. He must."

To expect any ideas but coarse ones from Roy, Tynn could not. But his
attention was caught by the last suggestion.

"Leave Verner's Pride?" slowly repeated Tynn. "Must he?--good heavens!
must my master be turned from Verner's Pride?"

"Where'll be the help for it?" asked Roy, in a confidential tone. "I
tell you, Mr. Tynn, my heart's been a-bleeding for him ever since I
heard it. _I_ don't see no help for his turning out. I have been
a-weighing it over and over in my mind, and I don't see none. Do you?"

Tynn looked very blank. He was feeling so. He made no answer, and Roy
continued, blandly confidential still.

"If that there codicil, that was so much talked on, hadn't been lost,
he'd have been all right, would Mr. Verner. No come-to-life-again Fred
Massingbird needn't have tried at turning him out. Couldn't it be hunted
for again, Mr. Tynn?"

Roy turned the tail of his eye on Tynn. Would his pumping take effect?
Mrs. Tynn would have told him that her husband might be pumped dry, and
never know it. She was not far wrong. Unsuspicious Tynn went headlong
into the snare.

"Where would be the good of hunting for it again--when every conceivable
place was hunted for it before?" he asked.

"Well, it was a curious thing, that codicil," remarked Roy. "Has it
_never_ been heered on?"

Tynn shook his head. "Never at all. What an awful thing this is, if it's
true!"

"It is true, I tell ye," said Roy. "You needn't doubt it. There was a
report a short while agone that the codicil had been found, and Matiss
had got it in safe keeping. As I sat here, afore you come up, I was
thinking how well it 'ud have served Mr. Verner's turn just now, if it
_was_ true."

"It is not true," said Tynn. "All sorts of reports get about. The
codicil has never been found, and never been heard of."

"What a pity!" groaned Roy, with a deep sigh. "I'm glad I've told it
you, Mr. Tynn! It's a heavy secret for a man to carry about inside of
him. I must be going."

"So must I," said Tynn. "Roy, are you sure there's no mistake?" he
added. "It seems a tale next to impossible."

"Well, now," said Roy, "I see you don't half believe me. You must wait a
few days, and see what them days 'll bring forth. That Mr. Massingbird's
back from Australia, I'll take my oath to. _I_ didn't believe it at
first; and when young Duff was a-going on about the porkypine, I shook
him, I did, for a little lying rascal. I know better now."

"But how do you know it?" debated Tynn.

"Now, never you mind. It's my business, I say, and nobody else's. You
just wait a day or two, that's all, Mr. Tynn. I declare I am as glad to
have met with you to-night, and exchanged this intercourse of opinions,
as if anybody had counted me out a bag o' gold."

"Well, good-night, Roy," concluded Tynn, turning his steps towards
Verner's Pride. "I wish I had been a hundred miles off, I know, before I
had heard it."

Roy slipped over the gate; and there, out of sight, he executed a kind
of triumphant dance.

"Then there is no codicil!" cried he. "I thought I could wile it out of
him! That Tynn's as easy to be run out as is glass when it's hot."

And, putting his best leg forward, he made his way as fast as he could
make it towards his home.

Tynn made _his_ way towards Verner's Pride. But not fast. The
information he had received filled his mind with the saddest trouble,
and reduced his steps to slowness. When any great calamity falls
suddenly upon us, or the dread of any great calamity, our first natural
thought is, how it may be mitigated or averted. It was the thought that
occurred to Tynn. The first shock over, digested, as may be said, Tynn
began to deliberate whether he could do anything to help his master in
the strait; and he went along, turning all sorts of suggestions over in
his mind. Much as Sibylla was disliked by the old servant--and she had
contrived to make herself very much disliked by them all--Tynn could not
help feeling warmly the blow that was about to burst upon her head. Was
there anything earthly he could do to avert it?--to help her or his
master?

He did not doubt the information. Roy was not a particularly reliable
person; but Tynn could not doubt that this was true. It was the most
feasible solution of the ghost story agitating Deerham; the only
solution of it, Tynn grew to think. If Frederick Massingbird----

Tynn's reflections came to a halt. Vaulting over a gate on the other
side the road--the very gate through which poor Rachel Frost had glided
the night of her death, to avoid meeting Frederick Massingbird and
Sibylla West--was a tall man. He came, straight across the road, in
front of Tynn, and passed through a gap of the hedge, on to the grounds
of Verner's Pride.

But what made Tynn stand transfixed, as if he had been changed into a
statue? What brought a cold chill to his heart, a heat to his brow? Why,
as the man passed him, he turned his face full on Tynn; disclosing the
features, the white, whiskerless cheek, with the black mark upon it, of
Frederick Massingbird. Recovering himself as best he could, Tynn walked
on, and gained the house.

Mrs. Verner had gone to her room. Mr. Verner was mixing with his guests.
Some of the gentlemen were on the terrace smoking, and Tynn made his way
on to it, hoping he might get a minute's interview with his master. The
impression upon Tynn's mind was that Frederick Massingbird was coming
there and then, to invade Verner's Pride: it appeared to Tynn to be his
duty to impart what he had heard and seen at once to Mr. Verner.

Circumstances favoured him. Lionel had been talking with Mr. Gordon at
the far end of the terrace, but the latter was called to from the
drawing-room windows and departed in answer to it. Tynn seized the
opportunity; his master was alone.

Quite alone. He was leaning over the outer balustrade of the terrace,
apparently looking forth in the night obscurity on his own lands,
stretched out before him. "Master!" whispered Tynn, forgetting ceremony
in the moment's absorbing agitation, in the terrible calamity that was
about to fall, "I have had an awful secret made known to me to-night. I
must tell it you, sir."

"I know it already, Tynn," was the quiet response of Lionel.

Then Tynn told--told all he had heard, and how he had heard it; told how
he had just _seen_ Frederick Massingbird. Lionel started from the
balustrade.

"Tynn! You saw him! Now?"

"Not five minutes ago, sir. He came right on to these grounds through
the gap in the hedge. Oh, master! what will be done?" and the man's
voice rose to a wail in its anguish. "He may be coming on now to put in
his claim to Verner's Pride; to--to--to--all that's in it!"

But that Lionel was nerved to self-control, he might have answered with
another wail of anguish. His mind filled up the gap of words, that the
delicacy of Tynn would not speak. "He may be coming to claim Sibylla."


CHAPTER LXIII.

LOOKING OUT FOR THE WORST.


The night passed quietly at Verner's Pride. Not, for all its inmates,
pleasantly. Faithful Tynn bolted and barred the doors and windows with
his own hand, as he might have done on the anticipated invasion of a
burglar. He then took up his station to watch the approaches to the
house, and never stirred until morning light. There may have run in
Tynn's mind some vague fear of violence, should his master and Frederick
Massingbird come in contact.

How did Lionel pass it? Wakeful and watchful as Tynn. He went to bed;
but sleep, for him, there was none. His wife, by his side, slept all
through the night. Better, of course, for her that it should be so; but,
that her frame of mind could be sufficiently easy to admit of sleep, was
a perfect marvel to Lionel. Had he needed proof to convince him how
shallow was her mind, how incapable she was of depth of feeling, of
thought, this would have supplied it. She slept throughout the night.
Lionel never closed his eyes; his brain was at work, his mind was
troubled, his heart was aching. Not for himself. His position was
certainly not one to be envied; but, in his great anxiety for his wife,
self passed out of sight. To what conflict might she not be about to be
exposed! to what unseemly violence of struggle, outwardly and inwardly,
might she not expose herself! He knew quite well that, according to the
laws of God and man, she was Frederick Massingbird's wife; not his. He
should never think--when the time came--of disputing Frederick
Massingbird's claim to her. But, what would she do?--how would she act?
He believed in his heart, that Sibylla, in spite of her aggravations
shown to him, and whatever may have been her preference for Frederick
Massingbird in the early days, best cared for him, Lionel, now. He
believed that she would not willingly return to Frederick Massingbird.
Or, if she did, it would be for the sake of Verner's Pride.

He was right. Heartless, selfish, vain, and ambitious, Verner's Pride
possessed far more attraction for Sibylla than did either Lionel or
Frederick Massingbird. Allow her to keep quiet possession of that, and
she would not cast much thought to either of them. If the conflict
actually came, Lionel felt, in his innate refinement, that the proper
course for Sibylla to adopt would be to retire from all social ties,
partially to retire from the world--as Miss West had suggested she
should do now in the uncertainty. Lionel did not wholly agree with Miss
West. He deemed that, in the uncertainty, Sibylla's place was by his
side, still his wife; but, when once the uncertainty was set at rest by
the actual appearance of Frederick Massingbird, then let her retire. It
was the only course that he could pursue, were the case his own. His
mind was made up upon one point--to withdraw himself out of the way when
that time came. To India, to the wilds of Africa--anywhere, far, far
away. Never would he remain to be an eye-sore to Sibylla or Frederick
Massingbird--inhabiting the land that they inhabited, breathing the air
that sustained life in them. Sibylla might rely on one thing--that when
Frederick Massingbird did appear beyond doubt or dispute, that very hour
he said adieu to Sibylla. The shock soothed--and he would soothe it for
her to the very utmost of his power--he should depart. He would be no
more capable of retaining Sibylla in the face of her husband, than he
could have taken her, knowingly, from that husband in his lifetime.

But where _was_ Frederick Massingbird? Tynn's opinion had been--he had
told it to his master--that when he saw Frederick Massingbird steal into
the grounds of Verner's Pride the previous evening, he was coming on to
the house, there and then. Perhaps Lionel himself had entertained the
same conviction. But the night had passed, and no Frederick Massingbird
had come. What could be the meaning of it? What could be the meaning of
his dodging about Deerham in this manner, frightening the
inhabitants?--of his watching the windows of Verner's Pride? Verner's
Pride was his; Sibylla was his; why, then, did he not arrive to assume
his rights?

Agitated with these and many other conflicting thoughts, Lionel lay on
his uneasy bed, and saw in the morning light. He did not rise until his
usual hour; he would have risen far earlier but for the fear of
disturbing Sibylla. To lie there, a prey to these reflections, to this
terrible suspense, was intolerable to him, but he would not risk waking
her. The day might prove long enough and bad enough for her, without
arousing her to it before her time. He rose, but she slept on still.
Lionel did wonder how she could.

Not until he was going out of the room, dressed, did she awake. She
awoke with a start. It appeared as if recollection, or partial
recollection, of the last night's trouble flashed over her. She pushed
aside the curtain, and called to him in a sharp tone of terror.

"Lionel!"

He turned back. He drew the curtain entirely away, and stood by her
side. She caught his arm, clasping it convulsively.

"Is it a dreadful dream, or is it true?" she uttered, beginning to
tremble. "Oh, Lionel, take care of me! Won't you take care of me?"

"I will take care of you as long as I may," he whispered tenderly.

"You will not let him force me away from you? You will not give up
Verner's Pride? If you care for me, you will not."

"I do care for you," he gently said, avoiding a more direct answer. "My
whole life is occupied in caring for you, in promoting your happiness
and comfort. How I _have_ cared for you, you alone know."

She burst into tears. Lionel bent his lips upon her hot face. "Depend
upon my doing all that I can do," he said.

"Are you going to leave me by myself?" she resumed in fear, as he was
turning to quit the room. "How do I know but he may be bursting in upon
me?"

"Is that all your faith in me, Sibylla? He shall not intrude upon you
here; he shall not intrude upon you anywhere without warning. When he
does come, I shall be at your side."

Lionel joined his guests at breakfast. His wife did not. With smiling
lips and bland brow, he had to cover a mind full of intolerable
suspense, an aching heart. A minor puzzle--though nothing compared to
the puzzle touching the movements of Frederick Massingbird--was working
within him, as to the movements of Captain Cannonby. What could have
become of that gentleman? Where could he be halting on his journey? Had
his halt anything to do with them, with this grievous business?

To Lionel's great surprise, just as they were concluding breakfast, he
saw the close carriage driven to the door, attended by Wigham and
Bennet. You may remember the latter name. Master Dan Duff had called him
"Calves" to Mr. Verner. If Verner's Pride could not keep its masters, it
kept its servants. Lionel knew he had not ordered it; and he supposed
his wife to be still in bed. He went out to the men.

"For whom is the carriage ordered, Bennet?"

"For my mistress, I think, sir."

And at that moment Lionel heard the steps of his wife upon the stairs.
She was coming down, dressed. He turned in, and met her in the hall.
"Are you going out?" he cried, his voice betokening surprise.

"I can't be worried with this uncertainty," was Sibylla's answer, spoken
anything but courteously. "I am going to make Deborah tell me all she
knows, and where she heard it."

"But----"

"I won't be dictated to, Lionel," she querulously stopped him with. "I
will go. What is it to you?"

He turned without a remonstrance, and attended her to the carriage,
placing her in it as considerately as though she had met him with a
wife's loving words. When she was seated, he leaned towards her. "Would
you like me to accompany you, Sibylla?"

"I don't care about it."

He closed the door in silence, his lips compressed. There were times
when her fitful moods vexed him above common. This was one. When they
knew not but the passing hour might be the last of their union, the last
they should ever spend together, it was scarcely seemly to mar its
harmony with ill temper. At least, so felt Lionel. Sibylla spoke as he
was turning away.

"Of course, I thought you would go with me. I did not expect you would
grumble at me for going."

"Get my hat, Bennet," he said. And he stepped in and took his seat
beside her.

Courteously, and smiling as though not a shade of care were within ages
of him, Lionel bowed to his guests as the carriage passed the
breakfast-room windows. He saw that curious faces were directed to him;
he felt that wondering comments, as to their early and sudden drive,
were being spoken; he knew that the scene of the past evening was
affording food for speculation. He could not help it; but these minor
annoyances were as nothing, compared to the great trouble that absorbed
him. The windows passed, he turned to his wife.

"I have neither grumbled at you for going, Sibylla, nor do I see cause
for grumbling. Why should you charge me with it?"

"There! you are going to find fault with me again! Why are you so
cross?"

Cross! He cross! Lionel suppressed at once the retort that was rising to
his lips; as he had done hundreds of times before.

"Heaven knows, nothing was further from my thoughts than to be 'cross,'"
he answered, his tone full of pain. "Were I to be cross to you, Sibylla,
in--in--what may be our last hour together, I should reflect upon myself
for my whole life afterwards."

"It is not our last hour together!" she vehemently answered. "Who says
it is?"

"I trust it is not. But I cannot conceal from myself the fact that it
maybe so. Remember," he added, turning to her with a sudden impulse, and
clasping both her hands within his in a firm, impressive
grasp--"remember that my whole life, since you became mine, has been
spent for you; in promoting your happiness; in striving to give you more
love than has been given to me. I have never met you with an unkind
word; I have never given you a clouded look. You will think of this
when we are separated. And, for myself, its remembrance will be to my
conscience as a healing balm."

Dropping her hands, he drew back to his corner of the chariot, his head
leaning against the fair, white watered silk, as if heavy with
weariness. In truth, it was so; heavy with the weariness caused by
carking care. He had spoken all too impulsively; the avowal was wrung
from him in the moment's bitter strife. A balm upon his conscience that
he had done his duty by her in love? Ay. For the love of his inmost
heart had been another's--not hers.

Sibylla did not understand the allusion. It was well. In her weak and
trifling manner, she was subsiding into tears when the carriage suddenly
stopped. Lionel, his thoughts never free, since a day or two, of
Frederick Massingbird, looked up with a start, almost expecting to see
him.

Lady Verner's groom had been galloping on horseback to Verner's Pride.
Seeing Mr. Verner's carriage, and himself inside it, he had made a sign
to Wigham, who drew up. The man rode up to the window, a note in his
hand.

"Miss Verner charged me to lose no time in delivering it to you, sir.
She said it was immediate. I shouldn't else have presumed to stop your
carriage."

He backed his horse a step or two, waiting for the answer, should there
be any. Lionel ran his eyes over the contents of the note.

"Tell Miss Verner I will call upon her shortly, Philip."

And the man, touching his hat, turned his horse round, and galloped back
towards Deerham Court.

"What does she want? What is it?" impatiently asked Sibylla.

"My mother wishes to see me," replied Lionel.

"And what else? I know _that's_ not all," reiterated Sibylla, her tone a
resentful one. "You have always secrets at Deerham Court against me."

"Never in my life," he answered. "You can read the note, Sibylla."

She caught it up, devouring its few lines rapidly. Lionel believed it
must be the doubt, the uncertainty, that was rendering her so irritable;
in his heart he felt inclined to make every allowance for her; more,
perhaps, than she deserved. There were but a few lines:--

    "Do come to us at once, my dear Lionel! A most strange report
    has reached us, and mamma is like one bereft of her senses.
    She wants you here to contradict it; she says she knows it
    cannot have any foundation.

    DECIMA."

Somehow the words seemed to subdue Sibylla's irritation. She returned
the note to Lionel, and spoke in a hushed, gentle tone. "Is it _this_
report that she alludes to, do you think, Lionel?"

"I fear so. I do not know what other it can be. I am vexed that it
should already have reached the ears of my mother."

"Of course!" resentfully spoke Sibylla. "You would have spared _her_!"

"I would have spared my mother, had it been in my power. I would have
spared my wife," he added, bending his grave, kind face towards her,
"that, and all other ill."

She dashed down the front blinds of the carriage, and laid her head upon
his bosom, sobbing repentantly.

"You would bear with me, Lionel, if you knew the pain I have
here"--touching her chest. "I am sick and ill with fright."

He did not answer that he _did_ bear with her--bear with her most
patiently--as he might have done. He only placed his arm round her that
she might feel its shelter; and, with his gentle fingers, pushed the
golden curls away from her cheeks, for her tears were wetting them.

She went into her sister's house alone. She preferred to do so. The
carriage took Lionel on to Deerham Court. He dismissed it when he
alighted; ordering Wigham back to Miss West's, to await the pleasure of
his mistress.


CHAPTER LXIV.

ENDURANCE.


Lionel had probably obeyed the summons sooner than was expected by Lady
Verner and Decima; sooner, perhaps, than they deemed he could have
obeyed it. Neither of them was in the breakfast-room: no one was there
but Lucy Tempest.

By the very way in which she looked at him--the flushed cheeks, the
eager eyes--he saw that the tidings had reached her. She timidly held
out her hand to him, her anxious gaze meeting his. Whatever may have
been the depth of feeling entertained for him, Lucy was too
single-minded not to express all she felt of sympathy.

"Is it true?" were her first whispered words, offering no other
salutation.

"Is what true, Lucy?" he asked. "How am I to know what you mean?"

They stood looking at each other. Lionel waiting for her to speak; she
hesitating. Until Lionel was perfectly certain that she alluded to that
particular report, he would not speak of it. Lucy moved a few steps from
him, and stood nervously playing with the ends of her waist-band, the
soft colour rising in her cheeks.

"I do not like to tell you," she said simply. "It would not be a
pleasant thing for you to hear, if it be not true."

"And still less pleasant for me, if it be true," he replied, the words
bringing him conviction that the rumour they had heard was correct. "I
fear it is true, Lucy."

"That--some one--has come back?"

"Some one who was supposed to be dead."

The avowal seemed to take from her all hope. Her hands fell listlessly
by her side, and the tears rose to her eyes. "I am so sorry!" she
breathed. "I am so sorry for you, and for--for----"

"My wife. Is that what you were going to say?"

"Yes, it is. I did not like much to say it. I am truly grieved. I wish I
could have helped it!"

"Ah! you are not a fairy with an all-powerful wand yet, Lucy, as we read
of in children's books. It is a terrible blow, for her and for me. Do
you know how the rumour reached my mother?"

"I think it was through the servants. Some of them heard it, and old
Catherine told her. Lady Verner has been like any one wild; but for
Decima, she would have started----"

Lucy's voice died away. Gliding in at the door, with a white face and
drawn-back lips, was Lady Verner. She caught hold of Lionel, her eyes
searching his countenance for the confirmation of her fears, or their
contradiction. Lionel took her hands in his.

"It is true, mother. Be brave, for my sake."

With a wailing cry she sat down on the sofa, drawing him beside her.
Decima entered and stood before them, her hands clasped in pain. Lady
Verner made him tell her all the particulars; all he knew, all he
feared.

"How does Sibylla meet it?" was her first question when she had listened
to the end.

"Not very well," he answered, after a momentary hesitation. "Who could
meet it well?" "Lionel, it is a judgment upon her. She--"

Lionel started up, his brow flushing.

"I beg your pardon, mother. You forget that you are speaking of my wife.
She _is_ my wife," he more calmly added, "until she shall have been
proved not to be."

No. Whatever may have been Sibylla's conduct to him personally, neither
before her face nor behind her back, would Lionel forget one jot of the
respect due to her. Or suffer another to forget it; although that other
should be his mother.

"What shall you do with her, Lionel?"

"Do with her?" he repeated, not understanding how to take the question.

"When the man makes himself known?"

"I am content to leave that to the time," replied Lionel, in a tone that
debarred further discussion.

"I knew no good would come of it," resumed Lady Verner, persistent in
expressing her opinion. "But for the wiles of that girl you might have
married happily, might have married Mary Elmsley."

"Mother, there is trouble enough upon us just now without introducing
old vexations," rejoined Lionel. "I have told you before that had I
never set eyes upon Sibylla after she married Frederick Massingbird,
Mary Elmsley would not have been my wife."

"If he comes back, he comes back to Verner's Pride?" pursued Lady Verner
in a low tone, breaking the pause which had ensued.

"Yes. Verner's Pride is his."

"And what shall you do? Turned, like a beggar, out on the face of the
earth?"

Like a beggar? Ay, far more like a beggar than Lady Verner, in her worst
apprehension, could picture.

"I must make my way on the earth as I best can," he replied in answer,
"I shall leave Europe--probably for India. I may find some means,
through my late father's friends, of getting my bread there."

Lady Verner appeared to appreciate the motive which no doubt dictated
the suggested course. She did not attempt to controvert it; she only
wrung her hands in passionate wailing.

"Oh, that you had not married her! that you had not subjected yourself
to this dreadful blight!"

Lionel rose. There were limits of endurance even for his aching heart.
Reproaches in a moment of trouble are as cold iron entering the soul.

"I will come in another time when you are more yourself, mother," was
all he said. "I could have borne sympathy from you this morning, better
than complaint."

He shook hands with her. He laid his hand in silence on Decima's
shoulder with a fond pressure as he passed her; her face was turned from
him, the tears silently streaming down it. He nodded to Lucy, who stood
at the other end of the room, and went out. But, ere he was half-way
across the ante-room, he heard hasty footsteps behind him. He turned to
behold Lucy Tempest, her hands extended, her face streaming down with
tears.

"Oh, Lionel, please not to go away thinking nobody sympathises with you!
I am so grieved; I am so sorry! If I can do anything for you, or for
Sibylla, to lighten the distress, I will do it."

He took the pretty, pleading hands in his, bending his face until it was
nearly on a level with hers. But that emotion nearly over-mastered him
in the moment's anguish, the very consciousness that he might be free
from married obligations, would have rendered his manner cold to Lucy
Tempest. Whether Frederick Massingbird was alive or not, _he_ must be a
man isolated from other wedded ties, so long as Sibylla remained on the
earth. The kind young face, held up to him in its grief, disarmed his
reserve. He spoke out to Lucy as freely as he had done in that long-ago
illness, when she was his full confidante. Nay, whether from her looks,
or from some lately untouched chord in his memory reawakened, that old
time was before him now, rather than the present, as his next words
proved.

"Lucy, with one thing and another, my heart is half broken. I wish I had
died in that illness. Better for me! Better--perhaps--for you."

"Not for me," said she, through her tears. "Do not think of me. I wish I
could help you in this great sorrow!"

"Help from you of any sort, Lucy, I forfeited in my blind wilfulness,"
he hoarsely whispered. "God bless you!" he added, wringing her hands to
pain. "God bless you for ever!"

She did not loose them. He was about to draw his hands away, but she
held them still, her tears and sobs nearly choking her.

"You spoke of India. Should it be that land that you choose for your
exile, go to papa. He may be able to do great things for you. And, if in
his power, he _would_ do them, for Sir Lionel Verner's sake. Papa longs
to know you. He always says so much about you in his letters to me."

"You have never told me so, Lucy."

"I thought it better not to talk to you too much," she simply said. "And
you have not been always at Deerham."

Lionel looked at her, holding her hands still. She knew how futile it
was to affect ignorance of truths in that moment of unreserve; she knew
that her mind and its feelings were as clear to Lionel as though she had
been made of glass, and she spoke freely in her open simplicity. She
knew, probably, that his deepest love and esteem were given to her.
Lionel knew it, if she did not; knew it to his very heart's core. He
could only reiterate his prayer, as he finally turned from her--"God
bless you, Lucy, for ever, and for ever!"


CHAPTER LXV.

CAPTAIN CANNONBY.


Deerham abounded in inns. How they all contrived to get a living, nobody
could imagine. That they did jog along somehow, was evident; but they
appeared to be generally as void of bustle as were their lazy
sign-boards, basking in the sun on a summer's day. The best in the
place, one with rather more pretension to superiority than the rest, was
the Golden Fleece. It was situated at the entrance to Deerham, not far
from the railway station; not far either from Deerham Court; in fact,
between Deerham Court and the village.

As Lionel approached it, he saw the landlord standing at its
entrance--John Cox. A rubicund man, with a bald head, who evidently did
justice to his own good cheer, if visitors did not. Shading his eyes
with one hand, he had the other extended in the direction of the
village, pointing out the way to a strange gentleman who stood beside
him.

"Go as straight as you can go, sir, through the village, and for a
goodish distance beyond it," he was saying, as Lionel drew within
hearing. "It will bring you to Verner's Pride. You can't mistake it;
it's the only mansion thereabouts."

The words caused Lionel to cast a rapid glance at the stranger. He saw a
man of some five-and-thirty or forty years, fair of complexion once, but
bronzed now by travel, or other causes. The landlord's eyes fell on
Lionel.

"Here is Mr. Verner!" he hastily exclaimed. "Sir"--saluting
Lionel--"this gentleman was going up to you at Verner's Pride."

The stranger turned, holding out his hand in a free and pleasant manner
to Lionel. "My name is Cannonby."

"I could have known it by the likeness to your brother," said Lionel,
shaking him by the hand. "I saw him yesterday. I was in town, and he
told me you were coming. But why were you not with us last night?"

"I turned aside on my journey to see an old military friend--whom, by
the way, I found to be out--and did not get to Deerham until past ten,"
explained Captain Cannonby. "I thought it too late to invade you, so put
up here until this morning."

Lionel linked his arm within Captain Cannonby's, and drew him onwards.
The moment of confirmation was come. His mind was in too sad a state to
allow of his beating about the bush; his suspense had been too sharp and
urgent for him to prolong it now. He plunged into the matter at once.

"You have come to bring me some unpleasant news, Captain Cannonby.
Unhappily, it will be news no longer. But you will give me the
confirming particulars."

Captain Cannonby looked as if he did not understand. "Unpleasant news?"
he repeated.

"I speak"--and Lionel lowered his voice--"of Frederick Massingbird. You
know, probably, what I would ask. How long have you been cognisant of
these unhappy facts?"

"I declare, Mr. Verner, I don't know what you mean," was Captain
Cannonby's answer, given in a hearty tone. "To what do you allude?"

Lionel paused. Was it possible that he--Captain Cannonby--was in
ignorance? "Tell me one thing," he said. "Your brother mentioned that
you had heard, as he believed, some news connected with me and--and my
wife, in Paris, which had caused you to hurry home, and come down to
Verner's Pride. What was that news?"

"The news I heard was, that Mrs. Massingbird had become Mrs. Verner. I
had intended to find her out when I got to Europe, if only to apologise
for my negligence in not giving her news of John Massingbird or his
property--which news I could never gather for myself--but I did not know
precisely where she might be. I heard in Paris that she had married you,
and was living at Verner's Pride."

Lionel drew a long breath. "And that was all?"

"That was all."

Then he was in ignorance of it! But, to keep him in ignorance was
impossible. Lionel must ask confirmation or non-confirmation of the
death. With low voice and rapid speech he mentioned the fears and the
facts. Captain Cannonby gathered them in, withdrew his arm from
Lionel's, and stood staring at him.

"Fred Massingbird alive, and come back to England!" he uttered, in
bewildered wonder.

"We cannot think otherwise," replied Lionel.

"Then, Mr. Verner, I tell you that it cannot be. It _cannot_ be, you
understand. I saw him die. I saw him laid in the grave."

They had not walked on. They stood there, looking at each other,
absorbed in themselves, oblivious to the attention that might be fixed
on them from any stray passers-by. At that moment there were no
passers-by to fix it; the bustle of Deerham only began with the houses,
and those they had not yet reached.

"I would give all my future life to believe you," earnestly spoke
Lionel; "to believe that there can be no mistake--for my wife's sake."

"There is no mistake," reiterated Captain Cannonby. "I saw him dead; I
saw him buried. A parson, in the company halting there, read the burial
service over him."

"You may have buried him, fancying he was dead," suggested Lionel,
giving utterance to some of the wild thoughts of his imaginings.
"And--forgive me for bringing forward such pictures--the mistake may
have been discovered in time--and--"

"It could not be," interrupted Captain Cannonby. "I am quite certain he
was dead. Let us allow, if you will, for argument's sake, that he was
not dead when he was put into the ground. Five minutes' lying there,
with the weight of earth upon him, would have effectually destroyed
life; had any been left in him to destroy. There was no coffin, you must
remember."

"No?"

"Parties to the gold-fields don't carry a supply of coffins with them.
If death occurs _en route_, it has to be provided for in the simplest
and most practical form. At least, I can answer that such was the case
with regard to Fred Massingbird. He was buried in the clothes he wore
when he died."

Lionel was lost in abstraction.

"He died at early dawn, just as the sun burst out to illumine the
heavens, and at midday he was buried," continued Captain Cannonby. "I
saw him buried. I saw the earth shovelled in upon him; nay, I helped to
shovel it. I left him there; we all left him, covered over; at rest for
good in this world. Mr. Verner, dismiss this great fear; rely upon it
that he was, and is, dead."

"I wish I could rely upon it!" spoke Lionel. "The fear, I may say the
certainty, has been so unequivocally impressed upon my belief, that a
doubt must remain until it is explained who walks about, bearing his
outward appearance. He was a very remarkable-looking man, you know. The
black mark on his cheek alone would render him so."

"And that black mark is visible upon the cheek of the person who is seen
at night?"

"Conspicuously so. This ghost--as it is taken for--has nearly frightened
one or two lives away. It is very strange."

"Can it be anybody got up to personate Fred Massingbird?"

"Unless it be himself, that is the most feasible interpretation,"
observed Lionel. "But it does not alter the mystery. It is not only in
the face and the black mark that the likeness is discernible, but in
the figure also. In fact, in all points this man bears the greatest
resemblance to Frederick Massingbird--at least, if the eyes of those who
have seen him may be trusted. My own butler saw him last night; the man
passed close before him, turning his face to him in the moment of
passing. He says there can be no doubt that it is Frederick
Massingbird."

Captain Cannonby felt a little staggered. "If it should turn out to be
Frederick Massingbird, all I can say is that I shall never believe
anybody's dead again. It will be like an incident in a drama. I should
next expect my old father to come to life, who has lain these twelve
years past at Kensal Green Cemetery. Does Mrs. Verner know of this?"

"She does, unfortunately. She was told of it during my absence
yesterday. I could have wished it kept from her, until we were at some
certainty."

"Oh, come, Mr. Verner, take heart!" impulsively cried Captain Cannonby,
all the improbabilities of the case striking forcibly upon him. "The
thing is not possible; it is not indeed."

"At any rate, your testimony will be so much comfort for my wife,"
returned Lionel gladly. "It has comforted me. If my fears are not
entirely dispelled, there's something done towards it."

Arrived at the Belvedere Road, Lionel looked about for his carriage. He
could not see it. At that moment Jan turned out of the surgery. Lionel
asked him if he had seen Sibylla.

"She is gone home," replied Jan. "She and Miss Deb split upon some rock,
and Sibylla got into her carriage, and went off in anger."

He was walking away with his usual rapid strides, on his way to some
patient, when Lionel caught hold of him. "Jan, this is Captain Cannonby.
The friend who was with Frederick Massingbird when he died. He assures
me that he is dead. Dead and buried. My brother, Captain Cannonby."

"There cannot be a doubt of it," said Captain Cannonby, alluding to the
death. "I saw him die; I helped to bury him."

"Then who _is_ it that walks about, dressed up as his ghost?" debated
Jan.

"I cannot tell," said Lionel, a severe expression arising to his lips.
"I begin to think with Captain Cannonby; that there can be no doubt that
Frederick Massingbird is dead; therefore, he, it is not. But that it
would be undesirable, for my wife's sake, to make this doubt public, I
would have every house in the place searched. Whoever it may be, he is
concealed in one of them."

"Little doubt of that," nodded Jan. "I'll pounce upon him, if I get the
chance."

Lionel and Captain Cannonby continued their way to Verner's Pride. The
revived hope in Lionel's mind strengthened with every step they took. It
did seem impossible, looking at it from a practical, matter-of-fact
point of view, that a man buried deep in the earth, and supposed to be
dead before he was placed there, could come to life again.

"What a relief for Sibylla!" he involuntarily cried, drawing a long,
relieved breath on his own score. "This must be just one of those cases,
Captain Cannonby, when good Catholics, in the old days, made a vow to
the Virgin of so many valuable offerings, should the dread be removed
and turn out to have been no legitimate dread at all."

"Ay. I should like to be in at the upshot."

"I hope you will be. You must not run away from us immediately. Where's
your luggage?"

Captain Cannonby laughed. "Talk to a returned gold-digger of his
'luggage'! Mine consists of a hand portmanteau, and that is at the
Golden Fleece. I can order it up here if you'd like me to stay with you
a few days. I should enjoy some shooting beyond everything."

"That is settled, then," said Lionel. "I will see that you have your
portmanteau. Did you get rich at the diggings?"

The captain shook his head. "I might have made something, had I stuck at
it. But I grew sick of it altogether. My brother, the doctor, makes a
sight of money, and I can get what I want from him," was the candid
confession.

Lionel smiled. "These rich brothers in reserve are a terrible drag upon
self-exertion. Here we are!" he added, as they turned in at the gates.
"This is Verner's Pride."

"What a fine place!" exclaimed Captain Cannonby, bringing his steps to a
halt as he gazed at it.

"Yes, it is. Not a pleasant prospect, was it, to contemplate the being
turned out of it by a dead man."

"A dead--You do not mean to say that Frederick Massingbird--if in
life--would be the owner of Verner's Pride?"

"Yes, he would be. I was its rightful heir, and why my uncle willed it
away from me, to one who was no blood relation, has remained a mystery
to this day. Frederick Massingbird succeeded, to my exclusion. I only
came into it at his death."

Captain Cannonby appeared completely thunderstruck at the revelation.
"Why, then," he cried, after a pause, "this may supply the very
motive-power that is wanting, for one to personate Fred Massingbird."

"Scarcely," replied Lionel. "No ghost, or seeming ghost, walking about
in secret at night, could get Verner's Pride resigned to him. He must
come forward in the broad face of day, and establish his identity by
indisputable proof."

"True, true. Well, it is a curious tale! I should like, as I say, to
witness the winding-up."

Lionel looked about for his wife. He could not find her. But few of
their guests were in the rooms; they had dispersed somewhere or other.
He went up to Sibylla's dressing-room, but she was not there.
Mademoiselle Benoite was coming along the corridor as he left it again.

"Do you know where your mistress is?" he asked.

"_Mais certainement_," responded mademoiselle. "Monsieur will find madam
at the archerie."

He bent his steps to the targets. On the lawn, flitting amidst the other
fair archers, in her dress of green and gold, was Sibylla. All traces of
care had vanished from her face, her voice was of the merriest, her step
of the fleetest, her laugh of the lightest. Truly, Lionel marvelled.
There flashed into his mind the grieving face of another, whom he had
not long ago parted from; grieving for their woes. Better for his mind's
peace that these contrasts had not been forced so continually upon him.

Could she, in some unaccountable manner, have heard the consoling news
that Cannonby brought? In the first moment, he thought it must be so: in
the next, he knew it to be impossible. Smothering down a sigh, he went
forward, and drew her apart from the rest; choosing that covered walk
where he had spoken to her a day or two previously, regarding Mrs.
Duff's bill. Taking her hands in his, he stood before her, looking with
a reassuring smile into her face.

"What will you give me for some good news, Sibylla?"

"What about?" she rejoined.

"Need you ask? There is only one point upon which news could greatly
interest either of us, just now. I have seen Cannonby. He is here,
and--"

"Here! At Verner's Pride?" she interrupted. "Oh, I shall like to see
Cannonby; to talk over old Australian times with him."

Who was to account for her capricious moods? Lionel remembered the
evening, during the very moon not yet dark to the earth, when Sibylla
had made a scene in the drawing-room, saying she could not bear to hear
the name of Cannonby, or to be reminded of the past days in Melbourne.
She was turning to fly to the house, but Lionel caught her.

"Wait, wait, Sibylla! Will you not hear the good tidings I have for you?
Cannonby says there cannot be a doubt that Frederick Massingbird is
dead. He left him dead and buried, as he told you in Melbourne. We have
been terrified and pained--I trust--for nothing."

"Lionel, look here," said she, receiving the assurance in the same
equable manner that she might have heard him assert it was a fine day,
or a wet one, "I have been making up my mind not to let this bother
worry me. That wretched old maid Deborah went on to me with such rubbish
this morning about leaving you, about leaving Verner's Pride, that she
vexed me to anger. I came home and cried; and Benoite found me lying
upon the sofa; and when I told her what it was, she said the best plan
was, not to mind, to meet it with a laugh, instead of tears--"

"Sibylla!" he interposed in a tone of pain. "You surely did not make a
confidante of Benoite!"

"Of course I did," she answered, looking as if surprised at his
question, his tone. "Why not? Benoite cheered me up, I can tell you,
better than you do. 'What matter to cry?' she asked. 'If he does come
back, you will still be the mistress of Verner's Pride.' And so I
shall."

Lionel let go her hands. She sped off to the house, eager to find
Captain Cannonby. He--her husband--leaned against the trunk of a tree,
bitter mortification in his face, bitter humiliation in his heart. Was
this the wife to whom he had bound himself for ever? Well could he echo
in that moment Lady Verner's reiterated assertion, that she was not
worthy of him. With a stifled sigh that was more like a groan, he turned
to follow her.

"Be still, be still!" he murmured, beating his hand upon his bosom, that
he might still its pain. "Let me bear on, doing my duty by her always in
love!"

That pretty Mrs. Jocelyn ran up to Lionel, and intercepted his path.
Mrs. Jocelyn would have liked to intercept it more frequently than she
did, if she had but received a little encouragement. She tried hard for
it, but it never came. One habit, at any rate, Lionel Verner had not
acquired, amid the many strange examples of an artificial age--that of
not paying considerate respect, both in semblance and reality, to other
men's wives.

"Oh, Mr. Verner, what a truant you are! You never come to pick up our
arrows."

"Don't I?" said Lionel, with his courteous smile. "I will come presently
if I can. I am in search of Mrs. Verner. She is gone in to welcome a
friend who has arrived."

And Mrs. Jocelyn had to go back to the targets alone.


CHAPTER LXVI.

"DON'T THROTTLE ME, JAN!"


There was a good deal of sickness at present in Deerham: there generally
was in the autumn season. Many a time did Jan wish he could be master of
Verner's Pride just for twelve months, or of any other "Pride" whose
revenues were sufficient to remedy the evils existing in the poor
dwellings: the ill accommodation, inside; the ill draining, out. Jan,
had that desirable consummation arrived, would not have wasted time in
thinking over it; he would have commenced the work in the same hour with
his own hands. However, Jan, like most of us, had not to do with things
as they might be, but with things as they were. The sickness was great,
and Jan, in spite of his horse's help, was, as he often said, nearly
worked off his legs.

He had been hastening to a patient when encountered by Lionel and
Captain Cannonby. From that patient he had to hasten to others, in a
succession of relays, as it were, all day long; sometimes his own legs
in requisition, sometimes the horse's. About seven o'clock he got home
to tea, at which Miss Deborah made him comfortable. Truth to say, Miss
Deborah felt rather inclined to pet Jan as a son. He had gone there a
boy, and Miss Deb, though the years since had stolen on and on, and had
changed Jan into a man, had not allowed her ideas to keep pace with
them. So do we cheat ourselves! There were times when a qualm of
conscience came over Miss Deb. Remembering how hard Jan worked, and that
her father took more than the lion's share of the profits, it appeared
to her scarcely fair. Not that she could alter it, poor thing! All she
could do was to be as economical as possible, and to study Jan's
comforts. Now and again she had been compelled to go to Jan for money,
over and above the stipulated sum paid to her. Jan gave it as freely and
readily as he would have filled Miss Amilly's glass pot with castor oil.
But Deborah West knew that it came out of Jan's own pocket; and, to ask
for it, went terribly against her feelings and her sense of justice.

The tea was over. But she took care of Jan's--some nice tea, and toasted
tea-cakes, and a plate of ham. Jan sat down by the fire, and, as Miss
Deb said, took it in comfort. Truth to say, had Jan found only the
remains of the teapot, and stale bread-and-butter, he might have thought
it comfortable enough for him; he would not have grumbled had he found
nothing.

"Any fresh messages in, do you know, Miss Deb?" he inquired.

"Now, do pray get your tea in peace, Mr. Jan, and don't worry yourself
over 'fresh messages,'" responded Miss Deb. "Master Cheese was called
out to the surgery at tea-time, but I suppose it was nothing particular,
for he was back again directly."

"Of course!" cried Jan. "_He'd_ not lose his tea without a fight for
it."

Jan finished his tea and departed to the surgery, catching sight of the
coat-tails of Mr. Bitterworth's servant leaving it. Master Cheese was
seated with the leech basin before him. It was filled with Orleans
plums, of which he was eating with uncommon satisfaction. Liking
variations of flavour in fruit, he occasionally diversified the plums
with a sour codlin apple, a dozen or so of which he had stowed away in
his trousers' pockets. Bob stood at a respectful distance, his eyes
wandering to the tempting collation, and his mouth watering. Amongst the
apples Master Cheese had come upon one three parts eaten away by the
grubs, and this he benevolently threw to Bob. Bob had disposed of it,
and was now vainly longing for more.

"What did Bitterworth's man want?" inquired Jan of Master Cheese.

"The missis is took bad again, he says," responded that gentleman, as
distinctly as he could speak for the apples and the plums: "croup, or
something. Not as violent as it was before. Can wait."

"You had better go up at once," was Jan's reply.

Master Cheese was taken aback. "_I_ go up!" he repeated, pulling a face
as long as his arm. "All that way! I had to go to Baker's and to Flint's
between dinner and tea."

"And to how many Bakers and Flints do I have to go between dinner and
tea?" retorted Jan. "You know what to give Mrs. Bitterworth. So start."

Master Cheese felt aggrieved beyond everything. For one thing, it might
be dangerous to leave those cherished plums in the leech basin, Bob
being within arm's length of them; for another, Master Cheese liked his
ease better than walking. He cast some imploring glances at Jan, but
they produced no effect, so he had to get his hat. Vacillating between
the toll that might be taken of the plums if he left them, and the
damage to his hair if he took them, he finally decided on the latter
course. Emptying the plums into his hat, he put it on his head. Jan was
looking over what they termed the call-book.

"Miss Deb says you were called out at tea-time," observed Jan, as Master
Cheese was departing. "Who was it?"

"Nobody but old Hook. The girl was worse."

"What! Alice? Why have you not got it down here?" pointing to the book.

"Oh, they are nobody," grumbled Master Cheese. "I wonder the paupers are
not ashamed to come here to our faces, asking for attendance and physic!
I They know they'll never pay."

"That's my business," said Jan, "Did he say she was very ill?"

"'Took dangerous,' _he_ said," returned Master Cheese. "Thought she'd
not live the night out."

Indefatigable Jan put on his hat, and went out with Master Cheese.
Master Cheese turned leisurely towards Mr. Bitterworth's; Jan cut across
the road at a strapping pace, and took the nearest way to Hook's
cottage. It led him past the retired spot where he and the Reverend Mr.
Bourne had found Alice lying that former night.

Barely had Jan gained it when some tall, dark form came pushing through
the trees at right angles, and was striding off to the distance. One
single moment's indecision--for Jan was not sure at first in the
uncertain light--and then he put his long legs to their utmost speed,
bore down, and pinned the intruder.

"Now, then!" said Jan, "ghost or no ghost, who are you?"

He was answered by a laugh, and some joking words--

"Don't throttle me quite, Jan. Even a ghost can't stand that."

The tone of the laugh, the tone of the voice, fell upon Jan Verner's
ears with the most intense astonishment. He peered into the speaker's
face with his keen eyes, and gave vent to an exclamation. In spite of
the whiskerless cheeks, the elaborate black mark, in spite of the
strange likeness to his brother, Jan recognised the features, not of
Frederick, but of John Massingbird.


CHAPTER LXVII.

DRESSING UP FOR A GHOST.


And so the mystery was out. And the ghost proved to be no ghost at
all--to be no husband of Sibylla--come to disturb the peace of her and
of Lionel; but _John_ Massingbird in real flesh and blood.

There was so much explanation to ask and to be given, that Jan was
somewhat hindered on his way to Hook's.

"I can't stop," said he, in the midst of a long sentence of John's.
"Alice Hook may be dying. Will you remain here until I come back?"

"If you are not long," responded John Massingbird. "I intend this to be
the last night of my concealment, and I want to go about, terrifying the
natives. The fun it has been!"

"Fun, you call it?" remarked Jan. "If Hook's girl does die, it will lie
at your door."

"_She_ won't die," lightly answered John. "I'll send her a ten-pound
note to make amends. Make you haste, Jan, if I am to wait."

Jan sped off to Hook's. He found the girl very ill, but not so much so
as Cheese had intimated. Some unseemly quarrel had taken place in the
cottage, which had agitated her.

"There's no danger," mentally soliloquised Jan, "but it has thrown her
back a good two days."

He found John Massingbird--restless John!--restless as ever!--pacing
before the trees with hasty strides, and bursting into explosions of
laughter.

"Some woman was coming along from one of the cottages by Broom's and I
appeared to her, and sent her on, howling," he explained to Jan. "I
think it was Mother Sykes. The sport this ghost affair has been!"

He sat down on a bench, held his sides, and let his laughter have vent.
Laughter is contagious, and Jan laughed with him, but in a quieter way.

"Whatever put it into your head to personate Frederick?" inquired Jan.
"Was it done to frighten the people?"

"Not at first," answered John Massingbird.

"Because, if to frighten had been your motive, you need only have
appeared in your own person," continued Jan. "You were thought to be
dead, you know, as much as Fred was. Fred _is_ dead, I suppose?"

"Fred is dead, poor fellow, safe enough. I was supposed to be dead, but
I came to life again."

"Did you catch Fred's star when he died?" asked Jan, pointing to the
cheek.

"No," replied John Massingbird, with another burst of laughter, "I get
that up with Indian-ink."

Bit by bit, Jan came into possession of the details. At least, of as
much of them as John Massingbird deemed it expedient to furnish. It
appeared that his being attacked and robbed and left for dead, when
travelling down to Melbourne, was perfectly correct. Luke Roy quitted
him, believing he was dead. Luke would not have quitted him so hastily,
but that he wished to be on the track of the thieves, and he hastened to
Melbourne. After Luke's departure, John Massingbird came, as he phrased
it, to life again. He revived from the suspended animation, or swoon,
which, prolonged over some hours, had been mistaken for death. The
bullet was extracted from his side, and he progressed pretty rapidly
towards recovery.

Luke meanwhile had reached Melbourne; and had come in contact with a
family of the name of Eyre. Luke--if you have not forgotten--had said to
Mr. Eyre that he had obtained a clue to the men who robbed his master;
such, at least, was the information given by that gentleman to Sibylla
Massingbird, on her subsequent sojourn at his house. He, Mr. Eyre, had
said that Luke had promised to return the following day and inform him
how he sped in the search, but that Luke never did return; that he had
never seen him afterwards. All true. Luke found the clue, which he
thought he had gained, to be no clue at all; but he heard news that
pleased him better than fifty clues would have done--that his master,
Mr. Massingbird, was alive. One who had travelled down to Melbourne from
where John was lying, gave him the information. Without waiting to break
bread or draw water, without giving another thought to Mr. Eyre, Luke
started off there and then, to retrace his steps to John Massingbird.
John was nearly well then, and they returned at once to the diggings. In
his careless way, he said the loss must be given up for a bad job; they
should never find the fellows, and the best plan was to pick up more
gold to replace that gone. Luke informed him he had written home to
announce his death. John went into a fit of laughter, forbade Luke to
contradict it, and anticipated the fun he should have in surprising
them, when he went home on the accumulation of his fortune. Thus he
stopped at the diggings, remaining in complete ignorance of the changes
which had taken place; the voyage of Frederick and his wife to
Melbourne, the death of Mr. Verner, the subsequent death of Frederick;
and above all--for that would have told most on John--of the strange
will left by Mr. Verner, which had constituted him the inheritor of
Verner's Pride.

But fortune did not come in the rapid manner fondly expected by John.
The nuggets seemed shy. He obtained enough to rub along with, and that
was all. The life did not ill suit him. To such a man as Lionel Verner,
of innate refinement, just and conscientious, the life would have been
intolerable, almost worse than death. John was not overburdened with any
one of those qualities, and he rather liked the life than not. One thing
was against him: he had no patience. Roving about from place to place,
he was satisfied nowhere long. It was not only that he perpetually
changed the spot, or bed, of work, but he changed from one settlement
to another. This was the reason probably that Captain Cannonby had never
met with him; it was more than probable that it was the cause of his
non-success. Luke Roy was not so fond of roving. He found a place likely
to answer his expectations, and he remained at it; so that the two
parted early, and did not again meet afterwards.

There was a time when this night-watch passed in drowsiness, as she
resignedly awaited the moment when the finished task would bring
her sleep; but since the coming of Francois Paradis the long weekly vigil
was very sweet to her, for she could think of him and of herself
with nothing to distract her dear imaginings. Simple they were, these
thoughts of hers, and never did they travel far afield.
In the springtime he will come back; this return of his, the joy
of seeing him again, the words he will say when they find themselves
once more alone, the first touch of hands and lips.

Not easy was it for Maria to make a picture for herself of how
these things were to come about.

Yet she essayed. First she repeated his full name two or three times,
formally, as others spoke it: Paradis, from St. Michel de Mistassini ...
Francois Paradis ... Then suddenly, with sweet intimacy,--Francois!

The evocation fails not.

He stands before her tall and strong, bold of eye, his face bronzed with
sun and snow-glare. He is by her side, rejoicing at the sight of her,
rejoicing that he has kept his faith, has lived the whole year discreetly,
without drinking or swearing.
There are no blueberries yet to gather-it is only springtime-yet some
good reason they find for rambling off to the woods; he walks beside her
without word or joining of hands, through the massed laurel flaming
into blossom, and naught beyond does either need to flush the cheek,
to quicken the beating of the heart.

Now they are seated upon a fallen tree, and thus he speaks: "Were
you lonely without me, Maria?"

Most surely it is the first question he will put to her; but she is able
to carry the dream no further for the sudden pain stabbing her heart. Ah!
dear God! how long will she have been lonely for him before that
moment comes! A summer to be lived through, an autumn, and all the
endless winter! She sighs, but the steadfast patience of the race
sustains her, and her thoughts turn upon herself and what the future
may be holding.

When she was at St. Prime, one of her cousins who was about to be wedded
spoke often to her of marriage. A young man from the village and another
from Normandin had both courted her; for long months spending the Sunday
evenings together at the house.

"I was fond of them both,"--thus she declared to Maria. "And I really
think I liked Zotique best; but he went off to the drive on the St.
Maurice, and he wasn't to be back till summer; then Romeo asked me and I
said, 'Yes.' I like him very well, too."
Maria made no answer, but even then her heart told her that all
marriages are not like that; now she is very sure.

The love of Francois Paradis for her, her love for him, is a thing
apart-a thing holy and inevitable--for she was unable to imagine that
between them it should have befallen otherwise; so must this love give
warmth and unfading colour to every day of the dullest life. Always
had she dim consciousness of such a presence-moving the spirit like the
solemn joy of chanted masses, the intoxication of a sunny windy
day, the happiness that some unlooked-for good fortune brings, the
certain promise of abundant harvest ...

In the stillness of the night the roar of the fall sounds loud and near;
the north-west wind sways the tops of spruce and fir with a sweet
cool sighing; again and again, farther away and yet farther, an owl is
hooting; the chill that ushers in the dawn is still remote. And Maria,
in perfect contentment, rests upon the step, watching the ruddy beam from
her fire-flickering, disappearing, quickened again to birth.

She seems to remember someone long since whispering in her ear that the
world and life were cheerless and gray. The daily round, brightened
only by a few unsatisfying, fleeting pleasures; the slow passage of
unchanging years; the encounter with some young man, like other young
men, whose patient and hopeful courting ends by whining affection; a
marriage then, and afterwards a vista of days under another
roof, but scarce different from those that went before. So does one
live, the voice had told her. Naught very dreadful in the prospect,
and, even were it so, what possible but submission; yet all level,
dreary and chill as an autumn field.

It is not true! Alone there in the darkness Maria shakes her head, a smile
upon her lips, and knows how far from true it is. When she thinks of
Paradis, his look, his bearing, of what they are and will be to
one another, be and she, something within her bosom has strange
power to burn with the touch of fire, and yet to make her shiver.

All the strong youth of her, the long-suffering of her sooth-fast heart
find place in it; in the upspringing of hope and of longing, this
vision of her approaching miracle of happiness.

Below the oven the red gleam quivers and fails.

"The bread must be ready!" she murmurs to herself. But she cannot bring
herself at once to rise, loth as she is to end the fair dream that
seems only beginning.

CHAPTER VII
A MEAGER REAPING

SEPTEMBER arrived, and the dryness so welcome for the hay-making persisted
till it became a disaster. According to the Chapdelaines, never had
the country been visited with such a drought as this, and every day a
fresh motive was suggested for the divine displeasure.

Oats and wheat took on a sickly colour ere attaining their growth;
a merciless sun withered the grass and the clover aftermath, and all
day long the famished cows stood lowing with their heads over the fences.
They had to be watched continually, for even the meager standing crop
was a sore temptation, and never a day went by but one of them broke
through the rails in the attempt to appease her hunger among the
grain.

Then, of a sudden one evening, as though weary of a constancy so unusual,
the wind shifted and in the morning came the rain. It fell off and on
for a week, and when it ceased and the wind hauled again to the north-west,
autumn had come.

The autumn!

And it seemed as though spring were here but yesterday.
The grain was yet unripe, though yellowed by the drought; nothing save
the hay was in barn; the other crops could draw nutriment from the soil
only while the too brief summer warmed it, and already autumn was here,
the forerunner of relentless winter, of the frosts, and soon the snows
...

Between the wet days there was still fine bright weather, hot toward
noon, when one might fancy that all was as it had been: the harvest still
unreaped, the changeless setting of spruces and firs, and ever the same
sunsets of gray and opal, opal and gold, and skies of misty blue above
the same dark woodland. But in the mornings the grass was sometimes white
with rime, and swiftly followed the earliest dry frosts which killed and
blackened the tops of the potatoes.

Then, for the first time, a film of ice appeared upon the drinking-trough;
melted by the afternoon sun it was there a few days later, and yet a
third time in the same week.

Frequent changes of wind brought an alternation of mild rainy days and
frosty mornings; but every time the wind came afresh from the north-west
it was a little colder, a little more remindful of the icy winter
blasts.
Everywhere is autumn a melancholy season, charged with regrets for that
which is departing, with shrinking from what is to come; but under
the Canadian skies it is sadder and more moving than elsewhere, as
though one were bewailing the death of a mortal summoned untimely
by the gods before he has lived out his span.

Through the increasing cold, the early frosts, the threats of snow,
they held back their hands and put off the reaping from day to day,
encouraging the meager grain to steal a little nourishment from the
earth's failing veins and the spiritless sun. At length, harvest they
must, for October approached. About the time when the leaves of birches
and aspens were turning, the oats and the wheat were cut and carried
to the barn under a cloudless sky, but without rejoicing.

The yield of grain was poor enough, yet the hay-crop had been excellent,
so that the year as a whole gave occasion neither for excess of joy nor
sorrow. However, it was long before the Chapdelaines, in evening
talk, ceased deploring the unheard-of August droughts, the
unprecedented September frosts, which betrayed their hopes.

Against the miserly shortness of the summer and the harshness of a climate
that shows no mercy they did not rebel, were even without a touch of
bitterness; but they did not give up contrasting the season with
that other year of wonders which fond imagination made the standard of
their comparisons; and thus was ever on their lips the countryman's
perpetual lament, so reasonable to the ear, but which recurs unfailingly:
"Had it only been an ordinary year!"

CHAPTER VIII
ENTRENCHED AGAINST WINTER
ONE October morning Maria's first vision on arising was of countless
snow-flakes sifting lazily from the skies.

The ground was covered, the trees white; verily it seemed that autumn
was over, when in other lands it had scarce begun.

But Edwige Legare thus pronounced sentence: "After the first snowfall
there is yet a month before winter sets in. The old folks always so
declared, and I believe it myself." He was right; for in two days a
rain carried off the snow and the dark soil again lay bare. Still the
warning was heeded, and they set about preparations; the yearly defences
against the snow that may not be trifled with, and the piercing
cold.

Esdras and Da'Be protected the foundation of their dwelling with earth
and sand, making an embankment at the foot of the walls; the other
men, armed with hammer and nails, went round the outside of the
house, nailing up, closing chinks, remedying as best they could the
year's wear and tear.

Within, the women forced rags into the crevices, pasted upon the wainscotting
at the north-west side old newspapers brought from the village and
carefully preserved, tested with their hands in every corner for
draughts.

These things accomplished, the next task was to lay in the winter's store
of wood. Beyond the fields, at the border of the forest plenty of dead
trees yet were standing.

Esdras and Legare took ax in hand and felled for three days; the trunks
were piled, awaiting another fall of snow when they could be loaded
on the big wood-sleigh.

All through October, frosty and rainy days came alternately, and
meanwhile the woods were putting on a dress of unearthly loveliness.

Five hundred paces from the Chapdelaine house the bank of the Peribonka
fell steeply to the rapid water and the huge blocks of stone above
the fall, and across the river the opposite bank rose in the fashion
of a rocky amphitheatre, mounting to loftier heights-an amphitheatre
trending in a vast curve to the northward.

Of the birches, aspens, alders and wild cherries scattered upon the
slope, October made splashes of many-tinted red and gold.

Throughout these weeks the ruddy brown of mosses, the changeless green
of fir and cypress, were no more than a background, a setting only for
the ravishing colours of those leaves born with the spring, that
perish with the autumn.

The wonder of their dying spread over the hills and unrolled itself,
an endless riband following the river, ever as beautiful, as rich
in shades brilliant and soft, as enrapturing, when they pawed into
the remoteness of far northern regions and were unseen by human eye.

But ere long there sweeps from out the cold north a mighty wind like a
final sentence of death, the cruel ending to a reprieve, and soon the
poor leaves, brown, red and golden, shaken too unkindly, strow the
ground; the snow covers them, and the white expanse has only
for adornment the sombre green of trees that alter not their garb-triumphing
now, as do those women inspired with bitter wisdom who barter their right
to beauty for life everlasting.

In November Esdras, Da'Be and Edwige Legare went off again to the
shanties.

The father and Tit'Be harnessed Charles Eugene to the wood-sleigh, and
laboured at hauling in the trees that had been cut, and piling them
near the house; that done, the two men took the double-handed saw
and sawed, sawed, sawed from morning till night; it was then the
turn of the axes, and the logs were split as their size required.

Nothing remained but to cord the split wood in the shed beside the
house, where it was sheltered from the snow; the huge piles mingling
the resinous cypress which gives a quick hot flame, spruce and red
birch, burning steadily and longer, close-grained white birch with
its marble-like surface, slower yet to be consumed and leaving red
embers in the morning after a long winter's night.

The moment for laying in wood is also that of the slaughtering.
After entrenching against cold comes the defence against hunger.
The quarters of pork went into the brine-tub; from a beam in the shed
there hung the side of a fat heifer-the other half sold to people in
Honfleur-which the cold would keep fresh till spring; sacks of flour
were piled in a corner of the house, and Tit'Be, provided with a
spool of brass wire, set himself to making nooses for hares.

After the bustle of summer they relapsed into easy-going ways, for
the summer is painfully short and one must:-not lose a single hour
of those precious weeks when it is possible to work on the land,
whereas the winter drags slowly and gives all too much time for the
tasks it brings.

The house became the centre of the universe; in truth the only spot where
life could be sustained, and more than ever the great cast-iron stove
was the soul of it.

Every little while some member of the family fetched a couple of
logs from under the staircase; cypress in the morning, spruce
throughout the day, in the evening birch, pushing them in upon the
live coals.

Whenever the heat failed, mother Chapdelaine might be heard saying
anxiously.-" Don't let the fire out, children." Whereupon Maria, Tit'Be
or Telesphore would open the little door, glance in and hasten to
the pile of wood.

In the mornings Tit'Be jumped out of bed long before daylight to
see if the great sticks of birch had done their duty and burned all
night; should, unluckily, the fire be out he lost no time in
rekindling it with birch-bark and cypress branches, placed heavier
pieces on the mounting flame, and ran back to snuggle under the
brown woollen blankets and patchwork quilt till the comforting
warmth once more filled the house.

Outside, the neighbouring forest, and even the fields won from it, were
an alien unfriendly world, upon which they looked wonderingly
through the little square windows.

And sometimes this world was strangely beautiful in its frozen
immobility, with a sky of flawless blue and a brilliant sun that
sparkled on the snow; but the immaculateness of the blue and the
white alike was pitiless and gave hint of the murderous cold.

Days there were when the weather was tempered and the snow fell straight
from the clouds, concealing all; the ground and the low growth was
covered little by little, the dark line of the woods was hidden behind
the curtain of serried flakes. Then in the morning the sky was clear
again, but the fierce northwest wind swayed the heavens. Powdery snow,
whipped from the ground, drove across the burnt lands and the
clearings in blinding squalls, and heaped itself behind whatever
broke the force of the gale.

To the south-east of the house it built an enormous cone, and between house
and stable raised a drift five feet high through which the shovel
had to carve a path; but to windward the ground was bare, scoured
by the persistent blast.

On such days as these the men scarcely left the house except to
care for the beasts, and came back on the run, their faces rasped
with the cold and shining-wet with snow-crystals melted by the heat
of the house.

Chapdelaine would pluck the icicles from his moustache, slowly draw
off his sheepskin-lined coat and settle himself by the stove with
a satisfied sigh.

"The pump is not frozen?" he asks.
"Is there plenty of wood in the house?"
Assured that the frail wooden fortress is provided with water, wood and
food, he gives himself up to the indolences of winter quarters,
smoking pipes innumerable while the women-folk are busy with the
evening meal. The cold snaps the nails in the plank walls with reports
like pistol-shots; the stove crammed with birch roars lustily; the
howling of the wind without is like the cries of a besieging host.

"It must be a bad day in the woods!"

thinks Maria to herself; and then perceives that she has spoken aloud.

"In the woods they are better off than we are here," answers her
father.

"Up there where the trees stand close together one does not feel the
wind. You can be sure that Esdras and Da'Be are all right."
"Yes?"
But it was not of Esdras and Da'Be that she had just been thinking.

CHAPTER IX

ONE THOUSAND AVES
SINCE the coming of winter they had often talked at the Chapdelaines about
the holidays, and now these were drawing near.

"I am wondering whether we shall have any callers on New Year's
Day," said Madame Chapdelaine one evening.

She went over the list of all relatives and friends able to make the
venture. "Azalma Larouche does not live so far away, but she--she is
not very energetic.

The people at St. Prime would not me to take the journey. Possibly
Wilfrid or Ferdinand might drive from St.

Gedeon if the ice on the lake were in good condition."

A sigh disclosed that she still was dreaming of the coming and going
in the old parishes at the time of the New Year, the family dinners,
the unlooked-for visits of kindred arriving by sleigh from the next
village, buried under rugs and furs, behind a horse whom coat was
white with frost.

Maria's thoughts were turning in another direction. "If the roads are as
bad as they were last year," said she, "we shall not be able to attend
the midnight mass.

And yet I should so much have liked it this time, and father promised
..."
Through the little window they looked on the gray sky, and found
little to cheer them.

To go to midnight mass is the natural and strong desire of every
French-Canadian peasant, even of those living farthest from the
settlements.

What do they not face to accomplish it I Arctic cold, the woods at
night, obliterated roads, great distances do but add to the
impressiveness and the mystery.

This anniversary of the birth of Jesus is more to them than a mere
fixture in the calendar with rites appropriate; it signifies the
renewed promise of salvation, an occasion of deep rejoicing, and
those gathered in the wooden church are imbued with sincerest
fervour, are pervaded with a deep sense of the supernatural.

This year, more than ever, Maria yearned to attend the-mass after many
weeks of remoteness from houses and from churches; the favours she would
fain demand seemed more likely to be granted were she able to
prefer them before the altar, aided in heavenward flight by the
wings of music.

But toward the middle of December much snow fell, dry and fine as
dust, and three days before Christmas the north-west wind arose and
made an end of the roads.

On the morrow of the storm Chapdelaine harnessed Charles Eugene to
the heavy sleigh and departed with Tit'Be; they took shovels to
clear the way or lay out another route.

The two men returned by noon, worn out, white with snow, asserting that
there would be no breaking through for several days. The disappointment
must be borne; Maria sighed, but the idea came to her that there might
be other means of attaining the divine goodwill.

"Is it true, mother," she asked as evening was falling, "that if
you repeat a thousand Aves on the day before Christmas you are
always granted the thing you seek?"

"Quite true," her mother reverently answered. "One desiring a favour who
says her thousand Aves properly before midnight on Christmas Eve,
very seldom fails to receive what she asks."

On Christmas Eve the weather was cold but windless. The two men went out
betimes in another effort to beat down the road, with no great hope of
success; but long before they left, and indeed long before daylight,
Maria began to recite her Aves.

Awakening very early, she took her rosary from beneath the pillow
and swiftly repeated the prayer, passing from the last word to the
first without stopping, and counting, bead by bead.

The others were still asleep; but Chien left his place at the stove
when he saw that she moved, and came to sit beside the bed, gravely
reposing his head upon the coverings.

Maria's glance wandered over the long white muzzle resting upon the
brown wool, the liquid eyes filled with the dumb creature's pathetic
trustfulness, the drooping glossy ears; while she ceased not to
murmur the sacred words.-" Hail Mary, full of grace ..."

Soon Tit'Be jumped from bed to put wood upon the fire; an impulse of
shyness caused Maria to turn away and hide her rosary under the
coverlet as she continued to pray. The stove roared; Chien went back to
his usual spot, and for another half-hour nothing was stirring in the
house save the fingers of Maria numbering the boxwood beads, and
her lips as they moved rapidly in the task she had laid upon
herself.

Then must she arise, for the day was dawning; make the porridge and
the pancakes while the men went to the stable to care for the
animals, wait upon them when they returned, wash the dishes, sweep
the house.

What time she attended to these things, Maria was ever raising a little
higher toward heaven the monument of her Aves; but the rosary had
to be laid aside and it was hard to keep a true reckoning.

As the morning advanced however, no urgent duty calling, she was able to
sit by the window and steadily pursue her undertaking.

Noon; and already three hundred Aves. Her anxiety lessens, for now
she feels almost sure of finishing in time.

It comes to her mind that fasting would give a further title to heavenly
consideration, and might, with reason, turn hopes into certainties;
wherefore she ate but little, foregoing all those things she liked
the best.

"Mr. Jan Verner, I'd like to know what right you have to send for Lionel
from the room when he is at dinner? If he _is_ your brother, you have no
business to forget yourself in that way. He can't help your being his
brother, I suppose; but you ought to know better than to presume upon
it."

"Sibylla!--"

"Be quiet, Lionel. I _shall_ tell him of it. Never was such a thing
heard of, as for a gentleman to be called out for nothing, from his
table's head! You do it again, Jan, and I shall order Tynn to shut the
doors to you of Verner's Pride."

Jan received the lecture with the utmost equanimity, with imperturbable
good nature. Lionel wound his arms about his wife, gravely and gently;
whatever may have been the pain caused by her words, he suppressed it.

"Jan came here to tell me news that quite justified his sending for me,
wherever I might be, or however occupied, Sibylla. He has succeeded in
solving to-night the mystery which has hung over us; he has discovered
who it is that we have been taking for Frederick Massingbird."

"It is not Frederick Massingbird," cried Sibylla, speaking sharply.
"Captain Cannonby says that it cannot be."

"No, it is not Frederick Massingbird--God be thanked!" said Lionel.
"With that knowledge, we can afford to hear who it is bravely; can we
not, Sibylla?"

"But why don't you tell me who it is?" she retorted, in an impatient,
fretful tone, not having the discernment to see that he wished to
prepare her for what was coming. "Can't you speak, Jan, if he won't?
People have no right to come, dressed up in other people's clothes and
faces, to frighten us to death. He ought to be transported! Who is it?"

"You will be startled, Sibylla," said Lionel. "It is one whom we have
believed to be dead; though it is not Frederick Massingbird."

"I _wish_ you'd tell--beating about the bush like that! You need not
stare so, Jan. I don't believe you know."

"It is your cousin, Sibylla; John Massingbird."

A moment's pause. And then, clutching at the hand of Lionel--

"Who?" she shrieked.

"Hush, my dear. It is John Massingbird."

"Not dead! Did he not die?"

"No. He recovered, when left, as was supposed, for dead. He is coming
here to-morrow morning, Jan says."

Sibylla let fall her hands. She staggered back to a pillar and leaned
against it, her upturned face white in the starlight.

"Is--is--is Verner's Pride yours or his?" she gasped in a low tone.

"It is his."

"His! Neither yours nor mine?"

"It is only his, Sibylla."

She raised her hands again; she began fighting with the air, as if she
would beat off an imaginary John Massingbird. Another minute, and her
laughter and her cries came forth together, shriek upon shriek. She was
in strong hysterics. Lionel supported her, while Jan ran for water; and
the gay company came flocking out of the lighted rooms to see.


CHAPTER LXIX.

NO HOME.


People talk of a nine days' wonder. But no nine days' wonder has ever
been heard or known, equal to that which fell on Deerham; which went
booming to the very extremity of the county's boundaries. Lionel Verner,
the legitimate heir--it may so be said--the possessor of Verner's Pride,
was turned out of it to make room for an alien, resuscitated from the
supposed dead.

Sailors tell us that the rats desert a sinking ship. Pseudo friends
desert a falling house. You may revel in these friends in prosperity,
but when adversity sets in, how they fall away! On the very day that
John Massingbird arrived at Verner's Pride, and it became known that not
he, but Mrs. and Mr. Verner must leave it, the gay company gathered
there dispersed. Dispersed with polite phrases, which went for nothing.
They were so very sorry for the calamity, for Mr. and Mrs. Verner; if
they could do anything to serve them they had only to be commanded. And
then they left; never perhaps to meet again, even as acquaintances. It
may be asked, what could they do? They could not invite them to a
permanent home; saddle themselves with a charge of that sort; neither
would such an invitation stand a chance of acceptance. It did not appear
they could do anything; but their combined flight from the house, one
after the other, did strike with a chill of mortification upon the
nerves of Lionel Verner and his wife.

His wife! Ah, poor Lionel had enough upon his hands, looking on one side
and another. _She_ was the heaviest weight. Lionel had thanked God in
his true heart that they had been spared the return of Frederick
Massingbird; but there was little doubt that the return of Frederick
would have been regarded by her as a light calamity, in comparison with
this. She made no secret of it. Ten times a day had Lionel to curb his
outraged feelings, and compress his lips to stop the retort that would
rise bubbling up within them. She would openly lament that it was not
Frederick who had returned, in which case she might have remained at
Verner's Pride!

"You'll not turn them out, Massingbird?" cried Jan, in his
straightforward way, drawing the gentleman into the fruit-garden to a
private conference. "_I_ wouldn't."

John Massingbird laughed good-humouredly. He had been in the sunniest
humour throughout; had made his first appearance at Verner's Pride in
bursts of laughter, heartily grasping the hands of Lionel, of Sibylla,
and boasting of the "fun" he had had in playing the ghost. Captain
Cannonby, the only one of the guests who remained, grew charmed with
John, and stated his private opinion in the ear of Lionel Verner that he
was worth a hundred such as Frederick.

"How can I help turning them out?" answered he. "_I_ didn't make the
will--it was old Daddy Verner."

"You need not act upon the will," said Jan. "There was a codicil, you
know, superseding it, though it can't be found. Sibylla's your
cousin--it would be a cruel thing to turn her from her home."

"Two masters never answered in a house yet," nodded John. "I'm not going
to try it."

"Let them stop in Verner's Pride, and you go elsewhere," suggested Jan.

John Massingbird laughed for five minutes. "How uncommon _young_ you
are, Jan!" said he. "Has Lionel been putting you up to try this on?"

Jan swung himself on a tolerably strong branch of the mulberry-tree,
regardless of any damage the ripe fruit might inflict on his nether
garments, as he answered--

"Knowing Lionel, you needn't ask it, Massingbird. There'd be a
difficulty in getting him to stop in Verner's Pride now, but he might be
coaxed to do it for the sake of his wife. She'll have a fit of illness
if she has to go out of it. Lionel is one to stand by his own to the
last; while Verner's Pride was his, he'd have fought to retain its
possession, inch by inch; but let ever so paltry a quibble of the law
take it from him, and he'd not lift up his finger to keep it. But, I
say, I think he might be got to do it for Sibylla."

"I'll tell you a secret, Jan," cried John Massingbird. "I'd not have
Sibylla stop in Verner's Pride if she paid me ten thousand a year for
the favour. There! And as to resigning Verner's Pride the minute I come
into it, nobody but a child or Jan Verner could ever have started so
absurd an idea. If anything makes me feel cross, it is the thought of my
having been knocking about yonder, when I might have been living in
clover here. I'd get up an Ever-perpetual Philanthropic
Benefit-my-fellow-creature Society, if I were you, Jan, and hold
meetings at Exeter Hall!"

"Not in my line," said Jan, swaying himself about on the bough.

"Isn't it! I should say it was. Why don't you invite Sibylla to your
house, if you are so fond of her?"

"She won't come," said Jan.

"Perhaps you have not asked her!"

"I was beginning to ask her, but she flew at me and ordered me to hold
my tongue. No, I see it," Jan added, in self-soliloquy, "she'll never
come there. I thought she might: and I got Miss Deb to think so.
She'll--she'll--"

"She'll what?" asked John Massingbird.

"She'll be a thorn in Lionel's side, I'm afraid."

"Nothing more likely," acquiesced easy John. "Roses and thorns go
together. If gentlemen will marry the one, they must expect to get their
share of the other."

Jan jumped off his bough. His projects all appeared to be failing. The
more he had dwelt upon his suddenly-thought-of scheme, that Dr. West's
house might afford an asylum for Lionel and his wife, the more he had
become impressed with its desirability. Jan Verner, though the most
unselfish, perhaps it may be said the most improvident of mortals, with
regard to himself, had a considerable amount of forethought for the rest
of the world. It had struck him, even before it struck Lionel, that, if
turned out of Verner's Pride, Lionel would _want_ a home; want it in the
broadest acceptation of the word. It would have been Jan's delight to
give him one. He, Jan, went home, told Miss Deb the news that it was
John Massingbird who had returned, not Frederick, and imparted his views
of future arrangements.

Miss Deb was dubious. For Mr. Verner of Verner's Pride to become an
inmate of their home, dependent on her housekeeping, looked a formidable
affair. But Jan pointed out that, Verner's Pride _gone_, it appeared to
be but a choice of cheap lodgings; their house would be an improvement
upon that. And Miss Deb acquiesced; and grew to contemplate the addition
to her family, in conjunction with the addition Jan proposed to add to
her income, with great satisfaction.

_That_ failed. Failed upon Jan's first hint of it to Mrs. Verner.
She--to use his own expression--flew out at him, at the bare hint; and
Sibylla Verner could fly out in an unseemly manner when she chose.

Jan's next venture had been with John Massingbird. That was failure the
second. "Where are they to go?" thought Jan.

It was a question that Lionel Verner may also have been asking in his
inmost heart. As yet he could not look his situation fully in the face.
Not from any want of moral courage, but because of the inextricable
confusion that his affairs seemed to be in. And, let his moral courage
be what it would, the aspect they bore might have caused a more hardy
heart than Lionel's to shrink. _How much he owed he could not tell_;
nothing but debt stared him in the face. He had looked to the autumn
rents of Verner's Pride to extricate him from a portion of his
difficulties; and now those rents would be received by John Massingbird.
The furniture in the house, the plate, the linen, none of it was his; it
had been left by the will with Verner's Pride. The five hundred pounds,
all that he had inherited by that will, had been received at the
time--and was gone. One general sinking fund seemed to have swallowed up
everything; that, and all else; leaving a string of debts a yard long in
its place.

Reproaches now would be useless; whether self-reproach, or reproach to
his wife. The latter Lionel would never have given. And yet, when he
looked back, and thought how free from debt he might have been, nothing
but reproach, however vaguely directed, reproach of the past generally,
seemed to fill his heart. To turn out in the world, a free man, though
penniless, would have been widely different from turning out, plunged
over head and ears in difficulties.

In what quarter did he not owe money? He could not say. He had not been
very provident, and Sibylla had not been provident at all. But this much
might be said for Lionel: that he had not wasted money on useless
things, or self-indulgence. The improvements he had begun on the estate
had been the chief drain, so far as he went; and the money they took had
caused him to get backward with the general expenses. He had also been
over liberal to his mother. Money was owing on all sides; for large
things and for small; how much, Lionel did not yet know. He did not
know--he was afraid to guess--what private debts might have been
contracted by his wife. There had been times lately, when, in
contemplating the embarrassment growing so hopelessly upon him, Lionel
had felt inclined to wish that some climax would come and end it; but he
had never dreamt of such a climax as this. A hot flush dyed his cheeks
as he remembered there was nearly a twelvemonth's wages owing to most of
his servants; and he had not the means now of paying them.

"Stop on a bit if you like," said John Massingbird, in a hearty tone;
"stop a month, if you will. You are welcome. It will be only changing
your place from master to guest."

From master to guest! That same day John Massingbird assumed his own
place, unasked, at the head of the dinner-table. Lionel went to the side
with a flushed face. John Massingbird had never been remarkable for
delicacy, but Lionel could not help thinking that he might have waited
until he was gone, before assuming the full mastership. Captain Cannonby
made the third at the dinner, and he, by John Massingbird's request,
took the foot of the table. It was not the being put out of his place
that hurt Lionel so much, as the feeling of annoyance that John
Massingbird could behave so unlike a gentleman. He felt ashamed for him.
Dinner over, Lionel went up to his wife, who was keeping her room,
partly from temper, partly from illness.

"Sibylla, I'll not stop here another day," he said. "I see that John
Massingbird wants us to go. Now, what shall I do? Take lodgings?"

Sibylla looked up from the sofa, her eyes red with crying, her cheeks
inflamed.

"Anybody but you, Lionel, would never allow him to turn you out. Why
don't you dispute the right with him? Turn _him_ out, and defy him!"

He did not tell Sibylla that she was talking like a child. He only said
that John Massingbird's claim to Verner's Pride was indisputable--that
it had been his all along; that, in point of fact, he himself had been
the usurper.

"Then you mean," she said, "to give him up quiet possession?"

"I have no other resource, Sibylla. To attempt any sort of resistance
would be foolish as well as wrong."

"_I_ shan't give it up. I shall stay here in spite of him. You may do as
you like, but he is not going to get me out of my own home."

"Sibylla, will you try and be rational for once? If ever a time called
for it, it is the present. I ask you whether I shall seek after
lodgings."

"And I wonder that you are not ashamed to ask me," retorted Sibylla,
bursting into tears. "Lodgings, after Verner's Pride! No. I'd rather die
than go into lodgings. I dare say I shall die soon, with all this
affliction."

"I do not see what else there is for us but lodgings," resumed Lionel,
after a pause. "You will not hear of Jan's proposition."

"Go back to my old home!" she shrieked. "Like--as poor Fred used to
say--bad money returned. No! that I never will. You are wrapt up in Jan;
if he proposed to give me poison, you'd say yes. I wish Fred had not
died!"

"Will you be so good as tell me what _you_ think ought to be done?"
inquired Lionel.

"How can I think? Where's the good of asking me? I think the least you
can do in this wretchedness, is to take as much worry off me as you can,
Lionel."

"It is what I wish to do," he gently said. "But I can see only one plan
for us, Sibylla--lodgings. Here we cannot stay; it is out of the
question. To take a house is equally so. We have no furniture--no money,
in short, to set up a house, or to keep it on. Jan's plan, until I can
turn myself round and see what's to be done, would be the best. You
would be going to your own sisters, who would take care of you, should I
find it necessary to be away."

"Away! Where?" she quickly asked.

"I must go somewhere and do something. I cannot lead an idle life,
living upon other people's charity, or let you live upon it. I must find
some way of earning a livelihood: in London, perhaps. While I am looking
out, you would be with your sisters."

"Then, Lionel, hear me!" she cried, her throat working, her blue eyes
flashing with a strange light. "I will _never_ go home to my sisters! I
will never, so long as I live, enter that house again, to reside! You
are no better than a bear to wish me to do it."

What was he to do? She was his wife, and he must provide for her; but
she would go neither into lodgings, nor to the proposed home. Lionel set
his wits to work.

"I wonder--whether--my mother--would invite us there, for a short
while?" The words were spoken slowly, reluctantly, as if there were an
undercurrent of strong doubt in his mind. "Would you go to Deerham Court
for a time, Sibylla, if Lady Verner were agreeable?"

"Yes," said Sibylla, after a minute's consideration. "I'd go there."

Deeming it well that something should be decided, Lionel went
downstairs, caught up his hat, and proceeded to Deerham Court. He did
not say a word about his wife's caprice; or that two plans, proposed to
her, had been rejected. He simply asked his mother whether she would
temporarily receive him and his wife, until he could look round and
decide on the future.

To his great surprise, Lady Verner answered that she would; and answered
readily. Lionel, knowing the light in which she regarded his wife, had
anticipated he knew not what of objection, if not of positive refusal.

"I wish you to come here, Lionel; I intended to send for you and tell
you so," was the reply of Lady Verner. "You have no home to turn to,
and I could not have it said that my son in his strait was at fault for
one. I never thought to receive your wife inside my doors, but for your
sake I will do so. No servants, you understand, Lionel."

"Certainly not," he answered. "I cannot afford servants now as a matter
of luxury."

"I can neither afford them for you, nor is there room in my house to
accommodate them. This applies to that French maid of yours," Lady
Verner pointedly added. "I do not like the woman; nothing would induce
me to admit her here, even were circumstances convenient. Any attendance
that your wife may require, she shall have."

Lionel smiled a sad smile. "Be easy, mother. The time for my wife to
keep a French maid has gone by. I thank you very sincerely."

And so Lionel Verner was once more to be turned from Verner's Pride, to
take up his abode with his wife in his mother's home. When were his
wanderings to be at rest?


CHAPTER LXX.

TURNING OUT.


The battle that there was with Mrs. Verner! She cried, she sobbed, she
protested, she stormed, she raved. Willing enough, was she, to go to
Lady Verner's; indeed the proposed visit appeared to be exceedingly
palatable to her; but she was not willing to go without Mademoiselle
Benoite. She was used to Benoite; Benoite dressed her, and waited on
her, and read to her, and took charge of her things; Benoite was in her
confidence, kept her purse; she could not do without Benoite, and it was
barbarous of Lionel to wish it. How could she manage without a maid?

Lionel gravely laid his hand upon her shoulder. Some husbands might have
reminded her that until she married him she had never known the services
of a personal attendant; that she had gone all the way to Melbourne,
had--as John Massingbird had expressed it with regard to himself--been
knocking about there, and had come back home again alone, all without so
much as thinking of one. Not so Lionel. He laid his hand upon her
shoulder in his grave kindness.

"Sibylla, do you forget that we have no longer the means to keep
ourselves? I must find a way to do that, before I can afford you a
lady's maid. My dear, I am very sorry; you know I am; for that, and all
the other discomforts that you are meeting with; but there is no help
for it. I trust that some time or other I shall be able to remedy it."

"We should not have to keep her," argued Sibylla. "She'd live with Lady
Verner's servants."

Neither did he remind her that Lady Verner would have sufficient tax,
keeping himself and her. One would have thought her own delicacy of
feeling might have suggested it.

"It cannot be, Sibylla. Lady Verner has no accommodation for Benoite."

"She must make accommodation. When people used to come here to visit us,
they brought their servants with them."

"Oh, Sibylla! can you not see the difference? But--what do you owe
Benoite?" he added in a different tone.

"I don't owe her anything," replied Sibylla eagerly, quite mistaking the
motive of the question. "I have always paid her every month. She'd never
let it go on."

"Then there will be the less trouble," thought Lionel.

He called Benoite to him, then packing up Sibylla's things for Deerham
Court, inquired into the state of her accounts, and found Sibylla had
told him correctly. He gave Benoite a month's wages and a month's board
wages, and informed her that as soon as her mistress had left the house,
she would be at liberty to leave it. A scene ensued with Sibylla, but
for once Lionel was firm.

"You will have every attendance provided for you, Sibylla, my mother
said. But I cannot take Benoite; neither would Lady Verner admit her."

John Massingbird had agreed to keep on most of the old servants. The
superfluous ones, those who had been engaged when Verner's Pride grew
gay, Lionel found the means of discharging; paying them as he had paid
Benoite.

Heavy work for him, that day! the breaking up of his home, the turning
forth to the world. And, as if his heart were not sufficiently heavy, he
had the trouble of Sibylla. The arrangements had been three or four days
in process. It had taken that time to pack and settle things, since he
first spoke to Lady Verner. There were various personal trifles of his
and Sibylla's to be singled out and separated from what was now John
Massingbird's. But all was done at last, and they were ready to depart.
Lionel went to John Massingbird.

"You will allow me to order the carriage for Sibylla? She will like it
better than a hired one."

"Certainly," replied John, with much graciousness. "But what's the good
of leaving before dinner?"

"My mother is expecting us," simply answered Lionel.

Just the same innate refinement of feeling which had characterised him
in the old days. It so happened that Lionel had never bought a carriage
since he came into Verner's Pride. Stephen Verner had been prodigal in
his number of carriages, although the carriages had a sinecure of it,
and Lionel had found no occasion to purchase. Of course they belonged to
John Massingbird; everything else belonged to him. He, for the last
time, ordered the close carriage for his wife. His carriage, it might
surely be said, more than John Massingbird's. Lionel did not deem it so,
and asked permission ere he gave the order.

Sibylla had never seen her husband quietly resolute in opposing her
whims, as he had been with regard to Benoite. She scarcely knew what to
make of it; but she had deemed it well to dry her tears, and withdraw
her opposition. She came down dressed at the time of departure, and
looked about for John Massingbird. That gentleman was in the study. Its
large desk, a whole mass of papers crowded above it and underneath it,
pushed into the remotest corner. Lionel had left things connected with
the estate as straight as he could. He wished to explain affairs to John
Massingbird, and hand over documents and all else in due form, but he
was not allowed. Business and John had never agreed. John was sitting
now before the window, his elbows on the sill, a rough cap on his head,
and a short clay pipe in his mouth. Lionel glanced with dismay at the
confusion reigning amid the papers.

"Fare you well, John Massingbird," said Sibylla.

"Going?" said John, coolly turning round. "Good-day."

"And let me tell you, John Massingbird," continued Sibylla, "that if
ever you had got turned out of your home as you have turned us, you
would know what it was."

"Bless you! I've never had anything of my own to be turned out of,
except a tent," said John, with a laugh.

"It is to be hoped that you may, then, some time, and that you will be
turned out of it! That's my best wish for you, John Massingbird."

"I'd recommend you to be polite, young lady," returned John
good-humouredly. "If I sue your husband for back rents, you'd not be
quite so independent, I calculate."

"Back rents!" repeated she.

"Back rents," assented John. "But we'll leave that discussion to another
time. Don't you be saucy, Sibylla."

"John," said Lionel, pointing to the papers, "are you aware that some
valuable leases and other agreements are amongst those papers? You might
get into inextricable confusion with your tenants, were you to mislay,
or lose them."

"They are safe enough," said careless John, taking his pipe from his
mouth to speak.

"I wish you had allowed me to put things in order for you. You will be
wanting me to do it later."

"Not a bit of it," said John Massingbird. "I am not going to upset my
equanimity with leases, and bothers of that sort. Good-bye, old fellow.
Lionel!"

Lionel turned round. He had been going out.

"We part friends, don't we?"

"I can answer for myself," said Lionel, a frank smile rising to his
lips. "It would be unjust to blame you for taking what you have a right
to take."

"All right. Then, Lionel, you'll come and see me here?"

"Sometimes. Yes."

They went out to the carriage, Lionel conducting his wife, and John in
attendance, smoking his short pipe. The handsome carriage, with its coat
of ultra-marine, its rich white lining, its silver mountings, and its
arms on the panels. The Verner arms. Would John paint them out? Likely
not. One badge on the panels of his carriages was as good to John
Massingbird as another. He must have gone to the Herald's College had he
wanted to set up arms on his own account.

And that's how Lionel and his wife went out of Verner's Pride. It seemed
as if Deerham pavement and Deerham windows were lined on purpose to
watch the exodus. The time of their departure had got wind.

"I have done a job that goes again the grain, sir," said Wigham to his
late master, when the carriage had deposited its freight at Deerham
Court, and was about to go back again. "I never thought, sir, to drive
you out of Verner's Pride for the last time."

"I suppose not, Wigham. I thought it as little as you."

"You'll not forget, sir, that I should be glad to serve you, should you
ever have room for me. I'd rather live with you, sir, than with anybody
else in the world."

"Thank you, Wigham. I fear that time will be very far off."

"Or, if my lady should be changing her coachman, sir, perhaps she'd
think of me. It don't seem nateral to me, sir, to drive anybody but a
Verner. Next to yourself, sir, I'd be proud to serve her ladyship."

Lionel, in his private opinion, believed that Lady Verner would soon be
compelled to part with her own coachman, to lay down her carriage.
Failing the income she had derived from his revenues, in addition to her
own, he did not see how she was to keep up many of her present expenses.
He said farewell to Wigham and entered the Court.

Decima had hastened forward to welcome Sibylla. Decima was one who, in
her quiet way, was always trying to make the best of surrounding
circumstances--not for herself, but for others. Let things be ever so
dark, she would contrive to extract out of them some little ray of
brightness. Opposite as they were in person, in disposition she and Jan
were true brother and sister. She came forward to the door, a glad smile
upon her face, and dressed rather more than usual. It was one of her
ways, the unwonted dress, of showing welcome and consideration to
Sibylla.

"You are late, Mrs. Verner," she said, taking her cordially by the hand.
"We have been expecting you some time. Catherine! Thérèse, see to these
packages."

Lady Verner had actually come out also. She was too essentially the lady
to show anything but strict courtesy to Sibylla, now that she was about
to become an inmate under her roof. What the effort cost her, she best
knew. It was no light one; and Lionel felt that it was not. She stood in
the hall, just outside the door of the ante-room, and took Sibylla's
hand as she approached.

"I am happy to see you, Mrs. Verner," she said, with stately courtesy.
"I hope you will make yourself at home."

They all went together into the drawing-room, in a crowd, as it were.
Lucy was there, dressed also. She came up with a smile on her young and
charming face, and welcomed Sibylla.

"It is nearly dinner-time," said Decima to Sibylla. "Will you come with
me upstairs, and I will show you the arrangements for your rooms.
Lionel, will you come?"

She led the way upstairs to the pretty sitting-room with its blue-and
white furniture, hitherto called "Miss Decima's room"; the one that
Lionel had sat in when he was growing convalescent.

"Mamma thought you would like a private sitting-room to retire to when
you felt disposed," said Decima. "We are only sorry it is not larger.
This will be exclusively yours."

"It is small," was the not very gracious reply of Sibylla.

"And it is turning you out of it, Decima!" added Lionel.

"I did not use it much," she answered, proceeding to another room on the
same floor. "This is your bedroom, and this the dressing-room," she
added, entering a spacious apartment and throwing open the door of a
smaller one which led out of it. "We hope that you will find everything
comfortable. And the luggage that you don't require to use can be
carried upstairs."

Lionel had been looking round, somewhat puzzled. "Decima! was not this
Lucy's room?"

"Lucy proposed to give it up to you," said Decima. "It is the largest
room we have; the only one that has a dressing-room opening from it,
except mamma's. Lucy has gone to the small room at the end of the
corridor."

"But it is not right for us to turn out Lucy," debated Lionel. "I do not
like the idea of it."

"It was Lucy herself who first thought of it, Lionel. I am sure she is
glad to do anything she can to render you and Mrs. Verner comfortable.
She has been quite anxious to make it look nice, and moved nearly all
the things herself."

"It does look comfortable," acquiesced Lionel as he stood before the
blaze of the fire, feeling grateful to Decima, to his mother, to Lucy,
to all of them. "Sibylla, this is one of your fires; yea like a blaze."

"And Catherine will wait upon you, Mrs. Verner," continued Decima. "She
understands it. She waited on mamma for two years before Thérèse came.
Should you require your hair done, Thérèse will do that; mamma thinks
Catherine would not make any hand at it."

She quitted the room as she spoke, and closed the door, saying that she
would send up Catherine then. Lionel had his eyes fixed on the room and
its furniture; it was really an excellent room--spacious, lofty, and
fitted up with every regard to comfort as well as to appearance. In the
old days it was Jan's room, and Lionel scarcely remembered to have been
inside it since; but it looked very superior now to what it used to look
then. Lady Verner had never troubled herself to improvise superfluous
decorations for Jan. Lionel's chief attention was riveted on the bed, an
Arabian, handsomely carved, mahogany bed, with white muslin hangings,
lined with pink, matching with the window-curtains. The hangings were
new; but he felt certain that the bed was the one hitherto used by his
mother.

He stepped into the dressing-room, feeling more than he could have
expressed, feeling that he could never repay all the kindness they
seemed to be receiving. Equally inviting looked the dressing-room. The
first thing that caught Lionel's eye were some delicate paintings on the
walls, done by Decima.

His gaze and his ruminations were interrupted. Violent sobs had struck
on his ear from the bed-chamber; he hastened back, and found Sibylla
extended at full length on the sofa, crying.

"It is such a dreadful change after Verner's Pride!" she querulously
complained. "It's not half as nice as it was there! Just this old
bedroom and a mess of a dressing-room, and nothing else! And only that
stupid Catherine to wait upon me!"

It _was_ ungrateful. Lionel's heart, in its impulse, resented it as
such. But, ever considerate for his wife, ever wishing, in the line of
conduct he had laid down for himself, to find excuses for her, he
reflected the next moment that it _was_ a grievous thing to be turned
from a home as she had been. He leaned over her; not answering as he
might have answered, that the rooms were all that could be wished, and
far superior they, and all other arrangements made for them, to anything
enjoyed by Sibylla until she had entered upon Verner's Pride; but he
took her hand in his, and smoothed the hair from her brow, and softly
whispered--

"Make the best of it, Sibylla, for my sake."

"There's no 'best' to be made," she replied, with a shower of tears, as
she pushed his hand and his face away.

Catherine knocked at the door. Miss Decima had sent her and bade her say
that dinner was on the point of being served. Sibylla sprang up from the
sofa, and dried her tears.

"I wonder whether I can get at my gold combs?" cried she, all her grief
flying away.

Lionel turned to Catherine; an active little woman with a high colour
and a sensible countenance, looking much younger than her real age.
_That_ was not far off fifty; but in movement and lissomeness, she was
young as she had been at twenty. Nothing vexed Catherine so much as for
Lady Verner to allude to her "age." Not from any notions of vanity, but
lest she might be thought growing incapable of her work.

"Catherine, is not that my mother's bed?"

"To think that you should have found it out, Mr. Lionel!" echoed
Catherine, with a broad smile. "Well, sir, it is, and that's the truth.
We have been making all sorts of changes. Miss Lucy's bed has gone in
for my lady, and my lady's has been brought here. See, what a big, wide
bed it is!" she exclaimed, putting her arm on the counterpane. "Miss
Lucy's was a good-sized bed, but my lady thought it would be hardly big
enough for two; so she said hers should come in here."

"And what's Miss Lucy sleeping on?" asked Lionel, amused. "The boards?"

Catherine laughed. "Miss Lucy has got a small bed now, sir. Not, upon my
word, that I think she'd mind if we did put her on the boards. She is
the sweetest young lady to have to do with, Mr. Lionel! I don't believe
there ever was one like her. She's as easy satisfied as ever Mr. Jan
was."

"Lionel! I can't find my gold combs!" exclaimed Sibylla, coming from the
dressing-room, with a face of consternation. "They are not in the
dressing-case. How am I to know which box Benoite has put them in?"

"Never mind looking for the combs now," he answered. "You will have time
to search for things to-morrow. Your hair looks nice without combs. _I_
think nicer than with them."

"But I wanted to wear them," she fractiously answered. "It is all your
fault! You should not have forced me to discharge Benoite."

Did she wish him to look for the gold combs? Lionel did not take the
hint. Leaving her in the hands of Catherine, he quitted the room.


CHAPTER LXXI.

UNPREMEDITATED WORDS.


Lucy was in the drawing-room alone when Lionel entered it. "Lady
Verner," she said to him, "has stepped out to speak to Jan."

"Lucy, I find that our coming here has turned you out of your room," he
gravely said. "I should earnestly have protested against it, had I known
what was going to be done."

"Should you?" said she, shaking her head quite saucily. "We should not
have listened to you."

"We! Whom does the 'we' include?"

"Myself and Decima. We planned everything. I like the room I have now,
quite as much as that. It is the room at the end, opposite the one Mrs.
Verner is to have for her sitting-room."

"The sitting-room again! What shall you and Decima do without it?"
exclaimed Lionel, looking as he felt--vexed.

"If we never have anything worse to put up with than the loss of a
sitting-room that was nearly superfluous, we shall not grieve," answered
Lucy, with a smile. "How did we do without it before--when you were
getting better from that long illness? We had to do without it then."

"I think not, Lucy. So far as _my_ memory serves me, you were sitting in
it a great portion of your time--cheering me. I have not forgotten it,
if you have."

Neither had she--by her heightened colour.

"I mean that we had to do without it for our own purposes, our drawings
and our work. It is but a little matter, after all. I wish we could do
more for you and Mrs. Verner. I wish," she added, her voice betraying
her emotion, "that we could have prevented your being turned from
Verner's Pride."

"Ay," he said, speaking with affected carelessness, and turning about an
ornament in his fingers, which he had taken from the mantel-piece, "it
is not an every-day calamity."

"What shall you do?" asked Lucy, going a little nearer to him, and
dropping her voice to a tone of confidence.

"Do? In what way, Lucy?"

"Shall you be content to live on here with Lady Verner? Not seeking to
retrieve your--your position in any way?"

"My living on here, Lucy, will be out of the question. That would never
do, for more reasons than one."

Did Lucy Tempest divine what one of these reasons might be? She did not
intend to look at him, but she caught his eyes in the pier-glass. Lionel
smiled.

"I am thinking what a trouble you must find me--you and Decima."

She did not speak at first. Then she went quite close to him, her
earnest, sympathising eyes cast up to his.

"If you please, you need not pretend to make light of it to me," she
whispered. "I don't like you to think that I do not know all you must
feel, and what a blow it is. I think I feel it quite as much as you can
do--for your sake and for Mrs. Verner's. I lie awake at night, thinking
of it; but I do not say so to Decima and Lady Verner. I make light of it
to them, as you are making light of it to me."

"I know, I know!" he uttered in a tone that would have been a passionate
one, but for its wailing despair. "My whole life, for a long while, has
been one long scene of acting--to you. I dare not make it otherwise.
There's no remedy for it."

She had not anticipated the outburst; she had simply wished to express
her true feeling of sympathy for their great misfortunes, as she might
have expressed it to any other gentleman who had been turned from his
home with his wife. She could not bear for Lionel not to know that he
had her deepest, her kindliest, her truest sympathy, and this had
nothing to do with any secret feeling she might, or might not, entertain
for him. Indeed, but for the unpleasant, latent consciousness of that
very feeling, Lucy would have made her sympathy more demonstrative. The
outbreak seemed to check her; to throw her friendship back upon herself;
and she stood irresolute; but she was too single-minded, too full of
nature's truth, to be angry with what had been a genuine outpouring of
his inmost heart, drawn from him in a moment of irrepressible sorrow.
Lionel let the ornament fall back on the mantel-piece, and turned to
her, his manner changing. He took her hands, clasping them in one of
his; he laid his other hand lightly on her fair young head, reverently
as any old grandfather might have done.

"Lucy!--my dear friend!--you must not mistake me. There are times when
some of the bitterness within me is drawn forth, and I say more than I
ought: what I never should say, in a calmer moment. I wish I _could_
talk to you; I wish I could give you the full confidence of all my
sorrows, as I gave it you on another subject once before. I wish I could
draw you to my side, as though you were my sister, or one of my dearest
friends, and tell you of the great trouble at my heart. But it cannot
be, I thank you, I _thank_ you for your sympathy. I know that you would
give me your friendship in all single-heartedness, as Decima might give
it me; and it would be to me a green spot of brightness in life's arid
desert. But the green spot might for me grow too bright, Lucy; and my
only plan is to be wise in time, and to forego it."

"I did but mean to express my sorrow for you and Mrs. Verner," she
timidly answered; "my sense of the calamity which has fallen upon you."

"Child, I know it; and I dare not say how I feel it; I dare not thank
you as I ought. In truth it is a terrible calamity. All its consequences
I cannot yet anticipate; but they may be worse than anybody suspects, or
than I like to glance at. It is a deep and apparently an irremediable
misfortune. I cannot but feel it keenly; and I feel it for my wife more
than for myself. Now and then, something like a glimpse of consolation
shows itself--that it has not been brought on by any fault of mine; and
that, humanly speaking, I have done nothing to deserve it."

"Mr. Cust used to tell us that however dark a misfortune might be,
however hopeless even, there was sure to be a way of looking at it, by
which we might see that it might have been darker," observed Lucy.
"_This_ would have been darker for you, had it proved to be Frederick
Massingbird, instead of John; very sadly darker for Mrs. Verner."

"Ay; so far I cannot be too thankful," replied Lionel. The remembrance
flashed over him of his wife's words that day--in her temper--she wished
it had been Frederick. It appeared to be a wish that she had already
thrown out frequently; not so much that she did wish it, as to annoy
him.

"Mr. Cust used to tell us another thing," resumed Lucy, breaking the
silence: "that these apparently hopeless misfortunes sometimes turn out
to be great benefits in the end. Who knows but in a short time, through
some magic or other, you and Mrs. Verner may be back at Verner's Pride?
Would not that be happiness?"

"I don't know about happiness, Lucy; sometimes I feel tired of
everything," he wearily answered. "As if I should like to run away for
ever, and be at rest. My life at Verner's Pride was not a bed of
rose-leaves."

He heard his mother's voice in the ante-room, and went forward to open
the door for her. Lady Verner came in, followed by Jan. Jan was going to
dine there; and Jan was actually in orthodox dinner costume. Decima had
invited him, and Decima had told him to be sure to dress himself; that
she wanted to make a little festival of the evening to welcome Lionel
and his wife. So Jan remembered, and appeared in black. But the gloss of
the whole was taken off by Jan having his shirt fastened down the front
with pins, where the buttons ought to be. Brassy-looking, ugly, bent
pins, as big as skewers, stuck in horizontally.

"Is that a new fashion coming in, Jan?" asked Lady Verner, pointing with
some asperity to the pins.

"It's to be hoped not," replied Jan. "It took me five minutes to stick
them in, and there's one of the pins running into my wrist now. It's a
new shirt of mine come home, and they have forgotten the buttons. Miss
Deb caught sight of it, when I went in to tell her I was coming here,
and ran after me to the gate with a needle and thread, wanting to sew
them on."

"Could you not have fastened it better than that, Jan?" asked Decima,
smiling as she looked at the shirt.

"I don't see how," replied Jan. "Pins were the readiest to hand."

Sibylla had been keeping them waiting dinner. She came in now, radiant
in smiles and in her gold combs. None, to look at her, would suppose she
had that day lost a home. A servant appeared and announced dinner.

Lionel went up to Lady Verner. Whenever he dined there, unless there
were other guests besides himself, he had been in the habit of taking
her in to dinner. Lady Verner drew back.

"No, Lionel. I consider that you and I are both at home now. Take Miss
Tempest."

He could only obey. He held out his arm to Lucy, and they went forward.

"Am I to take anybody?" inquired Jan.

That was just like Jan! Lady Verner pointed to Sibylla, and Jan marched
off with her. Lady Verner and Decima followed.

"Not there, not there, Lucy," said Lady Verner, for Lucy was taking the
place she was accustomed to, by Lady Verner. "Lionel, you will take the
foot of the table now, and Lucy will sit by you."

Lady Verner was rather a stickler for etiquette, and at last they fell
into their appointed places. Herself and Lionel opposite each other,
Lucy and Decima on one side the table, Jan and Sibylla on the other.

"If I am to have you under my wing as a rule, Miss Lucy, take care that
you behave yourself," nodded Lionel.

Lucy laughed, and the dinner proceeded. But there was very probably an
undercurrent of consciousness in the heart of both--at any rate, there
was in his--that it might have been more expedient, all things
considered, that Lucy Tempest's place at dinner had not been fixed by
the side of Lionel Verner.

Dinner was half over when Sibylla suddenly laid down her knife and fork,
and burst into tears. They looked at her in consternation. Lionel rose.

"That horrid John Massingbird!" escaped her lips. "I always disliked
him."

"Goodness!" uttered Jan, "I thought you were taken ill, Sibylla. What's
the good of thinking about it?"

"According to you, there's no good in thinking of anything," tartly
responded Sibylla. "You told me yesterday not to think about Fred, when
I said I wished he had come back instead of John--if one must have come
back."

"At any rate, don't think about unpleasant things now," was Jan's
answer. "Eat your dinner."


CHAPTER LXXII.

JAN'S SAVINGS.


Lionel Verner looked his situation full in the face. It was not a
desirable one. When he had been turned out of Verner's Pride before, it
is probable he had thought _that_ about the extremity of all human
calamity; but that, looking back upon it, appeared a position to be
coveted, as compared with this. In point of fact it was. He was free
then from pecuniary liabilities; he did not owe a shilling in the world;
he had five hundred pounds in his pocket; nobody but himself to look to;
and--he was a younger man. In the matter of years he was not so very
much older now; but Lionel Verner, since his marriage, had bought some
experience in human disappointment, and nothing ages a man's inward
feelings like it.

He was now, with his wife, a burden upon his mother; a burden she could
ill afford. Lady Verner was somewhat embarrassed in her own means, and
she was preparing to reduce her establishment to the size that it used
to be in her grumbling days. If Lionel had but been free! free from debt
and difficulty! he would have gone out into the world and put his
shoulder to the wheel.

Claims had poured in upon him without end. Besides the obligations he
already knew of, not a day passed but the post brought him from London
outstanding accounts, for debts contracted by his wife, with demands for
their speedy settlement. Mr. Verner of Verner's Pride might not have
been troubled with these accounts for years, had his wife so managed:
but Mr. Verner, turned from Verner's Pride, a--it is an ugly word, but
expressive of the truth--a pauper, found the demands come pouring thick
and threefold upon his head. It was of no _use_ to reproach Sibylla; of
no use even to speak, save to ask "Is such-and-such a bill a just
claim?" Any approach to such topics was the signal for an unseemly burst
of passion on her part; or for a fit of hysterics, in which fashionable
affectation Sibylla had lately become an adept. She _tried_ Lionel
terribly--worse than tongue can tell or pen can write. There was no
social confidential intercourse. Lionel could not go to her for
sympathy, for counsel, or for comfort. If he attempted to talk over any
plans for the future, for the immediate future; what they could do, what
they could not; what might be best, what worst; she met him with the
frivolousness of a child, or with a sullen reproach that he "did nothing
but worry her." For any purposes of companionship, his wife was a
nonentity; far better that he had been without one. She made his whole
life a penance; she betrayed the frivolous folly of her nature ten times
a day; she betrayed her pettish temper, her want of self-control, dyeing
Lionel's face of a blood-red. He felt ashamed for her; he felt doubly
ashamed for himself--that his mother, that Lucy Tempest should at last
become aware what sort of a wife he had taken to his bosom, what
description of wedded life was his.

What was he to do for a living? The only thing that appeared to be open
to him was to endeavour to get some sort of a situation, where, by means
of the hands or the head, he might earn a competence. And yet, to do
this, it was necessary to be free from the danger of arrest. He went
about in dread of it. Were he to show himself in London he felt sure
that not an hour would pass, but he would be sued and taken. If his
country creditors accorded him forbearance, his town ones would not. Any
fond hope that he had formerly entertained of studying for the Bar, was
not available now. He had neither the means nor the time to give to
it--the time for study ere remuneration should come. Occasionally a
thought would cross him that some friend or other of his prosperity
might procure for him a government situation. A consulship, or
vice-consulship abroad, for instance. _Any_ thing abroad. Not to avoid
the payment of his creditors, for whether abroad or at home, Lionel
would be sure to pay them, if by dint of pinching himself he could find
the means; but that he might run away from home and mortification, take
his wife and make the best of her. But consulships and other government
appointments are more easily talked of than obtained; as any body who
has tried for them under difficulties knows. Moreover, although Lionel
had never taken a prominent part in politics, the Verner interest had
always been given against the government party, then in power. He did
not see his way at all clear before him; and he found that it was to be
still further obstructed on another score.

After thinking and planning and plotting till his brain was nearly
bewildered, he at length made up his mind to go to London, and see
whether anything could be done. With regard to his creditors there, he
must lay the state of the case frankly before them, and say: "Will you
leave me my liberty, and wait? You will get nothing by putting me in
prison, for I have no money of my own, and no friend to come forward and
advance it to clear me. Give me time, accord me my liberty, and I will
endeavour to pay you off by degrees." It was, at any rate, a
straightforward mode of going to work, and Lionel determined to adopt
it. Before mentioning it to his wife, he spoke to Lady Verner.

And then occurred the obstruction. Lady Verner, though she did not
oppose the plan, declined to take charge of Sibylla, or to retain her in
her house during Lionel's absence.

"I could not take her with me," said Lionel. "There would be more
objections to it than one. In the first place, I have not the means; in
the second--"

He came to an abrupt pause, and turned the words off. He had been about
incautiously to say, "She would most likely, once in London, run me into
deeper debt." But Lionel had kept the fact of her having run him into
debt at all, a secret in his own breast. Whatever may have been his
wife's faults and failings, he did not make it his business to proclaim
them to the world. She proclaimed enough herself, to his grievous
chagrin, without his helping to do it.

"Listen, Lionel," said Lady Verner. "You know what my feeling always was
with regard to your wife. A closer intercourse has not tended to change
that feeling, or to lessen my dislike of her. Now you must forgive my
saying this; it is but a passing allusion. Stay on with me as long as
you like; stay on for ever, if you will, and she shall stay; but if you
leave, she must leave. I should be sorry to have her here, even for a
week, without you. In fact, I would not."

"It would be quite impossible for me to take her to London," deliberated
Lionel. "I can be there alone at a very trifling cost; but a lady
involves so much expense. There must be lodgings, which are dear; and
living, which is dear; and attendance; and--and--many other sources of
outlay."

"And pray, what should you do, allowing that you went alone, without
lodgings and living and attendance, and all the rest of it?" asked Lady
Verner. "Take a room at one of their model lodging-houses, at half a
crown a week, and live upon the London air?"

"Not very healthy air for fastidious lungs," observed Lionel, with a
smile. "I don't quite know how I should manage for myself, mother;
except that I should take care to condense my expenses into the very
narrowest compass that man ever condensed them yet."

"Not you, Lionel. You were never taught that sort of close economy."

"True," he answered. "But the most efficient of all instructors has come
to me now--necessity. I wish you would increase my gratitude and my
obligation to you by allowing Sibylla to remain here. In a little time,
if I have luck, I may make a home for her in London."

"Lionel, _it cannot be_," was the reply of Lady Verner. And he knew when
she spoke in that quiet tone of emphasis, that it could not be. "Why
should you go to London?" she resumed. "My opinion is that you will do
no good by going; that it is a wild-goose scheme altogether which you
have got in your head. I think I could tell you a better."

"What is yours?"

"Remain contentedly here with me until the return of Colonel Tempest. He
may even now be on his road. He will no doubt be able to get you some
civil appointment in one of the Presidencies; he has influence here with
the people that have to do with India. That will be the best plan,
Lionel. You are always wishing you could go abroad. Stay here quietly
until he comes; I should like you to stay, and I will put up with your
wife."

Some allusion, or allusions, in the words brought the flush to Lionel's
cheeks. "I cannot reconcile it to my conscience, mother, to remain on
here, a burden, upon your small income."

"But it is not a burden, Lionel," she said. "It is rather a help."

"How can that be?" he asked.

"So long as Jan pays."

"So long as Jan pays!" echoed Lionel, in astonishment. "Does Jan--pay?"

"Yes he does. I thought you knew it? Jan came here the day you
arrived--don't you remember it, when he had the pins in his shirt?
Decima had invited him to dinner, and he came in ten minutes before it,
and called me out of the room here, where I was with Lucy. The first
thing he did was to tumble into my lap a roll of bank-notes, which he
had been to Heartburg to get. A hundred and forty pounds, it was; the
result of his savings since he joined Dr. West in partnership. The next
thing he said was that all his own share of the profits of the practice,
he should bring to me to make up for the cost of you and Sibylla. Jan
said he had proposed that you should go to him; but Sibylla would not
consent to it."

Lionel's blood coursed on with a glow. Jan slaving and working for him!

"I never knew this," he cried.

"I am sure I thought you did," said Lady Verner. "I supposed it to have
been a prearranged thing between you and Jan. Lionel," looking up into
his face with an expression of care, and lowering her voice, "but for
that hundred and forty pounds, I don't see how I could have gone on. You
had been very liberal to me, but somehow debt upon debt seemed to come
in, and I was growing quite embarrassed. Jan's money set me partially
straight. My dear--as you see you are no 'burden,' as you call it, you
will give up this London scheme, will you not, and remain on?"

"I suppose I must," mechanically answered Lionel, who seemed buried in
thought.

He did suppose he must. He was literally without money, and his
intention had been to ask the loan of a twenty-pound note from generous
Jan, to carry him to London, and keep him there while he turned himself
about, and saw what could be done. How could he ask Jan now? There was
little doubt that Jan had left himself as void of ready cash as he,
Lionel, was. Dr. West's was not a business where patients went and paid
their guinea fee, two or three dozen patients a day. Dr. West (or Jan
for him) had to doctor his patients for a year, and send in his modest
bill at the end of it, very often waiting for another year before the
bill was paid. Sibylla on his hands, and no money, he did not see how he
was to get to London.

"But just think of it," resumed Lady Verner. "Jan's savings for nearly
three years of practice to amount only to a hundred and forty pounds! I
questioned him pretty sharply, asking him what on earth he could have
done with his money, and he acknowledged that he had given a good deal
away. He said Miss West had borrowed some, the doctor kept her so short;
then Jan, it seems, forgot to put down the expenses of the horse to the
general account, and that had to come out of his pocket. Another thing
he acknowledged having done. When he finds the poor can't conveniently
pay their bills, he crosses it off in the book, and furnishes the money
himself. He has not common-sense, you know, Lionel; and never had."

Lionel caught up his hat, and went out in the moment's impulse, seeking
Jan. Jan was in the surgery alone, making up pills, packing up
medicines, answering callers; doing, in fact, Master Cheese's work.
Master Cheese had a headache, and was groaning dismally in consequence
in an arm-chair, in front of Miss Deb's sitting-room fire, and sipping
some hot elder wine, with sippets of toast in it, which he had assured
Miss Deb was a sovereign specific, though it might not be generally
known, to keep off the sickness.

"Jan," said Lionel, going straight up, and grasping him by the hand;
"what am I to say to you? I did not know, until ten minutes ago, what it
is that you are doing for me."

Jan put down a pill-box he held, and looked at Lionel. "What am I doing
for you?" he asked.

"I speak of this money that I find you have handed to my mother. Of the
money you have undertaken to hand to her."

"Law, is that all?" said Jan, taking up the pill-box again, and biting
one of the pills in two to test its quality. "I thought you were going
to tell me I had sent you poison, or something; coming in like that."

"Jan, I can never repay you. The money I may, some time; I hope I shall:
the debt of gratitude, never."

"There's nothing to repay," returned Jan, with composure. "As long as I
have meat and drink and clothes, what do I want with extra money? You
are heartily welcome to it, Lionel."

"You are working your days away, Jan, and for no benefit to yourself. I
am reaping it."

"A man can but work," responded Jan. "I like work, for my part; I
wouldn't be without it. If old West came home and said he'd take all the
patients for a week, and give me a holiday, I should only set on and
pound. Look here," pointing to the array on the counter, "I have done
more work in two hours than Cheese gets through in a week."

Lionel could not help smiling. Jan went on--

"I don't work for the sake of accumulating money, but because work is
life's business, and I like work for its own sake. If I got no money by
it, I should work. Don't think about the money, Lionel. While it lay in
that bank where was the use of it? Better for my mother to have it, than
for me to be hoarding it."

"Jan, did it never strike you that it might be well to make some
provision for contingencies? Old age, say; or sudden deprivation of
strength, through accident or other cause? If you give away all you
might save for yourself, what should you do were the evil day to come?"

Jan looked at his arms. "I am tolerably strong," said he; "feel me. My
head's all right, and my limbs are all right. If I should be deprived of
strength before my time, I dare say, God, in taking it, would find some
means just to keep me from want."

The answer was delivered in the most straightforward simplicity. Lionel
looked at him until his eyes grew moist.

"A pretty fellow I should be, to hoard up money while anybody else
wanted it!" continued Jan. "You and Sibylla make yourselves comfortable,
Lionel, that's all."

They were interrupted by the entrance of John Massingbird and his pipe.
John appeared to find his time hang rather heavily on his hands: _he_
could not say that work was the business of his life. He might be seen
lounging about Deerham at all hours of the day and night, smoking and
gossiping. Jan was often honoured with a visit. Mr. Massingbird of
Verner's Pride was not a whit altered from Mr. Massingbird of nowhere:
John favoured the tap-rooms as much as he had used to favour them.

"The very man I wanted to see!" cried he, giving Lionel a hearty slap on
the shoulder. "I want to talk to you a bit on a matter of business. Will
you come up to Verner's Pride?"

"When?" asked Lionel.

"This evening, if you will. Come to dinner: only our two selves."

"Very well," replied Lionel. And he went out of the surgery, leaving
John Massingbird talking to his brother.

"On business," John Massingbird had said. Was it to ask him about the
mesne profits?--when he could refund them?--to tell him he would be
sued, unless he did refund them? Lionel did not know; but he had been
expecting John Massingbird to take some such steps.

In going back home, choosing the near cross-field way, as Jan often did,
Lionel suddenly came upon Mrs. Peckaby, seated on the stump of a tree,
in a very disconsolate fashion. To witness her thus, off the watch for
the white animal that might be arriving before her door, surprised
Lionel.

"I'm a'most sick of it, sir," she said. "I'm sick to the heart with
looking and watching. My brain gets weary and my eyes gets tired. The
white quadruple don't come, and Peckaby, he's a-rowing at me
everlastin'. I'm come out here for a bit o' peace."

"Don't you think it would be better to give the white donkey up for a
bad job, Mrs. Peckaby?"

"Give it up!" she uttered, aghast. "Give up going to New Jerusalem on a
white donkey! No, sir, that would be a misfortin' in life!"

Lionel smiled sadly as he left her.

"There are worse misfortunes in life, Mrs. Peckaby, than not going to
New Jerusalem on a white donkey."


CHAPTER LXXIII.

A PROPOSAL.


Lionel Verner was seated in the dining-room at Verner's Pride. Not its
master. Its master, John Massingbird, was there, opposite to Lionel.
They had just dined, and John was filling his short pipe as an
accompaniment to his wine. During dinner, he had been regaling Lionel
with choice anecdotes of his Australian life, laughing ever; but not a
syllable had he broached yet about the "business" he had put forth as
the plea for the invitation to Lionel to come. The anecdotes did not
raise the social features of that far-off colony in Mr. Verner's
estimation. But he laughed with John; laughed as merrily as his heavy
heart would allow him.

It was quite a wintry day, telling of the passing autumn. The skies were
leaden-gray; the dead leaves rustled on the paths; and the sighing wind
swept through the trees with a mournful sound. Void of brightness, of
hope, it all looked, as did Lionel Verner's fortunes. But a few short
weeks ago he had been in John Massingbird's place, in the very chair
that _he_ now sat in, never thinking to be removed from it during life.
And now!--what a change!

"Why don't you smoke, Lionel?" asked John, setting light to his pipe by
the readiest way--that of thrusting it between the bars of the grate.
"You did not care to smoke in the old days, I remember."

"I never cared for it," replied Lionel.

"I can tell you that you would have cared for it, had you been knocked
about as I have. Tobacco's meat and drink to a fellow at the diggings;
as it is to a sailor and a soldier."

"Not to all soldiers," observed Lionel. "My father never smoked an ounce
of tobacco in his life. I have heard them say so. And he saw some
service."

"Every man to his liking," returned John Massingbird. "Folks preach
about tobacco being an acquired taste! It's all bosh. Babies come into
the world with a liking for it, I know. Talking about your father, would
you like to have that portrait of him that hangs in the large
drawing-room? You can if you like. I'm sure you have more right to it
than I."

"Thank you," replied Lionel. "I should very much like it, if you will
give it me."

"What a fastidious chap you are, Lionel!" cried John Massingbird,
pulling vigorously; for the pipe was turning refractory, and would not
keep alight. "There are lots of things you have left behind you here,
that I, in your place, should have marched off without asking."

"The things are yours. That portrait of my father belonged to my Uncle
Stephen, and he made no exception in its favour when he willed Verner's
Pride, and all it contained, away from me. In point of legal right, I
was at liberty to touch nothing, beyond my personal effects."

"Liberty be hanged!" responded John. "You are over fastidious; always
were. Your father was the same, I know; can see it in his likeness. I
should say, by the look of that, he was too much of a gentleman for a
soldier."

Lionel smiled. "Some of our soldiers are the most refined gentlemen in
the world."

"I can't tell how they retain their refinement, then, amid the rough and
ready of camp life. I know I lost all I had at the diggings."

Lionel laughed outright at the notion of John Massingbird's losing his
refinement at the diggings. He never had any to lose. John joined in the
laugh.

"Lionel, old boy, do you know I always liked you, with all your
refinement; and it's a quality that never found great favour with me. I
liked you better than I liked poor Fred; and that's the truth."

Lionel made no reply, and John Massingbird smoked for a few minutes in
silence. Presently he began again.

"I say, what made you go and marry Sibylla?"

Lionel lifted his eyes. But John Massingbird resumed, before he had time
to speak.

"She's not worth a button. Now you need not fly out, old chap. I am not
passing my opinion on your wife; wouldn't presume to do such a thing;
but on my cousin. Surely I may find fault with my cousin, if I like! Why
did you marry her?"

"Why does anybody else marry?" returned Lionel.

"But why did you marry _her_? A sickly, fractious thing! I saw enough of
her in the old days. There! be quiet! I have done. If it hadn't been for
her, I'd have asked you to come here to your old home; you and I should
jog along together first-rate. But Sibylla bars it. She may be a model
of a wife; I don't insinuate to the contrary, take you note, Mr. Verner;
but she's not exactly a model of temper, and Verner's Pride wouldn't be
big enough to hold her and me. Would you have taken up your abode with
me, had you been a free man?"

"I cannot tell," replied Lionel. "It is a question that cannot arise
now."

"No. Sibylla stops it. What are you going to do with yourself?"

"That I cannot tell. I should like an appointment abroad, if I could get
one. I did think of going to London, and looking about me a bit; but I
am not sure that I shall do so just yet."

"I say, Lionel," resumed John Massingbird, sinking his voice, but
speaking in a joking sort of way, "how do you mean to pay your debts? I
hear you have a few."

"I have a good many, one way or another."

"Wipe them off," said John.

"I wish I could wipe them off."

"There's nothing more easy," returned John in his free manner. "Get the
whitewash brush to work. The insolvent court has its friendly doors ever
open."

The colour came into the face of Lionel. A Verner _there!_ He quietly
shook his head. "I dare say I shall find a way of paying some time, if
the people will only wait."

"Sibylla helped you to a good part of the score, didn't she? People are
saying so. Just like her!"

"When I complain of my wife, it will be quite time enough for other
people to begin," said Lionel. "When I married Sibylla, I took her with
her virtues and her faults; and I am quite ready to defend both."

"All right. I'd rather you had the right of defending them than I," said
incorrigible John. "Look here, Lionel, I got you up here to-day to talk
about the estate. Will you take the management of it?"

"Of this estate?" replied Lionel, scarcely understanding.

"Deuce a bit of any other could I offer you. Things are all at sixes and
sevens already. They are chaos; they are purgatory. That's our word out
yonder, Lionel, to express the ultimatum of badness. Matiss comes and
bothers; the tenants, one and another, come and bother; Roy comes and
bothers. What with it all, I'm fit to bar the outer doors. Roy, you
know, thought I should put him into power again! No, no, Mr. Roy; Fred
might have done it, but I never will. I have paid him well for the
services he rendered me; but put him into power--no. Altogether, things
are getting into inextricable confusion; I can't look to them, and I
want a manager. Will you take it, Lionel? I'll give you five hundred a
year."

The mention of the sum quite startled Lionel. It was far more than he
should have supposed John Massingbird would offer to any manager. Matiss
would do it for a fourth. _Should_ he take it?

He sat, twirling his wine-glass in his fingers. There was a soreness of
spirit to get over, and it could not be done all in a moment. To become
a servant (indeed it was no better) on the land that had once been his;
that ought to be his now, by the law of right--a servant to John
Massingbird! Could he bend to it? John smoked, and sat watching him.

He thought of the position of his wife; he thought of the encumbrance on
his mother: he thought of his brother Jan, and what _he_ had done; he
thought of his own very unsatisfactory prospects. Was _this_ putting his
shoulder to the wheel, as he had resolved to do, thus to hesitate on a
quibble of pride? Down, down with his rebellious spirit! Let him be a
man in the sight of Heaven!

He turned to John Massingbird, his brow clear, his eye serene. "I will
take it, and thank you," he said in a steady, cheerful tone.

"Then let's have some grog on the strength of it," was that gentleman's
answer. "Tynn says the worry nearly took my mother's life out of her
during the time she managed the estate; and it would take it out of
mine. If I kept it in my own hands, it would go to the dogs in a
twelvemonth. And you'd not thank me for that, Lionel. You are the next
heir."

"You may take a wife yet."

"A wife for me!" he shouted. "No, thank you. I know the value of 'em too
well for that. Give me my liberty, and you may have the wives. Lionel,
the office had better be in the study as it used to be: you can come up
here of a day. I'll turn the drawing-room into my smoke-shop. If there
are any leases or other deeds missing, you must get them drawn out
again. I'm glad it's settled."

Lionel declined the grog; but he remained on, talking things over. John
Massingbird sat in a cloud of smoke, drinking Lionel's share as well as
his own, and listening to the rain, which had begun to patter against
the window-panes.


CHAPTER LXXIV.

GOING TO NEW JERUSALEM ON A WHITE DONKEY.


And now we must pay a visit to Mrs. Peckaby; for great events were
happening to her on that night.

When Lionel met her in the day, seated on the stump, all disconsolate,
she had thrown out a hint that Mr. Peckaby was not habitually in quite
so social a mood as he might be. The fact was, Peckaby's patience had
run out; and little wonder, either. The man's meals made ready for him
in any careless way, often not made ready at all, and his wife spending
her time in sighing, and moaning, and looking out for the white donkey!
You, my readers, may deem this a rather far-fetched episode in the
story; you may deem it next to impossible that any woman should be so
ridiculously foolish, or could be so imposed upon; but I am only
relating to you the strict truth. The facts occurred precisely as they
are being narrated, and not long ago. I have neither added to the story
nor taken from it.

Mrs. Peckaby finished out her sitting on the stump under the gray skies.
The skies were grayer when she rose to go home. She found on her arrival
that Peckaby had been in to his tea, that is, he had been in, hoping to
partake of that social meal; but finding no preparation made for it, he
had a little relieved his mind by pouring a pail of water over the
kitchen fire, thereby putting the fire out and causing considerable
damage to the fire-irons and appurtenances generally, which would cause
Mrs. Peckaby some little work to remedy.

"The brute!" she ejaculated, putting her foot into the slop on the
floor, and taking a general view of things. "Oh, if I was but off!"

"My patience, what a mess!" exclaimed Polly Dawson, who happened to be
going by, and turned in for a gossip. "Whatever have done it?"

"Whatever have done it? why that wretch Peckaby," retorted the aggrieved
wife. "Don't you never get married, Polly Dawson, if you want to keep on
the right side of the men. They be the worst animals in all creation.
Many a poor woman's life has been aggrivated out of her."

"If I do get married, I shan't begin the aggrivation by wanting to be
off to them saints at New Jerusalem," impudently returned Polly Dawson.

Mrs. Peckaby received it meekly. What with the long-continued
disappointment, the perpetual "aggrivations" of Peckaby, and the
prospect of work before her, arising from the gratuitous pail of water,
she was feeling unusually cowed down.

"I wish I was a hundred mile off," she cried. "Nobody's fate was never
so hard as mine."

"It'll take you a good two hours to redd up," observed Polly Dawson.
"I'd rather you had to do it nor me."

"I'd see it further--afore it should take me two hours--and Peckaby with
it," retorted Mrs. Peckaby, reviving to a touch of temper. "I shall but
give it a lick and a promise; just mop up the wet, and dry the grate,
and get a bit of fire alight. T'other things may go."

Polly Dawson departed, and Mrs. Peckaby set to her work. By dint of some
trouble, she contrived to obtain a cup of tea for herself after awhile,
and then she sat on disconsolately as before. Night came on, and she
had ample time to indulge her ruminations.

Peckaby had not been in. Mrs. Peckaby concluded he was solacing himself
at that social rendezvous, the Plough and Harrow, and would come home in
a state of beer. Between nine and ten he entered--hours were early in
Deerham--and to Mrs. Peckaby's surprise, he was not only sober, but
social.

"It have turned out a pouring wet night," cried he. And the mood was so
unwonted, especially after the episode of the wet grate, that Mrs.
Peckaby was astonished into answering pleasantly.

"Will ye have some bread and cheese?" asked she.

"I don't mind if I do. Chuff, he gave me a piece of his bread and bacon
at eight o'clock, so I ain't over hungry."

Mrs. Peckaby brought forth the loaf and the cheese, and Peckaby cut
himself some and ate it. Then he went upstairs. She stayed to put the
eatables away, raked out the fire, and followed. Peckaby was already in
bed. To get into it was not a very ceremonious proceeding with him, as
it is not with many others. There was no superfluous attire to throw
off, there was no hindering time with ablutions, there were no prayers.
Mrs. Peckaby favoured the same convenient mode, and she had just put the
candle out, when some noise struck upon her ear.

It came from the road outside. They slept back, the front room having
been the one let to Brother Jarrum; but in those small houses, at that
quiet hour noises in the road were heard as distinctly back as front.
There was a sound of talking, and then came a modest knock at Peckaby's
door.

Mrs. Peckaby went to the front room, opened the casement, and looked
out. To say that her heart leaped into her mouth would be a most
imperfect figure of speech to describe the state of feeling that rushed
over her. In the rainy obscurity of the night she could discern
something white drawn up to the door, and the figures of two men
standing by it. The only wonder was that she did not leap out; she might
have done it, had the window been large enough.

"Do Susan Peckaby live here?" inquired a gruff voice, that seemed as if
it were muffled.

"Oh, dear good gentlemen, yes!" she responded, in a tremble of
excitement. "Please what is it?"

"The white donkey's come to take her to New Jerusalem."

With a shrieking cry of joy that might have been heard all the way up
Clay Lane, Mrs. Peckaby tore back to her chamber.

"Peckaby," she cried, "Peckaby, the thing's come at last! The blessed
animal that's to bear me off. I always said it would."

Peckaby--probably from drowsiness--made no immediate response. Mrs.
Peckaby stooped down to the low bed, and shook him well by the shoulder.

"It's the white quadruple, Peckaby, come at last!"

Peckaby growled out something that she was in a state of too great
excitement to hear. She lighted the candle; she flung on some of the
things she had taken off; she ran back to the front before they were
fastened, lest the messengers, brute and human, should have departed,
and put her head out at the casement again, all in the utmost fever of
agitation.

"A minute or two yet, good gentlemen, please! I'm a'most ready. I'm
a-waiting to get out my purple gownd."

"All right, missus," was the muffled answer.

The "purple gownd" was kept in this very ex-room of Brother Jarrum's hid
in a safe place between some sheets of newspaper. Had Mrs. Peckaby kept
it open to the view of Peckaby, there's no saying what grief the robe
might not have come to, ere this. Peckaby, in his tantrums, would not
have been likely to spare it. She put it on, and hooked it down the
front, her trembling fingers scarcely able to accomplish it. That it was
full loose for her she was prepared to find; she had grown thin with
fretting. Then she put on a shawl; next, her bonnet; last some green
leather gloves. The shawl was black, with worked coloured corners--a
thin small shawl that hardly covered her shoulders; and the bonnet was a
straw, trimmed with pink ribbons--the toilette which had long been
prepared.

"Good-bye, Peckaby," said she, going in when she was ready, "You've said
many a time as you wished I was off, and now you have got your wish. But
I don't want to part nothing but friends."

"Good-bye," returned Peckaby, in a hearty tone, as he turned himself
round on his bed. "Give my love to the saints."

To find him in this accommodating humour was more than she had bargained
for. A doubt had crossed her sometimes, whether, when the white donkey
did come, there might not arise a battle with Peckaby, ere she should
get off. This apparently civil feeling on his part awoke a more social
one on hers; and a qualm of conscience darted across her, suggesting
that she might have made him a better wife had she been so disposed. "He
might have shook hands with me," was her parting thought, as she
unlocked the street door.

The donkey was waiting outside with all the patience for which donkeys
are renowned. It had been drawn up under a sheltering ledge at a door or
two's distance, to be out of the rain. Its two conductors were muffled
up, as befitted the inclemency of the night, something like their voices
appeared to have been. Mrs. Peckaby was not in her sober senses
sufficiently to ask whether they were brothers from the New Jerusalem,
or whether the style of costume they favoured might be the prevailing
mode in that fashionable city; if so, it was decidedly more useful than
elegant, consisting apparently of hop sacks, doubled over the head and
over the back.

"Ready, missus?"

"I be quite ready," she answered, in a tremble of delight. "There ain't
no saddle!" she called out, as the donkey was trotted forward.

"You won't want a saddle; these New Jerusalem animals bain't like the
ord'nary uns. Jump on him, missus."

Mrs. Peckaby was so exceedingly tall, that she had not far to jump. She
took her seat sideways, settled her gown, and laid hold of the bridle,
which one of the men put into her hands. He turned the donkey round, and
set it going with a smack; the other helped by crying "Gee-ho!"

Up Clay Lane she proceeded in triumph. The skies were dark, and the rain
came soaking down; but Mrs. Peckaby's heart was too warm to dwell on any
temporary inconvenience. If a thought crossed her mind that the beauty
of the pink ribbons might be marred by the storm, so as somewhat to dim
the glory of her entrance into the city and introduction to the saints,
she drove it away again. Trouble had no admission in her present frame
of mind. The gentlemen in the hop sacks continued to attend her; the one
leading the donkey, the other walking behind and cheering the animal on
with periodical gee-ho's.

"I suppose as it's a long way, sir?" asked Mrs. Peckaby, breaking the
silence, and addressing the conductor.

"Middlin'," replied he.

"And how do we get over the sea, please, sir?" asked she again.

"The woyage is pervided for, missus," was the short and satisfactory
response. "Brother Jarrum took care of that when he sent us."

Her heart went into a glow at the name. And them envious disbelievers in
Deerham had cast all sorts of disparaging accusations to the brother,
openly expressing their opinion that he had gone off purposely without
her, and that she'd never hear of him again!

Arrived at the top of Clay Lane, the road was crossed, and the donkey
was led down a turning towards the lands of Sir Rufus Hautley. It may
have occurred to Mrs. Peckaby to wonder that the highway was not taken,
instead of an unfrequented bye-path, that only led to fields and a wood;
but, if so, she said nothing. Had the white donkey taken her to a
gravel-pit, and pitched headlong in with her, she would have deemed, in
her blind faith, that it was the right road to New Jerusalem.

A long way it was, over those wet fields. If the brothers and the donkey
partook of the saintly nature of the inhabitants of Salt Lake City,
possibly they did not find it a weary one. Mrs. Peckaby certainly did
not. She was rapt in a glowing vision of the honours and delights that
would welcome her at her journey's end;--so rapt, that she and the
donkey had been for some little time in one of the narrow paths of the
wood before she missed her two conductors.

It caused Mrs. Peckaby to pull the bridle, and cry "Wo-ho!" to the
donkey. She had an idea that they might have struck into the wrong path,
for this one appeared to be getting narrower and narrower. The wood was
intersected with paths, but only a few of them led right through it. She
pulled up, and turned her head the way she had come, but was unable to
distinguish anything, save that she was in the heart of the wood.

"Be you behind, gentlemen?" she called out.

There was no reply. Mrs. Peckaby waited a bit, thinking they might have
lagged unwittingly, and then called out again, with the like result.

"It's very curious!" thought Mrs. Peckaby.

She was certainly in a dilemma. Without her conductors, she knew no more
how to get to New Jerusalem than she did how to get to the new moon. She
might find her way through the wood, by one path or another; but, once
on the other side, she had no idea which road to turn the donkey
to--north, south, east, or west. She thought she would go back and look
after them.

But there was some difficulty in doing this. The path had grown so
narrow that the donkey could not easily be turned. She slipped off him,
tied the bridle to a tree, and ran back as fast as the obscurity of the
path allowed her, calling out to the gentlemen.

The more she ran and the more she called, the less did there appear to
be anybody to respond to it. Utterly at a nonplus, she at length
returned to the donkey--that is, to the spot, so far as she could judge,
where she had left it. But the donkey was gone.

Was Mrs. Peckaby awake or asleep? Was the past blissful dream--when she
was being borne in triumph to New Jerusalem--only an imaginary one? Was
her present predicament real! Which _was_ imagination and which was
real? For the last hour she had been enjoying the realisation of all her
hopes; now she seemed no nearer their fruition than she had been a year
ago. The white donkey was gone, the conducting brothers were gone, and
she was alone in the middle of a wood, two miles from home, on a wet
night. Mrs. Peckaby had heard of enchantments, and began to think she
must have been subjected to something of the sort.

She rubbed her eyes; she pinched her arms. Was she in her senses or not?
Sure never was such a situation heard of! The cup of hope presented
palpably to her lips, only to vanish again--she could not tell how--and
leave no sign. A very disagreeable doubt--not yet a suspicion--began to
dawn over Mrs. Peckaby. Had she been made the subject of a practical
joke?

She might have flung the doubt from her, but for a distant sound that
came faintly on her ears--the sound of covert laughter. Her doubt turned
to conviction. Her face became hot; her heart, but for the anger at it,
would have grown sick with the disappointment. Her conductors and the
donkey were retreating, having played their joke out! Two certainties
forced themselves upon her mind. One, that Peckaby and his friends had
planned it; she felt sure now that the biggest of the "brothers" had
been nobody but Chuff, the blacksmith: the other certainty was, that she
should never be sent for to New Jerusalem in any way. Why it should have
been, Mrs. Peckaby could not have told, then or afterwards; but the
positive conviction that Brother Jarrum _had_ been false, that the story
of sending for her on a white donkey had only been invented to keep her
quiet, fixed itself in her mind in that moment in the lonely wood. She
sunk down amidst the trees and sobbed bitterly.

But all the tears combined that the world ever shed could not bring her
nearer to New Jerusalem, or make her present situation better. After
awhile she had the sense to remember that. She rose from the ground,
turned her gown up over her shoulders, found her way out of the wood,
and set off on her walk back again in a very humble frame of mind,
arriving home as the clock was striking two.

She could make nobody hear. She knocked at the door, she knocked at the
window, gently at first, then louder; she called and called, but there
came no answer. Some of the neighbours, aroused by the unwonted
disturbance, came peeping at their windows. At length Peckaby opened
his; thrusting his head out at the very casement from which Mrs. Peckaby
had beheld the deceitful vision earlier in the night.

"Who's there?" called out Peckaby.

"It's me, Peckaby," was the answer, delivered in a forlorn tone. "Come
down and open the door."

"Who's 'me'?" asked Peckaby.

"It's me," repeated Mrs. Peckaby, looking up.

And what with her height and the low casement, their faces were really
not many inches apart; but yet Peckaby appeared not to know her.

"You be off, will you!" retorted he. "A pretty thing if tramps be to
come to decent folks' doors and knock 'em up like this. Who's door did
you take it for?"

"It's me!" screamed Mrs. Peckaby. "Don't you know me? Come and undo the
door, and let me come in. I be sopping."

"Know you! How should I know you? Who be you?"

"Good heavens, Peckaby! you must know me. Ain't I your wife?"

"My wife! Not a bit on't. You needn't come here with that gammon,
missis, whoever you be. My wife's gone off to New Jerusalem on a white
donkey."

He slammed to the casement. Mrs. Peckaby, what with the rain and what
with the disappointment, burst into tears. In the same moment, sundry
other casements opened, and all the heads in the vicinity--including the
blacksmith Chuffs, and Mrs. Chuff's--were thrust out to condole with
their neighbour, Mrs. Peckaby.

"Had she been and come back a'ready?" "Did she get tired of the saints
so soon as this--or did they get tired of her?" "What sort of a city,
was it?" "Which was most plentiful--geese or sage?" "How many wives,
besides herself, had the gentleman that _she_ chose?" "Who took care of
the babies?" "Did they have many public dances?" "Was veils for the
bonnets all the go?" "Was it a paradise or warn't it?" "And how was
Brother Jarrum?"

Amongst the many questions asked, those came prominently, tingling on
the ears of the unhappy Mrs. Peckaby. Too completely prostrate with
events to retort, she suddenly let drop her gown, that she had kept so
carefully turned, and clapped both her hands upon her face. Then came a
real, genuine question from the next door casement--Mrs. Green's.

"Ain't that your plum-coloured gownd? What's come to it?"

Mrs. Peckaby, somewhat aroused, looked at the gown in haste. What _had_
come to it? Patches of dead-white, looking not unlike paint, covered it
about on all sides, especially behind. The shawl had caught some white,
too, and the green leather gloves looked, inside, as though they had had
a coat of whitewash put on them. Her beautiful gownd! laid by so
long!--what on earth had ruined it like that?

Chuff, the blacksmith, gave a great grin from his window. "Sure that
there donkey never was painted down white!" quoth he.

That it had been painted down white and with exceedingly wet paint too,
there could be little doubt. Some poor donkey humble in his coat of
gray, converted into a fine white animal for the occasion, by Peckaby
and Chuff and their cronies. Mrs. Peckaby shrieked and sobbed with
mortification, and drummed frantically on her house door. A chorus of
laughter echoed from all sides, and Peckaby's casement flew open again.

"Will you stop that there knocking, then?" roared Peckaby, "Disturbing a
man's night's rest."

"I _will_ come in then, Peckaby," she stormed, plucking up a little
spirit in her desperation. "I be your wife, you know I be, and I will
come in."

"My good woman, what's took you?" cried Peckaby, in a tone of
compassionating suavity. "You ain't no wife of mine. My wife's miles on
her road by this time. She's off to New Jerusalem on a white donkey."

A new actor came up to the scene--no other than Jan Verner. Jan had been
sitting up with some poor patient, and was now going home. To describe
his surprise when he saw the windows alive with nightcapped heads, and
Mrs. Peckaby in her dripping discomfort, in her paint, in her state
altogether, outward and inward, would be a long task. Peckaby himself
undertook the explanation, in which he was aided by Chuff; and Jan sat
himself down on the public pump, and laughed till he was hoarse.

"Come, Peckaby, you'll let her in," cried he, before he went away.

"Let her in!" echoed Peckaby, "That would be a go, that would! What 'ud
the saints say? They'd be for prosecuting of her for bigamy. If she's
gone over to them, sir, she can't belong legal to me."

Jan laughed so that he had to hold his sides, and Mrs. Peckaby shrieked
and sobbed. Chuff began calling out that the best remedy for white paint
was turpentine.

"Coma along, Peckaby, and open the door," said Jan, rising. "She'll
catch an illness if she stops here in her wet clothes, and I shall have
a month's work, attending on her. Come!"

"Well, sir, to oblige you, I will," returned the man. "But let me ever
catch her snivelling after them saints again, that's all! They should
have her if they liked; I'd not."

"You hear, Mrs. Peckaby," said Jan in her ear. "I'd let the saints alone
for the future, if I were you."

"I mean to, sir," she meekly answered, between her sobs.

Peckaby in his shirt and nightcap, opened the door, and she bounded in.
The casements closed to the chorus of subsiding laughter, and the echoes
of Jan's footsteps died away in the distance.


CHAPTER LXXV.

AN EXPLOSION OF SIBYLLA'S.


Sibylla Verner sat at the window of her sitting-room in the twilight--a
cold evening in early winter. Sibylla was in an explosive temper. It was
nothing unusual for her to be in an explosive temper now; but she was in
a worse than customary this evening. Sibylla felt the difference between
Verner's Pride and Deerham Court. She lived but in excitement; she cared
but for gaiety. In removing to Deerham Court she had gone readily,
believing that she should there find a large portion of the gaiety she
had been accustomed to at Verner's Pride; that she should, at any rate,
be living with the appliances of wealth about her, and should go out a
great deal with Lady Verner. She had not bargained for Lady Verner's
establishment being reduced to simplicity and quietness, for her laying
down her carriage and discharging her men-servants and selling her
horses, and living again the life of a retired gentlewoman. Yet all
these changes had come to pass, and Sibylla's inward spirit turned
restive. She had everything that any reasonable mind could possibly
desire, every comfort; but quiet comfort and Sibylla's taste did not
accord. Her husband was out a great deal at Verner's Pride and on the
estate. As he had resolved to do over John Massingbird's dinner-table,
so he was doing--putting his shoulder to the wheel. He had never looked
after things as he was looking now. To be the master of Verner's Pride
was one thing, to be the hired manager of Verner's Pride was another;
and Lionel found every hour of his time occupied. His was no
eye-service; his conscience was engaged in his work and he did it
efficiently.

Sibylla still sat at the window, looking out into the twilight. Decima
stood near the fire in a thoughtful mood. Lucy was downstairs in the
drawing-room at the piano. They could hear the faint echo of her soft
playing as they sat there in silence. Sibylla was in no humour to talk:
she had repulsed Decima rudely--or it may rather be said
fractiously--when the latter had ventured on conversation. Lady Verner
had gone out to dinner. The Countess of Elmsley had been there that day,
and she had asked Lady Verner to go over in the evening and take a
friendly dinner with her. "Bring any of them that you like with you,"
had been her careless words in parting. But Lady Verner had not chosen
to take "any of them." She had dressed and driven off in the hired fly
alone; and this it was that was exciting the anger of Sibylla. She
thought Lady Verner might have taken her.

Lucy came in and knelt down on the rug before the fire, half shivering.
"I am so cold!" she said. "Do you know what I did, Decima? I let the
fire go out. Some time after Lady Verner went up to dress, I turned
round and found the fire was out. My hands are quite numbed."

"You have gone on playing there without a fire!" cried Decima.

"I shall be warm again directly," said Lucy cheerily. "As I passed
through the hall, the reflection of the blaze came out of the
dining-room. We shall get warm there. Is your head still aching, Mrs.
Verner?"

"It is always aching," snapped Sibylla.

Lucy, kind and gentle in spirit, unretorting, ever considerate for the
misfortunes which had come upon Mrs. Verner, went to her side. "Shall I
get you a little of your aromatic vinegar?" she asked.

"You need not trouble to get anything for me," was the ungracious
answer.

Lucy, thus repulsed, stood in silence at the window. The window on this
side of the house overlooked the road which led to Sir Rufus Hautley's.
A carriage, apparently closely shut up, so far as she could see in the
dusk, its coachman and footman attending it, was bowling rapidly down
towards the village.

"There's Sir Rufus Hautley's carriage," said Lucy. "I suppose he is
going out to dinner."

Decima drew to the window and looked out. The carriage came sweeping
round the point, and turned on its road to the village, as they
supposed. In the still silence of the room, they could hear its wheels
on the frosty road, after they lost sight of it; could hear it bowl
before their house and--pull up at the gates.

"It has stopped here!" exclaimed Lucy.

Decima moved quietly back to the fire and sat down. A fancy arose to
Lucy that she, Decima, had turned unusually pale. Was it so?--or was it
fancy? If it was fancy, why should the fancy have arisen? Ghastly pale
her face certainly looked, as the blaze played upon it.

A few minutes, and one of the servants came in, handing a note to
Decima.

"Bring lights," said Decima, in a low tone.

The lights were brought; and then Decima's agitation was apparent. Her
hands shook as she broke the seal of the letter. Lucy gazed in surprise;
Sibylla, somewhat aroused from her own grievances, in curiosity.

"Desire the carriage to wait," said Decima.

"It is waiting, Miss Decima. The servants said they had orders."

Decima crushed the note into her pocket as well as her shaking fingers
would allow her, and left the room. What could have occurred, thus to
agitate calm and stately Decima? Before Lucy and Mrs. Verner had
recovered their surprise she was back again, dressed to go out.

"I am sorry to leave you so abruptly, as mamma is not here," she said.
"I dare say Lionel will be in to dinner. If not, you must for once
entertain each other."

"But where are you going?" cried Mrs. Verner.

"To Sir Rufus Hautley's. He wishes to see me."

"What does he want with you?" continued Sibylla.

"I do not know," replied Decima.

She quitted the room and went down to the carriage, which had waited for
her. Mrs. Verner and Lucy heard it drive away again as quickly as it had
driven up. As it turned the corner and pursued its way up the road, past
the window they were looking from, but at some distance from it, they
fancied they saw the form of Decima inside, looking out at them.

"Sir Rufus is taken ill," said old Catherine to them, by way of news.
"The servants say that it's feared he won't live through the night. Mr.
Jan is there, and Dr. Hayes."

"But what can he want with Miss Verner?" reiterated Sibylla.

Catherine shook her head. She had not the remotest idea.

Lionel Verner did not come in for dinner, and they descended to it
without him. His non-appearance was no improvement to the temper of his
wife. It had occurred lately that Lionel did not always get home to
dinner.

Sometimes, when detained at Verner's Pride, he would take it with John
Massingbird; if out on the estate, and unable to reach home in time, he
would eat something when he came in. Her fractious state of mind did not
tend to soothe the headache she had complained of earlier in the day.
Every half-hour that passed without her husband's entrance, made her
worse in all ways, head and temper; and about nine o'clock she went up
to her sitting-room and lay down on the sofa, saying that her temples
were splitting.

Lucy followed her. Lucy thought she must really be ill. She could not
understand that any one should be so fractious, except from wearing
pain. "I will bathe your temples," she gently said.

Sibylla did not appear to care whether her temples were bathed or not.
Lucy got some water in a basin and two thin handkerchiefs, wringing out
one and placing it on Mrs. Verner's head and forehead, kneeling to her
task. That her temples were throbbing and her head hot, there was no
question; the handkerchief was no sooner on, than it was warm, and Lucy
had to exchange it for the other.

"It is Lionel's fault," suddenly burst forth Sibylla.

"His fault?" returned Lucy. "How can it be his fault?"

"What business has he to stop out?"

"But if he cannot help it?" returned Lucy. "The other evening, don't you
remember, Mr. Verner said when he came in, that he could not help being
late sometimes now?"

"_You_ need not defend him," said Sibylla. "It seems to me that you are
all ready to take his part against me."

Lucy made no reply. An assertion more unfounded could not have been
spoken. At that moment the step of Lionel was heard on the stairs. He
came in, looking jaded and tired.

"Up here this evening!" he exclaimed, laying down a paper or parchment
which he had in his hand. "Catherine says my mother and Decima are out.
Why, Sibylla, what is the matter?"

Sibylla dashed the handkerchief off her brow as he advanced to her, and
rose up, speaking vehemently. The sight of her husband appeared to have
brought the climax to her temper.

"Where have you been? Why were you not in to dinner?"

"I could not get home in time. I have been detained."

"It is false," she retorted, her blue eyes flashing fire. "Business,
business! it is always your excuse now! You stay out for no good
purpose."

The outbreak startled Lucy. She backed a few paces, looking scared.

"Sibylla!" was all the amazed reply returned by Lionel.

"You leave me here, hour after hour, to solitude and tears, while you
are out, taking your pleasure! I have all the endurance of our position,
and you the enjoyment."

He battled for a moment with his rising feelings; battled for calmness,
for forbearance, for strength to bear. There were moments when he was
tempted to answer her in her own spirit.

"Pleasure and I have not been very close friends of late, Sibylla," he
gravely said. "None can know that better than you. My horse fell lame,
and I have been leading him these last two hours. I have now to go to
Verner's Pride. Something has arisen on which I must see Mr.
Massingbird."

"It is false, it is false," reiterated Sibylla. "You are not going to
Verner's Pride; you are not going to see Mr. Massingbird. You know best
where you are going; but it is not there. It is the old story of Rachel
Frost over again."

The words confounded Lionel; both that they were inexplicable and spoken
in passion so vehement.

"What do you say about Rachel Frost?" he asked.

"You know what I say, and what I mean. When Deerham looked far and near
for the man who did the injury to Rachel, they little thought they might
have found him in Lionel Verner. Lucy Tempest, it is true. He----"

But Lionel had turned imperatively to Lucy, drawing her to the door,
which he opened. It was no place for her, a discussion such as this.

"Will you be so kind as to go down and make me a cup of tea, Lucy?" he
said, in a wonderfully calm tone, considering the provocation he was
receiving. Then he closed the door on Lucy, and turned to his wife.

"Sibylla, allow me to request, nay, to insist, that when you have fault
to find, or reproach to cast to me, you choose a moment when we are
alone. If you have no care for what may be due to me and to yourself,
you will do well to bear in mind that something is due to others. Now,
then, tell me what you mean about Rachel Frost."

"I won't," said Sibylla. "You are killing me," and she burst into tears.

Oh, it was weary work!--weary work for him. Such a wife as this!

"In what way am I killing you?"

"Why do you leave me so much alone?"

"I have undertaken work, and I must do it. But, as to leaving you alone,
when I am with you, you scarcely ever give me a civil word."

"You are leaving me now--you are wanting to go to Verner's Pride
to-night," she reiterated with strange inconsistency, considering that
she had just insinuated he did _not_ want to go there.

"I must go there, Sibylla. I have told you why; and I have told you
truth. Again I ask you what you meant about Rachel Frost."

Sibylla flung up her hands petulantly. "I won't tell you, I say. And you
can't make me. I wish, I _wish_ Fred had not died."

She turned round on the sofa and buried her face in the cushions.
Lionel, true to the line of conduct he had carved out for himself, to
give her all possible token of respect and affection ever, whatever
might be her provocation--and all the more true to it from the very
consciousness that the love of his inmost heart grew less hers, more
another's, day by day, bent over her and spoke kindly. She flung back
her hand in a repelling manner towards him, and maintained an obstinate
silence. Lionel, sick and weary, at length withdrew, taking up the
parchment.

_How_ sick and weary, none, save himself, could know. Lucy Tempest had
the tea before her, apparently ready, when he looked into the
drawing-room.

"I am going on now to Verner's Pride, Lucy. You can tell my mother so,
should she ask after me when she returns. I may be late."

"But you will take some tea, first?" cried Lucy, in a hasty tone. "You
asked me to make it for you."

He knew he had--asked her as an excuse to get her from the room.

"I don't care for it," he wearily answered.

"I am sure you are tired," said Lucy. "When did you dine?"

"I have not dined. I have taken nothing since I left home this
morning."

"Oh!" She was hastening to the bell. Lionel stopped her, laying his hand
upon her arm.

"I could not eat it, Lucy. Just one cup of tea, if you will."

She, returned to the table, poured out the cup of tea, and he drank it
standing.

"Shall I take Mrs. Verner up a cup?" asked Lucy. "Will she drink it, do
you think?"

"Thank you, Lucy. It may do her head good. I think it aches much
to-night."

He turned, and departed. Lucy noticed that he had left the parchment
behind him, and ran after him with it, catching him as he was about to
close the hall door. She knew that all such business-looking papers went
up to Verner's Pride.

"Did you mean to leave it? Or have you forgotten it?"

He had forgotten it. He took it from her, retaining her hand for a
moment. "Lucy, _you_ will not misjudge me?" he said, in a strange tone
of pain.

Lucy looked up at him with a bright smile and a very emphatic shake of
the head. She knew by instinct that he alluded to the accusation of his
wife, touching Rachel Frost. Lucy misjudge _him!_

"You should have waited to eat some dinner," she gaily said. "Take care
you don't faint by the way, as that sick patient of Jan's did the other
morning."

Lionel went on. At any rate there was peace outside, if not within; the
peace of outward calm. He lifted his hat; he bared his brow, aching with
its weight of trouble, to the clear night air; he wondered whether he
should have this to bear his whole life long. At the moment of passing
the outer gates, the carriage of Sir Rufus Hautley drew up, bearing
Decima.

Lionel waited to receive her. He helped her out, and gave her his arm to
the hall door. Decima walked with her head down.

"You are silent, Decima. Are you sad?"

"Yes," she answered. "Sir Rufus is dead."

"Dead!" echoed Lionel, in very astonishment, for he had heard nothing of
the sudden illness.

"It is so," she replied, breaking into sobs. "Spasms at the heart, they
say. Jan and Dr. Hayes were there, but they could not save him."


CHAPTER LXXVI.

AN UNEXPECTED ARRIVAL.


Deborah and Amilly West were sitting over the fire In the growing dusk
of a February evening. Their sewing lay on the table; some home dresses
they were making for themselves, for they had never too much superfluous
cash for dressmakers, with fashionable patterns and fashionable prices.
It had grown too dark to work, and they had turned to the fire for a
chat, before the tea came in, and the gas was lighted.

"I tell you, Amilly, it is of no use playing at concealment, or trying
to suppress the truth," Deborah was saying. "She is as surely going as
that the other two went; as sure as sure can be. I have always felt that
she would go. Mr. Lionel was talking to me only yesterday. He was not
satisfied with his brother; at least, he thought it as well to act as
though he were not satisfied with him; and he was about to ask Dr.
Hayes----"

Her voice died away. Master Cheese had come in with a doleful face.

"Miss Deb, I'm sent up to Deerham Hall. There's a bothering note come
from Miss Hautley to Jan, about one of the servants, and he says I am to
go up and see what it is."

"Well?" returned Miss Deb, wondering why Master Cheese should come in to
give the information to her. "You couldn't expect Mr. Jan to go up,
after being out all day, as he has."

"Folks are sure to go and fall ill at the most untoward hour of the
twenty-four," grumbled Master Cheese. "I was just looking for a good
tea. I feel as empty as possible, after my short dinner. I wish----"

"Short dinner!" echoed Miss Deb, in amazement; at least, it would have
been in amazement, but that she was accustomed to these little episodes
from the young gentleman. "We had a beautiful piece of roast beef; and
I'm sure you ate as much as you chose!"

"There was no pudding or pie," resentfully retorted Master Cheese. "I
have felt all the afternoon just as if I should sink; and I couldn't get
out to buy anything for myself, because Jan never came in, and the boy
stopped out. I wish, Miss Deb, you'd give me a thick piece of
bread-and-jam, as I have to go off without my tea."

"The fact is, Master Cheese, you have the jam so often, in one way or
another, that there's very little left. It will not last the season
out."

"The green gooseberries'll be coming on, Miss Deb," was Master Cheese's
insinuating reply. "And there's always apples, you know. With plenty of
lemon and a clove or two, apples make as good a pudding as anything
else."

Miss Deb, always good-natured, went to get him what he had asked for,
and Master Cheese took his seat in front of the fire, and toasted his
toes.

"There was a great mistake made when you were put to a surgeon," said
Miss Amilly, laughing. "You should have gone apprentice to a
pastry-cook."

"She's a regular fidgety old woman, that Miss Hautley," broke out Master
Cheese with temper, passing over Miss Amilly's remark. "It's not two
months yet that she has been at the Hall, and she has had one or the
other of us up six times at least. I wonder what business she had to
come to it? The Hall wouldn't have run away before Sir Edmund could get
home."

Miss Deb came back with the bread-and-jam; a good thick slice, as the
gentleman had requested. To look at him eating, one would think he had
had nothing for a week. It disappeared in no time, and Master Cheese
went out sucking his fingers and his lips. Deborah West folded up the
work, and put things straight generally in the room. Then she sat down
again, drawing her chair to the side of the fire.

"I do think that Cheese has got a wolf inside him," cried Amilly, with a
laugh.

"He is a great gourmand. He said this morning----" began Miss Deb, and
then she stopped.

Finding what she was about to say thus brought to an abrupt conclusion,
Amilly West looked at her sister. Miss Deb's attention was riveted on
the room door. Her mouth was open, her eyes seemed starting from her
head with a fixed stare, and her countenance was growing white. Amilly
turned her eyes hastily to the same direction, and saw a dark, obscure
form filling up the doorway.

Not obscure for long. Amilly, more impulsive than her sister, rose up
with a shriek, and darted forward with outstretched arms of welcome;
Deborah followed, stretching out hers.

"My dear father!"

It was no other than Dr. West. He gave them each a cool kiss, walked to
the fire and sat down, bidding them not smother him. For some little
while they could not get over their surprise or believe their senses.
They knew nothing of his intention to return, and had deemed him
hundreds of miles away. Question after question they showered down upon
him, the result of their amazement. He answered just as much as he
chose. He had only come home for a day or so, he said, and did not care
that it should be known he was there, to be tormented with a shoal of
callers.

"Where's Mr. Jan?" asked he.

"In the surgery," said Deborah.

"Is he by himself?"

"Yes, dear papa. Master Cheese has just gone up to Deerham Hall, and the
boy is out."

Dr. West rose, and made his way to the surgery. The surgery was empty.
But the light of a fire from the half-opened door, led him to Jan's
bedroom. It was a room that would persist in remaining obstinately damp,
and Jan, albeit not over careful of himself, judged it well to have an
occasional fire lighted. The room, seen by this light, looked
comfortable. The small, low, iron bed stood in the far corner; in the
opposite corner the bureau, as in Dr. West's time, the door opening to
the garden (never used now) between them, at the end of the room. The
window was on the side opposite the fire, a table in the middle. Jan was
then occupied in stirring the fire into a blaze, and its cheerful light
flickered on every part of the room.

"Good-evening, Mr. Jan."

Jan turned round, poker in hand, and stared amiably. "Law!" cried he.
"Who'd have thought it?"

The old word; the word he had learned at school--law. It was Jan's
favourite mode of expressing surprise still, and Lady Verner never could
break him of it. He shook hands cordially with Dr. West.

The doctor shut the door, slipping the bolt, and sat down to the fire.
Jan cleared a space on the table, which was covered with jars and glass
vases, cylinders, and other apparatus, seemingly for chemical purposes,
and took his seat there.

The doctor had taken a run home, "making a morning call, as it might be
metaphorically observed," he said to Jan. Just to have a sight of home
faces, and hear a little home news. Would Mr. Jan recite to him somewhat
of the latter?

Jan did so; touching upon all he could recollect. From John
Massingbird's return to Verner's Pride, and the consequent turning out
of Mr. Verner and his wife, down to the death of Sir Rufus Hautley; not
forgetting the pranks played by the "ghost," and the foiled expedition
of Mrs. Peckaby to New Jerusalem. Some of these items of intelligence
the doctor had heard before, for Jan periodically wrote to him. The
doctor looked taller, and stouter, and redder than ever, and as he
leaned thoughtfully forward, and the crimson blaze played upon his face,
Jan thought how like he was growing to his sister, the late Mrs. Verner.

"Mr. Jan," said the doctor, "it is not right that my nephew, John
Massingbird, should enjoy Verner's Pride."

"Of course it's not," answered Jan. "Only things don't go by rights
always, you know. It's but seldom they do."

"He ought to give it up to Mr. Verner."

"So I told him," said Jan. "I should, in his place."

"What did he say?"

"Say? Laughed at me, and called me green."

Dr. West sat thoughtfully pulling his great dark whiskers. Dark as they
were, they had yet a tinge of red in the fire-light. "It was a curious
thing; a very curious thing, that both brothers should die, as was
supposed, in Australia," said he. "Better--as things have turned
out--that Fred should have turned up afterwards, than John."

"I don't know that," spoke Jan with his accustomed truth-telling
freedom. "The pair were not good for much, but John was the best of
them."

"I was thinking of Sibylla," candidly admitted the doctor. "It would
have been better for her."

Jan opened his eyes considerably.

"Better for her!--for it to turn out that she had two husbands living?
That's logic, that is."

"Dear me, to be sure!" cried the doctor. "I was not thinking of that
phase of the affair, Mr. Jan. Is she in spirits?"

"Who? Sibylla? She's fretting herself into her grave."

Dr. West turned his head with a start. "What at? The loss of Verner's
Pride?"

"Well, I don't know," said Jan, ever plain-spoken. "She puzzles me. When
she was at Verner's Pride, she never seemed satisfied. She was
perpetually hankering after excitement--didn't seem to care for Lionel,
or for anybody else, and kept the house full of people from top to
bottom. She has a restless, dissatisfied temper, and it keeps her on the
worry. Folks with such tempers know no peace, and let nobody else know
any that's about them. A nice life she leads Lionel! Not that _he'd_
drop a hint of it. He'd cut out his tongue before he'd speak a word
against his wife; he'd rather make her out to be an angel."

"Are they pretty comfortably off for money?" inquired Dr. West, after a
pause. "I suppose Mr. Verner must have managed to feather his nest a
little, before leaving?"

"Not a bit of it," returned Jan. "He was over head and ears in debt.
Sibylla helped him to a good portion of it. She went the pace. John
Massingbird waives the question of the mesne profits, or Lionel would be
in worse embarrassment than he is."

Dr. West looked crestfallen. "What do they live on?" he asked. "Does
Lady Verner keep them? She can't have too much for herself now."

"Oh! it's managed somehow," said Jan.

Dr. West sat for some time in ruminating silence; pulling his whiskers
as before, running his hands through his hair, the large clear blue
sapphire ring, which he always wore on his finger, conspicuous. Jan
swayed his legs about, and waited to afford any further information.
Presently the doctor turned to him, a charming expression of open
confidence on his countenance.

"Mr. Jan, I am in great hopes that you will do me a little favour. I
have temporary need of a trifle of pecuniary aid--some slight debts
which have grown upon me abroad," he added carelessly, with a short
cough--"and, knowing your good heart, I have resolved to apply to you.
If you can oblige me with a couple of hundred pounds or so, I'll give
you my acknowledgment, and return it punctually as soon as I am able."

"I'd let you have it with all the pleasure in life, if I had got it,"
heartily replied Jan; "but I have not."

"My dear Mr. Jan! Not got it! You must have quite a nice little nest of
savings laid by in the bank! I know you never spend a shilling on
yourself."

"All I had in the bank, and what I have drawn since, has been handed to
my mother. I wanted Lionel and Sibylla to come here: I and Miss Deb
arranged it all; and in that case I should have given the money to Miss
Deb. But Sibylla refused; she would not come here, she would not go
anywhere but to Lady Verner's. So I handed the money to my mother."

The confession appeared to put the doctor out considerably. "How very
imprudent, Mr. Jan! To give away all you possessed, leaving nothing for
yourself! I never heard of such a thing!"

"Lionel and his wife were turned out of everything, and had nobody to
look to. I don't see that I could have put the money to better use,"
stoutly returned Jan. "It was not much, there's such a lot of the Clay
Lane folks always wanting things when they are ill. And Miss Deb, she
had had something. You keep her so short, doctor."

"But you pay her the sum that was agreed upon for housekeeping?" said
Dr. West.

"What should hinder me?" returned Jan. "Of course I do. But she cannot
make both ends meet, she says, and then she has to come to me. _I_'m
willing: only I can't give money away and put it by, you see."

Dr. West probably did see it. He saw beyond doubt, that all hope of
ready money from easy Jan was gone--from the simple fact that Jan's
coffers were just now empty. The fact did not afford him satisfaction.

"I'll tell you what, Mr. Jan," said he, brightening up, "you shall give
me your signature to a little bill--a bill at two months, let us say. It
will be the same as money."

"Can't," said Jan.

"You _can't!_" replied Dr. West.

"No!" said Jan resolutely. "I'd give away all I had in hand to give, and
welcome; but I'd never sign bills. A doctor has no business with 'em.
Don't you remember what they did for Jones at Bartholomew's?"

"I don't remember Jones at Bartholomew's," frigidly returned the doctor.

"No! Why, what's gone with your memory?" innocently asked Jan. "If you
think a bit, you'll recollect about him, and what his end was. Bills
did it; the signing of bills to oblige some friend. I'll never sign a
bill, doctor. I wouldn't do it for my own mother."

Thus the doctor's expectations were put a final end to, so far as Jan
went--and very certain expectations they had, no doubt, been. As to Jan,
a thought may have crossed him that the doctor and his daughter Sibylla
appeared to have the same propensity for getting out of money. Dr. West
recovered his equanimity, and magnanimously waived the affair as a
trifle not worth dwelling on.

"How does Cheese get on?" he asked.

"First rate--in the eating line," replied Jan.

"Have you got him out of his idleness yet?"

"It would take a more clever man than I to do that, doctor. It's
constitutional. When he goes up to London, in the autumn, I shall take
an assistant: unless you should be coming home yourself."

"I have no intention of it at present, Mr. Jan. Am I to understand you
that Sibylla has serious symptoms of disease?"

"There's no doubt of it," said Jan. "You always prophesied it for her,
you know. When she was at Verner's Pride she was continually ailing: not
a week passed but I was called in to attend her. She was so imprudent
too--she _would_ be. Going out and getting her feet wet; sitting up half
the night. We tried to bring her to reason; but it was of no use. She
defied Lionel; she would not listen to me--as well speak to a post."

"Why should she defy her husband? Are they on bad terms?"

"They are on as good terms as any man and wife could be, Sibylla being
the wife," was Jan's rejoinder. "You know something of her temper and
disposition, doctor--it is of no use to mince matters--you remember how
it had used to be with her here at home. Lionel's a husband in a
thousand. How he can possibly put up with her, and be always patient and
kind, puzzles me more than any problem ever did in Euclid. If Fred had
lived--why, he'd have broken her spirit or her heart long before this."

Dr. West rose and stretched himself. The failings of Sibylla were not a
pleasant topic, thus openly mentioned by Jan; but none knew better than
the doctor how true were the grounds on which he spoke. None knew
better, either, that disease for her was to be feared.

"Her sisters went off about this age, or a little later," he said
musingly. "I could not save them."

"And Sibylla's as surely going after them, doctor, as that I am here,"
returned Jan. "Lionel intends to call in Dr. Hayes to her."

"Since when has she been so ill?"

"Not since any time in particular. There appears to be no real illness
yet--only symptoms. She coughs, and gets as thin as a skeleton.
Sometimes I think, if she could call up a cheerful temper, she'd keep
well. You will see what you think of her."

The doctor walked towards the bureau at the far corner. "Have you ever
opened it, Mr. Jan?"

"It's not likely," said Jan. "Didn't you tell me not to open it? Your
own papers are in it, and you hold the key."

"It's not inconvenient to your room, my retaining it I hope?" asked the
doctor. "I don't know where else I should put my papers."

"Not a bit of it," said Jan. "Have another in here as well, if you like.
It's safe here."

"Do you know, Mr. Jan, I feel as if I'd rather sleep in your little bed
to-night than indoors," said the doctor looking at Jan's bed. "The room
seems like an old friend to me: I feel at home in it."

"Sleep in it, if you like," returned Jan, in his easy good nature. "Miss
Deb can put me into some room or other. I say, doctor, it's past
tea-time. Wouldn't you like some refreshment?"

"I had a good dinner on my road," replied Dr. West; which Jan might have
guessed, for Dr. West was quite sure to take care of himself. "We will
go in, if you like; Deb and Amilly will wonder what has become of me.
How old they begin to look!"

"I don't suppose any of us look younger," answered Jan.

They went into the house. Deborah and Amilly were in a flutter of
hospitality, lading the tea-table with good things that it would have
gladdened Master Cheese's heart to see. They had been upstairs to smooth
out their curls, to put on clean white sleeves and collars, a gold
chain, and suchlike little additions, setting themselves off as they
were now setting off the tea-table, all in their affectionate welcome to
their father. And Dr. West, who liked eating as well as ever did Master
Cheese, surveyed the table with complacency as he sat down to it,
ignoring the dinner he had spoken of to Jan. Amilly sat by him, heaping
his plate with what he liked best, and Deborah made the tea.

"I have been observing to Mr. Jan that you are beginning to look very
old, Deb," remarked the doctor; "Amilly also."

It was a cruel shaft. A bitter return for their loving welcome. Perhaps
they _were_ looking older, but he need not have said it so point blank,
and before Jan. They turned crimson, poor ladies, and bent to sip their
tea, and tried to turn the words off with a laugh, and did not know
where to look. In true innate delicacy of feeling, Dr. West and his
daughter, Sibylla, rivalled each other.

The meal over, the doctor proposed to pay a visit to Deerham Court, and
did so, Jan walking with him, first of all mentioning to Deborah the
wish expressed by Dr. West as to occupying Jan's room for the night,
that she might see the arrangement carried out.

Which she did. And Jan, at the retiring hour--though this is a little
anticipating, for the evening is not yet over--escorted the doctor to
the door of the room, and wished him a good night's rest, never
imagining but that he enjoyed one. But had fire, or any other accident,
burst open the room to public gaze in the lone night hours, Dr. West
would have been seen at work, instead of asleep. Every drawer of the
bureau was out, every paper it contained was misplaced. The doctor was
evidently searching for something, as sedulously as he had once searched
for that lost prescription, which at the time appeared so much to
disturb his peace.


CHAPTER LXXVII.

AN EVENING AT LADY VERNER'S.


In the well-lighted drawing-room at Deerham Court was its mistress, Lady
Verner. Seated with her on the same sofa was her son, Lionel. Decima, at
a little distance, was standing talking to Lord Garle. Lucy Tempest sat
at the table cutting the leaves of a new book; and Sibylla was bending
over the fire in a shivering attitude, as if she could not get enough of
its heat. Lord Garle had been dining with them.

The door opened and Jan entered. "I have brought you a visitor,
Sibylla," said he, in his unceremonious fashion, without any sort of
greeting to anybody. "Come in, doctor."

It caused quite a confusion, the entrance of Dr. West. All were
surprised. Lionel rose, Lucy rose; Lord Garle and Decima came forward,
and Sibylla sprang towards him with a cry. Lady Verner was the only one
who retained entire calmness.

"Papa! it cannot be you! When did you come?"

Dr. West kissed her, and turned to Lady Verner with some courtly words.
Dr. West was an adept at such. Not the courtly words that spring
genuinely from a kindly and refined nature; but those that are put on to
hide a false one. All people, true-hearted ones, too, cannot distinguish
between them; the false and the real. Next, the doctor grasped the hand
of Lionel.

"My son-in-law!" he exclaimed in a very demonstrative manner. "The last
time you and I had the pleasure of meeting, Mr. Verner, we little
anticipated that such a relationship would ensue. I rejoice to welcome
you in it, my dear sir."

"True," said Lionel, with a quiet smile. "Coming events do not always
cast their shadows before."

With Decima, with Lord Garle, with Lucy Tempest, the doctor severally
shook hands; he had a phrase of suavity for them all.

"I should not have known you," he said to the latter.

"No!" returned Lucy. "Why?"

"You have grown, Miss Tempest. Grown much."

"Then I must have been very short before," said Lucy. "I am not tall
now."

"You have grown into remarkable beauty," added the doctor.

Whether Lucy had grown into beauty, or not, she did not like being told
of it. And she did not like Dr. West. She had not been in love with him
ever, as you may recollect; but she seemed to like him now, as he stood
before her, less and less. Drawing away from him when she could do so
civilly, she went up and talked to Jan.

A little while, and they had become more settled, dispersing into
groups. The doctor, his daughter, and Lionel were sitting on a couch
apart, conversing in an undertone; the rest disposed themselves as they
would. Dr. West had accepted a cup of coffee. He kept it in his hand,
sipping it now and then, and slowly ate a biscuit.

"Mr. Jan tells me Sibylla is not very strong," he observed, addressing
both of them, but more particularly Lionel.

"Not very," replied Lionel. "The cold weather of this winter has tried
her; has given her a cough. She will be better, I hope, when it comes in
warm."

"How do you feel, my dear?" inquired the doctor, apparently looking at
his coffee-cup instead of Sibylla. "Weak here?"--touching his chest.

"Not more weak than I had used to be," she answered in a cross tone, as
if the confession that she did feel weak was not pleasant to her.
"There's nothing the matter with me, papa; only Lionel makes a fuss."

"Nay, Sibylla," interposed Lionel good-humouredly, "I leave that to you
and Jan."

"You would like to make papa believe you don't make a fuss!" she cried,
in a most resentful tone; "when you know, not two days ago, you wanted
to prevent my going to the party at Mrs. Bitterworth's!"

"I plead guilty to that," said Lionel. "It was a most inclement night, a
cold, raw fog that penetrated everywhere, carriages and all else, and I
wished you not to venture out in it. The doing so increased your cough."

"Mr. Verner was right," said Dr. West. "Night fogs are pernicious to a
degree, where the chest and lungs are delicate. You should not stir out
of the house, Sibylla, after sunset. Now don't interrupt, my dear. Let
the carriage be ever so closely shut, it makes no difference. There is
the change of atmosphere from the warm room to the cold carriage; there
are the draughts of air in passing to it. You must not do it, Sibylla."

"Do you mean to say, papa, that I am to live like a hermit?--never to go
out?" she returned, her bosom heaving with vexation. "It is not much
visiting that I have had, goodness knows, since quitting Verner's Pride:
if I am to give it all up, you may as well put me out of the world. As
good be dead!"

"Sibylla," said the doctor, more impressively than he often spoke, "I
know your constitution, and I know pretty well what you can and what you
can not bear. Don't attempt to stir out after sunset again. Should you
get stronger it will be a different matter. At present it must not be.
Will you remember this, Mr. Verner?"

"If my wife will allow me to remember it," he said, bending to Sibylla
with a kindly tone. "My will was good to keep her in, all this winter;
but she would not be kept."

"What has Jan been telling you about me, papa? It is a shame of him! I
am not ill."

"Mr. Jan has told me very little indeed of your ailments," replied Dr.
West. "He says you are not strong; he says you are fretful, irritable.
My dear, this arises from your state of health."

"I have thought so, too," said Lionel, speaking impulsively. Many and
many a time, latterly, when she had nearly tired out his heart and his
patience, had he been willing to find an excuse for her still--that her
illness of body caused in her the irritation of mind. Or, at any rate,
greatly increased it.

An eye, far less experienced than that of Dr. West--who, whatever may
have been his other shortcomings, was clever in his profession--could
have seen at a glance how weak Sibylla was. She wore an evening dress of
white muslin, its body very low and its sleeves very short; her chest
was painfully thin, and every breath she took lifted it ominously: she
seemed to be breathing outside as well as in. The doctor touched the
muslin.

"This is not a fit dress for you, Sibylla--"

"Lionel has been putting you up to say it, papa!" she burst forth.

Dr. West looked at her. He surmised, what was indeed the case, that her
husband had remonstrated against the unsuitableness of the attire, to
one in her condition.

"You have heard every word Mr. Verner has spoken to me, Sibylla. You
should be wrapped up warmly always. To be exposed as you are now, is
enough to--to"--give you your death, he was about to say, but changed
the words--"make you very ill."

"Decima and Lucy Tempest dress so," she returned in a tone that
threatened tears.

Dr. West lifted his eyes to where Decima and Lucy were standing with
Lord Garle. Decima wore a silk dress, Lucy a white one; each made
evening fashion.

"They are both healthy," he said, "and may wear what they please. Look
at their necks, compared to yours, Sibylla. I shall ask Mr. Verner to
put all these thin dresses, these low bodies, behind the fire."

"He would only have the pleasure of paying for others to replace them,"
was the undutiful rejoinder. "Papa, I have enough trouble, without your
turning against me."

Turning against her! Dr. West did not point out how purposeless were her
words. His intention was to come in in the morning, and talk to her
seriously of her state of health, and the precautions it was necessary
to observe. He took a sip of his coffee, and turned to Lionel.

"I was about to ask you a superfluous question, Mr. Verner--whether that
lost codicil has been heard of. But your leaving Verner's Pride is an
answer."

"It has never been heard of," replied Lionel. "When John Massingbird
returned and put in his claim--when he took possession, I may say, for
the one was coeval with the other--the wanting of the codicil was indeed
a grievance; far more than it had appeared at the time of its loss."

"You must regret it very much."

"I regret it always," he answered. "I regret it bitterly for Sibylla's
sake."

"Papa," she cried, in deep emotion, her cheeks becoming crimson, her
blue eyes flashing with an unnatural light, "if that codicil could be
found it would save my life. Jan, in his rough, stupid way, tells me I
am fretting myself into my grave. Perhaps I am. I want to go back to
Verner's Pride."

It was not a pleasant subject to converse on; it was a subject utterly
hopeless--and Dr. West sought one more genial. Ranging his eyes over the
room, they fell upon Lord Garle, who was still talking with Decima and
Lucy.

"Which of the two young ladies makes the viscount's attraction, Mr.
Verner?"

Lionel smiled. "They do not take me into their confidence, sir; any one
of the three."

"I am sure it is not Decima, papa," spoke up Sibylla. "She's as cold as
a stone. I won't answer for its not being Lucy Tempest. Lord Garle comes
here a good deal, and he and Lucy seem great friends. I often think he
comes for Lucy."

"Then there's little doubt upon the point," observed the doctor, coming
to a more rapid conclusion than the words really warranted. "Time was,
Mr. Verner, when I thought that young lady would have been your wife."

"Who?" asked Lionel. But that he only asked the question in his
confusion, without need, was evident; the tell-tale flush betrayed it.
His pale face had turned red; red to the very roots of his hair.

"In those old days when you were ill, lying here, and Miss Tempest was
so much with you, I fancied I saw the signs of a mutual attachment,"
continued the doctor. "I conclude I must have been mistaken."

"Little doubt of that, doctor," lightly answered Lionel, recovering his
equanimity, though he could not yet recover his disturbed complexion,
and laughing as he spoke.

Sibylla's greedy ears had drunk up the words, her sharp eyes had caught
the conscious flush, and her jealous heart was making the most of it. At
that unfortunate moment, as ill-luck had it, Lucy brought up the basket
of cakes and held it out to Dr. West. Lionel rose to take it from her.

"I was taking your name in vain, Miss Tempest," said the complacent
doctor. "Did you hear me?"

"No," replied Lucy, smiling. "What about?"

"I was telling Mr. Verner that in the old days I had deemed his choice
was falling upon another, rather than my daughter. Do you remember,
young lady?--in that long illness of his?"

Lucy did remember. And the remembrance, thus called suddenly before her,
the words themselves, the presence of Lionel, all brought to her far
more emotion than had arisen to him. Her throat heaved as with a spasm,
and the startled colour dyed her face. Lionel saw it. Sibylla saw it.

"It proves to us how we may be mistaken, Miss Tempest," observed the
doctor, who, from that habit of his, already hinted at, of never looking
people in the face when he spoke to them, had failed to observe
anything. "I hear there is a probability of this fair hand being
appropriated by another. One who can enhance his value by coupling it
with a coronet."

"Don't take the trouble, Lucy. I am holding it."

It was Lionel who spoke. In her confusion she had not loosed hold of the
cake-basket, although he had taken it. Quietly, impassively, in the most
unruffled manner spoke he, smiling carelessly. Only for a moment had his
self-control been shaken. "Will you take a biscuit, Dr. West?" he
asked; and the doctor chose one.

"Lucy, my dear, will you step here to me?"

The request came from the other end of the room, from Lady Verner.
Lionel, who was about to place the cake-basket on the table, stopped and
held out his arm to Lucy, to conduct her to his mother. They went
forward, utterly unconscious that Sibylla was casting angry and jealous
glances at them; conscious only that those sacred feelings in either
heart, so well hid from the world, had been stirred to their very
depths.

The door opened, and one of the servants entered. "Mr. Jan is wanted."

"Who's been taken ill now, I wonder?" cried Jan, descending from the arm
of his mother's sofa, where he had been perched.

In the ante-room was Master Cheese, looking rueful.

"There's a message come from Squire Pidcock's," cried he in a most
resentful tone. "Somebody's to attend immediately. Am _I_ to go?"

"I suppose you'd faint at having to go, after being up to Miss
Hautley's," returned Jan. "You'd never survive the two, should you?"

"Well, you know, Jan, it's a good mile and a half to Pidcock's, and I
had to go to the other place without my tea," remonstrated Master
Cheese.

"I dare say Miss Deb has given you your tea since you came home."

"But it's not like having it at the usual hour. And I couldn't finish it
in comfort, when this message came."

"Be off back and finish it now, then," said Jan. And the young gentleman
departed with alacrity, while Jan made the best of his way to Squire
Pidcock's.


CHAPTER LXXVIII.

AN APPEAL TO JOHN MASSINGBIRD.


Lionel Verner walked home with Dr. West, later in the evening. "What do
you think of Sibylla?" was his first question, before they had well
quitted the gates.

"My opinion is not a favourable one, so far as I can judge at present,"
replied Dr. West. "She must not be crossed, Mr. Verner."

"Heaven is my witness that she is not crossed by me, Dr. West," was the
reply of Lionel, given more earnestly than the occasion seemed to call
for. "From the hour I married her, my whole life has been spent in the
endeavour to shield her from crosses, so far as lies in the power of
man; to cherish her in all care and tenderness. There are few husbands
would bear with her--her peculiarities--as I have borne; as I will still
bear. I say this to you, her father; I would say it to no one else. My
chief regret, at the wrenching from me of Verner's Pride, is for
Sibylla's sake."

"My dear sir, I honestly believe you. I know what Sibylla was at home,
fretful, wayward, and restless; and those tendencies are not likely to
be lessened, now disease has shown itself. I always feared it was in her
constitution; that, in spite of all our care, she would follow her
sisters. They fell off and died, you may remember, when they seemed most
blooming. People talked freely--as I understood at the time--about my
allowing her so suddenly to marry Frederick Massingbird; but my course
was dictated by one sole motive--that it would give her the benefit of a
sea voyage, which might prove invaluable to her constitution."

Lionel believed just as much of this as he liked. Dr. West was his
wife's father, and, as such, he deferred to him. He remembered what had
been told him by Sibylla; and he remembered the promise he had given
her.

"It's a shocking pity that you are turned from Verner's Pride!" resumed
the doctor.

"It is. But there's no help for it."

"Does Sibylla grieve after it _very_ much? Has it any real effect, think
you, upon her health?--as she seemed to intimate."

"She grieves, no doubt. She _keeps_ up the grief, if you can understand
it, Dr. West. Not a day passes, but she breaks into lamentations over
the loss, complaining loudly and bitterly. Whether her health would not
equally have failed at Verner's Pride, I am unable to say. I think it
would."

"John Massingbird, under the circumstances, ought to give it up to you.
It is _rightfully_ yours. Sibylla's life--and she is his own
cousin--may depend upon it: he ought not to keep it. But for the loss of
the codicil, he would never have come to it."

"Of course he could not," assented Lionel. "It is that loss which has
upset everything."

Dr. West fell into silence, and continued in it until his house was in
view. Then he spoke again.

"What will you undertake to give me, Mr. Verner, if I can bring John
Massingbird to hear reason, and re-establish you at Verner's Pride?"

"Not anything," answered Lionel. "Verner's Pride is John Massingbird's
according to the law; therefore it cannot be mine. Neither would he
resign it."

"I wonder whether it could be done by stratagem?" mused Dr. West. "Could
we persuade him that the codicil has turned up?--or something of that?
It would be very desirable for Sibylla."

"If I go back to Verner's Pride at all, sir, I go back by _right_;
neither by purchase nor by stratagem," was the reply of Lionel. "Rely
upon it, things set about in an underhand manner never prosper."

"I might get John Massingbird to give it up to you," continued the
doctor, nodding his head thoughtfully, as if he had some scheme afloat
in it. "I might get him to resign it to you, rents and residence and
all, and betake himself off. You would give me a per centage?"

"Were John Massingbird to offer such to me to-morrow, of his own free
will, I should decline it," decisively returned Lionel. "I have suffered
too much from Verner's Pride ever to take possession of it again, except
by indisputable right--a right in which I cannot be disturbed. Twice
have I been turned from it, as you know. And the turning out has cost me
more than the world deemed."

"But surely you would go back to it if you could, for Sibylla's sake?"

"Were I a rich man, able to rent Verner's Pride from John Massingbird, I
might ask him to let it me, if it would gratify Sibylla. But, to return
there as its master, on sufferance, liable to be expelled again at any
moment--never! John Massingbird holds the right to Verner's Pride, and
he will exercise it, for me."

"Then you will not accept my offer--to try and get you back again; and
to make me a substantial honorarium if I do it?"

"I do not understand you, Dr. West. The question cannot arise."

"If I make it arise; and carry it out?"

"I beg your pardon--No."

It was an emphatic denial, and Dr. West may have felt himself foiled; as
he had been foiled by Jan's confession of empty pockets, earlier in the
evening.

"Nevertheless," observed he equably, as he shook hands with Lionel,
before entering his own house, "I shall see John Massingbird to-morrow,
and urge the hardship of the case upon him."

It was probably with that view that Dr. West proceeded early on the
following morning to Verner's Pride, after his night of search, instead
of sleep, astonishing John Massingbird not a little. That gentleman was
enjoying himself in a comfortable sort of way in his bedroom. A
substantial breakfast was laid out on a table by the bedside, while he,
not risen, smoked a pipe as he lay, by way of whetting his appetite. Dr.
West entered without ceremony.

"My stars!" uttered John, when he could believe his eyes. "It's never
you, Uncle West! Did you drop from a balloon?"

Dr. West explained. That he had come over for a few hours' sojourn. The
state of his dear daughter Sibylla was giving him considerable
uneasiness, and he had put himself to the expense and inconvenience of a
journey to see her, and judge of her state himself.

That there were a few trifling inaccuracies in this statement, inasmuch
as that his daughter's state had had nothing to do with the doctor's
journey, was of little consequence. It was all one to John Massingbird.
He made a hasty toilette, and invited the doctor to take some breakfast.

Dr. West was nothing loth. He had breakfasted at home; but a breakfast
more or less was nothing to Dr. West. He sat down to the table, and took
a choice morsel of boned chicken on his plate.

"John, I have come up to talk to you about Verner's Pride."

"What about it?" asked John, speaking with his mouth full of devilled
kidneys.

"The place is Lionel Verner's."

"How d'ye make out that?" asked John.

"That codicil revoked the will which left the estate to you. It gave it
to him."

"But the codicil vanished," answered John.

"True. I was present at the consternation it excited. It disappeared in
some unaccountably mysterious way; but there's no doubt that Mr. Verner
died, believing the estate would go in its direct line--to Lionel. In
fact, I know he did. Therefore you ought to act as though the codicil
were in existence, and resign the estate to Lionel Verner."

The recommendation excessively tickled the fancy of John Massingbird. It
set him laughing for five minutes.

"In short, you never ought to have attempted to enter upon it,"
continued Dr. West. "Will you resign it to him?"

"Uncle West, you'll kill me with laughter, if you joke like that," was
the reply.

"I have little doubt that the codicil is still in existence," urged Dr.
West. "I remember my impression at the time was that it was only
mislaid, temporarily lost. If that codicil turned up, you would be
obliged to quit."

Men threatened by this fate had told her that death coming in such a
guise smote with gentle and painless hand-a hand that merely lulled to
sleep; but she could not make herself believe it, and all the
sufferings that Francois, might have endured before giving up and
falling to the white ground passed before her eyes.

No need for her to see the spot, too well she knew the winter terrors
of the great forest, the snow heaped to the firs' lower branches,
alders almost buried beneath it, birches and aspens naked as skeletons
and shuddering in the icy wind, a sunless sky above the massed and
gloomy spires of green.

She sees Francois making his way through the close-set trees,
limbs stiffened with the cold, his skin raw with that pitiless
nor'wester, gnawed by hunger, stumbling with fatigue, his feet so
weary that with no longer strength to lift them his snowshoes often
catch the snow and throw him to his knees.

Doubtless when the storm abated he saw his error, knew that he was
walking toward the barren northland, turned at once and took the right
course--he so experienced, the woods his home from boyhood.

But his food is nearly gone, the cold tortures him; with lowered head
and clenched teeth he fights the implacable winter, calling to aid his
every reserve of strength and high courage. He thinks of the road he
must follow, the miles to be overcome, measures his chances of life;
and fitful memories arise of a house, so warm and snug, where all
will greet him gladly; of Maria who, knowing what he has dared for
her sake, will at length raise to him her truthful eyes shining
with love.

Perhaps he fell for the last time when succour was near, a few yards
only from house or shanty. Often so it happens. Cold and his ministers
of death flung themselves upon him as their prey; they have stilled
the strong limbs forever, covered his open handsome face with snow,
closed the fearless eyes without gentleness or pity, changed his
living body into a thing of ice ...

Maria has no more tears that she may shed, but she shivers and trembles
as he must have trembled and shivered before he sank into merciful
unconsciousness; horror and pity in her face, Maria draws nearer
the stove as though she might thus bring him warmth and shield his
dear life against the assassin.

"O Christ Jesus, who didst stretch forth Thine arm to those in need,
why didst Thou not disperse the snows with those pale hands of
Thine? Holy Virgin, why didst Thou not sustain him by Thy power
when, for the last time, his feet were stumbling? In all the legions
of heaven why was there found no angel to show him the way?"

But it is her grief that utters these reproaches, and the steadfast
heart of Maria is fearful of having sinned in yielding to it.
Another dread is soon to assail her. Perhaps Francois Paradis was not
able quite faithfully to keep the promises he made to her. In the
shanty, among rough and careless men, may he not have had moments of
weakness; blasphemed or taken the names of the saints in vain, and
thus have gone to his death with sin upon his conscience, under the
weight of divine wrath.

Her parents had promised but a little ago that masses should be said.

How good they were! Having guessed her secret how kindly had they been
silent! But she herself might help with prayers the poor soul in torment.
Her beads still lay upon the table; she takes them in her hands, and
forthwith the words of the Ave mount to her lips,--"Hail Mary, full of
grace..."
The
previous autumn, the season when the enemy chiefly loved to show itself,
had been comparatively free, but he appeared to be about taking his
revenge now. In every third house people were down with ague and fever.
Men who ought to be strong for their daily toil, women whose services
were wanted for their households and their families, children whose
young frames were unfitted to battle with it, were indiscriminately
attacked. It was capricious as a summer's wind. In some dwellings it
would be the strongest and bravest that were singled out; in some the
weakest and most delicate. Jan was worked off his legs. Those necessary
appendages to active Jan generally were exercised pretty well; but Jan
could not remember the time when they had been worked as they were now.
Jan grew cross. Not at the amount of work: it may be questioned whether
Jan did not rather prefer that, than the contrary; but at the prevailing
state of things. "It's a sin and a shame that precautions are not taken
against this periodical sickness," said Jan, speaking out more forcibly
than was his wont. "If the place were drained and the dwellings
improved, the ague would run away to more congenial quarters. _I_'d not
own Verner's Pride, unless I could show myself fit to be its owner."

The shaft may have been levelled at John Massingbird, but Lionel Verner
took it to himself. How full of self-reproach he was, he alone knew. He
had had the power in his own hands to make these improvements, and in
some manner or other he had let the time slip by: now, the power was
wrested from him. It is ever so. Golden opportunities come into our
hands, and we look at them complacently, and--do not use them. Bitter
regrets, sometimes remorse, take their places when they have flitted
away for ever; but neither the regret nor the remorse can recall the
opportunity lost.

Lionel pressed the necessity upon John Massingbird. It was all he could
do now. John received it with complacent good-humour, and laughed at
Lionel for making the request. But that was all.

"Set about draining Clay Lane, and build up new tenements in place of
the old?" cried he. "What next, Lionel?"

"Look at the sickness the present state of things brings," returned
Lionel. "It is what ought to have been altered years ago."

"Ah!" said John. "Why didn't you alter it, then, when you had Verner's
Pride?"

"You may well ask! It was my first thought when I came into the estate.
I would set about that; I would set about other improvements. Some I did
carry out, as you know; but these, the most needful, I left in abeyance.
It lies on my conscience now."

They were in the study. Lionel was at the desk, some papers before him;
John Massingbird had lounged in for a chat--as he was fond of doing, to
the interruption of Lionel. He was leaning against the door-post; his
attire not precisely such that a gentleman might choose, who wished to
send his photograph to make a morning call. His pantaloons were hitched
up by a belt; braces, John said, were not fashionable at the diggings,
and he had learned the comfort of doing without them; a loose sort of
round drab coat without tails; no waistcoat; a round brown hat, much
bent, and a pair of slippers. Such was John Massingbird's favourite
costume, and he might be seen in it at all hours of the day. When he
wanted to go abroad, his toilette was made, as the French say, by the
exchanging of the slippers for boots, and the taking in his hand a club
stick. John's whiskers were growing again, and promised to be as fine a
pair as he had worn before going out to Australia; and now he was
letting his beard grow, but it looked very grim and stubbly. Truth to
say, a stranger passing through the village and casting his eyes on Mr.
John Massingbird, would have taken him to be a stable helper, rather
than the master of that fine place, Verner's Pride. Just now he had a
clay pipe in his mouth, its stem little more than an inch long.

"Do you mean to assert that you'd set about these improvements, as you
call them, were you to come again into Verner's Pride?" asked he of
Lionel.

"I believe I should. I would say unhesitatingly that I should, save for
past experience," continued Lionel. "Before my uncle died, I knew how
necessary it was that they should be made, and I as much believed that
I should set about them the instant I came into the estate, as that I
believe I am now talking to you. But you see I did not begin them. It
has taught me to be chary of making assertions beforehand."

"I suppose you think you'd do it?"

"If I know anything of my own resolution I should do it. Were Verner's
Pride to lapse to me to-morrow, I believe I should set about it the next
day. But," Lionel added after a short pause, "there's no probability of
its lapsing to me. Therefore I want you to set about it in my place."

"I can't afford it," replied John Massingbird.

"Nonsense! I wish I could afford things a quarter as well as you."

"I tell you I can't," reiterated John, taking his pipe from his mouth to
make a spittoon of the carpet--another convenience he had learned at the
diggings. "I'm sure I don't know how on earth my money goes; I never did
know all my life how money went; but, go it does. When Fred and I were
little chaps, some benevolent old soul tipped us half a crown apiece.
Mine was gone by middle-day, and I could not account for more than
ninepence of it--never could to this day. Fred, at the end of a
twelvemonth's time, had got his half-crown still snug in his pocket. Had
Fred come into Verner's Pride, he'd have lived in style on a thousand of
his income yearly, and put by the rest."

He never would, Sibylla being his wife, thought Lionel. But he did not
say it to John Massingbird.

"An estate, such as this, brings its duties with it, John," said he.
"Remember those poor people down with sickness."

"Bother duty," returned John. "Look here, Lionel; you waste your breath
and your words. I have _not_ got the money to spend upon it; how do you
know, old fellow, what my private expenses may be? And if I had the
money, I should not do it," he continued. "The present state of the
property was deemed good enough by Mr. Verner; it was so deemed (if we
may judge by facts) by Mr. Lionel Verner; and it is deemed good enough
by John Massingbird. It is not he who's going to have the cost thrown
upon him. So let it drop."

There was no resource but to let it drop; for that he was in full
earnest, Lionel saw. John continued--

"You can save up the alterations for yourself, to be commenced when you
come into the property. A nice _bonne bouche_ of outlay for you to
contemplate."

"I don't look to come into it," replied Lionel.

"The probabilities are that you will come into it," returned John
Massingbird, more seriously than he often spoke. "Barring getting shot,
or run over by a railway train, you'll make old bones, you will. You
have never played with your constitution; I have, in more ways than one:
and in bare years I have considerably the advantage of you. Psha! when I
am a skeleton in my coffin, you'll still be a young man. You can make
your cherished alterations then."

"You may well say in more ways than one," returned Lionel, half joking,
half serious. "There's smoking among the catalogue. How many pipes do
you smoke in a day? Fifty?"

"Why didn't you say day and night? Tynn lives in perpetual torment lest
my bed should ignite some night, and burn up him, as well as Verner's
Pride. I go to sleep sometimes with my pipe in my mouth as we do at the
diggings. Now and then I feel half inclined to make a rush back there.
It suited me better than this."

Lionel bent over some papers that were before him--a hint that he had
business to do. Mr. Massingbird did not take it. He began filling his
pipe again, scattering the tobacco on the ground wholesale in the
process, and talking at the same time.

"I say, Lionel, why did old Verner leave the place away from you? Have
you ever wondered?"

Lionel glanced up at him in surprise.

"Have I ever ceased wondering, you might have said. I don't know why he
did."

"Did he never give you a reason--or an explanation?"

"Nothing of the sort. Except--yes, except a trifle. Some time after his
death, Mrs. Tynn discovered a formidable-looking packet in one of his
drawers, sealed and directed to me. She thought it was the missing
codicil; so did I, until I opened it. It proved to contain nothing but a
glove; one of my old gloves, and a few lines from my uncle. They were to
the effect that when I received the glove I should know why he
disinherited me."

"And did you know?" asked John Massingbird, applying a light to his
pipe.

"Not in the least. It left the affair more obscure, if possible, than it
had been before. I suppose I never shall know now."

"Never's a long day," cried John Massingbird. "But you told me about
this glove affair before."

"Did I? Oh, I remember. When you first returned. That is all the
explanation I have ever had."

"It was not much," said John. "Dickens take this pipe! It won't draw.
Where's my knife?"

Not finding his knife about him, he went off to look for it, dragging
his slippers along the hall in his usual lazy fashion. Lionel, glad of
the respite, applied himself to his work.


CHAPTER LXXX.

RECOLLECTIONS OF A NIGHT GONE BY.


One was dying in Deerham, but not of ague, and that was old Matthew
Frost. Matthew was dying of old age, to which we must all succumb, if we
live long enough.

April was in, and the fever and ague were getting better. News was
brought to Lionel one morning that old Matthew was not expected to last
through the day. Jan entered the breakfast-room at Deerham Court and
told him so. Lionel had been starting to Verner's Pride; but he changed
his course towards Clay Lane.

"Jan," said he, as he was turning away, "I wish you'd go up and see
Sibylla. I am sure she is very ill."

"I'll go if you like," said Jan. "But there's no use in it. She won't
listen to a word I say, or attend to a single direction that I give.
Hayes told me, when he came over last week, that it was the same with
him. She persists to him, as she does to me, that she has no need of
medicine or care; that she is quite well."

"I am aware she persists in it," replied Lionel, "but I feel sure she is
very ill."

"I know she is," said Jan, "She's worse than folks think for. Perhaps
you amongst them, Lionel. I'll go up to her." He turned back to the
house as he spoke, and Lionel went on to Clay Lane.

Old Matthew was lying on his bed, very peaceful--peaceful as to his
inward and his outward state. Though exceedingly weak, gradually
sinking, he retained both speech and intellect: he was passing away
without pain, and with his faculties about him. Tremblay from St. Hyacinthe.
You would never be lonesome ..."
Pausing again he surveyed the white plain with its ragged crop of
brown stumps, the bleak plateau dropping a little farther in a long
slope to the levels of the frozen river; meanwhile ransacking his
mind for some final persuasive word.

"I hardly know what to say ... You have always lived here and it is not
possible for you to guess what life is elsewhere, nor would I be
able to make you understand were I to talk forever.

But I love you, Maria, I earn a good wage and I never touch a drop.

If you will marry me as I ask I will take you off to a country that
will open your eyes with astonishment--a fine country, not a bit like
this, where we can live in a decent way and be happy for the rest of our
days."
Maria still was silent, and yet the sentences of Lorenzo Surprenant beat
upon her heart as succeeding waves roll against the shore. It was not his
avowals of love, honest and sincere though they were, but the lures
he used which tempted her.

Only of cheap pleasures had he spoken, of trivial things ministering
to comfort or vanity, but of these alone was she able to conjure up a
definite idea. All else--the distant glamour of the city, of a life new
and incomprehensible to her, full in the centre of the bustling world
and no longer at its very confines--enticed her but the more in
its shimmering remoteness with the mystery of a great light that
shines from afar.

Whatsoever there may be of wonder and exhilaration in the sight and
touch of the crowd; the rich harvests of mind and sense for which
the city dweller has bartered his rough heritage of pride in the
soil, Maria was dimly conscious of as part of this other life in a
new world, this glorious re-birth for which she was already yearning.

But above all else the desire was strong upon her now to flee away, to
escape.

The wind from the cast was driving before it a host of melancholy
snow-laden clouds.

"Matthew, it was my firm intention to continue your annuity to Robin,"
spoke Lionel. "I am sorry the power to do so has been taken from me. You
know that it will not rest with me now, but with Mr. Massingbird. I fear
he is not likely to continue it."

"Don't regret it, sir. Robin, I say, is growing to be an industrious man
again, and he can get a living well. If he had stopped a
half-dazed-do-nothing, he might have wanted that, or some other help;
but it isn't so. His trouble's at rest, and his old energies are coming
back to him. It seems to have left my mind at leisure, sir; and I can go
away, praying for the souls of my poor daughter and of Frederick
Massingbird."

The name--_his_--aroused the attention of Lionel; more, perhaps, than he
would have cared to confess. But his voice and manner retained their
quiet calmness.

"What did you say, Matthew?"

"It was him, sir; Mr. Frederick Massingbird. It was nobody else."

Down deep in Lionel Verner's heart there had lain a conviction, almost
ever since that fatal night, that the man had been no other than the one
now spoken of, the younger Massingbird. Why the impression should have
come to him he could not have told at the time; something, perhaps, in
Frederick's manner had given rise to it. On the night before John
Massingbird's departure for Australia, after the long interview he had
held with Mr. Verner in the study, which was broken in upon by Lionel on
the part of Robin Frost, the three young men--the Massingbirds and
Lionel--had subsequently remained together, discussing the tragedy. In
that interview it was that a sudden doubt of Frederick Massingbird
entered the mind of Lionel. It was impossible for him to tell why. He
only knew that the impression--nay, it were more correct to say the
conviction, seized hold upon him, never to be eradicated. Perhaps
something strange in Frederick's manner awoke it. Lionel surmised not
how far his guilt might have extended; but that he was the guilty one,
he fully believed. It was not his business to proclaim this; had it been
a certainty, instead of a fancy, Lionel would not have made it his
business. But when Frederick Massingbird was on the point of marrying
Sibylla, then Lionel partially broke through his reserve, and asked him
whether he had nothing on his conscience that ought to prevent his
making her his wife. Frederick answered freely and frankly, to all
appearance, and for the moment Lionel's doubts were dissipated: only,
however, to return afterwards with increased force. Consequently he was
not surprised to hear this said, though surprised at Matthew Frost's
knowing it.

"How did you hear it, Matthew?" he asked.

"Robin got at it, sir. Poor Robin, he was altogether on the wrong scent
for a long while, thinking it was Mr. John; but it's set right now, and
Robin, he's at ease. May Heaven have mercy upon Frederick Massingbird!"

Successful rival though he had proved to him, guilty man that he had
been, Lionel heartily echoed the prayer. He asked no more questions of
the old man upon the subject, but afterwards, when he was going out, he
met Robin and stopped him.

"Robin, what is this that your father has been telling me about
Frederick Massingbird?"

"Only to think of it!" was Robin's response, growing somewhat excited.
"To think how our ways get balked! I had swore to be revenged--as you
know, sir--and now the power of revenge is took from me! He's gone where
my revenge can't reach him. It's of no good--I see it--for us to plan.
Our plans'll never be carried out, if they don't please God."

"And it was Frederick Massingbird?"

"It was Frederick Massingbird," assented Robin, his breath coming thick
and fast with agitation. "We had got but one little ewe lamb, and he
must leave the world that was open to him, and pick her up, and destroy
her! I ain't calm yet to talk of it, sir."

"But how did you ascertain this? Your suspicions, you know, were
directed to Mr. John Massingbird: wrongly, as I believed; as I told
you."

"Yes, they were wrong," said Robin. "I was put upon the wrong scent: but
not wilfully. You might remember a dairy wench that lived at Verner's
Pride in them days, sir--Dolly, her name was; she that went and got
married after to Joe Stubbs, Mr. Bitterworth's wagoner. It was she told
me, sir. I used to be up there a good bit with Stubbs, and one day when
I was sick and ill there, the wife told me she had seen one of the
gentlemen come from the Willow Pool that past night. I pressed her to
tell me which of them, and at first she said she couldn't, and then she
said it was Mr. John. I never thought but she told me right, but it
seems--as she confesses now--that she only fixed on him to satisfy me,
and because she thought he was dead, over in Australia, and it wouldn't
matter if she did say it. I worried her life out over it, she says; and
it's like I did. She says now, if she was put upon her Bible oath, she
couldn't say which of the gentlemen it was, more nor the other; but she
did see one of 'em."

"But this is not telling me how you know it to have been Mr. Frederick,
Robin."

"I learned it from Mr. John," was the reply. "When he come back I saw
him; I knew it was him; and I got a gun and watched for him. I meant to
take my revenge, sir. Roy, he found me out; and in a night or two, he
brought me face to face with Mr. John, and Mr. John he told me the
truth. But he'd only tell it me upon my giving him my promise not to
expose his brother. So I'm balked even of that revenge. I had always
counted on the exposing of the man," added Robin in a dreamy tone, as if
he were looking back into the past; "when I thought it was Mr. John, I
only waited for Luke Roy to come home, that I might expose him. I judged
that Luke, being so much with him in Australia, might have heard a slip
word drop as would confirm it. Somehow, though I thought Dolly Stubbs
spoke truth, I didn't feel so sure of her as to noise it abroad."

"You say it was Mr. John Massingbird who told you it was his brother?"

"He told me, sir. He told me at Roy's, when he was a-hiding there. When
the folks here was going mad about the ghost, I knowed who the ghost
was, and had my laugh at 'em. It seemed that I could laugh then," added
Robin, looking at Mr. Verner, as if he deemed an apology for the words
necessary. "My mind was set at rest."

Did a thought cross Lionel Verner that John Massingbird, finding his own
life in peril from Robin's violence, had thrown the blame upon his
brother falsely? It might have done so, but for his own deeply-rooted
suspicions. That John would not be scrupulously regardful of truth, he
believed, where his own turn was to be served. Lionel, at any rate, felt
that he should like, for his own satisfaction, to have the matter set at
rest, and he took his way to Verner's Pride.

John Massingbird, his costume not improved in elegance, or his clay pipe
in length, was lounging at his ease on one of the amber damask satin
couches of the drawing-room, his feet on the back of a proximate chair,
and his slippers fallen off on the carpet. A copious tumbler of
rum-and-water--his favourite beverage since his return--was on a table,
handy; and there he lay enjoying his ease.

"Hollo, old fellow! How are you?" was his greeting to Lionel, given
without changing his position in the least.

"Massingbird, I want to speak to you," rejoined Lionel. "I have been to
see old Matthew Frost, and he has said something which surprises me--"

"The old man's about to make a start of it, I hear," was the
interruption of Mr. Massingbird.

"He cannot last long. He has been speaking--naturally--of that unhappy
business of his daughter's. He lays it to the door of Frederick; and
Robin tells me he had the information from you."

"I was obliged to give it him, in self-defence," said John Massingbird.
"The fellow had got it into his head, in some unaccountable manner, that
I was the black sheep, and was prowling about with a gun, ready capped
and loaded, to put a bullet into me. I don't set so much store by my
life as some fidgets do, but it's not pleasant to be shot off in that
summary fashion. So I sent for Mr. Robin and satisfied him that he was
making the same blunder that Deerham just then was making--mistaking one
brother for the other."

"_Was_ it Frederick?"

"It was."

"Did you know it at the time?"

"No. Never suspected him at all."

"Then how did you learn it afterwards?"

John Massingbird took his legs from the chair. He rose, and brought
himself to an anchor on a seat facing Lionel, puffing still at his
incessant pipe.

"I don't mind trusting you, old chap, being one of us, and I couldn't
help trusting Robin Frost. Roy, he knew it before--at least, his wife
did; which amounts to something of the same; and she spoke of it to me.
I have ordered them to keep a close tongue, under pain of unheard-of
penalties--which I should never inflict; but it's as well to let poor
Fred's memory rest in quiet and good odour. I believe honestly it's the
only scrape of the sort he ever got into. He was cold and cautious."

"But how did you learn it?" reiterated Lionel.

"I'll tell you. I learned it from Luke Roy."

"From Luke Roy!" repeated Lionel, more at sea than before.

"Do you remember that I had sent Luke on to London a few days before
this happened? He was to get things forward for our voyage. He was
_fou_--as the French say--after Rachel; and what did he do but come back
again in secret, to get a last look at her, perhaps a word. It happened
to be this very night, and Luke was a partial witness to the scene at
the Willow Pond. He saw and heard her meeting with Frederick; heard
quite enough to know that there was no chance for him; and he was
stealing away, leaving Fred and Rachel at the termination of their
quarrel, when he met his mother. She knew him, it seems, and to that
encounter we are indebted for her display when before Mr. Verner, and
her lame account of the 'ghost.' You must recollect it. She got up the
ghost tale to excuse her own terror; to throw the scent off Luke. The
woman says her life, since, has been that of a martyr, ever fearing that
suspicion might fall upon her son. She recognised him beyond doubt; and
nearly died with the consternation. He glided off, never speaking to
her, but the fear and consternation remained. She recognised, too, she
says, the voice of Frederick as the one that was quarrelling; but she
did not dare confess it. For one thing, she knew not how far Luke might
be implicated."

Lionel leaned his brow on his hand, deep in thought. "How far was
Frederick implicated?" he asked in a low tone. "Did he--did he put her
into the pond?"

"No!" burst forth John Massingbird, with a vehemence that sent the ashes
of his pipe flying. "Fred would not be guilty of such a crime as that,
any more than you or I would. He had--he had made vows to the girl, and
broken them; and that was the extent of it. No such great sin, after
all, or it wouldn't be so fashionable a one," carelessly added John
Massingbird.

Lionel waited in silence.

"By what Luke could gather," went on John, "it appeared that Rachel had
seen Fred that night with his cousin Sibylla--your wife now. What she
had seen or heard, goodness knows; but enough to prove to her that
Fred's real love was given to Sibylla, that she was his contemplated
wife. It drove Rachel mad: Fred had probably filled her up with the idea
that the honour was destined for herself. Men are deceivers ever, and
women soft, you know, Lionel."

"And they quarrelled over it?"

"They quarrelled over it. Rachel, awakened out of her credulity, met him
with bitter reproaches. Luke could not hear what was said towards its
close. The meeting--no doubt a concerted one--had been in that grove in
view of the Willow Pond, the very spot that Master Luke had chosen for
his own hiding-place. They left it and walked towards Verner's Pride,
disputing vehemently; Roy made off the other way, and the last he saw of
them, when they were nearly out of sight, was a final explosion, in
which they parted. Fred set off to run towards Verner's Pride, and
Rachel came flying back towards the pond. There's not a shadow of doubt
that in her passion, her unhappy state of feeling, she flung herself in;
and if Luke had only waited two minutes longer, he might have been in at
the death--as we say by the foxes. That's the solution of what has
puzzled Deerham for years, Lionel."

"Could Luke not have saved her?"

"He never knew she was in the pond. Whether the unexpected sight of his
mother scared his senses away, he has often wondered; but he heard
neither the splash in the water nor the shriek. He made off, pretty
quick, he says, for fear his mother should attempt to stop him, or
proclaim his presence aloud--an inconvenient procedure, since he was
supposed to be in London. Luke never knew of her death until we were on
the voyage. I got to London only in time to go on board the ship in the
docks, and we had been out for days at sea before he learned that Rachel
was dead, or I that Luke had been down, on the sly, to Deerham. I had to
get over that precious sea-sickness before entering upon that, or any
other talk, I can tell you. It's a shame it should attack men!"

"I suspected Fred at the time," said Lionel.

"You did! Well, I did not. My suspicions had turned to a very different
quarter."

"Upon whom?"

"Oh, bother! where's the good of ripping it up, now it's over and done
with?" retorted John Massingbird. "There's the paper of baccy by your
elbow, chum. Chuck it here."


CHAPTER LXXXI.

A CRISIS IN SIBYLLA'S LIFE.


Sibylla Verner improved neither in health nor in temper. Body and mind
were alike diseased. As the spring had advanced, her weakness appeared
to increase; the symptoms of consumption became more palpable. She would
not allow that she was ill; she, no doubt, thought that there was
nothing serious the matter with her; nothing, as she told everybody, but
the vexing after Verner's Pride.

Dr. West had expressed an opinion that her irritability, which she could
neither conceal nor check, was the result of her state of health. He was
very likely right. One thing was certain; that since she grew weaker and
worse, this unhappy frame of mind had greatly increased. The whole
business of her life appeared to be to grumble, to be cross, snappish,
fretful. If her body was diseased, most decidedly her temper was also.
The great grievance of quitting Verner's Pride she made a plea for the
indulgence of every complaint under the sun. She could no longer gather
a gay crowd of visitors around her; she had lost the opportunity with
Verner's Pride; she could no longer indulge in unlimited orders for new
dresses and bonnets, and other charming adjuncts to the toilette,
without reference to how they were to be paid for; she had not a dozen
servants at her beck and call; and if she wanted to pay a visit, there
was no elegant equipage, the admiration of all beholders, to convey her.
She had lost all with Verner's Pride. Not a day--scarcely an
hour--passed, but one or other, or all of these vexations, were made the
subject of fretful, open repining. Not to Lady Verner--Sibylla would not
have dared to annoy her; not to Decima or to Lucy; but to her husband.
How weary his ear was, how weary his spirit, no tongue could tell. She
tried him in every way--she did nothing but find fault with him. When he
stayed out, she grumbled at him for staying, meeting him with reproaches
on his entrance; when he remained in, she grumbled at him. In her sad
frame of mind it was essential--there are frames of mind in which it
_is_ essential, as the medical men will tell you, where the sufferer
cannot help it--that she should have some object on whom to vent her
irritability. Not being in her own house, there was but her husband. He
was the only one sufficiently nearly connected with her to whom the
courtesies of life could be dispensed with; and therefore he came in for
it all. At Verner's Pride there would have been her servants to share it
with him; at Dr. West's there would have been her sisters; at Lady
Verner's there was her husband alone. Times upon times Lionel felt
inclined to run away; as the disobedient boys run to sea.

The little hint, dropped by Dr. West, touching the past, had not been
without its fruits in Sibylla's mind. It lay and smouldered there. _Had_
Lionel been attached to Lucy?--had there been love-scenes, love-making
between them? Sibylla asked herself the questions ten times in a day.
Now and then she let drop a sharp, acrid bit of venom to him--his "old
love, Lucy." Lionel would receive it with impassibility, never
answering.

On the day spoken of in the last chapter, when Matthew Frost was dying,
she was more ill at ease, more intensely irritable, than usual. Lady
Verner had gone with some friends to Heartburg, and was not expected
home until night; Decima and Lucy walked out in the afternoon, and
Sibylla was alone. Lionel had not been home since he went out in the
morning to see Matthew Frost. The fact was Lionel had had a busy day of
it: what with old Matthew and what with his conversation with John
Massingbird afterwards, certain work which ought to have been done in
the morning he had left till the afternoon. It was nothing unusual for
him to be out all day; but Sibylla was choosing to make his being out on
this day an unusual grievance. As the hours of the afternoon passed on
and on, and it grew late, and nobody appeared, she could scarcely
suppress her temper, her restlessness. She was a bad one to be alone;
had never liked to be alone for five minutes in her life; and thence
perhaps the secret of her having made so much of a companion of her
maid, Benoite. In point of fact, Sibylla Verner had no resources within
herself; and she made up for the want by indulging in her naturally bad
temper.

Where were they? Where was Decima? Where was Lucy? Above all, where was
Lionel? Sibylla, not being able to answer the questions, suddenly began
to get up a pretty little plot of imagination--that Lucy and Lionel were
somewhere together. Had Sibylla possessed one of Sam Weller's patent
self-acting microscopes, able to afford a view through space and stairs
and deal doors, she might have seen Lionel seated alone in the study at
Verner's Pride, amidst his leases and papers; and Lucy in Clay Lane,
paying visits with Decima from cottage to cottage. Not possessing one of
those admirable instruments--if somebody at the West End would but set
up a stock of them for sale, what a lot of customers he'd have!--Sibylla
was content to cherish the mental view she had conjured up, and to
improve upon it. All the afternoon she kept improving upon it, until she
worked herself up to that agreeable pitch of distorted excitement when
the mind does not know what is real, and what fancy. It was a regular
April day; one of sunshine and storm; now the sun shining out bright and
clear; now, the rain pattering against the panes; and Sibylla wandered
from room to room, upstairs and down, as stormy as the weather.

_Had_ her dreams been types of fact? Upon glancing from the window,
during a sharper shower than any they had yet had, she saw her husband
coming in at the large gates, Lucy Tempest on his arm, over whom he was
holding an umbrella. Little Alma Rose, asleep on her father's knee, was
undressed and put to bed; Telesphore followed; Tit'Be arose in
turn, stretched himself, and fined the stove with green birch logs;
the father made a last trip to the stable and came back running,
saying that the cold was increasing.

Soon all had retired, save Maria.

"You won't forget to put out the lamp?"
"No, father."
Forthwith she quenched the light, preferring it so, and seated herself
again by the window to repeat the last Aves. When she had finished, a
scruple assailed her, and a fear lest she had erred in the reckoning,
because it had not always been possible to count the beads of her
rosary. Out of prudence she recited yet another fifty and then was
silent-jaded, weary, but full of happy confidence, as though the moment
had brought her a promise inviolable.

The world outside was lit; wrapped in that frore splendour which the night
unrolls over lands of snow when the sky is clear and the moon is
shining.

Within the house was darkness, and it seemed that wood and field had
illumined themselves to signal the coming of the holy hour.

"The thousand Aves have been said," murmured Maria to herself, "but
I have not yet asked for anything ... not in words."

She bad thought that perhaps it were not needful; that the Divinity
might understand without hearing wishes shaped by lips--Mary above
all ...

Who had been a woman upon earth. But at the last her simple mind was
taken with a doubt, and she tried to find speech for the favour she was
seeking.

Francois Paradis ... Most surely it concerns Francois Paradis.
Hast Thou already guessed it, O Mary, full of grace? How might she frame
this her desire without impiety?

That he should be spared hardship in the woods ... That he should
be true to his word and give up drinking and swearing ...

That he return in the spring
That he return in the spring ... She goes no further, for it seems
to her that when be is with her again, his promise kept, all the
happiness in the world must he within their reach, unaided ...
almost unaided ...

But Sibylla's passion was terrible--not to be controlled. All the
courtesies of life were lost sight of--its social usages were as
nothing. She flung Lionel's hand away from her.

"I hope she can hear me!" broke like a torrent from her trembling lips.
"It is time she heard, and others also! I have been blind, I say, long
enough. But for papa, I might have gone on in my blindness to the end."

How was he to stop it? That Lucy must hear every word as plainly as he
did, he knew; words that fell upon his ear, and blistered them. There
was no egress for her--no other door--she was there in a cage, as may be
said. He did what was the best to be done under the circumstances; he
walked into the presence of Lucy, leaving Sibylla to herself.

At least it might have been the best in some cases. It was not in this.
Sibylla, lost in that moment to all sense of the respect due to herself,
to her husband, to Lucy, allowed her wild fancies, her passion, to
over-master everything; and she followed him in. Her eyes blazing, her
cheeks aflame, she planted herself in front of Lucy.

"Are you not ashamed of yourself, Lucy Tempest, to wile my husband from
me?"

Lucy looked perfectly aghast. That she thought Mrs. Verner had suddenly
gone mad, may be excused to her. A movement of fear escaped her, and
she drew involuntary nearer to Lionel, as if for protection.

"No! you shan't go to him! There has been enough of it. You shall not
side with him against me! He is my husband! How dare you forget it! You
are killing me amongst you."

"I--don't--know--what--you--mean, Mrs. Verner," gasped Lucy, the words
coming in jerks from her bloodless lips.

"Can you deny that he cares for you more than he does for me? That you
care for him in return? Can not you--"!

"Be silent, Sibylla!" burst forth Lionel. "Do you know that you are
speaking to Miss Tempest?"

"I won't be silent!" she reiterated, her voice rising to a scream. "Who
is Lucy Tempest that you should care for her? You know you do! and you
know that you meant to marry her once! Is it--"

Pushing his wife on a chair, though gently, with one arm, Lionel caught
the hand of Lucy, and placed it within the other, his chest heaving with
emotion. He led her out of the room and through the ante-room, in
silence to the door, halting there. She was shaking all over, and the
tears were coursing down her cheeks. He took both her hands in his, his
action one of deprecating entreaty, his words falling in the tenderest
accents from between his bloodless lips.

"Will you _bear_ for my sake, Lucy? She is my wife. Heaven knows, upon
any other I would retort the insult."

How Lucy's heart was wrung!--wrung for him. The insult to herself she
could afford to ignore; being innocent, it fell with very slender force;
but she felt keenly for his broken peace. Had it been to save her life,
she could not help returning the pressure of his hand as she looked up
to him her affirmative answer; and she saw no wrong or harm in the
pressure. Lionel closed the door upon her, and returned to his wife.

A change had come over Sibylla. She had thrown herself at full length on
a sofa, and was beginning to sob. He went up to her, and spoke gravely,
not unkindly, his arms folded before him.

"Sibylla, when is this line of conduct to cease? I am nearly wearied
out--nearly," he repeated, putting his hand to his brow, "wearied out.
If I could bear the exposure for myself, I cannot bear it for my wife."

She rose up and sat down on the sofa facing him. The hectic of her
cheeks had turned to scarlet.

"You do love her! You care for her more than you care for me. Can you
deny it?"

"What part of my conduct has ever told you so?"

"I don't care for conduct," she fractiously retorted, "I remember what
papa said, and that's enough. He said he saw how it was in the old
days--that you loved her. What business had you to love her?"

"Stay, Sibylla! Carry your reflections back, and answer yourself. In
those old days, when both of you were before me to choose--at any rate,
to _ask_--I chose _you_, leaving her. Is it not a sufficient answer?"

Sibylla threw back her head on the sofa-frame, and began to cry.

"From the hour that I made you my wife, I have striven to do my duty by
you, tenderly as husband can do it. Why do you force me to reiterate
this declaration, which I have made before?" he added, his face working
with emotion. "Neither by word nor action have I been false to you. I
have never, for the briefest moment, been guilty behind your back of
that which I would not be guilty of in your presence. No! my allegiance
of duty has never swerved from you. So help me Heaven!"

"You can't swear to me that you don't love her?" was Sibylla's retort.

It appeared that he did not intend to swear it. He went and stood
against the mantel-piece, in his old favourite attitude, leaning his
elbow on it and his face upon his hand--a face that betrayed his inward
pain. Sibylla began again: to tantalise him seemed a necessity of her
life.

"I might have expected trouble when I consented to marry you. Rachel
Frost's fate might have taught me the lesson."

"Stay," said Lionel, lifting his head. "It is not the first hint of the
sort that you have given me. Tell me honestly what it is you mean."

"You need not ask; you know already. Rachel owed her disgrace to you."

Lionel paused a moment before he rejoined. When he did, it was in a
quiet tone.

"Do you speak from your own opinion?"

"No, I don't. The secret was intrusted to me."

"By whom? You must tell me, Sibylla."

"I don't know why I should not," she slowly said, as if in deliberation.
"My husband trusted me with it."

"Do you allude to Frederick Massingbird?" asked Lionel, in a tone whose
coldness he could not help.

"Yes, I do. He _was_ my husband," she resentfully added. "One day, on
the voyage to Australia, he dropped a word that made me think he knew
something about that business of Rachel's, and I teased him to tell me
who it was who had played the rogue. He said it was Lionel Verner."

A pause. But for Lionel's admirable disposition, how terribly he might
have retorted upon her, knowing what he had learned that day.

"Did he tell you I had completed the roguery by pushing her into the
pond?" he inquired.

"I don't know. I don't remember. Perhaps he did."

"And--doubting it--you could marry me!" quietly remarked Lionel.

She made no answer.

"Let me set you right on that point once for all, then," he continued.
"I was innocent as you. I had nothing to do with it. Rachel and her
father were held in too great respect by my uncle--nay, by me, I may
add--for me to offer _her_ anything but respect. You were misinformed,
Sibylla."

She laughed scornfully. "It is easy to say so."

"As it was for Frederick Massingbird to say to you what he did."

"If it came to the choice," she retorted, "I'd rather believe him than
you."

Bitter aggravation lay in her tone, bitter aggravation in her gesture.
Was Lionel tempted to forget himself?--to set her right? If so, he beat
the temptation down. All men would not have been so forbearing.

"Sibylla, I have told you truth," he simply said.

"Which is as much as to say that Fred told----" she was vehemently
beginning when the words were stopped by the entrance of John
Massingbird. John, caught in the shower near Deerham Court, made no
scruple of running to it for shelter, and was in time to witness
Sibylla's angry tones and inflamed face.

What precisely happened Lionel could never afterwards recall. He
remembered John's free and easy salutation, "What's the row?"--he
remembered Sibylla's torrent of words in answer. As little given to
reticence or delicacy in the presence of her cousin, as she had been in
that of Lucy Tempest, she renewed her accusation of her husband with
regard to Rachel: she called on him--John--to bear testimony that Fred
was truthful. And Lionel remembered little more until he saw Sibylla
lying back gasping, the blood pouring from her mouth.

John Massingbird--perhaps in his eagerness to contradict her as much as
in his regard to make known the truth--had answered her all too
effectually before Lionel could stop him. Words that burned into the
brain of Sibylla Verner, and turned the current of her life's pulses.

It was her husband of that voyage, Frederick Massingbird, who had
brought the evil upon Rachel, who had been with her by the pond that
night.

As the words left John Massingbird's lips, she rose up, and stood
staring at him. Presently she essayed to speak, but not a sound issued
from her drawn lips. Whether passion impeded her utterance, or startled
dismay, or whether it may have been any physical impediment, it was
evident that she could not get the words out.

Fighting her hands on the empty air, fighting for breath or for speech,
so she remained for a passing space; and then the blood began to trickle
from her mouth. The excitement had caused her to burst a blood-vessel.

Lionel crossed over to her: her best support. He held her in his arms,
tenderly and considerately, as though she had never given him an
unwifely word. Stretching out his other hand to the bell, he rang it
loudly. And then he looked at Mr. Massingbird.

"Run for your life," he whispered. "Get Jan here."


CHAPTER LXXXII.

TRYING ON WREATHS.


The months went on, and Deerham was in a commotion: not the Clay Lane
part of it, of whom I think you have mostly heard, but that more refined
if less useful portion, represented by Lady Verner, the Elmsleys, the
Bitterworths, and other of the aristocracy congregating in its
environs.

Summer had long come in, and was now on the wane; and Sir Edmund
Hautley, the only son and heir of Sir Rufus, was expected home. He had
quitted the service, had made the overland route, and was now halting in
Paris; but the day of his arrival at Deerham Hall was fixed. And this
caused the commotion: for it had pleased Miss Hautley to determine to
welcome him with a _fête_ and ball, the like of which for splendour had
never been heard of in the county.

Miss Hautley was a little given to have an opinion of her own, and to
hold to it. Sir Rufus had been the same. Their friends called it
firmness; their enemies obstinacy. The only sister of Sir Rufus, not
cordial with him during his life, she had invaded the Hall as soon as
the life had left him, quitting her own comfortable and substantial
residence to do it, and persisted in taking up her abode there until Sir
Edmund should return; as she was persisting now in giving this _fête_ in
honour of it. In vain those who deemed themselves privileged to speak,
pointed out to Miss Hautley that a _fête_ might be considered out of
place, given before Sir Rufus had been dead a twelvemonth, and that Sir
Edmund might deem it so; furthermore, that Sir Edmund might prefer to
find quietness on his arrival instead of a crowd.

They might as well have talked to the wind, for all the impression it
made upon Miss Hautley. The preparations for the gathering went on
quickly, the invitations had gone out, and Deerham's head was turned.
Those who did not get invitations were ready to swallow up those who
did. Miss Hautley was as exclusive as ever proud old Sir Rufus had been,
and many were left out who thought they _might_ have been invited.
Amongst others, the Misses West thought so, especially as one card had
gone to their house--for Mr. Jan Verner.

Two cards had been left at Deerham Court. For Lady and Miss Verner: for
Mr. and Mrs. Verner. By some strange oversight, Miss Tempest was
omitted. That it was a simple oversight there was no doubt; and so it
turned out to be; for, after the _fête_ was over, reserved old Miss
Hautley condescended to explain that it was, and to apologise; but this
is dating forward. It was not known to be an oversight when the cards
arrived, and Lady Verner felt inclined to resent it. She hesitated
whether to treat it resentfully and stay away herself; or to take no
notice of it, further than by conveying Lucy to the Hall in place of
Decima.

Lucy laughed. She did not seem to care at all for the omission; but as
to going without the invitation, or in anybody's place, she would not
hear of it.

"Decima will not mind staying at home," said Lady Verner. "She never
cares to go out. You will not care to go, will you, Decima?"

An unwonted flush of crimson rose to Decima's usually calm face. "I
should like to go to this, mamma, as Miss Hautley has invited me."

"_Like_ to go to it!" repeated Lady Verner. "Are you growing capricious,
Decima? You generally profess to 'like' to stay at home."

"I would rather go this time, if you have no objection," was the quiet
answer of Decima.

"Dear Lady Verner, if Decima remained at home ever so, I should not go,"
interposed Lucy. "Only fancy my intruding there without an invitation!
Miss Hautley might order me out again."

"It is well to make a joke of it, Lucy, when I am vexed," said Lady
Verner. "I dare say it is only a mistake; but I don't like such
mistakes."

"I dare say it is nothing else," replied Lucy, laughing. "But as to
making my appearance there under the circumstances, I could not really
do it to oblige even you, Lady Verner. And I would just as soon be at
home."

Lady Verner resigned herself to the decision, but she did not look
pleased.

"It is to be I and Decima, then. Lionel," glancing across the table at
him--"you will accompany me. I cannot go without you."

It was at the luncheon table they were discussing this; a meal of which
Lionel rarely partook; in fact, he was rarely at home to partake of it;
but he happened to be there to-day. Sibylla was present. Recovered from
the accident--if it may be so called--of the breaking of the
blood-vessel; she had appeared to grow stronger and better with the
summer weather. Jan knew the improvement was all deceit, and told them
so; told _her_ so; that the very greatest caution was necessary, if she
would avert a second similar attack; in fact, half the time of Jan's
visits at Deerham Court was spent in enjoining perfect tranquillity on
Sibylla.

But she was so obstinate! She would not keep herself quiet; she would go
out; she would wear those thin summer dresses, low, in the evening. She
is wearing a delicate muslin now, as she sits by Lady Verner, and her
blue eyes are suspiciously bright, and her cheeks are suspiciously
hectic, and the old laboured breath can be seen through the muslin
moving her chest up and down, as it used to be seen--a lovely vision
still, with her golden hair clustering about her; but her hands are hot
and trembling, and her frame is painfully thin. "'She was sleeping, the
dear child,' Chloe said. 'She would come and tell me when she was awake,
if I would wait.'
"I said that I would stay awhile, and I wandered out under the shade
of the great whispering trees, to wait the waking hour."If--you--particularly wish it, mother," was Lionel's reply, spoken with
hesitation.

"Do you not wish to go?" rejoined Lady Verner.

"I would very much prefer not," he replied.

"Nonsense, Lionel! I don't think you have gone out once since you left
Verner's Pride. Staying at home won't mend matters. I _wish_ you to go
with me; I shall make a point of it."

Lady Verner spoke with some irritation, and Lionel said no more. He
supposed he must acquiesce.

