She hid her face on Ilbrahim's head, and her long raven hair, discolored
with the ashes of her mourning, fell down about him like a veil. A low
and interrupted moan was the voice of her heart's anguish, and it did
not fail to move the sympathies of many who mistook their involuntary
virtue for a sin. Sobs were audible in the female section of the house,
and every man who was a father drew his hand across his eyes. Tobias
Pearson was agitated and uneasy, but a certain feeling like the
consciousness of guilt oppressed him, so that he could not go forth and
offer himself as the protector of the child. Dorothy, however, had
watched her husband's eye. Her mind was free from the influence that had
begun to work on his, and she drew near the Quaker woman, and addressed
her in the hearing of all the congregation.

"Stranger, trust this boy to me, and I will be his mother," she said,
taking Ilbrahim's hand. "Providence has signally marked out my husband
to protect him, and he has fed at our table and lodged under our roof,
now many days, till our hearts have grown very strongly unto him. Leave
the tender child with us, and be at ease concerning his welfare."

The Quaker rose from the ground, but drew the boy closer to her, while
she gazed earnestly in Dorothy's face. Her mild, but saddened features,
and neat matronly attire harmonized together, and were like a verse of
fireside poetry. Her very aspect proved that she was blameless, so far
as mortal could be so, in respect to God and man; while the enthusiast,
in her robe of sackcloth and girdle of knotted cord, had as evidently
violated the duties of the present life and the future, by fixing her
attention wholly on the latter. The two females, as they held each a
hand of Ilbrahim, formed a practical allegory; it was rational piety and
unbridled fanaticism contending for the empire of a young heart.

"Thou art not of our people," said the Quaker, mournfully.

"No, we are not of your people," replied Dorothy, with mildness, "but we
are Christians, looking upward to the same Heaven with you. Doubt not
that your boy shall meet you there, if there be a blessing on our tender
and prayerful guidance of him. Thither, I trust, my own children have
gone before me, for I also have been a mother; I am no longer so," she
added, in a faltering tone, "and your son will have all my care."

"But will ye lead him in the path which his parents have trodden?"
demanded the Quaker. "Can ye teach him the enlightened faith which his
father has died for, and for which I, even I, am soon to become an
unworthy martyr? The boy has been baptized in blood; will ye keep the
mark fresh and ruddy upon his forehead?"

"I will not deceive you," answered Dorothy. "If your child become our
child, we must breed him up in the instruction which Heaven has imparted
to us; we must pray for him the prayers of our own faith; we must do
toward him according to the dictates of our own consciences, and not of
yours. Were we to act otherwise, we should abuse your trust, even in
complying with your wishes."

The mother looked down upon her boy with a troubled countenance, and
then turned her eyes upward to Heaven. She seemed to pray internally,
and the contention of her soul was evident.

"Friend," she said at length to Dorothy, "I doubt not that my son shall
receive all earthly tenderness at thy hands. Nay, I will believe that
even thy imperfect lights may guide him to a better world; for surely
thou art on the path thither. But thou hast spoken of a husband. Doth he
stand here among this multitude of people? Let him come forth, for I
must know to whom I commit this most precious trust."

She turned her face upon the male auditors, and after a momentary delay,
Tobias Pearson came forth from among them. The Quaker saw the dress
which marked his military rank, and shook her head; but then she noted
the hesitating air, the eyes that struggled with her own, and were
vanquished; the color that went and came, and could find no
resting-place. As she gazed, an unmirthful smile spread over her
features, like sunshine that grows melancholy in some desolate spot.
Her lips moved inaudibly, but at length she spake.

"I hear it, I hear it. The voice speaketh within me and saith, 'Leave
thy child, Catharine, for his place is here, and go hence, for I have
other work for thee. Break the bonds of natural affection, martyr thy
love, and know that in all these things eternal wisdom hath its ends.' I
go, friends, I go. Take ye my boy, my precious jewel. I go hence,
trusting that all shall be well, and that even for his infant hands
there is a labor in the vineyard."

She knelt down and whispered to Ilbrahim, who at first struggled and
clung to his mother, with sobs and tears, but remained passive when she
had kissed his cheek and arisen from the ground. Having held her hands
over his head in mental prayer, she was ready to depart.

"Farewell, friends in mine extremity," she said to Pearson and his wife;
"the good deed ye have done me is a treasure laid up in Heaven, to be
returned a thousand-fold hereafter. And farewell ye, mine enemies, to
whom it is not permitted to harm so much as a hair of my head, nor to
stay my footsteps even for a moment. The day is coming when ye shall
call upon me to witness for ye to this one sin uncommitted, and I will
rise up and answer."

She turned her steps toward the door, and the men, who had stationed
themselves to guard it, withdrew, and suffered her to pass. A general
sentiment of pity overcame the virulence of religious hatred.
Sanctified by her love and her affliction, she went forth, and all the
people gazed after her till she had journeyed up the hill, and was lost
behind its brow. She went, the apostle of her own unquiet heart, to
renew the wanderings of past years. For her voice had been already heard
in many lands of Christendom; and she had pined in the cells of a
Catholic Inquisition before she felt the lash and lay in the dungeons of
the Puritans. Her mission had extended also to the followers of the
Prophet, and from them she had received the courtesy and kindness which
all the contending sects of our purer religion united to deny her. Her
husband and herself had resided many months in Turkey, where even the
Sultan's countenance was gracious to them; in that pagan land, too, was
Ilbrahim's birthplace, and his Oriental name was a mark of gratitude for
the good deeds of an unbeliever.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Pearson and his wife had thus acquired all the rights over Ilbrahim
that could be delegated, their affection for him became, like the memory
of their native land, or their mild sorrow for the dead, a piece of the
immovable furniture of their hearts. The boy, also, after a week or two
of mental disquiet, began to gratify his protectors, by many inadvertent
proofs that he considered them as parents, and their house as home.
Before the winter snows were melted, the persecuted infant, the little
wanderer from a remote and heathen country, seemed native in the New
England cottage, and inseparable from the warmth and security of its
hearth. Under the influence of kind treatment, and in the consciousness
that he was loved, Ilbrahim's demeanor lost a premature manliness which
had resulted from his earlier situation; he became more childlike, and
his natural character displayed itself with freedom. It was in many
respects a beautiful one, yet the disordered imaginations of both his
father and mother had perhaps propagated a certain unhealthiness in the
mind of the boy. In his general state, Ilbrahim would derive enjoyment
from the most trifling events, and from every object about him; he
seemed to discover rich treasures of happiness, by a faculty analogous
to that of the witch-hazel, which points to hidden gold where all is
barren to the eye. His airy gayety, coming to him from a thousand
sources, communicated itself to the family, and Ilbrahim was like a
domesticated sunbeam, brightening moody countenances, and chasing away
the gloom from the dark corners of the cottage.

On the other hand, as the susceptibility of pleasure is also that of
pain, the exuberant cheerfulness of the boy's prevailing temper
sometimes yielded to moments of deep depression. His sorrows could not
always be followed up to their original source, but most frequently they
appeared to flow, though Ilbrahim was young to be sad for such a cause,
from wounded love. The flightiness of his mirth rendered him often
guilty of offences against the decorum of a Puritan household, and on
these occasions he did not invariably escape rebuke. But the slightest
word of real bitterness, which he was infallible in distinguishing from
pretended anger, seemed to sink into his heart and poison all his
enjoyments, till he became sensible that he was entirely forgiven. Of
the malice which generally accompanies a superfluity of sensitiveness,
Ilbrahim was altogether destitute; when trodden upon, he would not turn;
when wounded, he could but die. His mind was wanting in the stamina for
self-support; it was a plant that would twine beautifully round
something stronger than itself, but if repulsed, or torn away, it had no
choice but to wither on the ground. Dorothy's acuteness taught her that
severity would crush the spirit of the child, and she nurtured him with
the gentle care of one who handles a butterfly. Her husband manifested
an equal affection, although it grew daily less productive of familiar
caresses.

The feelings of the neighboring people, in regard to the Quaker infant
and his protectors, had not undergone a favorable change, in spite of
the momentary triumph which the desolate mother had obtained over their
sympathies. The scorn and bitterness, of which he was the object, were
very grievous to Ilbrahim, especially when any circumstance made him
sensible that the children, his equals in age, partook of the enmity of
their parents. His tender and social nature had already overflowed in
attachments to everything about him, and still there was a residue of
unappropriated love, which he yearned to bestow upon the little ones who
were taught to hate him. As the warm days of spring came on, Ilbrahim
was accustomed to remain for hours silent and inactive within hearing
of the children's voices at their play; yet, with his usual delicacy of
feeling, he avoided their notice, and would flee and hide himself from
the smallest individual among them. Chance, however, at length seemed to
open a medium of communication between his heart and theirs; it was by
means of a boy about two years older than Ilbrahim, who was injured by a
fall from a tree in the vicinity of Pearson's habitation. As the
sufferer's own home was at some distance, Dorothy willingly received him
under her roof, and became his tender and careful nurse.

Ilbrahim was the unconscious possessor of much skill in physiognomy, and
it would have deterred him, in other circumstances, from attempting to
make a friend of this boy. The countenance of the latter immediately
impressed a beholder disagreeably, but it required some examination to
discover that the cause was a very slight distortion of the mouth, and
the irregular, broken line and near approach of the eyebrows. Now they
talk of taking the dresses from us.'
"I reassured François as to the intention of government, and assured him
there was no talk of taking away the dresses.

"The second room, that which adjoins the public exhibition room, is
appropriated for the dissection of those, the mode of whose death appears
to the police to be suspicious. Its only furniture is a marble table, on
which the dissections take place, and a shelf on which are placed
several bottles of chlorate. This room is immediately above the room
of M. Perrin. The dissecting table above just answers to the girls' piano
below.

"In this room, which I crossed rapidly to avoid as much as possible the
sight of a body extended on the plank, I saw the little girl, who had
been stifled the night before in the diligence; she was a lovely child.
The other figure was frightfully disfigured; scarcely even would his
mother have recognised him.

"There remained only the public room; it is narrow, ill aired; ten
or twelve black and sloping stones receive the suicides, who are placed
on it almost in a state of nudity; the places are seldom all occupied,
except perhaps during a revolution. Then it is that the Morgue is
recruited; two more days of glory and immortality in July, and
the plague had been in Paris.

"'It is true,' said M. Perrin, 'we worked hard during the three days,
and we were allowed the use of two assistants. Corpses every where,
within, without, at the gate, on the bank.'--
"'And your girls?'
"'During these days they did not leave their apartment, nor looked
out to the street, nor to the river; besides, you are mistaken if
you think the spectacle would have terrified them.

Brought up here, they will walk at night without a light in front of the
glass, which divides the corpses from the public, without trembling; we
become accustomed to any thing.'
"Methought I heard the poor children, so familiar with the idea of death,
so accustomed to this domestic spectacle of their existence, asking
innocently of the strangers whom they visited,--as one would ask where
is your garden, your kitchen, or your cabinet,--'where do _you_ keep
your dead here?'
"These were all the facts I could gather with regard to the establishment.
I was opening the glass door to breathe the fresh air again, when the
entrance of the crowd drove me back into the interior; they were following
a bier, on which lay a body, from which the water dripped in a long stream.
From one of the hands which were closely clenched, the keeper
detached a strip of coloured linen, and a fragment of lace. 'Ah!' said
he, 'let me look, 'tis she!'
"'Who is it?'
"'The nurse who was here this morning; the nurse of the little Norman girl.
Good! they may be buried together.' And M. Perrin put on his spectacles,
opened his register, and wrote in his best current-hand--_unknown!_"

* * * * *

POETRY.

* * * * *
The Maid of Elvar. By Allan Cunningham.

This is one of the most gratifying "appearances" in the literature of the
day. It reminds us that however the poet's harp may have remained
unstrung, it has not lost its vigour or sweetness--its depth of feeling,
or its melody of tone, and these too are ably sustained through nearly
600 stanzas in an exquisitely embellished narrative.
The poem is "a song of other times;" the story is one of chivalrous love;
the hero is a young warrior and poet; the Maid of Elvar offers a garland
of gold for the best song in honour of one of his victories;
"minstrels meet and sing, but the song of Eustace, though on another
theme, is reckoned the best; the Maid hangs the gold chain round
his neck, and retires, admiring the young stranger;" and thereby
hangs the tale.

As our limits will not allow us to detach a scene or incident,
we must be content, for the present, with culling a few of the choicest
flowers of the song.

CIVIL WAR.

Woe, woe was ours. Chief drew his sword on chief:
Religion with her relique and her brand, Made strife between our
bosom-bones, and grief And lawless joy abounded in the land; Our
glass of glory sank nigh its last sand; Rank with its treason,
priesthood with its craft, Turned Scotland's war-lance to a
willow-wand.
But war arose in Scotland--civil war; Serf warred with chief, and
father warred with son, The church too warred with all: her evil
star That rules o'er sinking realms shone like the sun-- Her lights
waxed dim and died out one by one-- Woe o'er the land hung like a
funeral pall:
The sword the bold could brave, the coward shun, But famine followed
fast and fell on all-- Pale lips cried oft for food which came not
at their call.

RURAL PEACE.His gait was thenceforth slow, even, and unvaried
by the sudden bursts of sprightlier motion, which had once corresponded
to his overflowing gladness; his countenance was heavier, and its former
play of expression, the dance of sunshine reflected from moving water,
was destroyed by the cloud over his existence; his notice was attracted
in a far less degree by passing events, and he appeared to find greater
difficulty in comprehending what was new to him, than at a happier
period. A stranger, founding his judgment upon these circumstances,
would have said that the dulness of the child's intellect widely
contradicted the promise of his features; but the secret was in the
direction of Ilbrahim's thoughts, which were brooding within him when
they should naturally have been wandering abroad. An attempt of Dorothy
to revive his former sportiveness was the single occasion on which his
quiet demeanor yielded to a violent display of grief; he burst into
passionate weeping, and ran and hid himself, for his heart had become so
miserably sore that even the hand of kindness tortured it like fire.
Sometimes, at night and probably in his dreams, he was heard to cry,
"Mother! mother!" as if her place, which a stranger had supplied while
Ilbrahim was happy, admitted of no substitute in his extreme affliction.
Perhaps, among the many life-weary wretches then upon the earth, there
was not one who combined innocence and misery like this poor,
broken-hearted infant, so soon the victim of his own heavenly nature.

While this melancholy change had taken place in Ilbrahim, one of an
earlier origin and of different character had come to its perfection in
his adopted father. The incident with which this tale commences found
Pearson in a state of religious dulness, yet mentally disquieted, and
longing for a more fervid faith than he possessed. The first effect of
his kindness to Ilbrahim was to produce a softened feeling, and
incipient love for the child's whole sect; but joined to this, and
resulting perhaps from self-suspicion, was a proud and ostentatious
contempt of their tenets and practical extravagances. In the course of
much thought, however, for the subject struggled irresistibly into his
mind, the foolishness of the doctrine began to be less evident, and the
points which had particularly offended his reason assumed another
aspect, or vanished entirely away. The work within him appeared to go on
even while he slept, and that which had been a doubt, when he laid down
to rest, would often hold the place of a truth, confirmed by some
forgotten demonstration, when he recalled his thoughts in the morning.
But while he was thus becoming assimilated to the enthusiasts, his
contempt, in no wise decreasing toward them, grew very fierce against
himself; he imagined, also, that every face of his acquaintance wore a
sneer, and that every word addressed to him was a gibe. Such was his
state of mind at the period of Ilbrahim's misfortune; and the emotions
consequent upon that event completed the change, of which the child had
been the original instrument.

In the meantime, neither the fierceness of the persecutors, nor the
infatuation of their victims, had decreased. The dungeons were never
empty; the streets of almost every village echoed daily with a lash; the
life of a woman, whose mild and Christian spirit no cruelty could
imbitter, had been sacrificed; and more innocent blood was yet to
pollute the hands that were so often raised in prayer. Early after the
Restoration, the English Quakers represented to Charles II. that a "vein
of blood was open in his dominions"; but though the displeasure of the
voluptuous king was roused, his interference was not prompt. And now the
tale must stride forward over many months, leaving Pearson to encounter
ignominy and misfortune; his wife to a firm endurance of a thousand
sorrows; poor Ilbrahim to pine and droop like a cankered rosebud; his
mother to wander on a mistaken errand, neglectful of the holiest trust
which can be committed to a woman.

       *       *       *       *       *

A winter evening, a night of storm, had darkened over Pearson's
habitation, and there were no cheerful faces to drive the gloom from his
broad hearth. The fire, it is true, sent forth a glowing heat and a
ruddy light, and large logs, dripping with half-melted snow, lay ready
to be cast upon the embers. But the apartment was saddened in its aspect
by the absence of much of the homely wealth which had once adorned it;
for the exaction of repeated fines, and his own neglect of temporal
affairs, had greatly impoverished the owner. And with the furniture of
peace, the implements of war had likewise disappeared; the sword was
broken, the helm and cuirass were cast away forever; the soldier had
done with battles, and might not lift so much as his naked hand to guard
his head. But the Holy Book remained, and the table on which it rested
was drawn before the fire, while two of the persecuted sect sought
comfort from its pages.

He who listened, while the other read, was the master of the house, now
emaciated in form, and altered as to the expression and healthiness of
his countenance; for his mind had dwelt too long among visionary
thoughts, and his body had been worn by imprisonment and stripes. The
hale and weather-beaten old man, who sat beside him, had sustained less
injury from a far longer course of the same mode of life. In person he
was tall and dignified, and, which alone would have made him hateful to
the Puritans, his gray locks fell from beneath the broad-brimmed hat,
and rested on his shoulders. As the old man read the sacred page, the
snow drifted against the windows, or eddied in at the crevices of the
door, while a blast kept laughing in the chimney, and the blaze leaped
fiercely up to seek it. And sometimes, when the wind struck the hill at
a certain angle, and swept down by the cottage across the wintry plain,
its voice was the most doleful that can be conceived; it came as if the
Past were speaking, as if the Dead had contributed each a whisper, as if
the Desolation of Ages were breathed in that one lamenting sound.

The Quaker at length closed the book, retaining however his hand between
the pages which he had been reading, while he looked steadfastly at
Pearson. The attitude and features of the latter might have indicated
the endurance of bodily pain; he leaned his forehead on his hands, his
teeth were firmly closed, and his frame was tremulous at intervals with
a nervous agitation.

"Friend Tobias," inquired the old man, compassionately, "hast thou found
no comfort in these many blessed passages of Scripture?"

"Thy voice has fallen on my ear like a sound afar off and indistinct,"
replied Pearson, without lifting his eyes. "Yea, and when I have
hearkened carefully, the words seemed cold and lifeless, and intended
for another and a lesser grief than mine. Remove the book," he added, in
a tone of sullen bitterness. "I have no part in its consolations, and
they do but fret my sorrow the more."

"Nay, feeble brother, be not as one who hath never known the light,"
said the elder Quaker, earnestly, but with mildness. "Art thou he that
wouldst be content to give all, and endure all, for conscience' sake;
desiring even peculiar trials, that thy faith might be purified, and thy
heart weaned from worldly desires? And wilt thou sink beneath an
affliction which happens alike to them that have their portion here
below, and to them that lay up treasure in heaven? Faint not, for thy
burden is yet light."

"It is heavy! It is heavier than I can bear!" exclaimed Pearson, with
the impatience of a variable spirit. "From my youth upward I have been a
man marked out for wrath; and year by year, yea, day after day, I have
endured sorrows, such as others know not in their lifetime. And now I
speak not of the love that has been turned to hatred, the honor to
ignominy, the ease and plentifulness of all things to danger, want, and
nakedness. All this I could have borne, and counted myself blessed. But
when my heart was desolate with many losses, I fixed it upon the child
of a stranger, and he became dearer to me than all my buried ones; and
now he too must die, as if my love were poison. Verily, I am an
accursed man, and I will lay me down in the dust, and lift up my head no
more."

"Thou sinnest, brother, but it is not for me to rebuke thee; for I also
have had my hours of darkness, wherein I have murmured against the
cross," said the old Quaker. He continued, perhaps in the hope of
distracting his companion's thoughts from his own sorrows. "Even of late
was the light obscured within me, when the men of blood had banished me
on pain of death, and the constables led me onward from village to
village, toward the wilderness. A strong and cruel hand was wielding the
knotted cords; they sunk deep into the flesh, and thou mightst have
tracked every reel and totter of my footsteps by the blood that
followed. As we went on--"

"Have I not borne all this; and have I murmured?" interrupted Pearson,
impatiently.

"Nay, friend, but hear me," continued the other. "As we journeyed on,
night darkened on our path, so that no man could see the rage of the
persecutors, or the constancy of my endurance, though Heaven forbid that
I should glory therein. The lights began to glimmer in the cottage
windows, and I could discern the inmates as they gathered in comfort and
security, every man with his wife and children by their own evening
hearth. At length we came to a tract of fertile land; in the dim light,
the forest was not visible around it; and behold! there was a
straw-thatched dwelling, which bore the very aspect of my home, far over
the wild ocean, far in our own England. Then came bitter thoughts upon
me; yea, remembrances that were like death to my soul. The happiness of
my early days was painted to me; the disquiet of my manhood, the altered
faith of my declining years. I remembered how I had been moved to go
forth a wanderer, when my daughter, the youngest, the dearest of my
flock, lay on her dying bed, and--"

"Couldst thou obey the command at such a moment?" exclaimed Pearson,
shuddering.

"Yea, yea," replied the old man, hurriedly. "I was kneeling by her
bedside when the voice spoke loud within me; but immediately I rose, and
took my staff, and gat me gone. O, that it were permitted me to forget
her woful look, when I thus withdrew my arm, and left her journeying
through the dark valley alone! for her soul was faint, and she had
leaned upon my prayers. Now in that night of horror I was assailed by
the thought that I had been an erring Christian, and a cruel parent;
yea, even my daughter, with her pale, dying features, seemed to stand by
me and whisper, 'Father, you are deceived; go home and shelter your gray
head.' O Thou, to whom I have looked in my furthest wanderings,"
continued the Quaker, raising his agitated eyes to Heaven, "inflict not
upon the bloodiest of our persecutors the unmitigated agony of my soul,
when I believed that all I had done and suffered for thee was at the
instigation of a mocking fiend! But I yielded not; I knelt down and
wrestled with the tempter, while the scourge bit more fiercely into the
flesh. My prayer was heard, and I went on in peace and joy toward the
wilderness."

The old man, though his fanaticism had generally all the calmness of
reason, was deeply moved while reciting this tale; and his unwonted
emotion seemed to rebuke and keep down that of his companion. They sat
in silence, with their faces to the fire, imagining perhaps, in its red
embers, new scenes of persecution yet to be encountered. The snow still
drifted hard against the windows, and sometimes, as the blaze of the
logs had gradually sunk, came down the spacious chimney and hissed upon
the hearth. A cautious footstep might now and then be heard in a
neighboring apartment, and the sound invariably drew the eyes of both
Quakers to the door which led thither. When a fierce and riotous gust of
wind had led his thoughts, by a natural association, to homeless
travellers on such a night, Pearson resumed the conversation.

"I have well-nigh sunk under my own share of this trial," observed he,
sighing heavily; "yet I would that it might be doubled to me, if so the
child's mother could be spared. Her wounds have been deep and many, but
this will be the sorest of all."

"Fear not for Catharine," replied the old Quaker, "for I know that
valiant woman, and have seen how she can bear the cross. A mother's
heart, indeed, is strong in her, and may seem to contend mightily with
her faith; but soon she will stand up and give thanks that her son has
been thus early an accepted sacrifice. The boy hath done his work, and
she will feel that he is taken hence in kindness both to him and her.
Blessed, blessed are they that with so little suffering can enter into
peace!"

The fitful rush of the wind was now disturbed by a portentous sound; it
was a quick and heavy knocking at the outer door. Pearson's wan
countenance grew paler, for many a visit of persecution had taught him
what to dread; the old man, on the other hand, stood up erect, and his
glance was firm as that of the tried soldier who awaits his enemy.

"The men of blood have come to seek me," he observed, with calmness.
"They have heard how I was moved to return from banishment; and now am I
to be led to prison, and thence to death. It is an end I have long
looked for. I will open unto them, lest they say, 'Lo, he feareth!'"

"Nay, I will present myself before them," said Pearson, with recovered
fortitude. "It may be that they seek me alone, and know not that thou
abidest with me."

"Let us go boldly, both one and the other," rejoined his companion. "It
is not fitting that thou or I should shrink."

They therefore proceeded through the entry to the door, which they
opened, bidding the applicant, "Come in, in God's name!" A furious blast
of wind drove the storm into their faces, and extinguished the lamp;
they had barely time to discern a figure, so white from head to foot
with the drifted snow, that it seemed like Winter's self, come in human
shape to seek refuge from its own desolation.

"Enter, friend, and do thy errand, be it what it may," said Pearson. "It
must needs be pressing, since thou comest on such a bitter night."

"Peace be with this household," said the stranger, when they stood on
the floor of the inner apartment.

Pearson started, the elder Quaker stirred the slumbering embers of the
fire, till they sent up a clear and lofty blaze; it was a female voice
that had spoken; it was a female form that shone out, cold and wintry,
in that comfortable light.

"Catharine, blessed woman," exclaimed the old man, "art thou come to
this darkened land again? art thou come to bear a valiant testimony as
in former years? The scourge hath not prevailed against thee, and from
the dungeon hast thou come forth triumphant; but strengthen, strengthen
now thy heart, Catharine, for Heaven will prove thee yet this once, ere
thou go to thy reward."

"Rejoice, friends!" she replied. "Thou who hast long been of our people,
and thou whom a little child hath led to us, rejoice! Lo! I come, the
messenger of glad tidings, for the day of persecution is overpast. The
heart of the king, even Charles, hath been moved in gentleness toward
us, and he hath sent forth his letters to stay the hands of the men of
blood. A ship's company of our friends hath arrived at yonder town, and
I also sailed joyfully among them."

As Catharine spoke, her eyes were roaming about the room, in search of
him for whose sake security was dear to her. Pearson made a silent
appeal to the old man, nor did the latter shrink from the painful task
assigned him.

"Sister," he began, in a softened yet perfectly calm tone, "thou tellest
us of His love, manifested in temporal good; and now must we speak to
thee of that selfsame love, displayed in chastenings. Hitherto,
Catharine, thou hast been as one journeying in a darksome and difficult
path, and leading an infant by the hand; fain wouldst thou have looked
heavenward continually, but still the cares of that little child have
drawn thine eyes and thy affections to the earth. Sister! go on
rejoicing, for his tottering footsteps shall impede thine own no more."

But the unhappy mother was not thus to be consoled; she shook like a
leaf, she turned white as the very snow that hung drifted into her hair.
The firm old man extended his hand and held her up, keeping his eye upon
hers, as if to repress any outbreak of passion.

"I am a woman, I am but a woman; will He try me above my strength?" said
Catharine very quickly, and almost in a whisper. "I have been wounded
sore; I have suffered much; many things in the body, many in the mind;
crucified in myself, and in them that were dearest to me. Surely," added
she, with a long shudder, "He hath spared me in this one thing." She
broke forth with sudden and irrepressible violence, "Tell me, man of
cold heart, what has God done to me? Hath he cast me down, never to rise
again? Hath he crushed my very heart in his hand? And thou, to whom I
committed my child, how hast thou fulfilled thy trust? Give me back the
boy, well, sound, alive, alive; or earth and Heaven shall avenge me!"

The agonized shriek of Catharine was answered by the faint, the very
faint voice of a child.

On this day it had become evident to Pearson, to his aged guest, and to
Dorothy that Ilbrahim's brief and troubled pilgrimage drew near its
close. The two former would willingly have remained by him, to make use
of the prayers and pious discourses which they deemed appropriate to the
time, and which, if they be impotent as to the departing traveller's
reception in the world whither it goes, may at least sustain him in
bidding adieu to earth. But though Ilbrahim uttered no complaint, he was
disturbed by the faces that looked upon him; so that Dorothy's
entreaties, and their own conviction that the child's feet might tread
heaven's pavement and not soil it, had induced the two Quakers to
remove. Ilbrahim then closed his eyes and grew calm, and, except for now
and then a kind and low word to his nurse, might have been thought to
slumber. As nightfall came on, however, and the storm began to rise,
something seemed to trouble the repose of the boy's mind, and to render
his sense of hearing active and acute. If a passing wind lingered to
shake the casement, he strove to turn his head toward it; if the door
jarred to and fro upon its hinges, he looked long and anxiously
thitherward; if the heavy voice of the old man, as he read the
Scriptures, rose but a little higher, the child almost held his dying
breath to listen; if a snowdrift swept by the cottage, with a sound like
the trailing of a garment, Ilbrahim seemed to watch that some visitant
should enter.

But, after a little time, he relinquished whatever secret hope had
agitated him, and, with one low, complaining whisper, turned his cheek
upon the pillow. He then addressed Dorothy with his usual sweetness, and
besought her to draw near him; she did so, and Ilbrahim took her hand in
both of his, grasping it with a gentle pressure, as if to assure himself
that he retained it. At intervals, and without disturbing the repose of
his countenance, a very faint trembling passed over him from head to
foot, as if a mild but somewhat cool wind had breathed upon him, and
made him shiver. As the boy thus led her by the hand, in his quiet
progress over the borders of eternity, Dorothy almost imagined that she
could discern the near, though dim delightfulness of the home he was
about to reach; she would not have enticed the little wanderer back,
though she bemoaned herself that she must leave him and return. But just
when Ilbrahim's feet were pressing on the soil of Paradise, he heard a
voice behind him, and it recalled him a few, few paces of the weary path
which he had travelled. As Dorothy looked upon his features, she
perceived that their placid expression was again disturbed; her own
thoughts had been so wrapped in him, that all sounds of the storm, and
of human speech, were lost to her; but when Catharine's shriek pierced
through the room, the boy strove to raise himself.

"Friend, she is come! Open unto her!" cried he.

In a moment, his mother was kneeling by the bedside; she drew Ilbrahim
to her bosom, and he nestled there, with no violence of joy, but
contentedly, as if he were hushing himself to sleep. He looked into her
face, and, reading its agony, said, with feeble earnestness, "Mourn not,
dearest mother. I am happy now." And with these words, the gentle boy
was dead.

       *       *       *       *       *

The king's mandate to stay the New England persecutors was effectual in
preventing further martyrdoms; but the colonial authorities, trusting in
the remoteness of their situation, and perhaps in the supposed
instability of the royal government, shortly renewed their severities in
all other respects. Catharine's fanaticism had become wilder by the
sundering of all human ties; and wherever a scourge was lifted, there
was she to receive the blow; and whenever a dungeon was unbarred,
thither she came, to cast herself upon the floor. But in process of
time, a more Christian spirit--a spirit of forbearance, though not of
cordiality or approbation--began to pervade the land in regard to the
persecuted sect. And then, when the rigid old Pilgrims eyed her rather
in pity than in wrath; when the matrons fed her with the fragments of
their children's food, and offered her a lodging on a hard and lowly
bed; when no little crowd of schoolboys left their sports to cast stones
after the roving enthusiast--then did Catharine return to Pearson's
dwelling, and made that her home.

As if Ilbrahim's sweetness yet lingered round his ashes, as if his
gentle spirit came down from heaven to teach his parent a true religion,
her fierce and vindictive nature was softened by the same griefs which
had once irritated it. When the course of years had made the features of
the unobtrusive mourner familiar in the settlement, she became a subject
of not deep, but general interest; a being on whom the otherwise
superfluous sympathies of all might be bestowed. Every one spoke of her
with that degree of pity which it is pleasant to experience, every one
was ready to do her the little kindnesses, which are not costly, yet
manifest good-will; and when at last she died, a long train of her once
bitter persecutors followed her, with decent sadness and tears that were
not painful, to her place by Ilbrahim's green and sunken grave.


THE ANGEL

By HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN


Whenever a good child dies, an angel from heaven comes down to earth,
and takes the dead child in his arms, spreads out his great white wings,
and flies away over all the places the child has loved, and picks quite
a handful of flowers, which he carries up to the Almighty, that they may
bloom in heaven more brightly than on earth. And the Father presses all
the flowers to His heart; but He kisses the flower that pleases him
best, and the flower is then endowed with a voice, and can join in the
great chorus of praise!

"See"--this is what an angel said, as he carried a dead child up to
heaven, and the child heard, as if in a dream, and they went on over the
regions of home where the little child had played, and they came through
gardens with beautiful flowers--"which of these shall we take with us to
plant in heaven?" asked the angel.

Now there stood near them a slender, beautiful rose bush; but a wicked
hand had broken the stem, so that all the branches, covered with
half-opened buds, were hanging drooping around, quite withered.

"The poor rose bush!" said the child. "Take it, that it may bloom up
yonder."

And the angel took it, and kissed the child, and the little one half
opened his eyes. They plucked some of the rich flowers, but also took
with them the despised buttercup and the wild pansy.

"Now we have flowers," said the child.

And the angel nodded, but he did not yet fly upward to heaven. It was
night and quite silent. They remained in the great city; they floated
about there in a small street, where lay whole heaps of straw, ashes,
and sweepings, for it had been removal-day. There lay fragments of
plates, bits of plaster, rags, and old hats, and all this did not look
well. And the angel pointed amid all this confusion to a few fragments
of a flower-pot, and to a lump of earth which had fallen out, and which
was kept together by the roots of a great dried field flower, which was
of no use, and had therefore been thrown out into the street.

"We will take that with us," said the angel. "I will tell you why, as we
fly onward.

"Down yonder in the narrow lane, in the low cellar, lived a poor sick
boy; from his childhood he had been bedridden. _Jubilate_! God and
Freedom! Sing, Americans, sing Tyrant Cotton's dead forever! Honest Corn
is King!

LITERARY NOTICES.

AMONG THE PINES. BY EDMUND KIRKE. New-York: J. R. Gilmore, 532 Broadway.
1862.

Perhaps it is not altogether in rule to say much of a work which has
appeared in our pages. But we may at least call attention to what others
have said. And good authority--plenty of it, such authority as should
make a reputation for any book--has declared _The Pines_ to be in
truth a work of the highest merit and of a new order. It is a perfectly
truthful record of scenes and characters drawn from personal experience
in the South; combining the accuracy of Olmstead's works with the
thrilling interest of _Uncle Tom_. It should be fairly stated--as the
author desires it should be--that every thing did not occur precisely
in the order in which it is here narrated. But all is _true_--every
page speaks for itself in this particular. No stronger piece of local
coloring ever issued from the American press. We seem, in reading it, to
live in the South--to know the people who come before us. All of them
are, indeed, life-portraits. In one or two instances, the very names
of the originals remain unchanged.

In it the author deals fairly and honorably with the South.

The renegade Yankee, and not the native planter, is made to bear the
heaviest blow.

The principal character, Colonel J----, is one of nature's noblemen,
struggling through aristocratic education and circumstance with
an evil whose evil he cannot comprehend.

Very valuable indeed are the sketches of life among the 'mean whites.'
No descriptions of them to be compared with these in _The Pines_
have ever yet appeared. They rise clear as cameo-reliefs on a dark
ground, and we feel that they too are like the slave-holder, victims
like the slave, of a system, and not with him, deliberate wretches. Their
squalor, ignorance, pride, and dependence--their whole social _status_,
inferior to that of the blacks whom they despise, appear as set
forth, we do not say by a master-hand, but _by themselves_.

This work, tolerant and just, yet striking, has appeared at the right
time.

While interesting as a novel, it is full of solid, simple facts--it
is based on them and built up with them.

Without attempting to set forth a principle, it shows beyond dispute
that slavery does not pay in the South as well as free labor would,
and that the blacks would produce more as free laborers than as
slaves.

It shows that Emancipation for the sake of the White Man is a great
truth, and that the white man would be benefited by raising the sense
of independence in the black, and by elevating him in every way in
which he is capable of improvement.

It may be said with great truth of _The Pines_, that it would be difficult
to find a book in which such striking facts and vivid pictures are set
forth with such perfect simplicity of language. There is no effort at
fine writing in it, and no consciousness of its absence.

The author never seems to have realized that a story could be told for
effect, and the natural result has been the most unintentional
yet the strongest effect. The practical eye of one familiar with planks
and turpentine, building and farming, business and furniture,
economy and comfort, betrays itself continually.

He sees how things could be bettered not as a mere philanthropist would
try to see them, but as one who knows how capital ought to be employed,
and he appreciates the fact that the sufferings of the people of
every class in the South are really based on the _wastefulness_ of
the present system.

That this spirit should be combined with a keen observation of local
humor, and in several instances with narratives imbued with deep
pathos, is not, however, remarkable.

The man who can most vividly set forth facts and transfer nature to
paper, seldom misses variety.

We rejoice that this work has met with such favorable reception from the
public, and are happy to state that the author will continue his
contributions to these columns.

He has already, by a single effort, established a wide-spread
reputation, and we know that he has that in him which will induce
efforts of equal merit and a future which will be honorably recorded in
histories of the literature of the present day.

THOMAS HOOD'S WORKS. Volume IV. Aldine Edition. Edited by EPES SARGENT.
New-York: G. P. Putnam. Boston: A. K.
Loring. 1862.

No better paper, no better type, can be desired than what is lavished
upon these beautiful editions of Putnam's works. It is a pleasure
to touch their silky, Baskerville-feeling leaves, and think that
one possesses in the series one more work _de luxe_, which 'any
one' might be glad to own.The rich shoemaker in the town took the
measure of her little feet; this was done in his own house, in his
little room, and there stood great glass cases with neat shoes and
shining boots. It had quite a charming appearance, but the old lady
could not see well, and therefore took no pleasure in it. Among the
shoes stood a red pair, just like those which the princess had worn. How
beautiful they were! The shoemaker also said they had been made for a
Count's child, but they had not fitted.

"That must be patent leather," observed the old lady, "the shoes shine
so!"

"Yes, they shine!" replied Karen; and they fitted her, and were bought.
But the old lady did not know that they were red; for she would never
have allowed Karen to go to the confirmation in red shoes; and that is
what Karen did.

Every one was looking at her shoes. And when she went across the church
porch, toward the door of the choir, it seemed to her as if the old
pictures on the tombstones, the portraits of clergymen and clergymen's
wives, in their stiff collars and long black garments, fixed their eyes
upon her red shoes. And she thought of her shoes only, when the priest
laid his hand upon her head and spoke holy words. And the organ pealed
solemnly, the children sang with their fresh sweet voices, and the old
preceptor sang too; but Karen thought only of her red shoes.

In the afternoon the old lady was informed by everyone that the shoes
were red; and she said it was naughty and unsuitable, and that when
Karen went to church in future, she should always go in black shoes,
even if they were old.

Next Sunday was sacrament Sunday. And Karen looked at the black shoes,
and looked at the red ones--looked at them again--and put on the red
ones.

The sun shone gloriously; Karen and the old lady went along the footpath
through the fields, and it was rather dusty.

By the church door stood an old invalid soldier with a crutch and a long
beard; the beard was rather red than white, for it was red altogether;
and he bowed down almost to the ground, and asked the old lady if he
might dust her shoes. And Karen also stretched out her little foot.

"Look, what pretty dancing shoes!" said the old soldier. "Fit so
tightly when you dance!"

And he tapped the soles with his hand. And the old lady gave the soldier
an alms, and went into the church with Karen.

And every one in the church looked at Karen's red shoes, and all the
pictures looked at them. And while Karen knelt in the church she only
thought of her red shoes; and she forgot to sing her psalm, and forgot
to say her prayer.

Now all the people went out of church, and the old lady stepped into her
carriage. Karen lifted up her foot to step in too; then the old soldier
said:

"Look, what beautiful dancing shoes!"

And Karen could not resist: she was obliged to dance a few steps; and
when she once began, her legs went on dancing. It was just as though the
shoes had obtained power over her. She danced round the corner of the
church--she could not help it; the coachman was obliged to run behind
her and seize her; he lifted her into the carriage, but her feet went on
dancing, so that she kicked the good old lady violently. At last they
took off her shoes, and her legs became quiet.

At home the shoes were put away in a cupboard; but Karen could not
resist looking at them.

Now the old lady became very ill, and it was said she would not recover.
She had to be nursed, and waited on: and this was no one's duty so much
as Karen's. But there was to be a great ball in the town, and Karen was
invited. She looked at the old lady who could not recover; she looked
at the red shoes, and thought there would be no harm in it. She put on
the shoes, and that she might very well do; but they went to the ball
and began to dance.

But when she wished to go to the right hand, the shoes danced to the
left, and when she wanted to go upstairs the shoes danced downward, down
into the street and out at the town gate. She danced, and was obliged to
dance, till she danced straight out into the dark wood.

There was something glistening up among the trees, and she thought it
was the moon, for she saw a face. But it was the old soldier with the
red beard: he sat and nodded, and said:

"Look, what beautiful dancing-shoes!"

Then she was frightened, and wanted to throw away the red shoes; but
they clung fast to her. And she tore off her stockings; but the shoes
had grown fast to her feet. And she danced and was compelled to go
dancing over field and meadow, in rain and sunshine, by night and by
day; but it was most dreadful at night.

She danced out into the open churchyard; but the dead there do not
dance; they have far better things to do. She wished to sit down on the
poor man's grave, where the bitter fern grows; but there was no peace
nor rest for her. And when she danced toward the open church door, she
saw there an angel in long white garments, with wings that reached from
his shoulders to his feet; his countenance was serious and stern, and
in his hand he held a sword that was broad and gleaming.

"Thou shalt dance!" he said--"dance on thy red shoes, till thou art pale
and cold, and till thy body shrivels to a skeleton. Thou shalt dance
from door to door, and where proud, haughty children dwell, shalt thou
knock, that they may hear thee, and be afraid of thee! Thou shalt dance,
dance!"

"Mercy!" cried Karen.

But she did not hear what the angel answered, for the shoes carried her
away--carried her through the door on to the field, over stock and
stone, and she was always obliged to dance.

One morning she danced past a door which she knew well. There was a
sound of psalm-singing within, and a coffin was carried out, adorned
with flowers. Then she knew that the old lady was dead, and she felt
that she was deserted by all, and condemned by the angel of heaven.

She danced, and was compelled to dance--to dance in the dark night. The
shoes carried her on over thorn and brier; she scratched herself till
she bled; she danced away across the heath to a little lonely house.
Here she knew the executioner dwelt; and she tapped with her fingers on
the panes, and called:

"Come out, come out! I cannot come in for I must dance!"

And the executioner said:

"You probably don't know who I am? I cut off the bad people's heads
with my axe, and mark how my axe rings!"

"Do not strike off my head," said Karen, "for if you do I cannot repent
of my sin. But strike off my feet with the red shoes!"

And then she confessed all her sin, and the executioner cut off her feet
with the red shoes; but the shoes danced away with the little feet over
the fields and into the deep forest.

And he cut her a pair of wooden feet, with crutches, and taught her a
psalm, which the criminals always sing; and she kissed the hand that had
held the axe, and went away across the heath.

"Now I have suffered pain enough for the red shoes," said she. "Now I
will go into the church, that they may see me."

And she went quickly toward the church door, but when she came there the
red shoes danced before her, so that she was frightened, and turned
back.

The whole week through she was sorrowful, and wept many bitter tears;
but when Sunday came she said:

"Now I have suffered and striven enough! I think that I am just as good
as many of those who sit in the church and carry their heads high."

And then she went boldly on; but she did not get further than the
churchyard gate before she saw the red shoes dancing along before her;
then she was seized with terror, and turned back, and repented of her
sin right heartily.

And she went to the parsonage, and begged to be taken there as a
servant. She promised to be industrious, and to do all she could; she
did not care for wages, and only wished to be under a roof and with good
people. The clergyman's wife pitied her, and took her into her service.
And she was industrious and thoughtful. Silently she sat and listened
when in the evening the pastor read the Bible aloud. All the little ones
were very fond of her; but when they spoke of dress and splendor and
beauty, she would shake her head.

Next Sunday they all went to church, and she was asked if she wished to
go too, but she looked sadly, with tears in her eyes, at her crutches.
And then the others went to hear God's word; but she went alone into her
little room, which was only large enough to contain her bed and a chair.
And here she sat with her hymn-book; and as she read it with a pious
mind, the wind bore the notes of the organ over to her from the church;
and she lifted up her face, wet with tears, and said:

"O Lord, help me!"

Then the sun shone so brightly; and before her stood the angel in the
white garments, the same as she had seen that night at the church door.
But he no longer grasped the sharp sword; he held a green branch covered
with roses; and he touched the ceiling, and it rose up high, and
wherever he touched it a golden star gleamed forth; and he touched the
walls, and they spread forth widely, and she saw the organ which was
pealing its rich sounds; and she saw the old pictures of clergymen and
their wives; and the congregation sat in the decorated seats, and sang
from their hymn-books. The church had come to the poor girl in her
narrow room, or her chamber had become a church. She sat in the chair
with the rest of the clergyman's people; and when they had finished the
psalm, and looked up, they nodded and said:

"That was right that you came here, Karen."

"It was mercy!" said she.

And the organ sounded its glorious notes; and the children's voices
singing in the chorus sounded sweet and lovely; the clear sunshine
streamed so warm through the window upon the chair in which Karen sat;
and her heart became so filled with sunshine, peace, and joy, that it
broke. Her soul flew on the sunbeams to heaven; and there was nobody who
asked after the RED SHOES.


THE LOVLIEST ROSE IN THE WORLD

By HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN


Once there reigned a Queen, in whose garden were found the most glorious
flowers at all seasons and from all the lands in the world; but
especially she loved roses, and therefore she possessed the most various
kinds of this flower, from the wild dog-rose, with the apple-scented
green leaves, to the most splendid Provence rose. They grew against the
earth walls, wound themselves round pillars and window-frames, into the
passages, and all along the ceiling in all the halls. And the roses were
various in fragrance, form, and color.

But care and sorrow dwelt in these halls: the Queen lay upon a sick-bed,
and the doctors declared that she must die.

"There is still one thing that can serve her," said the wisest of them.
"Bring her the loveliest rose in the world, the one which is the
expression of the brightest and purest love; for if that is brought
before her eyes ere they close, she will not die."

And young and old came from every side with roses, the loveliest that
bloomed in each garden; but they were not the right sort. The flower was
to be brought out of the garden of Love; but what rose was it there that
expressed the highest and purest love?

And the poets sang of the loveliest rose in the world, and each one
named his own; and intelligence was sent far round the land to every
heart that beat with love, to every class and condition, and to every
age.

"No one has till now named the flower," said the wise man. "No one has
pointed out the place where it bloomed in its splendor. They are not the
roses from the coffin of Romeo and Juliet, or from the Walburg's grave,
though these roses will be ever fragrant in song. They are not the roses
that sprouted forth from Winkelried's blood-stained lances, from the
blood that flows in a sacred cause from the breast of the hero who dies
for his country; though no death is sweeter than this, and no rose
redder than the blood that flows then. Nor is it that wondrous flower,
to cherish which man devotes, in a quiet chamber, many a sleepless
night, and much of his fresh life--the magic flower of science."

"I know where it blooms," said a happy mother, who came with her pretty
child to the bedside of the Queen. "I know where the loveliest rose of
the world is found! The rose that is the expression of the highest and
purest love springs from the blooming cheeks of my sweet child when,
strengthened by sleep, it opens its eyes and smiles at me with all its
affection!"

"Lovely is this rose; but there is still a lovelier," said the wise man.

"Yes, a far lovelier one," said one of the women. "I have seen it, and a
loftier, purer rose does not bloom. I saw it on the cheeks of the
Queen. She had taken off her golden crown, and in the long dreary night
she was carrying her sick child in her arms: she wept, kissed it, and
prayed for her child as a mother prays in the hour of her anguish."

"Holy and wonderful in its might is the white rose of grief; but it is
not the one we seek."

"No, the loveliest rose of the world I saw at the altar of the Lord,"
said the good old Bishop. "I saw it shine as if an angel's face had
appeared. The young maidens went to the Lord's Table, and renewed the
promise made at their baptism, and roses were blushing, and pale roses
shining on their fresh cheeks. A young girl stood there; she looked with
all the purity and love of her young spirit up to heaven: that was the
expression of the highest and purest love."

"May she be blessed," said the wise man; "but not one of you has yet
named to me the loveliest rose of the world."

Then there came into the room a child, the Queen's little son. Tears
stood in his eyes and glistened on his cheeks; he carried a great open
book, and the binding was of velvet, with great silver clasps.

"Mother!" cried the boy, "only hear what I have read."

And the child sat by the bedside, and read from the book of Him who
suffered death on the cross to save men, and even those who were not yet
born.

"Greater love there is not"--

And a roseate hue spread over the cheeks of the Queen, and her eyes
gleamed, for she saw that from the leaves of the book there bloomed the
loveliest rose, that sprang from the blood of Christ shed on the cross.

"I see it!" she said: "he who beholds this, the loveliest rose on earth,
shall never die."


A VISION OF THE LAST DAY

By HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN


Of all the days of our life the greatest and most solemn is the day on
which we die. Hast thou ever tried to realize that most sure, most
portentous hour, the last hour we shall spend on earth?

There was a certain man, an upholder of truth and justice, a Christian
man and orthodox, so the world esteemed him. And, in sooth, it may be
that some good thing was found in him, since in sleep, amid the visions
of the night, it pleased the Father of spirits to reveal him to himself,
making manifest to him what he was in truth, namely, one of those who
trust in themselves that they are righteous and despise others.

He went to rest, secure that his accounts were right with all men, that
he had paid his dues and wrought good works that day; of the secret
pride of his heart, of the harsh words that had passed his lips, he took
no account at all. And so he slept, and in his sleep Death stood by his
bedside, a glorious Angel, strong, spotless, beautiful, but unlike every
other angel, stern, unsmiling, pitiless of aspect.

"Thine hour is come, and thou must follow me!" spake Death. And Death's
cold finger touched the man's feet, whereupon they became like ice, then
touched his forehead, then his heart. And the chain that bound the
immortal soul to clay was riven asunder, and the soul was free to follow
the Angel of Death.

But during those brief seconds, while yet that awful touch thrilled
through feet, and head, and heart, there passed over the dying man, as
in great, heaving, ocean waves, the recollection of all that he had
wrought and felt in his whole life; just as one shuddering glance into a
whirlpool suffices to reveal in thought rapid as lightning, the entire
unfathomable depth; just as in one momentary glance at the starry
heavens we can conceive the infinite multitude of that glorious host of
unknown orbs.

In such a retrospect the terrified sinner shrinks back into himself, and
finding there no stay by which to cling, must feel shrinking into
infinite nothingness; while the devout soul raises its thoughts to the
Almighty, yielding itself up to Him in childlike trust, and praying,
"Thy will be done in me!"

But this man had not the childlike mind, neither did he tremble like the
sinner; his thoughts were still the self-praising thoughts in which he
had fallen asleep. His path, he believed, must lead straight heavenward,
and Mercy, the promised Mercy, would open to him the gates.

And, in his dream, the Soul followed the Angel of Death, though not
without first casting one wistful glance at the couch where lay, in its
white shroud, the lifeless image of clay, still, as it were, bearing the
impress of the soul's own individuality. And now they hovered through
the air, now glided along the ground. Was it a vast decorated hall they
were passing through, or a forest? It seemed hard to tell; Nature, it
appeared, was formally set out for show, as in the artificial old French
gardens, and amid its strange, carefully arranged scenes, passed and
repassed troops of men and women, all clad as for a masquerade.

"Such is human life!" said the Angel of Death.

The figures seemed more or less disguised; those who swept by in the
glories of velvet and gold were not all among the noblest or most
dignified-looking, neither were all those who wore the garb of poverty
insignificant or vulgar. It was a strange masquerade! But most strange
it was to see how one and all carefully concealed under their clothing
something they would not have others perceive, but in vain, for each was
bent upon discovering his neighbor's secret, and they tore and snatched
at one another till, now here, now there, some part of an animal was
revealed. In one was found the grinning head of an ape, in another the
cloven foot of a goat, in a third the poison-fang of a snake, in a
fourth the clammy fin of a fish.

All had in them some token of the animal--the animal which is fast
rooted in human nature, and which here was seen struggling to burst
forth. And, however closely a man might hold his garment over it, the
others would never rest till they had rent the hiding veil, and all kept
crying out, "Look here! look now! here he is! there she is!"--and every
one mockingly laid bare his fellow's shame.

"And what was the animal in me?" inquired the disembodied Soul; and the
Angel of Death pointed to a haughty form, around whose head shone a
bright, widespread glory of rainbow-colored rays, but at whose heart
might be seen lurking, half-hidden, the feet of the peacock; the glory
was, in fact, merely the peacock's gaudy tail.

And as they passed on, large, foul-looking birds shrieked out from the
boughs of the trees; with clear, intelligible, though harsh, human
voices they shrieked, "Thou that walkest with Death, dost remember me?"
All the evil thoughts and desires that had nestled within him from his
birth until his death now called after him, "Rememberest thou me?"

And the Soul shuddered, recognizing the voices; it could not deny
knowledge of the evil thoughts and desires that were now rising up in
witness against it.

"In our flesh, in our evil nature, dwelleth no good thing," cried the
Soul; "but, at least, thoughts never with me ripened into actions; the
world has not seen the evil fruit." And the Soul hurried on to get free
from the accusing voices; but the great black fowls swept in circles
round, and screamed out their scandalous words louder and louder, as
though they would be heard all over the world. And the Soul fled from
them like the hunted stag, and at every step stumbled against sharp
flint stones that lay in the path. "How came these sharp stones here?
They look like mere withered leaves lying on the ground."

"Every stone is for some incautious word thou hast spoken, which lay as
a stumbling-block in thy neighbor's path, which wounded thy neighbor's
heart far more sorely and deeply than these sharp flints now wound thy
feet."

"Alas! I never once thought of that," sighed the Soul.

And those words of the gospel rang through the air, "Judge not, that ye
be not judged."

"We have all sinned," said the Soul, recovering from its momentary
self-abasement. "I have kept the Law and the Gospel, I have done what I
could, I am not as others are!"

And in his dream this man now stood at the gates of heaven, and the
Angel who guarded the entrance inquired, "Who art thou? Tell me thy
faith, and show it to me in thy works."

"I have faithfully kept the Commandments, I have humbled myself in the
eyes of the world, I have preserved myself free from the pollution of
intercourse with sinners, I have hated and persecuted evil, and those
who practice it, and I would do so still, yea, with fire and sword, had
I the power."

"Then thou art one of Mohammed's followers?" said the Angel.

"I? a Mohammedan?--never!"

"'He who strikes with the sword shall perish by the sword,' thus spake
the Son; His religion thou knowest not. It may be that thou art one of
the children of Israel, whose maxim is, 'An eye for an eye, a tooth for
a tooth'--art thou such?"

"I am a Christian."

"I see it not in thy faith or in thine actions. The law of Christ is the
law of forgiveness, love, and mercy."

"Mercy!" The gracious echo of that sweet word thrilled through infinite
space, the gates of heaven opened, and the Soul hovered toward the
realms of endless bliss.

But the flood of light that streamed forth from within was so dazzlingly
bright, so transcendently white and pure, that the Soul shrank back as
from a two-edged sword, and the hymns and harp-tones of Angels mingled
in such exquisite celestial harmony as the earthly mind has not power
either to conceive or to endure. And the Soul trembled and bowed itself
deeper and deeper, and the heavenly light penetrated it through and
through, and it felt to the quick, as it had never truly felt before,
the burden of its own pride, cruelty, and sin.

"What I have done of good in the world, that did I because I could not
otherwise, but the evil that I did--that was of myself!"

The confession was wrung from him; more and more the man felt dazzled
and overpowered by the pure light of heaven; he seemed falling into a
measureless abyss, the abyss of his own nakedness and unworthiness.
Shrunk into himself, humbled, cast out, unripe for the kingdom of
heaven, shuddering at the thought of the just and holy God--hardly dared
he to gasp out, "Mercy!"

And the face of the Angel at the portal was turned toward him in
softening pity. "Mercy is for them who implore it, not claim it; there
is Mercy also for thee. Turn thee, child of man, turn thee back the way
thou camest to thy clayey tabernacle; in pity is it given thee to dwell
in dust yet a little while. Be no longer righteous in thine own eyes,
copy Him who with patience endured the contradiction of sinners, strive
and pray that thou mayest become poor in spirit, and so mayest thou yet
inherit the Kingdom."

"Holy, loving, glorious forever shalt thou be, O, erring human
spirit!"--thus rang the chorus of Angels. And again overpowered by those
transcendent melodies, dazzled and blinded by that excess of purest
light, the Soul again shrank back into itself. It seemed to be falling
an infinite depth; the celestial music grew fainter and fainter, till
common earthly sights and sounds dispelled the vision. The rays of the
early morning sun falling full on his face, the cheerful crow of the
vigilant cock, called the sleeper up to pray.

Inexpressibly humbled, yet thankful, he arose and knelt beside his bed.
"Thou, who hast shown me to myself, help me now, that I may not only do
justly, but love mercy, and walk humbly with my God. Thou, who hast
convicted me of sin, now purify me, strengthen me, that, though ever
unworthy of Thy presence, I may yet, supported by Thy Love, dare to
ascend into Thine ever lasting light!"

The Vision was his; be the lesson, the prayer, also ours.


THE OLD GRAVESTONE

By HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN


In one of our small trading towns, at that time of year when folk say
"The evenings grow long," a whole family was assembled together. The air
was still mild and warm; the lamp was lighted, the long curtains hung
down before the windows, and bright moonlight prevailed without. They
were talking about a big old stone that lay down in the yard, close by
the kitchen door, where the servants often placed the kitchen utensils,
after they had been cleaned, to dry in the sun, and where the children
were fond of playing; it was, in fact, an old gravestone.

"Yes," said the master of the house, "I believe it comes from the old
ruined convent chapel; pulpit and gravestones, with all their epitaphs,
were sold; my late father bought several of these; the others were
broken into paving-stones, but this one was left unused, lying in the
yard."

"It is easy to know it for a gravestone," said the eldest of the
children. "You can still see on it an mountain-sides and a piece of an
angel, but the inscription is almost quite worn out, except the name
'Preben,' and a capital 'S' a little further on, and underneath it
'Martha,' but it is impossible to make out any more, and that you can
only read after if has been raining, or when we have washed it."

"Why, then, it must be the gravestone of Preben Swan and his wife!"
exclaimed an old man, who by his age might appear the grandfather of
everybody in the room. "To be sure, they were among the last that were
buried in the old convent churchyard--the grand old couple! Everybody
knew them, everybody loved them; they were like king and queen in the
town. Folk said they had more than a barrelful of gold, and yet they
went about simply clad, in the coarsest cloth, only their linen was
always of dazzling whiteness. Yes, that was a charming old pair, Preben
and Martha. One was always so glad to see them, sitting together on the
bench at the top of their stone staircase, under the old lime-tree's
shade. They were so good to the poor! they feasted them, clothed them,
and there was good sense and a true Christian spirit in all their
benevolence.

Part of this was owing to her education, part to the necessity of repelling
sometimes the advances of conceited coxcombs. But she was really a
most interesting girl, with much of her father's spirit, resolution,
and ability. Her affection for him was only exceeded by his for her.
True, their lives were centred in each other too much. But it was very
beautiful to behold.

Such was the condition of Burnsville, and such the situation of Joel Burns,
when Hiram Meeker sought to remove to that place and enter his service.

A MERCHANT'S STORY.

'All of which I saw, and part of which I was.'

CHAPTER I.

It is a dingy old sign. It has hung there in sun and rain till its
letters are faint and its face is furrowed. It has looked down on a
generation that has passed away, and seen those who placed it there go
out of that doorway never to return; still it clings to that dingy
old warehouse, and still Russell, Rollins & Co. is signed in that dingy
old counting-room at the head of the stairway. It is known the world
over.
It is heard of on the cotton-fields of Texas, in the cane-brakes of
Cuba, and amid the rice-swamps of Carolina. The Chinaman speaks of it
as he sips his tea and handles his chop-sticks in the streets of Canton,
and the half-naked negro rattles its gold as he gathers palm-oil and the
copal-gum on the western coast of Africa. Its plain initials, painted
in black on a white ground, float from tall masts over many seas, and
its simple 'promise to pay,' scrawled in a bad hand on a narrow strip
of paper, unlocks the vaults of the best bankers in Europe.

And yet, it is a dingy old sign! Men look up to it as they pass by, and
wonder that a cracked, weather-beaten board that would not sell
for a dollar, should be counted 'good for a million.'

It is a dingy old warehouse, with narrow, dark, cobwebbed windows, and
wide, rusty iron shutters, which, as the bleak November wind sweeps up
old Long Wharf, swing slowly on their hinges with a sharp, grating
creak. I heard them in my boyhood. Perched on a tall stool at that old
desk, I used to listen, in the long winter-nights, to those strange,
wild cries, till I fancied they were voices of the uneasy dead, come
back to take the vacant seats beside me, and to pace again, with ghostly
tread, the floor of that dark old counting-room. They were ever a mystery
and a terror to me; but they never creaked so harshly, or cried
so wildly, as on a bleak November night, not many years ago, when
I turned my steps, for the last time, up the trembling old stairway.

It was just after nightfall. A single gas-burner threw a dim, uncertain
light over the old desk, and lit up the figure of a tall, gray-headed
man, who was bending over it. He had round, stooping shoulders, and
long, spindling limbs. One of his large feet, encased in a thick,
square-toed shoe, rested on the round of the desk, the other, which was
planted squarely on the floor, upheld his spare, gaunt frame. His face
was thin and long, and two deep, black lines under his eyes contrasted
strangely with the pallid whiteness of his features. His clothes were
of the fashion of some years ago, and had, no doubt, served long as his
'Sunday best,' before being degraded to daily duty.

They were of plain black, and though not shabby, were worn and
threadbare, and of decidedly economical appearance.

Every thing about him, indeed, wore an economical look.

His scant coat-tails, narrow pants, and short waistcoat, showed that
the cost of each inch of material had been counted, while his thin hair,
brushed carefully over his bald head, had not a lock to spare; and
even his large, sharp bones were covered with only just enough
flesh to hold them comfortably together.

He had stood there till his eye was dim and his step feeble, and though
he had, for twenty years--when handing in his semi-annual trial-balances
to the head of the house--declared that each one was his last, every body
said he would continue to stand there till his own trial-balance was
struck, and his earthly accounts were closed forever.

As I entered, he turned his mild blue eye upon me, and taking my hand
warmly in his, exclaimed:

'My dear boy'--I was nearly forty--'I am glad to see you.'
'I am glad to see _you_, David.'
'Why, bless me, Mr. Kirke, is that you?' exclaimed a much younger man,
springing from his seat near the other, and grasping me by both hands.

'What has brought you to Boston?'
'Business, Frank.

I've just arrived, and go back to-morrow. Come! my wife is in the
carriage at the door, and wants you to spend the evening with us.'
'I can't--I'm very sorry,' and he added, in a lower tone, '_she_
has just heard of her father's death, and goes home to-morrow. I
have engaged to pass the evening with her.'
'Her father dead! how was it?'
'He was thrown from his horse, and died the same day. She knew
nothing of it till yesterday. I can not neglect her now. I will
spend to-morrow with mother.'
He always called her _mother_, though he was not her son.--and the boy drew forth a phial, which his mother put to her
lips. "Ah, that is as good as warm meat, and it is not so dear. O, the
water is so cold--but if my strength will but last me out to bring you
up honestly, my sweet child!"

At that moment approached an elderly woman, poorly clad, blind of one
eye, lame on one leg, and with her hair brushed into one large curl to
hide the blind eye--but in vain, the defect was only the more
conspicuous. This was "Lame Maren," as the neighbors called her, a
friend of the washerwoman's. "Poor thing, slaving and toiling away in
the cold water! it is hard that you should be called names"--for Maren
had overheard the sheriff speaking to the child about his own mother--
"hard that your boy should be told you are good-for-nothing."

"What! did the sheriff really say so, child?" said the Laundress, and
her lips quivered. "So you have a mother who is good-for-nothing!
Perhaps he is right, only he should not say so to the child--but I must
not complain, for good things have come to me from that house."

"Why yes, you were in service there once, when the sheriff's parents
were alive, many years since. There is a grand dinner at the sheriff's
to-day," went on Maren; "it would have been put off, though, had not
everything been prepared. I heard it from the porter. News came in a
letter, an hour ago, that the sheriff's younger brother, at Copenhagen,
is dead."

"Dead!" repeated the Laundress, and she turned as white as a corpse.

"What do you care about it?" said Maren. "To be sure, you must have
known him, since you served in the house."

"Is he dead? he was the best, the kindest of creatures! indeed, there
are not many like him," and the tears rolled down her cheeks. "O, the
world is turning round, I feel so ill!" and she clung to the
washing-stool for support.

"You are ill, indeed!" cried Maren. "Take care, the stool will overturn.
I had better get you home at once."

"But the linen?"

"I will look after that--only lean on me. The boy can stay here and
watch it till I come back and wash what is left; it is not much."

The poor laundress's limbs trembled under her. "I have stood too long in
the cold water; I have had no food since yesterday. O, my poor child!"
and she wept.

The boy cried too, as he sat alone beside the brook, watching the wet
linen. Slowly the two women made their way up the little alley and
through the street, past the sheriff's house. Just as she reached her
humble home, the laundress fell down on the paving-stones, fainting.
She was carried upstairs and put to bed. Kind Maren hastened to prepare
a cup of warm ale--that was the best medicine in this case, she
thought--and then went back to the brook and did the best she could with
the linen.

In the evening she was again in the laundress's miserable room. She had
begged from the sheriff's cook a few roasted potatoes and a little bit
of bacon, for the sick woman. Maren and the boy feasted upon these, but
the patient was satisfied with the smell of them--that, she declared,
was very nourishing.

Supper over, the boy went to bed, lying crosswise at his mother's feet,
with a coverlet made of old carpet-ends, blue and red, sewed together.

The Laundress now felt a little better; the warm ale had strengthened
her, the smell of the meat had done her good.

"Now, you good soul," said she to Maren, "I will tell you all about it,
while the boy is asleep. That he is already; look at him, how sweetly he
looks with his eyes closed; he little thinks how his mother has
suffered. May he never feel the like! Well, I was in service with the
sheriff's parents when their youngest son, the student, came home; I was
a wild young thing then, but honest--that I must say for myself. And the
student was so pleasant and merry, a better youth never lived. He was a
son of the house, I only a servant, but we became sweethearts--all in
honor and honesty--and he told his mother that he loved me; she was like
an angel in his eyes, so wise, kind, and loving! And he went away, but
his gold ring of betrothal was on my finger. When he was really gone, my
mistress called me in to speak to her; so grave, yet so kind she looked,
so wisely she spoke, like an angel, indeed. She showed me what a gulf of
difference in tastes, habits, arid mind lay between her son and me. 'He
sees you now to be good-hearted and pretty, but will you always be the
same in his eyes? You have not been educated as he has been;
intellectually you cannot rise to his level. I honor the poor,' she
continued, 'and I know that in the kingdom of heaven many a poor man
will sit in a higher seat than the rich; but that is no reason for
breaking the ranks in this world, and you two, left to yourselves, would
drive your carriage full tilt against all obstacles till it toppled over
with you both. I know that a good honest handicraftsman, Erik, the
glove-maker, has been your suitor; he is a widower without children, he
is well off; think whether you cannot be content with him.' Every word
my mistress spoke went like a knife through my heart, but I knew she was
right; I kissed her hand, and shed such bitter tears! But bitterer tears
still came when I went into my chamber and lay upon my bed. O, the long,
dreary night that followed! Our Lord alone knows what I suffered. Not
till I went to church on Sunday did a light break upon my darkness. It
seemed providential that as I came out of church I met Erik the
glove-maker. There were no more doubts in my mind; he was a good man,
and of my own rank. I went straight to him, took his hand, and asked,
'Art thou still in the same mind toward me?'--'Yes, and I shall never be
otherwise minded,' he replied.--'Dost thou care to have a girl who likes
and honors thee, but does not love thee?'--'I believe love will come,'
he said, and so he took my hand. I went home to my mistress; the gold
ring that her son had given to me, that I wore all day next my heart,
and on my finger at night in bed, I now drew forth; I kissed it till my
mouth bled, I gave it to my mistress, and said that next week the bans
would be read for me and the glove-maker. My mistress took me in her
arms and kissed me; she did not tell me I was good-for-nothing; I was
good for something then, it seems, before I had known so much trouble.
The wedding was at Candlemastide, and our first year all went well; my
husband had apprentices, and you, Maren, helped me in the housework."

"O, and you were such a good mistress!" exclaimed Maren. "Never shall I
forget how kind you and your husband were to me."

"Ah, you were with us during our good times! We had no children then.
The student I never saw again--yes, once I saw him, but he did not see
me. He came to his mother's funeral; I saw him standing by her grave,
looking so sad, so ashy pale--but all for his mother's sake. When
afterward his father died, he was abroad and did not come to the
funeral. Nor has he been here since; he is a lawyer, that I know, and he
has never married. But he thought no more of me, and had he seen me, he
would certainly have never recognized me, so ugly as I am now. And it is
right it should be so."

Then she went on to speak of the bitter days of adversity, when troubles
had come upon them in a flood. They had five hundred rix-dollars, and as
in their street a house could be bought for two hundred, it was
considered a good investment to buy it, take it down, and build it anew.
The house was bought; masons and carpenters made an estimate that one
thousand and twenty rix-dollars more would be required. Erik arranged to
borrow this sum from Copenhagen, but the ship that was to bring him the
money was lost, and the money with it. "It was just then that my sweet
boy, who lies sleeping here, was born. Then his father fell sick; for
three-quarters of a year I had to dress and undress him every day. We
went on borrowing and borrowing; all our things had to be sold, one by
one; at last Erik died. Since then I have toiled and moiled for the
boy's sake, have gone out cleaning and washing, done coarse work or
fine, whichever I could get; but I do everything worse and worse; my
strength will never return any more; it is our Lord's will! He will take
me away, and find better provision for my boy."

She fell asleep. In the morning she seemed better, and fancied she was
strong enough to go to her work again. But no sooner did she feel the
cold water than a shivering seized her, she felt about convulsively with
her hands, tried to step forward, and fell down. Her head lay on the
dry bank, but her feet were in the water of the brook, her wooden shoes
were carried away by the stream. Here she was found by Maren.

A message had been taken to her lodging that the sheriff wanted her, had
something to say to her. It was too late; the poor washerwoman was dead.
The letter that had brought the sheriff news of his brother's death also
gave an abstract of his will; among other bequests he had left six
hundred rix-dollars to the glove-maker's widow, who had formerly served
his parents. "There was some love-nonsense between my brother and her,"
quoth the sheriff. "It is all as well she is out of the way; now it will
all come to the boy, and I shall apprentice him to honest folk who will
make him a good workman." For whatever the sheriff might do, were it
ever so kind an action, he always spoke harshly and unkindly. So he now
called the boy to him, promised to provide for him, and told him it was
a good thing his mother was dead; she was good-for-nothing!

She was buried in the paupers' churchyard. Maren planted a little
rose-tree over the grave; the boy stood by her side the while.

"My darling mother!" he sighed, as the tears streamed down from his
eyes. "It was not true that she was good-for-nothing!"

"No, indeed!" cried her old friend, looking up to heaven. "Let the world
say she was good-for-nothing; our Lord in his heavenly kingdom will not
say so."


"IN THE UTTERMOST PARTS OF THE SEA"

By HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN


Some large ships were sent up toward the North Pole, for the purpose of
discovering the boundaries of land and sea, and of trying how far men
could make their way.

A year and a day had elapsed; amid mist and ice had they, with great
difficulty, steered further and further; the winter had now begun; the
sun had set, one long night would continue during many, many weeks. One
unbroken plain of ice spread around them; the ships were all fast moored
to it; the snow lay about in heaps, and had even shaped itself into
cubiform houses, some as big as our barrows, some only just large enough
for two or three men to find shelter within. Darkness they could not
complain of, for the Northern Lights--Nature's fireworks--now red, now
blue, flashed unceasingly, and the snow glistened so brightly.

At times when it was brightest came troops of the natives,
strange-looking figures, clad in hairy skins, and with sledges made out
of hard fragments of ice; they brought skins to exchange, which the
sailors were only too glad to use as warm carpets inside their snow
houses, and as beds whereon they could rest under their snowy tents,
while outside prevailed an intensity of cold such as we never experience
during our severest winters. But the sailors remembered that at home it
was still autumn; and they thought of the warm sunbeams and the leaves
still clinging to the trees in varied glories of crimson and gold. Their
watches told them it was evening, and time for rest, and in one of the
snow houses two sailors had already lain down to sleep; the youngest of
these two had with him his best home-treasure, the Bible that his
grandmother had given him at parting. Every night it lay under his
pillow; he had known its contents from childhood, and every day he read
a portion; and often as he lay on his couch, he recalled to mind those
holy words of comfort, "If I should take the wings of the morning, and
remain in the uttermost parts of the sea, even there should Thy hand
lead me, and Thy right hand should hold me."

These sublime words of faith were on his lips as he closed his eyes,
when sleep came to him, and dreams with sleep--busy, swift-winged
dreams, proving that though the body may rest, the soul must ever be
awake. First he seemed to hear the melodies of songs dear to him in his
home; a mild summer breeze seemed to breathe upon him, and a light shone
upon his couch, as though the snowy dome above him had become
transparent; he lifted his head, and behold! the dazzling white light
was not the white of a snow wall, it came from the large wings of an
angel stooping over him, an angel with eyes beaming with love. The
angel's form seemed to spring from the pages of the Bible, as from the
pitcher of a lily-blossom; he extended his arms, and lo! the narrow
walls of the snow-hut sank back like a mist melting before the daylight.
Once again the green meadows and autumnal-tinted woods of the sailor's
home lay around him, bathed in quiet sunshine; the stork's nest was
empty, but the apples still clung to the wild apple-tree; though leaves
had fallen, the red hips glistened, and the blackbird whistled in the
little green cage that hung in the lowly window of his childhood's home;
the blackbird whistled the tune he had taught him, and the old
grandmother wound chickweed about the bars of the cage, as her grandson
had been wont to do. And the smith's pretty young daughter stood drawing
water from the well, and as she nodded to the grandmother, the latter
beckoned to her, and held up a letter to show her, a letter that had
come that morning from the cold northern lands, from the North Pole
itself, where the old woman's grandson now was--safe under God's
protecting hand. And the two women, old and young, laughed and wept by
turns--and he the while, the young sailor whose body was sleeping amid
ice and snow, his spirit roaming in the world of dreams, under the
angel's wings, saw and heard it all, and laughed and wept with them. And
from the letter these words were read aloud, "Even in the uttermost
parts of the sea, His right hand shall hold me fast": and a sweet,
solemn music was wafted round him, and the angel drooped his wings; like
a soft protecting veil they fell closer over the sleeper.

The dream was ended; all was darkness in the little snow-hut, but the
Bible lay under the sailor's head, faith and hope abode in his heart.
God was with him, and his home was with him, "even in the uttermost
parts of the sea."


"SOMETHING"

By HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN


"I will be Something," declared the eldest of five brothers; "I will be
of use in the world; be it ever so humble a position that I may hold,
let me be but useful, and that will be Something. I will make bricks;
folk cannot do without them, so I shall at least do Something."

"Something very little, though," replied the second brother. "Why, it is
as good as nothing! it is work that might be done by a machine. Better
be a mason, as I intend to be. Then one belongs to a guild, becomes a
citizen, has a banner of one's own. Nay, if all things go well, I may
become a master, and have apprentices and workmen under me. That will be
Something!"

"It will be nothing at all then, I can tell you that!" rejoined the
third. "Think how many different ranks there are in a town far above
that of a master-mason. You may be an honest sort of a man, but you will
never be a gentleman; gentle and simple; those are the two grand
divisions, and you will always be one of the 'simple.' Well, I know
better than that. I will be an architect; I will be one of the thinkers,
the artists; I will raise myself to the aristocracy of intellect. I may
have to begin from the very lowest grade; I may begin as a carpenter's
boy, and run about with a paper-cap on my head, to fetch ale for the
workmen; I may not enjoy it, but I shall try to imagine it is only a
masquerade. 'To-morrow,' I shall say, 'I will go my own way, and others
shall not come near me.' Yes, I shall go to the Academy, learn to draw,
and be called an architect. That will be Something! I may get a title,
perhaps; and I shall build and build, as others before me have done.
Yes, that will be Something!"

"But it is Something that I care nothing about," said the fourth. "I
should not care to go on, on, in the beaten track, to be a mere copyist;
I will be a genius, cleverer than all of you put together; I will create
a new style, provide ideas for buildings suited to the climate and
materials of our country, suited to our national character, and the
requirements of the age."

"But supposing the climate and the materials don't agree," suggested the
fifth, "how will you get on then, if they won't co-operate? As for our
national character, to be following out that in architecture will be
sheer affectation, and the requirements of modern civilization will
drive you perfectly mad. I see you will none of you ever be anything,
though of course you won't believe me. But do as you please, I shall not
be like you. I shall reason over what you execute; there is something
ridiculous in everything; I shall find it out, show you yeur
faults--that will be Something!"

And he kept his word; and folk said of this fifth brother, "There is
something in him, certainly; he has plenty of brains! but he does
nothing." But he was content, he was Something.

But what became of the five brothers? We will hear the whole.

The eldest brother, the brickmaker, found that every brick he turned out
whole yielded him a tiny copper coin--only copper--but a great many of
these small coins, added together, could be converted into a bright
silver dollar, and through the power of this, wheresoever he knocked,
whether at baker's, butcher's, or tailor's, the door flew open, and he
received what he wanted. Such was the virtue of his bricks; some, of
course, got broken before they were finished, but a use was found even
for these. For up by the trench would poor Mother Margaret fain build
herself a little house, if she might; she took all the broken bricks,
ay, and she got a few whole ones besides, for a good heart had the
eldest brother, though only a brickmaker. The poor thing built her house
with her own hands; it was very narrow, its one window was all on one
side, the door was too low, and the thatch on the roof might have been
laid on better, but it gave her shelter and a home, and could be seen
far over the sea, which sometimes burst over the trench in its might,
and sprinkled a salt shower over the little house, which kept its place
there years after he who made the bricks was dead and gone.

As for the second brother, he learned to build after another fashion, as
he had resolved. When he was out of his apprenticeship, he buckled on
his knapsack and started, singing as he went, on his travels. He came
home again, and became a master in his native town; he built, house
after house, a whole street of houses; there they stood, looked well,
and were a credit to the town; and these houses soon built him a little
house for himself. How? Ask the houses, and they will give you no
answer; but the people will answer you and say, "Why, of course, the
street built him his house!" It was small enough, and had only a clay
floor, but when he and his bride danced over it, the floor grew as
smooth as if it had been polished, and from every stone in the wall
sprung a flower, that looked as gay as the costliest tapestry. It was a
pretty house and a happy wedded pair. The banner of the Masons' Guild
waved outside, and workmen and apprentices shouted "Hurra!" Yes, that
was Something! and at last he died--that, too, was Something!

Next comes the architect, the third brother. He began as a carpenter's
apprentice, and ran about the town on errands, wearing a paper-cap; but
he studied industriously at the Academy, and rose steadily upward. If
the street full of houses had built a house for his brother the mason,
the street took its name from the architect; the handsomest house in the
whole street was his--that was Something, and he was Something! His
children were gentlemen, and could boast of their "birth"; and when he
died, his widow was a widow of condition--that is Something--and his
name stood on the corner of the street, and was in everybody's
lips--that is Something, too!

Now for the genius, the fourth brother, who wanted to invent something
new, something original. Somehow the ground gave way beneath his feet;
he fell and broke his neck. But he had a splendid funeral, with music
and banners, and flowery paragraphs in the newspapers; and three
eulogiums were pronounced over him, each longer than the last, and this
would have pleased him mightily, for he loved speechifying of all
things. A monument was erected over his grave, only one story high--but
that is Something!

So now he was dead, as well as his three elder brothers; the youngest,
the critic, outlived them all, and that was as it should be, for thus he
had the last word, which to him was a matter of the greatest importance.
"He had plenty of brains," folk said. Now his hour had struck, he died,
and his soul sought the gates of heaven. There it stood side by side
with another soul--old Mother Margaret from the trenches.

"It is for the sake of contrast, I suppose, that I and this miserable
soul should wait here together," thought the critic. "Well now, who are
you, my good woman?" he inquired.

And the old woman replied, with as much respect as though St. Peter
himself were addressing her--in fact, she took him for St. Peter, he
gave himself such grand airs--"I am a poor old soul, I have no family, I
am only old Margaret from the house near the trenches."

"Well, and what have you done down below?"

"I have done as good as nothing in the world! nothing whatever! It will
be mercy, indeed, if such as I am suffered to pass through this gate."

"And how did you leave the world?" inquired the critic, carelessly. He
must talk about something; it wearied him to stand there, waiting.

"Well, I can hardly tell how I left it; I have been sickly enough during
these last few years, and could not well bear to creep out of bed at all
during the cold weather. It has been a severe winter, but now that is
all past. For a few days, as your highness must know, the wind was quite
still, but it was bitterly cold; the ice lay over the water as far as
one could see. All the people in the town were out on the ice; there was
dancing, and music, and feasting, and sledge-racing, I fancy; I could
hear something of it all as I lay in my poor little chamber. And when it
was getting toward evening, the moon was up, but was not yet very
bright; I looked from my bed through the window, and I saw how there
rose up over the sea a strange white cloud; I lay and watched it,
watched the black dot in it, which grew bigger and bigger, and then I
knew what it foreboded; that sign is not often seen, but I am old and
experienced. I knew it, and I shivered with horror. Twice before in my
life have I seen that sign, and I knew that there would be a terrible
storm and a spring flood; it would burst over the poor things on the
ice, who were drinking and dancing and merry-making. Young and old, the
whole town was out on the ice; who was to warn them, if no one saw it,
or no one knew what I knew? I felt so terrified, I felt all alive, as I
had not felt for years! I got out of bed, forced the window open; I
could see the folk running and dancing over the ice; I could see the
gay-colored flags, I could hear the boys shout 'Hurra!' and the girls
and lads a-singing. All were so merry; and all the time the white cloud
with its black speck rose higher and higher! I screamed as loud as I
could; but no one heard me, I was too far off. Soon would the storm
break loose, the ice would break in pieces, and all that crowd would
sink and drown. Hear me they could not; get out to them I could not;
what was to be done? Then our Lord sent me a good thought; I could set
fire to my bed; better let my house be burned to the ground than that so
many should miserably perish. So I kindled a light; I saw the red flame
mount up; I got out at the door, but then I fell down; I lay there, I
could not get up again. But the flames burst out through the window and
over the roof; they saw it down below, and they all ran as fast as they
could to help me; the poor old crone they believed would be burned;
there was not one who did not come to help me. I heard them come, and I
heard, too, such a rustling in the air, and then a thundering as of
heavy cannon-shots, for the spring-flood was loosening the ice, and it
all broke up. But the folk were all come off it to the trenches, where
the sparks were flying about me; I had them all safe. But I could not
bear the cold and the fright, and that is how I have come up here. Can
the gates of heaven be opened to such a poor old creature as I? I have
no house now at the trenches; where can I go, if they refuse me here?"

Then the gates opened, and the Angel bade poor Margaret enter. As she
passed the threshold, she dropped a blade of straw--straw from her
bed--that bed which she had set alight to save the people on the ice,
and lo! it had changed into gold! dazzling gold! yet flexible withal,
and twisting into various forms.

"Look, that was what yonder poor woman brought," said the Angel. 'Will
you come home, my dear?' he said, Oh will you come home, my honey?
And by the point of my broad sword, A hand I'll ne'er lay on you.'
'Last night I lay on a good feather-bed, And my own wedded lord beside
me, And to-night I'll lie in the ash-corner, With the gypsies all
around me.

'They took off my high-heeled shoes, That were made of Spanish leather,
And I have put on coarse Lowland brogues, To trip it o'er the heather.'

'The Earl of Cashan is lying sick; Not one hair I'm sorry; I'd
rather have a kiss from his fair lady's lips Than all his gold and
his money.'

THERE WERE THREE LADIES
THERE were three ladies play'd at the ba', With a hey, hey, an' a lilly
gay.

Bye cam three lords an' woo'd them a', Whan the roses smelled sae
sweetly.

The first o' them was clad in yellow:

'O fair May, will ye be my marrow?'

Whan the roses smelled sae sweetly.

The niest o' them was clad i' ried:
O fair May, will ye be my bride?'
The thrid o' them was clad i' green:
He said, 'O fair May, will ye be my queen?'

THE HEIR OF LINNE
PART I
LITHE and listen, gentlemen, To sing a song I will begin:
It is of a lord of faire Scotlànd, Which was the unthrifty heir of
Linne.

His father was a right good lord, His mother a lady of high degree; But
they, alas! were dead, him froe, And he lov'd keeping companie.
To spend the day with merry cheer, To drinke and revell every night,
To card and dice from eve to morne, It was, I weep, his heart's
delight.
To ride, to run, to rant, to roar, To alwaye spend and never spare,
I wot, an' it were the king himself, Of gold and fee he mote be
bare.
So fares the unthrifty lord of Linne Till all his gold is gone and
spent; And he maun sell his lands so broad, His house, and lands,
and all his rent.
His father had a keen stewàrde, And John o' the Scales was called
he:
But John is become a gentel-man, And John has got both gold and
fee.
Says, Welcome, welcome, lord of Linne, Let nought disturb thy merry
cheer; If thou wilt sell thy lands soe broad, Good store of gold I
'll give thee here.She had listened,
understood, and kept his words.

Her father was a poor honest man, and when first he brought her to the
school, he had made the stipulation that she should not be taught the
Christian faith. To let her go away during the Scripture lesson might,
however, have given offence, and raised thoughts of various kinds in the
minds of the other children, and so she stayed; but this could not go on
any longer.

The teacher went to her father, and told him that either he must take
his daughter away from the school, or consent to her becoming a
Christian.

"I cannot bear to see those burning eyes, that yearning, that thirst of
the soul, as it were, after the words of the gospel," said the teacher.

And the father burst into tears. "I know but little myself of our own
religion, but her mother was a daughter of Israel, of strong and firm
faith, and on her dying bed I made a vow that our child should never
receive Christian baptism; that vow I must keep; it is to me as a
convenant with God."

And the little Jewish girl was taken away from the school of the
Christians.

Years rolled by.

In one of the smallest towns of Jutland served as maid in a plain
burgher's house a poor girl of the Mosaic faith; this was Sarah. Her
hair was black as ebony, her eyes dark, and yet brilliant and full of
light, such as you see among the daughters of the East; and the
expression in the countenance of the grown-up girl was still that of the
child who sat on the school-room bench, listening with thoughtful and
wistful eye.

Each Sunday sounded from the church the pealing of the organ to the song
of the congregation, and the tones floated over the street, into the
house, where the Jewish girl attended to her work, diligent and faithful
in her calling. "Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy," this was her
law; but her Sabbath was a day of labor to the Christians, and only in
her heart could she keep it holy; and that was not enough for her. But
when the thought arose in her soul, "What matters it before God about
days and hours?" and on the Sunday of the Christians her hour of
devotion remained undisturbed. If, then, the organ's peal and the
psalm-tunes reached over to her, where she stood in the kitchen, even
this became a quiet and consecrated spot. She would read then the
treasure and peculiar property of her people, the Old Testament, and
this alone; for she kept deep in her heart what her father had told the
teacher and herself when she was taken from the school--the vow made to
her dying mother, "that Sarah should not be baptized, not forsake the
faith of her fathers." The New Testament was, and should remain forever,
a sealed book to her; and yet she knew much of it; it shone to her
through the recollections of childhood.

One evening she sat in a corner of the parlor, and heard her master
reading aloud. She might listen, she thought, for this was not the
gospel; nay! 'twas out of an old story-book he read: she might stay. And
he read of a Hungarian knight, taken captive by a Turkish pasha, who had
him yoked with oxen to the plow; and he was driven with lashes, and had
to suffer pain and ignominy beyond endurance.

But at home the knight's wife sold all her jewels, and mortgaged castle
and lands, and his friends contributed large sums, for enormous was the
ransom demanded; still it was raised, and he was delivered out of
thraldom and disgrace. Sick and suffering, he came to his home. But
soon resounded far and near the summons to war against the foe of
Christianity. The sick man heard the call, and had neither peace nor
rest any longer; he was placed on his charger; the blood came again to
his cheeks, his strength seemed to return, and he rode forth to victory.
The very pasha who had him yoked to the plow, and made him suffer pain
and scorn, became his captive. He was carried home to the castle
dungeon, but before his first hour there had elapsed the knight came,
and asked the prisoner, "What dost thou think awaiteth thee?"

"I know," said the Turk; "retribution."

"Yes, the Christian's retribution," said the knight. "Christ taught us
to forgive our enemies, to love our fellow-men. God is love! Depart in
peace to thy home and thy dear ones, and be gentle and good to those who
suffer."

Then the prisoner burst into tears.

"How could I believe such a thing could be possible? Torments and
sufferings I looked forward to as a certainty, and I took poison, which
must kill me; within a few hours I shall die. There is no remedy. But
before I die make known to me the faith that embraces such an amount of
love and mercy; it is great and divine! In it let me die; let me die a
Christian!" and his prayer was granted.

This was the legend, the history which was read; they all listened to it
with attention, but deepest sank it into the heart of her who sat alone
in the corner--the servant maid--Sarah, the Jewess. Heavy tears stood in
her black sparkling eyes while she sat here, as once on the
school-bench, and felt the greatness of the gospel. The tears rolled
down her cheeks.

"Let not my child become a Christian!" were the mother's last words on
her dying bed, and they rang through her soul with those of the law,
"Honor thy father and thy mother!"

"Still I have not been baptized! they call me 'the Jewess'; the
neighbors' boys did so, hooting at me last Sunday as I stood outside the
open church door, and looked in where the altar-lights burned and the
congregation sang. Ever since my school-days, up to this hour--even
though I have tried to close my eyes against it--a power from
Christianity has like a sunbeam shone into my heart. But, my mother, I
will not give thee sorrow in thy grave! I will not betray the vow my
father made to thee; I will not read the Christian's Bible. Have not I
the God of my fathers? On Him let me rest my head!"

And years rolled by.

The husband died, the wife was left behind in hard plight. Now she could
no longer afford to have a maid; but Sarah did not forsake the widow;
she became her help in distress, and kept the household together; she
worked till late in the night, and got bread for the house by the labor
of her hands. There were no near relatives to help a family where the
mother grew weaker each day, lingering for months on a bed of sickness.
Sarah, gentle and pious, watched, nursed, and worked, and became the
blessing of the poor home.

"There lies the Bible," said the invalid; "read to me this wearisome
evening; I sadly want to hear God's word."

And Sarah bowed her head; she folded her hands round the Bible, which
she opened, and read aloud to the sick woman; now and again the tears
welled forth, but her eyes shone clearer, even as the darkness cleared
from her soul. "Mother, thy child shall not receive the baptism of the
Christians, shall not be named in their communion; in this we will be
united here on earth, but above this there is--is a greater unity--even
in God. 'He goes with us beyond the grave'; 'It is He who pours water
upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground.' I understand
it! I do not know myself how I came to it! through Him it is--in
Him--Christ!"

And she trembled as she named the holy name; a baptism of fire streamed
through her, stronger than her frame could bear, and she bent down, more
powerless even than she by whom she watched.

"Poor Sarah!" they said; "she is worn out with labor and watching."

They took her to the hospital for the poor; there she died; thence she
was borne to her grave; not to the Christians' graveyard; that was not
the place for the Jewish girl: no, outside, by the wall, her grave was
dug.

And God's sun, which shone upon the graves of the Christians, shines
also upon that of the Jewish girl; and the hymns which are sung by the
graves of the Christians resound by her grave beyond the wall; thither,
too, reaches the promise: "There is resurrection in Christ, in Him, the
Saviour, who said to his disciples, 'John truly baptized with water; but
ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost.'"


THE STORY OF A MOTHER

By HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN


A mother sat by her little child: she was very sorrowful, and feared
that it would die. Its little face was pale, and its eyes were closed.
The child drew its breath with difficulty, and sometimes so deeply as if
it were sighing; and then the mother looked more sorrowfully than before
on the little creature.

Then there was a knock at the door, and a poor old man came in, wrapped
up in something that looked like a great horse-cloth, for that keeps
warm; and he required it, for it was cold winter. Without, everything
was covered with ice and snow, and the wind blew so sharply that it cut
one's face.

And as the old man trembled with cold, and the child was quiet for a
moment, the mother went and put some beer on the stove in a little pot,
to warm it for him. The old man sat down and rocked the cradle, and the
mother seated herself on an old chair by him, looked at her sick child
that drew its breath so painfully, and seized the little hand.

"You think I shall keep it, do you not?" she asked. "The good God will
not take it from me!"

And the old man--he was _Death_--nodded in such a strange way, that it
might just as well mean _yes_ as _no_. And the mother cast down her
eyes, and tears rolled down her cheeks. Her head became heavy: for three
days and three nights she had not closed her eyes; and now she slept,
but only for a minute; then she started up and shivered with cold.

"What is that?" she asked, and looked round on all sides; but the old
man was gone, and her little child was gone; he had taken it with him.
And there in the corner the old clock was humming and whirring; the
heavy leaden weight ran down to the floor--plump!--and the clock
stopped.

But the poor mother rushed out of the house crying for her child.

Out in the snow sat a woman in long black garments, and she said, "Death
has been with you in your room; I saw him hasten away with your child:
he strides faster than the wind, and never brings back what he has taken
away."

"Only tell me which way he has gone," said the mother. "Tell me the way,
and I will find him."

"I know him," said the woman in the black garments; "but before I tell
you, you must sing me all the songs that you have sung to your child. I
love those songs; I have heard them before. I am Night, and I saw your
tears when you sang them."

"I will sing them all, all!" said the mother. "But do not detain me,
that I may overtake him, and find my child."

But Night sat dumb and still. Then the mother wrung her hands, and sang
and wept. And there were many songs, but yet more tears, and then Night
said, "Go to the right into the dark fir wood; for I saw Death take that
path with your little child."

Deep in the forest there was a cross road, and she did not know which
way to take. There stood a Blackthorn Bush, with not a leaf nor a
blossom upon it; for it was in the cold winter time, and icicles hung
from the twigs.

"Have you not seen Death go by, with my little child?"

"Yes," replied the Bush, "but I shall not tell you which way he went
unless you warm me on your bosom. I'm freezing to death here; I'm
turning to ice."

And she pressed the Blackthorn Bush to her bosom, quite close, that it
might be well warmed. And the thorns pierced into her flesh, and her
blood oozed out in great drops. But the Blackthorn shot out fresh green
leaves, and blossomed in the dark winter night: so warm is the heart of
a sorrowing mother! And the Blackthorn Bush told her the way that she
should go.

Then she came to a great Lake, on which there were neither ships nor
boat. The Lake was not frozen enough to carry her, nor sufficiently open
to allow her to wade through, and yet she must cross it if she was to
find her child. Then she laid herself down to drink the Lake; and that
was impossible for any one to do. But the sorrowing mother thought that
perhaps a miracle might be wrought.

"No, that can never succeed," said the Lake. "Let us rather see how we
can agree. I'm fond of collecting pearls, and your eyes are the two
clearest I have ever seen: if you will weep them out into me I will
carry you over into the great greenhouse, where Death lives and
cultivates flowers and trees; each of these is a human life."

"Oh, what would I not give to get my child!" said the afflicted mother;
and she wept yet more, and her eyes fell into the depths of the Lake,
and became two costly pearls. But the Lake lifted her up, as if she sat
in a swing, and she was wafted to the opposite shore, where stood a
wonderful house, miles in length. One could not tell if it was a
mountain containing forests and caves, or a place that had been built.
But the poor mother could not see it, for she had wept her eyes out.

"Whatsoever," he says, "those blindfolded, blockheady fools, the
astrologers of Louvain, Nuremberg, Tubingen, and Lyons, may tell
you, don't you feed yourselves up with whims and fancies, nor believe
there is any Governor of the whole universe this year but God the
Creator, who by his Word rules and governs all things, in their
nature, propriety, and conditions, and without whose preservation
and governance all things in a moment would be reduced to nothing,
as out of nothing they were by him created."

It is a most sound and salutary truth, not to be forgotten in times of
commercial distress, nor even in discussing financial questions, remote
as they may seem to be from the domain of ethics.

God rules in the market, as he does on the mountain; he has provided eternal
laws for society, as he has for the stars or the seas; and it is
just as impossible to escape him or his ways in Wall Street or State
Street as it is anywhere else.

We do not wish to suggest any improper comparisons, but does not
the Psalmist assert, "If I make my bed in _sheol_, behold Thou art
there"?

In other words, commerce, the exchange of commodities, banking, and
whatever relates to it, currency, the rise and fall of prices, the
rates of profits, are all subject to laws as universal and unerring
as those which Newton deduces in the "Principia," or Donald McKay
applies in the construction of a clipper ship.

As they are manifested by more complicated phenomena, man may not know
them as accurately as he knows the laws of astronomy or mechanics;
but he can no more doubt the existence of the former than he can
the existence of the latter; and he can no more infringe the one
than he can infringe the other with impunity.

The poorest housekeeper is perfectly well aware that certain rules of
order are to be observed in the management of the house, or else
you will have either starvation or the sheriff inside of it in a
little time.

But what means that formidable, big-sounding phrase, Political Economy,
more than national housekeeping? Can you manage the immense,
overgrown family of Uncle Sam with less calculation, less regard
to justice, prudence, thrift, than you use in your own little
affairs?

Can you sail that tremendous vessel, the Ship of State, without looking
well to your chart and compass and Navigator's Guide?

When the "Central America" sinks to the bottom of the sea with five
hundred souls on board, though it is in the midst of a terrible
tempest, the public instinct is inclined to impute the disaster less to
the mysterious uproar of wind and wave than to some concealed defect
in the vessel. Had she sunk in a tranquil ocean, while the winds were
idle and the waves asleep, the incident would have produced a burst
of indignation, above the deeper wail of sorrow, strong enough to sweep
the guilty instruments of it out of existence. The world would have felt
that some great law of mechanics had been wilfully violated.
Then Death breathed upon her hands, and she felt that his breath was
colder than the icy wind; and her hands sank down powerless.

"You can do nothing against me," said Death.

"But the merciful God can," she replied.

"I only do what He commands," said Death. "I am his gardener. I take all
his trees and flowers, and transplant them into the great Paradise
gardens, in the unknown land. But how they will flourish there, and how
it is there, I may not tell you."

"Give me back my child," said the mother; and she implored and wept. All
at once she grasped two pretty flowers with her two hands, and called to
Death, "I'll tear off all your flowers, for I am in despair."

"Do not touch them," said Death. "You say you are so unhappy, and now
you would make another mother just as unhappy!"

"Another mother?" said the poor woman; and she let the flowers go.

"There are your eyes for you," said Death. "I have fished them up out of
the Lake; they gleamed up quite brightly. I did not know that they were
yours. Take them back--they are clearer now than before--and then look
down into the deep well close by. I will tell you the names of the two
flowers you wanted to pull up, and you will see what you were about to
frustrate and destroy."

And she looked down into the well, and it was a happiness to see how one
of them became a blessing to the world, how much joy and gladness she
diffused around her. And the woman looked at the life of the other, and
it was made up of care and poverty, misery and woe.

"Both are the will of God," said Death.

"Which of them is the flower of misfortune, and which the blessed one?"
she asked.

"That I may not tell you," answered Death; "but this much you shall
hear, that one of these two flowers is that of your child. It was the
fate of your child that you saw--the future of your own child."

Then the mother screamed aloud for terror.

"Which of them belongs to my child? Tell me that. Release the innocent
child! Let my child free from all that misery! Rather carry it away!
Carry it into God's kingdom! Forget my tears, forget my entreaties, and
all that I have done!"

"I do not understand you," said Death. "Will you have your child back,
or shall I carry it to that place that you know not?"

Then the mother wrung her hands, and fell on her knees, and prayed to
the good God.

"Hear me not when I pray against Thy will, which is at all times the
best! Hear me not! hear me not!" And she let her head sink down on her
bosom.

And Death went away with her child into the unknown land.


THE LITTLE MATCH GIRL

By HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN


It was terribly cold; it snowed and was already almost dark, and evening
came on, the last evening of the year. In the cold and gloom a poor
little girl, bareheaded and barefoot, was walking through the streets.
When she left her own house she certainly had had slippers on; but of
what use were they? They were very big slippers, and her mother had used
them till then, so big were they. The little maid lost them as she
slipped across the road, where two carriages were rattling by terribly
fast. One slipper was not to be found again, and a boy had seized the
other, and run away with it. He thought he could use it very well as a
cradle, some day when he had children of his own. So now the little girl
went with her little naked feet, which were quite red and blue with the
cold. In an old apron she carried a number of matches, and a bundle of
them in her hand. No one had bought anything of her all day, and no one
had given her a farthing.

Shivering with cold and hunger she crept along, a picture of misery,
poor little girl! The snowflakes covered her long fair hair, which fell
in pretty curls over her neck; but she did not think of that now. In all
the windows lights were shining, and there was a glorious smell of
roast goose, for it was New Year's Eve. Yes, she thought of that!

In a corner formed by two houses, one of which projected beyond the
other, she sat down, cowering. She had drawn up her little feet, but she
was still colder, and she did not dare to go home, for she had sold no
matches, and did not bring a farthing of money. From her father she
would certainly receive a beating, and besides, it was cold at home, for
they had nothing over them but a roof through which the wind whistled,
though the largest rents had been stopped with straw and rags.

Her little hands were almost benumbed with the cold. Ah, a match might
do her good, if she could only draw one from the bundle, and rub it
against the wall, and warm her hands at it. She drew one out. R-r-atch!
how it spluttered and burned! It was a warm bright flame, like a little
candle, when she held her hands over it; it was a wonderful little
light! It really seemed to the little girl as if she sat before a great
polished stove, with bright brass feet and a brass cover. How the fire
burned! how comfortable it was! but the little flame went out, the stove
vanished, and she had only the remains of the burned match in her hand.

A second was rubbed against the wall. It burned up, and when the light
fell upon the wall it became transparent like a thin veil, and she could
see through it into the room. On the table a snow-white cloth was
spread; upon it stood a shining dinner service; the roast goose smoked
gloriously, stuffed with apples and dried plums. And what was still more
splendid to behold, the goose hopped down from the dish, and waddled
along the floor, with a knife and fork in its breast, to the little
girl. Then the match went out, and only the thick, damp, cold wall was
before her. She lighted another match. Then she was sitting under a
beautiful Christmas tree; it was greater and more ornamented than the
one she had seen through the glass door at the rich merchant's.
Thousands of candles burned upon the green branches, and colored
pictures like those in the print shops looked down upon them. The little
girl stretched forth her hand toward them; then the match went out. The
Christmas lights mounted higher. She saw them now as stars in the sky:
one of them fell down, forming a long line of fire.

"Now some one is dying," thought the little girl, for her old
grandmother, the only person who had loved her, and who was now dead,
had told her that when a star fell down a soul mounted up to God.

She rubbed another match against the wall; it became bright again, and
in the brightness the old grandmother stood clear and shining, mild and
lovely.

"Grandmother!" cried the child, "O! take me with you! I know you will go
when the match is burned out. You will vanish like the warm fire, the
warm food, and the great, glorious Christmas tree!"

And she hastily rubbed the whole bundle of matches, for she wished to
hold her grandmother fast. And the matches burned with such a glow that
it became brighter than in the middle of the day; grandmother had never
been so large or so beautiful. She took the little girl in her arms, and
both flew in brightness and joy above the earth, very, very high, and up
there was neither cold, nor hunger, nor care--they were with God.

But in the corner, leaning against the wall, sat the poor girl with red
cheeks and smiling mouth, frozen to death on the last evening of the Old
Year. The New Year's sun rose upon a little corpse! The child sat there,
stiff and cold, with the matches, of which one bundle was burned. "She
wanted to warm herself," the people said. No one imagined what a
beautiful thing she had seen, and in what glory she had gone in with her
grandmother to the New Year's Day.


FLOWERS WITHOUT FRUIT


Prune thou thy words; the thoughts control
  That o'er thee swell and throng:--
They will condense within thy soul,
  And change to purpose strong.

But he who lets his feelings run
  In soft luxurious flow,
Shrinks when hard service must be done,
  And faints at every woe.

Faith's meanest deed more favor bears,
  Where hearts and wills are weigh'd,
Than brightest transports, choicest prayers,
  Which bloom their hour, and fade.

_--J. H. Newman_


CONTENTMENT


My mind to me a kingdom is;
  Such perfect joy therein I find,
As far exceeds all earthly bliss
  That world affords, or grows by kind:
Though much I want what most men have,
Yet doth my mind forbid me crave.

Content I live--this is my stay;
  I seek no more than may suffice:
I press to bear no haughty sway;
   Look--what I lack, my mind supplies!
Lo! thus I triumph like a king,
Content with that my mind doth bring.

I see how plenty surfeits oft,
   And hasty climbers soonest fall;
I see how those that sit aloft
   Mishap doth threaten most of all;
These get with toil, and keep with fear:
Such cares my mind could never bear.

I laugh not at another's loss;
   I grudge not at another's gain;
No worldly wave my mind can toss;
   I brook that is another's pain.
I fear no foe: I scorn no friend:
I dread no death: I fear no end.

Some have too much, yet still they crave;
   I little have, yet seek no more:
They are but poor, though much they have,
   And I am rich, with little store.
They poor, I rich: they beg, I give:
They lack, I lend: they pine, I live.

I wish but what I have at will:
   I wander not to seek for more:
I like the plain; I climb no hill:
   In greatest storm I sit on shore,
And laugh at those that toil in vain,
To get what must be lost again.
--This is my choice; for why?--I find
No wealth is like a quiet mind.

_--Unknown_


THE SEARCH FOR PEACE


Sweet Peace, where dost thou dwell? I humbly crave,
    Let me once know.
  I sought thee in a secret cave,
    And ask'd, if Peace were there?
A hollow wind did seem to answer, "No:--
    Go seek elsewhere."

I did; and going did a rainbow note:
    Surely, thought I,
  This is the lace of Peace's coat:
    I will search out the matter.
But while I look'd, the clouds immediately
    Did break and scatter.

Then went I to a garden, and did spy
    A gallant flower,
  The Crown Imperial: Sure, said I,
    Peace at the root must dwell.
But when I digg'd, I saw a worm devour
    What show'd so well.

At length I met a reverend good old man:
    Whom when for Peace
  I did demand, he thus began:
    "There was a Prince of old
At Salem dwelt, who lived with good increase
    Of flock and fold.

"He sweetly lived; yet sweetness did not save
    His life from foes.
  But after death, out of his grave
    There sprang twelve stalks of wheat:
Which many wondering at, got some of those
    To plant and set.

"It prosper'd strangely, and did soon disperse
    Through all the earth:
  For they that taste it do rehearse,
    That virtue lies therein;
A secret virtue, bringing peace and mirth
  By flight of sin.

"Take of this grain, which in my garden grows,
    And grows for you;
  Make bread of it:--and that repose
    And peace, which everywhere
With so much earnestness you do pursue,
    Is only there."

_--G. Herbert_


A SONG OF PRAISE


To God, ye choir above, begin
  A hymn so loud and strong
That all the universe may hear
  And join the grateful song.

Praise Him, thou sun, Who dwells unseen
  Amidst transcendent light,
Where thy refulgent orb would seem
  A spot, as dark as night.

Thou silver moon, 'ye host of stars,
  The universal song
Through the serene and silent night
  To listening worlds prolong.

Sing Him, ye distant worlds and suns,
  From whence no travelling ray
Hath yet to us, through ages past,
  Had time to make its way.

Assist, ye raging storms, and bear
  On rapid wings His praise,
From north to south, from east to west,
  Through heaven, and earth, and seas.

Exert your voice, ye furious fires
  That rend the watery cloud,
And thunder to this nether world
  Your Maker's words aloud.

Ye works of God, that dwell unknown
  Beneath the rolling main;
Ye birds, that sing among the groves,
  And sweep the azure plain;

Ye stately hills, that rear your heads,
  And towering pierce the sky;
Ye clouds, that with an awful pace
  Majestic roll on high;

Ye insects small, to which one leaf
  Within its narrow sides
A vast extended world displays,
  And spacious realms provides;

Ye race, still less than these, with which
  The stagnant water teems,
To which one drop, however small,
  A boundless ocean seems;

Whate'er ye are, where'er ye dwell,
  Ye creatures great or small,
Adore the wisdom, praise the power,
  That made and governs all.

_--P. Skelton_


THE TRAVELLER


How are thy servants blest, O Lord!
  How sure is their defence!
Eternal wisdom is their guide,
  Their help, Omnipotence.

In foreign realms, and lands remote,
  Supported by Thy care,
Through burning climes I pass'd unhurt,
  And breathed in tainted air.

Thy mercy sweeten'd every soil,
  Made every region please;
The hoary Alpine hills it warm'd,
  And smoothed the Tyrrhene seas.

Think, O my soul, devoutly think,
  How, with affrighted eyes,
Thou saw'st the wide-extended deep
  In all its horrors rise.

Confusion dwelt in every face,
  And fear in every heart;
When waves on waves, and gulfs on gulfs,
  O'ercame the pilot's art.

Yet then from all my griefs, O Lord,
  Thy mercy set me free;
Whilst, in the confidence of prayer,
  My soul took hold on Thee.

For though in dreadful whirls we hung
  High on the broken wave,
I knew Thou wert not slow to hear,
  Nor impotent to save.

--The storm was laid; the winds retired,
  Obedient to Thy will;
The sea that roar'd at Thy command,
  At Thy command was still.

_--J. Addison_


TRUE GREATNESS


The fairest action of our human life
  Is scorning to revenge an injury:
For who forgives without a further strife
  His adversary's heart to him doth tie:
And 'tis a firmer conquest truly said
  To win the heart, than overthrow the head.

If we a worthy enemy do find,
  To yield to worth, it must be nobly done:--
But if of baser metal be his mind,
  In base revenge there is no honor won.
Who would a worthy courage overthrow?
  And who would wrestle with a worthless foe?

We say our hearts are great, and cannot yield;
  Because they cannot yield, it proves them poor:
Great hearts are task'd beyond their power but seld:
  The weakest lion will the loudest roar.
Truth's school for certain does this same allow,
  High-heartedness doth sometimes teach to bow.

_--Lady E. Carew_


CHARACTER OF A HAPPY LIFE


How happy is he born and taught
  That serveth not another's will;
Whose armor is his honest thought,
  And simple truth his utmost skill!

Whose passions not his masters are,
  Whose soul is still prepared for death,
Not tied unto the world with care
  Of public fame, or private breath;

Who envies none that chance doth raise
  Or vice; who never understood
How deepest wounds are given by praise;
  Nor rules of state, but rules of good;

Who hath his life from rumors freed;
  Whose conscience is his strong retreat;
Whose state can neither flatterers feed,
  Nor ruin make accusers great;

Who God doth late and early pray
  More of His grace than gifts to lend;
And entertains the harmless day
  With a well-chosen book or friend;

--This man is freed from servile bands
  Of hope to rise, or fear to fall;
Lord of himself, though not of lands;
  And having nothing, yet hath all.

_--Sir H. Wotton_


A THANKSGIVING TO GOD, FOR HIS HOUSE


Lord, thou hast given me a cell,
  Wherein to dwell;
A little house, whose humble roof
  Is weather-proof;
Under the spars of which I lie
  Both soft and dry;
Where thou, my chamber for to ward,
  Hast set a guard
Of harmless thoughts, to watch and keep
  Me, while I sleep.
Low is my porch, as is my fate:
  Both void of state;
And yet the threshold of my door
  Is worn by th' poor,
Who thither come, and freely get
  Good words, or meat.
Brazil is a country but little
   known to the majority
of readers, and the little
   that is known
is so fragmentary that it is as
   likely to convey
a false idea as an incomplete one. The
   writers of this
volume combine two qualifications
   for the work of
dissipating this ignorance. They
   have a direct personal
knowledge of Brazil, gained during
   a long residence in
the country, and they have carefully
   studied every
valuable book on its history and
   resources.
'Tis thou that crown'st my glittering hearth
   With guiltless mirth,
And giv'st me wassail-bowls to drink,
   Spiced to the brink.
Lord, 'tis thy plenty-dropping hand
   That soils my land,
And giv'st me, for my bushel sown,
   Twice ten for one;
Thou mak'st my teeming hen to lay
  Her egg each day;
Besides my healthful ewes to bear
  Me twins each year;
The while the conduits of my kine
  Run cream, for wine:
All these, and better, thou dost send
  Me--to this end,
That I should render, for my part,
  A thankful heart.

_--R. Herrick_




FRIENDS DEPARTED


They are all gone into the world of light!
  And I alone sit lingering here!
Their very memory is fair and bright,
  And my sad thoughts doth clear.

It glows and glitters in my cloudy breast
  Like stars upon some gloomy grove,
Or those faint beams in which this hill is drest
  After the Sun's remove.

I see them walking in an air of glory,
  Whose light doth trample on my days;
My days, which are at best but dull and hoary,
  Mere glimmerings and decays.

O holy hope! and high humility!
  High as the Heavens above!
These are your walks, and you have show'd them me,
  To kindle my cold love.

Dear, beauteous Death; the jewel of the just!
  Shining nowhere but in the dark;
What mysteries do lie beyond thy dust,
  Could man outlook that mark!

He that hath found some fledged birdes nest may know
  At first sight if the bird be flown;
But what fair dell or grove he sings in now,
  That is to him unknown.

And yet, as Angels in some brighter dreams
  Call to the soul when man doth sleep,
So some strange thoughts transcend our wonted themes,
  And into glory peep.

_--H. Vaughan_




THE LAND OF DREAMS


"Awake, awake, my little boy!
Thou wast thy mother's only joy;
Why dost thou weep in thy gentle sleep?
O wake! thy father does thee keep."

--"O what land is the Land of Dreams?
What are its mountains, and what are its streams?
O father! I saw my mother there
Among the lilies by waters fair.

"Among the lambs, clothed in white,
She walk'd with her Thomas in sweet delight:
I wept for joy; like a dove I mourn:--
O when shall I again return!"

--"Dear child! I also by pleasant streams
Have wander'd all night in the Land of Dreams:--
But, though calm and warm the waters wide,
I could not get to the other side."

--"Father, O father! what do we here,
In this land of unbelief and fear?--
The Land of Dreams is better far,
Above the light of the morning star."

_--W. Blake_




ADORATION


Sweet is the dew that falls betimes,
And drops upon the leafy limes;
  Sweet Hermon's fragrant air:
Sweet is the lily's silver bell,
And sweet the wakeful tapers smell
  That watch for early prayer.

Sweet the young nurse, with love intense,
Which smiles o'er sleeping innocence;
  Sweet when the lost arrive;
Sweet the musician's ardor beats,
While his vague mind's in quest of sweets,
  The choicest flowers to hive.

Strong is the horse upon his speed;
Strong in pursuit the rapid glede,
  Which makes at once his game:
Strong the tall ostrich on the ground;
Strong through the turbulent profound
  Shoots xiphias to his aim.

Strong is the lion--like a coal
His eyeball--like a bastion's mole
  His chest against the foes:
Strong the gier-eagle on his sail;
Strong against tide the enormous whale
  Emerges as he goes.

Here sire is heired by son, And war
comes never; ancle deep in
  flowers In summer walk its
dames among the sunny bowers.

  He rose, find homeward by the slumbering stream Walked with the
morn-dew glistening on his shoon.

