Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England


Adrift in a Boat, by W.H.G. Kingston.

________________________________________________________________________

This is not a very long book, but the story is a good one.  Several
families have met together to have a picnic on a pleasant local beach.
To everyone's delight they are joined by Harry Merryweather, a
midshipman home on leave.  Harry and another youth, David Moreton, go
for a wander round the rocks, but are cut off by the strong tide.  The
weather then turns very nasty, but the boys are able to swim to a
passing boat containing an old man, Jefferies, and his young grandson,
Tristram.  The weather is now so bad they can't get back to the local
harbour at Penmore.

There is an accident and young Tristram is lost overboard, and drowned.

They see a vessel, a brig, on her way down channel, but when they get to
her they find she is an abandoned wreck.  More bad weather.  They are
seen by a schooner about some bad business, who opens fire, probably to
destroy an unwanted witness to some crime.  The brig is sinking.  They
make a raft.  Old Jefferies dies.  They are picked up by a French
schooner, which turns out to be a privateer.  At this point the story
gets even more convoluted, and you will have to read the book to see
what happens next, and how the boys eventually get home.

________________________________________________________________________

ADRIFT IN A BOAT, BY W.H.G. KINGSTON.


CHAPTER ONE.

THE PICNIC ON THE SANDS--THE MIDSHIPMAN--HARRY MERRYWEATHER AND DAVID
MORETON CAUGHT BY THE TIDE--THE ALARM.

Few parts of the shores of old England present more beautiful and
romantic scenery than is to be found on the coast of Cornwall.  There
are deep bays, and bold headlands, and wild rocks, and lofty cliffs, and
wooded heights, and bare downs, and yellow sands full of the most minute
and delicate shells, so delicate that it is surprising how they could
have existed in the rough and boisterous ocean, and been cast up whole
from the depths below.  In one of those beautiful bays, many years ago,
a large party was collected, on a bright afternoon in the early part of
autumn.  I remained alone for the rest of the winter, except when my man
occasionally visited me with meat; and I found the time hang very heavy,
as I had no books, and nothing could be done in the way of
collecting specimens of natural history."
_Magazine of Natural History_
* * * * *

[Illustration: BURIAL PLACE IN TONGATABU.]
This is another of Mr. Bennett's sketches made during his recent visit
to several of the Polynesian Islands. It represents the burial-place
of the Chiefs of Tongatabu: over this "earthly prison of their bones,"
we may say with Titus Andronicus:

In pence and honour rest you here my sons:
(The) readiest champions, repose you here, Secure from worldly chances
and mishaps:
Here lurks no treason, here no envy swells, Here grow no damned grudges:
here are no storms, No noise, but silence and eternal sleep.

Mr. Bennett thus describes the spot, with some interesting circumstances:

"July 29th. I visited this morning a beautiful spot named Maofanga, at a
short distance from our anchorage; here was the burial-place of
the chiefs.
The tranquillity of this secluded spot, and the drooping trees of
the casuarina equisetifolia, added to the mournful solemnity of the
place.
Off this place, the Astrolabe French discovery ship lay when, some
time before, she fired on the natives. The circumstances respecting
this affair, as communicated to me, if correct, do not reflect much
credit on the commander of the vessel.A loud shout from a hilarious old gentleman, who
had constituted himself director of the entertainment, and who claimed
consequently the right of making more noise than anybody else, or indeed
than all the rest put together, now summoned them up to the tablecloth,
to which at the sound, with no lingering steps, they came, exhibiting
their treasures on their arrival to their older friends.  The party
forthwith began to seat themselves round the ample tablecloth, but they
took up a good deal more room than had it been spread on a table.  The
variety of attitudes they assumed was amusing.  The more elderly ladies
sat very upright, with their plates on their laps; the younger ones who
had gone for the water, and their friends of the same age, managed to
assume more graceful attitudes; while the young men who had been to
school and college, and had read how the Romans took their meals,
stretched themselves out at the feet of the former, leaning on their
elbows, and occasionally, when not actually engaged in conveying ham and
chicken or pie to their mouths, giving glances at the bright and
laughing eyes above them.  The hilarious old gentleman tried kneeling,
that he might carve a round of beef placed before him, but soon found
that attitude anything but pleasant to his feelings; then he sat with
one side to the cloth, then with the other.  At last he scraped a trench
in the sand sufficient to admit his outstretched legs, and, placing the
beef before him, carved vigorously away till all claimants were
supplied.  The younger boys and girls, tucking their legs under them
like Turks, speedily bestowed their undivided attention to the task of
stowing away the good things spread out before their eyes.

"This is jolly, don't you think so, Mary?" exclaimed a fine boy of about
fourteen to a pretty little girl who sat next to him; "there is only one
thing wanting to make it perfect--Harry Merryweather ought to be here.
He wrote word that he expected to be with us this morning, and I told
him where the picnic was to take place, that should he be too late to
get home, he might come here direct.  Oh, he is such a capital fellow,
and now that he is in the navy, and has actually been in a battle, he
will have so much to tell us about."

Mary Rymer fully agreed with David Moreton, for Harry was a favourite
with every one who knew him.  Although Harry Merryweather had not
arrived for the picnic, his friends appeared to be enjoying themselves
very much, judging by the smiles and giggling and the chattering, and
the occasional shouts of laughter which arose when old Mr Tom Sowton,
and florid, fat Mr Billy Burnaby, uttered some of their jokes.  Not
that they were the only people who uttered good things, but they were
professed jokers, and seemed to consider it their duty to make people
merry; Mr Burnaby, indeed, if he could not make people laugh at what he
said, made them laugh at what he did.

The party had come from various quarters in the neighbourhood, some from
a distance inland, in carriages, and two or three families who lived on
or near the coast, in two pretty yachts, which lay at anchor in the bay.
One of them belonged to Mr Moreton, David's father, and the other to
Captain Rymer, with whose family David was as much at home as with his
own; and he and his sisters looked upon Mary, Captain Rymer's daughter,
quite in the light of a sister.  She was, indeed, a very charming little
girl, well worthy of their affections.  The first course of the picnic
was concluded--that is to say, the chickens, and hams, and pies, and
cold beef, and tongues, and a few other substantials were pushed back;
the potatoes, which had been boiled in salt water, having been
pronounced excellent.  The tarts and cakes and fruit, peaches and figs
and grapes, were brought to the front, and underwent the admiration they
deserved, when suddenly David Moreton, looking up, raised a loud shout,
and, jumping to his feet, clapped his hands and waved them vehemently.
The shout was echoed in different keys by many others, and all turning
their eyes in the direction David was pointing, they saw, on the top of
the cliff a boy, on whose jacket and cap the glitter of a little gold
lace and his snow-white trousers proclaimed him to be that hero in
embryo, a midshipman.  Having looked about him for a few seconds, he
began to descend the cliff at so seemingly breakneck a speed, that
several of the ladies shrieked out to him to take care, and Mary Rymer
turned somewhat pale and stood looking anxiously as the young sailor
dropped from one point of rock to another, or slid down a steep incline,
or swung himself by the branches of shrubs or tufts of grass to the
ledge below him, and ran along it as if it had been a broad highway,
though a false step might have proved his destruction.  Once he stopped.
To go back was impossible, and to attempt to descend seemed almost
certain destruction.  Mr Sowton and Billy Burnaby jumped up, almost
dragging away the tablecloth, upsetting tarts, and fruit-dishes, and
bottles of wine, and all the other things, when Harry gave a tremendous
spring to a ledge which his sharp eye had detected, and was in a few
seconds afterwards standing safe on the sands and shaking hands warmly
with everybody present.  When he came to Mr Tom Sowton and Billy
Burnaby, it might have been supposed from the way in which they wrung
each other's hands, that there was a wager pending as to which should
first twist off his friend's fist.

"Fortunately, we haven't eaten up all the good things, Harry," exclaimed
Mr Sowton, dragging the midshipman, nothing loth, to the well-spread
cloth.  "Now open your mouth, and Burnaby and I will try and feed you.
What will you have first,--beef, or pudding, or a peach, or a tongue, or
a cold chicken?  Oh dear me, there is but a drumstick and a merrythought
left.  Which will you have?  No!  I see I am wrong again, the drumstick
is in the dish, and the merrythought is in my head, with numerous
companions.  Does anybody wish to know what they are?  I'll fill my
naval friend's plate first with cold beef and mustard, and then inform
you."  Thus the old gentleman ran on.  He kept his word with regard to
Harry, who very soon by diligent application caught up the rest of the
party, and was able to commence on the tarts and peaches.  All the
gentlemen asked him to take wine, and the ladies were eager to hear his
adventures.  He briefly recounted them in an animated manner, for as he
had been little more than a year at sea, everything he had seen and done
had the freshness of novelty.  He belonged to the gallant _Arethusa_
frigate, which had put into Plymouth from a successful cruise in the Bay
of Biscay, where, after capturing several minor prizes of considerable
value, she had taken an enemy's frigate of equal force.  He had
consequently got leave for a few days to come home and see his widowed
mother.  He was her only son; her husband had been an officer in the
army, and was killed in battle; her daughter Jane could never be induced
to leave her, but they had promised to send Harry on to the picnic after
he had indulged them with a little of his society.  He had come by a
chance conveyance, knowing that he should be able to return with some of
his friends.

In those days it was the custom to sit long after dinner, and even at a
picnic people consumed a considerable amount of time round the cloth.
At length, however, they got up and broke into separate parties.  Some
went in one direction, some in another.  The elders were more inclined
to sit still, or went only a little way up the cliff; but several of the
grown-up young ladies and gentlemen climbed up by somewhat steep paths
to the downs above.  The younger ones, the tide being low, very
naturally preferred scrambling out on the rocks in search of
sea-anemones, and other marine curiosities.  There were numerous
projecting rocks forming small bays in the large bay, and thus
completely hiding the different parties from each other.  No two boys
could have had a more sincere regard for each other than had David
Moreton and Harry Merryweather.  David was longing to go to sea with
Harry, but his father was greatly averse to his going.  He was the
eldest son, and heir to a large property.  As the boys had been
separated for so long a time (long in their lives), they had a great
deal to say to each other.  They consequently strolled away, forgetting
what Mary Rymer or the rest of their fair companions might have thought
of their gallantry, in and out along the sands, round the points and
over the rocks, till they had got to a considerable distance from the
place where the picnic had been held.  A dry rock, high above the water,
which they could reach by going along a ledge connecting it with the
mainland, tempted them to scramble out to it.  There they chose a nice
cosy, dry nook, where, sitting down, the water immediately around them
was hidden from their sight.  This circumstance must be remembered.  It
was very delightful.  They had not yet said one-half of what they had
got to say to each other, so they sat on talking eagerly, looking out
seaward and watching the white sails which glided by coming up channel
in the distant horizon.  David was so delighted with the accounts Harry
gave him, that he resolved to make a further attempt to induce his
father to allow him to go to sea.  It must be owned that Harry, full of
life and happiness himself, had pictured only the bright side of
everything.  He had described the courage and determination to win with
which he and his shipmates had gone into action, and the enthusiasm and
delight they had felt on gaining the victory and capturing the prize;
but he forgot to speak of the death of some cut down in their prime, and
the wounds and sufferings of others, many maimed and crippled for life.
Thus they talked on without marking how the time went by.  Harry's
watch, which he had locked up carefully before going into action, had
been destroyed by a shot which had knocked the desk and everything in it
to pieces; and David had forgotten to wind his up.  Suddenly it occurred
to them that the sun was getting very low, and that it was high time for
them to return.

They jumped up to scramble back over the rock, but no sooner had they
done so than Harry cried out, "We are caught!" and David exclaimed, "The
tide has risen tremendously, how shall we get to the shore?"

"Swim there," answered Harry; "I see no other way.  If we were to shout
ever so loud we should not be heard, and I do not suppose any one knows
where we are."  By this time they had got to the inner end of the rock,
where they found that the distance between them and the shore was not
only considerable, but that a strong current swept round the rock, and
that though before the sea had been calm, it had got up somewhat, and
caused a surf to break on the shore.  What was to be done?  David was a
first-rate swimmer, and would not have had much difficulty by himself in
stemming the current, and landing through the surf; but Harry, though a
sailor, had not learned that art before he went to sea, and could swim
very little.  It is extraordinary how many sailors in those days could
not swim, and lost their lives in consequence.  They stood looking at
the foaming, swirling waters, not knowing what to do.

"I would try it," said Harry at length, "but I am afraid if I were to
give in that I should drown you as well as myself."

"I think that I might support you, and we should drift in somewhere a
little further down, perhaps," said David.

"Much more likely that we should be swept out to sea," answered Harry.
"No, no, David, that will never do.  You can swim on shore before the
surf gets heavier, and your father or Captain Rymer will send a boat for
me very soon."

"But these are spring tides, and if the sea gets up at all, it will soon
wash right over this rock," said David.

"The more reason for you to hurry to get a boat from the yachts,"
observed the midshipman.

While they were speaking, they observed the two yachts, which had
hitherto been hid by a point of land, standing out to sea.  They had
come from the east with a fine northerly smooth water breeze, but the
wind had drawn off shore to the east, and as the tide was at flood
running up channel, the vessels had stood off shore to get the full
strength of it.  This the boys at once understood, but how they should
have gone off without them was the puzzle.  Matters were growing
serious.  Even should David reach the shore, he might not find a boat,
and it was a long way he feared from any house where he could get help,
so that Harry might be lost before he could get back.  They retraced
their steps to the highest part of the rock, and waved and shouted, even
though they knew that their voices could not be heard, but the yachts
stood on at some distance from each other; it should be remarked,
Captain Rymer's leading.  It was evident that they were not seen.  The
hot tide came rushing in, rising higher and higher.  Both the boys
became very anxious, David more on his friend's account than his own.
So many persons have lost their lives much in the same way, that it
seemed probable the two boys would lose theirs.

We must now go back to the picnic party.  Mr Sowton and Mr Burnaby,
and a few of the other more elderly ladies and gentlemen, began at
length to think it time to return home.  The hampers were repacked and
carried, some up the cliffs by the servants, and others on board the
yachts; and Mr Sowton and Billy Burnaby acting, as they said, as
whippers-in, began shouting and screeching at the top of their voices.
Captain Rymer and Mr Moreton had gone on board their vessels to get
ready, and thus there was no one actually in command.  The boats to take
off the party were rather small, and several trips had to be made.  In
the meantime, those who were returning home by land climbed up the steep
path to the top of the cliff, where their carriages were waiting for
them.  When they were fairly off, each party inquired what had become of
Harry and David.  Captain Rymer's yacht, the _Arrow_, was off the first,
for the _Psyche_, Mr Moreton's, fouled her anchor, and it was some time
before it could be got up.

Mr Moreton thought that his son, and the young midshipman had,
attracted by sweet Mary Rymer, gone on board the _Arrow_; while Mary,
who, it must be owned, was rather sorry not to see them, took it for
granted that Harry was returning, as he had come, by land, and that
David had gone with him.

The yachts had a long beat back.  As they got away from the land, the
wind increased very much, and came in strong sharp cold gusts which made
it necessary first to take in the gaff-topsails, and then one reef and
then another in the mainsails.  As the wind increased the sea got up,
and the little vessels, more suited to fine weather than foul, had hard
work to look up to the rising gale.  Still there was no help for it.
The tide helped them along, but by its meeting the wind much more sea
was knocked up than if both had been going the same way.  Had such been
the case, the vessels could not have made good their passage.  Darkness
coming on made matters worse: poor old Mr Sowton became wonderfully
silent, and Mr Burnaby, who was sitting on the deck of the cabin,
holding on by the leg of the table, looked the very picture of woe.
Mary Rymer, who was well accustomed to yachting, and a few others, kept
up their spirits, though all hailed with no little satisfaction the
lights which showed the entrance to Pencliffe harbour, into which they
were bound.

Mr Moreton's party had been at home some time, and most of the family
had retired to their rooms, when they began to wonder why David had not
appeared.

"He is probably still at the Rymers', or has accompanied Harry to Mrs
Merryweather's," said Mrs Moreton to her husband; still, as night drew
on, she became somewhat anxious.  Her anxiety increased when a servant
came with a message from Mrs Merryweather to inquire why Mr Harry did
not come home.

Mr Moreton himself now became even more anxious than his wife.  Neither
his daughters, nor some friends staying with them, remembered seeing
either Harry or David for some time before they embarked.

Mr Moreton, putting on a thick coat, for it was now blowing very hard,
went off to Captain Rymer's house, which was close down to the bay,
accompanied by Mrs Merryweather's servant, and greatly alarmed the
family by asking for his son and Harry.

"Why, did they not come back with you?" asked the captain.  "No, we
thought they were on board the _Arrow_," answered Mr Moreton.  "They
may have gone with the Trevanians, but I do not think that Harry would
have failed to come back to his mother.  I will go back and see her.
They must have set off by land, and there may have been an upset or a
break-down.  It will be all right tomorrow."

The morrow, however, came, but the boys did not appear.  Mr Moreton
therefore rode over early to the Trevanians, but they knew nothing of
the boys.

He now became seriously alarmed.  As it was blowing too hard to go by
sea, he sent a messenger to say that he should not be home for some
hours, and continued on to the bay where the picnic had been held.  Then
he made inquiries at the nearest cottages, but no one had seen his son
or Harry Merryweather.  He went from cottage to cottage in vain, making
inquiries.

At last a fisherman suggested that the beach should be searched.  Mr
Moreton at once set out with a party quickly assembled to perform the
anxious task, dreading to find the mangled body of his son and his brave
young friend.  No signs of them could be found.  Still his anxiety was
in no respect lessened.

He stopped on his way back at one cottage which he had not before
visited.  He found the inmate, an old woman, in deep affliction.  Her
husband, old Jonathan Jefferies, a fisherman, when out on his calling,
had perished during the gale in the night.  He could sympathise with
her, and as far as money help was concerned, he promised all in his
power.  With an almost broken heart he returned home to give the sad
news to his wife and family.

Poor Mrs Merryweather, she was even still more to be pitied.  To have
her son restored to her, and then to find him snatched away again so
suddenly, perhaps for ever!

Day after day passed by, and no news came of the much-loved missing
ones.


CHAPTER TWO.

ON THE ROCKS--A BRAVE LAD--SAVED--TRISTRAM'S FATE--STILL IN A BOAT.

"David, you must try to swim on shore, and save yourself," exclaimed
Harry Merryweather, looking at the foaming seas, which now began, with a
deafening noise, to dash furiously round the rock on which he and his
friend stood.  "If you don't go soon, you will not be able to get there
at all.  Leave me, I beg you.  There is no reason why both should be
lost."

"No indeed, that I will not," answered David, stoutly.  "If I thought
that I could get help by trying to swim on shore I would go, but I do
not think there is a place near where I could find a boat."

Harry did not speak for a minute or two.

At last he put his hand on David's shoulder, and said, "I ask you again
to swim on shore by yourself.  I will pray for you as you are swimming,
and you shall pray for me when you reach the beach.  My dear mother
taught me to pray when I was a child, and she has ever shown to me that
God hears all faithful prayers, and in His good time grants them; so
that I have always prayed since I went to sea, both when I was turning
into my hammock, and when I was turning out; and I knew that my mother
was praying for me too, for she is always praying for me; and I know
that God hears those prayers, so you see that makes me very brave.  I am
sure that I can trust Him."

"I am so glad to hear you say that," answered David.  "My father was
teaching us just the same thing after reading the Bible at prayers the
other night.  It's true--it's true, I know."

"Then trust to Him, and do as I ask you," said Harry, earnestly.  "Take
off your jacket and shoes at all events--you will be back in time to
save them and me also."

"I don't like leaving you at all, but I will do as you wish," exclaimed
David, after a moment's further thought, taking off his jacket.  As he
did so he turned his head round seaward.  "Hillo!--why, there is a
boat," he exclaimed.  "She is under sail, standing this way."

The boys together sprang back to the highest part of the rock, and David
still holding his jacket waved it vehemently.  It was a small
fishing-boat, beating up from the westward.  She was then standing in
for the land, and Harry, whose nautical knowledge was not as yet
by-the-bye very great, was doubtful where she would go about again
before she got near enough for those on board to see them.  All they
could do was to wave and wave, and to shout--though their shouting,
shrill as it was, would have been of no use.

David, who really knew more about boat-sailing than his naval friend,
expressed his opinion that she was beating up for the little
boat-harbour of Penmore, about two miles to the eastward.  How anxiously
they watched her, as the tide sweeping her along she drew nearer and
nearer!  The wind, having--as the expression is--backed into the
south-east, enabled her to lay up well along shore, or their hope of
being seen would have been small indeed.  For some minutes longer she
stood on almost directly for them; then at length she went about--high
time, too, for she was getting near the breakers.  Now was the moment
for them to shout and wave, for if they were now neither seen nor heard
they must abandon their hope of help from her, as by the next tack she
would be a long way to the eastward.  How eagerly they watched her!
Again and again they waved and shouted.

"Yes, see--she is about," cried Harry, joyfully.  He was right--the boat
was evidently standing towards them.  Harry, forgetting all past
dangers, shouted and danced for joy.  Life was very sweet to him.  He
thought nothing of the ordinary risk of losing it which he was every day
running--but this was out of the way, and he had almost made up his mind
that he should not escape.  There were two people in the boat--an old
man and a boy.  The sail was lowered, and getting out their oars they
approached the rock cautiously.  It would have been excessively
dangerous to get close, as a heavier sea than usual might have driven
the boat against the rock and dashed her to pieces.  This Harry and
David saw.  The old man stood up in the boat, and beckoned to them.  He
was shouting also, but the thundering noise of the sea against the rock
prevented them from hearing him.

"He wants us to swim out to the boats," said David.  "I am sure that I
could do it, and I will bring in a rope for you."

"Oh, I do not think that you could," answered Harry.  "The sea rolls in
so heavily that you would be driven back.  They might let the end of a
rope, made fast to a cork or a float of some sort, drift in, and haul us
off."  The plan was clearly a good one, and they made signals to the old
man to carry it out; but either he did not understand them, or had not a
rope long enough.

"I must go," cried David, throwing off his coat and shoes.  "Pray for
me, remember."  He had been watching his opportunity: a heavy sea had
just passed, and, before Harry could even say another word, slipping
down to the edge of the rock, he glided in, giving himself all the
impetus he could with his feet, and almost the next instant was
breasting a sea at some distance from the rock.  Harry watched him
anxiously, not forgetting to pray.  Now he seemed almost driven back,
and now a foam-crested sea rolling in looked as if it would inevitably
overwhelm him.  Alas! yes--he disappeared.

"He is lost--he is lost!" cried Harry.  But no.  Directly after he was
again seen on the surface, working his way up another advancing sea.

Harry was now guided chiefly by the gesticulations of the people in the
boat,--that is to say, by the way the old man waved a hand, or looked
out, for they had to keep their oars moving with all their might and
main to avoid being driven dangerously near the rock.  At length Harry,
with thankfulness, saw David close to the boat but she seemed to be
going from him--then the old man stood up--stretched out his arm, and
David, well-nigh exhausted, was dragged into the boat.  Harry saw that
he was talking to the old man.

"What will he do?  I hope that he will not attempt to swim back to the
rock," thought Harry; yet he felt very sure that he should never reach
the boat by himself.  As the boat rose on the top of a wave, Harry saw
that David was employed in fastening several ropes together.  The task
which the old man and the boy could not perform, as they were obliged to
continue rowing, he was able to do.  Harry saw him very busy in the
bottom of the boat, and now he lifted a water-cask into the sea, and
veered away the rope over the stern.  For some time Harry did not regain
sight of the cask; at last he saw it on the top of a sea, but still a
long way from the rock.  He watched it anxiously; but still he doubted
whether he should be able to get hold of it.  It might, even if it
reached the rock, be dashed to pieces.  He got down as close to the
water as he dared go, for the seas were dashing so high up the rock that
he might easily be carried away by them--indeed, he was already wet
through and through with the spray, which was flying in dense sheets
over the rock, and in a few minutes more it seemed to him that it would
be completely overwhelmed--indeed, any moment a sea might sweep over it.
Harry had a brave heart, and as long as he had life was not likely to
lose courage.  He showed his coolness, indeed, for believing that the
cask would soon reach him, he deliberately tied David's jacket and shoes
round his waist, that he might have the pleasure of restoring them to
him.  He had observed how David slipped into the water.  There came the
cask, nearer and nearer.  Before it had time to touch the rock, he slid
down into the sea, and struck out boldly for it, and throwing his arms
over it caught the rope to which it was made fast, and drew himself up
till his chest rested on it.

He then shouted at the top of his voice, "Haul in--all right."  David,
however, could not hear him: but having watched him with intense
eagerness, now began slowly to haul in the rope, while the old man and
boy pulled the boat further off the rock.  Harry held firmly on, though
he almost lost his breath by the waters, which dashed in his face.  He
kept his senses, however, and had the wisdom to strike out with all his
might with his feet, which greatly helped him on, and took off the drag
from his arms which they would otherwise have felt.

As he rose to the top of a sea he again shouted out every now and then,
"All right--haul away."  He was, however, not much inclined to shout by
the time he got up to the stern of the boat.  David, with the help of
the old man, then quickly hauled him on board.

"And you have brought me my jacket and shoes," exclaimed David, gladly
putting them on, for he felt very cold directly the exertions he had
just gone through ceased.  The boys sincerely thanked God in their
hearts that they were saved--though but a very few audible words of
thanksgiving were uttered.  No time, indeed, was to be lost in getting
away from the rock.

The old man told David to go to the helm.  "And you other young master
take my oar and pull with all your might, while I sets the sails," he
added.  A sprit-mainsail, much the worse for wear, and a little rag of a
foresail were soon set.  It was as much sail as the boat in the rising
gale could carry, and away she flew seaward.  The old man took the helm,
and the boy, who had not spoken, laid in his oar, and facing forward,
put his hand on the foresheet to be ready to go about when the word was
given.  The boat was somewhat old and battered, like its master,--the
rigging especially seemed in a bad condition.

The old man saw the boys examining her, and divined their thoughts.
"She's not like one of your fine-painted yachts, young masters; but she
has helped to save your lives, and she'll serve my time, I'm pretty sure
of that," he observed.  "She'll be tried, howsomever, not a little
to-night, I'm thinking.  We were late as it was coming up from `Put off
shoal,' and this work with you made us still later, so that we shall
have to be thankful if we get into Penmore harbour before the tide
turns."

"She is a good boat, no doubt, and at all events we are most thankful to
you for having by her means saved our lives," said David; and Harry
repeated what he had said.

"No, young masters, it wasn't I saved you, it was God.  Don't thank me.
Man can do no good thing of himself, you know, and I couldn't have saved
you if it hadn't been His will."  The fishing-boat went careering on
over the foaming seas, guided by the skilful hand of the old man.  It is
surprising how much sea a small boat with good beam will go through when
well managed.  The old man was far more loquacious than the young one,
who sat quite still forward, only every now and then turning his face
aside as the spray dashed in it, and shaking the water from his
sou'-wester.

To the boys' inquiry of the old man to which place he belonged, "Little
better than a mile to the eastward of where I took you aboard," he
replied; "but when the wind blows as it does now, there's no place for
landing nearer than Penmore harbour.  That matters nothing, as we get a
good market for our fish near there, and we have a good lot to sell, you
see."  He pointed to the baskets in the centre of the boat, well filled
with mackerel and several other kinds of fish.  He told them that his
name was Jonathan Jefferies, that he had married a Cornish woman, and
settled in the parish, and that the lad was his grandson.  "Not quite
right up there," he remarked, touching his forehead; "but he is a good
lad, and knows how to do his duty.  We call him Tristram Torr, for he is
our daughter's son.  She is dead, poor thing, and his father was lost at
sea, we suppose, for he went away and never came back."

The old man thus continued giving scraps of his family history, till the
gloom of evening gave way to the darkness of night.  His chief regret at
being out so late was that his old woman would be looking for him, as he
had told her that he expected to be home earlier than usual.  The darker
it grew the less talkative, however, he became; indeed, all his
attention was taken up in steering, for with the darkness the wind and
sea increased, till the boat could hardly look up to it.  At last Harry
and David began to suspect that though they had escaped from the rock,
they were in no small danger of being swamped, and thus, after all,
losing their lives.  Every now and then a heavy sea broke into the boat
and half filled her.  Still the boy Tristram said nothing, but turning
round took a bailer from under the thwart, and began energetically
bailing away.  Harry and David did the same with their hats, till old
Jefferies handed them a bucket, with which they more rapidly cleared the
boat.  They had to be quick about it, for scarcely was she free of water
than another sea came in and again half filled her.  It seemed also
pretty evident to them that instead of going to windward she was making
leeway, though, as the tide was still running to the eastward, she was
going in that direction.  The two boys were feeling thoroughly chilled
and uncomfortable; they were, of course, wet to the skin, and the wind
was strong and keen, and even when they sat down, by the old man's
advice, in the bottom of the boat, their legs were in water.  Still they
kept up their spirits, and when the water washed into the boat they were
glad to jump up and bail it out again.  Besides that they were in danger
of being swamped, it appeared to the midshipman and his friend that
there was a great risk of being run down.  Already two or three
phantom-like forms had suddenly appeared out of the darkness, and
gliding by were soon lost to sight.

The boy, however, had made no remark about them; suddenly he shouted,
"Grandfather, a sail on the weather-bow."

"About, then," cried the old man.  Harry and David looked out, and saw,
almost ahead of them, towering to the skies it seemed, a dark pyramid of
canvas.

"She is a big ship running down channel," said Harry.  "She will be over
us! she will be over us!"  The boat was at that moment in stays, going
about.  Scarcely had he spoken, when there was a loud crack.  The mast
went by the board, and as it came down struck the old man on the head.
He would have fallen overboard had not Harry and David seized his coat
and dragged him in.

"Here, pull, masters," cried Tristram, trying to get out both the oars.
PHILIP

LAYS OF MONK AND HERMIT
THE SCRIBE THE HERMIT'S SONG CRINOG KING AND HERMIT ON ÆNGUS THE CULDEE
THE SHAVING OF MURDOCH ON THE FLIGHTINESS OF THOUGHT THE MONK AND HIS
WHITE CAT INVOCATIONS AND REFLECTIONS
A PRAYER TO THE VIRGIN MAELISU'S HYMN TO THE ARCHANGEL MICHAEL
MAELISU'S HYMN TO THE HOLY SPIRIT EVE'S LAMENTATION ALEXANDER THE
GREAT THE KINGS WHO CAME TO CHRIST QUATRAINS CHARMS AND INVOCATIONS
LAMENTATIONS
THE SONG OF CREDE, DAUGHTER OF GUARE THE DESERTED HOME THE MOTHERS'
LAMENT AT THE SLAUGHTER OF THE INNOCENTS THE KEENING OF MARY CAOINE
SONGS TO MUSIC
BATTLE HYMN THE SONG OF THE WOODS THE ENCHANTED VALLEY REMEMBER THE
POOR 

II.

WELSH POEMS
THE ODES TO THE MONTHS THE TERCETS HAIL, GLORIOUS LORD!

MY BURIAL THE LAST CYWYDD THE LABOURER THE ELEGY ON SION GLYN THE NOBLE'S
GRAVE THE BARD'S DEATH-BED CONFESSION QUICK, DEATH!
COUNSEL IN VIEW OF DEATH FROM "THE LAST JUDGMENT" A GOOD WIFE
"MARCHOG JESU!"

THE DESTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM LOVE DIVINE BEHIND THE VEIL THE REIGN OF
LOVE PLAS GOGERDDAN ALL THROUGH THE NIGHT DAVID OF THE WHITE ROCK THE
HIGH TIDE "ORA PRO NOBIS" A FLOWER-SUNDAY LULLABY THE BALLAD
OF THE OLD BACHELOR OF TY'N Y MYNYDD THE QUEEN'S DREAM THE WELSH
FISHERMEN

III. OLD AND NEW TESTAMENT STUDIES
DAVID'S LAMENT OVER SAUL AND JONATHAN THE FIERY FURNACE RUTH AND NAOMI
THE LILIES OF THE FIELD AND THE FOWLS OF THE AIR THE GOOD PHYSICIAN THE
SOWER THE PRODIGAL'S RETURN ST. MARY MAGDALEN

IV. CHURCH FESTIVALS
A CHRISTMAS COMMUNION HYMN A CHRISTMAS CAROL OF THE EPIPHANY A
FOURTEENTH-CENTURY CAROL EARTH'S EASTER EASTER DAY, 1915 THE ASCENSION
WHITSUNTIDE HARVEST HYMN

V. GOOD AND FAITHFUL SERVANTS
FATHER O'FLYNN LADY GWENNY OLD DOCTOR MACK TO THE MEMORY OF JOHN
OWEN SAINT CUTHBERT ALFRED THE GREAT SIR SAMUEL FERGUSON "MEN, NOT
WALLS, MAKE A CITY" FIELD-MARSHAL EARL KITCHENER INSCRIPTION FOR A
ROLL OF HONOUR IN A PUBLIC SCHOOL AN EPITAPH AN INTERCESSIONAL
ANSWERED 

VI.

PERSONAL AND VARIOUS
LET THERE BE JOY!
A HOLIDAY HYMN SUMMER MORNING'S WALK SNOW-STAINS REMEMBRANCE SANDS OF
GOLD THE MOURNER DE PROFUNDIS IMMORTAL HOPE WE HAD A CHILD BY THE
BEDSIDE OF A SICK CHILD HE HAS COME BACK SPRING'S SECRETS THE LORD'S
LEISURE SPRING IS NOT DEAD AIM NOT TOO HIGH WILD WINE OF NATURE BRIDAL
INVOCATION THE COMING OF SIR GALAHAD AND A VISION OF THE GRAIL ASK
WHAT THOU WILT 

I.

IRISH POEMS

THE ISLE OF THE HAPPY
(From the Early Irish)
Once when Bran, son of Feval, was with his warriors in his royal fort,
they suddenly saw a woman in strange raiment upon the floor of the house.
No one knew whence she had come or how she had entered, for the ramparts
were closed. Then she sang these quatrains of Erin, the Isle of the
Happy, to Bran while all the host were listening:
A branch I bear from Evin's apple-trees Whose shape agrees with
Evin's orchard spray; Yet never could her branches best belauded
Such crystal-gauded bud and bloom display.

There is a distant Isle, deep sunk in shadows, Sea-horses round its
meadows flash and flee; Full fair the course, white-swelling waves
enfold it, Four pedestals uphold it o'er the sea.

White the bronze pillars that this Fairy Curragh,[A] The Centuries
thorough, glimmering uphold.
Through all the World the fairest land of any Is this whereon the many
blooms unfold.

And in its midst an Ancient Tree forth flowers, Whence to the Hours
beauteous birds outchime; In harmony of song, with fluttering feather,
They hail together each new birth of Time.

And through the Isle glow all glad shades of colour, No hue of dolour
mars its beauty lone.
'Tis Silver Cloud Land that we ever name it, And joy and music claim it
for their own.

Not here are cruel guile or loud resentment, But calm contentment, fresh
and fruitful cheer; Not here loud force or dissonance distressful,
But music melting blissful on the ear.

No grief, no gloom, no death, no mortal sickness, Nor any weakness our
sure strength can bound; These are the signs that grace the race
of Evin.
Beneath what other heaven are they found?

A Hero fair, from out the dawn's bright blooming, Rides forth, illuming
level shore and flood; The white and seaward plain he sets in motion,
He stirs the ocean into burning blood.

A host across the clear blue sea comes rowing, Their prowess showing,
till they touch the shore; Thence seek the Shining Stone where Music's
measure Prolongs the pleasure of the pulsing oar.

It sings a strain to all the host assembled; That strain untired
has trembled through all time!

It swells with such sweet choruses unnumbered, Decay and Death have
slumbered since its chime.

Thus happiness with wealth is o'er us stealing, And laughter pealing
forth from every hill.

Yea! through the Land of Peace at every season Pure Joy and Reason
are companions still.

Through all the lovely Isle's unchanging hours There showers and showers
a stream of silver bright; A pure white cliff that from the breast of
Evin Mounts up to Heaven thus assures her light.

Long ages hence a Wondrous Child and Holy, Yet in estate most lowly
shall have birth; Seed of a Woman, yet whose Mate knows no man To rule
the thousand thousands of the earth.

His sway is ceaseless; 'twas His love all-seeing That Earth's vast
being wrought with perfect skill.

All worlds are His; for all His kindness cares; But woe to all gainsayers
of His Will.

The stainless heavens beneath His Hands unfolded, He moulded Man
as free of mortal stain, And even now Earth's sin-struck sons and
daughters His Living Waters can make whole again.

Not unto all of you is this my message Of marvellous presage at this
hour revealed.
Let Bran but listen from Earth's concourse crowded Unto the shrouded
wisdom there concealed.

Upon a couch of languor lie not sunken, Beware lest drunkenness becloud
thy speech!

Put forth, O Bran, across the far, clear waters.
And Evin's daughters haply thou may'st reach.

[Footnote A: Plain or tableland such as the Curragh of Kildare.]

THE WISDOM OF KING CORMAC 
(From the Early Irish)
THE DEPTHS OF KING CORMAC'S HEART 

CARBERY
"Cormac, Conn's grandson, and son of great Art Declare to me now
from the depths of thy heart, With the wise and the foolish, With
strangers and friends, The meek and the mulish, The old and the
young, With good manners to make God amends-- How I must govern my
tongue, And in all things comport myself purely, The good and the
wicked among."

CORMAC
"The answer thereto is not difficult surely.

Be not too wise nor too scatter-brained, Not too conceited nor too
restrained, Be not too haughty nor yet too meek, Too tattle-tongued
or too loth to speak, Neither too hard nor yet too weak.
If too wise you appear, folk too much will claim of you, If too foolish,
they still will be making fresh game of you, If too conceited, vexatious
they'll dub you, If too unselfish, they only will snub you, If too much
of a tattler, you ne'er will be heeded, If too silent, your company ne'er
will be needed, If overhard, your pride will be broken asunder, If
overweak, the folk will trample you under."

THE HOUSE OF HOSPITALITY

CARBERY
"Cormac, grandson of Conn, what dues hath a Chief and an ale-house?" Said
Cormac: "Not hard to tell!
Good behaviour around a good Chief; Lamps to light for the eye's
relief; Exerting ourselves for the Company's sake, Seats assigned
with no clownish mistake, Deft and liberal measuring carvers;
Attentive and nimble-handed servers; Moderation in music and song;
A telling of stories not too long; The Host, to a bright elation
stirred, Giving each guest a welcoming word.

Silence during the Bard's reciting-- Each chorus in sweet concent
uniting."

HOW KING CORMAC ORDERED HIS YOUTH 

CARBERY
"O Cormac, grandson of Conn, say sooth, How didst thou order thy
days in youth?"

CORMAC
"Into the woods I went a-listening, I was a gazer when stars were
glistening; Blind when secrets were plain to guess; A silent one in the
wilderness; I was talkative with the many, Yet, in the mead-hall,
milder than any; I was stern amid battle cries; I was gentle towards
allies; I was a doctor unto the sick; On the feeble I laid no stick.

Not close lest burdensome I should be; Though wise not given to
arrogancy.

I promised little, though lavish of gift; I was not reckless though
I was swift; Young, I never derided the old; And never boasted though I
was bold; Of an absent one no ill would I tell; I would not reproach,
though I praised full well; I never would ask but ever would give, For
a kingly life I craved to live!"

THE WORST WAY OF PLEADING

CARBERY

"O Cormac Mac Art, of Wisdom exceeding, What is the evilest way of
pleading?" Said Cormac: "Not hard to tell!

Against knowledge contending; Without proofs, pretending; In bad language
escaping; A style stiff and scraping; Speech mean and muttering,
Hair-splitting and stuttering; Uncertain proofs devising; Authorities
despising; Scorning custom's reading; Confusing all your pleading;
To madness a mob to be leading; With the shout of a strumpet Blowing
one's own trumpet."

KING CORMAC'S WORST ENEMY
"O Cormac Mac Art, of your enemies' garrison, Who is the worst for your
witty comparison?" Said Cormac: "Not hard to tell!
A man with a satirist's nameless audacity; A man with a slave-woman's
shameless pugnacity; One with a dirty dog's careless up-bound, The
conscience thereto of a ravening hound.

Like a stately noble he answers all speakers From a memory full as a
Chronicle-maker's, With the suave behaviour of Abbot or Prior, Yet the
blasphemous tongue of a horse-thief liar And he wise as false in every
grey hair, Violent, garrulous, devil-may-care.

When he cries, 'The case is settled and over!' Though you were a saint,
I swear you would swear!"

IRISH TRIADS
(By an unknown Author of the ninth century)

Three signs whereby to mark a man of vice Are hatred, bitterness, and
avarice.

Three graceless sisters in the bond of unity Are lightness, flightiness,
and importunity.

Three clouds, the most obscuring Wisdom's glance, Forgetfulness,
half-knowledge, ignorance.

Three savage sisters sharpening life's distress, Foul Blasphemy, Foul
Strife, Foul-mouthedness.

Three services the worst for human hands, A vile Lord's, a vile Lady's,
a vile Land's.

Three gladnesses that soon give way to griefs, A wooer's, a
tale-bearer's, and a thief's.

Three signs of ill-bred folk in every nation-- A visit lengthened to a
visitation, Staring, and overmuch interrogation.

Three arts that constitute a true physician:
To cure your malady with expedition.
To let no after-consequence remain, And make his diagnosis without
pain.

Three keys that most unlock our secret thinking Are love and trustfulness
and overdrinking.

Three nurses of hot blood to man's undoing-- Excess of pride, of drinking,
and of wooing.

Three the receivers are of stolen goods:
A cloak, the cloak of night, the cloak of woods.

Three unions, each of peace a proved miscarriage, Confederate feats, joint
ploughland, bonds of marriage.

Three lawful hand-breadths for mankind about the body be, From shoes
to hose, from ear to hair, from tunic unto knee.

Three youthful sisters for all eyes to see, Beauty, desire, and
generosity.

Three excellences of our dress are these-- Elegance, durability, and
ease.

Three idiots of a bad guest-house are these-- A hobbling beldam with a
hoicking wheeze, A brainless tartar of a serving-girl, For serving-boy
a swinish lubber-churl.

Three slender ones whereon the whole earth swings-- The thin milk stream
that in the keeler sings; The thin green blade that from the cornfield
springs; That thin grey thread the housewife's shuttle flings.

The three worst welcomes that will turn a guest-house For weary wayfarers
into a Pest-house-- Within its roof a workman's hammer beat; A bath of
scalding water for your feet; With no assuaging draught, salt food to
eat.

Three finenesses that foulness keep from sight-- Fine manners in the
most misfeatured wight; Fine shapes of art by servile fingers moulded;
Fine wisdom from a cripple's brain unfolded.

Three fewnesses that better are than plenty:
A fewness of fine words--but one in twenty; A fewness of milch cows, when
grass is shrinking; Fewness of friends when beer is best for
drinking.

Three worst of snares upon a Chieftain's way:
Sloth, treachery, and evil counsel they!

Three ruins of a tribe to west or east:

A lying Chief, false Brehon, lustful Priest.

The rudest three of all the sons of earth:
A youngster of an old man making mirth; A strong man at a sick man poking
fun; A wise man gibing at a foolish one.

Three signs that show a fop: the comb-track on his hair; The track of his
nice teeth upon his nibbled fare; His cane-track on the dust, oft as he
takes the air.

Three sparks that light the fire of love are these-- Glamour of face,
and grace, and speech of ease.

Three steadinesses of wise womanhood-- steady tongue through evil, as
through good; A steady chastity, whoso else shall stray; Steady house
service, all and every day.

Three sounds of increase: kine that low, When milk unto their calves they
owe; The hammer on the anvil's brow, The pleasant swishing of the
plough.

Three sisters false: I would! I might! I may!
Three fearful brothers: Hearken! Hush! and Stay!
Three coffers of a depth unknown Are his who occupies the throne,
The Church's, and the privileged Poet's own.
Three glories of a gathering free from strife-- Swift hound, proud
steed, and beautiful young wife.
The world's three laughing-stocks (be warned and wiser!)-- An angry
man, a jealoused, and a miser.
Three powers advantaging a Chieftain most Are Peace and Justice and
an Armed Host.

Lays of the Irish Saints
ST. PATRICK'S BLESSING ON MUNSTER 
(From the Early Irish)
Blessing from the Lord on High Over Munster fall and lie; To her
sons and daughters all Choicest blessing still befall; Fruitful
blessing on the soil That supports her faithful toil.
Blessing full of ruddy health, Blessing full of every wealth That
her borders furnish forth, East and west and south and north;
Blessing from the Lord on High Over Munster fall and lie!
Blessing on her peaks in air, Blessing on her flagstones bare,
Blessing from her ridges flow To her grassy glens below!
Blessing from the Lord on High Over Munster fall and lie!
As the sands upon her shore Underneath her ships, for store, Be her
hearths, a twinkling host, Over mountain, plain and coast; Blessings
from the Lord on High Over Munster fall and lie!
THE BREASTPLATE OF ST. PATRICK
Otherwise called "The Deer's Cry." For St. Patrick sang this hymn
when the ambuscades were laid against him by King Leary that he
might go to Tara to sow the Faith. Then it seemed to those lying
in ambush that he and his monks were wild deer with a fawn, even
Benen (Benignus) following him.
I invoke, upon my path To the King of Ireland's rath, The Almighty
Power of the Trinity; Through belief in the Threeness, Through
confession of the Oneness Of the Maker's Eternal Divinity.
I invoke, on my journey arising, The power of Christ's Birth and
Baptizing, The powers of the hours of His dread Crucifixion, Of His
Death and Abode in the Tomb, The power of the hour of His glorious
Resurrection From out the Gehenna of gloom, The power of the hour
when to Heaven He ascended, And the power of the hour when by Angels
attended, He returns for the Judgment of Doom!
On my perilous way To Tara to-day, I, Patrick, God's servant, Invoke
from above The Cherubim's love!
Yea! I summon the might of the Company fervent Of Angel obedient,
ministrant Archangel To speed and to prosper my Irish Evangel.
I go forth on my path in the trust Of the gathering to God of the
Just; In the power of the Patriarchs' prayers; The foreknowledge
of Prophets and Seers; The Apostles' pure preaching; The Confessors'
sure teaching; The virginity blest of God's Dedicate Daughters, And
the lives and the deaths of His Saints and His Martyrs!
I arise to-day in the strength of the heaven, The glory of the sun,
The radiance of the moon, The splendour of fire and the swiftness
of the levin, The wind's flying force, The depth of the sea, The
earth's steadfast course, The rock's austerity.
I arise on my way, With God's Strength for my stay, God's Might to
protect me, God's Wisdom to direct me, God's Eye to be my providence,
God's Ear to take my evidence, God's Word my words to order, God's
Hand to be my warder, God's Way to lie before me, God's Shield and
Buckler o'er me, God's Host Unseen to save me, From each ambush of
the Devil, From each vice that would enslave me."Oh!  I hope we shall get much more than that," exclaimed Harry, in a
confident tone.  "What do you think of a compass, and sail, and spars,
and rigging for our boat, and if so we shall without difficulty be able
to find our way home.  Hurrah! what do you think of that?"

"I did not fancy that we were likely to be so fortunate," answered
David.  "To think that we should have run directly against a ship out in
the ocean here!  What shall we do now?"

"Why, get on board ourselves, and then hoist the old man up," answered
Harry.  "We must not leave him in the boat, lest she should get stove
in."

The boys quickly scrambled up the ship's side.  Both her masts were
gone, and the bowsprit had been carried away, with a considerable
portion of the bulwarks, when the masts fell, and all her boats and
caboose.  Altogether she had a very forlorn appearance, while there was
no sign of a human being on board.  Their first care was to get up the
old man.  Harry leaped down into the cabin of the brig, and instantly
returned with a long horsehair sofa cushion.  "We must pass straps round
this, and parbuckle him up," he observed.  Fortunately a davit remained.
To this they secured a tackle, and David, jumping into the boat to pass
the cushion under old Jefferies, they soon had him up safe on deck.
They then, having got up the hamper of fish, with the bread and the jar
of water, veered the boat away with a hawser astern.  They were now able
for the first time to attend to the old man.  They examined his head,
and finding where he had been struck, bathed the place with water, and
they also poured a few drops of water down his throat.  This seemed to
revive him greatly, and at last they thought that they might leave him,
to examine the vessel.  The cold dull grey light of the early morning
enabled them to do so.  The brig had not long been deserted, and great
was their satisfaction to find all sorts of things to eat on board--
biscuits, and even soft bread, though it was rather stale, and a box of
eggs, and bacon and cheese, and even some cooked meat, and there were
also melons, and oranges, and dried figs, and grapes, and other fruits,
which showed that she had probably come from a warm country, where these
fruits grew; indeed, they afterwards learned from some papers they
found, that she was the _Fair Ianthe_, and was from the Mediterranean,
homeward bound.  While Harry and David were examining one of the
lockers, they felt something moving against their legs.  They looked
down, and saw a fine white cat, which by her movements, and the pleased
purrs she gave when she saw that she was noticed, seemed to welcome
them.

"She must be a fairy, or the good genius of the ship," exclaimed David.
"Or, if she is a mere mortal cat, she must be very hungry, as I am sure
I am, so let us go up and breakfast on deck, and try and get the old man
to eat something."

"Do you know, I think that he would do much better down below, if we
could take off his wet things, and put him to bed," observed Harry.

To this David agreed, and, after they had eaten a little bread, for they
would not give themselves time to take more, they contrived, with
considerable exertion, to lower old Jefferies into the cabin, and to put
him into bed.  This done, they lighted a fire in the cabin stove, and
made tea and boiled some eggs, and did some rashers.  They wisely, also,
took off their own wet things, which they hung up to dry, while they put
on some clothes which they found in the cabin.  What a hearty breakfast
they made!--and if it had not been for the thoughts of the poor lad who
had gone overboard, and the anxiety of their friends, they would have
pronounced themselves very jolly.  As it was, it cannot be said that
they were very unhappy.  At last they contrived to get old Jefferies to
swallow some tea, and a little substantial food, for which he seemed
much the better, and in a few minutes they had the satisfaction of
seeing him drop off into a sound sleep.

Harry and David returned to their meal, for they still felt somewhat
hungry.  They soon began to nod, and at last David's head dropped on the
table.

"I shall be off too, if I don't jump on deck and look after the boat,
and see how the weather is," said Harry.  He found the boat secure, but
the weather very dull and far from promising, though there was then but
little wind.  He scanned the horizon.  Not a sail was in sight, and
unless with a stronger breeze than then blew, none could approach for
some time to come.  On examining the vessel he thought that there was no
danger of her sinking; indeed, except that she had lost her mast, he
could not make out why she had been deserted.  He judged by the way she
rolled that she was slightly leaking, and had made some water.  "We'll
pump her out by and by, and she will be all right till we get a fair
breeze to return home," he thought to himself.  "Perhaps we may carry
her in, and obtain salvage.  That would be very fine, better than all
the prize-money I am likely to make for a long time to come."  Such were
the ideas that floated through his mind as he returned to the cabin.  A
comfortable-looking bed invited him to rest, and rousing up David for a
moment, he made him crawl half asleep into another.  Both of them in
half a second were soundly sleeping, and had the tempest again arisen,
they would not probably have awakened then.

Very different would have been the case had Harry been a captain, but
the cares and responsibilities of midshipmen are light, and their
slumbers sound.  Hours passed by, when they both started up, hearing a
voice crying out, "Where am I?  What has happened?  Ah me! ah me!"  It
was old Jefferies who spoke.  They went to him.  He had returned to
consciousness, and now remembered the loss of his grandson.  They did
their best to comfort the old man.  They felt that they had been
remotely the cause of the lad's death.  "No fault of yours, young
gentlemen," he answered to a remark one of them had made; "it was God's
will to call the boy home.  We must never murmur at what God chooses to
do.  He knows what's best for us.  Ah, if you had heard Mr Wesley
preach, as I often have, you'd understand these things better than you
do, perhaps."  They were glad to let him talk on, as the doing so seemed
to divert his mind from his grief.  He told them much about the great
preacher, and among other things that he was never stopped by weather
from keeping an appointment, and that though wet through, with his high
boots full of water, he would deliver his message of love to an
assembled congregation before he would change his garments.

While they were all asleep the fire had gone out.  They relighted it,
and cooked an abundance of their fish, and spread their table with it,
and several other things they had discovered.  They little knew how the
time had gone by, and were therefore greatly surprised to find darkness
again coming on.  The two lads hurried on deck, followed by old
Jefferies.  The sky was still obscured.  No land was in sight, and only
two or three sails could be observed in the far distance.  They watched
them, but they were steering away from the ship.  It was evidently too
late, even if old Jefferies had been strong enough, to leave her that
day.  They therefore made up their minds to pass another night on board,
and to leave early the next day.

"If the sky is clear we may do so," observed Harry.  "But I have hunted
everywhere, and can find no compass; so that unless we can see the
stars, we shall be unable to steer a right course.  If we venture to
make the attempt, we may perhaps find ourselves far away in the
Atlantic, and never be able to return."


CHAPTER FOUR.

A STORM--THE BOAT LOST--A DISCOVERY--HARRY SAVES DAVID'S LIFE--PUMPING--
THE STRANGE SAIL.

Another night began on board the wreck.  The boys, however, saw nothing
unpleasant in the prospect.  They had plenty of food and firing, their
clothes were dry, old Jefferies appeared to be recovering, and they
hoped he would be able to assist them in navigating the boat homeward.
They agreed that they would be up by daylight, and fit the boat with a
mast and sails and oars, besides loading her with as many provisions as
she could carry.  They felt rather chilly, so they made up a fire, and
sat chatting over it quite comfortably, till they almost forgot they
were out on the ocean, no land in sight, in a dismasted vessel, and all
by themselves.  Harry again broached the idea of carrying in the ship
herself, but David doubted whether they could manage to do so.  Harry
then explained that they might form ury-masts out of a number of spars
lashed together, and that sails might be hoisted on these, fixed in
different parts of the deck.

"The rudder is in good order, so that we may just as easily find our way
to the land, and into port, I hope, in the ship, as in the boat; while
we shall be far more comfortable, and not much longer about it, I should
think," he remarked.  "I only fear lest an enemy's cruiser should see
us, and either take possession of the brig, or burn her, and carry us
off prisoners."

"Not much chance of that, I should hope," answered David.  "We should
not prove a prize of much value, after all."

"Oh, indeed! they would think it no small thing to capture a British
naval officer," remarked the young mid, drawing himself up to his full
height, which was not very great; "and I vote we do not give in without
a fight for it."

"But I only saw two guns on deck, and I do not think that we should be
able to work them, even if we can find powder and shot," said David.

"Oh, there is a store of both on board, depend on it, and if we put on a
bold face, we may drive off an enemy, provided he is not a very big
one," answered the midshipman.

Some time was occupied in these discussions.  They then went on deck and
looked about them.  

* * * * *
Gentlemen not desirous of serving should inspect one of our Bijou Residences.
Bath (h. and c.); rent inclusive. District enjoys best water supply
and most lenient Exemption Tribunal in the Home Counties.

* * * * *
Persons requiring the Loan of Children may obtain these useful aids to
exemption in lots of not less than half-a-dozen (mixed), by the day,
week, or month, as desired.

* * * * *
FLAT FOOT IN TWELVE DAYS! A GENUINE DISCOVERY.

Gentlemen wishing to acquire this useful impediment may do so with secrecy
and despatch on application (with fee). No _permanent_ disability
need be feared, a certain cure being guaranteed within one calendar
month after date of signing peace, upon payment of a further fee

.

* * * * *
LEARN TO FAINT.

One Correspondence Course will teach you this useful art in two and
a half lessons

.

* * * * *
Do you want not to go to the Front?

Then try our LITTLE WHITE LIVER PILLS and you will never have another
worry. _Dose:_ One, once. Sold everywhere.

* * * * *
HOW TO LOOK OLD. A USEFUL WRINKLE.

No more worry. No matter _how_ youthful your appearance, in TEN MINUTES
we can make you look
AS GREY AS GRANDPA.

Call and inspect our appliances. They will convince you.

* * * * *
Are you a MAN OF GENIUS? And young? And in perfect health? We will see
that you are saved for your country. In the words of one of our
exempted clients:--
"For why should youth aglow with gifts divine Be driven forth to
glut the foreign swine?"

* * * * *
[Illustration: THE GRAPES OF VERDUN.

THE OLD FOX. "YOU DON'T SEEM TO BE GETTING MUCH NEARER THEM."
THE CUB.

"NO, FATHER. HADN'T WE BETTER GIVE IT OUT THAT THEY'RE SOUR?"]
* * * * *
[Illustration: _His Fiancée._ "HE HAD VERY BAD LUCK. HE WAS KNOCKED OVER
BY A RICOCHET."
_Her Aunt._ "REALLY?

I DIDN'T KNOW THE GERMANS HAD ANY NATIVE TROOPS FIGHTING FOR THEM."]
* * * * *
THE WATCH DOGS.

XXXVII.

MY DEAR CHARLES,--This letter is written in England, but the reason for
my presence here is not to be dismissed in a breath or mentioned first
anyhow. It is to be led up to gradually, the music being stopped and the
audience being asked to refrain from shuffling their feet about and
coughing when we come to the critical moment.

Reviewing my military career, I do not look upon myself as great; I look
upon myself rather as very great. Even at the beginning of it I had
a distinct way with me. I would say to fifty men, "Form fours," and
sure enough they would form them. I would then rearrange my ideas and
say, "Form two-deep," and there, in the twinkling of an eye, was your two
deep. This is not common, I think; it was just something in me, some
peculiar gift for which I was not responsible. So pleasing was the
effect that I would sometimes go on repeating the process for ten
minutes or so, and every time it fell out exactly as I said it would,
no one ever daring to suggest that the sooner I settled down to a
definite policy, whether in fours or twos, the sooner the War would
end.

For six months I continued performing this difficult and dangerous work,
only once making the mistake of ordering my men to take a left turn and
myself taking a right one. Fortunately this happened in a local town of
tortuous by-ways, and so it fell out that I and my platoon only met again
later in the day; and a most touching meeting it was. Discussing
the matter afterwards with my C.O., I inclined to the view that it was
an accident which I, for my part, was quite ready to forgive and
forget.
My C.O. was, however, out of sorts at the moment; in fact he let his
tongue run away with him. He even proposed to put me on the Barrack
Square for a month, a suggestion which caused my Adjutant (who was
interfering as usual) to smile quite unpleasantly. I just looked
them straight in the face and said nothing. This, I think, was little
short of masterly on my part, since I knew all the time, and knew that
they know, that there was in fact no Barrack Square thereabouts to put
me on.

After this my men did so extraordinarily well that I became a marked man.
I was, in fact, invited to step over to France and to give some practical
demonstrations in the art of making war. To pack a few articles into a
bag and to parade my men was with me the work of a moment. Before
starting it was, however, proper to address a pre-battle speech to them.
Silence was enjoined and I spoke, spoke simply and honestly as a great
soldier should. "Form fours," said I, and paused dramatically.
"Form two-deep," I continued, and my meaning was understood. "Form
fours," I concluded ... and we were ready for the worst.

So we moved away for the Field. We did this, I remember, at 5 A.M. Not
a moment was to be lost. Our train started at noon and we had three
miles to march to the station. Running it pretty close, wasn't it?

Never shall I forget the anxious faces which greeted our arrival at the
French port. "Nip up to the trenches," said O.C. megaphone, "and
save the situation if you can." Up to the trenches we nipped,
covering the distance of sixty miles in less than three weeks. There
was no doubt about our willingness and ability to do as we were
told; our only difficulty was to discover in the dark where the
situation was. Never shall I forget the tense strain that first night,
my men standing to arms through the long hours, with their rifles
pointing into the darkness beyond. But not a shot was fired, and when
dawn broke all was well. True, the first light revealed the fact that
I had got us all with our backs to the enemy, so that if there
had been a battle it would have been between ourselves and Mr. Jones's
platoon. But you can't have everything; and sense of direction never was
my strong point. Never shall I forget our first breakfast in the
trenches. It consisted of bacon and eggs, marmalade and tea. How strange
and novel an experience it was to be at war!

Never shall I forget.... Now I know there was something else, but there
are such a lot of things that I am never going to forget about this
War that I cannot be expected to remember them all. It was something
about someone not shaving, and being in the rear rank while the front
rank was being inspected, and in the front rank while the rear
rank was being inspected. It was by such brilliance of strategy as this
that I was able to do the Bosch out of that little dinner he meant to
have in Paris. It was owing to the same, and to my being overheard to
remark that I could run the blessed War by myself better than this,
that I was given a pen and a piece of blotting-paper and told to carry
on. After which, of course, the wretched Bosch never even got as far
as Calais.

Truly a remarkable man! But hear the crisis of my career.

This letter is written in England. If you would only read your morning
paper properly, you would know why. Looking down the Births Column to
see if anybody you know has been born, you would have noticed that
We, Henry, are the father of a son, a tall, good-looking fellow, who
weighs eight, eighteen or eighty pounds (I could not be sure which) and
is a man of few words, obviously the strong silent sort.

On hearing the news we at once reported our achievement to the Staff and
asked what we were to do about it.

We were informed that, as far as we were concerned, the War stood adjourned
for eight days. Later, as we stood in the street trying to think it
all out and to remodel our demeanour so as to suggest the responsibility
and respectability of a father, we were asked severely why we were
standing idle, and told that, unless we were seen forthwith moving off
for England at the double, action would be taken. So home, where we
were very respectfully saluted by the New Draft. A strange but nice
woman who had the parade in hand invited us to come a little closer,
but this we refused to do, giving as our reason that we were beginning
as we meant to go on and that undue familiarity is bad for discipline.

We then addressed a few kind words to the Lady in the Case, who appeared
to take it all very much as a matter of course, and with her
discussed future dispositions.

The Army and the Bar were negatived at once; it was suggested (not by
us) that we have already in our small family an example sufficiently
fortunate of both.
He will be a sailor or a financier. There is something about sailors; it
is always a pleasure and a pride to take one of them out to dinner
in a public place, especially if he's your own.

On the other hand the financier alternative is suggested with a
view to the possibility (as things tend) that it may be he who has
to take us out to dinner.

Yours ever, HENRY.

* * * * *
[Illustration: _Mistress._ "WELL, JANE, WHAT SORT OF NEWS HAVE YOU
FROM YOUR YOUNG MAN AT THE FRONT?"

_Jane._ "FATAL, MUM."
_Mistress._ "DEAR, DEAR! I'M VERY SORRY----"
_Jane._ "YES, MUM.

'E'S BROKE IT OFF, MUM."]
* * * * *
"The fall of rain during February in Exeter amounted to 5.39 inches.
During the same month 80 hours 58 mins. of sunshine were recorded,
being an average of 2 hours 42 mins. per day. The chief tradesmen
of the district are responsible for this gratifying result."
_Express and Echo (Exeter)._
They seem to be easily satisfied down in the West. If London tradesmen
take to purveying the weather we shall want a little less rain and a
good deal more sunshine.

* * * * *
IN PRAISE OF PUSSY.

[Professor ROBERT WALLACE, of Edinburgh University, has been defending
the cat as a useful member of society and a defence against the
ravages of plague, and encourages the breeding, collecting and
distributing of types of cats known to be "superior ratters."]

In these days of stress and passion Feline charms are out of fashion, And
the cult of Pasht is coldly looked upon; But cat-lovers may take
solace From the words of ROBERT WALLACE, Who's a scientific Edinboro'
don.

Cats as lissome merry minxes, Or impenetrable Sphinxes-- Leonine,
aloof, impassive, topaz-eyed-- Leave our staid professor chilly,
For he clearly thinks it silly To regard them from the decorative
side.

It is _not_ their grace, now serious, Now malicious, now mysterious,
That appeals to his utilitarian mind; But, when viewed as extirpators
Of disease-disseminators, Then he looks with admiration on their
kind.

For if cats should ever shun us Rats with plague would overrun us, And
they're bad enough on economic grounds; For their annual depredation
On the food-stuffs of the nation He would estimate at twenty million
pounds.

True, O Puss, romance is lacking In your latest champion's backing,
But at least he isn't talking through his hat; And if, after all, what
matters Is to have "superior ratters"-- Well, he pays the highest
homage to the Cat.

* * * * *
HEROISM.

There are heroes and heroes. All heroes are heroes: that is certain.
But there are some heroes whose heroism involves more thought (shall
I say?), more material, than that of others, who are heroic in a kind
of rush, without any premeditation--heroic by instinct. Now it seems
to me that the rewards of the more complex heroes ought--but let me
illustrate.

I have a friend who is a hero.

The other day in France he did one of the most desperate things, and did
it apparently as a matter of course; and he is to have the V.C. for
it. But is the V.C. enough'? If it's enough for the instinctive heroes,
is it enough for him? That is my question.
The secret history of his deed is known only to me and to himself, and
when I give you an idea of it you will be able to answer.

I will tell you.

Never mind what the deed was. All I will say is that it is comparable
to the glorious feat of Lieutenant WARNEFORD, who bombed the Zeppelin
from above and sent it crashing down. My friend is an aviator too, and
since I am not allowed to describe his great performance in detail let
us pretend that it was an exact replica of the WARNEFORD triumph. Armed
with his bombs he saw the approaching Zepp and flew high, six or seven
thousand feet, to get above it. So far he had merely obeyed the
dictates of his brave impulsive nature. He had given no thought to
the chances of danger or death, but had flown direct to his duty.
So far he was instinctive. But my friend, as well as being unusually
brave, is a singularly retiring kind of man. He hates publicity,
ostentation. Very shy and very quiet, he moves about the world
unperceived, and has all the reluctances of the anchorite. Nothing
but his deep feeling about the War could have got him to do anything
as prominent as aviation, so that it is not unnatural that, as he
mounted higher and higher and came nearer and nearer to the desired
point over the Zepp, he should suddenly realise what it would mean
for him if he succeeded in bringing it down.
Not that he had too much time for such reflections, for until the
envelope intervened between him and the Zepp's marksmen he was being
blazed at steadily. Bullets whistled about him. But one thinks
swiftly, and in a flash he saw the extremely distasteful consequences
to humility, and the dislocation of his secluded way of life if,
dropping his bombs accurately, he earned (as he was bound to do)
the Victoria Cross. All this he saw, and was properly furious at
his bad luck--at the trick that destiny had played on him. He then
dropped the bombs, the envelope ignited, and the Zepp, with its
crew and its deadly cargo, fell to earth and was blown to atoms.
Now my point is that for such a hero as my friend, whose whole soul
is to be outraged by publicity and _réclame_, and much of whose
dearly loved privacy is to be lost for ever, there ought to be a
V.C. above and beyond the ordinary V.C.--a super V.C.; for he
performed not one deed, but two: he not only destroyed the Zepp but
he surrendered his sanctuary.

* * * * *
An Exhibition of Mr. Punch's War Cartoons is now being held at the
Leicester Galleries, Leicester Square.What do you say?"

"If yonder craft is of the character you fancy, I say let us stick to
the wreck; but we will ask old Jefferies what he thinks about it--we
wouldn't leave him on any account; at the same time, if he wishes to go,
I should say that we ought to go."

"I agree with you," answered Harry.  "Let us pump away till she gets
nearer, and then we will go and consult Jefferies."

The schooner approached, and a nearer view only confirmed the boys in
their opinion of her character.  Why she came near the wreck it was
difficult to say.  Another look through the spy-glass showed them a
number of men on board and several guns on her deck.

"I do not suppose they will trouble themselves about us unless we hail
them, and then, perhaps, they might endeavour to take us off the wreck,
but I am not quite certain about it," observed Harry.  They were
standing while speaking inside the companion hatch, with their heads
just above it.

The schooner was coming up fast.  Suddenly the ports nearest them were
opened, wreaths of smoke burst forth, and several shots whistled close
above their heads, one going through the bulwarks and ploughing up the
deck.  Their impulse was to jump below.  They could do nothing to help
themselves, but they hoped that the strangers would not continue to make
a target of them.

Jefferies had heard the shots, and wondered why they had been fired.
When they told him their suspicions, he advised them to keep below.

"I have my thoughts on the subject," he remarked.  "Hark! they are
firing again; there! another shot struck the ship.  If it was not for
the heavy sea running we should be worse off than we are.  It is no easy
matter to take aim from the deck of a craft tumbling about as the
schooner must be.  If it was, depend upon it there would be a score or
more sent into the brig between wind and water."

"But why should the schooner's people be so anxious to make a target of
the brig?" asked David.

"To sink her," answered the old man.  "They think, if fallen in with,
she might tell a tale they don't wish to have known.  That's my notion,
but I may be wrong."

"There they go again at it!" exclaimed Harry.  "Two shots struck us.
Don't you think, David, that we had better go on deck and show
ourselves?  They would scarcely try to sink the wreck if they found that
there were people on board, even though they might not take us off."

"The very reason that would make them still more anxious to send us to
the bottom.  You had better not show yourselves," said the old man; but
the lads did not hear him, for they were already on their way on deck.


CHAPTER FIVE.

MAKING A RAFT--AFLOAT ON IT--THE GRIEF AT HOME--CAPTAIN RYMER'S
APPOINTMENT--THE VOYAGE.

That raging sea, which it appeared at first would prove the destruction
of those on board the brig, was in reality the means of their
preservation.  Just as the boys got their heads above the companion
hatch, another whole broadside was let fly, and though many of the shots
passed over the ship, two or three struck her between wind and water.
Had the sea been calmer, many more probably would have found their way
through her sides, and she must instantly have gone to the bottom.  Such
was the fate the boys, not without good reason, now anticipated for her.
Another broadside would prove sufficient.

"Had we not better show ourselves, and ask to be taken on board?" said
David.

"What, boys, and be murdered!" cried the old man from below.  "Stick to
the ship, and don't trust those villains.  There's One who will take
care of you if you put faith in Him."

"Old Jefferies is right.  Let us die rather than go on board the
pirate," said Harry.

Once more they climbed up the companion ladder, from which they had
jumped down at the last broadside.  They watched the schooner.  She had
tacked, as if about to run down close to them, and deliver another
broadside.  Seeing this, they were prepared to leap back into the cabin,
when suddenly she hauled her tacks aboard, and stood directly away from
them.  Did her crew believe that the shots they had fired would speedily
effect their supposed purpose, and take the brig to the bottom, or were
they only firing for practice?  As soon as the schooner had got a little
distance off, the boys jumped on deck and hurried to the pump.  Harry
first sounded the well.  His face grew very serious.

"David," he said, "the water has gained fearfully on us.  The shot-holes
must be letting in the water fast, and I do not think that the brig can
float another hour--perhaps not ten minutes."

"What are we to do, then?" asked David.

"Build a raft," answered Harry.  "There are plenty of spars.  I saw some
carpenter's tools and large nails in the cabin, and we may break off the
hatches.  They will help us.  We must be sharp about it, though."

Of this there could be no doubt.  That they might give the old fisherman
a better chance of saving his life, they agreed to get him up first.  By
taking an abundance of food and rest, he had greatly recovered his
strength, and was now able to do as they proposed.

"If I cannot work, I may give you my advice," he observed.  "I have more
than once had to trust to a raft for my life."

The cat followed them on deck.  The old man shook his head when he saw
her.

"She knows that the cabin is no longer a safe place for her, and that
she will be better off up here," he said, as the boys placed him on a
heavy coil of rope near the mainmast.  The ship was happily more quiet
than she had before been, and the boys, having collected all the spars
and planks they could find, as well as some chairs and a table from the
cabin, commenced, under old Jefferies' directions, to form the proposed
raft.  They worked away with all their might, knowing well that a few
minutes' delay would be fatal.  A large raft was not required, as it had
to support only three persons and their provisions.  The great thing was
to make it strong enough.  They brought up all the small rope they could
find and lashed the stoutest of the spars together, so as to form an
oblong framework, with a centre spar as a keel.  They further secured
them with large nails.  Then they placed planks and smaller spars across
this, with the table, top downwards, and the chairs on their backs,
secured to it.  They managed to wrench off two of the cabin doors, and
these, nailed down and lashed across the raft, raised the deck and
increased its strength.  Besides the chairs, there were some strong
stools in the cabin.  These they nailed down at each corner, and secured
them also by lashings, with their legs up.  They then passed ropes round
the legs, thus forming a sort of bulwark that might save them from being
washed off the raft.  They had still much to do after this before the
raft would be complete.  They wanted a couple of chests in which to keep
their provisions, a cask for water, a mast and sails, and oars, and
blankets to keep them warm at night.  They had been some time at work,
and the water was already over the cabin floor.  Any attempt to save the
vessel was now hopeless.  Harry, happening to look up, saw what, had he
been on the watch, he would have observed long before, a large ship,
under a press of sail, at no great distance.  Was the wreck seen by
those on board?  If so, their prospect of escape was greatly improved.
They hoped that they were seen, for although they were thankful that
they had had time to form a raft, they knew well that at best it was a
perilous means of support, that it might be upset or dashed to pieces,
or that they might float about on it unseen till all their provisions
and water were exhausted, and then die of starvation and thirst.  They
earnestly hoped, therefore, that they might be seen from the passing
ship.  They had reserved a short spar as a mast for the raft.  To this
they fastened a flag, and secured it to the mainmast.  So occupied were
they, indeed, in watching the stranger, that for a few minutes they
forgot to go on with their raft, till recalled by old Jefferies to
continue the important work.  They had now to search for some chests.
They had seen several in the fore peak.  It was with a degree of awe,
perhaps not altogether free from fear, that they again went to where the
dead seaman lay.  They quickly cut two chests clear of the lashings
which secured them, and were emptying them of their contents, when they
came upon a box or case, the size of an ordinary writing-case.  It was
of foreign manufacture, and secured with strong brass bands.  When
taking it out with other things, Harry heard a sound like the chink of
money within.  He shook it.  There was no doubt about the matter.
"We'll keep it.  It may be useful, and it is our lawful prize," he
observed, as he put it back into the chest.  Fastening ropes to the
handles of the chests, they were soon hauled on deck, and secured to the
raft.  Now came the important work of provisioning their ark of safety.
They had already got on deck some biscuits, and salt beef and pork
uncooked.  They again descended for more articles which they had seen,
and which, together with some blankets, they brought up.  Once more they
went below, and even during the short time they had been on deck, they
observed that the water had considerably risen.  Still they were
persevering in their search for more provisions, when old Jefferies'
voice summoned them hastily on deck.

"She is going down!--she is going down!" he shouted.

They rushed up, and had just time to drag him on to the raft, and to
seize the oars and spars they had got ready, when the vessel's bow rose,
and her stern gradually sank, till she glided away towards the bottom,
literally from beneath their feet.  Just before this the cat, who seemed
determined to stick to the vessel to the last, made a spring on to the
raft, where she stood trembling with fear and astonishment at the
disappearance of her home.  As soon as the water reached the raft, by
means of the poles they shoved off from the wreck, and then pulled away
with all their might, so as completely to clear her.  The raft rocked
violently, and, in spite of all their efforts, seemed dragged towards
the vortex formed by the sinking vessel.  In another instant the brig
was no longer to be seen, and her secret, whatever it was, was buried
with her.  They looked anxiously around.  The ship was standing in the
direction the schooner had gone.  They floated alone on that wild,
stormy waste of waters.  The old man had been placed in the middle of
the raft, while the boys took their places on either side of him,
endeavouring with the oars to keep the raft before the seas.  Among
other things placed on it were some carpenter's tools, spars, blankets,
and a good supply of rope.  They had thus the means of rigging a mast.
They did this by nailing boards between the two front legs of the table,
and lashing the mast to the middle of the boards, while they carried
stays forward and on either side.  The wind was so much warmer, that
they supposed it must have shifted to the west, though the thick clouds
which still shrouded the sky prevented them from finding out the points
of the compass.  By Jefferies' advice, they continued making the
arrangements which have been described, though they still hoped they
might be seen from the passing ship, which Harry declared to be the
frigate to which he belonged--the _Ariadne_.  At last, however, they had
to abandon this hope, as the frigate continued her course, in chase,
apparently, of the mysterious schooner.  Unless seen by some other
vessel, Harry and David felt that they must now, humanly speaking,
depend on their own exertions for reaching the shore.  Harry rigged a
mast; they next fitted a sail, and with no small satisfaction hoisted
it.  By fixing an oar so as to act as a rudder astern, the raft, as soon
as the sail was hoisted, behaved remarkably well, and glided over the
seas with considerable ease and rapidity.  Their spirits rose again, for
they fully believed that they should in two or three days reach either
the English or the Irish coast.  They had no idea how far to the
westward they had been driven.  By degrees the sea went down, which was
very pleasant, but so also did the wind, till it became a perfect calm.
An end was thus put to their hopes of soon reaching the land.  However,
they were far more comfortable than they had been for some time.  The
afternoon sun shone out brightly, and dried their clothes; and they had
plenty to eat--biscuits, and cooked meat, and cheese and butter, and
figs and raisins, and several other fruits, and some bottles of wine, of
which they wisely partook very sparingly.  It, however, did the old man
much good, and he appeared to have recovered both his strength and
spirits.  Although well off in many respects, they had, however, a
scarcity of one article, without which they could not hope to prolong
existence.  That was water.  They could only secure one small cask, and
they saw, therefore, that they must husband the precious liquid with the
greatest care.

They now floated tranquilly on the calm waters, and though they would
far rather have been sailing northward, they were thus enabled to
strengthen the raft, and to prepare for it encountering any more rough
weather which might come on.  They had made old Jefferies as comfortable
as they could in the centre of the raft, and they soon had the satis
faction of finding that he had fallen asleep.  Having accomplished all
that could be done, they began to chat away as composedly as if nothing
very particular had occurred.  They went on, indeed, almost with the
conversation which had been interrupted when they discovered that the
rock on which they were sitting was surrounded by water.  Strange to
say, Harry expressed no wish or intention of leaving the profession he
had embraced should they reach the shore, while David was as determined
as ever to enter it should he be able to obtain his father's leave.  No
wonder, when the long list of glorious victories won by the British navy
was fresh in the memory of the nation, and naval officers in all social
circles were looked upon and courted as heroes.  At length old Jefferies
awoke.

"Now, boys, you must take your rest," he said.  "You have watched for
me, and now I'll watch for you.  It won't do for us all to nap together,
and if I see any change I'll call you.  Never fear, puss and I will look
after the ship."

The boys did not require a second bidding, but stretching themselves
inside the legs of the upturned table, were soon fast asleep.

We must now return for a short time to their friends on shore.  Poor
Mrs Merryweather was almost broken-hearted on being at length compelled
to give up all hopes of ever again seeing her gallant son, and on being
able to account in no other way for his and his friend's disappearance
than that they had fallen over a cliff, or been washed away by the sea.
She knew where to go for comfort and consolation; and her chief
satisfaction, when she heard that old Mrs Jefferies had lost her
husband and grandson on the same night, was to show her whence she could
derive the same consolation she herself had found.  It was a sore trial
to the poor old woman.  Mr and Mrs Morton also did their best to
comfort her; indeed, had it not been for them she would have been
compelled to resort to the workhouse for support.  They sympathised with
the old woman, not because they were aware of the service her husband
had rendered those dear to them, but because, as they supposed, a like
calamity had overtaken her and themselves at the same time.  Still Mr
Morton did not cease for a long time to have search made for them, till
at length he was with a sad heart compelled to give it up in despair.
Captain Rymer sympathised heartily with his neighbour's misfortune, and
pretty little Mary shed many a tear for the loss of her two friends.
Several months passed by, and still no news came of the lost ones.  With
great reluctance the two families at length went into mourning.  It was
a sad day, for it was an acknowledgment that hope was given up, and that
the two dear lads were no longer among the living.

One morning Captain Rymer and his family were seated at breakfast; Mrs
Rymer had just poured out a cup of tea, and Mary had handed it to him
with a slice of toast which she had carefully buttered, when the
post-bag was brought into the room.  He opened it, and drew forth a long
official-looking envelope.

"No other letter?" asked his wife.

"No, not one; and this is probably of no great importance either," he
answered, placing it by his side, and beginning to eat the toast Mary
had just given him.  Captain Rymer had been actively engaged during the
whole of the late war in many dangerous and arduous services, and, like
other officers, felt somewhat aggrieved that his services had not been
fully recognised.  He had frequently applied for some civil appointment,
but his requests had not been attended to, and the only results were
polite answers, couched in the same official language, stating that his
merits would be duly considered.  At last he made up his mind that he
was to be laid on the shelf, and that he should never get anything.
However, when he had finished his toast, he opened the letter.

"This is indeed what I little expected," he exclaimed.  "I am appointed
as Lieutenant-Governor of Saint -- in the West Indies.  It is one of the
most healthy of the islands.  I have often been there; indeed, it is in
consequence of my knowledge of the inhabitants that I have been
selected; and you will all be able to accompany me."

This information, as may be supposed, caused a great deal of excitement
in the family.  As Captain Rymer was ordered to proceed at once, there
was no time to be lost in making the necessary preparations.  Their
friends called to congratulate, and at the same time to express their
regret at losing them.  The Mortons, and poor Mrs Merryweather, would
certainly miss them more than anybody else.  Mary could not help looking
forward with pleasure to the interesting places she would probably
visit, and the new style of life she would have to lead; though she was
very sorry to leave so many kind friends, and the attached servants, who
could not accompany them.  In those days outfits were not to be
procured, nor other arrangements made, so rapidly as at present, and
Captain Rymer found it impossible to be ready to sail in the ship
appointed to carry him out.  He had, therefore, to take his passage in a
West India trader, to sail a few weeks later.  The _Betsy_ was a fine
large ship, carrying guns, to enable her to defend herself against the
pirates and small privateers, often no better, which at that time
infested the Caribbean Sea, and especially on the Spanish main and round
the coast of Cuba.  The cabins of the _Betsy_, on board which many
wealthy West India planters frequently came backwards and forwards, were
for their accommodation fitted up in a style of luxury seldom found on
board merchantmen in general.  The _Betsy_ put into Falmouth to take the
family and their baggage on board.  She then had to remain till joined
by several other West India ships.  Everything was then made ready for
sailing, and a bright look-out was kept for another fleet, bound in the
same direction, coming down channel under convoy of two men-of-war.
They were at length descried, and the ships in Falmouth harbour
immediately got under weigh, and stood out to join them.  At that time,
although most of the men-of-war carrying the flag of England's enemies
had been swept from the seas, a large number of their privateers still
remained to annoy and often injure her commerce.  It was therefore not
considered safe for merchantmen to sail without the protection of one or
more men-of-war.  Mary was delighted with the appearance of the cabins,
so luxurious compared to what she had expected; and she was still more
pleased when, on going on deck, she observed a large fleet of stately
ships with which she was surrounded.  The water was calm, the sky clear,
and the sun shone brightly on the pyramids of white canvas towering up
from the black, shining, freshly painted hulls which floated on the blue
ocean in all directions.  On the outskirts were the still more stately
men-of-war, their bright-coloured signal flags continually moving up and
down, while they occasionally fired a gun either on one side or the
other, in rather a difficult attempt to keep their somewhat refractory
charges on their proper course.  Mary, after watching the manoeuvres of
the men-of-war and the fleet of merchant vessels for some time,
exclaimed--

"Why, papa, they put me in mind of a herd of cattle driven through the
country, the drovers running here and there, shouting loudly, and
sending their sharp barking dogs now to one side, now to the other, to
keep them together."

"Not a bad idea, Mary," answered Captain Rymer.  "But should thick
weather come on, or a heavy gale spring up, the work will be much more
difficult.  Sometimes a whole herd, as you would call them, is
scattered, and lions or wolves occasionally pounce down on the weakest,
and carry them off."

"I hope that will not be our fate, papa," said Mary, timidly.

"No fear of that, dearest.  I am sorry that I should have put such a
notion into your head," answered Captain Rymer.  "The _Betsy_ is a
well-found ship, well manned and well armed, and Captain Bolton has the
character of being a first-rate seaman, so that we have every reason for
expecting to arrive in safety at our destination."

"Oh, I am not at all afraid," said Mary.  "Besides, you know, papa, we
can pray to be protected; and what a comfort it is, and how brave it
should make us, to know that God hears our prayers, and will grant them
whenever He sees that to do so is best for us!"

What a support in daily life, what a consolation to the voyager over the
stormy ocean, is a firm confidence in that glorious truth!


CHAPTER SIX.

ON THE RAFT--THE SHARK--THE SEA-FIGHT.

The raft still floated uninjured; the sea continued perfectly calm.
Harry and David retained their health and spirits, hoping that they
should reach the land at last; and the old man appeared to be steadily
recovering.  The calm tried them in one respect more than when the wind
blew, because after the raft had been strengthened they had nothing to
do.  They talked of the past and of the future, but even friends cannot
talk on all day, especially if they are hungry and thirsty, and are
anxious about any matter.  At last David recollected that they had taken
some fishing lines and hooks out of the boat, and thrown them with other
articles on the raft.  They were soon discovered, and the lads flattered
themselves that they had nothing more to do than to bait the hooks, if
bait could be found, and to throw them overboard.  Old Jefferies smiled
when he saw their preparations, and told them that, although certain
fish were to be caught occasionally in the open sea, the greater number
were to be found along the coasts of the different countries of the
world.  "To my mind God has so ordered it that all the fish which best
serve for the food of man swim round and round the coasts of the
countries of the world, in shallow water, where they can be got at and
caught, or else they visit certain known spots, like the banks of
Newfoundland, or the fishing grounds in the North Sea.  Now if they all
lived in the deep seas, or kept wandering about to all parts just as
fancy led them, fishermen would never know where to go and look for
them.  Instead of that, as I have said, as the seasons come round, God
leads them to the same places and almost on the same day every year; and
so the fisherman is prepared with his nets or lines to catch them.
However, I don't mean to say that there are no fish out even in
mid-ocean, and if we get our lines, perhaps we shall catch some."

The lines were fitted in different ways; one with a heavy lead that it
might sink towards the bottom, the other to throw to a distance, and
then to drag quickly back again.  The chief difficulty was with regard
to the bait.  David, however, proposed using a piece of salt pork,
though old Jefferies thought that no fish would bite at it.

"I'll try, at all events," he answered; and baiting his hook he threw it
skilfully to a considerable distance.  He tried over and over again till
his arm grew tired, while Henry let his line down to its entire end, but
neither of them got a bite.

"Very little use, I am afraid," said Harry, drawing up his line.

"Let it hang out, at all events.  It can do no harm, and something may
take a fancy to it," observed David, again throwing his own line.
"Halloa!  I have got something--a big fellow, too--he'll pull me off the
raft if I don't take care.  Lend a hand, Harry."

Harry took hold of the line.  Now they were able to haul in some of the
line, and then again the fish swam off in an opposite direction,
actually moving the raft.

"It may be a porpoise," said Harry.

"Perhaps it is a shark!" exclaimed David.  "It can't be a young whale."

"It is a big fish of some sort, of that there is no doubt," responded
Harry.  "The fellow will get tired before long, and then we will make
him show his nose."

"If he does not cut through the line before that," observed old
Jefferies, who would not pronounce as to what fish it was.

"If the line does not break I have little fear of its being cut through,
for there is a long shank to the hook, and the line has never been
slack," answered David, hauling in more of the line.

The fish, if such it was, at length began to grow weary of towing the
raft, and allowed himself to be drawn nearer and nearer till his mouth
was seen for an instant close to the surface.

Now he has his just reward!
We men of Unterwald have owed it long.

BAUMGARTEN.
The deed got wind, and now they're in pursuit.
Heavens! whilst we speak, the time is flying fast.

[It begins to thunder.

KUONI.
Quick, ferrymen, and set the good man over.

RUODI.
Impossible! a storm is close at hand, Wait till it pass! You must.

BAUMGARTEN.
Almighty heavens!
I cannot wait; the least delay is death.

KUONI (to the fisherman).
Push out. God with you! We should help our neighbors; The like misfortune
may betide us all.

[Thunder and the roaring of the wind.

RUODI.
The south wind's up! [4] See how the lake is rising!
I cannot steer against both storm and wave.

BAUMGARTEN (clasping him by the knees).
God so help you, as now you pity me!

WERNI.
His life's at stake. Have pity on him, man!

KUONI.

He is a father: has a wife and children.

[Repeated peals of thunder.

RUODI.

What! and have I not, then, a life to lose, A wife and child at home
as well as he?

See, how the breakers foam, and toss, and whirl, And the lake eddies up
from all its depths!
Right gladly would I save the worthy man, But 'tis impossible, as you
must see.

BAUMGARTEN (still kneeling).
Then must I fall into the tyrant's hands, And with the port of safety
close in sight!
Yonder it lies! My eyes can measure it, My very voice can echo to its
shores.
There is the boat to carry me across, Yet must I lie here helpless and
forlorn.

KUONI.
Look! who comes here?

RUODI.
'Tis Tell, brave Tell, of Buerglen. [5]
[Enter TELL, with a crossbow.

TELL.
Who is the man that here implores for aid?

KUONI.
He is from Alzellen, and to guard his honor From touch of foulest shame,
has slain the Wolfshot!

The imperial seneschal, who dwelt at Rossberg.
The viceroy's troopers are upon his heels; He begs the boatman here
to take him over, But he, in terror of the storm, refuses.

RUODI.
Well, there is Tell can steer as well as I.
He'll be my judge, if it be possible.
[Violent peals of thunder--the lake becomes more tempestuous.
Am I to plunge into the jaws of hell?
I should be mad to dare the desperate act.

TELL.
The brave man thinks upon himself the last.
Put trust in God, and help him in his need!

RUODI.
Safe in the port, 'tis easy to advise.
There is the boat, and there the lake! Try you!

TELL.
The lake may pity, but the viceroy will not.
Come, venture, man!

SHEPHERD and HUNTSMAN.
Oh, save him! save him! save him!

RUODI.
Though 'twere my brother, or my darling child, I would not go. It
is St. Simon's day, The lake is up, and calling for its
victim.

TELL.
Naught's to be done with idle talking here.
Time presses on--the man must be assisted.
Say, boatman, will you venture?

RUODI.
No; not I.

TELL.
In God's name, then, give me the boat! I will With my poor strength,
see what is to be done!

KUONI.
Ha, noble Tell!

WERNI.
That's like a gallant huntsman!

BAUMGARTEN.
You are my angel, my preserver, Tell.

TELL.
I may preserve you from the viceroy's power But from the tempest's
rage another must.
Yet you had better fall into God's hands, Than into those of men.
[To the herdsman.
Herdsman, do thou Console my wife, should aught of ill befall me.
I do but what I may not leave undone.

[He leaps into the boat.
KUONI (to the fisherman).
A pretty man to be a boatman, truly!
What Tell could risk you dared not venture on.

RUODI.
Far better men than I would not ape Tell.
There does not live his fellow 'mong the mountains.
WERNI (who has ascended a rock).
He pushes off. God help thee now, brave sailor!
Look how his bark is reeling on the waves!

KUONI (on the shore).
The surge has swept clean over it. And now 'Tis out of sight. Yet
stay, there 'tis again Stoutly he stems the breakers, noble
fellow!

SEPPI.
Here come the troopers hard as they can ride!

KUONI.
Heavens! so they do! Why, that was help, indeed.
[Enter a troop of horsemen.

FIRST HORSEMAN.
Give up the murderer! You have him here!

SECOND HORSEMAN.
This way he came! 'Tis useless to conceal him!

RUODI and KUONI.
Whom do you mean?The night passed away quietly, and towards
morning the old man, in spite of his intentions to keep watch, fell
asleep.  David was the first to rouse up.  The sun had not risen, but a
streak of red in the sky showed in what quarter he was about to appear.
David stood up to look around him.  He would not call Harry till it was
necessary, for he was sleeping so calmly, with a smile on his
countenance, dreaming of some pleasant scenes at home, probably with his
mother and sister present.  As David was thus standing up, holding on to
the mast, he felt a light air fan his cheek.  It came from the south.
He turned his eyes in that direction to look for a further sign of the
wished-for breeze.  As he did so he observed in the horizon a sail--he
judged a large ship.  Directly afterwards another appeared, in a
different part of the horizon.  He watched them attentively for some
time.  Their sails were filled with wind, and they seemed to be drawing
nearer to each other, and also nearer to the raft.  As soon as it struck
David that this was the case, he could no longer resist the temptation
of rousing up his companion.  Harry sprang to his feet.  Midshipmen do
not rub their eyes and yawn, and groan and growl, before they get up,
especially if they happen to be sleeping on a raft in the chops of the
channel.

"Yes, they are standing this way," he exclaimed.  "They are frigates,
and what is more, though one is English, I doubt by the cut of the sails
whether the other is."

"At all events we shall have a good chance of being picked up," said
David.

"I hope so; but if an idea which has struck me is correct, they will
have too much to do to look after each other to take any notice of us,"
observed the midshipman.

"What do you mean?" asked David.

"That one is English and the other French, and if so, it is not likely
that, having come in sight of each other, they will part without
exchanging shots," remarked Harry.

"Unless the Frenchman runs away," said David.

"No fear of that.  The monsieurs are brave fellows, though we can lick
them, and it is not often they show the white feather," remarked Harry.
"I really think that I am right.  They look to me like two frigates, and
one I am sure is French.  We'll rouse up the old man, and hear what he
has to say about the matter.  He'll not thank us for letting him sleep
on."

"The old man is awake," said Jefferies, sitting up and gazing in the
direction indicated by the boys, under his open hand.  For some time he
was silent.  "Yes, there's little doubt about the matter," he said at
length.  "They are frigates, and one is English; the other is a
foreigner, but whether Spaniard, Dutchman, or French, is more than I can
say.  If they are going to fight, as you think, we can't help it,
neither can we make them sail near enough to see us, and pick us up; but
I'll tell you what we can do, young gentlemen, we can lift up our voices
in prayer to God to thank Him for His favours, and to ask Him for His
protection."

All three knelt down, and lifted up their voices to God in prayer, with
a heartiness which might be sought for in vain within the lofty walls of
many a proud building.  Such is the spiritual worship in which God the
Spirit alone has pleasure.  The party on that wave-tossed raft rose from
their knees greatly refreshed in spirit, and sat down to enjoy their
morning meal with hearts grateful that they had food sufficient to
sustain life.  Soon after, the sun rose, as it were with a spring out of
his ocean bed, and shed his light across the expanse of waters on the
sails of the approaching ships, which seemed to have drawn suddenly
near, so clear and defined did their forms become.  Harry watched with
even greater eagerness than before one of the ships, which he declared
was, he believed, that to which he belonged.  David was rather inclined
to laugh at the notion, as he considered that it was impossible Harry
should be able to know his own ship at so great a distance off.  There
seemed to be no doubt that both were frigates--of that the old man
expressed himself sure; that they were not both English he thought very
likely.  As to the other point, it was, if correct, a guess of Harry's.
They continued to draw nearer and nearer to each other, and as they
approached the raft at the same time, the breeze which filled their
sails reached her.

"Shall we hoist our sails, and stand for the shore as before?" asked
David.

"We should miss the chance of being picked up if we did so," answered
Harry.  "Besides, I should not like to run away without knowing after
all whether the ships would fight, and who was the conqueror."

"Not much chance of our getting out of sight before they begin, for they
are already not far off gun-shot of each other," observed the old man,
who again raised himself to look out, but sunk down once more to his
seat in the centre of the raft.

The two boys, however, stood up, holding on by the mast, in spite of the
increasing rocking of the raft, watching eagerly the movements of the
two frigates--for frigates there was no doubt they both were.

"Up go the colours!" exclaimed Harry, with a shout.  "Hurrah!  There's
the glorious old flag of England, and the other is French--there's no
doubt about it.  Then there'll be a fight.  Hurrah!  I wish I was aboard
the old ship; I'm sure it's her.  Couldn't we manage it even now?  Pull
the raft up to her.  I wish that she would see us and pick us up.  Oh
dear! how provoking!  I'd give anything to be on board!"  Such were the
exclamations to which the young midshipman gave utterance, as he stood
watching the ships.  "The old ship has tacked, she is standing away from
us!  The Frenchman is about also.  They'll be away.  We shall not see
any of the fighting after all."

"We shall be less likely to suffer from their shots, and for that we may
be grateful," observed the old man.

The midshipman, so eager was he, scarcely listened to what was said.
The frigates were manoeuvring, each endeavouring to gain the
weather-gauge before commencing the action, which it was very evident
would take place.  There appeared to be no lack of a disposition to
fight on either side, for they both took in their lighter sails, and
finally hauled up their courses.  Now the English frigate wore round,
her example being followed by the Frenchman, both running back towards
the raft, which it seemed that the former would pass by, or even run
over, when suddenly she tacked, and standing close to a wind towards the
French frigate, fired a broadside into her quarter, while the latter was
in stays.  The effect of the broadside must have been severe, for it was
some time before she actually got about, leaving to the English frigate
the advantage of the weather-gauge, which had been the object of all the
previous manoeuvres.  For some time the two ships ran on alongside of
each other, rapidly exchanging shots, without any great apparent damage
to the masts or rigging.  They were so placed that many of the shots
which missed came flying towards the raft, but providentially she was
too far off for them to reach her.  Once more the after-yards of the
French ship being shot away, she kept off the wind, and, followed by her
antagonist, stood towards the raft, still keeping up a hot fire at her.
In a short time the damage was repaired, and once more the French ship
hauling her wind, the two stood on together close-hauled.  It was
evident, from the rapid way in which the French frigate's damages had
been repaired, that she was well manned, and that the result was by no
means so certain as Harry had at first anticipated.  The firing had had
the effect, it appeared, of lessening the little wind there had
previously been.  The two frigates, therefore, moved but slowly, and
consequently kept within sight of those on the raft.  Harry was almost
too eager to speak.  David now and then made a few remarks.  More than
an hour had passed away since the commencement of the action, and as yet
there was no visible advantage gained by either party.  Suddenly Harry
gave a cry of anger and annoyance, in which David joined him.  The old
man looked up.  There was cause for it.  The flag of England was seen to
drop from the masthead of the frigate.  Could it be that she had struck?
The firing continued as furious as ever.  No, it was impossible!

"See! see! there's another flying out!" exclaimed the midshipman,
exultingly.  "All right, some fine fellow has climbed up and nailed it
there.  Only the halliards were shot away.  My captain would go down
sooner than strike; I know that."

The loud reports of the guns came succeeding each other rapidly over the
calm ocean.  Now a loud crash, then a broadside was fired by both
parties at once, the sound of the different guns blending into one; now
a perfect silence, and then again single shots, and after a cessation
another broadside.  At length the combatants scarcely moved, and became
enshrouded in a dense cloud of smoke, which nearly concealed them from
view.  The firing was more furious than ever.  They were yard-arm to
yard-arm, discharging their broadsides into each other.  A light breeze
played over the water--the ships emerged from the cloud of smoke.  The
English frigate had lost her mizen-mast, and its wreck lay over her
quarter.

Harry groaned, but directly afterwards he shouted, "They'll not give in,
though--they'll not give in, I am sure they won't."


CHAPTER SEVEN.

THE UNION JACK BEATS--THE RAFT STILL UNSEEN--THE PRIVATEER--DEATH OF OLD
JEFFERIES--THE FRENCH CAPTAIN.

The loss of her mizen-mast did not appear to damp the ardour of the
British frigate's crew.  The firing was continued with unabated fury on
both sides, neither ship apparently moving through the water; now they
were shrouded in smoke--now the smoke was blown away, and the firing
ceased.  "The Frenchman's foremast is tottering!" shouted Harry.  "See!
see!  David.  Down it comes--hurrah! hurrah!"  Still the flags of their
respective countries waved at the mastheads of the frigates.  The mast
did not come down either when Harry thought it would, neither did the
firing cease altogether.  Faint sounds of musketry or pistol-shots came
across the water--then three or four great guns were fired--the sides of
the ships were close together, or rather, the bow of the English frigate
was fast to the Frenchman's side.

"They are boarding," cried Harry; "I know it must be that--then our
fellows will win the day.--The Frenchman's flag will be down directly.
Watch! watch!  I know it will."

They waited eagerly, looking out for some time.  Suddenly a cloud of
smoke ascended from one of the ships.  It was difficult to say from
which; again and again the guns were fired.  "I am afraid that after all
our friends are getting the worst of it," remarked David, with a sigh.

"Oh, no, no! impossible!" exclaimed Harry.  "See, see! down comes the
Frenchman's flag--hurrah! hurrah!  I knew it would be so.  Englishmen
are never licked.  We would go down first with our colours flying.
Hurrah! hurrah! we've gained the day."  Harry waved his cap above his
head, and shouted long and loudly, communicating his enthusiasm, not
only to David, but to the old man himself; but so vehement in his
demonstrations of joy did he become at last, that he nearly upset the
raft, and then well-nigh fell overboard himself.  David was rather more
quiet in his demonstrations, still he did not feel less satisfaction
probably than his friend.

"We must get on board to congratulate them," exclaimed Harry; "I
wouldn't miss that on any account; if we pull hard we shall be able to
get up to them--eh, Mr Jefferies?  They will be some time repairing
damages and shifting the prisoners, and they are not likely to make sail
till then."

"We mustn't count too much upon that, young gentleman; we are further
off than you think, and darkness will be down over the ocean long before
we can get up to them.  Besides, do you know, I don't think the sights
aboard those ships, either the conqueror or the conquered, would be so
pleasant as you suppose.  I know what a man-of-war is after a
hard-fought battle.  The decks strewn with the dead, and slippery with
blood and gore, the cockpit full of wounded men, lately strong and
hardy, now cripples for life, many dying, entering into eternity,
without a hope beyond their ocean grave, Christless, heathens in reality
if not in name, stifled groans and sighs, and oftentimes shrieks of
despair on every side.  Such sights I have seen in my youth, and I speak
the language of some of the great preachers who have come down to these
parts, and boldly put forth the gospel of salvation to perishing sinners
under the blue vault of heaven.  You only look at one side of the
picture, and that quickly vanishes away; mine, unhappily, is too real to
be wiped out quickly."  The old man spoke in a tone he had not hitherto
used, which showed that his education had been superior to that which
men of his vocation generally possess.

This remark, it must be confessed, considerably damped the ardour of the
young midshipman.  The latter, however, still continued to urge him and
David to try and get on board one of the ships.  They were in reality as
anxious as he was to do so, for they could not but feel that they were
exposed to many dangers while they remained on the raft.  The wind had
dropped, and in one respect this was in their favour, as the frigates
could not sail away; but what little wind there was was against them,
and this made rowing their heavy craft more tedious.  They progressed
very slowly, and after two hours' hard rowing they seemed no nearer than
before.  The day was drawing on; still they persevered.  Hope continued
to cheer the two boys, whatever the old man might have thought about the
matter.  At last Harry stopped.  "They are making sail, and the breeze
is getting up.  Oh dear! oh dear!  They'll be off before we can reach
them.  Still we'll try--pull away, David, pull away, there's a good
fellow."

All the efforts of the lads brought them no nearer the two frigates.
They could see the British ensign run up above that of the French.
Still it was evident that they themselves were not observed: no wonder,
under the circumstances, as everybody on board must have been busily
engaged.  Still thus, as it were, to be deserted, was very trying to the
young lads.  They bore up, however, manfully under the disappointment.

"Perhaps the wind may fall or shift again, and they may have after all
to take a tack this way," exclaimed Harry, whose hopeful enthusiasm it
was impossible to damp.  At last the night returned, and the darkness
shut out the frigates from their sight.  The lads had to while away the
time by conversation, and expressed their intentions of not going to
sleep during the night; they, however, stowed themselves away in their
accustomed places, where, should they by any chance begin to slumber,
they might not run the risk of falling into the sea.  For some time they
kept to this resolution, Harry still buoyed up with the hope that they
might get on board the frigate in the morning.  At last David's voice
began to get very drowsy, so even did Harry's, and in spite of their
strange position and their anxiety, first one and then the other dropped
off to sleep.  The old man leaned forward to ascertain that they were
both secure.

"Sleep on, lads! sleep on!" he muttered.  "He who reigns above can alone
tell whether or not this is the last night you will spend on earth.  I
liked not the look of the sky when the sun went down, and before many
hours have passed this frail raft may be tossing on an ocean of foaming
seas."  The old man was silent, but he did not sleep.  Often he prayed.
He thought over many things of his past life, as men under such
circumstances are apt to do.  Happy are those who have not to reflect on
crimes committed, injuries done to others too late to remedy! and still
more fearful must be the thoughts of those who are not trusting to the
perfect and complete sacrifice offered on Calvary--whose sins have not
been washed away in the blood of the Lamb.  The old man knew in whom he
trusted, and no bitterness entered his thoughts.  The hours passed on;
stars became obscured; clouds were seen chasing each other across the
dark sky, slowly at first, then more and more rapidly; the raft began to
rock, scarcely perceptibly, then gently, then with more and more
movement, but the boys slept on; accustomed to spend their time on the
heaving wave, they did not feel the motion.  At length a grey cold light
began gradually to steal over the foam-covered ocean.  The boys still
slept on.  The old man alone was awake on the raft.  He lifted himself
up, and bent forward as if in prayer.  Thus he remained for some time.
At length David, less accustomed to the sea than Harry, awoke from the
motion of the raft.  The exclamation to which he gave utterance aroused
his companion; David quickly started to his feet, and gazed anxiously
around the horizon.  The two frigates had disappeared.  No sail was in
sight; nothing was to be seen but the heavy leaden-coloured waves, while
the clouds seemed to come closely down on all sides.  The raft drove
quickly on before the storm.

"In what direction are we going?" asked David.

"To the south-west, I have an idea," answered Harry; "but I should not
mind that, if I thought we were likely to fall in with the two
frigates."

"Trust in God, my lads," said old Jefferies.

He spoke truly; for already the raft gave signs of breaking up, from the
violence to which it had been exposed.  The old man and the two boys did
all they could to secure it more strongly by such ropes as they still
had to spare, but it was difficult and dangerous to move from their
positions.  The seas followed rapidly, and more than once had almost
broken over them.  Still, while their mast stood, and they could keep
their sail set, they hoped to continue running before the sea.  They
spoke but little to each other, and continued looking out on either
side, in the hope of seeing some vessels which might afford them a
refuge.  Still none appeared.  The old man continued steering the raft
with great judgment and dexterity, but it was clear that the gale was
increasing, and that in a very short time the frail structure on which
they floated could not hold together amidst the fierce waves to which it
would be exposed.  Still, serious as was their position, the boys did
not forget that they had had nothing to eat since the previous night.
Harry dived down into their provision-box, and produced some biscuits
and a piece of tongue.  Their first care was to offer some to the old
man.

"No, thank you, good lads, I've no hunger," he answered.

In spite of their pressing, he refused to take any of the food.

"I can't say that I'm not hungry," cried Harry, "though I'm afraid we
must go without our tea."

David, who felt something like old Jefferies, when pressed, however, by
Harry, gladly joined him in discussing such provisions as they could
easily get at.  Both of them were much refreshed by the nourishment, and
in spite of the foreboding looks of the old man could not help holding
sanguine hopes of escaping from their perilous position.  Still they
were hoping against hope, for in spite of the additional lashings they
had cast round their raft, first one piece of plank and then another was
torn off.

"Hold on tight!" cried Harry, as he gazed astern, "here comes a
tremendous sea, and I don't know how we shall keep before it."

As he spoke a high foaming wave came roaring up.  Already the raft was
mounting a wave in front, or the consequences would have been more
disastrous.  The upper part of the sea broke completely over the raft,
but it still floated on.  Those on it looked anxiously round to see if
any of their number were missing.  The old man was still at his post at
the helm, and the two boys at their places.  It was evident, however,
that a few more such seas would utterly destroy the raft.  As Harry
again gazed astern, he saw to his dismay many similar seas preparing to
follow; still he would not say this, even to David, and tried in his own
hearty way to keep up his companions' spirits.  An hour or so thus
passed away, when the raft gave stronger signs than ever of not having
power to hold together.

_--Being lately present on the occasion of a wedding at a town in the
East Riding of Yorkshire, I was witness to the following custom, which
seems to take rank as a genuine scrap of folk-lore. On the bride
alighting from her carriage at her father's door, a plate covered with
morsels of bride's cake was flung from a window of the second story
upon the heads of the crowd congregated in the street below; and
the divination, I was told, consists in observing the fate which
attends its downfall.

If it reach the ground in safety, without being broken, the omen
is a most _un_favourable one.

If on the other hand, the plate be shattered to pieces (and the more the
better), the auspices are looked upon as most happy.

OXONIENSIS.

* * * * *

SHAKSPEARE CORRESPONDENCE.

_Shakspearian Drawings._--I have very recently become possessed of some
curious drawings by Hollar; those relating to Shakspeare very interesting,
evidently done for one Captain John Eyre, who could himself handle
the pencil well.

The inscription under one is as follows, in the writing of the said
J.
Eyre:

"Ye house in ye Clink Streete, Southwarke, now belonging to Master
Ralph Hansome, and in ye which Master Shakspeare lodged in ye while
he writed and played at ye Globe, and untill ye yeare 1600 it was
at the time ye house of Grace Loveday.

Will had ye two Rooms over against ye Doorway, as I will possibly show."

Size of the drawing, 12 × 7, "W.

Hollar delin., 1643." It is an exterior view, beautifully executed,
showing very prominently the house and a continuation of houses, forming
one side of the street.

The second has the following inscription in the same hand:

"Ye portraiture of ye rooms in ye which Master Will Shakspeare lodged in
Clink Streete, and which is told to us to be in ye same state as
when left by himself, as stated over ye door in ye room, and on the
walls were many printed verses, also a portraiture of Ben Jonson
with a ruff on a pannel."

Size of the drawing 11-5/8 × 6-7/8, "W. Hollar delin., 1643:" shows the
interior of three sides, and the floor and ceiling, with the tables,
chairs, and reading-desk; an open door shows the interior of his
sleeping-room, being over the entrance door porch.

The third--

"Ye Globe, as to be seen before ye Fire in ye year 1615, when this
place was burnt down. This old building," &c.

Here follows a long interesting description. It is an exterior view; size
of drawing 7¼ wide × 9-7/8 high, "W.

H. 1640."
The fourth shows the stage, on which are two actors: this drawing, 7-7/8
×
6½, was done by J.

Eyre, 1629, and on which he gives a curious description of his accompanying
Prince Charles, &c.; at this time he belonged to the Court, as he
also accompanied that prince to Spain.

The fifth, done by the same hand in a _most masterly manner_, pen
and ink portrait of Shakspeare, copied, as he writes, from a portrait
belonging to the Earl of Essex, with interesting manuscript
notice.

The sixth, done also by J. Eyre:

"Ye portraiture of one Master Ben Jonson, as on ye walls of Master
Will Shakspeare's rooms in Clinke Streete, Southwarke."--J. E. 1643.

The first three, in justice to Hollar, independent of the admirers
of the immortal bard and lovers of antiquities, should be engraved
as "Facsimiles of the Drawings."

This shall be done on my receiving the names of sixty subscribers,
the amount of subscription one guinea, for which each subscriber
will receive three engravings, to be paid for when delivered.

P. T.

P. S.--These curious drawings may be seen at No. 1.

Osnaburgh Place, New Road.

_Thomas Shakspeare._--From a close examination of the documents referred
to (as bearing the signature of Thomas Shakspeare) in my last {546}
communication to "N. & Q.," Vol. vii., p. 405.), and from the _nature_
of the _transaction_ to which they relate, _my impression_ is,
that he was by profession a money scrivener in the town of Lutterworth;
a circumstance which may possibly tend to the discovery of his
family connexion (if any existed) with William Shakspeare.

CHARLECOTE.

_Passage in Macbeth, Act I. Sc. 5._-- 
" . . .

Come, thick night, And pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell, That my
keen knife see not the wound it makes, Nor heaven peep through the
_blanket_ of the dark, To cry, Hold, hold!"

In MR.

PAYNE COLLIER'S _Notes and Emendations_, p. 407., we are informed
that the old corrector substitutes _blankness_ for _blanket_.

The change is to me so exceedingly bad, even if made on some sort
of authority (as an extinct 4to.), that I should have let it be its
own executioner, had not MR.

COLLIER apparently given in his adhesion to it.

I now beg to offer a few obvious reasons why _blanket_ is unquestionably
Shakspeare's word.

In the _Rape of Lucrece_, Stanza CXV., we have a passage very
nearly parallel with that in _Macbeth_:

"O night, thou furnace of foul reeking smoke, Let not the jealous
day behold thy face, Which underneath thy _black all-hiding cloak_,
Immodestly lies martyr'd with disgrace."

In _Lucrece_, the _cloak_ of night is invoked to screen a deed of adultery;
in _Macbeth_ the _blanket_ of night is invoked to hide a murder: but the
foul, reeking, smoky cloak of night, in the passage just quoted, is
clearly parallel with the smoky blanket of night in _Macbeth_. The
complete imagery of both passages has been happily caught by Carlyle
(_Sartor Resartus_, 1841, p. 23.), who, in describing night, makes
Teufelsdröckh say:

"Oh, under that _hideous coverlet of vapours, and putrefactions, and
unimaginable gases_, what a fermenting-vat lies simmering and hid!"
C. MANSFIELD INGLEBY.

Birmingham.

_"Discourse of Reason"_ (Vol. vii., p. 497.).

--This phrase, "generally supposed to be peculiarly Shakspearian," which
A. E. B. has indicated in his quotation from Philemon Holland, occurs
also in Dr.

T. Bright's _Treatise of Melancholy_, the date of which is 1586. In the
third page of the dedicatory epistle there is this sentence:

"Such as are of quicke conceit, and delighted in _discourse of reason_
in naturall things."
Here, then, is another authority against Gifford's proposed "emendation"
of the expression as it occurs in _Hamlet_.

M. D.

* * * * *

Minor Notes.

_The MSS. of Gervase Hollis._--These were taken during the reign of
Charles I., and continue down to the middle of Charles II. In Harl.
MSS. 6829, will be found a most curious and valuable volume,
containing the painted glass, arms, monuments, brasses, and epitaphs
in the various churches and chapels, &c. throughout the county of
Lincoln.

The arms are all drawn in the margin in colours. Being taken before
the civil war, they contain all those which were destroyed or defaced by
the Parliament army. They were all copied by Gough, which he notices in
his _Brit.

Top._, vol. i. p. 519., but not printed.

His genealogical collections are contained in a series of volumes marked
with the letters of the alphabet, and comprehended in the Lansdowne
Catalogue under No. 207.

The Catalogue is very minute, and the contents of the several volumes
very miscellaneous; and some of the genealogical notes are simply
short memoranda, which, in order to be made available, must be
wrought out from other sources.

They all relate more or less to the county of Lincoln. One of these,
called "Trusbut," was presented to the British Museum by Sir Joseph
Banks in 1817, and will be found in Add.

MSS. 6118.

E. G. BALLARD.

_Anagrams.

_--The publication of two anagrams in your Number for May 7, calls to my
mind a few that were made some years ago by myself and some friends,
as an experiment upon the anagrammatic resources of words and
phrases.

A subject was chosen, and each one of the party made an anagram, good,
bad, or indifferent, out of the component letters. The following may
serve as a specimen of the best of the budget that we made.

1. French Revolution.
Violence, run forth!

2. Swedish Nightingale.
Sing high! sweet Linda. (_q. d._ di Chamouni.)
3. Spanish Marriages.
Rash games in Paris; or, Ah! in a miser's grasp.

4. Paradise Lost.
Reap sad toils.

5. Paradise Regained.
Dead respire again.

C. MANSFIELD INGLEBY.

Birmingham.

_Family Caul--Child's Caul._--The will of Sir John Offley, Knight, of
Madeley Manor, Staffordshire (grandson of Sir Thomas Offley, Lord Mayor
of London temp. Eliz.), proved at Doctors' Commons 20th May, 1658,
contains the following singular bequest:
"Item, I will and devise one Jewell done all in Gold enammelled,
wherein there is a Caul that covered my face and shoulders when I
first came into the world, the use thereof to my loving Daughter
the Lady {547} Elizabeth Jenny, so long as she shall live; and after
her decease the use likewise thereof to her Son, Offley Jenny,
during his natural life; and after his decease to my own right heirs
male for ever; and so from Heir to Heir, to be left so long as it
shall please God of his Goodness to continue any Heir Male of my
name, desiring the same Jewell be not concealed nor sold by any of
them."

CESTRIENSIS.

_Numerous Progeny._--The _London Journal_ of Oct. 26, 1734, contains
the following paragraph:

"Letters from Holderness, in Yorkshire, mention the following
remarkable inscription on a tombstone newly erected in the churchyard
of Heydon, viz.

'Here lieth the body of William Strutton, of Padrington, buried the 18th
of May, 1734, aged 97, who had by his first wife 28 children, and by
a second wife 17; own father to 45, grandfather to 86, great-grandfather
to 97, and great-great-grandfather to 23; in all 251.'"

T. B. H.

* * * * *

Queries.

SMITH, YOUNG, AND SCRYMGEOUR MSS.

Thomas Smith, in his _Vitæ Illustrium_, gives extracts from a so-called
Ephemeris of Sir Peter Young, but which Sir Peter compiled during the
latter years of his life. Thomas Hearne says, in a note to the Appendix
to Leland's _Collectanea_, that he had had the use of some of Smith's
MSS.
This Ephemeris of Sir Peter Young may be worth the publishing if
it can be found: can any of your readers say whether it is among
Smith's or Hearne's MSS., or if it be preserved elsewhere?

Peter Young, and his brother Alexander, were pupils of Theodore Beza,
having been educated chiefly at the expense of their maternal uncle
Henry Scrymgeour, to whose valuable library Peter succeeded. It was brought
to Scotland by Alexander about the year 1573 or 1574, and was
landed at Dundee.

It was especially rich in Greek MSS.; and Dr.

Irvine, in his "Dissertation on the Literary History of Scotland,"
prefixed to his _Lives of the Scottish Poets_, says of these MSS.
and library, "and the man who is so fortunate as to redeem them
from obscurity, shall assuredly be thought to have merited well
from the republic of letters."

It is much to be feared, however, that as to the MSS.
this good fortune awaits no man; for Sir Peter Young seems to have
given them to his fifth son, Patrick Young, the eminent Greek
scholar, who was librarian to Prince Henry, and, after his death,
to the king, and to Charles I.

Patrick Young's house was unfortunately burned, and in it perished
many MSS. belonging to himself and to others.

If Scrymgeour's MSS.

escaped the fire, they are to be sought for in the remnant of Patrick
Young's collection, wherever that went, or in the King's Library,
of which a considerable part was preserved.

Young's house was burned in 1636, and he is supposed to have carried
off a large number of MSS. from the royal library, after the king's
death in 1649.

If therefore Scrymgeour's MSS.

were among these, it is possible that they may yet be traced, for
they would be sold with Young's own, after his death in 1652.

This occurred on the 7th of September, rather suddenly, and he left no
will, and probably gave no directions about his MSS. and library,
which were sold _sub hastâ_, probably within a few months after his
death, and with them any of the MSS.
which he may have taken from the King's Library, or may have had
in his possession belonging to others.

Smith says that he had seen a large catalogue of MSS. written in Young's
own hand. Is this catalogue extant?

Patrick Young left two daughters, co-heiresses: the elder married to John
Atwood, Esq.; the younger, to Sir Samuel Bowes, Kt.

A daughter of the former gave to a church in Essex a Bible which
had belonged to Charles I.; but she knew so little of her grandfather's
history that she described him as Patrick Young, Esq., library
keeper to the king, quite unconscious that he had been rector of
two livings, and a canon and treasurer of St.

Paul's.

Perhaps, after all, the designation was not so incorrect, for though
he held so many preferments, he never was in priest's orders, and
sometimes was not altogether free from suspicion of not being a
member of the Church of England at all, except as a recipient of
its dues, and of course, a deacon in its orders.

But it may be worthy of note, as affording another clue by which, perchance,
to trace some of Scrymgeour's MSS., that Sir Thomas Bowes, Kt., who was
Sir Symonds D'Ewes's literary executor, employed Patrick Young to value
a collection of coins, &c., among which he recognised a number
that had belonged to the king's cabinet, and which Sir Symonds had
purchased from Hugh Peters, by whom they had been purloined.

Young taxed Peters with having taken books, and MSS. also, which the other
denied, with the exception of two or three, but was not believed. I
do not know what relation Sir Thomas Bowes was to Sir Samuel, who
married Young's second daughter, nor to Paul Bowes, who edited
D'Ewes's _Journals_ in 1682.

It is quite possible that some of Scrymgeour's MSS. may have fallen
into D'Ewes's hands, may have come down, and be recognisable by some
mark.

As to Scrymgeour's books, it is probable that they were deposited
in Peter Young's house of Easter Seatoun, near to Arbroath, of which
he obtained possession about 1580, and which remained with his
descendants for about ninety years, when his great-grandson sold
it, and purchased the castle and part of the lands of Aldbar.

That any very fine library was removed thither is not probable, especially
any bearing Henry {548} Scrymgeour's name; and for this reason,
that Thomas Ruddiman was tutor to David Young, and was resident at
Aldbar, and would hardly have failed to notice, or to record, the
existence of any so remarkable a library as Scrymgeour's, or even
of Sir Peter Young's, who was himself an ardent collector of books,
as appears from some of his letters to Sir Patrick Vans (_recte_
Vaux) which I have seen, and as might be inferred from his literary
tastes and pursuits.

There is perhaps reason to believe that Sir Peter's library did not
descend in his family beyond his eldest son, Sir James Young, who
made an attempt to deprive the sons of his first marriage (the elder
of whom died in infancy) of their right of succession to their
grandfather's estates, secured to them under their father's marriage
contract, and which attempt was defeated by their uncle, Dr.

John Young, Dean of Winchester (sixth son of Sir Peter), who acquired
from Lord Ramsay, eldest son of the Earl of Dalhousie, part of the
barony of Baledmouth in Fife.

Dean Young founded a school at St.

Andrew's, on the site of which is now built Dr. Bell's Madras College.

Sir Peter Young the elder, knighted in 1605, has been sometimes
confounded with his third son, Peter, who received his knighthood
at the hands of Gustavus Adolphus, on the occasion of that king
being invested with the Order of the Garter.

Another fine library (Andrew Melville's) was brought into Scotland
about the same time as Scrymgeour's; and it is creditable to the
statesmen of James's reign that there was an order in the Scotch exchequer,
that books imported into Scotland should be free from custom.

A note of this order is preserved among the Harleian MSS. in the British
Museum; but my reference to the number is not at hand.

DE CAMERA.

* * * * *

MORMON PUBLICATIONS.

Can any of your correspondents oblige me by supplying particulars of
other editions of the following Mormon works? The particulars required
are the size, place, date, and number of pages. The editions enumerated
below are the only ones to which I have had access.

1.
Harry had been perhaps
unwisely anxious to put on his own uniform again, which was now
thoroughly dry and fit to wear.  Pierre advised him not to appear before
the captain in it.  "Still it's my proper dress," answered Harry, who,
like many midshipmen, was very tenacious on that subject.  The gale,
which had been in their favour, had carried them a long way towards
their destination, as they judged by the warmth of the atmosphere and
the tropical appearance of the sea.  The officers as usual paced the
quarter-deck, and the men congregated together forward.  A monkey, which
had hitherto stowed himself away somewhere out of sight, was among the
occupants of the deck.  To an English crew a monkey is a great
acquisition, but a French ship's company can scarcely get on without
one.  When they are inclined to play pranks he is always at their
service, and woe betide the unhappy small boy of a ship's company on
whose muster-roll a monkey is not to be found! as he has to endure what
the four-handed animal would otherwise have to go through.

On looking over the side Harry observed a black fin gliding along at the
same rate as the schooner.  "Look there, David; did you ever see a
regular shark before?" he said.  "If anybody was to fall overboard that
fellow would snap him in two in half a second.  The best swimmer would
have but a poor chance unless he was well prepared.  I have heard of a
sailor attacking a shark with a knife in his hand, and cutting him up;
but a man only with iron nerves and great presence of mind and a good
swimmer could ever make the attempt."  While they were speaking the
captain appeared on deck.  "Here, you boys, come aft," he shouted.
"What, do you think you are to pass away your time in idleness, and get
fed and grow fat?  You are very much mistaken if you think any such
thing.  Take each of you a tar-bucket, and go and black down the rigging
from the fore-topmast head."  Poor Harry looked at his uniform; it had
endured the wetting, but it would be spoiled in a few minutes by the
operation which he was ordered to perform.  He saw that it would not do
to disobey the captain's orders.  If they had time to find Pierre they
might borrow some frocks and canvas trousers.

"I say what I mean," shouted the captain; "and off with you at once--one
taking the starboard, and one the larboard rigging.  What, you don't
like to spoil your clothes, I see.  I was not allowed any clothes to
spoil when I was in an English prison."

"Surely you will let us borrow some frocks, sir," answered David.
"Though we are gentlemen, and unaccustomed to such work, we are willing
to obey you, only we don't want to spoil our clothes."

"Aloft, I say, or overboard you go.  There's a fellow alongside ready to
breakfast off you, if you are anxious to feed him."  The little
Frenchman looked so fierce that the boys really believed he was in
earnest.

"It can't be helped," said David.  "You must tell me what to do, for I
never blacked down rigging even on board the yacht."

"Just secure the bucket as you descend, and take care not to let the tar
drop from the brush on deck.  It's not the difficulty of the thing, but
it is very derogatory."

Seeing that there was no use in further expostulation, the boys took
each of them a bucket as they were ordered, and ascended, one on one
side, and one on the other, of the fore-rigging, and having reached the
masthead Harry secured his bucket, and showed David how to secure his.
The operation, besides being a very dirty one, was tedious, as each rope
had to be gone carefully round with the tar.  Often they made melancholy
faces at each other as they gradually descended, but neither the captain
nor officers showed the slightest commiseration, only watching
apparently to see that the work was effectually performed.  While the
captain remained on deck the crew took no notice of them.  This was,
however, evidently done in kindness.  At length the work was over, and,
seeing the captain on deck, they thought the best way was to go aft and
report what they had done.  "Very well," said the captain; "tomorrow you
will black down the main-rigging; in the meantime I want to see a polish
put upon those brass stanchions, and the swivel guns are not so bright
as they should be.  I shall have work for you in my cabin, too, by and
by.  You are young English gentlemen, I understand.  You may consider it
a privilege to have to serve a poor republican seaman, who has worked
his way up from before the mast."

"We will do our best to obey you, sir," answered David, who wisely
wished to conciliate the man, in spite of his surly manners.  He
remembered that "a soft answer turneth away wrath."


CHAPTER NINE.

THE PRISONERS HAVE TO WORK--THE CHASE--THE MERCHANT SHIP IS TAKEN--THE
BOYS FIND THEIR FRIEND CAPTAIN RYMER AND MARY--THE HURRICANE.

Next morning, as soon as the boys appeared on deck, the captain again
called them aft.

"Aloft with you, lads, and black down the main-rigging," he exclaimed as
they approached him, looking more humble even than they felt.  Knowing,
however, that there was no use in refusing to do what they were ordered,
Harry and David took up the buckets to which the captain pointed, and
ascended as before.

"We must look out not to drop any tar on deck," said Harry, "he will
make it an excuse to give us a rope's-ending if we do; I'm sure he means
mischief."

The boys soon gained the masthead, and began their very disagreeable
task.  The sun was extremely hot; the ship rolled slowly from side to
side as she glided on before the wind.  Poor David felt very sick and
wretched; more than once he thought he must give in, but Harry cheered
him by exclaiming--

"Let us show that we are Englishmen, and at all events that we are not
to be daunted by any work these Frenchmen can give us."

Thus encouraged, David, who really had as much spirit as Harry,
determined to persevere.  The work, however, progressed more slowly than
on the previous day.  Several times the captain came on deck and watched
them; they continued their work as it they did not observe him.  By the
time it was completed, as may be supposed, their clothing was entirely
spoiled.  As they stepped on deck he grinned at them maliciously.

"Ah! now you look what you must in future expect to be," he remarked;
"go forward and stow away those buckets, and then come aft to me."

"I wonder what he is going to make us do next?" said Harry, as they
handed the buckets over to the boatswain.  Poor David, overcome with the
heat, scarcely answered.  A cup of water which he had obtained from a
cask on deck somewhat revived him.

"Well, we must go aft, and face it out as best we can," he answered;
"come along, I'm ready."

The captain ordered them into his cabin.

"Now, lads, I want that furniture cleaned; the brass has not been
burnished for some time."  He put some leather into their hands.  The
difficulty of the work was not so great, but it was evidently given to
insult them on account of its menial character.  Harry especially felt
this.  Still they had no resource but to obey, and scrubbed away with
might and main.  At last the captain came below.

"Now, you young English midshipman, I've some special work for you to
do.  See that locker; there are several pairs of boots and shoes--you'll
find a blacking-bottle and brushes.  I want them cleaned."  Harry's
proud spirit rose within him.  Should he defy the tyrannical captain,
and declare that he would die sooner than so employ himself?  The
captain seemed to divine his thoughts.

"As you please, youngster," he observed; "no one disobeys me on board
this vessel."

Harry remembered the shark, and the captain's threat on the previous
day.

"Oh!  I will help you," said David, looking at him.

"No, it is his work," said the captain.

Poor Harry saw there was no use in offering any resistance, and taking
out the brushes began to clean the shoes.  It was a work which a
midshipman in those days often had to perform for himself; but then it
was very different doing it for another, and that other a Frenchman.  At
length, however, the boys were dismissed, having performed all the tasks
given to them.  They hurried forward and dived below.  The first person
they met was Pierre, who looked with commiseration on their tarred
dresses.

"I came on board with a nice clean suit, and had to spoil it just as you
have had to spoil yours," he observed; "and now he abuses me when I go
into his cabin, for not looking clean."

After this the boys were regularly sent aft to help wash down decks, and
to keep the stanchions and other parts about the ship bright.  This gave
them abundant occupation.  However, when they could manage to get below,
they were treated even more kindly than before by the crew.

They had been for some weeks cruising up and down without even sighting
a sail, when one morning, on Harry and David coming on deck, they found
the captain and officers in a considerable state of excitement.  The
captain himself went aloft with his glass, and on his return ordered the
ship's course to be altered, and all sail to be set.

"We are in chase of some vessel or other," observed Harry; "depend upon
it the Frenchmen expect to make a prize of her."

All hands were called on deck.  Now one sail and now another was
added,--some rigged out so as just to skim the surface of the water,
while with buckets and scoops the sails were wetted as high as they
could be reached.  Harry and David could see in the far distance a large
ship, which from her narrow yards and the cut of her sails Harry said he
thought was really a merchantman, which of course the Frenchman took her
to be.

"But suppose she is not," said David.

"Then they will find out that they have caught a Tartar, and we shall
get out of the power of this Monsieur Sourcrout," answered Harry;
"however, we mustn't raise our hopes too high."

"The ship ahead has shown English colours," the boys heard from some of
the crew, for they could not get a glass to look through.  She, it
seemed, did not like the appearance of the stranger, for she now set all
sail and went off also directly before the wind.  A stern chase is a
long chase, but if the chaser is a faster vessel than the chased, she
will come up with her at last.  As the day drew on it was very evident
that the schooner had gained very considerably on the chase.  She was
seen to be an old-fashioned merchant vessel, a regular West India
trader, probably, which would afford a rich prize to the captors.

The excitement of the captain and officers was extreme.  Already they
anticipated the rich booty which would soon be theirs.

"Oh! do you think those people on board that vessel will give in without
fighting?" asked David.

"I think very likely not," said Harry; "we shall soon know; in less than
an hour we shall be alongside."

"What had we better do?" asked David.

"Stay on deck and see what takes place," said Harry.

"What, and run the chance of being shot?" said David; "I don't think
that would be wise."

"Well, let us wait and see till the time comes," said Harry, who was
evidently very unwilling to go below while any fighting was taking
place.

In the meantime the Frenchmen were very active in preparing the ship for
action.  Arm-chests were thrown open, and arms were handed to each of
the crew.  The cutlasses were secured to their waists, and the pistols
they stuck in their belts.  The guns were cast loose and loaded, and the
French ensign run up at the peak.  The magazine was opened, and Harry
and David were called aft by the captain, and told to go below.

"I knew that's what we should have to do," said Harry.

"Stand by, and hand up the powder as it is wanted," said the captain, in
an authoritative tone, which there was no disobeying.  Pierre and the
other boys were employed in the same way.

"We shall have to carry the powder on deck in these tubs, and sit on it
till it is wanted," said Harry.

"And run as great a risk of being shot as any of the crew?" asked David.

"There's no help for it," said Harry.  "If we refuse, the French skipper
is just as likely to shoot us through the head as not.  He's been
waiting for this opportunity to have his revenge on us."

As soon as the guns were loaded, a fresh supply of powder was called
for, and Harry and the other boys were ordered to carry it up on deck.
There they sat in a row on the tubs which contained the bags of powder,
looking anything but contented with their lot.  The schooner now rapidly
came up with the merchant vessel,--for such there seemed no doubt was
the character of the chase.  Whether or not she would fight seemed a
question.  As they drew nearer, a considerable number of men were seen
on deck, and she gave no signs of yielding.  As soon as the Frenchman's
bow-chaser could be brought to bear, a shot was fired, but no reply was
given.  Another and another followed in rapid succession.  Neither of
the shots took effect.  At length the schooner got near enough to fire a
whole broadside.  As she was about to do so, the ship hauled up her
courses, and, standing across the Frenchman's bows, gave her a raking
broadside which struck down several of her crew, and caused some little
damage to her masts and spars.  Harry and David looked anxiously towards
each other.  Neither of them was hurt, nor was Pierre, in whom they took
a warm interest.  This opposition, however, seemed to excite the captain
to the utmost pitch of fury.  He stamped and swore, and ordered a
broadside to be immediately poured into the English ship.  The two
vessels now ran on alongside each other.  It was clear if the English
vessel was to be taken, she would not be captured without a severe
struggle.  The Frenchman's guns were heavier and more numerous than
hers, and the crew were better trained to their use.  This soon began to
tell.  Several of her spars were soon shot away, and from the faintness
of her fire it seemed too probable that many of her crew had been killed
or wounded.  As long as the Frenchman's spars remained standing, to
escape was hopeless, and her guns were therefore directed rather to
knock away the Frenchman's masts than to kill the crew.  In this,
however, she was not successful, and several of her own spars were shot
away instead.  At length the French captain, delivering another
broadside, ranged up alongside with the intention of boarding.  An
attempt was made to avoid this, and boarding nettings were seen triced
up above the bulwarks of the English ship.  Again the Frenchman ran
alongside.

"They shall not foil us a second time," exclaimed the French captain;
"no quarter if they do not yield."

Harry and David trembled for the fate of their unfortunate countrymen on
board the merchantman.  Just then the English ensign was seen to descend
from the peak.  Those on board the English vessel thought that further
resistance was hopeless.  The Frenchmen swarmed up the sides, and were
quickly in possession of the English ship.

"We'll follow, and see what takes place," said Harry; "we may perhaps
help some of the poor people."

As there was no one to interfere with them, they were soon on the
merchantman's deck.  Some five or six of the crew lay dead, while three
or four others, badly wounded, were being conveyed below.  The French
captain, by his gestures, seemed disappointed at not having his expected
revenge, and he was abusing the English captain for having attempted to
oppose him.  A man stood by, receiving the swords of the captain and
several other persons, who seemed to be gentlemen.  Harry and David
observed one whose face had been turned away from them at first.

"Harry," exclaimed David, "I'm sure that's Captain Rymer.  If Mary is on
board, how dreadful for her!"

"It's very like him," said Harry; "I'm afraid it must be him.  But how
could he have come on board the ship?  We shall soon know, at all
events--I will try and speak to him."

As may be supposed, even their dearest friends would not have known the
two lads in their tarry clothes, and their faces begrimed with powder.
As soon as the French captain and his followers went below to examine
the cargo of the ship, Harry and David stole up to the gentleman whom
they supposed to be Captain Rymer.  He was indeed their friend.

"What, lads!" he exclaimed, looking at them, "are you really alive?  I
am thankful to find you so, even in this plight."

Harry rapidly explained how they came to be on board the French vessel.

"And is Mary with you?" asked Harry, eagerly.

"Yes, and there are several other ladies in the cabin below.  They have
shut themselves in, and I trust will receive no annoyance from the
Frenchmen."

"I don't think we should be seen talking with you," said Harry, "because
we may hope to be of some assistance, although we don't see clearly how
that is to be just yet."

The Frenchmen seemed highly elated at finding they had captured an
unusually rich prize, and were in a very good humour, in spite of the
loss of a few of their number.  The dead were soon thrown overboard, and
the wounded placed in the doctor's hands out of sight, the decks washed
down, and most of the traces of the combat done away with.  A picked
crew of the Frenchmen was sent on board the English merchantman, which
it seemed the intention of the captain to carry into the nearest port in
the West Indies belonging to France.  Harry and David could not bear the
thoughts of being separated from Captain Rymer, and resolved to stow
themselves away on board the English vessel, hoping they might not be
missed.  Among the prize crew were, to their great satisfaction, their
good-natured friends Jacques Rossillion and Pierre Lamont.  The first
lieutenant came to take the command.  THE INCENDIARY.

I knew James Dutton, as I shall call him, at an early period of life, when
my present scanty locks of iron-gray were thick and dark, my now pale
and furrowed cheeks were fresh and ruddy, like his own. Time, circumstance,
and natural bent of mind, have done their work on both of us; and
if his course of life has been less equable than mine, it has been
chiefly so because the original impulse, the first start on the
great journey, upon which so much depends, was directed by wiser
heads in my case than in his.

We were school-fellows for a considerable time; and if I
acquired--as I certainly did--a larger stock of knowledge than he, it
was by no means from any superior capacity on my part, but that
his mind was bent on other pursuits.

He was a born Nimrod, and his father encouraged this propensity from
the earliest moment that his darling and only son could sit a pony,
or handle a light fowling-piece. Dutton, senior, was one of a then
large class of persons, whom Cobbett used to call bull-frog farmers;
men who, finding themselves daily increasing in wealth by the operation
of circumstances they neither created nor could insure or control--namely,
a rapidly increasing manufacturing population, and tremendous war-prices
for their produce--acted as if the chance-blown prosperity they enjoyed
was the result of their own forethought, skill, and energy, and therefore,
humanly speaking, indestructible.

James Dutton was, consequently, denied nothing--not even the luxury of
neglecting his own education; and he availed himself of the
lamentable privilege to a great extent.

It was, however, a remarkable feature in the lad's character, that
whatever he himself deemed essential should be done, no amount of
indulgence, no love of sport or dissipation, could divert him from
thoroughly accomplishing.

Thus he saw clearly, that even in the life--that of a sportsman-farmer--he
had chalked out for himself, it was indispensably necessary that a certain
quantum of educational power should be attained; and so he really
acquired a knowledge of reading, writing, and spelling, and then
withdrew from school to more congenial avocations.

I frequently met James Dutton in after-years; but some nine or ten
months had passed since I had last seen him, when I was directed
by the chief partner in the firm to which Flint and I subsequently
succeeded, to take coach for Romford, Essex, in order to ascertain
from a witness there what kind of evidence we might expect him to
give in a trial to come off in the then Hilary term, at Westminster
Hall.

It was the first week in January: the weather was bitterly cold;
and I experienced an intense satisfaction when, after despatching
the business I had come upon, I found myself in the long dining-room
of the chief market-inn, where two blazing fires shed a ruddy,
cheerful light over the snow-white damask table-cloth, bright
glasses, decanters, and other preparatives for the farmers'
market-dinner.

Prices had ruled high that day; wheat had reached L.30 a load; and
the numerous groups of hearty, stalwart yeomen present were in high
glee, crowing and exulting alike over their full pockets and the news--of
which the papers were just then full--of the burning of Moscow, and the
flight and ruin of Bonaparte's army. James Dutton was in the room,
but not, I observed, in his usual flow of animal spirits.
The crape round his hat might, I thought, account for that; and as he
did not see me, I accosted him with an inquiry after his health,
and the reason of his being in mourning.

He received me very cordially, and in an instant cast off the abstracted
manner I had noticed. His father, he informed me, was gone--had died
about seven months previously, and he was alone now at Ash Farm--why
didn't I run down there to see him sometimes, &c.?

Our conversation was interrupted by a summons to dinner, very cheerfully
complied with; and we both--at least I can answer for myself--did
ample justice to a more than usually capital dinner, even in those capital
old market-dinner times.

We were very jolly afterwards, and amazingly triumphant over the
frost-bitten, snow-buried soldier-banditti that had so long lorded
it over continental Europe.

Dutton did not partake of the general hilarity. There was a sneer upon
his lip during the whole time, which, however, found no expression
in words.

'How quiet you are, James Dutton!' cried a loud voice from out the
dense smoke-cloud that by this time completely enveloped us. On looking
towards the spot from whence the ringing tones came, a jolly, round
face--like the sun as seen through a London fog--gleamed redly dull
from out the thick and choking atmosphere.

'Everybody,' rejoined Dutton, 'hasn't had the luck to sell two hundred
quarters of wheat at to-day's price, as you have, Tom Southall.'

'That's true, my boy,' returned Master Southall, sending, in the plenitude
of his satisfaction, a jet of smoke towards us with astonishing force.
'And, I say, Jem, I'll tell ee what I'll do; I'll clap on ten guineas
more upon what I offered for the brown mare.'

'Done! She's yours, Tom, then, for ninety guineas!'
'Gie's your hand upon it!'

cried Tom Southall, jumping up from his chair, and stretching a
fist as big as a leg of mutton--well, say lamb--over the table. 'And
here--here,' he added, with an exultant chuckle, as he extricated a
swollen canvas-bag from his pocket--'here's the dibs at once.'
This transaction excited a great deal of surprise at our part of the table;
and Dutton was rigorously cross-questioned as to his reason for parting
with his favourite hunting mare.

'The truth is, friends,' said Dutton at last, 'I mean to give up
farming, and'---- 
'Gie up farmin'!'

broke in half-a-dozen voices. 'Lord!'
'Yes; I don't like it. I shall buy a commission in the army. There'll
be a chance against Boney, now; and it's a life I'm fit for.'

The farmers looked completely agape at this announcement; but making
nothing of it, after silently staring at Dutton and each other,
with their pipes in their hands and not in their mouths, till they
had gone out, stretched their heads simultaneously across the table
towards the candles, relit their pipes, and smoked on as before.

'Then, perhaps, Mr Dutton,' said a young man in a smartly-cut velveteen
coat with mother-of-pearl buttons, who had hastily left his seat
further down the table--'perhaps you will sell the double Manton,
and Fanny and Slut?'

'Yes; at a price.'
Prices were named; I forget now the exact sums, but enormous prices, I
thought, for the gun and the dogs, Fanny and Slut. The bargain was
eagerly concluded, and the money paid at once. Possibly the buyer had a
vague notion, that a portion of the vender's skill might come to him
with his purchases.

'You be in 'arnest, then, in this fool's business, James Dutton,'
observed a farmer gravely. 'I be sorry for thee; but as I s'pose the
lease of Ash Farm will be parted with; why---- John, waiter,
tell Master Hurst at the top of the table yonder, to come this
way.'
Master Hurst, a well-to-do, highly respectable-looking, and rather elderly
man, came in obedience to the summons, and after a few words in an
under-tone with the friend that had sent for him, said: 'Is this true,
James Dutton?'
'It is true that the lease and stock of Ash Farm are to be sold--at a
price. You, I believe, are in want of such a concern for the young
couple, just married.'
'Well, I don't say I might not be a customer, if the price were
reasonable.'
'Let us step into a private room, then,' said Dutton rising. 'This is not
a place for business of that kind. Sharp,' he added, _sotto voce_,
'come with us; I may want you.'
I had listened to all this with a kind of stupid wonderment, and I now,
mechanically as it were, got up and accompanied the party to another
room.

The matter was soon settled. Five hundred pounds for the lease--ten years
unexpired--of Ash Farm, about eleven hundred acres, and the stock,
implements; the ploughing, sowing, &c. already performed, to be paid for
at a valuation based on present prices. I drew out the agreement in
form, it was signed in duplicate, a large sum was paid down as deposit,
and Mr Hurst with his friend withdrew.

'Well,' I said, taking a glass of port from a bottle Dutton had
just ordered in--'here's fortune in your new career; but as I am a
living man, I can't understand what you can be thinking about.'

'You haven't read the newspapers?'

'O yes, I have! Victory! Glory! March to Paris! and all that sort of
thing.

Very fine, I daresay; but rubbish, moonshine, I call it, if purchased
by the abandonment of the useful, comfortable, joyous life of a
prosperous yeoman.'

'Is that all you have seen in the papers?'
'Not much else. What, besides, have you found in them?'
'Wheat, at ten or eleven pounds a load--less perhaps--other produce in
proportion.'

'Ha!'
'I see further, Sharp, than you bookmen do, in some matters. Boney's
done for; that to me is quite plain, and earlier than I thought
likely; although I, of course, as well as every other man with a
head instead of a turnip on his shoulders, knew such a
raw-head-and-bloody-bones as that must sooner or later come to the
dogs.

And as I also know what agricultural prices were _before_ the war, I can
calculate without the aid of vulgar fractions, which, by the by,
I never reached, what they'll be when it's over, and the thundering
expenditure now going on is stopped.

In two or three weeks, people generally will get a dim notion of all
this; and I sell, therefore, whilst I can, at top prices.'
The shrewdness of the calculation struck me at once. 'You will take
another farm when one can be had on easier terms than now, I suppose?'

'Yes; if I can manage it.

And I _will_ manage it. Between ourselves, after all the old man's debts
are paid, I shall only have about nine or ten hundred pounds to the good,
even by selling at the present tremendous rates; so it was time, you see,
I pulled up, and rubbed the fog out of my eyes a bit. And, hark ye,
Master Sharp!'

he added, as we rose and shook hands with each other--'I have now done
_playing_ with the world--it's a place of work and business; and
I'll do my share of it so effectually, that my children, if I
have any, shall, if I do not, reach the class of landed gentry; and
this you'll find, for all your sneering, will come about all the
more easily that neither they nor their father will be encumbered
with much educational lumber.

Good-by.'
I did not again see my old school-fellow till the change he had predicted
had thoroughly come to pass. Farms were everywhere to let, and a
general cry to parliament for aid rang through the land.

Dutton called at the office upon business, accompanied by a young woman
of remarkable personal comeliness, but, as a very few sentences
betrayed, little or no education in the conventional sense of the
word. She was the daughter of a farmer, whom--it was no fault of hers--a
change of times had not found in a better condition for weathering them.
Anne Mosely, in fact, was a thoroughly industrious, clever farm economist.

The instant Dutton had secured an eligible farm, at his own price and
conditions, he married her; and now, on the third day after the wedding,
he had brought me the draft of lease for examination.

'You are not afraid, then,' I remarked, 'of taking a farm in these bad
times?'
'Not I--at a price. We mean to _rough_ it, Mr Sharp,' he added
gaily.
'And, let me tell you, that those who will stoop to do that--I mean,
take their coats off, tuck up their sleeves, and fling appearances
to the winds--may, and will, if they understand their business, and
have got their heads screwed on right, do better here than in any
of the uncleared countries they talk so much about.

You know what I told you down at Romford. Well, we'll manage that
before our hair is gray, depend upon it, bad as the times may
be--won't we, Nance?'

'We'll try, Jem,' was the smiling response.

They left the draft for examination.

It was found to be correctly drawn. Two or three days afterwards,
the deeds were executed, and James Dutton was placed in possession.

The farm, a capital one, was in Essex.

His hopes were fully realised as to money-making, at all events.

He and his wife rose early, sat up late, ate the bread of carefulness,
and altogether displayed such persevering energy, that only about six
or seven years had passed before the Duttons were accounted a rich and
prosperous family. They had one child only--a daughter.

The mother, Mrs Dutton, died when this child was about twelve years of
age; and Anne Dutton became more than ever the apple of her father's
eye.

The business of the farm went steadily on in its accustomed track; each
succeeding year found James Dutton growing in wealth and importance; and
his daughter in sparkling, catching comeliness--although certainly not
in the refinement of manner which gives a quickening life and grace to
personal symmetry and beauty. James Dutton remained firm in his
theory of the worthlessness of education beyond what, in a narrow
acceptation of the term, was absolutely 'necessary;' and Anne
Dutton, although now heiress to very considerable wealth, knew only
how to read, write, spell, cast accounts, and superintend the
home-business of the farm.

I saw a good deal of the Duttons about this time, my brother-in-law,
Elsworthy, and his wife having taken up their abode within about half
a mile of James Dutton's dwelling-house; and I ventured once or
twice to remonstrate with the prosperous farmer upon the positive
danger, with reference to his ambitious views, of not at least so
far cultivating the intellect and taste of so attractive a maiden as
his daughter, that sympathy on her part with the rude, unlettered
clowns, with whom she necessarily came so much in contact, should
be impossible. He laughed my hints to scorn. 'It is idleness--idleness
alone,' he said, 'that puts love-fancies into girls' heads. Novel-reading,
jingling at a pianoforte--merely other names for idleness--these are
the parents of such follies. Anne Dutton, as mistress of this
establishment, has her time fully and usefully occupied; and when the
time comes, not far distant now, to establish her in marriage, she will
wed into a family I wot of; and the Romford prophecy of which you
remind me will be realised, in great part at least.'
He found, too late, his error. He hastily entered the office one morning,
and although it was only five or six weeks since I had last seen him,
the change in his then florid, prideful features was so striking and
painful, as to cause me to fairly leap upon my feet with surprise.

'Good Heavens, Dutton!' I exclaimed, 'what is the matter? What has
happened?'
'Nothing has happened, Mr Sharp,' he replied, 'but what you predicted,
and which, had I not been the most conceited dolt in existence, I,
too, must have foreseen. You know that good-looking, idle, and, I fear,
irreclaimable young fellow, George Hamblin?'
'I have seen him once or twice. Has he not brought his father to the verge
of a workhouse by low dissipation and extravagance?'
'Yes. Well, he is an accepted suitor for Anne Dutton's hand.

No wonder that you start. She fancies herself hopelessly in love with
him----Nay, Sharp, hear me out. I have tried expostulation, threats,
entreaties, locking her up; but it's useless. I shall kill the silly fool
if I persist, and I have at length consented to the marriage; for I
cannot see her die.' I began remonstrating upon the folly of yielding
consent to so ruinous a marriage, on account of a few tears and
hysterics, but Dutton stopped me peremptorily.

'It is useless talking,' he said. 'The die is cast; I have given my word.
You would hardly recognise her, she is so altered. I did not know
before,' added the strong, stern man, with trembling voice and glistening
eyes, 'that she was so inextricably twined about my heart--my life!'
It is difficult to estimate the bitterness of such a disappointment
to a proud, aspiring man like Dutton. I pitied him sincerely, mistaken,
if not blameworthy, as he had been.

'I have only myself to blame,' he presently resumed.

'A girl of cultivated taste and mind could not have bestowed a second
thought on George Hamblin. But let's to business. I wish the marriage-settlement,
and my will, to be so drawn, that every farthing received from me during
my life, and after my death, shall be hers, and hers only; and so
strictly and entirely secured, that she shall be without power to yield
control over the slightest portion of it, should she be so minded.' I
took down his instructions, and the necessary deeds were drawn in
accordance with them. When the day for signing arrived, the bridegroom-elect
demurred at first to the stringency of the provisions of the
marriage-contract; but as upon this point Mr Dutton was found to be
inflexible, the handsome, illiterate clown--he was little better--gave
up his scruples, the more readily as a life of assured idleness lay
before him, from the virtual control he was sure to have over his
wife's income. These were the thoughts which passed across his mind, I
was quite sure, as taking the pen awkwardly in his hand, he affixed
_his mark_ to the marriage-deed.

I reddened with shame, and the smothered groan which at the moment
smote faintly on my ear, again brokenly confessed the miserable folly
of the father in not having placed his beautiful child beyond all
possibility of mental contact or communion with such a person. The
marriage was shortly afterwards solemnised, but I did not wait to witness
the ceremony.

The husband's promised good-behaviour did not long endure; ere two months
of wedded life were past, he had fallen again into his old habits;
and the wife, bitterly repentant of her folly, was fain to confess,
that nothing but dread of her father's vengeance saved her from
positive ill usage.

It was altogether a wretched, unfortunate affair; and the intelligence--sad
in itself--which reached me about a twelvemonth after the marriage,
that the young mother had died in childbirth of her first-born, a girl,
appeared to me rather a matter of rejoicing than of sorrow or
regret. The shock to poor Dutton was, I understood, overwhelming for
a time, and fears were entertained for his intellects. He recovered,
however, and took charge of his grandchild, the father very willingly
resigning the onerous burden.

My brother-in-law left James Dutton's neighbourhood for a distant
part of the country about this period, and I saw nothing of the
bereaved father for about five years, save only at two business
interviews.

The business upon which I had seen him, was the alteration of his will,
by which all he might die possessed of was bequeathed to his darling
Annie.

His health, I was glad to find, was quite restored; and although
now fifty years of age, the bright light of his young days sparkled
once more in his keen glance.

His youth was, he said, renewed in little Annie. He could even bear to
speak, though still with remorseful emotion, of his own lost child. 'No
fear, Sharp,' he said, 'that I make that terrible mistake again. Annie
will fall in love, please God, with no unlettered, soulless booby! Her
mind shall be elevated, beautiful, and pure, as her person--she
is the image of her mother--promises to be charming and attractive.

You must come and see her.' I promised to do so; and he went his way.

At one of these interviews--the first it must have been--I made a chance
inquiry for his son-in-law, Hamblin. As the name passed my lips, a
look of hate and rage flashed out of his burning eyes.

I did not utter another word, nor did he; and we separated in silence.

It was evening, and I was returning in a gig from a rather long
journey into the country, when I called, in redemption of my promise,
upon James Dutton.

Annie was really, I found, an engaging, pretty, blue-eyed, golden-haired
child; and I was not so much surprised at her grandfather's doting
fondness--a fondness entirely reciprocated, it seemed, by the little girl.
It struck me, albeit, that it was a perilous thing for a man of
Dutton's vehement, fiery nature to stake again, as he evidently had
done, his all of life and happiness upon one frail existence.

An illustration of my thought or fear occurred just after we had finished
tea.

A knock was heard at the outer-door, and presently a man's voice, in
quarrelling, drunken remonstrance with the servant who opened it. The
same deadly scowl I had seen sweep over Dutton's countenance upon the
mention of Hamblin's name, again gleamed darkly there; and finding, after
a moment or two, that the intruder would not be denied, the master
of the house gently removed Annie from his knee, and strode out of
the room.

'Follow grandpapa,' whispered Mrs Rivers, a highly respectable widow
of about forty years of age, whom Mr Dutton had engaged at a high
salary to superintend Annie's education. The child went out, and Mrs
Rivers, addressing me, said in a low voice: 'Her presence will
prevent violence; but it is a sad affair.' She then informed me that
Hamblin, to whom Mr Dutton allowed a hundred a year, having become aware
of the grandfather's extreme fondness for Annie, systematically worked
that knowledge for his own sordid ends, and preluded every fresh attack
upon Mr Dutton's purse by a threat to reclaim the child.
With the experience they had already attained, they soon carried their
plan into execution, and in a short time conveyed a considerable
quantity of the stores on shore.  During their last trip, however, Harry
observed close alongside the raft a black fin, and a wicked pair of eyes
glancing up at him.

"There's a brute of a shark," he exclaimed; "he thinks he's going to get
a meal off one of us, I suspect."

Still they kept paddling on, and the shark did not attempt to come
nearer them.  They were not sorry, however, when they reached the shore,
and Captain Rymer told them that he considered they had done enough for
the day.  It must be owned it was far pleasanter to sit near Mary, and
listen to the account of all their friends at home.  She did not tell
them how completely they had been given up, for she knew it would make
Harry especially melancholy to think of the sorrow his supposed loss had
caused his mother, nor did she tell him how very sorry she herself had
been.  Indeed, she could say truly that many of their friends fully
expected that they would turn up at last.

"Doesn't this put you in mind of our picnic?" said Harry, looking up at
her, "though to be sure we are somewhat changed since then," looking
down on his tarred and dirty dress.  "I really think the next time I go
on board the wreck I must try and find a new suit of clothes."

"You do look rather disreputable," said Mary, laughing, "for an officer
in His Majesty's service.  Here comes Jacques with the dinner.  Really
Jacques must be a first-rate cook, and we ought to be thankful that he
escaped."

None of the party seemed inclined to be out of spirits, except the
lieutenant, who sat as usual by himself, and refused to take the food
Pierre offered him.  Had it even been otherwise, the good well-cooked
dinner provided by Jacques might have put them in good humour, while
there was no lack of wine, of which the West Indian planters had laid in
a good store.  In the evening a further supply of provisions and water
was obtained from the wreck.  The next day was wisely occupied in the
same way, till a sufficient supply of food was landed to last for a
couple of months or more.  More than once it was discussed whether it
could be possible to get the wreck off, but it was agreed that without
more strength than they possessed it would be impossible, though, as far
as could be ascertained, she had suffered no material damage.  Some of
the party thought they took a great deal of trouble for little purpose,
and that it would be more easy to get the stores on shore as they were
required.

"They will see the wisdom of what we have done should a hurricane come
on," said Captain Rymer, "and I am not at all sure, from the appearance
of the weather, that we shall escape one."

The next morning the heat was intense.  The sun rose surrounded by a
mass of ruddy hue, but was hidden ere long in a thick canopy of cloud.
Not a breath of wind stirred the calm waters.  In the distance a sail
was seen, which had approached the island during the night.  Captain
Rymer had been watching her for some time through his glass.  The French
lieutenant, on observing her, sprang to his feet, and eagerly asked the
captain to let him look through the glass.

"It is the _Hirondelle_!" he exclaimed.  "Then she did not go down in
the last hurricane.  My captain guessed rightly that the prize was cast
away on some island in this direction.  He is a sagacious man."

"I wish his sagacity had not led him to discover us," said Captain
Rymer.  "If he lands here he may after all succeed in getting off the
ship."

This announcement caused, as may be supposed, a considerable amount of
anxiety among those on the island.  While they were watching, two boats
were seen to leave the schooner.  Hitherto it had been so calm that a
feather held up would have fallen to the ground.  Suddenly, however,
there came a low moaning sound, and the leaves of the palm trees began
to rustle strangely.  In an instant afterwards the blast swept over the
island, snapping off the tops of many of the tallest trees.  The tents
were blown down, and it was with difficulty that those on the island
could avoid being carried away.  The sea, hitherto so calm, came dashing
in huge foaming billows against the weather side, and breaking over the
wreck with tremendous force, and it seemed scarcely possible that she
could resist the blows that she was receiving.  Now one sea and now
another dashed against her, till she seemed to be completely covered
with a mass of foam.  They looked out for the schooner, she was nowhere
to be seen.  Either she had gone down, or had been driven far away by
the hurricane.  The hurricane continued blowing without cessation; now
coming from one quarter, and now from another.

Evening was approaching, and an unusual darkness overspread the ocean.
It was fearful to contemplate what might be the fate of many of those
who floated on that stormy sea.  It was impossible to put up any shelter
for the ladies, but Mary felt that she had her father to protect her,
who sat by her side, sheltering her as well as he could, aided by Harry
and David.  Thus the night passed away, the whole party sitting grouped
together for mutual protection.  "What could have become of the
schooner?" was a question often asked and answered.  The morning broke
at length.  The _Cerberus_ had disappeared, but still further off, at
the end of the reef, an object was seen.  It was part of a wreck; there
were human beings clinging to it.  "Whether Englishmen or Frenchman we
must endeavour to save them," said Captain Rymer.


CHAPTER ELEVEN.

THE RESCUE OF THE FRENCH SEAMEN--MARY A PRISONER TO THE FRENCH--PIERRE
DELIVERS HER--BAD CONDUCT OF THE FRENCH.

The hurricane had given signs of abating, but the sea was still far too
rough to allow of even a good boat going off to the people on the reef;
still more impossible would it have been to have reached them by means
of a raft.  On examining the rafts which had been constructed to bring
the cargo on shore, both were found to have suffered by the hurricane.
It was determined, therefore, to build a smaller and more manageable
one, by means of which it was hoped to reach the shipwrecked people.
This work Captain Williams and his companions immediately set about
performing.  The French lieutenant now thoroughly aroused, lent his hand
to it.  In the course of a couple of hours a structure was formed with
which it was hoped they might venture out to sea.

Their next undertaking was to cut out a number mast, and fit a sail for
the raft.  Still the sea would not allow them to venture from the shore;
they had, therefore, to wait patiently, watching in the meantime the
people whom they were anxious to rescue.  The wreck seemed to be fixed
firmly at the end of a reef, and to have afforded them a shelter from
the fury of the seas, which would otherwise have washed them away.
Still, as they probably had no food nor water, it was impossible that
they could exist there for any length of time.  Should any attempt be
made by those on the wreck to reach the shore by swimming, it was but
too probable that they would be carried off by the sharks, numbers of
which swarmed around the island.  In the meantime, the men were employed
in getting up the tent, and in restoring matters to the condition they
were in before the hurricane.

The poor ladies had suffered greatly from the alarm into which they had
been thrown, and it was necessary they should obtain that rest which had
been denied them during the night.  Mary, however, kept up her spirits,
and could not help expressing her thankfulness that Harry and David had
been saved, and were thus sharing with her the adventures which she was
not likely to forget to the end of her days.

"How curious it will be when they hear about us at home," said David,
"and that we were all wrecked together on this out-of-the-way island."

"But how are they to hear about us?" observed Mary; "we must get away
from this before we can send a letter home, and how we are to get away
seems the question."

"Some means will turn up, depend upon it," said Harry, "we shall be seen
by some passing ship, or if not, we must build a boat and try to reach
some of the nearest islands.  We are not likely to have to spend all our
lives here, depend on that."

They little thought of the difficulties and dangers they had still to go
through.  The day was advancing, but still the sea was considered too
rough to allow the raft to be launched.  They watched the people on the
reef, who seemed to be clustering together, and who probably, unless
they had a telescope, would not be aware that there were any people on
the shore likely to come to their assistance.  At length the sun set,
and very unwillingly they were obliged to abandon the hope of going off
till the following morning.  They anxiously watched the weather during
the night, and were thankful to find that the wind had dropped to a
perfect calm.  By daybreak Captain Williams summoned those who had
agreed to accompany him, consisting of his mate and two English seamen,
and Jacques Rossillion.  By means of the long sweeps, which had been
carefully fitted to the raft, they were enabled to urge it along at a
good speed over the waters.

"Success attend your efforts!" said Captain Rymer, as he assisted in
shoving off the raft.  Harry and David begged that they might also go,
and assist in working the sweeps; and their offer was accepted.  They
had a somewhat long voyage to perform, and though they vigorously worked
the sweeps they could not move the raft more than at the rate of three
miles an hour.  As they approached the reef they were perceived by the
shipwrecked party, who waved to them as if urging them to come faster.
As they drew near the men pointed to their mouths, indicating that they
were suffering from thirst.  Unhappily, no water had been brought off.
Several, it appeared, had been in a state of delirium, and it was very
evident that it would be dangerous to approach too close to the wreck,
lest a number jumping upon the raft might upset it.  There appeared to
be about twenty or thirty people on the wreck, and Captain Williams
agreed that it would not be safe to convey more than eight or ten at a
time to the shore.  The French lieutenant recognised the men as
belonging to the schooner's crew, and he called out to them by name,
ordering eight at a time to come down, and that they would be taken on
board.  They did not seem, however, inclined to obey him.  Fortunately,
Captain Williams had stuck a brace of pistols in his belt, and he now
threatened to shoot any who might attempt to come on board the raft
unless ordered by the lieutenant.  This had the effect of keeping back
the greater number, and eight of the Frenchmen were safely got on board
the raft, which now at once commenced its return to the shore.  Those
who remained on the reef entreated that they might not be deserted,
though they would scarcely believe the promise made by their officer
that he would return for them.  The poor men who had been rescued showed
how much they had been suffering by pointing to their parched tongues,
and again and again asking for water.

Captain Williams and his companions exerted themselves to the utmost to
reach the shore.  This they at length accomplished, and water was
immediately procured for the thirsty men.  Their sufferings might be
those of the whole party, unless great economy was used in distributing
the precious fluid.  A small cask was put on the raft, with some cups,
and once more the party set forth to return to the reef, leaving those
who had first landed to the care of their friends on shore.  As the raft
again approached the reef, the poor wretches who had been left upon it
were seen stretching out their hands eagerly for water.  There was still
great danger lest they might rush down, in their anxiety to obtain it,
and either fall into the water or upset the raft.  Much caution was
therefore necessary.  The lieutenant and Jacques first leaped on to the
rock, when Captain Williams handed them up the cups of water; but the
first man who got the cup refused to let it leave his lips till he had
drained every drop.  Two were seen to fall backward after they had
drunk, and it was with difficulty they were saved from falling into the
sea.  Several who were already in a state of delirium, scarcely seemed
to value the boon which had been brought them.  In time, however, water
was given to all, and it was now necessary to select those who might be
carried away on the raft, as it would require another trip before all
could be removed.  Harry and David looked somewhat anxiously for the
French captain, but neither he nor any of the officers were among those
saved.  More than half of the crew, it was evident, had been lost.  The
lieutenant did not ask questions; indeed the poor men were not in a
condition to have replied to them.

For the safety of the raft it was necessary to secure the limbs of those
who were in a state of delirium, and it was painful to see them
struggling, as they lay on the raft, not understanding that this was
done for their own safety.  The second party were thus landed safely,
and again the raft put off for the remainder of the crew.  They had to
row the whole way; indeed it was fortunate that there was no wind, as it
would have made the approach to the reef much more dangerous.  As it
was, during the last trip the raft was very nearly driven against the
rocks by one of those sudden upheavings of the ocean which sometimes
occur, and send the water breaking over any opposing obstacle.  Happily,
they were able to shove off in time.

Altogether, nearly thirty people were safely landed.  It became,
however, a serious consideration to the former occupants of the island,
how the new comers were to be fed.  They had provisions which might have
lasted them a couple of months or more, though they had already seen the
necessity of going upon an allowance of water; their numbers were now
doubled, and they had not water to last them more than a very short
time.  Still, disregarding the character of those who had been rescued,
they did their utmost to restore the poor men who had been thrown upon
their care.  Two of them, however, died from having drunk a large
quantity of salt water, and others remained seriously ill for several
days.

The excitement of going off on the raft having subsided, the French
lieutenant again sunk into his former moody state.  At length the
Frenchmen appeared to have recovered, but they did not seem inclined to
associate with the English, nor with Jacques nor Pierre, who continued
to perform their former duties.  Captain Rymer and Captain Williams
agreed that it would be necessary to put a guard over their provisions
and stores, lest the Frenchmen should take it into their heads to help
themselves without leave.  It was explained to them that they must be
content with a very moderate amount of food, and a still smaller
quantity of water, unless a supply of the latter could be found.  They
seemingly acquiesced in the wisdom of this, but from the looks they
exchanged with each other, it was but too probable that they would be
tempted to break through the regulations which had been formed on the
subject.

With regard to food, they might obtain sufficient to support life both
from the shell-fish on the shore, and from any fish they might catch,
while the trees promised to afford them a supply of cocoanuts.  But
water was what they most required; without that it would be impossible
to support existence.  As long, however, as they were supplied with
food, the Frenchmen did not show any inclination to search for it for
themselves.  Pierre was sent to tell them that lines would be provided
for them, if they would try to catch some fish, and again the captain
set out to make a fresh search for water.

As soon as the Frenchmen had recovered, they showed a very different
disposition to what they had previously exhibited.  They then received
the food given to them by the English with apparent gratitude.  Now,
however, when it was sent to them they seized it rudely, and grumbled
because the supply was not larger.  Captain Rymer endeavoured to explain
to the French lieutenant that the arrangements made were for the good of
all.  He, however, either had no authority over his countrymen or
pretended to have none.  Still, as he associated himself with them, it
was evident that he intended to side with them whatever they might do.
This state of things gave considerable anxiety to the English officers.
It was arranged that a strict guard should be kept over the provisions
and water, and that no one should be allowed to take anything from the
stores.

Pierre continued, as before, to attend on the English, though he
occasionally paid a visit to the French, who were encamped at some
little distance, and out of sight of the rest of the party.  On being
questioned, he said that the French claimed the stores as their own,
because they had captured the vessel from which they were taken, and
that they were very angry at the idea of the English appropriating them.
It was agreed, however, that unless they were preserved as before, the
French sailors would probably consume the whole in a very short time,
and all the party would be left in a state of starvation.  Still, as the
French had hitherto shown no disposition to annoy the English, the
passengers continued to stroll about the shore of the island without any
apprehension, as they had been accustomed to do.  Harry and David
frequently escorted Mary in these expeditions.  They always returned
with a basket-full of shell-fish of various sorts.  The boys also fitted
some fishing lines, and after a little practice they succeeded in
catching a great many fish.  Some of them were very beautiful; but when
they showed them to Jacques, he told them that they were not fit to be
eaten.  Others, however, were excellent, and they had thus no
apprehension with regard to not having provisions for their support,
even though they might remain on the island for many months.  The great
anxiety was with regard to water.

One day Mary and her young companions had gone along the shore for a
considerable distance, when they reached a point of rock upon which they
believed that they should be able to catch a number of fish.  Mary did
not take the same interest in the sport that they did, but preferred
wandering along the beach and picking up the beautiful shells, and
several curious creatures that had been cast on shore.  Harry and David
soon began to catch a number of fish, and were completely absorbed in
their sport.  Mary said that she would go along the beach some little
distance, and then return to them.  They saw her walking along, now
stooping down to pick up a shell, now continuing her course close to the
water, when a rock hid her from view.  Just at that moment the fish
began to bite faster and faster, and as they hauled them up in their
eagerness they forgot to look out for their companion.  Suddenly Harry
exclaimed, "What can have become of Mary?  She is a long time away."

They both shouted her name, but there was no answer.  Gathering up their
lines and their fish they leaped off the rock, and ran along the beach
in the direction she had gone.  They did not, however, see her, and
became greatly alarmed.  In vain they shouted her name.

"She certainly could not have turned back and gone the other way," said
Philip; "besides, see, here are the marks of her feet on the sand; she
must have gone on further than she intended."  They traced her by the
marks of her feet in the sand for a considerable distance, when she
appeared to have turned inland, away from the beach.  "Surely here are
the marks of other feet," said David; "if there were any savages on the
island, I should be afraid she had been carried off by them."

They now pursued in the direction of the marks of the feet, though
Mary's were no longer to be traced.  The ground in the centre of the
island being hard, they here lost all traces.  They looked round in
every direction.  No persons were to be seen.  They continued running
eagerly forward, shouting again and again Mary's name, when they found
themselves in front of the French camp.  The French jeered at them as
they passed, and as they were unable to speak French, they could not
enquire if any of the people had seen Mary.  Not knowing what else to
do, they hurried back to their own friends with the bad news.  Captain
Rymer at first would scarcely credit the account they gave him.  He
however, with the two boys and Captain Williams, immediately set out to
search the neighbourhood of the spot where Mary had disappeared.  It was
evident to them that she had not been carried away from the island; they
therefore came to the conclusion that the Frenchmen had made her a
prisoner, in the hopes that they might thus compel the English to agree
to any terms they might propose.

Captain Rymer therefore determined to go to the French with Pierre as
interpreter, and to ascertain what terms the French had to propose.  At
first they denied that she was with them, but said that they were
determined to have one half of the provisions and water as their proper
share.  Captain Rymer replied that they were determined for the good of
all those on the island not to give up the provisions, and again
enquired whether they had seen his young daughter, but could get no
answer in return; and doubting whether the French really knew anything
about Mary, he returned to consult further with Captain Williams.  It
was agreed that, should they yield to the demands of the Frenchmen, as
soon as the first half of the provisions were consumed they would demand
the remainder, and that, therefore, it would be wiser at once to refuse
their demands.

The day was drawing on, but still there were no signs of Mary.  They
arranged that Jacques should carry their food as usual to the French,
and endeavour to obtain all the information that he could.  Harry and
David offered to go and watch in the neighbourhood of the camp, so that
if she really was there, and could make her escape, they might be ready
to assist her.  While they remained concealed, Pierre went on into the
camp.  He brought a larger supply of food than usual to each man, and
talked to one and then to the other, often in no complimentary terms of
the English.

"And why do you remain with them?" was the question put to him.

"Because I am well fed; and until you came I had none else to associate
with except Jacques, and I cannot make out whether he likes the English
or our own countrymen the best."

"Then do you intend to remain with us now?" was the question put to
Pierre.

"O yes!  I have had enough of the English, and wish to throw in my
fortunes with my own countrymen."

The Frenchmen seemed to think that Pierre was in earnest, as he showed
no inclination to leave them.  He was, however, very busy in going about
among the huts, whilst he put several questions to his countrymen, as to
whether they could guess anything about the little girl who had been
carried off.  "Our lieutenant knows something about that, and as he does
not want to fight with the English, hopes to gain his object by
diplomacy."

This convinced Pierre that Mary was in the camp, and he determined to
set her free if he could.  There was a hut in a grove close to the camp,
into which he had hitherto not looked, and he thought it very likely
that Mary had been shut up there.  He knew, however, that he should be
watched, especially by the lieutenant, who was walking up and down on
the beach, in his usual moody manner.  Nothing could be done, at all
events, until it was dark; and he therefore continued laughing and
talking with his countrymen, so as if possible to throw them off their
guard.  He observed the lieutenant once visit the hut with a tin of
food, and, on leaving it, he placed a log of wood across the door.  This
convinced him more even than before that Mary was shut up there.

Night came on at last.  By the conversation of the Frenchmen, he feared
that they had determined to have possession of the provisions by force,
if they could not gain them in any other way.  The Frenchmen amused
themselves as their countrymen, even under the most adverse
circumstances, are accustomed to do, by singing, telling stories, and
occasionally getting up and dancing.  At last, tired with their
exertions, they laid themselves down in their huts.  Pierre waited until
they all seemed asleep.  He most dreaded being detected by the
lieutenant.  He crept cautiously near the hut in which he was lying
down, and, greatly to his satisfaction, found that he also was asleep.
He instantly stole off to the hut in which he believed Mary was
confined.  The log at the entrance was somewhat heavy, and he had no
little difficulty in removing it without making a noise.  He pushed back
the rough planks that formed the door, and there, to his infinite
satisfaction, he saw Mary.  She was seated on a heap of boughs in a
corner of the hut, with her hands tied together, and her feet secured to
a log.  She uttered an exclamation of surprise on hearing Pierre
approach.

"Hush!" he said, "make no noise, I have come to release you."

He fortunately had the knife in his pocket that David had given him, and
with this he quickly cut the ropes with which the little girl was bound.

"Now," he said, "take my hand, and I will lead you to those with whom
you will soon find your way back to your friends."

Saying this, he took her hand and led her through the grove, the French
camp soon being lost sight of.  They quickly found the spot where Harry
and David were waiting.  The boys were delighted at finding their young
companion, and hurried off, supporting her between them, to their
friends, while Pierre returned to the French.  Captain Rymer was
overjoyed at seeing his daughter, as will be supposed.  The English did
not rest much that night, not knowing what the French would next do.  It
was nearly morning when a footstep was heard approaching the camp, and
Pierre came running up.  "My countrymen have determined to attack you,
and take the provisions by force," he said; "I had just time to escape,
for they already suspected me of assisting Miss Rymer to escape."

Jacques, who had remained with the English, was very sorry to hear what
the French proposed doing; he promised, however, to fight on the side of
his friends.  Ten muskets, and a small supply of powder and ball, had
been brought from the wreck.  Of these the Frenchman were not aware, but
as there was very little ammunition, it would soon be exhausted, and
then numbers would prevail.


CHAPTER TWELVE.

THE ARRIVAL OF THE "ARETHUSA"--THE FRENCH TAKEN PRISONERS--DAVID BECOMES
A MIDSHIPMAN--THE FIGHT AND VICTORY--JOY AT HOME--THE END.

Captain Rymer had taken the precaution of throwing up a breastwork round
the camp, which might assist him in repelling any attack of the
Frenchmen.  "Though my countrymen will kill me if they discover I have
warned you, I would rather die than that you should be taken by
surprise," exclaimed Pierre, as he was helped over the parapet.

"We hope that we shall be able to protect you," said Harry, who with
David had been on guard some time.

"Never fear; we have firearms, and your countrymen are without them.  If
they come, they will receive a warmer reception than they expect."

A few minutes afterwards a number of persons were seen stealing towards
the camp, and evidently hoping to take the company by surprise.
"Silence!" said Captain Rymer to his companions, "we will let them
suppose that we are asleep, and then, if we suddenly start up and fire a
musket or two over their heads they will become so alarmed that they
will perhaps desist from the attack."  This plan was followed out.  The
Frenchmen were evidently somewhat startled at finding that those they
had come to attack were better armed than themselves.

"Now, Pierre, tell them that if they come on many of them will be
killed," said Captain Rymer; "we don't wish to injure them, but we are
resolved not to yield to their demand."

The Frenchmen hearing this at first seemed to hesitate, but shouting to
each other they again advanced towards the embankment.  "You will take
the consequences of your folly," said Captain Rymer, and Pierre
interpreted what he said.  Several shots were fired, and two or three of
the Frenchmen were apparently hit.  The discharge had the effect of
making them retreat.  It was evident, however, that from the few muskets
that had gone off that the powder was far from good, and that little
dependence could therefore be placed on their firearms.  Still it
appeared that the French had had enough for the moment, as having failed
in their expected surprise of the English they retreated once more to
their own camp.  But the state of affairs was very serious, as it could
not be supposed that they would not again attempt to attack the camp.

"One thing must be done," observed Captain Rymer; "as soon as the sun
comes out we must dry our powder, that it may prove of more use than it
did just now."  In a short time daylight broke, and the sun, rising out
of the ocean, shed a bright light over the scene.  As he rose, his rays
fell on the white sails of a ship, not two miles from the island.
Captain Rymer's telescope was immediately turned towards her.  "She's an
English frigate," he exclaimed.

"Let me look, sir! let me look!" cried Harry, eagerly.

"That she is, indeed, and my own ship, the _Arethusa_, I am sure she is,
I should know her among fifty other frigates.  We expected that she
would be sent out to the West Indies."

The great point was now to draw the attention of those on board the
frigate to the island.  A flagstaff was quickly erected at a point clear
of the trees, and as the flag was run up, several muskets were fired at
the same time.  They waited anxiously to see the effect.  In another
minute an answering gun was fired from the frigate, and almost at the
same moment a couple of boats were seen approaching the shore.  Harry's
delight was very great when he recognised several of his shipmates in
the boats.  The second lieutenant of the frigate, who came in command,
was the first person to step on shore.  Harry, forgetting his own
appearance, instantly ran up to him, and was somewhat mortified at the
look of astonishment with which the lieutenant regarded him.

"What, don't you know me, sir?" exclaimed Harry.

"I begin to have an idea," said the lieutenant, putting out his hand,
"though there are one or two reasons why I should not know you.  The
first is, that we thought you had lost the number of your mess; and,
excuse me, you certainly do not look like an English midshipman."

"No, sir, I don't think I do," said Harry, laughing.  "Now let me
introduce my friends to you.  Here is Mr David Morton, and Captain
Rymer and Miss Rymer, and all these ladies and gentlemen.  And it will
take some time to tell you all about ourselves."

Harry, in his joy, let his tongue run on, scarcely knowing what he was
saying.  Captain Rymer now stepped forward and explained the state of
affairs.  This required some little time to do.

"I am sure the captain will be very glad to receive the master, crew,
and all the passengers of the _Cerberus_ on board the frigate," replied
the lieutenant; "but I don't know how he will be inclined to treat the
Frenchmen, who have behaved as you have described.  If they are left on
the island they will probably perish of thirst.  But, in the meantime,
should any English vessel come here, they might take the crew prisoners,
and make off in her."

It was agreed, therefore, that the best way would be to carry them off
as prisoners to Jamaica.  The Frenchmen were very indignant at hearing
the arrangements that had been made, but when they saw that the boat's
crew were armed they had the sense to know that resistance was useless.
Harry and David entreated that Pierre and Jacques might not be made
prisoners, and of course their request was granted.  Both Jacques and
Pierre begged that they might enter on board the frigate.  In a short
time nearly all those who had lately been living on the island were
carried on board the frigate.  The Frenchmen were placed in the prison
forward.  There was one exception, however, the French lieutenant was
nowhere to be found.  While the rest of his countrymen were embarking he
had disappeared.  A boat's crew was sent on shore to search for him.
The only trace that could be discovered of him was his hat at the end of
a ledge of rocks, off which it was supposed he had thrown himself, and
been drowned.  Poor man! he had given up all hopes of happiness in this
life, and had refused to believe in a life to come.

In those days it was not so difficult to enter the navy as at the
present time.  Notwithstanding all the hardships David had gone through
he was as anxious as ever to become a midshipman.  The captain promised
to place him on the quarter-deck, if he preferred remaining out in the
West Indies instead of going home.  David was naturally very anxious to
see his friends; but at the same time his darling desire to enter the
navy could now be realised.  If he went home he would be separated from
Harry, whom he now looked upon more than ever as a brother.

"At all events, I will remain out," said David, "till I can hear from
home, and then, should my father and mother desire me to return, I must
obey them."

The frigate conveyed Captain Rymer to his government, in the island of,
and as she was constantly cruising about in that neighbourhood Harry and
David had frequent opportunities of seeing Mary.  Those were stirring
days, and midshipmen met with various adventures.  David at length
anxiously broke open a letter which reached him from home.  His father
and mother expressed their gratitude to Heaven that he had escaped so
many dangers, and told him that, as his heart was set on becoming a
midshipman, they would no longer oppose his wishes.

Several years passed by; the frigate was at one time cruising amongst
the West Indian Islands, and at another time she was sent to Halifax,
then the chief station of the American squadron.  Fully four years
passed away before she was ordered home.  The command held by Captain
Rymer at the same time came to an end, and he and Mary prepared to
return to England.  The _Arethusa_ sailed some little time after them.
Nay why not memories of a life than ours A thousand times more blest within
us buried So deeply, the divine all-searching breath Of Poesy alone can
lure it forth.
All hail that hour when God's Redeeming Face Shall so illume our past
existences, That through them all man's spirit shall see plain, And
to his blessed past relink Life's broken chain.

THE REIGN OF LOVE
(After Ceiriog, to a Welsh Air. Ceiriog, 1832-1887, was the Welsh Burns;
his songs to old Welsh Airs are the best of their kind.)
Love that invites, love that delights, From hedgerow lush and leafy
heights Is flooding all the air; Their forest harps the breezes
strum, The happy brooks their burden hum; There's nothing deaf,
there's nothing dumb, But music everywhere!A sharp
look-out was kept.  Twice the look-out man exclaimed that she was
nowhere to be seen, but again she was caught sight of.  When morning
dawned it was calculated that the frigate had gained considerably upon
her.  The chase continued for the best part of the day.  At last the
frigate got her within length of her bow-chasers.  Several shots were
fired without inducing her to haul down her colours, which were French.
She was a large schooner, a powerful vessel, with heavy masts and sails.
At length a shot carried away her main-topmast, and now, finding that
any further attempt at escaping was useless, the colours were hauled
down.  She proved to be a French privateer returning home after a
successful cruise.  The rage of the Frenchmen was very great at finding
themselves captured, when they so soon expected to be in _La Belle
France_ to enjoy the booty they had obtained.  In a short time, however,
after the greater number had been transferred to the deck of the
frigate, they were dancing and singing, apparently forgetful of their
misfortune.  As no lieutenant from the frigate could be spared to take
charge of the prize, Harry, who had now become an experienced officer,
was sent on board in command, and David went as his lieutenant.  Pierre
begged that he might accompany them.  For two or three days they kept in
sight of the frigate, but a gale coming on, with thick weather, when
morning broke the _Arethusa_ was nowhere to be seen.

"We must find our way up Channel as best we can," said Harry.  "I think
you and I can manage a correct day's work, though we have not had as
much experience in navigation as would be desirable."

The weather continued bad for several days, during which the schooner
was hove-to.  Once more the sky cleared; the wind moderated, and a
coarse was steered up Channel.

"I can scarcely fancy that more than four years have passed away since
you and I drifted out here in a boat with poor old Jefferies.  We return
in a very different style, don't we?" remarked Harry to his companion.

They had reached, they calculated, the chops of the Channel, when a
large merchant ship was seen ahead.

"Should she prove to be an enemy's craft she will make a rich prize,"
said David.

"I rather think she is English," said Harry; "but see, there is another
vessel, a large lugger I make her out to be, bearing down upon her.  The
lugger is French, there is no doubt about that.  I should not be
surprised if she is a privateer, about to pounce down upon the merchant
vessel.  H.S.S.

* * * * *

THREE ENTHUSIASTIC NATURALISTS.

The first is a learned entomologist, who, hearing one evening at
the Linnean Society that a yellow Scarabaeus, otherwise beetle, of
a very rare kind was to be captured on the sands at Swansea,
immediately took his seat in the mail for that place, and brought back
in triumph the object of his desire. The second is Mr. David Douglas, who
spent two years among the wild Indians of the Rocky Mountains, was
reduced to such extremities as occasionally to sup upon the flaps
of his saddle; and once, not having this resource, was obliged to
eat up all the seeds he had collected the previous forty days in
order to appease the cravings of nature.These were so well worked that after a few shots the lugger's mizen-mast
was knocked away.  The main-mast followed, and the lugger, being now
reduced to an almost helpless condition, hauled down her colours.  I
was on the Tube. Conditions were favourable, as Sir OLIVER LODGE would
say to Mrs. PIPER. The old woman with the bundle was not there, but the
shop-girl with three regimental brooches was. Everything was going as
well as I could have wished.
The merchantman was bound for Falmouth, and to that port Harry also
resolved to steer with the prize, as she was not in a condition to be
taken up Channel.  The next morning the three vessels anchored in
Falmouth Harbour.  As neither Harry nor David could leave their vessels,
a messenger was despatched to their homes, and in a short time Mr and
Mrs Morton, Mrs Merryweather, and a considerable number of friends who
formed the picnic party on that memorable day when Harry and David went
adrift in a boat, were collected at the Green Bank Hotel.  You've a fine
yoke of bells there, master herdsman.
WERNI.
And likely cattle, too. Are they your own?

KUONI.
I'm not so rich. They are the noble lord's Of Attinghaus, and trusted
to my care.

RUODI.
How gracefully yon heifer bears her ribbon!Both Harry and David rose to rank and honour in the noble profession
they had selected, and as soon as the former obtained his rank as
post-captain, Mary Rymer became his wife; and among the adventures he
loved to describe to his young descendants, was that of how he and his
friend Admiral Morton, in their younger days, went "Adrift in a Boat."

THE END.