
Vesta had been sitting half an hour beside her unconscious husband,
listening to his broken speech, and thinking upon the rapidity of events
once started on their course, like eaglets scarcely taught to fly before
they attack and kill, when the sound of carriage-wheels, arrested at the
door, called her to the window, and Tom, the mocking-bird, which had
been comparatively quiet since he found his master snugly cared for, now
began to hop about, fly in the air, and sing again:

"Sweet--sweet--sweetie! come see! come see!"

Vesta saw Meshach's wiry, deliberate colored man step down and turn the
horses' heads, and there dropped from the carriage, without using the
carriage-step, at a leap and a skip, a young female object whose head
was invisible in an enormous coal-scuttle bonnet of figured blue chintz.
However quick she executed the leap, Vesta observed that the arrival had
forgotten to put on her stockings.

Before Vesta could turn from the window this singular object had darted
up the dark stairs of the old storehouse and thrown herself on the
delirious man's bed:

"Uncle, Uncle Meshach! air you dead, uncle? Wake up and kiss your
Rhudy!"

She had kissed her uncle plentifully while awaiting the same of him, and
the attack a little excited him, without recalling his mind to any
sustained remembrance, though Vesta heard the words "dear child," before
he turned his head and chased the wild poppies again. Then the young
female, ejaculating,

"Lord sakes! Uncle don't know his Rhudy!" pulled her black apron over
her head and had a silent cry--a little convulsion of the neck and not
an audible sigh besides.

"She weeps with some refinement," Vesta thought; and also observed that
the visitor was a tall, long-fingered, rather sightly girl of, probably,
seventeen, with clothing the mantuamaker was guiltless of, and a hoop
bonnet, such as old people continued to make in remembrance of the
high-decked vessels which had brought the last styles to them when their
ancestors emigrated with their all, and forever, from a land of _modes_.
The bonnet was a remarkable object to Vesta, though she had seen some
such at a distance, coining in upon the heads of the forest people to
the Methodist church. It resembled the high-pooped ship of Columbus,
which he had built so high on purpose, the girls at the seminary said,
so as to have the advantage of spying the New World first; but it also
resembled the long, hollow, bow-shaped Conestoga wagons of which Vesta
had seen so many going past her boarding-school at Ellicott's Mills
before the late new railroad had quite reached there. As she had often
peered into those vast, blue-bodied wagons to see what creatures might
be passengers in their depths, so she took the first opportunity of the
blue scuttle being jolted up by the mourner to discern the face within.

It was a pretty face, with a pair of feeling and also mischievous brown
eyes, set in the attitude of wonder the moment they observed another
woman in the room. The skin was pale, the mouth generous, the nose long,
like Milburn's, but not so emphatic, and the neck, brow, and form of the
face longish, and with something fine amid the wild, cow-like stare she
fixed on Vesta, exclaiming, in a whisper,

"Lord sakes! a lady's yer!"

Then she threw her apron over the Conestoga bonnet again, and held it up
there with her long fingers, and long, plump, weather-stained wrists.

Vesta looked on with the first symptoms of amusement she had felt since
the morning she and her mother laughed at the steeple-crown hat, as they
looked down from the windows of Teackle Hall upon the man already her
husband. That morning seemed a year ago; it was but yesterday.

"Old hats and bonnets," Vesta thought, "will be no novelties to me by
and by. This family of the Milburns is full of them."

Then, addressing the new arrival, Vesta said,

"This is your uncle, then? Where do you live?"

"I live at Nu _Ark_," answered the miss, taking down the black apron and
looking from the depths of the bonnet, like a guinea-pig from his hole.

"If she had said 'the Ark' without the 'New,'" Vesta thought, "it would
have seemed natural."

"Your uncle has a high fever," Vesta said, kindly; "he is not in danger,
we think. It was right of you to come, however. Now take off your
bonnet. What is your name?"

"Rhudy--I'm Rhudy Hullin, ma'am."

"Rhoda--Rhoda Holland, I think you say."

"Yes'm, Rhudy Hullin. I live crost the Pookamuke, on the Oushin side,
out thar by Sinepuxin. I don't live in a great big town like Princess
Anne; I live in Nu Ark."

At this the girl carefully extricated her head from the Conestoga
scuttle, looked all over the bonnet with pride and anxiety, and then
carefully laid it on the top of her uncle's hat-box.

"Uncle Meshach give it to me," she said, with a sly inclination towards
the sick bed. "Misc Somers made it. Uncle, he bought all the stuff; Misc
Somers draw'd it. Did you ever see anything like it?"

"Never," said Vesta.

"Well, some folks out Sinepuxin said it was a sin and a shame--sech
extravagins; but Misc Somers she said Uncle Meshach was rich an' hadn't
but one Rhudy. It ain't quite as big as Misc Somers's bonnet, but it's
draw'd mour."

Here Rhoda gave a repetition of what Vesta had twice before observed--an
inaudible sniffle, and, being caught in it, wiped her nose on her apron.

"Take my handkerchief," Vesta said, "you are cold," and passed over her
cambric with a lace border.

"What's it fur?" Rhoda asked, looking at it superstitiously. "You don't
wipe your nuse on it, do you? Lord sakes! ain't it a piece of your neck
fixin'?"

Vesta felt in a good humor to see this weed of nature turn the
handkerchief over and hold it by the thumb and finger, as if she might
become accountable for anything that might happen to it.

"I got two of these yer," she said; "Misc Somers made 'em outen a frock.
They ain't got this starch on 'em; they're great big things. I always
forgit 'em. My nuse wipes itself."

"Now come near the fire and warm your feet," said Vesta; "for your ride
from the oceanside, this cold morning, through the forests of the
Pocomoke, must have chilled you through. Lay off your blanket shawl."

Rhoda laid the huge black and green shawl, that reached to her feet, on
the green chest, and smoothed it with evident pride.

"Uncle Meshach bought that in Wilminton," she said; "ain't it beautiful!
I never wear it but when I come over yer or go to Snow Hill. Snow Hill's
sech a proud place!"

She had a way of laughing, by merely indenting her cheeks, without a
sound, just as she expressed the sense of pain; the only difference
being in the beaming of her eyes; and Vesta thought it had something
contagious in it. She would laugh broadly and in silence, as if she had
been put on behavior in church, and there had adopted a grimace to make
the other girls laugh and save herself the suspicion.

As she pulled her skirts down to her feet, Vesta's observation was
confirmed that Rhoda had no stockings on, and she could not help
exclaiming,

"My dear child, what possessed you to ride this October morning only
half dressed? You might catch your death."

Rhoda caught her nose on the half sniffle, raised and dimpled her cheeks
in a sly laugh, and cried,

"Lord sakes! you mean my legs? Why, I ain't got but two pairs of
stockings, an' Misc Somers is a wearin' one of' em, and the ould pair's
in the wash. It's so tejus to knit stockings, and sech fun to go
barefoot, that I don't wear' em unless Misc Somers finds it out. Why,
the boys can't see me!"

She grimaced again so naturally and engagingly that Vesta had to laugh
quite aloud, and saw meantime that the young woman's oft-cobbled shoes
covered a slender foot a lady might have envied.

"Now, Rhoda," Vesta said, almost indignantly, "why did you not ask your
wealthy uncle for some good yarn stockings?"

"Him? Why, ma'am, he's got so many pore kin, if he begin to give' em all
stockings, he'd go barefoot himself."

"Has he other nieces like you?"

"No." The girl quietly grimaced, with her brown eyes full of laughter.
"There's plenty of others, but none like Rhudy; the woods is full of
them others."

"So you are the favorite? Now, what was your uncle going to do with all
his money?"

"Lord sakes!" Rhoda said; "he was going to marry Miss Vesty with it.
That's what Misc Somers said."

The mocking-bird had been striking up once or twice in the conversation,
and now pealed his note loud:

"Vesta, she! she! she! she-ee-ee!"

A tingle of that superstition she had felt more than once already, in
her brief knowledge of this forest family, went through Vesta's veins
and nerves, and she silently remarked,

"How little a young girl knows of men around her--what satyrs are taking
her image to their arms! These people knew he loved me, when I knew not
that he ever saw me."

She addressed the niece again:

"Rhoda, did your uncle say he loved Miss Vesta?"

"No'm. He never said he luved nothing; but I heard Tom, the
mocking-bird, shout 'Vesty,' and saw a lady's picture yonder between
grandpar and grandmem, and told Misc Somers, and she says, 'Your Uncle
Meshach's in luve!' Oh, I was right glad of it, because he was so sad
and lonesome!"

The fountain of sympathy burst up again in Vesta's heart, and she felt
that there were compensations riches and station knew not of in humble
alliances like hers.

"Rhoda," she said, going to the young girl and putting her hand upon her
soft brown hair, "you have not noticed the new picture of a lady hanging
up here, have you?"

"No'm, not yet. Everything is so quare in this room sence I saw it last,
I hain't seen nothin' in it but you. Now I see the carpet, an' the
brass andirons, an' the chiney, an'--Lord sakes! is that a picture? Why,
I thought it was you."

"It is, Rhoda. I am Vesta; I am your new aunt."

The girl made one of her engaging, dimpled, silent laughs, as if by
stealth again, changed it into a silent cry by a revulsion as natural,
and rose to her feet and took Vesta in her arms.

"I'm so glad, I will cry a little," Rhoda simpered, her eyes all dewy;
"oh, how Misc Somers will say, 'I found it out first!'"

Tom kept up a whistling, self-gratulating little cry, as if he had his
own thoughts:

"Sweety! sweety! sweet! Vesty, see! see! see!"

Vesta felt a chain of happy thoughts arise in her mind, which she
expressed as frankly as the girl of forest product had spoken, that she
might not retard the welcome of these homely friendships:

"Yes, Rhoda, I am thankful to find a social life open to me where there
seemed no way, and brooks and playmates where everything looked dry. You
come here like a sunbeam, God bless you! I can hear you talk, and teach
you what little I know, and we will relieve each other, watching him."

She felt a slight modification of her joy at this reminder, but the bird
seemed to teach her patience, as he suggested, hopping and flying in the
air,

"Come see! come see! come see!"

"Yes," thought Vesta, "_come and see!_ It is good counsel. I begin to
feel the breaking of a new sense,--curiosity about the poor and lowly.
My education seems to have closed my observation on people of my own
race, who daily trode almost upon my skirts, and whom I never saw--whom
it was considered respectable not to see--while even my colored servants
enjoyed my whole confidence because they were my slaves. Yet, in
misfortune, to these plain white people I must have dropped; and then
Roxy and Virgie, sold to some temporary rich man, would have been above
me, slaves as they would continue! How false, how fatal, both slavery
and proud riches to the republicans we pretend to be! Compelled 'to see'
at last, I shall not close my eyes nor harden my heart."

The maid from Newark had meantime quietly inspected the rag carpet, the
cloth hangings, the fairy rocker, and all the acquisitions of her
uncle's abode, and Vesta again observed that she was of slender and
willowy shape and motion, unaffected in anything, not forward nor
excited, and with the shrewd look so near ready wit that she could make
Vesta laugh almost at will. Vesta showed her how to administer cool
drink and the sponging to the sufferer, and he saw them together with a
look of inquiry which the febrile action soon drove away.

"Are your parents living, Rhoda?"

"No'm; they're both dead. My mother was Uncle Meshach's sister, and she
married a rich man, who biled salt and had vessels an' kept tavern.
Father Hullin died of the pilmonary; mar died next. Misc Somers brought
me up whar the tavern used to be. It ain't a stand no more. Uncle
Meshach owns it."

"Is it a nice place?"

"Now it ain't as nice as it use to be, Aunt Vesty"--the girl glided
easily over what Vesta thought might be a hard word--"sence the shews
don't stop thar no mour."

"The shoes? What is that?"

"The wax figgers and glass-blowers, and the strongis' man in the world.
Did you ever see him?"

Vesta said, "No, dear."

"I saw him," Rhoda said, with a compression of her mouth and a gleam of
her eyes. "He bruke a stone with his fist and Misc Somers kep the
stone, and what do you think it was?"

"Marble?"

"No'm; chork! He jest washed the chork over with a little shell or
varnish or something, and, of course, it bruke right easy; so he wasn't
the strongest man in the world at all, and if Misc Somers ever see him,
she'll tell him so."

"Is it a little or a large house, Rhoda?"

"Oh, it's a magnificins house, twice as big as this, with the roof bent
like an elefin's back, an' three windows in it--rale dormant windows,
that looks like three eyes outen a crab, and a gabil end three rows of
windows high, and four high chimneys. The rope-walker said it was fit to
be a rueyal palace. Then thar's the kitchen an' colonnade built on to
it. It's the biggest house, I reckon, about Sinepuxin. That
rope-walker's a mountin-bank."

"A mountain bank? You mean a mountebank--an impostor?"

"Yes'm,"--the mouth shut and the eyes flashed again. "He allowed he'd
break the rupe after he'd walked on it, and he said it wasn't stretched
tight enough, and went along a feeling of it; and Misc Somers found out
every time he teched of it he put on some bluestone water or somethin'
else to rot it, so, of course, he bruke it easy. But Misc Somers's going
to tell him, if he comes agin, he's a mountin-bank. Lord sakes! she
ain't afraid."

"So, since it has ceased to be a tavern, dear, you see no more
jugglers?"

"The last shew there," Rhoda said, "was the canninbils and the
missionary. The missionary had converted of 'em, and they didn't eat no
more; but he tuld how they used to eat people; and they stouled a pony
outen the stables an' run to the Cypress swamp, and thar they turned out
to be some shingle sawyers he'd just a stained up. Misc Somers is
a-waitin' for him. Lord sakes! she don't keer."

"And so you were an orphan, brought up at the old roadside stage-house
at Newark? And who is Mrs. Somers?"

"Misc Somers, she's a ole aunt of Par Hullin. She an' me live together
sence par and mar died of the pilmonary. Oh, I have a passel of beaus
that takes me over to the Oushin on Sinepuxin beach, outen the way of
the skeeters, an' thar we wades and sails, and biles salt and roasts
mammynoes. Aunt Vesty, I can cut out most any girl from her beau; but,
Lord sakes! I ain't found no man I love yet."

"I'm glad of that," said Vesta, "because you will then be satisfied with
Princess Anne. They say your uncle will be sick here several weeks, and
we can help each other to make him well. Now he is waking."

Milburn opened his eyes and sighed, and saw them together, and Rhoda
held back considerately while the young wife approached the bed. He
looked at her with a bewildered doubt.

"I thought they said you had gone forever," he murmured.

"No, I am come forever, or until you wish me gone."

"I told them so," he sighed; "I said, 'She has high principle, though
she can't love me.'"

"Uncle Meshach, give Auntie time!" cried Rhoda, with a quick divination
of something unsettled or misunderstood. "Don't you know your Rhudy?
Even I was afraid of you till I was tuke sick and you thought it was the
pilmonary and nursed me."

"You have a good niece," Vesta said, as her husband kissed the stranger;
"and we shall love each other, I hope, and improve each other."

"Yes, that will be noble," he replied. "Teach her something; I have
never had the time. Oh, I am very ill; at a time like this, too!"

"Be composed, Mr. Milburn," the bride said; "it is only Nature taking
the time you would not give her, and which she means for us to improve
our almost violent acquaintance. I shall be very happy sitting here, and
wish you would let your niece be with me; I desire it."

He tried to smile, though the strong sweat succeeding the fever broke
upon him from his hands to his face.

"She is yours," he said; "the best of my poor kin. Do not despise us!"

Vesta drew her arm around Rhoda and kissed her, that he might see it.

"What goodness!" he sighed, and the opening of his pores, as it let the
fever escape, gave him a feeling of drowsy relief which Vesta
understood.

"Now let us turn the covers under the edges, Rhoda," she said, "and put
your blanket-shawl over him, and he will get some natural sleep."

He turned once, as if to see if she was there, and closed his eyes
peacefully as a child.

"Now, Rhoda," said Vesta, in a few minutes, "I hear papa's carriage at
the door, and, while he comes up, I shall ride back to see my mother and
get a few things at home."

"Who is your poppy, Aunt Vesty?"

"Don't you know him?--Judge Custis, who lives in Princess Anne."

"Jedge Custis! Why, Lord sakes! he ain't your par, is he? Aunt Vesty,
he's one of my old beaus."

The Judge brought with him Reverend William Tilghman, and Vesta, as she
was retiring, introduced Rhoda to both of them:

"This is Miss Rhoda--Mr. Milburn's niece."

Judge Custis, a trifle blushing, took both of Rhoda's hands:

"Ha, my pretty partner and dancing pupil! How are our friends at St.
Martin's Bay and Sinepuxent? Many a sail and clam-bake we have had,
Rhoda."

"You're a deceiver," Rhoda cried, with a dimpling somewhere between glee
and accusation. "I'm goin' to plosecute you, Jedge, fur not tellin' of
me you was a married man. My heart's bruke."

"Who could remember what he was, Rhoda, sitting all that evening beside
you at--where was it?"

"The Blohemian glass-blowers," Rhoda cried; "the only ones that ever
visited the Western Himisfure. Jedge," with sudden impetuosity, "that
little one, with the copper rings in his years, wasn't a Blohemian at
all. He lived up at Cape Hinlupen, an' Misc Somers see him thar when she
was a buyin' of herring thar. She's goin' to tell him, when she catches
him at Nu-ark."

The young rector observed the flash of those bright eyes following the
pleasing dimples, and the slips of orthography seemed to him never less
culpable coming from such lips and teeth.

"William," said Vesta, "come around this afternoon, and let us have our
usual Sunday reading-circle. Mr. Milburn will be awake and appreciate
it, as he is one of your most regular parishioners. Rhoda, you can
read?"

"Oh, yes'm. Misc Somers, she's a good reader. She reads the Old
Testamins. The names thar is mos' too long for me, but I reads the
Psalms an' the Ploverbs right well."

"Very well, then, we will read verse about, so that Mr. Milburn can hear
both our voices and his favorite minister's, too. You'll come, papa?"

"Yes, if I can. We have had a love-feast at Teackle Hall this morning,
and your sister from Talbot is down, but I think I can get off."

"Lord sakes!" Rhoda said, looking at Mr. Tilghman candidly; "you ain't a
minister now? Not a minister of the Gospil?"

"Unworthily so, Miss Rhoda."

"Well, I don't see how you was old enough to be convicted and learn it
all, unless you was a speretual merikle. Misc Somers see one of 'em at
Jinkotig. They called him the enfant phrenomeny. He exhorted at five
year old, and at seven give his experyins."

"Rare, Miss Rhoda," the rector said, hardly able to keep his reverence
in amusement at her impetuosity.

"Oh, he made a wild excitemins, Aunt Vesty. The women give each other
their babies to hold while they tuk turns a-shouting. 'Yer, Becky, hold
my baby while I shout!' says one. 'Now, Nancy, hold mine while I shout!'
To see that little boy up thar tellin' of his experyins was meriklus,
an' made an excitemins like the high tides on Jinkotig that drowns' em
out. But, Aunt Vesty, that little phrenomeny was a dwarf, twenty year
old, an' Misc Somers found it out and told about it."

"I'll be bound Mrs. Somers knows!" exclaimed the Judge.

"That she do," continued Rhoda, earnestly, with a slight sniffle of a
well-modelled nose and a dimpling that argued to Vesta something to
come. "Misc Somers says you held one of them babies, Jedge, to let its
mother shout, and pretended to be under a conviction; an' that you
backslid right thar and was a-whisperin' to the other mother. Lord
sakes! Misc Somers finds it all out."

"Well," said the Judge, finding the laugh against him, "I never did
better electioneering than that day. By holding that baby five minutes I
made a vote, and the mother will hold it twenty years before she will
make a vote."

"Misc Somers says, Jedge, you hold the women longer than thar babies;
but I told her you was in sech conviction you didn't know one from the
other. 'Oh,' she says, 'he's sly and safe when he gits over yer on the
Worcester side.' Misc Somers, she's dreadful plain."

William Tilghman, during the continuation of this colloquy, looked with
interest on the two young ladies: Vesta, the elder by two or three
years, and richly endowed with the lights of both beauty and
accomplishments; the maid from the ocean side, plainer, and with no
ornament within or without; but he could foresee, under Vesta's
fostering, a graceful woman, with coquetry and fascination not wholly
latent there; and, as his eyes met Rhoda's, he interpreted the look that
at a certain time of life almost every maiden casts on meeting a young
man--"Is he single?" She shot this look so archly, yet so strong, that
the arrow wounded him a very little as it glanced off. He smiled, but
the consciousness was restored a moment that he was a young man still,
as well as a priest. Love, which had closed a door like the portal of a
tomb against him, began to come forth like a glow-worm and wink its lamp
athwart the dark.

"She must come to Sunday-school," he thought, "if she stays in Princess
Anne. We will polish her."

The mocking-bird, not being satisfied with any lull in the conversation,
"pearted up," as he saw Vesta withdraw, and cried,

"'Sband! 'Sband! Meee--shack! Mee-ee-ee-shack! See me! see me! Gents!
gents! gents! genten! Sweet! sweetie! sweetie! Hoo! hoo! See! see!
Vesty, she! Ha! ha!"

He flew in the air over his stirring master, as if doubting that all was
well since the strange lady, who had been so quiet all the morning, was
gone.

"That bird almost speaks," said William Tilghman; "I have spent many an
hour teaching them, but never could make one talk like that."

"Maybe you had too much to teach to it," Rhoda Holland said; "it ain't
often they can speak, and they mustn't have much company to learn well.
Uncle Meshach haint had no company but that bird for years. I reckon
the bird got mad and lonesome, and jest hooted words at him."

"What is it saying now?" Tilghman asked. "See! it is almost convulsive
in its attempts to say something."

The gray bird, as impressive as a poor poet, seemed nearly in a state of
epilepsy to bring up some burden of oppressive sound, and, as they
watched it, almost tipsy with the intoxicant of speech, fluttering,
driving, and striking in the air, it suddenly brought out a note liquid
as gurgling snow from a bird-cote spout:

"L-l-lo-love! love! love! Ha! ha! L-l-love!"

"Well done, old bachelor!" Judge Custis remarked, in spite of his fagged
face, for good resolution and yesterday's unbracing had left him
somewhat limp and haggard still. "He brings out 'love' as if he had made
a vow against it, but the confession had to come. Many a monk would sing
the same if instinct could find a daring word in his chorals. These
mockers of Maryland were celebrated in the British magazines a hundred
years ago, and I recall some lines about them."

He then recited:

  "'His breast whose plumes a cheerful white display,
  His quivering wings are dressed in sober gray,
  Sure all the Muses this their bird inspire,
  And he alone is equal to a choir.
  Oh, sweet musician! thou dost far excel
  The soothing song of pleasing Philomel:
  Sweet is her song, but in few notes confined,
  But thine, thou mimic of the feathery kind!
  Runs thro' all notes: thou only know'st them all,
  At once the copy and th' original!'"

"That's magnificins!" Rhoda exclaimed, with quiet delight; "who is
'fellow Mil,' Jedge?"

"Oh, that's the British nightingale. These American mocking-birds
surpass them as one of our Eastern Shore clippers outsails all the naval
powers of Europe."

"I've hearn 'The British Nightingale,'" Rhoda said, with a flash of her
eyes; "he was a blind man with green specticklers that sang at Nu-ark,
''ome, sweet 'ome'--that's the way he plonounced it--an' it affected of
him so, he had to drink a whole tumbler of water, an' Misc Somers,
spying around to see if he was the rale nightingale, she found it was
gin in that glass, and told about it."

Rhoda made even the minister laugh, as she indented her cheeks and cast
a sheep's glance at him and the Judge. He marvelled that such forest
English could be resented so little by his mind, but he thought,

"Never mind, she may have had no more lessons than the bird, whose
difficulty is even beautiful. But see! Mr. Milburn is wide awake. My
friend, how do you feel?"

"Better, better!" murmured Milburn. "I cannot lie here any more. There
is money, _money_, gentlemen, dependent on my getting about."

He started up with the greatest resolution and confidence, and fell upon
his head before he had left the coverlets.

"No, no!" said the Judge, as he and Tilghman picked Milburn up and
arranged him as before. "Your will is matched this time, my brave
son-in-law! You are back in the hut you have consumed, among the fires
thereof, and the avenging blast of Nassawongo furnace burns in your
veins and cools you in the mill-pond alternately. Lie there and repent
for the injury you have done a spotless one!"

If Meshach heard this it was never known, but the unconscious or
impulsive utterance strengthened the impression with Tilghman and Rhoda
that Vesta's marriage was not altogether voluntary, and produced on both
a feeling of deeper sympathy and respect for her.

"Judge," the young minister said, "do good for evil, if evil there has
been! I have given him my hand sincerely; perhaps you can relieve his
mind of some business care."

"Mr. Milburn," the Judge said, when he saw the resinous eyes roll
towards him again out of that swarthy face, now pale with weakness, "I
am out of a job now, and can work cheap. Let me do any errand for you."

A look of petulance, followed by one of inquiry, came up from Milburn's
eyes, and he pressed his head between his wrists, as if to bring back
the blood that might propel his judgment. They heard him mutter,

"No business prudence--yet plausible, persuasive--might do it well."

The Judge spoke now, with some firmness:

"Milburn, there is no use of your rebelling. Here you are and here you
will lie till nature does her restoration, assisted by this medicine I
have brought you. You must undergo calomel, and this quinine must set on
its work of several weeks to break up the regularity of these chills. In
the meantime, as your interests are also Vesta's, and Vesta's are mine,
let me serve her, if not you."

The positive tone influenced the weakened system of the patient. He
looked at all three of the observers, and said to Tilghman, "William, I
might send you but for your calling; leave me with the Judge a little
while, both you and Rhoda."

Rhoda took the Conestoga bonnet from the top of the Entailed Hat box,
and arrayed herself in it, to the rector's exceeding wonder.

"Let's you and me go take a little walk," she said, putting her hand in
his arm with a quiet confidence in which was a spark of Meshach's will.
"I ain't afraid of Princess Anne people, if they are proud. Mise Somers
says King Solomons was no better than a lily outen the pond, and said so
himself."

The young man, sincere as his humility was, blushed a little at the idea
of walking through his native town with that bonnet at his side, he
being of one of the self-conscious, high-viewing families of the old
peninsula--his grand-uncle the staff-officer of Washington, and
messenger from Yorktown to Congress with the news, "Cornwallis has
fallen;" but it was his chivalric sense, and not his piety, which
immediately dispelled the last touch of coxcombry, when he felt that a
lady had requested him.

"With happiness, Miss Holland;" and he did not feel one shrinking
thought again as he ran the gantlet of the idle fellows of the town,
many of them his former vagrant playmates. Rhoda was perfectly happy. He
would have taken her to his grandmother's, with whom he kept house, but
that aristocratic old dowager might say something, he considered, to
destroy Rhoda's confidence in her elegant appearance and easy
vocabulary; and they walked past Teackle Hall, where Vesta saw them, and
opened the door and made them come in and eat a little. Rhoda at first
showed some uneasiness under this great pile of habitation, but Vesta
was so natural and gracious that the shyness wore off, and, at a fitting
moment, the bride said:

"Rhoda, my dear, there is a bonnet up-stairs I expect to wear this
winter, and I want to try it on you, whom I think it will particularly
become."

Rhoda's quiet eyes flashed as she saw the new article and heard Vesta
praise it, upon her head. The old bonnet had received a cruel blow, in
spite of Mrs. Somers.

Tilghman, too, accused himself that he felt a little relieved when he
escorted Rhoda back to Meshach's in another bonnet, and Vesta followed,
with her great shaggy dog, Turk; she not unconscious--though serene and
thoughtfully polite to all she knew--of people peering at her in wonder
and excitement from every door and window of the town. The news was
working in every household, from the servants in the kitchens to the
aged people helped to their food with bib and spoon, that the famed
daughter of Daniel Custis was the prize of the junk dealer and usurer
in "old town" by the bridge, who had enslaved a wife at last.


CHAPTER XIX.

THE DUSKY LEVELS.


The new son-in-law, left alone with Judge Custis, asked to be propped up
in bed, and nothing was visible that would support his pillow but the
aged leather hat-box that Custis, with a wry face, brought to do duty.

"My illness is unfortunate," he gasped; "not only to me, but to the new
ties I have formed; to the mutual interest my wife and I have in making
up your losses on Nassawongo furnace, which we are all the poorer by to
that amount; and to a suitor whose cause I have taken up. I have bought
an interest in a great lawsuit."

"Then the day of reckoning of your enemies has come, Milburn."

"Not yet," said the sick man, with a proud flash of his eyes, "unless I
am no merchant and you are no lawyer, and the first I will not concede."

"Nor I the second," exclaimed the Judge, with some pride and temper.

"You were once a good lawyer, if visionary," resumed the money-lender,
with scant ceremony. "Had we been able to respect each other we might
have been confederated in things valuable to ourselves and to our time
and place. But that is past, and you do not possess my confidence as my
legal agent, my attorney. I wish you to get another advocate for me."

"I am willing to be useful, even without your compliments," the Judge
said, remembering his Christian resolution. "We will not quarrel, if I
can serve you."

"I do not wish to hurt your feelings, but my strength is not great
enough for unmeaning flattery. This marriage was so dear to my heart
that I have put it before a very large interest about which I have no
time to lose, and still am helpless upon this bed. I will trust you to
do my errand. Go to that chest, Judge Custis, and you will find a
package of papers in the cedar till at the end. Bring them here."

As the Judge opened the old chest a musty smell, as of mummies wrapped
in herbs, ascended into his nose, and he saw some faded clothes, as
those of poor people deceased, male and female, lying within. The
mocking-bird piped a noisy warning as he raised the lid of the till and
saw the desired papers among a parcel of spotted and striped bird-eggs:

"Come see! come see! Meshach! he! he! sweet!"

"Now open the window yonder," said Meshach, taking the papers, "and let
Tom fly out. He starts my nerves. Wh-oo-t, whi-it, Tom!"

The mocking-bird, spreading its wings and tail, and striking obstinately
towards its master a minute, as he whistled, flew out of the window and
settled in the old willow below, and had a Sunday-afternoon concert,
calling the passing dogs by name, whistling to them, and deceiving cats
and chickens with invitations they familiarly heard, to eat, to shoo, to
scat, and to roost.

"If he regulates his wife like that bird," the Judge spoke to himself,
"she will fly to heaven soon."

Milburn opened the papers, counted them, and handed them to his
father-in-law.

"The papers will be plain to you, Judge Custis, after I have made a few
words of explanation. You well know that the canal between the Delaware
and Chesapeake is finished, and vessels are now passing through it from
bay to bay. It is taking one hundred dollars a day tolls, and twenty
vessels already go past between sun and sun, though the size of the
shipping of the cities it connects has not yet been adapted to its
proportions. It has been a cheap and quick work, costing something above
two millions of dollars, taking only five years of time; and yet it has
begun its mercantile life by a cheat upon a man to whom it is indebted
as a promoter and contractor, and to whom I have advanced the means to
compel justice and damages."

"Well, well, Milburn; I must pay tribute to your enterprise. The era of
these great carrying corporations has barely begun, and you stake your
little fortune against one of them that is backed by the great city of
Philadelphia!"

"The canal passes through the state of Delaware, in which is three
quarters of its little length of only fourteen miles, and there a suit
will be free, to some extent, from the corruptions they might exercise
in Pennsylvania; and, if successful there, we can more easily attach the
tolls of the canal. I have no more faith in the Legislature of Delaware
than of any other state; kidnappers sit in its responsible seats, and it
licenses lotteries to make prizes of its own honor. But we shall try our
case before a simple jury, which will be flax in the hands of one lawyer
in that state, if we can secure him; but hitherto he has refused my
contractor, and will not take the case."

"Why," said the Judge, "you must mean Clayton, the new senator."

"That is the man," Milburn continued, stopping for strength and breath.
"He is finely educated, I hear, at the colleges and law schools, and
possesses a remarkable power over the agricultural and mixed races of
that small state, whom he thoroughly understands by sympathy and
acquaintance. I heard him once in court, at Georgetown, wither and
confound the confederated kidnapping influences of the whole peninsula,
and, against the will and intention of the jury, prevail upon their
fears and sensibilities to find a bold rogue guilty of stealing free
men; of color--a rogue who was in this room, unless it is a delusion of
my fever, this very day, and with whom I fancied I had been in collision
somewhere."

"You only knocked him down with a brick, after Samson had done it with
his fist, and then the fellow came to me for shelter, afraid you would
pursue him at law, and I suppose he did an errand for my servants to
this abode."

The Judge looked around upon the abode as if he had used the most
respectable word he could possibly apply to it.

"I will compromise with such scoundrels as that one," Milburn spoke,
"only when I am afraid of them. But, to conclude my statement; for
reasons of timidity, or doubts of success, or political
ambition--something I cannot fathom--Mr. Clayton will not hearken to my
debtor, and I have not disclosed my own interest in the suit. He is at
home from Washington, and an appointment has been made with him at his
office in Dover to-morrow. You see I am unable to keep it, and I have no
one else to send, and information reaches me that the canal company,
discovering my money in the contractor's bank account, intends to retain
Clayton forthwith. If you set out this afternoon, you can reach
Laureltown for bedtime. It is at least forty miles thence to Dover, and
you might ride it to-morrow by noon, with push, and in that case you
have a chance to beat the Philadelphia emissary several hours. I have
five thousand dollars at stake already; I believe I shall get damages of
forty times five if I can retain that man."

"I am ready to start at once," said the Judge, rising up; "I can read
these papers on the way. The saddle was my cradle, and I have a good
horse. My valise can follow me on the stage to-morrow."

"Unless you see the best reasons for it, my name is not to be mentioned
to any one as a party to this suit; I am not popular with juries."

"Then good-bye, Milburn," said the Judge, but did not extend his hand.
"As you treat my daughter, may God treat you!"

"Amen," exclaimed the money-lender, as the Judge's feet passed over the
door-sill below, and he sank back to the bed, exhausted again.

       *       *       *       *       *

While the proceedings described occupied the white people, the servants,
Roxy and Virgie, in their clean Sunday suits, loitered around the bridge
behind the store, or strayed a little way up the Manokin brook, hearing
the mocking-bird rend his breast in all the ventriloquy of genius.

"Virgie," said Samson Hat, meeting them under the willow-tree, "when I
carries you off and marries you, I s'pect you'll be climbin' up in my
loft, too, makin' it comf'able fo' me."

"You ought to be ashamed of yourself, you old, black, impertinent
servant of darkness!" Virgie said. "Indeed, when I look at a man, he
must be almost white--not all white, though, like Roxy's beau."

"Who's he, Roxy?" Samson asked.

Roxie blushed, and said she had no beau, and never wanted one.

"Roxy's beau," says Virgie, "is that poor, helpless Mr. Jack Wonnell. He
comes to see her every day. He's devotion itself. Indeed, Samson, if you
are going to marry me, and Roxy marry all those bell-crown hats, we
shall cure the town of its two greatest afflictions."

"Bad ole hats?" asks Samson.

"Roxy'll burn all the bell-crowns for her beau, and I'll bury the
steeple-hat and you that cleans it, and the people will be so glad
they'll set me free and I can go North."

"Look out, Virgie; I'll put dat high-crown hat on you like Marster
Milburn put de bell on de buzzard. He went up to dat buzzard one day
wid a little tea-bell in his hand an' says, 'Buzzard, how do ye like
music?' Says de buzzard, tickled wid de compliment, 'I'm so larnid in
dat music, I disdains to sing; I criticises de birds dat does.' 'Den,'
says Mars Milburn, 'I needn't say to ye, P'ofessor Buzzard, dat dis
little bell will be very pleasin' to yo' refine taste.' Wid dat he takes
a little piece o' wire an' fastens de tea-bell to de bird's foot an'
says, 'Buzzard, let me hear ye play!' De buzzard flew and de bell
tinkled, an' all de other buzzards hear some'in' like de cowbell on de
dead cow dey picked yisterday, an' dey says, 'Who's dat a flyin' heah?
Maybe it's a cow's ghose!' So dey up, all scart, an' cross'd de bay; an'
de buzzard wid a bell haint had no company sence, becoz he stole a
talent he didn't have, and it made everybody oncomfitable."

"I've heard about Meshach belling a buzzard," said Roxy, "but they say
he's got something on his foot, too, like a hoof--a clove foot. Did you
ever see it, Samson?"

"He never tuk his foot off," said the negro, warily, "to let me see it.
Dat bell on de buzzard, gals, is like white beauty in a colored skin; it
draws white men and black men, like quare music in de air, but it makes
de pale gal lonesome. She can't marry ary white man; she despises black
ones."

The shrewd lover had touched a chord of young pain in the hearts of both
those delicate quadroons. Both were so nearly white that the slight
corruption increased their beauty, rounded their graceful limbs,
plumpened their willowy figures, gave a softness like mild night to
their expressive eyes, and blackened the silken tassels of their elegant
long hair. No tutor had taught them how to walk,--they who moved on
health like skylarks on the air. Faithful, pure-minded, modest, natural,
they were still slaves, and their place in matrimony, which nature
would have set among the worthiest--superior in love, superior in
maternity, superior in length of days and enjoyment--was, by the freak
of man's _caste_, as doubtful as the mermaid's.

Roxy was a little the shorter and fuller of shape, the milder and more
pathetic; in Virgie the white race had left its leaner lines and greater
unrelenting. She said to Samson, with the pique her reflections
inspired,

"I never thought the first man to make love to me would be as black as
you."

"De white corn years," says Samson, "de rale sugar-corn, de blackbird
gits. None of dem white gulls and pigeons gits dat corn. A white feller
wouldn't suit you, Virgie."

"Why?" says Roxy, "Virgie was raised among white children; so was I. We
didn't know any difference till we grew up."

"Dat was what spiled ye," Samson said; "de colored man is de best
husban'. He ain't thinkin' 'bout business while he makin' love, like
Marster Milburn. The black man thinks his sweetheart is business enough,
long as she likes him. He works fur her, to love her, not to be makin' a
fool of her, and put his own head full of hambition, as dey calls it.
You couldn't git along wid one o' dem pale, mutterin' white men, Virgie.
Now, Roxy's white man, he's most as keerless as a nigger; he kin't do
nothin' but make love, nohow. Dat's what she likes him fur."

"He's as kind a hearted man as there is in Princess Anne," Roxy spoke
up. "I never thought about him except as a friend. I know I sha'n't look
down on him because he likes a yellow girl, for then I would be looking
down on myself."

"Virgie," said Samson, "I reckon I'm a little ole, but you kin't fine
out whar it is. Ye ought to seen me fetch dat white hickory of a feller
in de eye yisterday, and he jest outen his teens. I know it's a kine of
impedent to be a courtin' of you, Virgie, dat's purtier dan Miss Vesty
herself--"

"Nobody can be as pretty as Miss Vesta," Virgie cried, delighted with
the compliment; "she's perfection."

"As I was gwyn to say," dryly added Samson, "I never just knowed what I
was a lettin' Marster Milburn keep my wages fur, till he married Miss
Vesty, and then I sot my eyes on Miss Vesty's friend an' maid, and I
says, 'Gracious goodness! dat's de loveliest gal in de world. I'll git
my money and buy her and set her free, and maybe she'll hab me, ole as I
am.'"

"She will, too, Samson, if you do that, I believe," Roxy cried; "see how
she's a-smiling and coloring about it."

Virgie's throat was sending up its tremors to her long-lashed eyes, and
a wild, speculative something throbbed in her slender wrists and beat in
the little jacket that was moulded to her swelling form: the first sight
of freedom in the wild doe--freedom, and a mate.

"My soul!" Roxy added, "if poor Mr. Wonnell could set me free, I think I
might pity him enough to be his wife."

Samson used his opportunity to stretch out his hand and take Virgie's,
while she indulged the wild dream.

"Dis han' is too purty," he said, "to be worn by a slave. Let me make it
free."

She turned away, but the negro had been a wise lover, and his plea
pierced home, and it struck the Caucasian fatherhood of the bright
quadroon.

"Freedom is mos' all I got," the negro continued; "it's wuth everything
but love, Virgie. Dat you got. Maybe we can swap' em and let me be yo'
slave."

"Don't, don't!" pleaded Virgie, pulling her hand very gently. "I'm
afeard of you; you clean the Bad Man's hat."


CHAPTER XX.

CASTE WITHOUT TONE.


Judge Custis was well out of town, riding to the north, when the little
reading-circle assembled, without his patronage, over the old store, and
the young minister directed it. In the warm afternoon the windows were
raised till Milburn's chill began to set in again, and they could hear
the mocking-bird, in his tree, tantalizing the great shaggy dog Turk by
whistling to him,

"Wsht! wsht! Come, sir! come, sir! Sic 'em! sic 'em! wh-i-it! sic 'em,
Turk! wsht! wh-i-i-t! Sirrah! Ha! ha!"

Turk would run a little way, run back, see nobody, watch all the windows
of the store, and finally he seemed to think the spot was haunted, or
unreliable in some way; for he would next run to the open store door,
and bark, run back, and, from a distance, watch the hollow dark within,
as if a vague enemy lived there, mocking his obedient nature and keeping
his mistress captive. Turk was a setter with mastiff mixing, worth a
little for the hunt and more for the watch, but as an ornament and
friend worth more than all; he was so impartial in his favors as to like
Aunt Hominy and Vesta about equally, and often slept in the kitchen
before the great chimney fire.

"Do we worry you, Mr. Milburn, by reading here?" Vesta asked.

"No, my darling. It is so kind of you to bring music to my poor loft."

William Tilghman opened his Bible at a place marked by a little
ribbon-backed bristol card, inscribed in Vesta's childhood by her
learning fingers, "Watch with me." He thought of his cousin, now
fluttering between her betrayal to this Pilate and her crucifixion, and
caught her eyes looking at the Bible-marker, as if saying to him and to
the forest maiden, "Watch with me."

Tilghman started the reading, Vesta followed, and Rhoda had to do her
part, also; but she required to labor hard to keep up, as the chapter
was in the Acts, descriptive of Paul's voyage towards Rome, and had
plenty of hard words and geography in it. At one verse, Rhoda's reading
was like this:

"And--when--we--had--sailed--slowl--li--many-days--and--scare--scare--skar
--skurse--I declar', Aunt Vesty, this print is blombinable!--scace--Oh,
yes, scacely--scarce--were--come--over--against--Ceni--Snide--Snid--Mr.
Tilghman, what is this crab-kine of word? Cnidus? Well, I declar'! a dog
couldn't spell that; it looks like Snyder spelled by his hired
man--against Cnidus--the--wind--not--snuffers--no, snuffering (here
Rhoda executed the double sniffle)--yes, didn't I say snuffering? I mean
suffering--suffering--us--we--sailed--under--I can't spell that nohow;
nobody kin!"

"'Sailed under Crete,' dear," assisted Vesta.

"Sailed under--Crety--over--against--Sal--Sal--Salm--oh, yes, psalms!
No: Sal Money."

"Salmone," explained the rector, not daring to look up; "we sailed under
Crete over against Salmone; and, hardly passing it, came unto a place
which is called the Fair Havens, nigh whereunto was the city of Lasea.'"

"Lord sakes!" exclaimed Rhoda, putting out her crescent foot, on which
was Vesta's worked stocking, "did they have Fair Havens in them days?
Was it this one over yer on the Wes'n Shu?"

"No," answered Tilghman; "Fair Havens was always a ready name for
sailors finding a good port in trouble."

"Thar ain't no good port out thar on the Oushin side now but Monroe's
Inlet, outen Jinkotig. The rest of 'em gits filled up, an' kadgin's the
on'y way to kadge through of 'em, Misc Somers says."

"She means warping, or pulling over a shoal inlet by a rope to an
anchor, as the water lifts the vessel."

"Yes, you know, Mr. Tilghman," Rhoda cried, delighted; "that's
kadgin'--pullin' over the bar by the anchor line. You're all agroun',
can't git nowhar, air a-bumpin' on the bar, an' the breakers is comin'
dreadful in your side: you'll break all up if you stay thar. So you git
the little anchor--the little one is better than ary too big a one--an'
put it in the yawl an' paddle acrost the bar an' sot her, an' them
aboard pulls as the billers lifts ye, and so they keep her headed in,
and, kadging, kadging, bumpety-bump, at las' you go clar of the bar an'
come home to smooth haven in Sinepuxin."

"Yes, my sisters," appended the young minister, "we need often to kedge
home, to warp over the bars of life, and Hope, in ever so little an
anchor, helps a little, if we do not lose the line. Little hopes are
often better than great ones, for o'er-great hopes swamp little vessels.
Even hope must be artfully shaped and skilfully dropped to take hold of
the unseen bottoms of opportunity. All of us have entertained burdensome
hopes, heavy anchors, and they would not hold us against the breakers;
but there may be little hopes, carried in advance of us, that will draw
us into pleasant sounds and bays."

"We owe to you, Rhoda, this comforting hope," said Vesta, "and, while
you are with us, we shall teach you to read more confidently."

Vesta then sang Charles Wesley's hymn:

  "'Jesus, in us thyself reveal!
  The winds are hushed, the sea is still,
    If in the ship Thou art.
  Oh, manifest Thy power divine;
  Enter this sinking church of Thine,
    And dwell in every heart.'"

The sounds of her singing reached the people, rambling curiously around
on Sunday afternoon to see the principals in the surprising marriage
they had but lately heard of, and, as she ended, Mr. Milburn called her,
saying,

"It is time for you to leave me till to-morrow."

"Is that your desire?"

"It is, kind lady. I have a servant-man, Samson, used to all my work,
and you can hear of my condition through your slave girls, going and
coming. I want you to feel free as ever, though my wife at last. I did
not seek you to cloud your morning, but to share your sunshine. Go to
Teackle Hall, and there I will come when I am stronger. At no time do I
ever wish you to sleep in this old stable."

"May I come and sit with you to-morrow, sir?"

"Oh, do so! I must see you a little day by day."

"May I take Rhoda with me?"

"Yes, if you will do it. She is a poor girl, but that is not her fault."

Vesta bent and touched his forehead with her lips, and, as she drew
back, he raised his cold hand and put a piece of paper in hers.

"Present my love to your mother," he said, in a chill; "and return her
the losses Judge Custis has named to me as her portion in Nassawongo
furnace. The amount is in this check, which I give you, although it is
Sunday, because it represents no business among any of us, but an act of
peace."

"You are an honorable man," Vesta said; "I have cost you dearly."

"It is the bumping of a few years on the bar," Meshach answered, trying
to smile; "be you my anchor out in calm water, and I will try to draw to
you some day. It is not the price I pay that troubles me; it is the
price you are paying."

"I am deeply interested in you," Vesta said; "if I should say more than
that, it would not now be true."

"Thank you for that much," Milburn said; "even your pity is a treasure,
and I thank God that I have made so much progress. Before you go, let my
bird come in, and then shut the window, to keep the night-hawks and owls
from finding him."

He managed, between his rising paroxysms of the chill, to whistle a note
or two, and Tom flew in the window and fluttered viciously around his
head, as if to be revenged for exile, and then, leaping on the old
hat-box, set up a show performance, in which were all the menagerie of
town and field, and, stopping a little while to hear the bird sing her
name again, Vesta and her friends withdrew.

Mrs. Custis was found in her bedroom, much improved in spirits, but
highly nervous.

"Oh, my poor, martyred, murdered idol!" she screamed, as Vesta came in;
"are you alive? Is the beast dead? Don't tell me he dares to live."

"Yes, mamma, here are his teeth," Vesta said, when she had kissed her
mother warmly. "He has sent you a check for all your lost money, and his
love, and me to live here with you in Teackle Hall. Liberty,
restitution, as you name it, and his affection to both of us: is he not
a gentleman now?"

Mrs. Custis eagerly took the check.

"Do you believe it is good, precious? Maybe he sent it to deceive me
while he could take advantage of your gratitude. Oh, these foresters are
devils! I wish I had the money for it."

"It is good for everything he has, mamma. Not to pay it would make him a
bankrupt. He gave it to me almost with gallantry. Indeed, he is the most
singular man I ever knew."

"That is the case with all pirates," said Mrs. Custis; "something in
the female nature attracts us to lawless men, who take what they
want--ourselves included. We were, I suppose, originally, just seized
and appropriated, and are looking out for the appropriator to this day.
But you, Vesta, with the Baltimore blood in you, do not expect to play
the Sabine bride tamely like that--to defend your spoiler and reconcile
him to your brethren?"

"I was thinking it was the Baltimore blood that made me appreciate Mr.
Milburn, mamma. The Custises were not traders."

"Pshaw! the Custises were libertines, unless history belies them; they
had else no popularity in the scamp court of Charley-over-the-water. He
thought the daughter of any gentleman in his following was made for his
mistress, and a large percentage of the said damsels thought he was
right."

"Mr. Milburn is no Cavalier, I can see that," Vesta said; "I am
attracted to him by elements of such strength and simplicity that I
fancy he is a Puritan."

"Puritan fiddlestick!" Mrs. Custis said, putting Milburn's check in her
bosom and pinning it in there, and looking vigilantly at the pin
afterwards. "Now, my great comfort, my only McLane! do not idealize this
forester as of any beginning whatsoever. It is all wrong. Thousands of
convicts were exported to Chesapeake Bay from the slums of London,
Bristol, Glasgow, and other places, and propagated here like the
pokeweed. With instincts of larceny, and, possibly, a little rebellion
in it, your man has robbed this house of your person; if he should also
take your heart, the shame would be upon us."

"Oh, mother, you are unforgiving!"

"Of course I am; I am Scotch."

"You have not one son-in-law but this who would give you back the large
amount your husband has misspent--not one who could do it but at a
sacrifice you would not permit. For you and papa, to restore your faith
in each other, I married our stranger creditor, forcing him to the altar
rather than he me; and he has already proved himself of more delicacy
than you, if I am to believe you are in your right mind. No, I am no
McLane."

"You are not, if you do not use their Scotch-Irish perseverance to get
the better of Meshach Milburn. You have obtained a marriage settlement
with him, now have it confirmed, and sue out your divorce before the
Legislature! Publicly as you have been profaned, ask the State of
Maryland for reparation. The McLanes, the Custises, and all their
connections, from the Christine River to the James, will storm
Annapolis, make your cause, if necessary, a political issue, and the
courts of this county will give you damages out of this beast's
unpopular wealth."

Vesta looked at her mother with astonishment.

"What would become of my self-respect, my maiden name, if I made that
show of my private griefs, mother?"

"Why, you would be a heroine. Every old lover, of whom there are so many
eligible ones, would feel his zeal return. A romance would attend your
name wherever the Baltimore newspapers are taken, and you would be as
great a heroine as Betty Patterson."

"That disobedient girl?" Vesta, still in astonishment, exclaimed.

"I saw her when the bride of Jerome Bonaparte. She was not half as
lovely as you! If Jerome had seen you--you were not born, then, and I
was in society--he would never have looked at Betty. But, you see, she
forced a settlement out of the Emperor, husbanded the income of it, and
she is rich, and freer to-day than if she had become a French
Bonaparte."

"Weak as they may be in many things, I am a Custis," Vesta spoke, with
pale scorn. "I would not drag my name through the tobacco-stained
lobbies of Annapolis to wear the crown of Josephine. The word I gave,
in pity of my parents, to the man who is now my husband, to become his
wife, I would not take back to my dying day, unless he first denied his
word. I believe there is such a thing as honor yet. Mother, you fret my
father by such principles."

"They are the principles of your uncle, Allan McLane."

"A man I shrink from," Vesta said, "although he is your brother. His
unfeeling respectability, his unchangeableness, his want of every
impulse but hate, his appropriation of our family honor, as if he was
our lawgiver and high-sheriff, his secretiveness, formal religion, and
mysterious prosperity, I do not appreciate, much as I have tried to be
charitable to him. I do not like Baltimore as I do the Eastern Shore; it
is fierce, hard, and suspicious."

"You shall not run down Baltimore before me," Mrs. Custis cried, hotly.
"It is a paradise to this region; and comparing Meshach Milburn to your
uncle is blasphemy."

"I have on my finger, mother, his mother's ring."

"A pretty object it is," said Mrs. Custis, taking a peep at it and
another at her check; "it requires a microscope to find it. The next
thing you will be walking through Baltimore on your bridal tour,
followed by a mob of small boys, to see Meshach's old steeple-top hat.
Then I shall feel for you, Vesta."

The cruel blow struck home. Vesta's reception, so unexpected, so
acrimonious, affected her with a sense of gross ingratitude, and with a
greater disappointment--she had failed to restore joy to her parents by
her desperate sacrifice.

She began to feel that she might have done wrong. The broad sight of her
act, looking back upon it from this momentary revulsion, seemed a
frightful flood, like the mouth of one of the little Eastern Shore
rivers that expands to a gulf in the progress of a brook. Last night she
saw in an instant the misunderstandings and ruin she could prevent by
her ready decision; now she saw the misunderstandings she never could
correct, the prejudices stronger than parental sympathy, the wide
separation her marriage had effected between two classes of her duty--to
think with her husband's affection and her mother's interests at the
same time.

It also occurred to her that her father, the darling of her thought, had
seemed slow to appreciate her marriage sacrifice, and was testy at her
willingness to loosen her heart with her vestal zone towards her
husband.

The whole day had passed with such relief, such satisfaction, that she
expected to end it in the tranquillity of Teackle Hall, like some young
eagle returned to her nest with abundant prey for the old birds there,
worn out with storm and time. In place of love and healing nature, Vesta
had found worldliness, resentment, intrigue, and aspersion, concluding
with a reference to the one object she feared and shrank from--the hat
of dark entail, the shadow upon her future life. Her eyes filled up, she
lisped aloud,

"I wish I had stayed with my husband!"

"Has he become so necessary to you already?" asked Mrs. Custis.

"He does appreciate my sacrifice," Vesta said, and her low sobs filled
the room. In a moment Virgie entered, alert to her playmate's pains, and
threw her arms around her mistress and kissed her like a child.

"Oh, missy," she spoke to Mrs. Custis, "to make her cry after what she
has done for all of us--to save your home, to save me from being sold!"

No scruples of race made Vesta reject this sympathy, precious to her
parched breast despite the quadroon taint as the golden sand in the
brooks of Africa, giving at once wealth and cooling. The slave girl's
long white arms, scarcely less pale than ivory--for she had slipped in
at the sign of sorrow, while making her simple toilet--drew Vesta into
her lap and laid her head upon the fair maiden shoulder, as if it was a
babe's. On such a shoulder, only a shadow darker, Vesta had often lain
in infancy, and sucked the milk that was sweet as Eve's--the common
fount of white and black--at the breast of Virgie's mother. That
faithful nurse was gone; the wild plum-tree grew upon her grave; but
Virgie inherited the motherly instinct and added the sisterly sympathy,
and her rich hair, half unbound, streamed down on Vesta's temples among
the dark ringlets there, while she looked into her own spirit for a word
to check those tears, and found it:

"People will say you have been crying, dear missy. The Lord knows you
did right. Don't let anybody make you lose your faith till your master,
your husband, does wrong to you; he wouldn't like to have you cry."

There was a nervous chord somewhere in the slave's throat that trembled
on the key of the heroic, and her nostrils, slightly rounded, her head,
free of carriage as the wild colt's, and a light from her soft eyes that
seemed to be reflected on their long, silken lashes, bore out a spirit
tamed by servitude, which still could kindle to everything that
concerned woman in her birthright.

Vesta kissed Virgie, and ceased to sob; she rose and kissed her mother
also.

"It was very wrong in me to say what I did not wish to say, about Uncle
Allan, mamma. I hope papa was kind to you to-day."

"Dear me!" Mrs. Custis cried; "everything is turned upside down by that
bog iron ore. A new element has come into the family to disturb it.
Nobody believes anything respectable any more. Your father is an
infidel, or a radical, or something perverse; you are defending those
wild foresters! What will become of the Christian religion and society
and good principles?"

"What did papa say before he left home?"

"He acted in the strangest manner, Vesta. He came right in and kissed
me, like a great booby, and sat down and wanted to talk about our
courting days. I thought at first he was drunk again, or that the
Methodists had got hold of him and fed him on camp-meeting straw. How do
you account for it?"

Virgie had slipped out as soon as the talk became confidential.

"He wants to do better, dear mamma. Do respond to his contrition and
affection! If we could all humble our hearts, it would be so easy to
start life better, and turn this accident to joy and comfort. I have
found new engagements and reliefs already. There is a young girl, Mr.
Milburn's niece, whom I shall bring home this evening and occupy myself
teaching her. She is an orphan, without a mother's knowledge, barely
able to read, but pretty and quaint."

"Bring a forester in here?" Mrs. Custis exclaimed, fairly shivering.
"What will Allan McLane's daughters say? Your sister from Talbot has
been here all this day, and you have scarcely given her an hour. Between
this fatal marriage and your neglect, she left, with her husband,
positively pale with horror. I do not know what is to follow this
marriage. I have posted a letter already to my brother Allan, telling
him of your betrayal by your father and this bridegroom. All our
connection will be up in arms."

Vesta's heart sank again, but she felt no fears of her husband's ability
to meet mere family opposition, secured by law and form in his rights.
She only feared hostility might rouse in him severity and defiance which
would neutralize her present influence upon him, and change his
accommodating, almost gentle, disposition as a husband.

For, blacker than any object in her future path, she saw a little,
trivial thing, like a wild boar closing her hitherto adventurous
excursion into the forest where her husband grew--the hat that had
covered his head!

Her mother's thoughtless mention of that object made it formidable to
her fears as some iron mask locked round her husband's countenance,
making day hideous and the world a dungeon to all who must walk with
him.

She discerned that his combative spirit would start to the defence of
his hat if it should become the subject of family rancor, because no man
forgives an insult to his personal appearance; and this article of wear
had ringed his brain with gangrene, and war made upon it would be met by
war, while Vesta had expected to induce forgetfulness of the rusty old
tile, to charm away the remembrance of it, and to have it laid forever
aside.

"I am not the daughter of Uncle McLane," Vesta protested. "I am,
besides, a woman, free of my minority. Mr. Milburn is hardly the man to
submit to any trespass. I warn you, mamma, to put my uncle at no
disadvantage; for my husband has already beaten papa, and he will smile
at your brother when he knows that I do not support any of his
pretensions."

"The first thing," answered Mrs. Custis, stubbornly, "is to see that he
pays this check. Oh, my dear money!"--she pressed it to her heart--"how
delightful it is to see you again. Science, love, glory, ideas: how
vulgar they are without money. With this check paid, I think I shall
never read a book again; and as for the bog ores, why, I shall scream if
there is an iron article in the house. Vesta, this house, I believe, is
yours now? I had forgotten. Well, no wonder you defend the man who took
your father's roof from over his head and gave it to you!"

"That is unkind, mamma. I value it only as a sure home for you and papa.
If I gave it to him it might be in risk again."

"But suppose you continue to defend this monster of a Milburn, he and
you may require the whole house. I am too well-bred to be converted to
any of his impious ideas. I am a Baltimorean, and stand by my colors."

"Let us speak of that no more," Vesta said, almost in despair, "but talk
of dear papa. I know he loves you."

"It is too late," Mrs. Custis remarked, solemnly, with another fondling
of her check; "he has neglected me too long. I expect his attention and
respect, and that he shall behave himself; but no lovey and no honey for
me now. Life has passed the noon and the early afternoon for him and me,
and I live to be respectable, to appreciate my security, to keep
upstarts at arm's-length, to enjoy my life in its appointed circle,
taking care of my income, and never--no, never!--giving any human being
the opportunity to make me a beggar again."

"Oh, mamma," Vesta said, "think of Judge Custis! Have you not made home
cold to him by this formalism? We must study men, and please them
according to their tastes, and therein lies our joy; else we are false
to the companionship God gave us to man for. Yield to your husband's
boyish-heartedness; fly with him, like the mate by the bird! He has
repented; welcome him to your love again, and stay his feet from truant
going, or he may dash down the precipice this sorrow has arrested him
before, of everlasting dissipation and the death of his noble soul!"

Vesta stood above her mother, deeply moved, deeply earnest. Her mother
stole another look at the bank check.

"Well, daughter, I will be humbugged by him if you desire it," she said,
but with slight answering emotion. "If I had my life to go over again I
would marry a business man, and let the aristocracy go. There is the
second knock at the front-door. I believe I will dress myself and go
down-stairs too."

There were two ladies in the parlor when Vesta went there--Grandmother
Tilghman and the Widow Dennis.

"Good-evening, Vesta," said the old lady, who was stone-blind, but
easily knew Vesta's footstep. "William thought you would not go to
evening service on account of Mr. Milburn's illness, so I came around to
sit till church was over, when he will take me home. But what is that I
hear in this parlor, like somebody sniffling?"

"It's me, Aunt Vesty," said the voice of Rhoda Holland from the
background.

"This is Mr. Milburn's niece, who has come here to stay with me," Vesta
said.

"Ah! then it is no Custis. The last sniffle I heard was at the ball to
Lafayette in the spring of 1781. The marquis had marched from Head of
Elk to the Bald Friars' ferry up the Susquehanna and inland among the
hills to Baltimore, and we gave him a ball which, at his request, was
turned into a clothing-party. He snuffed so much that he kept up a
sniffle all the evening, like--"

Here Rhoda's sniffle was heard again.

"Yes, that's a good imitation," said Grandmother Tilghman, "but I don't
like it."

"Did the gineral dance at the ball?" asked Rhoda. "What did he do with
his swurd? Did he dance with it outen his scibburd?"

"He danced like a gentleman," Mrs. Tilghman replied, as if she would
rather not, "and led me out in the first set. You danced with him,
Vesta, at the ball in '24, forty-three years afterwards. Does he sniffle
yet?"

"I don't recollect, grand-aunt. I was a little girl, and so much
flattered that I thought everything he did was perfect."

"Ah me!" exclaimed Mrs. Tilghman, pulling the feather of her turban up,
and looking as much like an old belle as possible at eighty years of
age; "you danced before Lafayette with my grandson Bill. Bill hardly
remembers Lafayette at all, thinking of you that night, so wonderful in
your girl's charms. I told him Vesta would never marry him, as he was
too plain and poor. But I never thought you would marry that--"

Here Rhoda sniffled warningly.

"Yes," exclaimed the old lady, catching the sniffle; "I never thought
you would marry _that_! But Bill is as dear a fool as ever. He says now
that Meshach Milburn is a good man, too. I never thought he was above
a--"

Rhoda sniffled earnestly.

"Precisely that," exclaimed the old lady; "that was my estimate of the
stock. Bill says he is a financial genius. I don't see what is to become
of girls in this generation. Here is Ellenora, too good to marry
Phoebus, the sailor man, too poor to marry anybody else; now, if
Milburn had married her and taken her son Levin into his business, it
would have been reasonable; but to take you and pervert your happiness,
almost makes me--"

Sniffle from Rhoda.

"Yes," said the old lady, snappishly; "almost! But I never did do it
yet."

"Did you ever see Gineral Washin'ton, mem?" Rhoda asked. "I thought,
maybe, you was old enough. Misc Somers, she see him up yer to Kint River
a-crossin' to 'Napolis. He was a-swarin' at the cappen of the piriauger
and a dammin' of the Eas'n Shu, and he said they wan't no good rudes in
Marylan' nohow; that the Wes'n Shu was all red mud, an' the Eas'n Shu
yaller mud, an' the bay was jus' pizen. Misc Somers say she don't think
it was Gineral Washin'ton, caze he cuss so. She goin' to find out when
she kin git a book an' somebody to read outen it to her, caze she
dreffle smart."

"Grand-aunt Tilghman," Vesta interposed to the blank silence of the
room, "knew General Washington intimately."

"Do tell us!" cried Rhoda. "You kin be a right interestin' ole woman, I
reckon, ef you air so quar."

In the midst of a smile, in which the blind old lady herself joined, and
Mrs. Custis at the same time entered the room, Mrs. Tilghman spoke as
follows:

"I went to visit Cousin Martha Washington several years before the
Revolution, at Mount Vernon. I had seen her while she was the widow of
Cousin Custis, and we occasionally corresponded. In those days we
visited by vessel, so a schooner of Robert Morris's father set me ashore
at Mount Vernon. Colonel Washington was then having his first portrait
painted by Wilson Peale, and he was forty years old. Peale and
Washington used to pitch the bar, play quoits, and fox-hunt, while
Cousin Martha, who was only three months younger than the colonel,
knitted and cut out sewing for her colored girls, and heard her
daughter, Martha Custis, play the harpsichord. Poor Martha had the
consumption; she was dark as an Indian; Washington often carried her
along the piazza and into the beautiful woodlands near the house; but
she died, leaving him all her money--nearly twenty thousand dollars. We
Custises rather looked down on Colonel Washington in those days; he was
not of the old gentry; his poor mother could barely read and write, and
once, when we went to Fredericksburg to see her, she was riding out in
the field among her few negroes as her own overseer, wearing an old
sun-bonnet, and sunburned like a forester."

"Dear me!" exclaimed Mrs. Custis. "I should think she was a great
impediment to Washington."

"I reckon that's the way her son got big," exclaimed Rhoda; "if his mar
had laid down in bed all day, he couldn't have killed King George so
easy with his swurd."

"I often said to Cousin Martha, 'What did you see in this big horse of a
man?' 'Oh,' she replied, 'he's the best overseer in Virginia. He looks
after my property as no other man could.'"

"Then," said Mrs. Custis, emphatically, "he was one man out of a
thousand."

"That's the kind of man you married, Vesta," spoke up Mrs. Dennis.

"_Her_ husband," said Mrs. Custis, "looked after her father's property,
I am sure, for he got it all."

"And returned it all," exclaimed Vesta.

Mrs. Custis remarked that Washington certainly was a blue-blooded man.

"Is thar people with blue blood comin' outen of 'em?" asked Rhoda
Holland. "Lord sakes! I should think it would make 'em cold."

"I wonder if men are ever great?" asked Vesta; "or whether it is not
great occasion and trial that project them. A crisis comes in our lives,
and, finding what we can endure, we incur greater risks, and finally
delight in such adventure."

"That is the way with my poor boy, Levin," said Mrs. Dennis, quietly, to
Vesta. She was a pretty woman, somewhat past thirty, with rosy cheeks,
blue eyes, neat but rather poor attire, and a simple, artless manner,
and might have passed for the sister of her son.

"Is Levin coming for you to-night?" Vesta asked.

"No," blushed the widow; "James Phoebus will see me home. Levin has
gone off in his boat, and I have been worried about him all day. Some
time, I am afraid, he will go and never return. Oh, Cousin Vesta, this
waiting for a husband neither alive nor dead is very trying."

Overhearing the remark, Mrs. Custis remarked, "Norah, you ought to be
ashamed to keep that faithful fellow waiting on you, when you could give
yourself a good husband and reward him so easily."

"I think you had better look out for old age," Mrs. Tilghman also said,
"while you have youth and good looks to obtain the provision. Oden
Dennis is probably dead; if not dead, he does not mean to return, for I
can think of no circumstances in this age which would forcibly detain a
man from his wife fifteen years. Even if he was in a prison, he would be
allowed to write to you. He may not be dead, Norah, but he is not coming
back. Get a father for your son; you cannot manage Levin."

"Maybe he has been stoled by Injins," exclaimed Rhoda, with great
fervor; "thar was a Injin captive in a shew at Nu-ark, that had been
kept nineteen years. He forgot his language, and whooped dreffle. Misc
Somers say he was an imploster, an' worked on the Brekwater up to
Lewistown. She's always lookin' behind the shew to find out somethin'."
(Slight sniffle.)

"Do get that girl a pocket-handkerchief, and show her how to use it,"
exclaimed Mrs. Tilghman, breaking out. "Ah! girls, I have been a widow
thirty years. I never gave up the expectation of marrying again till I
lost my eyesight; and even after that, at sixty-five, I had an offer of
marriage; but I said to my gallant old beau, 'I will not take a man I
cannot compliment by seeing him and admiring him every day. I love you,
but my blindness would give you too much pain.' In our quiet towns, all
the life worth living is domestic joy. Do not lose it, Ellenora; do not
put it off too long!"

"I could love Mr. Phoebus, plain as he is," the widow spoke, "if I
could persuade myself that Oden is dead. But that I cannot do. A real
person--spirit or man--is watching over me closely. My very shoes I wear
to-night came from that mysterious agent. It is not my son; it is not
James Phoebus. No other stranger would so secretly assist me. I am
bound up in the fear and wonder that it is my husband."

"That does beat conjecture," said old Mrs. Tilghman. "Have you no friend
you might suspect?"

"None," the widow answered. "None who have not worn out their means of
giving long ago. Can I marry, with this ghostly visitation coming so
regularly? Should I not have faith in a husband's living if I receive a
wife's care from an unseen hand?"

"Oden Dennis," Mrs. Custis remarked, "was hardly a man to do charity and
not be seen. He was rather self-indulgent, demonstrative, and restless.
I cannot think of his nocturnal visits in the body. Besides, he would
not supply you in that way, Norah, if he meant to come back; and if he
cannot himself come to you, neither could he send."

Not altogether relishing Mrs. Tilghman's reproof, Rhoda was again heard
from, saying:

"Lord sakes! all the women has to talk about when they is gone is the
men. When the men comes, they talks as if they never missed of 'em. Misc
Somers, she never had no man, an' she talks mos' about the women that
has got one. I think Aunt Vesty has got the best man in Prencess Anne.
He's the richest. He's the freest. He never courted no other gal. He
ain't got no quar old women runnin' of him down--caze Misc Somers is
dreffle afraid of him!" This last remark seemed apologetic and an
afterthought.

"I am beginning to think my fortune is better than I deserve," Vesta
replied, to soften the application, as wine, tea, and cake were brought
in. "Now, dear friends, as I am Mr. Milburn's wife, let us all be
Christians this Sunday night, and drink his health and happy recovery,
and that he may never repent his marriage."

They drank with some hesitation, except the bride, Rhoda, and Mrs.
Dennis. Mrs. Tilghman needed the wine too much to wait long, and Mrs.
Custis, finding she was observed, took a sip from her glass also,
excusing herself on the ground of a recent headache from drinking
heartily.

As the conversation proceeded, now by general participation, again by
couples apart, and Vesta found herself more and more a subject of
sympathy, with no little curiosity interwoven in it, she also imagined
that an undertone of belief was abroad that she had made a mercenary
marriage.

Old Mrs. Tilghman--in her prime a most caustic belle, and worldly as
three marriages, all shrewdly contracted, could make her--seemed
determined to hold that Vesta had rejected her grandson for the
money-lender on the consideration of wealth. Vesta's own mother, too,
who should have known her well, had twice hinted the same. Even the
inoffensive Ellenora had accepted that idea, or another kin to it, and
Rhoda Holland had remembered that her uncle was the richest of
bridegrooms in Princess Anne. Vesta felt the injustice, but said to
herself:

"I must make the sacrifice complete, and incur any harsh judgment it may
bear. I see that I shall be driven for sympathy to the last place in the
world I anticipated: to my husband's heart. Yes, there is something
besides love in marriage: if I cannot love him, he can understand me."

Vesta had come to a place all come to who volunteer an act of great
sacrifice--to have it put upon a low motive from the lower plane of
sacrifice in many otherwise kind people. We give our money to an
institution of charity, and it is said that it was for notoriety, or
self-seeking, or at the expense of our kin. We lead a forlorn hope in
politics, or some other arena, to establish a cause or assist a
principle, with the certain result of defeat, and we are said to be
jealous or malignant. Perhaps we make a book to illustrate some old
region off the highways of observation, drawn to it by kindred strings
or early patterings, and the politician there regards it as an attack,
the old family fossil as an intrusion, the very youth as if it were a
queer and gratuitous thing from such an outer source. So we wince a
little, but feel that it was necessary to be misunderstood to complete
the sacrifice.

The feeling of despondency increased after the little company separated,
and Vesta went to her room and laid herself upon her still maiden bed.
She had said her prayer and asked the approval of God, but her nervous
system, under the tension of almost two days' excitement and events such
as she had never known, was alert and could not fall to slumber. Old
passages of Testament lore haunted her soul, such as: "Thy desire shall
be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee;" "A man shall leave his
father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife." She began to see
that marriage was not merely the solution of a family trouble, and the
giving of her body as a hostage for a pecuniary debt, but that it was a
rendition of all her liberty, even the liberty of sympathy and of
sorrow, to the man to whom she must cleave.

In marrying him she had left friendship, father and mother, everything,
at a greater distance than she ever dreamed; and they resented the
desertion to the degree that they now confounded her with her new
interest, let go their claim upon her, and could scarce conceive of her
except in the dual relation of a woman subject to her husband, and
selfish as himself.

"I wonder if he will grow weary of me, too," she thought, with anguish,
"after his possession is established and I shall have no other source of
confidence? What did I know of this world only yesterday? Then every way
seemed clear and open for me, my friends abundant, and love profuse;
to-day I am in awful doubts, and yet I must not lose my will and drift
with every passing fear and confusion into the fickleness which makes
woman contemptible after she has given her hand. I will never give up
two persons--my father, and my husband!"

As she turned down the lamp, it being nearly midnight, a short, fierce
cry, quickly stifled, as if some wild animal had howled once in
nightmare and fallen asleep in his kennel again, seized on her ears and
chilled her blood.

Vesta started up in bed and listened. It seemed to her that there were
footsteps, but they passed away, and she listened in vain for any other
sounds, till sleep fell deep and dreamless upon her, like black Lethe
winding through a desert wedding-day.


CHAPTER XXI.

LONG SEPARATIONS.


Vesta was awakened by Roxy, Virgie, and her mother all standing around
her bed at once, exclaiming something unintelligible together. It was
late morning, the whole family having slept long, after the several
experiences of two such days, and the sun was shining through the great
trees before Teackle Hall and burnishing the windows, so that Vesta
could hardly see.

"The kitchen servants have run away," Mrs. Custis shrieked, on Vesta's
request that her mother only should talk. "Old Hominy is gone, and has
taken all her herbs and witcheries with her; and all the young children
bred in the kitchen, Ned and Vince, the boys, and little Phillis, the
baby, they, too, are gone."

"I heard a strange cry or howl last night, as I dropped to sleep," Vesta
exclaimed, rubbing her eyes.

"Dear missy," cried Virgie, falling upon the pillow, "it was your poor
dog Turk; his throat has been cut upon the lawn."

"Yes, missy," Roxy blubbered, "poor Turk lies in his blood. There is
nobody to get breakfast but Virgie and me. Indeed, we did not know about
it."

"That is not very likely," said the suspicious Mrs. Custis.

"I know you did not, girls," Vesta said, "you have too much intelligence
and principle, I am sure; nor could Hominy have been so inhuman to my
poor dog."

Vesta at once rose up and threw on her morning-gown.

"The first thing to be done is to have breakfast. Roxy, do you go at
once to Mr. Milburn's and bring his man Samson here, and awake Miss
Holland to take Samson's place by her uncle. Tell Samson to make the
fire, and you and he get the breakfast. No person is to speak of this
incident of the kitchen servants leaving us on any pretence."

"Won't you give the alarm the first thing?" cried Mrs. Custis, not very
well pleased to see Vesta keep her temper. "They may be overtaken before
they get far away, daughter. Those four negroes are worth twelve hundred
dollars!"

"They are not worth one dollar, mamma, if they have run away from us;
because I should never either sell them or keep them again if they had
behaved so treacherously."

"I say, sell them and get the money," Mrs. Custis cried; "are they not
ours?"

"No, mamma, they are mine. Mr. Milburn and papa are to be consulted
before any steps are taken. Papa deeded them to me only last Saturday;
why should they have deserted at the moment I had redeemed them? Virgie,
can you guess?"

Virgie hesitated, only a moment.

"Miss Vesty, I think I can see what made Hominy go. She was afraid of
Meshach Milburn and his queer hat. She believed the devil give it to
him. She thought he had bought her by marrying you, and was going to
christen her to the Bad Man, or do something dreadful with her and the
little children."

"That's it, Miss Vessy," plump little Roxy added. "Hominy loved the
little children dearly; she thought they was to become Meshach's, and
she must save them."

"Poor, superstitious creature!" Vesta exclaimed.

"More misery brought about by that fool's hat!" cried Mrs. Custis. "If I
ever lay hands on it, it shall end in the fire."

"No wonder," Vesta said, "that this poor, ignorant woman should do
herself such an injury on account of an article of dress that disturbs
liberal and enlightened minds! Now I recollect that Hominy said
something about having 'got Quaker.' What did it mean?"

The two slave girls looked at each other significantly, and Virgie
answered,

"Don't the Quakers help slaves to get off to a free state? Maybe she
meant that."

"Do you suppose the abolitionists would tamper with a poor old woman
like that, whose liberty would neither be a credit to them nor a comfort
to her? I cannot think so meanly of them," Vesta reflected. "Besides,
could she have killed my dog?"

"A gross, ignorant, fetich-worshipping negro would kill a dog, or a
child, or anything, when she is possessed with a devil," Mrs. Custis
insisted.

"I don't believe she killed Turk," Roxy remarked, as she left the room.
"There was a white man in the kitchen last Saturday night: I think he
slept there; master gave him leave."

"Yes, missy," Virgie continued, after Roxy had gone to obey her orders;
"he was a dreadful man, and looked at me so coarse and familiar that I
have dreamed of him since. It was the man Mr. Milburn knocked down for
mashing his hat; he was afraid Mr. Milburn would throw him into jail, so
he asked master to hide in the kitchen. But Hominy was almost crazy with
fear of Mr. Milburn before that."

Vesta held up her beautiful arms with a look of despair.

"What has not that poor old hat brought upon every body?" she cried.
"Oh, who dares contest the sunshine with the tailor and hatter? They are
the despots that never will abdicate or die."

"The idea of your father letting a tramp like that sleep in the kitchen
among the slaves!" cried Mrs. Custis. "What obligation had he incurred
there, too, I should like to know? Teackle Hall is become a cave of owls
and foxes; it is time for me to leave it. Here is my husband gone,
riding fifty miles for his worst enemy, leaving us without a cook and
without a man's assistance to discover where ours is gone. I know what I
shall do: I will start this day for Cambridge, to meet my brother, and
visit the Goldsboroughs there till some order is brought out of this
attempt to plant wheat and tares together."

Vesta stopped a moment and kissed her mother: "That is just the thing,
dear mother," she said. "Let me straighten out the difficulties here;
go, and come back when all is done, and you can be yourself again."

"I shall do it, Vesta. Brother Allan gets to Cambridge to-morrow
afternoon; I will go as far as Salisbury this day, and either meet him
on the road to-morrow or find him at Cambridge. Oh, what a house is
Teackle Hall--full of male and female foresters, abolitionists,
runaways, and radicals! All made crazy by the bog ores and the fool's
hat!"

Descending to the yard, Vesta found Turk lying in his blood, his mastiff
jaws and shaggy sides clotted red, and, as it seemed, the howl in which
he died still lingering in the air. The Virginia spirit rose in Vesta's
eyes:

"Whoever killed this dog only wanted the courage to kill men!" she
exclaimed. "James Phoebus, look here!"

The pungy captain had been abroad for hours, and the masts of his
vessel were just visible across the marshy neck in the rear of Teackle
Hall. He touched his hat and came in.

"Early mornin', Miss Vesty! Hallo! Turk dead? By smoke, yer's
pangymonum!"

"He's stabbed, Jimmy!" Samson Hat remarked, coming out of the kitchen;
"see whar de dagger struck him right over de heart! Dat made him howl
and fall dead. His froat was not cut dat sudden; it's gashed as if wid
somethin' blunt."

"Right you are, nigger! The throat-cuttin' was a make believe; the stab
will tell the tale. But who's this yer, lurkin' aroun' the kitchen do';
if it ain't Jack Wonnell, I hope I may die! Sic!"

With this, active as the dog had been but yesterday, Jimmy rushed on
Jack Wonnell, chased him to the fence, and brought him back by the neck.
Wonnell wore a bell-crown, and his hand was full of fall blossoms. As
Wonnell observed the dead dog, pretty little Roxy came out of the
kitchen, and stood blushing, yet frightened, to see him.

"What yo' doin' with them rosy-posies?" Jimmy demanded. "Who're they
fur? What air you sneakin' aroun' Teackle Hall fur so bright of a
mornin', lazy as I know you is, Jack Wonnell?"

"They are flowers he brings every morning for me," Roxy spoke up, coming
forward with a pretty simper.

"For you?" exclaimed Vesta. "You are not receiving the attentions of
white men, Roxy?"

"He offered, himself, to get flowers for me, so I might give you as
pretty ones as Virgie, missy. I let him bring them. He's a poor, kind
man."

"I jess got 'em, Jimmy," interjected Jack Wonnell, with his peculiar
wink and leer, "caze Roxy's the belle of Prencess Anne, and I'm the
bell-crown. She's my little queen, and I ain't ashamed of her."

"Courtin' niggers, air you!" Jimmy exclaimed, collaring Jack again. "Now
whar did you go all day Sunday with Levin Dennis and the nigger buyer?
What hokey-pokey wair you up to?"

"Mr. Wonnell," Roxy had the presence of mind to say, "take care you tell
the truth, for my sake! Aunt Hominy is gone, with all the kitchen
children, and Mr. Phoebus suspects you!"

"Great lightnin' bugs!" Jimmy Phoebus cried. "The niggers stole, an'
the dog dead, too?"

"I 'spect Jedge Custis sold 'em, Jimmy," Jack Wonnell pleaded, twisting
out of the bay captain's hands. "He's gwyn to be sold out by Meshach
Milburn. Maybe he jess sold 'em and skipped."

"Where is Judge Custis, Miss Vesty?" Phoebus asked.

"He has gone to Delaware, to be absent several days."

"Is what this bell-crowned fool says, true, Miss Vesty?"

"No. There was some fear among the kitchen servants of being sold; there
was no such necessity when they ran away, as it had been settled."

"It is unfortunate that your father is gone. He has been seen with a
negro trader. That trader and he disappear the same evening. The trader
lives about Delaware, too, Miss Vesty."

Vesta's countenance fell, as she thought of the suspicion that might
attach to her father. The great old trees around Teackle Hall seemed
moaning together in the air, as if to say, "Ancestors, this is strange
to hear!"

"Who told you, Jack Wonnell," spoke the bay sailor, "that Judge Custis
was to be sold out?"

"I won't tell you, Jimmy."

"I told him," Roxy cried, after an instant's hesitation, while Jimmy
Phoebus was grinding the stiff bell-crown hat down on Wonnell's
suffocating muzzle. "I did think we was all going to be sold, and had
nobody to pity me but that poor white man, and I told him as a friend."

"And I never told anybody in the world but Levin Dennis yisterday," Jack
cried out, when he was able to get his breath.

"Whar did you go, Jack, wid the long man and Levin all day yisterday?"
Samson asked.

"Yes, whar was you?" Jimmy Phoebus shouted, with one of his Greek
paroxysms of temper on, as his dark skin and black-cherry eyes flamed
volcanic. "Whar did you leave Ellenora's boy and that infernal
soul-buyer? Speak, or I'll throttle you like this dog!"

"You let him alone, sir!" little Roxy cried, hotly, "he won't deceive
anybody; he's going to tell all he knows."

"Let go, Jimmy," Samson said; "don't you see Miss Vesty heah?"

"Don't scare the man, Mr. Phoebus," Vesta added; "but I command him to
tell all that he knows, or papa shall commit him to jail."

Jack Wonnell, taking his place some steps away from Phoebus, and
wiping his eyes on his sleeve, whimpering a few minutes, to Roxy's great
agitation, finally told his tale.

"I'm sorry, Jimmy, you accused me before this beautiful lady an' my
purty leetle Roxy--bless her soul!--of stealing Jedge Custis's niggers.
Thair's on'y one I ever looked sheep's eyes at, an' she's a-standin'
here, listenin' to every true word I says. I'm pore trash, an' I reckon
the jail's as good as the pore-house for me, ef they want to send me
thair, fur it's in town, and Roxy kin come an' look through the bars at
me every day."

Roxy was so much affected that she threw her apron up to her face, and
Vesta and Phoebus had to smile, while Samson Hat, looking indulgently
on, exclaimed,

"Dar's love all froo de woods. Doves an' crows can't help it. It's
deeper down dan fedders an' claws."

"That nigger trader," continued Jack Wonnell, bell-crown in hand, "hired
me an' Levin to take him a tarrapinin'. He had a bag of gold that
big"--measuring with his hand in the crown of the hat--"an' he give
Levin some of it, an' I took it to Levin's mother las' night, an' told
her Levin wouldn't be back fur a week, maybe. I thought Mr. Johnson was
gwyn to give me some gold too, so I could buy Roxy, but yer's all he
give me. Everybody disappints me, Jimmy!"

Jack Wonnell showed an old silver fi'penny bit, and his countenance was
so lugubrious that the sailor exclaimed,

"Jack, he paid you too well for all the sense you got. Now, whar has
Levin gone with the _Ellenora Dennis?_"

"I don't know, Jimmy. He made Levin sail her up to the landin' down yer
below town, whair Levin's father, Cap'n Dennis, launched the _Idy_
fifteen year ago. I left Levin thar, and he said, 'Jack, I'm goin' off
with the nigger trader to git some of his money fur mother!'"

"Poor miserable boy!" Phoebus exclaimed; "he's led off easy as his
pore daddy. The man he's gone with, Miss Vesty, is black as hell. Joe
Johnson is known to every thief on the bay, every gypsy on the shore. He
steals free niggers when he can't buy slave ones, outen Delaware state.
He sometimes runs away Maryland slaves to oblige their hypocritical
masters that can't sell 'em publicly, an' Johnson and the bereaved owner
divides the price. Go in the house, yaller gal!" Jimmy Phoebus turned
to Roxy, who obeyed instantly. "Jack Wonnell, you go too; I'm done with
you!" (Jack slipped around the house and made his peace with Roxy before
he started.) "You needn't to go, Samson; I know you're true as steel!"

"I must go an' git de breakfast, Jimmy," the negro said, going in.

"Now, Miss Vesty"--Phoebus turned to the mistress of Teackle
Hall--"Joe Johnson has got old Hominy and the little niggers, by smoke!
That part of this hokey pokey is purty sure! Did he steal them an'
decoy them, or wair they sold to him by Judge Custis or by Meshach
Milburn?"

"By neither, I will risk my life. Mr. Milburn was taken to his bed
Saturday evening, and on Sunday father went to Delaware on legal
business for my husband."

"That is Meshach Milburn, I hear," the bay sailor remarked, with a
penetrating look. "Shall I go and see him on this nigger business?"

"No," Vesta replied; "he is too sick, and it is a delicate subject to
name to him. My girls, Virgie and Roxy, think old Hominy ran away from a
superstitious fear she had of Mr. Milburn, who had become the master of
Teackle Hall by marriage."

"Yes, by smoke! every nigger in town, big and little, is afraid of
Milburn's hat."

"He has no ownership in those servants, nor has my father now. I will
tell you, James--relying on your prudence--that Hominy belonged to me,
and so did those three children, having passed from my father to my
husband and thence to me and back to my father, and from him to me again
in the very hour of my marriage. I fear they have been persuaded away,
to be abused and sold out of Maryland."

Jimmy Phoebus looked up at the sighing trees and over the wide façade
of Teackle Hall, and exclaimed "by smoke!" several times before he made
his conclusions.

"Miss Vesty," he said, finally, "send for your father to come home
immediately. People will not understand how Joe Johnson, outlaw as he
is, dared to rob a Maryland judge of his house servants, Johnson himself
bein' a Marylander, unless they had some understanding. Your sudden
marriage, an' your pappy's embarrassments, will be put together, by
smoke! an' thar is some blunt enough to say that when Jedge Custis is
hard up, he'll git money anyhow!"

The charge, made with an honest man's want of skill, battered down all
explanations.

"I confess it," said Vesta. "Papa's going away on a Sunday, and these
people disappearing on Sunday night, might excite idle comment. It might
be said that he endeavored to sell some of his property before his
creditor could seize it."

"I have seen you about yer since you was a baby, Vesty, an' Ellenora
says you're better game an' heart than these 'ristocrats, fur who I
never keered! That's why I take the liberty of calling you Vesty. Now,
let me tell you about your niggers. If they was a-gwyn to freedom in a
white man's keer, I wouldn't stop 'em to be cap'n of a man-of-war. But
Joe Johnson, supposin' that he's got of 'em, is a demon. Do you see the
stab on that dog? well, it's done with one of the bagnet pistols them
kidnappers carries--hoss pistols, with a spring dagger on the muzzle;
and, when they come to close quarters, they stab with 'em. Johnson
killed your dog; I know his marks. He sails this whole bay, and maybe
he's run them niggers to Washin'ton, or to Norfolk, an' sold 'em south.
It ain' no use to foller him to either of them places, if he has, with
the wind an' start he's got, and your pappy's influence lost to us by
his absence. But thar is one chance to overhaul the thief."

"What is that, James?" said Vesta, earnestly. "I do want to save those
poor people from the abuse of a man who could kill my poor, fond dog."

"Joe Johnson keeps a hell-trap--a reg'lar Pangymonum, up near the head
of Nanticoke River. It's the headquarters of his band, and a black band
they air. He has had good wind"--the pungy captain looked up and noted
the breeze--"to get him out of Manokin last night, and into the Sound;
but he must beat up the Nanticoke all day, and we kin head him off by
land, if that's his destination, before he gits to Vienna, an' make him
show his cargo. Then, with a messenger to follow Jedge Custis an' turn
him back, we can swear these niggers on Johnson--and, you see, we can't
make no such oath till we git the evidence--an' then, by smoke! we'll
bring ole Hominy an' the pore chillen back to Teackle Hall."

"Here is one you love to serve, James," said Vesta, as the Widow Dennis
came in the gate.

"I came to meet you at the landing, James," said the blue-eyed,
sweet-voiced widow, with the timid step and ready blush. "Levin is gone
for a week with a negro trader; he sends me so much money, I fear he is
under an unusual temptation, and Wonnell says the trader is giving him
liquor. What shall I do?"

"Make me his father, Ellenory, and that'll give me an interest over him,
and you will command me. You want a first mate in your crew. Levin kin
make a fool of me if I go chase him now, and I can't measure money with
a nigger trader, by smoke!"

"Oh! James," the widow spoke, "you know my heart would be yours if I
could control it. When my way is clear you will have but to ask. Do go
and find Levin!"

"Norah, we suspect the same trader of having taken off Hominy, our cook,
and the kitchen children, in Levin's boat."

The widow listened to Vesta, and burst into tears. "He will be accessory
to the crime," she sobbed. "Oh, this is what I have ever feared. James
Phoebus, you have always had the best influence over Levin. If you
love me, arrest him before the law takes cognizance of this wild deed.
Where has he gone?"

Virgie appeared upon the lawn to say that Mrs. Custis wanted to know who
should drive her as far as Salisbury, where she could get a slave of her
son-in-law to continue on with her to Cambridge.

"I have been thinking all the morning where I can find a reliable man to
go and bring back papa," Vesta answered; "there are a few slaves at the
Furnace, but time is precious."

"Here is Samson," Virgie said, "and he has got a mule he rides all over
the county. Let him go."

"Go whar, my love?" asked Samson.

"To Dover, in Delaware," Vesta answered. "You can ride to Laurel by
dark, Samson, and get to Dover to-morrow afternoon."

"And I can ride with him as far as Salisbury," Jimmy Phoebus said,
"and get out to the Nanticoke some way; fur I see Ellenora will cry till
I go."

"You can do better than that, James," Vesta said, rapidly thinking.
"Samson can take you to Spring Hill Church or Barren Creek Springs, by a
little deviation, and at the Springs you will be only three miles from
the Nanticoke. Even mamma might go on with the carriage to-night as far
as the Springs, or to Vienna."

"If two of them are going," Virgie exclaimed, "one can drive Missy
Custis and the other ride the mule."

Samson shook his head.

"Dey say a free nigger man gits cotched up in dat ar Delawaw state.
Merrylin's good enough fur me. I likes de Merrylin light gals de best,"
looking at Virgie.

"Go now, Samson, to oblige Miss Vesty," Virgie said, "and I'll try to
love you a little, black and bad as you are."

"I'se afraid of Delawaw state," Samson repeated, laughing slowly. "Joe
Johnson, dat I put dat head on, will git me whar he lives if I go dar,
mebbe."

"No," Phoebus put in, "I'll be a lookin' after him on the banks of the
Nanticoke, Samson, while you keep right in the high-road from Laurel to
Georgetown, and on to Dover. Joe Johnson's been whipped at the post, and
banished from Delaware for life, and dussn't go thar no more."

"If you go, Samson," little Roxy put in, having reappeared, "Virgie'll
feel complimented. Anything that obliges Miss Vesty counts with Virgie."

"If you are a free man," Virgie herself exclaimed, her slight, nervous,
willowy figure expanding, "are you afraid to go into a freer state than
Maryland? If I was free I would want to go to the freest state of all.
Behave like a free man, Samson Hat, or what is freedom worth to you?"

"It's wuth so much, pretty gal, dat I don't want to be a-losin' of it,
mind, I tell you, 'sept to my wife when she'll hab me."

Samson watched the quadroon's delicate, high-bred features, her skin
almost paler than her young mistress's, her figure like the clove's
after a hard winter--the more active that a little meagre--her head
small, and its tresses soft as the crow blackbird's plumage, and the
loyalty that lay in her large eyes, like strong passion, for her
mistress, was turned to pride, and nearly scorn, when they listened to
him.

"A slave, Miss Vesty says"--Virgie spoke with almost fierceness--"is not
one that's owned, half as much as one that sells himself--to hard drink,
or to selfishness, or to fear. You're not a free man, Samson, if you're
afraid, and are like these low slave negroes who dare nothing if they
can only get a little low pleasure. All that can make a black man white,
in my eyes, is a white man's enterprise."

Vesta felt, as she often had done, the capable soul of her servant, and
did not resent her spirit as unbecoming a slave, but rather felt
responsive chords in her own nature, as if, indeed, Virgie was the more
imperious of the two. Coming now into full womanhood, her race elements
finding their composition, her character unrestrained by any one in
Teackle Hall, Virgie was her young mistress's shield-bearer, like David
to the princely Jonathan.

"Why, Virgie," Samson answered, with humility, "I never meant not to go,
lady gal, after marster's wife asked me, I only wanted you to beg me
hard, an' mebbe I'd git a kiss befo' I started."

"Wait till you come back, and see if you do your errand well," Virgie
spoke again. "I shall not kiss you now."

"I will," cried little Roxy, to the amusement of them all, giving Samson
a hearty smack from her little pouting mouth; "and now you've got it,
think it's Virgie's kiss, and get your breakfast and start!"

As they went to their abodes to make ready, Jimmy Phoebus found Jack
Wonnell playing marbles with the boys at the court-house corner.

"Jack," he said, "I'm a-going to find Levin an' that nigger trader. I
may git in a peck of trouble up yonder on the Nanticoke. Tell all the
pungy men whair I'm a-goin', an' what fur."

"Can't I do somethin' fur you, Jimmy? Can't I give you one o' my
bell-crowns; thair's a-plenty of 'em left."

"Take my advice, Jack, an' tie a stone to all them hats and sink' em in
the Manokin. Ole Meshach's hat has made more hokey-pokey than the Bank
of Somerset. Pore an' foolish as you air, maybe your ole bell-crowns
will ruin you."

The road to Salisbury--laid out in 1667, when "Cecil, Lord of Maryland
and Avalon," erected a county "in honor of our dear sister, the Lady
Mary Somerset"--followed the beaver-dams across the little river-heads,
and pierced the flat pine-woods and open farms, and passed through two
little hamlets, before our travellers saw the broad mill-ponds and
poplar and mulberry lined streets of the most active town--albeit
without a court-house--in the lower peninsula. Jimmy Phoebus, driving
the two horses and the family carriage, and Samson, following on his
mule, descended into the hollow of Salisbury at the dinner-hour, and
stopped at the hotel. The snore of grist-mills, the rasp of mill-saws,
the flow of pine-colored breast-water into the gorge of the village, the
forest cypress-trees impudently intruding into the obliquely-radiating
streets, and humidity of ivy and creeper over many of the old,
gable-chimneyed houses, the long lumber-yards reflected in the swampy
harbor among the canoes, pungies, and sharpies moored there, the small
houses sidewise to the sandy streets, the larger ones rising up the
sandy hills, the old box-bush in the silvery gardens, the bridges close
together, and the smell of tar and sawdust pleasantly inhaled upon the
lungs, made a combination like a caravan around some pool in the Desert
of the Nile.

"If there is any chance to catch my negroes," Mrs. Custis said, "I will
go right on after dinner. Samson, send Dave, my daughter's boy, to me
immediately; he is working in this hotel."

Samson found Dave to be none other than the black class-leader he had
failed to overcome at the beginning of our narrative, but changes were
visible in that individual Samson had not expected. From having a clean,
godly, modest countenance, becoming his professions, Dave now wore a
sour, evil look; his eyes were blood-shotten, and his straight, manly
shoulders and chest, which had once exacted Samson's admiration and
envy, were stooped to conform with a cough he ever and anon made from
deep in his frame.

"Dave," said Samson, "your missis's modder wants you, boy, to drive her
to Vienny. What ails you, Dave, sence I larned you to box?"

"Is you de man?" Dave exclaimed, hoarsely; "den may de Lord forgive you,
fur _I_ never kin. Dat lickin' I mos' give you, made me a po', wicked,
backslidin' fool."

"Why, Dave, I jess saw you was a _good_ man; I didn't mean you no harm,
boy."

"You ruined me, free nigger," repeated the huge slave, with a scowl,
partly of revenge and partly remorse. "You set up my conceit dat I could
box. I had never struck a chile till dat day; after dat I went aroun'
pickin' quarrels wid bigger niggers, an' low white men backed me to
fight. I was turned out o' my church; I turned my back on de Lord;
whiskey tuk hold o' me, Samson. De debbil has entered into Class-leader
Dave."

"Oh, brudder, wake up an' do better. Yer, I give you a dollar, an' want
to be your friend, Davy, boy."

"I'll git drink wid it," Dave muttered, going; and, as he passed out of
the stable-door he looked back at Samson fiercely, and exclaimed, "May
Satan burn your body as he will burn my soul. I hate you, man, long as
you live!"

Jimmy Phoebus remarked, a few moments afterwards, that Dave, dividing
a pint of spirits with a lean little mulatto boy, put a piece of money
in the boy's hands, who then rode rapidly out of the tavern-yard upon a
fleet Chincoteague pony.

At two o'clock they again set forward, the man Dave driving the carriage
and Jimmy Phoebus sitting beside him, while Samson easily kept
alongside upon his old roan mule, the road becoming more sandy as they
ascended the plateau between the Wicomico and Nanticoke, and the
carriage drawing hard.

"If it is too late to keep on beyond Vienna to-night," said Mrs. Custis,
"I will stop there with my friends, the Turpins, and start again, after
coffee, in the morning, and reach Cambridge for breakfast."

"I will turn off at Spring Hill," Samson spoke, "and I kin feed my mule
at sundown in Laurel an' go to sleep."

In an hour they came in sight of old Spring Hill church, a venerable
relic of the colonial Established Church, at the sources of a creek
called Rewastico; and before they crossed the creek the driver, Dave,
called "Ho, ho!" in such an unnecessarily loud voice that Mrs. Custis
reproved him sharply. Dave jumped down from the seat and appeared to be
examining some part of the breeching, though Samson assured him that it
was all right. As Dave finished his examination, he raised both hands
above his head twice, and stretched to the height of his figure as he
stood on the brow of a little hill.

"Missy Custis," he apologized, as he turned back, "I is tired mighty bad
dis a'ternoon. Dat stable keeps me up half de night."

"Liquor tires you more, David," Mrs. Custis spoke, sharply; "and that
tavern is no place to hire you to with your appetite for drink, as I
shall tell your master."

At this moment Jimmy Phoebus observed the lean little mulatto boy who
had left the hotel come up out of the swampy place in the road and
exchange a look of intelligence with Dave as he rode past on the pony.

"Boy," cried Samson, "is dat de road to Laurel?"

The boy made no answer, but, looking back once, timidly, ground his
heels into the pony's flank and darted into the brush towards Salisbury.

"Samson," spoke Dave, "you see dat ole woman in de cart yonder?"--he
pointed to a figure ascending the rise in the ground beyond the
brook--"I know her, an' she's gwyn right to Laurel. She lives dar. It's
ten miles from dis yer turn-off, an' she knows all dese yer
woods-roads."

"Good-bye, den, an' may you find Aunt Hominy an' de little chillen,
Jimmy, an' bring dem all home to Prencess Anne from dat ar Joe Johnson!"
cried Samson, and trotted his mule through the swamp and away. Jimmy
Phoebus saw him overtake the old woman in the cart and begin to speak
with her as the scrubby woods swallowed them in.

"What's dat he said about Joe Johnson?" observed Dave, after a bad
spell of coughing, as they cleared the old church and entered the sandy
pine-woods.

Mrs. Custis spoke up more promptly than Jimmy Phoebus desired, and
told the negro about the escape of Hominy and the children, and the hope
of Mr. Phoebus to head the party off as they ascended the Nanticoke
towards the Delaware state-line.

"You don't want to git among Joe Johnson's men, boss?" said the red-eyed
negro; "dey bosses all dis country heah, on boff sides o' de state-line.
All dat ain't in wid dem is afraid o' dem."

"How fur is it from this road to Delaware, Dave?" asked Phoebus.

"We're right off de corner-stone o' Delawaw state dis very minute. It's
hardly a mile from whar we air. De corner's squar as de stone dat sots
on it, an' is cut wid a pictur o' de king's crown."

"Mason and Dixon's line they call it," interpreted Mrs. Custis.

"Do you know Joe Johnson, Dave?"

"Yes, Marster Phoebus, you bet I does. He's at Salisbury, he's at
Vienna, he's up yer to Crotcher's Ferry, he's all ober de country, but
he don't go to Delawaw any more in de daylight. He was whipped dar, an'
banished from de state on pain o' de gallows. But he lives jess on dis
side o' de Delawaw line, so dey can't git him in Delawaw. He calls his
place Johnson's Cross-roads: ole Patty Cannon lives dar, too. She's
afraid to stay in Delawaw now."

"Why, what is the occupation of those terrible people at present?" asked
Mrs. Custis.

No answer was made for a minute, and then Dave said, in a low,
frightened voice, as he stole a glance at both of his companions out of
his fiery, scarred eyes:

"Kidnappin', I 'spect."

"It's everything that makes Pangymonum," Jimmy Phoebus explained;
"that old woman, Patty Cannon, has spent the whole of a wicked life, by
smoke!--or ever sence she came to Delaware from Cannady, as the bride of
pore Alonzo Cannon--a-makin' robbers an' bloodhounds out of the young
men she could git hold of. Some of' em she sets to robbin' the mails,
some to makin' an' passin' of counterfeit money, but most of 'em she
sets at stealin' free niggers outen the State of Delaware; and, when
it's safe, they steal slaves too. She fust made a tool of Ebenezer
Johnson, the pirate of Broad Creek, an' he died in his tracks a-fightin
fur her. Then she took hold of his sons, Joe Johnson an' young Ebenezer,
an' made 'em both outlaws an' kidnappers, an' Joe she married to her
daughter, when Bruington, her first son-in-law, had been hanged. When
Samson Hat, who is the whitest nigger I ever found, knocked Joe Johnson
down in Princess Anne, the night before last, he struck the worst man in
our peninsula."

Dave listened to this recital with such a deep interest that his breath,
strong with apple whiskey, came short and hot, and his hands trembled as
he guided the horses. At the last words, he exclaimed:

"Samson knocked Joe Johnson down? Den de debbil has got him, and means
to pay him back!"

"What's that?" cried Jimmy Phoebus.

The sweat stood on the big slave's forehead, as if his imagination was
terribly possessed, but before he could explain Mrs. Custis interrupted:

"I think it was said that old Patty Cannon corrupted Jake Purnell, who
cut his throat at Snow Hill five years ago. He was a free negro who
engaged slaves to steal other slaves and bring them to him, and he
delivered them up to the white kidnappers for money; and nobody could
account for his prosperity till a negro who had been beaten to death was
found in the Pocomoke River, and three slaves who had been seen in his
company were arrested for the murder. They confessed that they had
stolen the dead negro and he had escaped from them, and was so beaten
with clubs, to make him tractable, that when they gave him to Purnell
his life was all gone. Then he was thrown in the river, but his body
came up after sinking, and the confession of the wretched tools
explained to the slave-owners where all their missing negroes had gone.
They marched and surrounded Purnell's hut, and he was discovered
burrowed beneath it. They brought the dogs, and fire to drive him out,
and as he came out he cut his throat with desperate slashes from ear to
ear."

During this narrative the man Dave had listened with rising nervous
excitement, rolling his eyes as if in strong inward torment, till the
concluding words inspired such terror in him that he dropped the reins,
threw back his head, and shouted, with large beads of sweat all round
his brow:

"Mercy! mercy! Have mercy! Save me, oh, my Lord!"

"He's got a fit, I reckon," cried Jimmy Phoebus, promptly grasping the
reins as the horses started at the cry, and with his leg pinning Dave to
the carriage-seat. At that moment the road descended into the hollow of
Barren Creek, and, leaping down at the old Mineral Springs Hotel, a
health resort of those days, Phoebus humanely procured water and
freshened up the gasping negro's face.

"I declare, I am almost afraid to trust myself to this man," Mrs. Custis
observed, with more distaste than trepidation.

"Every nigger in this region," exclaimed Jimmy Phoebus, "thinks
Pangymonum's comin' down at the dreaded name of Patty Cannon; an' this
nigger's gone most to ruin, any way."

"Oh, marster," exclaimed the slave, recovering his speech and glaring
wildly around, "I hain't been always the pore sinner rum an' fightin'
has made of me. I served the Lord all my youth; I praised his name an'
kept the road to heaven; an' thinkin' of the shipwreck I'se made of a
good conscience, an' hearin' missis tell of the end of Jake Purnell, it
made me yell to de good Lord for mercy, mercy, oh, my soul!"

His frightful agitation increased, and Jimmy Phoebus soothed him,
good-naturedly saying:

"Mrs. Custis, I reckon you'd better let him come in the tavern and take
a little sperits; it'll strengthen his nerves an' make him drive
better."

As they drank at the old summer-resort bar, at that time in the height
of its celebrity, and the only _spa_ on the peninsula, south of the
Brandywine Springs, Phoebus spoke low to the negro:

"Dave, somethin' not squar and fair is a-workin' yer, by smoke! I've got
my eye on you, nigger, an' sure as hokey-pokey thair it'll stay. You
know my arrand yer, Dave: to save a pore, ignorant, deluded black woman
from Joe Johnson's band. Now, you've been a-cryin 'Mercy!' I want you to
show mercy by a-tellin' of me whar I'm to overtake an' sarch Levin
Dennis's cat-boat if it comes up the Nanticoke to-night with them people
and Joe Johnson aboard!"

Having swallowed his liquor greedily, the colored man replied, with his
former lowering countenance and evasive eyes:

"You can't do nothin' as low down de river as Vienny, 'case de Nanticoke
is too wide dar, and if you cross it at Vienny ferry, den you got de
Norfwest Fork between you and Johnson's Cross-roads, wid one ferry over
dat, at Crotcher's, an' Joe Johnson owns all dat place. But you kin keep
up dis side o' de Nanticoke, Marster Phoebus, de same distance as from
yer to Vienny, to de pint whar de Norfwest Fork come in. Sometimes Joe
Johnson sails up dat big fork to get to his cross-roads. In gineral he
keeps straight up de oder fork to Betty Twiford's wharf, right on de
boundary line."

"How far is that?"

"It's five miles from yer to Vienny, and five miles from yer to a
landin' opposite de Norfwest Fork. Four miles furder on you're at
Sharptown, an' dar you can see Betty Twiford's house on de bank two
miles acrost de Nanticoke."

"Nine miles, then, to Sharptown! He's had the tide agin him since he
entered the Nanticoke, and it's not turned yit. By smoke! I'll look for
a conveyance!"

"You can ride with me to the first landing," spoke up a noble-looking
man, whip in hand; "and after delaying a little there, I shall go on the
Sharptown ferry and cross the river."

Phoebus accepted the invitation immediately, and cautioning Mrs.
Custis to speak with less freedom in that part of the country, he bade
her adieu, and took the vacant seat in the stranger's buggy.

When Mrs. Custis came to Vienna ferry, and the horses and carriage went
on board the scow to be rowed to the little, old, shipping settlement of
that name, the negro Dave, standing at the horses' heads, exchanged a
few sentences with the ferry-keeper.

"Dave," called Mrs. Custis, a little later on, "you have no love, I see,
for old Samson."

"He made a boxer outen me an' a bad man, missis."

"Do you know the man he works for--Meshach Milburn?"

"No, missis. I never see him."

"He wears a peculiar hat--nothing like gentlemen's hats nowadays: it is
a hat out of a thousand."

"I never did see it, missis."

"You cannot mistake it for any other hat in the world. Now, Samson is
the only servant and watchman at Mr. Milburn's store, and he attends to
that disgraceful hat. If you can ever get it from him, Dave, and destroy
it, you will be doing a useful act, and I will reward you well."

The moody negro looked up from his remorseful, brutalized orbs, and
said:

"Steal it?"

"Oh, no, I do not advise a theft, David--though such a wretched hat can
have no legal value. It is an affliction to my daughter and Judge Custis
and all of us, and you might find some way to destroy it--that is all."

"I'll git it some day," the negro muttered; and drove into the old
tobacco-port of Vienna.


CHAPTER XXII.

NANTICOKE PEOPLE.


A map would be out of place in a story, yet there are probably some who
perceive that this is a story with a reality; and if such will take any
atlas and open it at the "Middle States" of the American republic, they
will see that the little State of Delaware is fitted as nicely into a
square niche of Maryland as if it were a lamp, or piece of statuary,
standing on a mantelpiece. It stands there on a mantelshelf about forty
miles wide, and rises to more than three times that height, making a
perfectly straight north and south line at right angles with its base.
Thus mortised into Maryland, its ragged eastern line is formed of the
Atlantic Ocean and the broad Delaware Bay.

The only considerable river within this narrow strip or _Hermes_ of a
state is the Nanticoke, which, like a crack in the wall,--and the same
blow fractured the image on the mantel,--flows with breadth and tidal
ebb and flow from the Chesapeake Bay through the Eastern Shore of
Maryland into Delaware, and is there formed of two tidal sources, the
one to the north continuing to be called the Nanticoke, and that to the
south--nearly as imposing a stream--named Broad Creek.

Nature, therefore, as if anticipating some foolish political boundaries
on the part of man, prepared one drain and channel of ingress at the
southwestern corner of Delaware to the splendid bay of Virginia.

Around that corner of the little Delaware commonwealth, in a flat, poor,
sandy, pine-grown soil, Jimmy Phoebus rode by the stranger in the
afternoon of October, with the sun, an hour high in the west, shining
upon his dark, Greekish cheeks and neck, and he hearing the fall birds
whistle and cackle in the mellowing stubble and golden thickets.

The meadow-lark, the boy's delight, was picking seed, gravel, and
insects' eggs in the fields--large and partridge-like, with breast
washed yellow from the bill to the very knees, except at the throat,
where hangs a brilliant reticule of blackish brown; his head and back
are of hawkish colors--umber, brown, and gray--and in his carriage is
something of the gamecock. He flies high, sometimes alone, sometimes in
the flock, and is our winter visitor, loving the old fields improvidence
has abandoned, and uttering, as he feeds, the loud sounds of challenge,
as if to cry, "Abandoned by man; pre-empted by me!"

Jimmy Phoebus also heard the bold, bantering woodpecker, with his red
head, whose schoolmaster is the squirrel, and whose tactics of keeping a
tree between him and his enemy the Indian fighters adopted. He mimics
the tree-frog's cry, and migrates after October, like other
voluptuaries, who must have the round year warm, and fruit and eggs
always in market. Dressed in his speckled black swallow-tail coat, with
his long pen in his mouth and his shirt-bosom faultlessly white, the
woodpecker works like some Balzac in his garret, making the tree-top
lively as he spars with his fellow-Bohemians; and being sure himself of
a tree, and clinging to it with both tail and talons, he esteems
everything else that lives upon it to be an insect at which he may run
his bill or spit his tongue--that tongue which is rooted in the brain
itself.

In the hollow golden bowl of echoing evening the sailor noted, too, the
flicker, in golden pencilled wings and back of speckled umber and
mottled white breast, with coal-black collar and neck and head of
cinnamon. His golden tail droops far below his perch, and, running
downward along the tree-trunk, it flashes in the air like a sceptre over
the wood-lice he devours with his pickaxe bill. "Go to the ant, thou
sluggard!" was an instigation to murder in the flicker, who loves young
ants as much as wild-cherries or Indian corn, and is capable of taking
any such satire seriously upon things to eat. Not so elfin and devilish
as the small black woodpecker, he is full of bolder play.

The redbird, like the unclaimed blood of Abel, flew to the little trees
that grew low, as if to cover Abel's altar; the jack-snipe chirped in
the swampy spots, like a divinity student, on his clean, long legs,
probing with his bill and critical eye the Scriptures of the fields; the
quail piped like an old bachelor with family cares at last, as he led
his mate where the wild seeds were best; and through the air darted
voices of birds forsaken or on doctor's errands, crying "Phoebe?
Phoebe?" or "Killed he! killed he!"

"Are you a dealer?" asked the gentleman of Jimmy Phoebus.

"Just a little that way," said Jimmy, warily, "when I kin git somethin'
cheap."

The stranger had a pair of keen, dancing eyes, and a long, eloquent,
silver-gray face that might have suited a great general, so fine was
its command, and yet too narrowly dancing in the eyes, like spiders in a
well, disturbing the mirror there.

"Ha!" chuckled the man, as if his eyes had chuckled, so poorly did that
sound represent his lordly stature and look of high spirit--"ha! that's
what brings them all to my neighbor Johnson: a fair quotient!"

"Quotient?" repeated Jimmy.

"Johnson's a great factor hereabout," continued the military-looking
man, bending his handsome eyes on the bay captain, as if there was a
business secret between them, and peering at once mischievously and
nobly; "he makes the quotient to suit. He leaves the suttle large and
never stints the cloff."

"He don't narry a feller down to the cloth he's got, sir?" assented
Jimmy, dubiously.

"Why should he? His equation is simple: I suppose you know what it is."

"Not ezackly," answered Phoebus, pricking up his ears to learn.

"Well, it is force and class sympathy against a dead quantity: laws
which have no consignees, cattle which have no lawyer and no tongue,
rights which have lapsed by their assertion being suspended, till demand
and supply, like a pair of bulldogs, tear what is left to pieces. Armed
with his _ca. sa._, my neighbor Johnson offsets everybody's _fi. fa._,
serves his writ the first, and makes to gentlemen like you a
satisfactory quotient. But he cuts no capers with Isaac and Jacob
Cannon!"

"I expect now that you are Jacob Cannon?" remarked the tawny sailor, not
having understood a word of what preceded. "If that's the case, I'm glad
to know your name, and thank you for givin' me this lift."

By a bare nod, just intelligible, Mr. Cannon signified that the guess
would do; and still meditating aloud in his small, grand way,
continued:

"We let neighbor Johnson and his somewhat peculiar mother-in-law make
such commerce as suits him, provided he studies to give us no
inconvenience. That is his equation; with his quotient we have no
concern other than our slight interest in his wastage, as when Madame
Cannon rides down to change a bill and leaves an order for
supplies--rum, chiefly, I believe. Gentlemen like you come into this
country to deal, replevin, or what not, and we say to you all, 'Don't
tread on us--that is all.' We shall not look into your parcels, nor lie
awake of nights to hear alarms; but harm Isaac and Jacob Cannon one
ha'pence and _levari facias, fi. fa.!_"

"And fee-fo-fum," ejaculated Jimmy, cheerfully; "I've hearn it before."

Looking again with some curiosity at his companion, Phoebus saw that
he was not beyond fifty years of age, of a spare, lofty figure--at least
six feet four high--sitting straight and graceful as an Indian, his
clothes well-tailored, his countenance and features both stern and
refined; every feature perfected, and all keen without being hard or
angular--and yet Jimmy did not like him. There seemed to have been made
a commodore or a general--some one designed for deeds of chivalry and
great philanthropy; and yet around and between the dancing eyes spider
lines were drawn, as if the fine high brain of Jacob Cannon had put
aside matters that matched it and meddled with nothing that ascended
higher above the world than the long white bridge of his nose. His
sentiments apparently fell no further towards his heart than that; his
brain belonged to the bridge of his nose.

"Another Meshach Milburn, by smoke!" concluded Jimmy.

After a little pause Phoebus inquired into the character of the people
in this apparently new region of country.

"The quotient of much misplanting and lawyering is the lands on the
Nanticoke," spoke the gray-nosed Apollo; "the piece of country directly
before us, in the rear of my neighbor Johnson's cross-roads, was an old
Indian reservation for seventy years, and so were three thousand acres
to our right, on Broad Creek. The Indian is a bad factor to civilize his
white neighbors; he does not know the luxury of the law, that grand
contrivance to make the equation between the business man and the herd.
Ha, ha!"

Mr. Cannon chuckled as if he, at least, appreciated the law, and turned
the fine horsy bridge of his nose, all gray with dancing eyelight,
enjoyingly upon Mr. Phoebus.

"The Indians were long imposed upon, and when they went away, at the
brink of the Revolutionary War, they left a demoralized white race; and
others who moved in upon the deserted lands of the Nanticokes were, if
possible, more Indian than the Indians. This peninsula never produced a
great Indian, but when Ebenezer Johnson settled on Broad Creek it
possessed a greater savage than Tecumseh. He took what he wanted and
appealed to nature, like the Indian. He stole nothing; he merely took
it. He served, with anything convenient, from his fists to a
blunderbuss, his _fi. fa._ and his _ca. sa._ upon wondering but
submissive mankind. Need I say that this was before the perfect day of
Isaac and Jacob Cannon?"

"They would have socked it to him, I reckon," Jimmy exclaimed,
consonantly.

Mr. Jacob Cannon gave a tender smile, such as the gray horse emits at
the prospect of oats, and continued:

"Such was the multiplicand to make the future race. Here, too, raged the
boundary-line debate between Penns and Calverts, with occasional raids
and broken heads, and a noble suit in chancery of fifty years, till no
man's title was known, and, instead of improving their lands, our
voluptuous predecessors improved chiefly their opportunities. You cut
sundry cords of wood and hauled it to the landing, and Ebenezer Johnson
coolly scowed it over to his paradise at the mouth of Broad Creek. You
had a little parcel of negroes, but the British war-ships, in two
successive wars, lay in the river mouth and beckoned them off. Having no
interest in any certain property, the foresters of the Nanticoke would
rather trade with the enemy than fight for foolish ideas; and so this
region was more than half Tory, and is still half passive, the other
half predatory. To neither half of such a quotient belongs the house of
Isaac and Jacob Cannon!"

His nostrils swelled a trifle with military spirit, and he raised the
bridge of his nose delicately, turning to observe his instinctive
companion.

"If it's any harm I won't ask it," the easy-going mariner spoke, "but
air you two Cannons ary kin to ole Patty Cannon?"

Mr. Cannon smiled.

"In Adam all sinned--there we may have been connected," he said. "The
question you ask may one day be actionable, sir. The Cannons are a
numerous people in our region, of fair substance, such as we have, but
they showed nothing to vary the equation of subsistence here till there
arose the mother of Isaac and Jacob Cannon. She was a remarkable woman;
unassisted, she procured the charter for Cannon's Ferry, and made the
port settlement of that name by the importance her ferry acquired; and
when she died there were found in her house nine hundred dollars in
silver--for she never would take any paper money--the earnings of that
sequestered ferry, to start her sons on their career. She knew the
peculiar character of some of her neighbors--how lightly _meum_ and
_tuum_ sat upon their fears or consciences--but she kept no guard except
her own good gray eyes and dauntless heart over that accumulating pile
of little sixpences, for there was but one spirit as bold as she in all
this region of the world--"

"And that, I reckon," observed Jimmy Phoebus, "was ole Patty Cannon
herself."

Mr. Jacob Cannon slightly bowed his head, and spoke aloud from an inner
communion:

"Forgive me, mother, that I make the comparison! Thy frugal oil, that
burned with pure and lonely widow's flame at Cannon's Ferry window, the
traveller hailed with comfort in his heart, and blessed the enterprise.
But to compound the equation another unknown quantity of female force
arose beside my mother's lamp. A certain young Cannon, distantly of our
stock, must needs go see the world, and he returned with a fair demon of
a bride, and settled, too, at Cannon's Ferry. He lived to see the
wondrous serpent he had warmed in his arms, and died, they say, of the
sting. But she lived on, and, shrinking back into the woods to a little
farm my mother's sons rented to her, she lighted there a
Jack-o'-the-lantern many a traveller has pursued who never returned to
tell. With Ebenezer Johnson's progeny and her own siren sisters, who
followed Madame Cannon to the Nanticoke, the nucleus of a settlement
began, and has existed for twenty years, that only the Almighty's
_venire facias_ can explore."[2]

"That's my arrand, Jacob Cannon," quietly remarked Jimmy Phoebus. "I'm
a pore man from Prencess Anne. If you took me for a nigger-dealer you
did me as pore a compliment as when I asked if you was Patty Cannon's
kin. But I have got just one gal to love and just one life to lose, an'
if God takes me thar, I'm a-goin' to Johnson's Cross-roads."

Mr. Jacob Cannon turned and examined his companion with some twinkling
care, but showed no personal concern.

"Every man must be his own security, my dark-skinned friend, till he can
find a bailsman. That place I never take--neither the debtor's nor the
security. The firm of Isaac and Jacob Cannon allows no trespass, and
further concern themselves not. But we are at the Nanticoke."

"I'm obliged to you for the lift, Mr. Jacob Cannon," said Jimmy,
springing down, "and hope you may never find it inconvenient to have let
such a pack of wolves use your neighborhood to trespass on human natur."


CHAPTER XXIII.

TWIFORD'S ISLAND.


Some piles of wood and an old wharf were at the river-side, and a little
scow, half filled with water, and with only a broken piece of paddle in
it, was the only boat the pungy captain could find. The merchant's buggy
was soon out of sight, and the wide, gray Nanticoke, several hundred
yards wide, and made wider by a broad river that flowed into it through
low bluffs and levels immediately opposite, was receiving the strong
shadows of approaching night, and the tide was running up it violent and
deep.

Long lines of melancholy woods shut both these rivers in; an osprey
suddenly struck the surface of the water, like a drowning man, and rose
as if it had escaped from some demon in the flood; the silence
following his plunge was deeper than ever, till a goatsucker,
noiselessly making his zigzag chase, cried, as if out of eternal gloom,
his solemn command to "_Whip_ poor Will." Those notes repeated--as by
some slave ordering his brother to be lashed or one sympathetic soul in
perdition made the time-caller to another's misery--floated on the
evening light as if the oars of Charon echoed on the Styx, and broken
hearts were crossing over.

Alone, unintimidated, but not altogether comfortable, Jimmy Phoebus
proceeded to bail out the old scow, and wished he had accepted one of
Jack Wonnell's hats to do the task, and, when he had finished it, the
stars and clouds were manoeuvring around each other in the sky, with
the clouds the more aggressive, and finally some drops of rain punctured
the long, bare muscles of the inflowing tide, making a reticule of
little pittings, like a net of beads on drifting women's tresses. As
night advanced, a puffing something ascended the broad, black aisle of
this forest river, and slowly the Norfolk steamboat rumbled past, with
passengers for the Philadelphia stage. Then silence drew a sheet of fog
around herself and passed into a cold torpor of repose, affected only by
the waves that licked the shores with intermittent thirst.

The waterman, regretting a little that he had not taken his stand at
Vienna, where human assistance might have been procured, and thinking
that the poison airs might also afflict him with Meshach Milburn's
complaints, fought sleep away till midnight, straining his eyes and ears
ever and anon for signs of some sail; but nothing drew near, and he had
insensibly closed his lids and might have soon been in deep sleep, but
that he suddenly heard, between his dreams and this world, something
like a little baby moaning in the night.

He sat up in the damp scow, where he had been lying, and listened with
all his senses wide open, and once again the cry was wafted upon the
river zephyrs, and before it died away the sailor's paddle was in the
water, and his frail, awkward vessel was darting across the tide.

He saw, in the black night, what none but a sailor's eyes would have
seen, a thing not visible, but divined, coming along on the bosom of the
river; and his ears saw it the clearer as that little cry continued--now
stopped, now stifled, now rising, now nearly piercing; and then there
was a growl, momentary and loud, and a rattle as of feet over wood, and
a stroke or thud, or heavy concussion, and then a white thing rose up
against the universal ink and rushed on the little scow, sucking water
as it came--the cat-boat under full sail.

Phoebus had paddled for the opposite shore of the river to prevent the
object of his quest escaping up the Northwest Fork, yet to be in its
path if it beat up the main fork, and, by a piece of instinctive
calculation, he had run nearly under the cat-boat bows.

"Ahoy, there!" cried Jimmy, standing up in his tipsy little skiff; "ahoy
the _Ellenory Dennis!_ I'm a-comin' aboard."

And with this, the paddle still in his hand, and his knees and feet
nearly sentient in their providence of uses, the sailor threw himself
upon the low gunwale, and let it glide through his palms till he could
see the man at the helm.

There was no light to be called so, but the helmsman was yet perceived
by the sailor's experienced eyes, and he grappled the gunwale firmer,
and, preparing to swing himself on board, shouted hoarsely,

"You Levin Dennis, I see you, by smoke! You know Jimmy Phoebus is your
friend, an' come out of this Pangymonum an' stop a-breakin' of your
mother's heart! Oh, I see you, my son!"

If he did see Levin Dennis, Levin did not see Jimmy Phoebus, nor
apparently hear him, but stood motionless at the helm as a frozen man,
looking straight on in the night. The rigging made a little flapping,
the rudder creaked on its hooks, but every human sound was still as the
grave now, and the boy at the helm seemed petrified and deaf and blind.

The pungy captain's temper rose, his superstition not being equal to
that of most people, and he cried again,

"You're a disgrace to the woman that bore you. Hell's a-waitin' for your
pore tender body an' soul. Heave ahoy an' let drop that gaff, an' take
me aboard, Levin!"

Still silent and passive as a stone, the youthful figure at the helm did
not seem to breathe, and the cat-boat cut the water like a fish-hawk.

A flash of bright fire lighted up the vessel's side, a loud pistol-shot
rang out, and the sailor's hands loosened from the gunwale and clutched
at the air, and he felt the black night fall on him as if he had pulled
down its ebony columns upon his head.

He knew no more for hours, till he felt himself lying in cold water and
saw the gray morning coming through tree-boughs over his head. He had a
thirsty feeling and pain somewhere, and for a few minutes did not move,
but lay there on his shoulder, holding to something and guessing what it
might be, and where he might be making his bed in this chilly autumn
dawn.

His hand was clutching the a-stern plank of the old scow, and was so
stiff he could not for some time open it. The scow was aground upon a
marshy shore, in which some large trees grew, and were the fringes of a
woods that deepened farther back.

"By smoke!" muttered Jimmy, "if yer ain't hokey-pokey. But I reckon I
ain't dead, nohow."

With this he lifted the other hand, that had been stretched beneath his
head, and was also numb with cramp and cold, and it was full of blood.

"Well," said Jimmy, "that feller did hit me; but, if he'll lend me his
pistol, I'll fire a straighter slug than his'n. I wonder where it is."

Feeling around his head, the captain came to a raw spot, the touch of
which gave him acute pain, and made the blood flow freshly as he
withdrew his hand, and he could just speak the words, "Water, or I'll--"
when he swooned away.

The sun was up and shining cheerily in the tree-tops as Phoebus, who
was its name-bearer, recovered his senses again, and he bathed his face,
still lying down, and tore a piece of his raiment off for a bandage,
and, by the mirror of a still, green pool of water, examined his wound,
which was in the fleshy part of his cheek--a little groove or gutter,
now choked with almost dried blood, where the ball had ploughed a line.
It had probably struck a bone, but had not broken it, and this had
stunned him.

"I was so ugly before that Ellenory wouldn't more than half look at me,"
Jimmy mused, "an' now, I 'spect, she'll never kiss that air cheek."

He then bandaged his cheek roughly, sitting up, and took a survey of the
scenery.

The river was here a full quarter of a mile wide, on the opposite shore
bluffy, and in places bold, but, on the side where Phoebus had drifted
with the tide, clutching his old scow with mortal grip, there extended a
point of level woods and marsh or "cripple," as if by the action of some
back-water, and this low ground appeared to have a considerable area,
and was nowhere tilled or fenced, or gave any signs of being visited.

But the opposite or northern shore was quite otherwise; there the river
had a wide bend or hollow to receive two considerable creeks, and
changed its course almost abruptly from west to southwest, giving a
grand view of its wide bosom for the distance of more than two miles
into Maryland; and the prospect was closed in that direction by a
whitish-looking something, like lime or shell piles, standing against
the background of pale blue woods and bluffs.

Right opposite the spot where Phoebus had been stranded, a cleared
farm came out to the Nanticoke, affording a front of only a single
field, on the crest of a considerable sand-bluff--elevations looking
magnified here, where nature is so level; and at one end of this field,
which was planted in corn that was now clinging dry to the naked stalks,
an old lane descended to a shell-paved wharf of a stumpy, square form;
and almost at the other, or western, end of the clearing stood a
respectable farm-house of considerable age, with a hipped roof and three
queer dormer windows slipping down the steeper half below, and two
chimneys, not built outside of the house, as was the general fashion,
but naturally rising out of the old English-brick gables. All between
the gables was built of wood; a porch of one story occupied nearly half
the centre of that side of the house facing the river; and to the right,
against the house and behind it, were kitchen, smoke-house, corn-cribs,
and other low tenements, in picturesque medley; while to the left
crouched an old, low building on the water's edge, looking like a
brandy-still or a small warehouse. The road from the wharf and lane
passed along a beach, and partly through the river water, to enter a
gate between this shed and the dwelling; and from the garden or lawn, on
the bluff before the latter, arose two tall and elegant trees, a
honey-locust and a stalwart mulberry.

"Now, I never been by this place before," Jimmy Phoebus muttered,
"but, by smoke! yon house looks to me like Betty Twiford's wharf, an',
to save my life, I can't help thinkin' yon white spots down this side of
the river air Sharptown. If that's the case, which state am I in?"

He rose to his feet, bailed the scow, which was nearly full of water,
and began to paddle along the shore, and, seeing something white, he
landed and parted the bushes, and found it to be a stone of a bluish
marble, bearing on one side the letter M, and on the other the letter P,
and a royal crown was also carved upon it.

"Yer's one o' Lord Baltimore's boundary stones," Phoebus exclaimed.
"Now see the rascality o' them kidnappers! Yon house, I know, is
Twiford's, because it's a'most on the state-line, but, I'm ashamed to
say, it's a leetle in Maryland. And that lane, coming down to the wharf,
is my way to Joe Johnson's Pangymonum at his cross-roads."

A sound, as of some one singing, seemed to come from the woods near by,
and Phoebus, listening, concluded that it was farther along the water,
so he paddled softly forward till a small cove or pool led up into the
swamp, and its shores nowhere offered a dry landing; yet there were
recent foot-marks deeply trodden in the bog, and disclosed up the slope
into the woods, and from their direction seemed to come the mysterious
chanting.

"My head's bloody and I'm wet as a musk-rat, so I reckon I ain't afraid
of gittin' a little muddy," and with this the navigator stepped from the
scow in swamp nearly to his middle, and pulled himself up the slope by
main strength.

"I believe my soul this yer is a island," Jimmy remarked; "a island
surrounded with mud, that's wuss to git to than a water island."

The tall trees increased in size as he went on and entered a noble grove
of pines, through whose roar, like an organ accompanied by a human
voice, the singing was heard nearer and nearer, and, following the track
of previous feet, which had almost made a path, Phoebus came to a
space where an axe had laid the smaller bushes low around a large
loblolly pine that spread its branches like a roof only a few feet from
the ground; and there, fastened by a chain to the trunk, which allowed
her to go around and around the tree, and tread a nearly bare place in
the pine droppings or "shats," sat a black woman, singing in a long,
weary, throat-sore wail. Jimmy listened to a few lines:

  "Deep-en de woun' dy han's have made
    In dis weak, helpless soul,
  Till mercy wid its mighty aid
    De-scen to make me whole;
            Yes, Lord!
    De-scen to make me whole."

A little negro child, perhaps three years old, was lying asleep on the
ground at the woman's feet, in an old tattered gray blanket that might
have been discarded from a stable. Near the child was a wooden box, in
which were a coarse loaf of corn-bread and some strips of bacon, and a
wooden trough, hollowed out of a log, contained water. The woman's face
was scratched and bruised, and, as she came to some dental sounds in her
chant, her teeth were revealed, with several freshly missing in front,
and her lips were swollen and the gums blistered and raw.

She glanced up as Phoebus came in sight, looked at him a minute in
blank curiosity, as if she did not know what kind of animal he was, and
then continued her song, wearily, as if she had been singing it for
days, and her mind had gone into it and was out of her control. As she
moved her feet from time to time, the chain rattled upon her ankles.

"Well," said Jimmy, "if this ain't Pangymonum, I reckon I'll find it at
Johnson's Cross-roads! Git up thar, gal, an' let me see what ails you."

The woman rose mechanically, still singing in the shrill, cracked, weary
drone, and, as she rose, the baby awoke and began to cry, and she
stooped and took it up, and, patting it with her hands, sang on, as if
she would fall asleep singing, but could not.

The chain, strong and rusty, had been very recently welded to her feet
by a blacksmith; the fresh rivet attested that, and there were also
pieces of charcoal in the pine strewings, as if fire had been brought
there for smith's uses. Jimmy Phoebus took hold of the chain and
examined it link by link till it depended from a powerful staple driven
to the heart of the pine-tree; though rusty, it was perfect in every
part, and the condition of the staple showed that it was permanently
retained in its position, as if to secure various and successive
persons, while the staple itself had been driven above the reach of the
hands, as by a man standing on some platform or on another's shoulders.

Phoebus took the chain in his short, powerful arms, and, giving a
little run from the root of the tree, threw all the strength of his
compact, heavy body into a jerk, and let his weight fall upon it, but
did not produce the slightest impression.

"There's jess two people can unfasten this chain," exclaimed Jimmy,
blowing hard and kneading his palms, after two such exertions, "one of
em's a blacksmith and t'other's a woodchopper. Gal, how did you git
yer?"

The woman, a young and once comely person of about twenty-eight years of
age, sang on a moment as if she did not understand the question, till
Phoebus repeated it with a kinder tone:

"Pore, abused creatur, tell me as your friend! I ain't none of these
kidnappers. Git your pore, scattered wits together an tell a friend of
all women an' little childern how he kin help you, fur time's worth a
dollar a second, an' bloody vultures are nigh by. Speak, Mary!"

The universal name seemed timely to this woman; she stopped her chanting
and burst into tears.

"My husband brought me here," she said, between her long sobs. "He sold
me. I give him everything I had and loved him, too, and he sold me--me
and my baby."

"I reckon you don't belong fur down this way, Mary? You don't talk like
it."

"No, sir; I belong to Philadelphia. I was a free woman and a widow; my
husband left me a little money and a little house and this child;
another man come and courted me, a han'some mulatto man, almost as white
as you. He told me he had a farm in Delaware, and wanted me to be his
wife; he promised me so much and was so anxious about it, that I
listened to him. Oh, he was a beautiful talker, and I was lonesome and
wanted love. I let him sell my house and give him the money, and started
a week ago to come to my new home. Oh, he did deceive me so; he said he
loved me dearly."

She began to cry again, and her mind seemed to wander, for the next
sentence was disconnected. Jimmy took the baby in his arms and kissed it
without any scruples, and the child's large, black eyes looked into his
as if he might be its own father, while he dandled it tenderly.

"The foxes has come an' barked at me two nights," said the woman; "they
wanted the bacon, I 'spect. The water-snakes has crawled around here in
the daytime, and the buzzards flew right down before me and looked up,
as if they thought I ought to be dead. But I wasn't afraid: that man I
give my love to was so much worse than them, that I just sung and let
them look at me."

"You say he sold you, Mary?"

The woman rubbed her weary eyes and slowly recollected where she had
left off.

"We moved our things on a vessel to Delaware, and come up a creek to a
little town in the marshes, and there we started for my husband's farm.
He said we had come to it in the night. I couldn't tell, but I saw a
house in the woods, and was so tired I went to sleep with my baby there,
and in the night I found men in the room, and one of them, a white man,
was tying my feet."

A crow cawed with a sound of awe in the pine tops, and squirrels were
running tamely all round about as she hesitated.

"I thought then of the kidnappers of Delaware, for I had heard about
them, and I jumped out of bed and fought for my life. They knocked me
down and the rope around my feet tripped me up; but I fought with my
teeth after my hands was tied, too, and I bit that white man's knees,
and then he picked up a fire-shovel, or something of iron, and knocked
my teeth out. My last hope was almost gone when I saw my husband coming
in, and I cried to him, 'Save me! save me, darling!' He had a rope in
his hand, and, before I could understand it, he had slipped it over my
neck and choked me."

"Your own husband? I can't believe it, to save my life!"

"I didn't believe it, neither, till I heard him say, when they loosened
the slipknot that had strangled me--the voice was his I had trusted so
much; I never could forget it!--'Eben,' he said, 'I've took down every
mole and spot on her body and can swear to' em, for I've learned 'em by
heart, and you won't have no trouble a-sellin' her, as she can't
testify."

"The imp of Pangymonum!" Jimmy cried. "He had married you to note down
your marks, and by' em swear you to be a slave!"

"The white man tried to sell me to a farmer, and then I told what I had
heard them say. He believed me, and told them the mayor of Philadelphia
had a reward out for them, for kidnappin' free people, already. Then
they talked together--a little scared they was--and tied me again, and
brought me on a cart through the woods to the river and fetched me here,
and chained me, and told me if I ever said I was free, to another man,
they meant to sell my baby and to drown me in the river."

She finished with a chilly tremor and a low wail like an infant, but the
sailor passed her baby into her arms to engage her, and said:

"The Lord is still a-countin' of his sparrows, or I wouldn't have been
on this arrand, by smoke! To drift yer, hangin' senseless to that ole
scow, must have been to save you, Mary. This is a island where they
chains up property, I reckon, that is bein' follered up too close.
Time's very precious, Mary, but I've got a sailor's knife yer, an' I'll
stay to cut the staple out o' this ole pine if they come an' kill me.
You take an' wash my face off outen that water-trough while I bite a bit
of the bacon."

He took the child again and amused it while the woman carefully cleaned
his wound and rebandaged it so that he could breathe and see and eat,
though the cotton folds wrapped in much of his face like a mask. He then
examined the chain again, especially where it was rivetted at the feet,
and lifted a large iron ball weighing several pounds, which was also
affixed to her ankle, so that she could not climb the tree. Her ankle he
found blistered by the red-hot rivet being smithed so barbarously close
to the flesh.

"Don't leave me, oh! don't leave me here to die," the woman pleaded, as
he started into the woods.

"I'll stay by you an' we'll die together, if we must; but it's not my
idee to die at all, Mary. I'm goin' to bring that air scow ashore while
I cut a hickory, if I can find one, to break this yer chain."

Plunging again into the mud nearly to his waist, Phoebus pulled the
scow up into the woods, and had barely concealed himself when he saw
come out of the creek below Twiford's house a cat-boat like the
_Ellenora Dennis_, and stand towards the island in the cripple.

"The tide's agin' em, an' they must make a tack to get yer," Jimmy
muttered; "but I'm afraid this knife will have to go to the heart of
some son of Pangymonum in ten minutes, or Ellenory Dennis never agin be
pestered by her ugly lover."

He was seized with a certain frenzy of strength and discernment at the
danger he was in, and, as he carried the scow onward and across the
woodland island, heavy as it was, he also noted a single small hickory
tree on that farther margin, and threw himself against it and bent it
down, and plunged his knife into the straining fibres so that it
crackled and splintered in his hand. He leaped to the tree and scaled it
as he had often climbed a mast, and he thrust the sapling under the
staple, trimming the point down with the knife as he clutched the tree
by his knees, and then, catching the young hickory like a lever, he
dropped down the pine trunk and got his shoulder under the sapling and
brought the weight of his body desperately against it. The staple bent
upward in the tree, but did not loosen.

At that instant the scraping of a boat upon the mud was heard, and the
black woman fell upon her knees.

"Pray, but do it soft," Jimmy whispered; "an' not a cry from the child,
or there'll be a murder!"

He had rapidly trimmed the hickory stem of its branches while he spoke,
so that it could penetrate the arborage of the tree from above, and
climbing higher, like a cat, he worked the point of the lever downwards
into the now crooked staple, and threw himself out of the tree against
the sapling, which bent like a bow nearly double, but would not break,
and, as the staple yielded and flew out, the chain and the deliverer
fell together on the soft pine litter.

"Hark!" exclaimed a voice through the woods.

"What was it?" asked another voice.

"Come!" Phoebus murmured, and gathered together the woman, the child,
and the chain and ball, and stepped, long and silent as a rabbit's
leaps, through the awe-hushed pines, carrying the whole burden on his
shoulders.

He sat them in the scow, which sank to the edges, and, covered by a
protruding point of woods, pushed off into the deep river, yet guiding
the frail vessel in to the sides of the stream, away from the influence
of the out-running tide. As the scow turned the first crease or elbow in
the river, it began to sink.

"If you make a sound you are a slave fur life," whispered the waterman,
as he slipped overboard and began to swim, with his hand upon the stern.
As he did this, straining every muscle of his countenance to keep
afloat, the wound in his cheek began to bleed again, and he felt his
strength going. Down, down he began to settle, till the water reached
his nostrils, and the woman heard him sigh as he was sinking:

"I'd do it--an' die--agin--fur--Ellenory. God bless her!"

The scow, now full of water, turned upside down, and threw mother and
child into the stream, and the child was gone beneath the surface before
the woman could catch herself upon a sunken branch of an imbedded tree;
and, as she gasped there, the body of the pungy captain swept past her
and she caught him by the hair, and he clutched her with the drowning
instinct, and down they went together, like husband and wife, in
nature's contempt of distinctions between living worms.

They went down to the very bottom, but not to drown; for the old tree,
having fallen where it grew in other years, was sustained upon its
limbs, and made an invisible yet sure pathway to the shore. The long
chain and the iron ball fettered to the colored woman's foot, however,
deprived her for a few moments of all power to step along the slippery,
submerged trunk, and, with her soul full of agony for her child, which
she no longer saw, she was about to let go of her deliverer's body and
throw herself also into the river, to die with them, when the old scow,
having emptied itself of the water, reappeared at the surface and struck
the woman a buoyant blow that altered the course of her thought.

"Pore, brave man," the woman gasped. "He's got a wife, maybe. He said,
'God bless her,' an' he give his life for a poor creature like me. God
has took my baby. I can't do nothing for it now, but maybe I can save
this man's life before I die."

Indifferent to her personal fate, she drew intelligence from her spirit
of sacrifice, which is the only thing better than learning. She pushed
the scow down and under Phoebus with her remaining hand, till it
relieved her of a portion of the weight of his body, and rose up,
half-bearing the bronze-faced sailor's form, and animating her generous
purpose with the honest and happy smile he wore upon his face, even in
the vestibule of the eternal palace. Then, gathering the long meshes of
the iron chain up from its termination at her feet, she threw the longer
portion of it into the scow, so that it no longer became entangled in
the cross-branches and knots below, and she could lift also the iron
ball sufficiently to glide her feet along the tree.

With pain and difficulty, lessened by self-forgetfulness, she pushed the
scow and the body to the foot of the tree, and, feeling around its old
roots for further support, the red-eyed terrapins arose and swam around
her, disturbed in their possessions; but she feared no reptiles any
more, since Death, the mighty crocodile, had eaten the babe that she had
nursed but this morning.

She had intelligent remembrance enough to think of all the precautions
her deliverer had taken, and, when she had dragged his body on the shore
into the dense, scrubby woods, she also drew out the little scow and
heaped some dead brush upon it, and had scarcely concealed herself when
she heard voices from the river, and the report of a sail swung around
upon its boom, and of feet upon a deck. The voices said:

"If she's got off to Delaware, Joe Johnson won't have long to stay on
his visit; for all the beaks will gather fur him an' be started by John
M. Clayton."

"I'm sorry fur Joe," answered another voice; "he hoped to make one more
big scoop this trip, an' quit the Corners fur good."

"Let us sail by ole Ebenezer Johnson's roost at Broad Creek mouth, an'
peep up both forks of the river," said the other voice, receding; "it's
only a mile and a half. If we discover nothin', we'll run down the river
and inquire at the landings as fur as Vienny."

The colored woman now worked with all her strength to revive the
insensible sailor, rolling him, rubbing his body till her elbows seemed
almost to be dropping off, and then rubbing his great, broad breast with
her head and face and neck. She breathed into his mouth the breath
heaven vouchsafed to Hagar as bountifully as to Sarah, and, wringing out
portions of her garments and hanging them at sunny exposures to dry, she
substituted them, in her exhausted intervals, for the wet clothing of
the man; and as she worked, with a hollow, desolate heart, she sobbed:

"Lord, gi' me this man's life! O Lord, that took my chile, I will have
this life back!"

Crying and weeping, fainting and laboring, the moments, it seemed the
very hours, ran by and still he did not waken; and still, with all that
noble strength that makes the fields of white men grow and blossom under
the negro's unthanked toil, the widow and childless one fought on for
this cold lump of brother nature.

He warmed, he breathed, he groaned, he spoke!

His voice was like a happy sigh, as of one disturbed near the end of a
comforting morning nap in summer:

"You thar, Mary?"

He stared around with difficulty, his wounded face now clotted and
stained with blood, and his eyes next looked an inquiry so kind and
apprehensive that she answered it, to save him breath:

"Baby's drowned. God does best!"

He reached his hand to hers--she was almost naked to the waist, having
sacrificed all she had, the greatest of which was modesty, to bring back
that life in him which came naked and unashamed into the world--and he
put his little strength into the grasp.

"Mary," he exhaled, "why didn't you ketch the baby and leave me go?"

"Oh, dearly as I loved it," the woman answered, "I'm glad you come up
under my hands instead. You can do good: you're a white man. Baby would
have only been a poor slave, or a free negro nobody would care for."

"I mean to do good, if the Lord lets me," sighed the sailor; "I mean to
go and die agin for human natur at Johnson's Cross-roads."


CHAPTER XXIV.

OLD CHIMNEYS.


The day was far advanced when Jimmy Phoebus was strong enough to rise
and walk, and leave the refuge in the woods. He advised the colored
woman to crawl through the pine-trees along the margin, while he paddled
in the old scow in the shadow of the forest, which now lay strong upon
the river's breast.

At the distance of about a mile, Broad Creek, like a tributary river,
flowed into the Nanticoke from the east, fully a quarter of a mile wide,
and half a mile up this stream an old, low, extended, weather-blackened
house faced the river, and seemed to grin out of its broken ribs and
hollow window-sockets like a traitor's skull discolored upon a gibbet.
It was falling to pieces, and along its roof-ridge a line of crows
balanced and croaked, as if they had fine stories to tell and weird
opinions to pass upon the former inhabitants of the tenement.

"There, I have hearn tell," said Jimmy, as he drew in to the bank, and
took the woman into the scow and began to tow her along the beach,
wading in the water, "_there_, I have hearn tell, lived the pirate of
Broad Creek, ole Ebenezer Johnson, who was shot soon after the war of
'12 at Twiford's house down yonder."

"For kidnapping free people?" asked the woman, without interest, the
question coming from her desolate heart.

"In them days they didn't kidnap much; it was jest a-beginnin'. The war
of '12 busted everything on the bay, burned half a dozen towns, kept the
white men layin' out an' watchin', and made loafers of half of 'em, an'
brought bad volunteers an' militia yer to trifle with the porer gals,
an' some of them strangers stuck yer after the war was done. I don't
know whar ole Ebenezer come from; some says this, an' some that. All we
know is, that he an' the Hanlen gals, one of 'em Patty Cannon, was the
head devils in an' after the war."

"It's a bad-lookin' ole house, sir. See, yonder's a coon runnin' out of
the door. Oh! I hear my child cryin' everywhere I look."

"The British begun to run the black people off in the war. The black
people wanted to go to 'em. The British filled the islands in Tangier
yer with nigger camps; they was a goin' to take this whole peninsuly,
an' collect an' drill a nigger army on it to put down Amerikey. When the
war was done, the British sailed away from Chesapeake Bay with thousands
of them colored folks, an' then the people yer begun to hate the free
niggers."

"For lovin' liberty?" the woman sighed, looking at the ball, which had
galled her ankle bloody.

"They hated free niggers as if they was all Tories an' didn't love
Amerikey. So, seein' the free niggers hadn't no friends, these Johnsons
an' Patty Cannon begun to steal 'em, by smoke! There was only a million
niggers in the whole country; Louisiana was a-roarin' for 'em; every
nigger was wuth twenty horses or thirty yokes of oxen, or two good farms
around yer, an' these kidnappers made money like smoke, bought the
lawyers, went into polytics, an' got sech a high hand that they tried a
murderin' of the nigger traders from Georgey an' down thar, comin' yer
full of gold to buy free people. That give 'em a back-set, an' they hung
some of Patty's band--some at Georgetown, some at Cambridge."

"If my baby's made white in heaven, I'm afraid I won't know him," the
woman said, nodding, and wandering in her mind.

"At last the Delawareans marched on Johnson's Cross-roads an' cleaned
his Pangymonum thar out, an' guarded him, and sixteen pore niggers in
chains he'd kidnapped, to Georgetown jail. Young John M. Clayton was
paid by the Phildelfy Quakers to git him convicted. Johnson was strong
in the county--we're in it now, Sussex--an' if Clayton hadn't skeered
the jury almost to death, it would have disagreed. He held 'em over
bilin' hell, an' dipped 'em thar till the court-room was like a
Methodis' revival meetin', with half that jury cryin' 'Save me, save me,
Lord!' while some of 'em had Joe Johnson's money in their pockets. Joe
was licked at the post, banished from the state, an' so skeered that he
laid low awhile, goin' off somewhar--to Missoury, or Floridey, or
Allybamy. But Patty Cannon never flinched; she trained the young boys
around yer to be her sleuth-hounds an' go stealin' for her; an', till
she dies, it's safer to be a chicken than a free nigger. They stole you,
pore creatur' from Phildelfy, an' they steal 'em in Jersey and away into
North Carliney; fur Joe Johnson's a smart feller fur enterprise, and
Patty Cannon's deep as death an' the grave."

Phoebus looked at the woman sitting in the scow, and he saw that she
was fast asleep; his tale having no power to startle her senses, now
worn-out by every infliction.

"I must git that ball an' chain off," the sailor said; "but iron, in
these ole sandy parts, is scarce as gold."

He lifted her out of the scow and laid her in the shade, and began to
explore the old house. To his joy, he found the iron crane still hanging
in the chimney, and signs of recent fire.

"These yer ole cranes was valleyble once," Jimmy said, "an' in the wills
they left 'em to their children like farms, an' lawsuits was had over
the bilin' pots an' the biggest kittles. It broke a woman's heart to git
a little kittle left her, an' the big-kittled gal was jest pestered with
beaux. But, by smoke! we're a-makin' iron now in Amerikey! Kittles is
cheap, and that's why this crane is left by robbers an' gypsies after
they used it."

He twisted the crane out of the bricks on which it was hinged, and some
of the mantel jamb fell down.

"Hallo!" cried Jimmy, "what's this a rollin' yer? A shillin', by George!
I say, by George, this time caze ole George the Third's picter's on it.
Maybe thar's more of 'em."

He pulled a few bricks out of the jamb, and raked the hollow space
inside with his hand, and brought forth a steel purse of English
manufacture, filled with shillings at one end, and fifteen golden
guineas at the other; they rolled out through the decayed filigree,
rusted, probably, by the rain percolating through the chimney, and the
purse crumbled to iron-mould in his hand.

"'The Lord is my shepherd,'" said the sailor, reverently; "'I shall not
want. He leadeth me by the still waters.' How beautiful Ellenory says
it. Look thar at the waters of the Nanticoke, beautiful as silver. Lord,
make 'em pure waters an' free, to every pore creatur!"

"To who! to who!" screamed a voice out of the hollow chimney.

"Well," answered Jimmy, hardly excited, "I ain't partickler. Ha! I
thought I knew you, Barney," he continued, as an owl fluttered out and
hopped up a ruined stairway.

"Now, British money ain't coined by Uncle Sam; what is the date? I can
make figgers out easy: Eighteen hundred and fifteen!' I was about to do
Ebenezer Johnson the onjustice of saying that he'd sold his country out
to ole Admiral Cockburn, but the war was done when this money was
coined. Whose was it?"

He removed more carefully some of the bricks, to put his hand in the
hollow depository left there, and, feeling around and higher up, brought
out the bronze hilt of a sword, on which was a name.

"Who would have thought this was a house of learnin'?" Jimmy said,
dubiously. "I can't read it. By smoke! maybe they've murdered somebody
yer. I reckon he was British. Ellenory kin read it, if I live to see her
agin."

There was nothing more, and, as he left the rotting old house, a crash
and a cloud of smoke rose up behind him, and the chimney fell into the
middle of the floor.

With the crane's sharp wrought-iron point and long leverage the pungy
captain succeeded, after tedious efforts, in breaking the links of the
chain and also in removing the linked cannon-ball from the woman's foot,
but he could not remove the iron band and link around her ankle.

"God bless you!" exclaimed the woman. "It's a sin to say so, but I feel
as if I could fly since that dreadful weight is off. Oh, I want to fly,
for I dreamed of my baby, an' he smiled at me from heaven as if he said,
'I'm happy, mamma!'"

"You don't owe me nothin', Mary. I love a widder, as you air, an' she
begged me to come yer. When you git to Prencess Anne, whar I want you to
go, find Ellenory Dennis, an' tell her I've seen her boy, an' I'll bring
him back if I kin."

"Princess Anne? where is it?"

"It's maybe, forty mile from yer, Mary; half-way between sunrise and
sunset."

"Right south, sir?"

"That's it. Now I'll tell you how to git thar. Take this old woods road
along Broad Creek and walk to Laurel, five miles; it's a little town on
the creek. Keep in under the woods, but don't lose the road, fur every
foot of it's dangerous to niggers. You kin git thar, maybe, by dark. I
don't know nobody thar, Mary, an' I can't write, fur I never learned
how. But you go right to the house of some preacher of the Gospel, and
tell him a lie."

Mary opened her eyes.

"I wouldn't have you tell a lie to anybody but a good man," continued
Phoebus, "fur then it's so close to the Lord it won't git fur an'
pizen many, as lies always does. You must tell that preacher that you're
the runaway slave of Judge Custis of Prencess Anne, an' you're sorry you
run away, an' want to go home."

"Oh, sir, you are not like my wicked husband, trying to sell me too?"

"No, Mary, bad as you've been used, faith's your only sure friend. If
you was to tell the preacher you had been kidnapped, he'd, maybe, be
afraid to help you. They're a timid set down yer on any subject
concernin' niggers; these preachers will help save black folks' souls,
but never rescue their pore broken bodies. When you tell him you are the
slave of a rich man like Judge Custis, he'll jump at the chance to do
the Judge a favor, an' tell you that you do right to go back to your
master. That's whair he's a liar, Mary--so he'll scratch _your_ lie
off."

"They'll turn me back at Princess Anne, and wont know me, maybe."

"Not if you do this, Mary. Make them take you to Judge Custis's
daughter--the one that's just been married. Tell her you want to speak
to her privately. Then tell her the nigger-skinned man--I'm him--that
she sent away with her mother, found you whar you was chained in the
woods. Take this link of the chain to show her. Tell her you want to be
her cook till the one that run away is found."

"I'll do it, sir. I've got no home to go to, now."

"Tell her all you remember. Tell her not to tell Ellenory any of my
troubles. Tell her I'm a-startin' for Pangymonum, an', if I die, it's
nothin' but a bachelor keepin' his own solitary company. Yer's a gold
piece an' three silver pieces I found, Mary, to pay your way. Good-bye."

"Won't you give me your knife?" asked the woman.

"What fur, Mary?"

"To kill myself if they kidnap me again."

"I have nothin' else to fight for my life with," said Phoebus. "No,
you must not do that. Keep in the woods to Laurel."

She fell on the ground and kissed his knees, and bathed them with her
tears.

"I do have faith, master," she said, "faith enough to be your slave."

"I'd cry a little, too," said Jimmy, twitching his eyes, as the woman
disappeared in the forest, "if I knowed how to do it; but, by smoke! the
wind on the bay's dried up my tear ponds. I'll bury these curiosities
right yer, with this chain and ball, and put some old bricks around' em
outen the chimney they come from."

He dug a hole with his knife, carefully cutting out a piece of the sod,
and restoring it over the buried articles; and, after notching some
trees to mark the place, he pushed in the scow again into Broad Creek,
and descended the Nanticoke on the falling tide to Twiford's wharf.

Dragging the scow up the bed of a creek to conceal it, he discovered
another boundary stone. A beach led under the cover of a sandy bluff to
the river gate of Twiford's comfortable house, and he boldly entered the
lane and lawn, saying to himself:

"I reckon a feller can ask to buy one squar meal a day in a free
country, fur I'm hungry."

Even in that day the house was probably seventy years old, roofed by an
artistic shingler in lines like old lace-work, the short roofs over the
three pretty dormers like laced bib-aprons, the window-casements in
small checkers of dark glass, the roof capacious as an armadillo's back
or land-turtle's; but half of it was almost as straight as the walls,
and the small, foreign bricks in the gables, glazed black and dark-red
alternately, were laid by conscientious workmen, and bade fair to stand
another hundred years, as they smoked their tidy chimney pipes from
hearty stomachs of fireplaces below.

Standing beneath the honey-locust tree at the lawn-gate, the sailor
beheld an extensive prospect of the river Nanticoke, bending in a
beautiful curve, like the rim of a silver salver, towards the south, the
blue perspective of the surrounding woods fading into the azure bluffs
on the farther shore, where, as he now identified it, the hamlet of
Sharptown assumed the mystery and similitude of a city by the
enchantment of distance. A large brig was riding up the river under the
afternoon breeze, carrying the English flag at her spanker. The
wild-fowl, flying in V-formed lines, like Hyads astray, flickered on the
salver of the river like house-flies. Some fishermen distantly appeared,
human, yet nearly stationary, as if to enliven a dream, and the bees in
a row of hives kept murmuring near by, increasing the restful sense in
the heart and the ears.

"Why cannot human natur be happy yer, pertickler with its gal--some one
like Ellenory?" Phoebus thought; "why must it git cruel an' desperate
for money, lookin' out on this dancin' water, an' want to turn this
trance into a Pangymonum?"

He crossed the lane to a squatty old structure of brick by the
water-side, and peeped in.

"A still, by smoke!" he said. "If it ain't apple brandy may I forgit my
compass! No, it's peach brandy. Well, anyway, it's hot enough; an' this,
I 'spect, is what started the Pangymonum."

He took a stout drink, and it revived his weakened system, and he bathed
his head in its strong alcohol. He then returned to the lawn and walked
around the house, peeping into the lower rooms--of which there were two
in the main building, the kitchen being an appendage--but saw nobody.
The porch in the rear extended the full width of the house, unlike the
smaller shed in front, which only covered two doors, standing curiously
side by side.

Completely sheltered by the longer porch, Phoebus, looking into a
window, there saw a table already set with a clean cloth, and bread and
cold chicken, and a pitcher of creamy milk, with a piece of ice floating
in it. On either side of a large fireplace at the table-side was a door,
one open, and leading by a small winding stair to the floor above. A bed
was also in the room, which looked out by one window upon the lawn and
the river, and by the other at the farm, the corn-cribs, and the small
barns and pound-yard.

With a sailor's quiet, sliding feet, Jimmy walked into the low hall, and
a cat-bird, in a cage there, immediately started such a shrill series of
cries that his steps were unheard by himself.

"Nobody bein' yer," thought Jimmy, "an' the flies gittin 'at the
victuals, I reckon I'll do as I would be done by."

So he began to eat, and soon he heard a female voice, very close by,
sound down the stairs, as if reciting to another person.

"Aunt Patty says Aunt Betty's first husband, Captain Twiford, was a
sea-captain and a widower, and she was one of the beautiful Hanley
girls, brought up by old Ebenezer Johnson at his house across on Broad
Creek; and there Captain Twiford courted her, and brought her here to
live. He died early--all my aunties' husbands died early--and is buried
in the vault out here behind the pound, where you can go in and see him
in his shroud, lying by Aunt Betty. Her next husband, John Gillis, left
her, and then she lived with William Russell, a negro-trader. Aunt Patty
governed all her sisters and the Johnson boys, too. Oh, how I fear her
when she looks at me sometimes with her bold, black eyes: I can't help
it."

Another voice, not a woman's, yet almost as gentle, now seemed to ask a
question; but the cat-bird, behaving like a detective and a tale-bearer,
made such a furious screaming at seeing a stranger drinking the milk,
that Phoebus could not hear it well. The pleasant female voice spoke
again:

"Yes, he was killed in the room under this, before I was born, Aunt
Patty says; and sometimes she likes to tell such dark and bloody tales,
and laughs with joy to see me frightened at them. Aunt Betty got in
debt, and this house and farm were sold under executions and bought by a
Maryland man, who stole an opportunity when the men were away, and set
his goods in the house and set Aunt Betty's goods outside upon the lawn.
It's only a mile, or a little more, from here to Ebenezer Johnson's, and
the news of the seizure was sent there."

Jimmy tore off a piece of chicken with his teeth, listening voraciously.

"Did you hear anything?" continued the voice; "I thought I did. The dogs
are chained up in the smoke-house, and bad people are often coming here;
I will go turn the dogs loose."

"Be dogged if you do!" Jimmy reflected. "That's the meanest cat-bird
ever I see, fur now it's shut up a-purpose."

There sounded something familiar to the uninvited guest in the voice
which seemed to delay this intention; but the cat-bird, with his
unaccommodating mood, broke right in again. Then the female continued:

"While the men--who had come armed, expecting trouble--were removing
Aunt Betty's goods out of the room, throwing many of them out of the
windows, so as to be themselves in sole possession, a sound was heard in
the room below, where your meal is now ready, like a panther skipping
and lashing his tail; and, before the men could breathe, old Ebenezer
Johnson was up the stairs and laying about him. His eyes were full of
murder. One man jumped right through that window and rolled off the
porch; another he pitched down the stairs; the third was a boy, Joe
King, barely grown--he lives not far from this house now--and Ebenezer
Johnson dashed him down the stairs, too, and started after him. All his
life the boy had been taught to dread that terrible man, and now he was
in his hands, or flying before him; and, as he reeled through the room
below, out of the door that opens on the back porch, the boy's eyes, in
the agony of the fear of death, beheld a rifle leaning there."

"Mighty good thing if it was thar now!" Jimmy inwardly remarked,
finishing the chicken, and still hungry.

"Oh, there _is_ a noise somewhere in this house," the voice exclaimed;
"I never tell this story but it makes me startled at every sound. The
boy, as he whirled past, grasped the long rifle, drew it to his
shoulder, and, with a young volunteer's skill--for he had been drilling
to fight the British--he put the two balls in that old man's brain. Both
balls entered over the left eyebrow, and one passed through the head and
was found in the wall; the other never was found.[3] The lawless giant
gave a trembling motion through his frame, his eyes glazed, and he sank
dead upon the floor without a sound--the wicked had ceased from
troubling! Aunt Betty, Aunt Patty, and Aunt Jane, three sisters shaped
by him in soul, fell on his body and wept and almost prayed, but it was
too late. They buried him near Aunt Betty, in the field behind the
pound."

Undertaking to rise from his chair, Jimmy Phoebus made a loud scraping
on the floor, and the table-knife fell with a ringing sound.

"Who's there?" cried a voice, and added, "I knew the dogs ought to be
loose."

"Who's there?" also asked the other voice, with something very familiar
to Phoebus in its sounds.

"E-b-e-n-e-z-e-r John-son!" answered Jimmy, in his deepest bass tones,
mentally considering that a ghost might carry more terror than a robber,
after that tale.

A little scream followed, and a whispered consultation, and then a
girl's bare feet, beautifully moulded, slowly descended the steep
stairway, and next a slender, graceful body came into view, and finally
a face, delicious as a ripe peach, looked once at the intruder below,
and all the pink and bright color faded from it to see, standing there,
where Ebenezer Johnson had given up the ghost, a stalwart effigy,
bandaged in white all round the head, and over the left eye and cheek,
where the dead river-pirate had received his double bullet, the blood
was hideously matted and not wholly stanched even yet. She sank slowly
down upon the steps and saw no more.

"Now, if I don't git out, the dogs will be set loose," muttered Jimmy,
as he disappeared up the farm-house lane and put the barn and pound
between him and the house; and scarcely had he done so when Levin Dennis
appeared coming down the stairs, all unconscious of the apparition, and,
finding the beautiful girl insensible, he raised her in his arms and
stole a kiss.

Paying for his one act of deceit by losing the principal object of his
quest, Jimmy Phoebus stopped a minute by Ebenezer Johnson's grave.

In a level field of deep sand--the soil here being the poorest in the
region--and between the cattle-pound and the pines, which were
everywhere jealous of their other indigenous brother, the Indian corn,
an old family burial-lot lay under some low cedar-trees, with wild berry
bushes growing all around. There were several little stones over
Twifords that had died early, and a large heap of sand, planted with
some flowers, that might have covered a favorite horse, but which
Phoebus believed was the resting-place of the river buccaneer; and
there was also a vault of brick and plaster, with the little door ajar,
where prurient visitors, themselves with Saul's own selfish curiosity to
raise the dead, had poked and peeped about until the coffin lids had
been drawn back and the dead pair exposed to the dry peninsular air.

The bay captain looked in and beheld his predecessor, Captain Twiford,
who also sailed the bay, lying in his shroud--not in full clothing, as
men are buried now, for clothing was too valuable in the scanty-peopled
country to feed it to the worms. Twiford lay shrivelled up, shroud and
flesh making but one skin, the face of a walnut color, the hair
complete, the teeth sound, and severe dignity unrelaxed by the exposure
he was condemned to for his evil alliance with Betty Hanley.

She also lay exposed, who had lived so shamelessly, respecting not the
mould of beauty God had given her, till now men leered to look upon her
nearly kiln-dried bosom glued into its winding-sheet, and the glory of
her hair, that had been handled by bantering outlaws, and in a rippling
wave of unbleached coal covered the grinning coquetry of her skull.

"Them that mocks God shall be mocked of him," said Jimmy Phoebus,
closing the door and putting some of the scattered bricks of the vault
against it. "Now, I reckon, I kin git to the cross-roads by a leetle
after dark."


CHAPTER XXV.

PATTY CANNON'S.


Phoebus passed along the side of a large, black, cypress-shaded
mill-pond, and found the boundary stone again, and took the angle from
its northern face as a compass-point, and, proceeding in that direction,
soon fell in with a sort of blind path hardly feasible for wheels, which
ran almost on the line between the states of Maryland and Delaware,
passing in sight of several of these old boundary stones. Not a dwelling
was visible as he proceeded, not even a clearing, not a stream except
one mere gutter in the sand, not a man, hardly an animal or a bird; the
monotonous sand-pines, too low to moan, too thick to expand, too dry to
give shade, yet grew and grew, like poor folks' sandy-headed children,
and kept company only with some scrubby oaks that had strayed that way,
till pine-cone and acorn seemed to have bred upon each other, and the
wild hogs disdained the progeny.

"Maybe I'll git killed up yer in this Pangymonum," Jimmy reflected; "an'
though I 'spose it don't make no difference whair you plant your bones,
I don't want to grow up into ole pines. Good, big, preachin' kind of
pines, that's a little above the world, an' says 'Holy, rolley,
melancho-ly, mind your soul-y'--I could go into their sap and shats
fust-rate. But to die yer an' never be found in these desert wastes is
pore salvage for a man that's lived among the white sails of the bay,
an' loved a woman elegant as Ellenory."

It was dark, and he could hardly see his way in half an hour. Sometimes
a crow would caw, to hear strange sounds go past, like an old
watchman's rattle moved one cog. The stars became bright, however, and
the moon was new, and when Phoebus came to a large cleared opening in
the pines, the lambent heavens broke forth and bathed the sandy fields
with silver, and showed a large, high house at the middle of the
clearing, with outside chimneys, one thicker than the other, and a porch
of two stories facing the east.

Though not a large dwelling, it was large for those days and for that
unfrequented region, and its roof seemed to Phoebus remarkably steep
and long, and yet, while enclosing so much space, had not a single
dormer window in it. The southern gable was turned towards the intruder,
and in it were two small windows at the top, crowded between the thick
chimney and the roof slope. The two main stories were well lighted,
however, and the porch was enclosed at the farther end, making a double
outside room there. No sheds, kitchens, or stables were attached to the
premises, but an old pole-well, like some catapult, reared its long pole
at half an angle between the crotch of another tree. Roads, marked by
tall worm fences, crossed at the level vista where this tall house
presided, and a quarter of a mile beyond the cross-roads, to the
northeast, was another house, much smaller, and hip-gabled, like
Twiford's, standing up a lane and surrounded by small stables, cribs,
orchard, and garden.

"I never 'spected to come yer," Jimmy Phoebus observed, "but I've
hearn tell of this place considabul. The big barn-roofed house is Joe
Johnston's tavern for the entertainment of Georgey nigger-traders that
comes to git his stolen goods. It's at the cross-roads, three miles from
Cannon's Ferry, whar the passengers from below crosses the Nanticoke fur
Easton and the north, an' the stages from Cambridge by the King's road
meets 'em yonder at the tavern. The tavern stands in Dorchester County,
with a tongue of Caroline reaching down in front of it, an' Delaware
state hardly twenty yards from the porch. Thar ain't a court-house
within twenty miles, nor a town in ten, except Crotcher's Ferry, whar
every Sunday mornin' the people goin' to church kin pick up a basketful
of ears, eyes, noses, fingers, an' hair bit off a-fightin' on Saturday
afternoon. They call the country around Crotcher's, Wire Neck, caze no
neck is left thar that kin be twisted off; the country in lower Car'line
they calls 'Puckem,' caze the crops is so puckered up. They say Joe's a
great man among his neighbors, an' kin go to the Legislater. The t'other
house out in the fields is Patty Cannon's own, whar she did all her
dev'lishness fur twenty years, till Joe got rich enough to build his
palace."

With the rapid execution of a man who only plans with his feet and
hands, the bay sailor observed that there was a grove of good high
timber--oaks and pines--only a few rods from the cross-roads and to the
right, under cover of which he could draw near the tavern. As he
proceeded to gain its shade, he heard extraordinary sounds of turbulence
from the front of the tavern, the yelling of men, the baying of hounds,
oaths and laughter, and, listening as he crossed the intervening space,
he fell into a ditch inadvertently, almost at the edge of the timber.

"Hallo!" cried Jimmy, lying quite still to draw his breath, since the
ditch was now perfectly dry, "this ditch seems to me to pint right for
that tavern."

He therefore crawled along its dry bed till it crossed under a road by a
wooden culvert or little bridge of a few planks.

The noise at the tavern was now like a fight, and, as Phoebus
continued to crawl forward, he heard twenty voices, crying,

"Gouge him, Owen Daw!" "Hit him agin, Cyrus James!" "Chaw him right up!"
"Give' em room, boys!"

Having crawled to what he judged the nearest point of concealed
approach, Phoebus lost the moment to take a single glance only, and,
drawing his old slouched hat down on his face to hide the bandaging, he
muttered, "Now's jess my time," and crept up to the back of the crowd,
which was all facing inwards in a circle, and did not perceive him.

A fully grown man, as it seemed, was having a fight with a boy hardly
fifteen years old; but the boy was the more reckless and courageous of
the two, while the man, with three times the boy's strength, lacked the
stomach or confidence to avail himself of it; and, having had the boy
down, was now being turned by the latter, amid shouts of "Three to two
on Owen Daw!" "Bite his nose off, Owen Daw!" "Five to two that Cyrus
James gits gouged by Owen Daw!"

The boy with a Celtic face and supple body was full of zeal to merit
favor and inflict injury, and, as the circle of vagrants and outlaws of
all ages reeled and swayed to and fro, Phoebus, unobserved by anybody,
put his head down among the rest and searched the faces for those of
Levin Dennis or Joe Johnson.

Neither was there, and the only face which arrested his attention was a
woman's, standing in the door of the enclosed space at the end of the
porch, at right angles to the central door of the tavern, and just
beside it. The whole building was without paint, and weather-stained,
but the room on the porch was manifestly newer, as if it had been an
afterthought, and its two windows revealed some of the crude appendages
of a liquor bar, as a fire somewhere within flashed up and lighted it.

By this fire the woman's face was also revealed, and she was so much
interested in the fight that she turned all parts of her countenance
into the firelight, slapping her hands together, laughing like a man,
dropping her oaths at the right places, and crying:

"I bet my money on little Owen Daw! Cy James ain't no good, by God!
Yer's whiskey a-plenty for Owen Daw if he gouges him. Give it to him,
Owen Daw! Shame on ye, Cy James!"

There was occasional servility and deference to this woman from members
of the crowd, however they were absorbed in the fight. She was what is
called a "chunky" woman, short and thick, with a rosy skin, low but
pleasing forehead, coal-black hair, a rolling way of swaying and moving
herself, a pair of large black eyes, at once daring, furtive, and
familiar, and a large neck and large breast, uniting the bull-dog and
the dam, cruelty and full womanhood.

Behind this woman, whom Phoebus thought to be Patty Cannon herself,
the moonlight from the rear came through the door in the older and main
building, shining quite through the house, and Phoebus saw that the
rear door was also open and was unguarded.

He took the first chance, therefore, of dodging around the corner of the
bar, intending to pass around the north gable of the house and dart up
the stairs by the unwatched door; but he had barely got out of sight
when a loud hurrah burst from the crowd as a feeble voice was heard
crying "Enough, enough!" followed by jeers rapidly approaching.

The large outside chimney, where Phoebus now was, had an arched cavity
in it large enough to contain a man, being the chimney of two different
rooms within, whose smoke, uniting higher up, ascended through one stem.
Into this cavity Phoebus dodged, in time to avoid the beaten party to
the fight, the grown man, who staggered blindly by towards a well, his
face dripping blood, and he was sobbing babyishly; but the concealed
sailor heard him say, in a whining tone:

"She set him on me; I'll make her pay for it."

Several of the partisans or tormentors of this craven followed after
him, and Jimmy himself fell in at the rear, and, instead of going with
the rest towards the well, where the loser was bathing his face,
Phoebus softly stepped over the low sill of the back door, the woman's
back being turned to him, and, as he had anticipated, a stairway
ascended there out of a large room, which answered the purposes of
parlor and hall, dining and gambling room, as Jimmy drank in at one
glance, from seeing tables, dishes and cards, bottles and whips, arms
and saddles. This stairway had no baluster, and was not safe in the dark
for strangers to the house.

Satisfying himself by an interior observation, as he had suspected
exteriorly, that there was no cellar under Johnson's tavern, the sailor
slipped up the stairs, intent to find where Judge Custis's property and
Ellenora's wayward son had been concealed. The second story had a hall,
which opened only at the front of the house and upon the upper piazza,
and four doors upon this hall indicated four bedrooms. One of them was
ajar, and, peeping through, Phoebus saw, extended on a bed, oblivious
to all the righting and din outside, Joe Johnson the negro-trader, his
form revealed by a lamp and the open fire.

An impulse, immediately repressed, came on the sailor to draw his knife
and stab Johnson to the heart, as probably the villain who had shot him
from the cat-boat. The negro-trader wearily turned his long length in
the bed, and Phoebus slipped back along the hall to the only door
besides that was not closed fast, leading into the room at the rear
southern corner of the house.

This door creaked loudly as it was opened, and a man of a bandit form
and dress, who was lying on a pallet within, revealed by the bright
moonlight streaming in at two windows, half roused himself as Jimmy
crouched at the door, where a partition, as of a very large
clothes-press, taking up fully half the room, rose between the intruder
and the occupant.

"Who's there?" exclaimed a voice, with a slight lisp in it.

Jimmy discovered that there was a low trap or door near the floor,
opening into this remarkable closet, and he slipped inside and drew his
knife again. The man was heard moving about the narrow room, and he
finally seemed to walk out into the hall and down the stairs.

Feeling around his closet, which was pitch dark, Phoebus found a deep
indentation in it, as of a smaller closet, and the sound of crooning
voices came from above.

"By smoke!" Jimmy mentally exclaimed, "this big closet is nothin' but a
blind fur a stairway in the little closet to climb up to the dungeon
under the big roof."

He stole out again and found the moonlight now streaming upon an empty
pallet and the burly watchman gone, and streaming, too, upon a larger
door in the closet opposite the indentation he had felt, this door
secured by a padlock through a staple fastening an iron bar. The key was
in the padlock, and Jimmy turned it back, drew off the lock and dropped
the bar.

The moment he opened the door an almost insupportable smell came down a
shallow hatchway within, up which leaned a rough step-ladder, movable,
and of stout construction.

"That smell," said Phoebus, entering, and pulling the door close
behind him, "might be wool, or camel, or a moral menagerie from the
royal gardings of Europe, but I guess it's Nigger."

He went up the steep steps with some difficulty, as they were made to
pass only one person, and at the top he entered a large garret, divided
into two by a heavy partition of yellow pine, with a door at the middle
of it, and from beyond this partition came the sounds of crooning and
babbling he had heard.

The bright night, shining through a small gable window, revealed this
outer half of the garret empty, and not furniture or other appurtenance
than the hole in the floor up which he had come, and the door into the
place of wailing beyond, which was fastened by a long iron spike
dropping into a staple that overshot a heavy wooden bar. As he slipped
up the spike and took the bar off, Phoebus heard some person in the
room below mutter, and lock the great padlock upon the other door,
effectually barring his escape by that egress.

"We must take things as they come," thought Jimmy, grimly, "partickler
in Pangymonum, whar I am now."

He also reflected that the arrangements of this kidnappers' pen, simple
as they seemed, were quite sufficient. If authority should demand to
search the house, the double clothes-press below, with the ladder pulled
up into the loft, became a harmless closet hung with wardrobe matters,
and the inner closet a storeroom for articles of bulk; and no human
being could either go up or come down without passing two inhabited
floors and three different doors, besides the door to the slave-pen.

This last door Phoebus now threw open and walked into the pen itself,
stooping his head to avoid the low entrance.

For some minutes he could not see the contents at all in the total
darkness that prevailed, as there was no window whatever in this pen or
den, but he heard various voices, and inhaled the strong, close air of
many African breaths exhausting the supply of oxygen, and knew that
chains and irons were being moved against the boards of the floor.

"Thair ain't nothin' to do yer," Jimmy remarked, softly, "but jess squat
down an' git a-climated, as they say about strangers to our bilious
shore, an' git your eyeballs tuned to the dark. But I should say that
this was both hokey-pokey an' Pangymonum, by smoke!"

A man in some part of the den was praying in a highly nervous, excited
way, slobbering out his agonizing sentences, and dwelling hard upon his
more open vowels, and keeping several other inmates in sympathy or equal
misery, as they piped in answer to his apostrophes:

"Lawd, de-_scen'! De_-scen', O my Lawd. I will not let dee go; no, oh my
Lawd! Come, save me! Yes, my Lawd! Come walkin' on de waters! Come outen
Lazarus's tomb! Come on de chario'f fire! Come in de power! De-scen'
now, O my Lawd!"

Phoebus's entrance made no excitement, and he crouched down to await
the strengthening of his eyes to see around him. The place appeared to
be nearly twenty-five feet square, and was cross-boarded both the gable
way and under the sloping roof, whose eaves were planked up a foot or
two above the floor; in the middle any man could stand upright and
scarcely touch the ridge beam with his hands, but along the sloping
sides could barely sit upright.

The man still continuing to express his absolute subjection of spirit in
a frenzy of words, and several little children crying and shouting
responsively, Phoebus ordered the man to cease, after asking him
kindly to do so several times; and the command being disobeyed, he
slapped the praying one with his open hand, and the poor wretch rolled
over in a kind of feeble fit.

A little child somewhere continuing to cry, Phoebus took it in his
arms and held between it and the starlight, at the half-open door, one
of the shillings he had obtained from the old cabin on Broad Creek a few
hours before. The child, seeing something shine, seized it and held
fast, and Phoebus next passed his hand over the face of a sleeping
man, who was snoring calmly and strenuously on the floor beside him. He
made room for the faint light to shine upon the sleeper's black face,
and exclaimed, in a moment:

"If it ain't Samson Hat I hope I may be swallered by a whale!"

Calling his name, "Samson! Samson!" Phoebus observed a most dejected
mulatto person, who had been lying back in the shadows, crawl forward,
rattling his manacles. This man, when spoken to, replied with such
refinement and accuracy, however his face betokened great inward misery,
that the sailor took as careful a survey of him as the moonlight
permitted, coming in by that one lean attic window. He was a man who had
shaved himself only recently, and his dark, curling side-whiskers and
clean lips, and the tuft of goatee in the hollow of his chin, and
intelligent, high forehead, seemed altogether out of place in this
darksome eyrie of the sad and friendless.

"Is he your friend, sir?" asked this man, turning towards Samson. "He
must have a good conscience if he is, for he slept soon after he was
brought here, and has never uttered a single complaint."

"And you have, I reckon?" said the waterman.

"Oh, yes, sir; I have been treated with such ingratitude. It would break
any gentleman's heart to hear my tale. Who is your friend, sir?"

"Samson, wake up, old bruiser!" cried Phoebus, shaking the sleeper
soundly; "you didn't give in to one or two, by smoke!"

"Is it you, Jimmy?" the old negro finally said, with a sheepish
expression; "why, neighbor, I'm glad to see you, but I'm sorry, too. A
black man dey don't want to kill yer, caze dey kin sell him, but a white
man like you dey don't want to keep, and dey dassn't let him go."

"A _white_ man here?" exclaimed the superior-looking person; "what can
they mean?"

"I'm ironed so heavy, Jimmy," continued Samson, "dat I can't set up
much. My han's is tied togedder wid cord, my feet's in an iron clevis,
and a ball's chained to de clevis."

"Give me your hands," exclaimed Jimmy; "I'll settle them cords, by
smoke!"

In a minute he had severed the cords at the wrist, and the intelligent
yellow man pleaded that a similar favor be done for him, to which the
sailor acceded ungrudgingly.

"Jimmy," said Samson, "if it's ever known in Prencess Anne--as I 'spect
it never will be, fur we're in bad hands, neighbor--dar'll be a laugh
instid of a cry, fur ole boxin' Samson, dat was kidnapped an' fetched to
jail by a woman!"

"You licked by a woman, Samson?"

"Yes, Jimmy, a woman all by herseff frowed me down, tied my hands an'
feet, an' brought me to dis garret. I hain't seen nobody but her an'
dese yer people, sence I was tuk."

"Ha!" exclaimed the dejected mulatto, "that's a favorite feat of Patty
Cannon. She is the only woman ever seen at a threshing-floor who can
stand in a half-bushel measure and lift five bushels of grain at once
upon her shoulders, weighing three hundred pounds."

"I ain't half dat," Samson smiled, quietly, "an' she handled me, shore
enough. You remember, Jimmy, when I leff you by ole Spring Hill church,
to go an' git a woman on a little wagon to show me de way to Laurel?"

"Why, it was only yisterday, Samson!"

"Dat was de woman, Jimmy. She was a chunky, heavy-sot woman, right purty
to look at, an' maybe fifty year ole. She was de nicest woman mos' ever
I see. She made me git off my mule an' ride in de wagon by her, an' take
a drink of her own applejack--she said she 'stilled it on her farm. She
said she knowed Judge Custis, an' asked me questions about Prencess
Anne, an' wanted me to work fur her some way. We was goin froo a pore,
pine country, a heap wuss dan Hardship, whar Marster Milburn come outen,
an' hadn't seen nobody on de road till we come to a run she said was
named de Tussocky branch, whar she got out of de wagon to water her
hoss. At dat place she come up to me an' says, 'Samson, I'll wrastle
you!' 'Go long,' says I, 'I kin't wrastle no woman like you.' 'You got
to,' she says, swearin' like a man, an' takin' holt of me jess like a
man wrastles. I felt ashamed, an' didn't know what to do, and, befo' I
could wink, Jimmy, dat woman had give me de trip an' shoved me wid a
blow like de kick of an ox, and was a-top of my back wid a knee like
iron pinnin' of me down."

"The awful huzzy of Pangymonum!"

"De fust idee I had was dat she was a man dressed up like a woman. I
started like lightnin' to jump up, an' my legs caught each oder; she had
carried de cord to tie me under her gown, an' clued it aroun' me in a
minute. As I run at her an' fell hard, she drew de runnin' knot tight
an' danced aroun' me like a fat witch, windin' me all up in de rope. De
sweat started from my head, I yelled an' fought an' fell agin, an', as I
laid with my tongue out like a calf in de butcher's cart, she whispered
to me, 'Maybe you're de las' nigger ole Patty Cannon'll ever tie!'

"At dat name I jess prayed to de Lord, but it was too late. She put me
in de cart an' gagged me so I couldn't say a word, and blood came outen
my mouth. I heard her talkin' to people as we passed by a town an' over
a bridge. Nobody looked in de cart whar I laid kivered over, till we
come to a ferry in de night, an' dar we passed over, and I heard her
talkin' to a man on dis side of de ferry. He come to de side of de wagon
an' peeped at me, layin' helpless dar, my eyes jess a-prayin' to
him--and he had an elegant eye in his head, Jimmy. He says softly to
hisself, 'Dis is no consignment, manifes'ly, to Isaac an' Jacob Cannon,'
an' he kivered me up again, an' the woman fetched me yer, put on de
irons, and shoved me into dis hole in de garret."

"I reckon that was Isaac Cannon, t'other Levite that never sees anything
that ain't in his quoshint."

"How's the purty gals, Jimmy? I shall see' em in my dreams, I' spect, if
I _am_ sold Souf. I ain't got long to stay, nohow, Jimmy, fur I'm mos'
sixty. If you ever git out, tell my marster to buy dat gal Virgie, an'
make her free. She ain't fit to be a slave."

"Gals has their place," said Phoebus, "but not whair men has to fight
for liberty. How many fighting men are we here?"

"I 'spect you's de only one, Jimmy; we's all chained up; dese
nigger-dealers is all blacksmifs an' keeps balls, hobbles, gripes, an'
clevises, an' loads us wid iron."

"Who is that woman back yonder so quare an' still?"

"Why, Jimmy, don't you know Aunt Hominy, Jedge Custis's ole cook? Dey
brought her in dis mornin' wi' two little children outen Teackle Hall
kitchen; one of dem you give dat silver to--little Ned. Hominy ain't
said a word sence she come."

Jimmy Phoebus went back to the corner of the den where the old woman
cowered, and called her name in many different accents and with kind
assurances:

"Hominy, ole woman, don't you know Ellenory's Jimmy? Jedge Custis is
comin' for you, aunty. I'm yer to take you home."

She did not speak at all, and Phoebus lifted her without resistance
nearer to the moonlight. Her lips mumbled unintelligibly, her eyes were
dull, she did not seem to know them.

Samson crawled forward, and also called her name kindly:

"Aunt Hominy, Miss Vesty's sent fur you. Dis yer is Jimmy Phoebus."

The little boy Ned now spoke up:

"Aunt Hominy ain't spoke sence dat Quaker man killed little Phillis."

"Jimmy," solemnly whispered Samson, "Aunt Hominy's lost her mind."

"Yes," spoke up the dejected and elegant mulatto prisoner, "she's become
an idiot. They sometimes take it that way."

Phoebus bent his face close down to the poor old creature's, sitting
there in her checkered turban and silver earrings, clean and tidy as
servants of the olden time, and he studied her vacant countenance, her
tenantless eyes, her lips moving without connection or relevance, and
felt that cruelty had inflicted its last miraculous injury--whipped out
her mind from its venerable residence, and left her body yet to suffer
the pains of life without the understanding of them.

"Oh, shame! shame!" cried the sailor, tears finally falling from his
eyes, "to deceive and steal this pore, believin' intelleck! To rob the
cook of the little tin cup full o' brains she uses to git food fur bad
an' fur good folks! Why, the devils in Pangymonum wouldn't treat that a
way the kind heart that briled fur 'em."

"De long man said he was Quaker man," exclaimed Vince, the larger boy,
"an' he come to take Hominy to de free country. Hominy was sold, she
said, an' must go. De long man had a boat--Mars Dennis's boat--an' in de
night little Phillis woke up an' cried. Nobody couldn't stop her. De
long man picked little Phillis up by de leg an' mashed her skull in agin
de flo'. Aunt Hominy ain't never spoke no mo'."

"Did you hear the long man speak after that, Vince?"

"Yes, mars'r. I heerd de long man tell Mars Dennis dat if he didn't
steer de boat an' shet his mouf, he'd shoot him. I heerd de pistol go
off, but Mars Dennis wasn't killed, fur I saw him steerin' afterwards."

"Thank God!" spoke the sailor, kissing the child. "Ellenory's boy was
innocent, by smoke! That nigger-trader shot me an' threatened Levin's
life if he listened to me hailing of him. The noise I heard was the
murder of the baby, whose cries betrayed the coming of the vessel.
Samson, thar's been treachery ever sence we left Salisbury, an' that
nigger Dave's a part of it."

"He said he hated me caze I larned him to box. Maybe my fightin's been
my punishment, Jimmy, but I never struck a man a foul blow."

"And what was _your_ hokey-pokey?" the pungy captain cried to the man
who had been making so much religious din. "Did they sell you fur never
knowin' whar to stop a good thing?"

The man hoarsely explained, himself interested by the disclosures and
fraternity around him:

"I was slave to a local preacher in Delaware, an' de sexton of de
church. It was ole Barrett's chapel, up yer between Dover an'
Murderkill--de church whar Bishop Coke an' Francis Asbury fust met on de
pulpit stairs. My marster an' me was boff members of it, but he loved
money bad, an' I was to be free when I got to be twenty-five years ole,
accordin' to de will of his Quaker fader, dat left me to him. Las'
Sunday night dey had a long class-meetin' dar, an' when nobody was leff
in de church but my marster an' me, he says to me, 'Rodney, le's you an'
me have one more prayer togedder befo' you put out dat las' lamp. You
pray, Rodney!' I knelt an' prayed for marster after I must leave him to
be free next year, an', while I was prayin' loud, people crept in de
church an' tied me, and marster was gone."

"He sold you fur life to them kidnappers, boy, becaze you was goin' to
be free next year. Don't your Bible tell you to watch _an'_ pray?"

"Yes, marster."

"Well, then, boys, it's all watch to-night and no more praying," cried
Jimmy Phoebus, cheerily. "Here are four men, loving liberty, bound to
have it or die. Thar's one of' em with a knife, an' the first kidnapper
that crosses that sill, man or woman--fur we'll trust no more women,
Samson--gits the knife to the hilt! The blessed light that shone onto
Calvary an' Bunker Hill is a gleamin' on the blade. Work off your irons,
if you kin; I'll git you rafters outen this roof to jab with if you
can't do no better. Are you all with me?"

"I am, Jimmy," answered Samson, quietly.

"I'll die with ye, too," exclaimed the praying man, with rekindled
spirit.

"We will all be murdered, gentlemen," protested the dejected mulatto. "I
know these desperate people."

"Then you crawl over in the corner," Phoebus commanded, "and see three
men fight fur you. We don't want any fine buck nigger to spile his
beauty for us."

The man crawled back into the blackness of the den again, and Phoebus
began to search the open half of the garret for implements of war. He
found two long pieces of chain, with which determined men might beat out
an adversary's brains.

"Now, boys," Jimmy delivered himself, "I hain't lost my head yisterday
nor to-day neither, by smoke! I'm goin' to kill the first person that
comes yer, an' git the keys of this den from him, an' lock all of you in
fast, an' the dead kidnapper, too. Then they won't git at you to ship
you off till I kin git to Seaford, over yer in Delaware--it's not more
than six mile--whar I know three captains of pungies, and all of' em's
in port thar now--all friends of Jimmy Phoebus, all well armed, and
their crews enough to handle Pangymonum!"

A noise was heard at the lock of the lower door, and Phoebus slipped
into the enclosed den and took his station just within the door.

"Remember," he whispered, "I open the fight."

The lock snapped at the door below the step-ladder, the bolt fell, and
the light of a lamp flashed up the hatchway and upon the naked roof, and
through the cracks of the boarded garret pen.

The sailor's knife was in his belt-pouch, where he carried it over the
hip. As he leaned down to look through a crack in the low door, he felt
a hand from the gloom behind touch him.

Instinctively he felt for his knife, and it was gone.

"Captain," cried the voice of the dejected mulatto, as the door of the
pen flew open and the bandit-looking stranger appeared with the lamp,
"there's a white man here going to kill you. I've taken his knife from
him and saved your life. It's a rebellion, captain!"

"Help! Patty! Joe!" cried the man, with a loud voice, as Jimmy Phoebus
threw himself upon him and extinguished the lamp, and the two powerful
men rolled on the floor together in a grip of mortal combat.

Phoebus was a man of great power, but his antagonist was strong and
slippery, too, and a spirited rough-and-tumble fighter.

The pungy captain was on top, the bandit man locked him fast in his arms
and legs, and tried to stab him in the side, as Phoebus felt the
handle of a clasp-knife, which seemed slow to obey its spring, strike
him repeatedly all round the groin, in strokes that would have killed,
inflicted by the blade.

Phoebus attempted to drag the man to the hatchway and force him down
it, while the two negro assistants of Phoebus beat down the negro
traitor with their chains, and searched him vainly for the knife he had
filched.

At last Phoebus prevailed, and his antagonist rolled down the open
hatchway, seven feet or more, still keeping his desperate hold on
Phoebus, and dragging him along; and both might have cracked their
skulls but for a woman just in the act of hurrying up the ladder,
against whom their two bodies pitched and were cushioned upon her.

The shock, however, stunned both of them, and when Phoebus recollected
himself he was tied hand and foot and lying on the garret floor again,
and over him stood Joe Johnson, flourishing a cowhide.

The bandages had again been torn from Phoebus's face, and he was
bleeding at the flesh-wound in his cheek, and breathless from his
conflict. A woman had dashed a vessel of water into his face, and this
had revived him.

The other man, called "captain," had, meantime, by the aid of this
woman--the same Phoebus had seen down-stairs--subdued and tied the
black insurgents, and both of them were flourishing their whips over the
backs and heads of the prisoners, big and little, so that the garret was
no slight reflection of the place of eternal torment, as the shadows of
the monsters, under the weak light, whipped and danced against the beams
and shingles, and shrieks and shouts of "Mercy!" blended in hideous
dissonance.

The woman now turned her lamp on the sailor's rough, swarthy, injured
countenance, and looked him over out of her dark, bold eyes:

"Joe, this is a nigger, by God!"

Johnson and the captain also examined him carefully, and, uttering an
oath, the former kicked the prostrate man with his heavy boot.

"I popped this bloke last night," he said, "and thought the scold's cure
had him. He's a sea-crab playin' the setter fur niggers. He sang beef to
me in Princess Anne. I told him thar he'd pass for a nigger, Patty, and
we'll sell him fur one to Georgey!"

"All's fish that comes to our net, Joe," the woman chuckled; "he'll sell
high, too."

"That white man," spoke the voice of Samson, within the pen, his chains
rattling, "has hunderds of friends a-lookin' fur him, an' you'll ketch
it if you don't let him off."

"What latitat chants there?" Joe Johnson demanded of Patty Cannon.

"That's my nigger, Joe," the woman answered.

"Fetch him to the light."

The captain propped Samson up, and Joe Johnson glared into his face, and
then struck him down with the handle of his heavy whip.

"Patty," he growled, "that nigger's scienced; he's the champion scrapper
of Somerset. He knocked me down, and I marked him fur it; and now, by
God! I'm a-goin' to burn him alive on Twiford's island."

He swore an oath, half blasphemous, half blackguard, and the captain
murmured, with a lisp:

"The white man is the only _witness_. Make sure of him!"

Irons were produced, and the captain speedily fastened Phoebus's hands
in a clevis, and hobbled his feet, and placed him, without brutality, in
the pen, and, further, chained him there to a ring in the joist below.
As the door was closed and bolted, a voice from the darkness of the pen
cried out:

"Aunt Patty, let me out: I saved the captain's life; I took the white
man's knife. I'll serve you faithfully if you only let me go."

"He blowed the gab," said Joe Johnson, "but it won't serve him."

"Zeke," cried the woman, "it's no use. You go to Georgey with the next
gang--you an' the white nigger thar."

The man threw himself upon the floor and moaned and prayed, as the
lamplight disappeared and the hatchway slid echoingly over the stairs,
and the lower bolts were drawn. As he lay there in horror and amid
contempt, a voice arrested his ears near by, singing, with musical and
easy spirit, so low that it seemed a hymn, from the roads and fields far
down beneath:

  "Deep-en de woun' dy hands have made
    In dis weak, helpless soul."

The man listened with awe and silence, as if a spirit hummed the tune,
and forgot his doom of slavery a moment in the deeper anguish of a
treacherous heart that simple hymn bestirred. It was only Jimmy
Phoebus, thinking what he could say to punish this double traitor
most, who had turned his back upon his race and upon gratitude, and
Jimmy had remembered the poor woman chained to the tree on Twiford's
island, and her oft-reiterated hymn; and the conclusion was flashed upon
his mind that the mulatto wretch who decoyed her away and sold her was
none other than his renegade fellow-prisoner, in turn made merchandise
of because too dangerous to set at large in the probable hue-and-cry for
her.

"Poor Mary!" Phoebus slowly spoke, in his deepest tones, with solemn
cadence.

The wretched man listened and trembled.

"Mary's sperrit's callin' 'Zeke!'" Phoebus continued, awful in his
inflection.

The miserable procurer's heart stopped at the words, and his eyeballs
turned in torment.

"Come, Zeke! poor Mary's a-waitin' for ye!" cried the sailor, suddenly,
in a voice of thunder, and as suddenly relapsed into the low singing of
the quiet hymn again:

  "Deep-en de woun' dy hands have made
    In dis weak, helpless soul,
  Till mercy, wid its mighty aid
    De-scen to make me whole;
          Yes, Lord!
    De-scen to make me whole."

The elegant Iscariot, at the thunder of the invocation, had reached into
a place between two of the cypress shingles in the roof, where he had
hidden the sailor's knife, the blade being pressed out of sight, and
only the handle within his grasp. It had been overlooked in the exciting
scenes of the previous few minutes, and now recurred to his mind, as
superstitious passions rolled like dreadful meteors across the black and
hopeless chasm of his despairing soul.

When the low drone of the hymn he had heard his victim sing to her baby,
when her faith in him was pure and childlike, crossed his maddened ears
again, he raised one shriek of "Mercy!" to which no answer fell, and
drew the blade across his throat and fell dead in the kidnappers' den.


CHAPTER XXVI.

VAN DORN.


A thin fur of frost was on the level farm-lands, and the saffron and
orange leaves were falling almost audibly from the trees, as Levin
Dennis awoke on Wednesday, in the long, low house standing back in the
fields from Johnson's cross-roads, and drank in the cool, stimulating
morn, the sun already having made his first relay, and his postilion
horn was blowing from the old tavern that reared its form so broadly and
yet so steeply in plain sight.

Levin had been brought up from Twiford's wharf the night before by the
pretty maid whom Jimmy Phoebus had so much frightened, and this was
his first day of restful feeling, having slept off the liquor fumes of
Sunday, the exciting watches of Monday, and the mingled pleasure and
pain, illness and interest, love and remorse, of Tuesday.

He had felt already the earliest twinges of youthful fondness for the
young girl he had spent the day with at Twiford's, while lying sick
there from a disordered stomach and nervous system, and her amiability
and charms, more than the temptation of unhallowed money, had changed
his purpose to escape at Twiford's and give information of the injury
inflicted upon Judge Custis's property.

It hardly seemed real that he had been an accessory to a felony and a
witness to a murder--the stealing of a gentleman's domestic slaves and
the braining of the smallest and most helpless of them, nearly in his
sight; yet so it had happened, and he felt the danger he was in, but
hesitated how to act. He had accepted the money of the trader, and
passed his mother's noblest friend on the river without recognition,
while a dastardly ball had probably ended poor Phoebus's career. To
all these deeds he was the only white witness, the only one on whose
testimony redress could be meted out.

He felt, therefore, that he was a prisoner, and his life dependent on
his cordial relations with the bloody negro-dealer and his band; and
Johnson had reiterated his promise that if Levin joined them in equal
fraternity he should make money fast and become a plantation proprietor.

This night coming, a raid on free negroes in Delaware was to be made by
the band in force, and Levin had been told that he must be one of the
kidnappers, and his frank co-operation that night would forever relieve
him of any suspicions of defection and bad faith.

"Steal one nigger, Levin," Joe Johnson had said, "and then if ever
caught in the hock you never can snickle!"

Levin interpreted this thieves' language to mean that he must do a crime
to get the kidnappers' confidence.

The power of this band he had divined a little of when, at points along
the river, especially about Vienna, there had been mysterious
intercourse between Joe Johnson and people on the shore, carried on in
imitations of animal sounds; and the negro ferryman at that old
Dorchester village had spoken with Johnson only half an hour before the
trader's encounter with Jimmy Phoebus in mid-stream, whereupon the
grim passenger had produced his pistol and notified Levin:

"Now, my feller prig, honor's what I expect from you, and, to remind you
of it, Levin, I'm a-goin' to pint this barking-iron at your mummer, so
that if you patter a cackle, a blue plum will go right down your
throat."

He had then tried to evade some one expected on the river, and, in a fit
of rage at the awakening and wailing of the child, had hushed it
forever, and then had shot Phoebus down.

Poor Hominy had sincerely believed that Johnson's peculiar slang was the
language of the good Quakers, followers of Elias Hicks, who sheltered
runaway slaves and spoke a "thee" and "thou" and "verily," and that
strange misapprehension in her ignorant mind the keen dealer had made
use of to decoy her into Levin's vessel and waft her into a distant
country.

"We didn't steal her, Levin," Johnson said; "she wanted to mizzle from a
good master, an' we jess sells the crooked moke an' makes it squar."

When Aunt Hominy, having under her protecting care the little children,
came on board the _Ellenora Dennis_ at Manokin Landing, Levin had been
asleep, and knew nothing of the theft till it was too late to protest,
and Johnson himself had sailed the cat-boat into broad water. Then,
bearing through Kedge's Strait, he had cruised up the open bay, out of
sight of the Somerset shore, and entered the Nanticoke towards night by
way of Harper's Strait, and run up on the night flood; but the instinct
of Jimmy Phoebus had cut him off at the forks of the Nanticoke, and
propelled another crime to Johnson's old suspected record. He had never
been indicted yet for murder, though murder was thought to be none too
formidable a crime for him.

There was a zest of adventure in this guilty errand, which, but for its
crime, would have pleased Levin moderately well, the roving drop in his
blood expanding to this wild association; and he knew but little
comparatively of the Delaware kidnappers, reading nothing, and in those
days little was printed about Patty Cannon's band except in the distant
journals like _Niles's Register_ or _Lundy's Genius of Emancipation_.
Levin had never sailed up the Nanticoke region before, and its scenery
was agreeable to his sight, while his heart was just fluttering in the
first flight of sentiment towards the interesting creature he had so
unexpectedly and, as he thought, so strangely discovered there.

Arriving at Twiford's in the night, Johnson had sent him to bed there,
and pushed on himself with the negro property to Johnson's Cross-roads;
and, when he awakened late the next day, Levin had found a beautiful
wildflower of a young woman sitting by his pallet, looking into his
large soft eyes with her own long-lashed orbs of humid gray, and
brushing his dark auburn ringlets with her hand. As he had looked up
wonderingly, she had said to him:

"I have never seen a man before with his hair parted in the middle, but
I think I have dreamed of one."

"Who air you?" Levin asked.

"Me! Oh, I'm Hulda. I'm Patty Cannon's granddaughter."

"That wicked woman!" Levin exclaimed. "Oh, I can't believe that!"

"Nor can I sometimes, till the sinful truth comes to me from her own
bold lips. Oh, sir, I am not as wicked as she!"

"How kin you be wicked at all," Levin asked, "when you look so good? I
would trust your face in jail."

"Would you? How happy that makes me, to be trusted by some one! Nobody
seems to trust me here. My mother was never kind to me. Captain Van Dorn
is kind, but too kind; I shrink from him."

"Where is your mother now?"

"She has gone south with her husband, to live in Florida for all the
rest of her life, and we are all going there after father gets one more
drove of slaves. You are one of father's men, I suppose?"

"Who is your father?"

"Joe Johnson."

"That man," murmured Levin. "Oh, no, it is too horrible."

"Do not hate me. Be a little kind, if you do, for I have watched you
here hours, almost hoping you never might wake up, so beautiful and pure
you looked asleep."

"And you--that's the way you look, Huldy. How kin you look so an' be his
daughter."

"I am not his child, thank God! He is my stepfather."

"What is your name, then, besides Huldy?"

The girl blushed deeply and hesitated. Her fine gray eyes were turned
upon her beautiful bare feet, white as the river that flashed beneath
the window.

"Hulda Bruinton," she said, swallowing a sigh.

"Bruinton--where did I hear that name?" Levin asked; "some tale has been
told me, I reckon, about him?"

"Yes, everybody knows it," Hulda said, in a voice of pain; "he was
hanged for murder at Georgetown when I was a little child."

Levin could not speak for astonishment.

"I might as well tell you," she said, "for others will, if I conceal it.
I can hardly remember my father. My mother soon married Joe and
neglected me, and Aunt Patty, my grandmother, brought me up. She was
kind to me, but, oh, how cruel she can be to others!"

"You talk as if you kin read, Huldy," said Levin, wishing to change so
harsh a topic; "kin you?"

"Yes, I can read and write as well as if I had been to school. Some one
taught me the letters around the tavern--some of the negro-dealers: I
think it was Colonel McLane; and I had a gift for it, I think, because I
began to read very soon, and then Aunt Patty made me read books to
her--oh, such dreadful books!"

"What wair they, Huldy?"

"The lives of pirates and the trials of murderers--about Murrell's band
and the poisonings of Lucretia Chapman, the execution of Thistlewood,
and Captain Kidd's voyages; the last I read her was the story of Burke
and Hare, who smothered people to death in the Canongate of Edinburgh
last year to sell their bodies to the doctors."

"Must you read such things to her?"

"I think that is the only influence I have over her. Sometimes she looks
so horribly at me, and mutters such threats, that I fear she is going to
kill me, and so I hasten to get her favorite books and read to her the
dark crimes of desperate men and women, and she laughs and listens like
one hearing pleasant tales. My soul grows sick, but I see she is
fascinated, and I read on, trying to close my mind to the cruel
narrative."

"Huldy, air you a purty devil drawin' me outen my heart to ruin me?"

"No, no; oh, do not believe that! I suppose all men are cruel, and all I
ever knew were negro-traders, or I should believe you too gentle to live
by that brutal work. I looked at you lying in this bed, and pity and
love came over me to see you, so young and fair, entering upon this life
of treachery and sin."

Levin gazed at her intently, and then raised up and looked around him,
and peered down through the old dormers into the green yard, and the
floody river hastening by with such nobility.

"Air we watched?" he inquired.

"By none in this house. All the men are away, making ready for the hunt
to-morrow night. The river is watched, and you would not be let escape
very far, but in this house I am your jailer. Joe told me he would sell
me if I let you get away."

Levin listened and looked once more ardently and wonderingly at her, and
fell upon his knees at her uncovered feet.

"Then, Huldy, hear me, lady with such purty eyes,--I must believe in
'em, wicked as all you look at has been! I never stole anything in my
life, nor trampled on a worm if I could git out of his path,--so help me
my poor mother's prayers! Huldy, how shall I save myself from these
wicked men and the laws I never broke till Sunday? Oh, tell me what to
do!"

"Do anything but commit their crimes," she answered. "Promise me you
will never do that! Let us begin, and be the friends I wished we might
be, before I ever heard you speak. What is your name?"

"Levin--Levin Dennis. My father's lost to me, and mother, too."

"Then Heaven has answered my many prayers, Levin, to give me something
to cherish and protect. I am almost a woman: oh, what is my dreadful
doom?--to become a woman here among these wolves of men, who meet around
my stepfather's tavern to buy the blood and souls of people born free.
Joe Johnson sells everything; he has often threatened to sell me to some
trader whose bold and wicked eyes stared at me so coarsely, and I have
heard them talk of a price, as if I was the merchandise to be
transferred--I, in whose veins every drop of blood is a white woman's."?

"I want you to watch over me, Huldy: I'm a poor drunken boy, my boat
chartered to Joe Johnson fur a week an' paid fur. Tell me what to do,
an' I'll do it."

"First," she said, "you must eat something and drink milk--nothing
stronger. Their brandy, which they 'still themselves, sets people on
fire. I will set the table for you."

It was after the table had been set that Jimmy Phoebus slipped in and
devoured the milk and meat, overhearing the continuance of the
conversation just given; and when his awkward motions had disturbed
these new young friends, Hulda fainted on the stairs before the
apparition Levin did not see, and he snatched the kiss that was like
plucking a pale-red blossom from some dragon's garden.

That night two horses without saddles came to bring them both to
Johnson's Cross-roads, and Levin awoke at Patty Cannon's old residence
on the neighboring farm.

He looked out of the small window in the low roof Upon a little garden,
where a short, stout, powerfully made woman, barefooted, was taking up
some flowers from their beds to put them into boxes of earth.

"Yer, Huldy," exclaimed this woman, "sot 'em all under the glass kivers,
honey, so grandmother will have some flowers for her hat next winter.
They wouldn't know ole Patty down at Cannon's Ferry ef she didn't come
with flowers in her hat."

A mischievous blue-jay was in a large cherry-tree, apparently
domesticated there, and he occupied himself mimicking over the woman's
head the alternate cries of a little bird in terror and a hawk's scream
of victory.

"Shet up, you thief!" spoke the woman, looking up. "Them blue-jays, gal,
the niggers is afeard of, and kills 'em, as Ole Nick's eavesdroppers and
tale-carriers. That's why I keeps 'em round me. They's better than a
watch-dog to bark at strangers, and, caze they steals all their life, I
love' em. Blue-jay, by Ged! is ole Pat Cannon's bird."

"Grandma," Hulda said, "I wish you had a large, elegant garden. You love
flowers."

"Purty things I always _would_ have," exclaimed the bulldog-bodied
woman, with an oath; "bright things I loved when I was a gal, and traded
what I had away fur 'em. Direckly I got big, I traded ugly things fur
'em, like niggers. I'd give a shipload of niggers fur an apern full of
roses."

"Florida, they say, is beautiful, grandma, and flowers are everywhere
there."

"Yes, gal, they says so; but I don't never expect to go thar.
Margaretty, your mommy, likes it thar. Delaware's my home; some of 'em
hates me yer, and the darned lawyers tries to indict me, but I'll live
on the line till they shoves me over it, whar I've been cock of the walk
sence I was a gal."

As Hulda, also barefooted, but moulded like the flowers, so that her
feet seemed natural as the naked roots, carried the boxes around to the
glass beds encircling a chimney--dahlias, autumnal crocuses or saffrons,
tri-colored chrysanthemums or gold-flowers, and the orange-colored
marigolds--the elder woman, resting on her hoe, smelled the turpentine
of a row of tall sunflowers and twisted one off and put it in her
wide-brimmed Leghorn hat.

"When I hornpipe it on the tight rope," Levin heard her chuckle, "one of
these yer big flowers must die with me."

She disappeared into the peach orchard, which tinted the garden with its
pinkish boughs, and Levin improved the chance to look over the cottage
and the landscape.

It was a mere farm, level as a floor, part of a larger clearing in the
primeval woods, where only fire or age had preyed since man was come;
and, although there seemed more land than belonged to this property, no
other house could Levin see over all the prospect except the bold and
tarnished form of Johnson's castle, sliding its long porch forward at
the base of that tall, blank, inexpressive roof which seemed suspended
like the drab curtain of a theatre between the solemn chimney towers;
the northern chimney broad and huge, and bottomed on an arch; the
southern chimney leaner, but erect as a perpetual sentry on the King's
road.

The house where Levin Dennis now looked out was a three-roomed, frame,
double cabin, with beds in every room but the kitchen, and the hip-roof
gave considerable bed accommodation in the attic besides, the rooms
being all small, as was general in that day. Around the house extended a
pretty garden, with some cherry and plum trees and wild peach along its
boundaries, and the fields around contained many stumps, showing that
the clearing had been made not many years before, while here and there
some heaps of brush had been allowed to accumulate instead of being
burned.

As Levin looked at one of those brush-heaps in a low place, a pair of
buzzards slowly and clumsily circled up from it, and, flying low, went
round and round as if they might be rearing their young there and hated
to go far; and, for long afterwards, Levin saw them hovering high above
the spot in parental mindfulness.

He drew his head in the dormer casement, and was making ready to go down
to the breakfast he smelled cooking below, when his own name was
pronounced in the garden, and he stopped and listened.

"You lie!" exclaimed the old woman's voice. "I'll mash you to the
ground!"

"He said so, grandma, indeed he did."

Levin had a peep from the depths of the garret, and he saw that Mrs.
Cannon was standing with the hoe she had been using raised over Hulda's
head, while a demoniac expression of rage distorted her not unpleasing
features.

Levin walked at once to the window and whistled, as if to the bird in
the tree. The older woman immediately dropped her hoe, and cried out to
Levin:

"Heigh, son! ain't you most a-starved fur yer breakfast? It's all ready
fur ye, an' Huldy's waitin' fur ye to come down."

Levin at once went down the short, winding stairs to a table spread in
the kitchen end, and the old woman blew a tin horn towards Johnson's
Cross-roads, as if summoning other boarders, and then she said to Levin,
with a very pleasing countenance:

"Son, these yer no-count people will be askin' you questions to bother
you, and I don't want no harm to come to you, Levin; so you tell
everybody you see yer that Levin Cannon is your name, and they'll think
you's juss one o' my people, and won't ask you no more."

Hulda slightly raised her eyes, which Levin took to mean assent, and he
said:

"Cannon's good enough for a body pore as me."

"You're a-goin' with Joe to-night, ain't you?"

"Yes'm, I b'leeves so."

"That's right, cousin. You'll git rich an' keep your chariot, yit.
Captain Van Dorn's gwyn to head the party. As Levin Cannon, ole Patty's
pore cousin, he'll look out fur you, son. Now have some o' my slappers,
an' jowl with eggs, an' the best coffee from Cannon's Ferry. Huldy, gal,
help yer Cousin Levin! He won't be your sweetheart ef you don't feed him
good."

The breakfast was brought in by a white man with a face scratched and
bitten, and one eye full of congested blood.

"Cy," Patty Cannon cried, "them slappers, I 'spect, you had hard work to
turn with that red eye Owen Daw give you."

"I'll brown both sides of him yit, when I git the griddle ready for
him," the man exclaimed, half snivelling.

"Before you raise gizzard enough for that, little Owen'll peck outen yer
eyes, Cy, like a crow; he's game enough to tackle the gallows. You may
git even with him thar, Cy."

The man turned his cowardly, serving countenance on Levin inquisitively,
and looked sullen and ashamed at Hulda, who observed:

"Cyrus, you are not fit for the rude boys around father's tavern, who
always impose on you. Please don't go there again."

"Where else kin he go?" inquired Patty Cannon, severely; "thar ain't no
church left nigh yer, sence Chapel Branch went to rot for want of
parsons' pay. Let him go to the tavern and learn to fight like a man,
an' if the boys licks him, let him kill some of 'em. Then Joe and the
Captain kin make somethin' of Cy James, an' people around yer'll respect
him. Why, Captain, honey, ain't ye hungry?"

This was addressed to a man with several bruises on his forehead, and an
enormous flaxen mustache, as soft in texture as a child's hair--a man
wearing delicate boots with high Flemish leggings, that curled over and
showed full women's hose of red, over which were buckled trousers of
buff corduroy, covering his thighs only, and fastened above his hips by
a belt of hide. His shirt was of blue figured stuff, and his loose,
unbuttoned coat was a kind of sailor's jacket of tarnished black velvet.
He hung a broad slouched hat of a yellowish-drab color, soft, like all
his clothing, upon a peg in the wall, and bowed to Hulda first with a
smile of welcome, to Madame Cannon cavalierly, and to Levin with a
graceful reserve that attracted the boy's attention from the notorious
woman at he head of the table, and held him interested during all the
meal.

"Pretty Hulda, I salute you! Patty, _buenos dias!_ I hope I see you
well, friend!"--the last to Levin.

As he took up his knife and fork Levin observed a ring, with a pure
white diamond in it, flash upon the Captain's hand. He was a blue-eyed
man, with a blush and a lisp at once, as of one shy, but at times he
would look straight and bold at some one of the group, and then he
seemed to lose his delicacy and become coarse and cold. One such look he
gave at Hulda, who bowed her eyes before it, and looked at him but
little again.

To Levin this man had the greatest fascination, partly from his
extraordinary dress--like costumes Levin had seen at the theatre in
Baltimore, where the pirates on the stage wore a jacket and open shirt
and belt similar in cut though not in material--and partly from his
countenance, in which was something very familiar to the boy, though he
racked his memory in vain for the time and place. The stranger was
hardly more than forty to forty-five years of age, but the mistress of
the house treated him with all the blandishments of a husband.

"Dear Captain! pore honey!" she said; "to have his beautiful yaller hair
tored out by the nigger hawk! Honey, he fell onto me, and I thought a
bull had butted me in the stummick."

"He broke no limbs, Patty," the captain lisped, feeding himself in a
dainty way--and Levin observed that his fork was silver, and his knife
was a clasp-knife with a silver handle, that he had taken from his
pocket--"_Chis! chis!_ if he had snapped my arm, the caravan must have
gone without me to-night. I am sore, though, for Señor was a valiant
wrestler."

"He'll git his pay, honey, when they sot him to work in Georgey an' flog
him right smart, an' we spend the price of him fur punch. He, he! lovey
lad!"

"I took this from him to-day when I searched him carefully," the captain
said, handing Patty Cannon a piece of silver coin.

The woman, though she looked to be little more than fifty years of age,
drew out spectacles of silver from an old leather case, and putting them
on, spelled out the coin:

"George--three--eighteen--eighteen hunderd-and-fifteen!"

She threw up her head so quickly that the spectacles dropped from her
nose, and Hulda caught them, and then Mrs. Cannon turned on Hulda with a
ferocious expression and snatched the spectacles from her hand.

"Whar did the devil git it?" Patty Cannon asked.

"Ah! who knows?" the Captain lisped with pale nonchalance, giving one of
those strong, piercing looks he sometimes afforded, right into the
hostess's eyes. "It might be a coincidence: _chis! chito!_ A shilling of
a certain year is no rare thing. But, Madame Cannon, it becomes slightly
curious when six such shillings, all numbered with that significant
year, came out of the same pocket!"

With this he passed five shillings of the same appearance over to the
hostess, and she put on her spectacles again and looked at them all, and
dropped them in her lap with a weary yet frightened expression, and
muttered:

"Van Dorn, who kin he be?"

"That is of less consequence, my dear, than whether we can afford to
sell him."

The Captain was now looking at Hulda with the same strong intentness,
but her eyes were in her plate; and, though Madame Cannon looked at her,
too, with both interest and dislike, Hulda quietly ate on, unconscious
of their regard.

"Shoo!" the woman said; "people kin scare theirselves every day if they
mind to. We've got him, and, if he knows anything, it's all in that
nigger noddle. So eat and be derned!"

"My guardian angel," the Captain remarked, with a blush and a stronger
lisp, "you may not have observed that I have never ceased to eat, while
you immediately lost your appetite. What will you do with the
shillings?"

Mrs. Cannon took them from her lap, and rose as if she meant to throw
them out of the window, her angry face bearing that interpretation.

"Stop, remarkable woman," the Captain said, pulling his soft, flaxen
mustache with the diamond-flashing hand, "let your fecund resources stop
and counsel, for I am only looking to your happiness, that has so
abundantly blessed my life and banished every superstition from my heart
till I believe in neither ghosts, nor God, nor devil, while you believe
in all of them, and give yourself many such unnecessary friends and
intruders. _Chito! chito!_ as the Cubans say, and hear my suggestion
before you throw away those shillings!"

"Take care how you mock me!" cried Patty Cannon, with her dark, bold
eyes furtive, like one both angered and troubled, and her ruddy cheeks
full of cloudy blood.

"Sit down! Give the shillings to pretty Hulda there."

"To her?"

"_Ya, ya!_ to pleasing Hulda; for what will trouble us then, her sinless
bosom being their safe depository, and her long-lashed eyes melting our
ghosts to gray air?"

With a look of strong dislike, the woman gave Hulda the shillings,
saying:

"If you ever show one of 'em to me, gal, I'll make you swaller it."

Hulda took the silver pieces and looked at them a moment with girlish
delight:

"Oh, grandma, how kind you are! Why do you speak so mad at me when you
give me these pretty things? They seem almost warm in my bosom as I put
them there, like things with life. Let me kiss you for them!"

She rose from the chair and approached the mistress of the house, who
sat in a strange terror, not forbidding the embrace, yet almost
shuddering as Hulda stooped and pressed her pure young lips to the
blanched and dissipated face of Patty Cannon.

The Captain looked at the kiss with his peculiar strong, cold look, and
smiled at Hulda graciously and said:

"There, ladies, repose in each other's confidence! A few shillings for
such a kiss is shameful pay, Aunt Patty. Do you remember as well as I
do, Madame Cannon, that once you missed some money, and thought your
mother had stolen it, and hunted everywhere for it, and it never came to
light?"

"Yes," cried Patty Cannon, "I do," and swore a man's oath.

"Has the Señor been in that direction, do you think? I think he has, for
Melson and Milman are up from Twiford's with the news that Zeke's last
hide has burst her chain and fled, and all the lower Nanticoke gives no
trace of her, and Zeke has passed the heavenly gates."

The Captain drew the back of his silver clasp-knife across his throat,
smilingly, and placed on the table a sailor's sheath-knife.

"Zeke only was untied; it was a too generous omission," he said. "The
Philadelphia woman the Señor says he set free, and that she has gone to
start an alarm against us. The Señor is a cool man: he told me that, and
laughed and roared, and says he will live to see us all in a
picture-frame. _Ayme, ayme_, Patty!"

With her face growing longer and longer, the woman heard these scarcely
intelligible sentences--wholly unintelligible to the younger people--and
to Levin it seemed that she grew suddenly old and yet older, till her
cheeks, but lately blooming, seemed dead and wrinkled, and, from
maintaining the appearance of hardly fifty, and fair at that, she now
looked to be more than sixty years of age, and sad and helpless.

"Van Dorn, I'm dying," she muttered, as her eyes glazed, and she settled
down in her chair like a lump of dough.

"_Ha! O hala hala_! hands off, fair Hulda," the Captain cried,
joyfully, as Hulda had been moved to relieve the poor old woman; "no one
shall assist at these ceremonies of expiation but Van Dorn himself,
whose rights in Mistress Cannon are of priority. She's dropsical, and
hastening to perdition too soon, which I must arrest and let her comfort
me still more. Sweet comforter! Young gentleman, you shall help me."

Levin took hold of Patty Cannon's feet and found that she seemed made of
bone, so tough were her sinews, and Van Dorn easily lifted her broad
shoulders, and so she was laid on a bed in the next room, where the
elegant Captain was seen rubbing her limbs, and even handling a bottle
of leeches, one of which he allowed to crawl over the hand that wore the
diamond, making it look like a ruby melting or in living motion. As this
voracious blood-lover took his fill around the straight ankles of the
hostess, the dainty Captain held her in his arms like an ardent lover.

"Honey," sighed the woman, "my rent is due, and Jake Cannon never waits.
Take Huldy and this yer new recruit, my cousin Levin Cannon, an' drive
'em to the ferry,--an' watch that boy, Van Dorn: I want him broke in!
Give him a pistol and a knife, an' have him cut somebody. Put the
blood-mark on him and he's ours."

"Great woman!" the Captain lisped, prolific of his kisses, "Maria
Theresa! Semiramis! Agrippina! Cleopatra! ever fecund in great ideas and
growing youthful by nightshade, _alto! quedo!_ but I love thee!"

"Am I young a little yit, honey?" asked Patty Cannon. "Oh, don't deceive
me, Van Dorn! Can my eyes look love an' hate, like old times?"

"_Si! quizá!_ More and more, dark angel, entering into black age like
torches in a cave, I see your deep eyes flame; but never do they please
me, Patty, as when they flash on some new wicked idea, like this of
marking the boy for life. Who is he?"

"He's a Cannon, one of the stock that my Delaware man belonged to. His
mother looked down on me fur coming in their family: I have remembered
her."

"You want your young cousin made a felon, then?"

"Yes, honey, I want him scorched, so the devil will know him fur his
own."

The Captain reached down to the lady's feet and pulled off the leech and
held it up against his hollow palm, gorged with the blood of the fair
patient.

"See, Patty! The boy shall drink blood like this, till, drunk with it,
he can hold on no more, and drops into our fate as in this vial."

As he spoke he let the leech fall in the bottle, where its reflection in
the glass seemed to splash blood.

"Ha, ha! Van Dorn, I love you!" the woman cried, and smothered him with
caresses.


CHAPTER XXVII.

CANNON'S FERRY.


When it was announced to Levin and Hulda, who had meantime been talking
in the garden, dangerously near the subject of love, that they were to
be given a ride to Cannon's Ferry with Captain Van Dorn, at the especial
desire of Aunt Patty Cannon--who also sent them a handful of half-cents
to spend--they were both delighted, though Hulda said:

"Dear Levin, if it was only ourselves going for good, how happy we might
be! I could live with your beautiful mother and work for her, and,
knowing me to be always there, you would bring your money home instead
of wasting it."

"Can't we do so some way?" asked Levin. "Oh, I wish I had some sense! I
wish Jimmy Phoebus was yer, Huldy, to take me out thair in the garden
an' whip me like my father. But, if I hadn't come yer, how could I have
seen you, Huldy?"

"How could I have spent such a heavenly night of peace and hope if you
had not come, dear? The Good Being must have led you to me."

"Huldy," said Levin, after thinking to the range of his knowledge,
"maybe thar's a post-office at Cannon's Ferry, an' you kin write a
letter to Jack Wonnell fur me."

"Why not to your mother, Levin?"

"Oh, I am ashamed to tell her; it would kill her."

"If we should be found out, Levin, Aunt Patty would kill me. There is no
paper here, no ink that I can get, the postage on a letter is almost
nineteen cents, and, look! these half-cents are short of the sum by just
two."

"I have gold," cried Levin, thinking of the residue of Joe Johnson's
bounty.

He put his hand into his pocket, but the money was no longer there.

"Hush!" cried Hulda, "you have been robbed. Everybody is robbed who
sleeps here. Grandma can smell gold like the rat that finds yellow
cheese."

The individual who had served the breakfast was seen coming towards
them, a man in size, with a low forehead, no chin to speak of, a long,
crane neck, and a badly scratched and festered face.

"Mister," he said to Levin, "come help me hitch the horses; I'm beat so
I can't see how."

Levin started at once, suggesting to Hulda to make search for his
missing money, and, when they were in the little stable, the man
observed, in a whisper, to Levin:

"By smoke!"

Levin went on putting the bridles and breeching on the horses, when the
man said again, with an insinuating grin:

"By smoke!"

"Heigh?" exclaimed Levin.

"By smoke!" the man remarked again, with a very ardent emphasis.

"You must have been in Prencess Anne," Levin said, "to swar 'by smoke.'"

The ill-raised man, with such an inferior head and cranish neck, now
slipped around to the front of Levin and looked down on him, and
whispered:

"Hokey-pokey!"

The idea crossed Levin's mind that the scullion of Patty Cannon must
have gone crazy.

"Whair did you pick up them words, Cy?" Levin asked.

"Hokey-pokey!" answered Cy James, with a more mysterious and impressive
sufflation; "Hokey-pokey! By smoke! and Pangymonum, too!"

"Why, Cy! what do you mean? Jimmy Phoebus never swars but in them air
words. Do you know Jimmy Phoebus?"

"Pangymonum, too!" hissed Cy James, with every animation. "Hokey-pokey,
three! an' By smoke, one!"

He put his long arms on his knees, and bent down like a great goose, and
stared into Levin's eyes.

"I never had sense enough," Levin said, "to guess a riddle, Cy Jeems.
Them words I have hearn a good man--my mother's friend--use so often
that they scare me. My mind's been a-thinkin' on him night an' day. Oh,
is he dead?"

"By smoke! Hokey-pokey! an' Pangymonum, too!" the long, lean, excited
fellow whispered, with the greatest solemnity.

"They're Jimmy Phoebus's daily words, dear Cyrus. He was killed on the
river night before last; I saw him fall; it is my sin and misery."

"He ain't dead," Cy James whispered, very low and carefully. "I won't
tell you whar he is till you make Huldy _like_ me."

"How kin I do that, Cy?"

"She thinks I'm a coward and gits whipped by Owen Daw. Tell her I ain't
no coward. Tell her I'm goin' to fry all these people on my griddle--all
but Huldy. Tell her I'm only playin' coward till I gets 'em all in
batter an' the griddle greased, an' then I'll be the bully of the
Cross-roads!"

"Do you hate _me_, Cy Jeems? I ain't done nothin' to you. I'm a
prisoner here till I kin git my boat back from Joe an' go to Prencess
Anne."

"I won't hate you if you kin make Huldy love me," Cy James replied.
"Tell her I ain't no coward; that I'm goin' to be free, an' rich too."
He dropped his palms to his knees again, and whispered, "fur I know whar
ole Patty buries her gole an' silver!"

"Come with those horses, you idle lads," the lisping voice of the
Captain was heard to call. "_Ya, ya!_ there, _luego!_ the morning passes
on."

"All ready," Cy James replied, and as they left the stable door he
whispered once again, and looked significantly towards Johnson's
Cross-roads:

"By smoke! Hokey-pokey! an' Pangymonum, too!"

The Captain, looking like a gentleman of the knightly ages misplaced in
this forest lair, held the reins standing on the ground, and handed
Hulda in to the seat beside his own with a grace and a blush and a
lisping laugh that, Levin thought, were very fascinating.

"Now, Master Cannon, take your place in the tail of the vehicle," the
Captain said, bowing to Levin, and darting one of those cold, coarse
looks at him that he vouchsafed but for a moment, like a soft cat that
has all the nature of the rabbit except the tiger's glare.

The vehicle was an old wagon without springs, and Levin's seat was a
piece of board, while Hulda's had a back to it, and the Captain had
padded it with a bear's-skin robe. He looked with the most delicate
attention at Hulda, blushed when she looked at him, and, scarcely
noticing the horses, yet having them under nearly automatic control, he
drove out of Patty Cannon's lane and turned into the woods.

Levin cast one long, prying look at Johnson's tavern, wishing he might
have the gift to see through its weather-stained planking and tall blank
roof, and then he watched the road, of hard sand or piney litter, with
here and there a mud-hole or long, puddly rut in it, unravel like a
ribbon behind the wheels among the thick pines.

He also observed the skill with which the Captain threw his long cowhide
whip, a mere strip of rawhide fastened to a stick, awkward in other
hands; but Van Dorn could brush a fly from either of the short, shaggy
Delaware horses with it, and hardly look where he struck or disturb the
horse, and he could deliver a blow with it by mere sleight that made the
animal stagger and tremble with the abrupt pain.

At a little sandy rill, the only one they crossed, a long water-snake
endeavored to escape before the rapid wagon could strike it, but the
Captain rose to his feet quick and cat-like, and projected the long lash
into the roadside, and the snake writhed and bounded in the air almost
cut in two. Then, sitting again and bending so close to Hulda that his
long, downy mustache of gold touched her cheek, Van Dorn said, softly:

"_Qué hermoso!_ Young wild-flower, let me take a snake out of your path
also?"

"Which one, Captain?"

"It does not matter. Name any one."

"Alas!" said Hulda, "I am of them; how can I wish harm to my stepfather
and my grand-dame? They are not what I wish, but I am commanded to honor
them."

"By whom, fair Hulda?"

"By God. I read it in the Book after I heard it from a slave."

"_Dónde está!_ What slave that we know was so God-read?"

"Poor drunken Dave. He was a good man before he knew us. He told me all
the Commandments for a drink of brandy, and I wrote them down and
afterwards I found them in a book."

"_Chis! chito!_ how graceful is your mind, Hulda! It comes out of the
absolute blank of your condition and discovers things, as the young
osprey, untaught before, knows where to dive for fish. Who that ever
comes to Johnson's Cross-roads brings the Bible?"

"Colonel McLane."

"He? the self-righteous crocodile! he gave you the Book?"

"Yes. He told me Joe and grandma were good people--'conservative good
people,' I think he called it; but he said you believed nothing, and
there was no basis, I think he called it, for 'conservative good' in
you."

"_O hala hala!_ But this is good," the Captain softly remarked, stroking
his golden mustache with the hand that carried the lustrous ring. "Patty
Cannon may be saved; I must be damned; and Allan McLane will sit in
judgment. No, I believe nothing, because such as they believe!"

"That is why nobody likes you," Hulda frankly observed, "agreeable as
you are."

"And can you believe in anything after the surroundings of your
childhood, touching crime like the pond-lily that grows among the
water-snakes?"

"The lily cannot help it, and is just as white as if it grew under
glass, because--"

"Because the lily has none of the blood of the snake?" the captain
lisped. "Do you enter that claim?"

"No," said Hulda; "I know I am born from wicked parents, a daughter of
crime, my father hanged, my mother of dreadful origin, but never have I
felt that God held me accountable for their works if I kept my heart
humble and my hands from sin; and never have I been tempted yet from
within my own nature to enjoy a single moment of such hideous
selfishness. And I thank my kind Maker that something to love and
believe in, though unhappy as myself, has come down the sad pathway I
looked along so many years, and found me waiting for him."

Without reply, the Captain kept his own thoughts for several minutes,
and finally sighed:

"I know one thing in which I might believe, pretty child."

"Oh, then embrace it," Hulda said, "and give your faith a single straw
to cling to."

Van Dorn's hand slipped around her waist, and his florid cheeks and blue
eyes bent beneath her Leghorn hat:

"I find it here, perhaps, Hulda. Shall I embrace your youth with my
strong passion? I fear I love you."

"Yes," she answered, looking up with her long-lashed eyes of such
entrancing gray; "kiss me if it will give you hope!"

The blush and high color went out of his face as he stared into those
passive, large gray orbs, wide open beneath his pouting, rich,
effeminate lips, and, as he hesitated, Hulda repeated:

"Kiss me, if it will make you hope!"

"No, no," he answered; "of all places I am most hopeless _there_."

"I knew you would not kiss me," Hulda said, with a tone above him, "if I
gave you the right for any pure object. The kiss _you_ would give me
does not see its mate in my soul."

"You hate me, then?" said Van Dorn.

"No, I pity you; I pray for you, too."

"For me? What interest have you in me?"

"I do not know," said Hulda. "I have often wondered what made me think
of you so often and, yet, never with admiration. You are the only person
here who appears to have lost something by being here; some portion of
you seems to have disappeared; I have felt that you might have been a
gentleman, though you can never be again. I shrink from you, and still I
pity you. But, with all your handsome ways, I would never love you,
while the poor boy who is riding with us I loved as soon as he came."

"_Chis! chito!_ You can shrink from me and not from a Cannon, too? Why,
girl, you have put him in my power."

"I have been in your power for a long time, Captain Van Dorn, and you
have looked at me with bold and evil eyes many a time, but never came
nearer. When I gaze at you as I did just now, you fly from me. That boy
I love is as safe as I am, in your hands."

"Why, dear presumer? Tell me."

"Because I love him, and you require my pity. As long as you protect
that poor orphan boy I shall carry your name to God for pardon; if you
ever do him harm, my prayers for you will be dumb forever."

"_Oh! aymé! aymé!_" softly laughed Van Dorn, his blush not coming now;
"you forget, Hulda, that I believe in nothing."

They had hardly gone four miles when a little, low-pitched town of small
square houses, strewn about like toy-blocks between pairs of red outside
chimneys, sat, in the soft, humid October morning, along the rim of a
marshy creek that, skirting the hamlet, flowed into the Nanticoke River
a few miles, by its course, above Twiford's wharf. Two streets, formed
by two roads, ended in a third street along the sandy, flattish river
shore, and there stood four or five larger dwellings, like their
humbler neighbors, built of wood, but with bolder, greater chimneys,
rising into the air as if in rivalry of four large ships and brigs that
lay at anchor or beside the two wharves, and threw their masts and spars
into the sailing clouds, making the low forest that closed river and
village in, stoop to its humility. But the beautiful river, with
frequent bluffs of sand and woods, flowing two hundred yards wide in
stately tide, and bearing up to Cannon's Ferry fish-boats and pungies,
Yankee schooners and woodscows, and the signs of life, however lowly,
that floated in blue smoke from many hearths, or sounded in oars,
rigging, and lading, seemed to Hulda human joy and power, and she cried
to Levin:

"Levin, oh, look! Did you ever see as big a place as this? Yonder is the
road to Seaford, just as far as we have come! The big ships are taking
corn for West Indies, and bringing sugar and molasses. That is the ferry
scow, and on the other side it is only five miles to Laurel."

"Do you like to travel that road?" asked the Captain, with his pleasing
lisp and blush returned again.

"It makes me sad," replied Hulda; "but I do not mutter when I go past
the spot, like grandma."

"What spot?" asked Levin.

"Where father killed the traveller," Hulda said. "He died shamefully for
it. You could almost see the place but for yonder woods, where the road
to Laurel climbs the sandy hill."

"What's this?" said Van Dorn, seeing a little crowd around one of the
single-story cabins, and turning his team into the parallel street.

A very tall, grand-looking man towered above the rest, and seemed unable
to stand upright in the low cottage, with his proportions, so that he
took his place on the grassy sand without and gave his directions to
some one within:

"Levy on the spinning-wheel! Simplify the equation! Stand by your _fi.
fa.!_ Don't be chicken-hearted, constable--she's had the equivalent; now
she sees the quotient, too."

Van Dorn looked on and saw a spinning-wheel come out of the door, and a
little wool in a bag after it. Jacob Cannon put his foot on the wheel
and poked his head in the door.

"I see an axe and a coffee-mill there, constable: levy onto 'em with
your _distringas. Experientia docet stultos!_ Pass out that pair of
shoes!"

A voice of a woman crying was heard, and Van Dorn and Levin both leaped
out to look.

Hulda also stepped down and disappeared.

A woman, barely able to stand up, and white as illness and anguish could
make her, had staggered to the door to beg that her shoes be given back,
and pointed to her naked feet.

"Now she's off the bed, levy on that!" cried the military figure with
the long, eloquent face and twinkling eyes; "shove it out the window.
Mind your _fi. fa._ and I'll take care of the quotient."

"Have mercy!" cried the woman; "my child was only born last week."

"Fling out that good chair there, constable. Levy on the green chest!
Don't you see a whole quilt or blanket anywhere! Allow neither tret nor
suttle when you serve a writ for Isaac and Jacob Cannon!"

"Where shall I lie with my babe?" cried the poor woman, looking around
on the naked cabin, where neither bed, nor blanket, nor chair, nor
chest, nor spinning-wheel remained.

"_Li-vari facias!_ and _fi-eri facias!_ If there's a mistake a replevin
lies, but no mistakes are made by Isaac and Jacob Cannon. Constable, I
think I see an iron pot on that crane!"

"It's got meat in it, sir--meat a-bilin'," answered the constable.

"Turn out the meat! Levy on the pot! Make the quotient accurate!
Eliminate the pot from the equation!"

Out came the pot, as the material boiling in it put out the October
fire, and it was thrown in the miscellaneous heap at Jacob Cannon's
feet.

"Now take the cradle, hard-hearted man," the woman cried, "and turn the
baby into the fire, too, since I can cook nothing to make its milk in my
breasts."

"Is the cradle worth anything, constable?" asked the magnificent-looking
man with the gray silvery lights around his horsy nose; "if it's worth
taking, I want it. People who can't pay their debts must live single
like Jacob Cannon, and not be distrained."

A boy, with his face scratched, and dissipation settled in it, bounded
suddenly into the aghast group of spectators, and made a vicious dive to
recover the effects around Jacob Cannon's feet, but that mighty worthy
took him by the collar and, holding him up, dropped him over a fence
like a bug:

"Owen Daw, here be witnesses to an assault _insultus_, actionable as a
trespass _vi_, the quotient whereof is damages or the equivalent in
Georgetown jail. Take heed, good citizens, and especially I note you,
Captain Van Dorn."

"I'll kill him," shouted the young bully of Johnson's Cross-roads, and
late distrainer on the profile of Cyrus James, Esquire, seizing an ugly
stick.

"Justifiable as _son assault demesne_," remarked the creditor,
carelessly, as he wrenched the bobbin from the spinning-wheel and
knocked the boy down with it.

His commanding manner and the ready hand operated to abash the latter,
and, deeply pained with the scene, Levin Dennis fervently and
impulsively cried to Van Dorn:

"Oh, Captain! can't you pay her debts! I'll give all Joe's going to give
me, to pay you back. See how she lays on the bare floor! Hear her child
crying for her! Oh! I think I hear my mother's voice a-callin' of me
home as I listen to it."

Van Dorn, feeling Levin's hands grasp his own with simple confidence,
heard and did not turn his head, while blushes like roses bloomed
successively upon his fresh, effeminate cheeks. He did not repel the
boy's hands, however, but looked at the scene with worldly and unpitying
curiosity.

"To pay the distraints of Isaac and Jacob Cannon," he murmured, softly,
"would keep a poor slaver poor. You must grow accustomed to such cries:
I had to do so. Learn to love money like that merchant and me, and you
will think them music."

"Oh, when we cry to God for mercy, captain, maybe our cries will sound
like that! I can't bear to hear it."

"You told mother, Jake Cannon, when she rented this ole house," the boy,
Owen Daw, exclaimed, "that she needn't pay the rent, if she didn't want
to, till the day of judgment."

"I've got the judgment," Jacob Cannon answered, his whitish eyes seeming
to chuckle to the bridge of his nose, "and this is the day it's due. All
legal days are 'judgment days' to Isaac and Jacob Cannon."

"My son, my son," the woman's voice wailed out to Owen Daw, "I see the
end of your going to Patty Cannon's: my baby to the grave, myself to the
almshouse, and you to the gallows."

"Captain, Captain," Levin cried, "oh, pay the debt for me! Mother's
never been poor as this. Pay it, and I will work fur you anywhair, dear
captain."

"How much is the debt," asked Van Dorn, lispingly.

"Ten dollars," spoke the constable, also moved to shame.

"Cannon, will you take me for it?"

"I'll take your judgment-bond or the cash, Captain Van Dorn, nothing
less."

"Put back her stuff," the captain said, slightly pressing Levin's hand,
as if to say, "This is for you"--"put back her stuff and I'll settle it
with Isaac Cannon."

"God bless you!" cried the woman, taking her babe from the cradle and
hushing its hunger at her breast; "they call you a wicked man, but
blessings on you for all the good you do!"

"_Chito! chito!_" smiled Van Dorn. "I did it for this foolish boy; I pity
none."

Hulda had resorted to the strand, or river street of Cannon's Ferry,
where there were two storehouses, and she had borrowed quill and ink,
and written a letter addressed to "Mrs. Ellenora Dennis, Princess Anne,
Somerset County, Maryland," saying:

"_Madam, Levin, your son, is near this place against his will, among
dangerous men and in great temptation, but he has found a friend. In one
week this friend will try to write again, and, if not heard from, seek
Levin Dennis at Johnson's Cross-roads_."

This letter, written with all her unproficient speed, had just been
folded, wafered, and endorsed, and she had put down one of the shillings
of 1815 to pay the postage, when a shadow fell upon the store counter,
and the letter was withdrawn from her hand; Van Dorn stood by her side.

"_Chis! chito! Es posible?_ A spy, perhaps. Now you will love Van Dorn,
or Grandma Cannon shall hear your letter read!"

"Give it to me, Captain," Hulda pleaded; "she will kill me if she reads
it."

"If it were sent, _pomarosa_, we all might die. No, you are too
dangerous."

He looked, without his blush, at the shilling she was putting back in
her bosom, and his eye was cold and fierce. Hulda's heart sank down.

"Brother Isaac," cried Jacob Cannon, to a man of fine, lean height, who
was at the desk--a man a little shorter than Jacob, and not so much of a
king in appearance but with the same whitish eyes dancing around the
bridge of his nose, and a more covert and thoughtful brow--"Brother
Isaac, Captain Van Dorn is chicken-hearted, and wants to settle the debt
of the Widow O'Day, otherwise Daw."

"By cash or judgment-note, captain?"

"Cash," answered Van Dorn, modestly; "take it out of this double-eagle,
with Madam Cannon's rent for your farm."

"There's a tree--a bee-tree, Brother Jacob, I think you said--cut down
from Mrs. Cannon's field?"

"Yes, actionable under statute made and provided, wilfully to spoil or
destroy any timber or other trees, roots, shrubs, or plants; value of
said bee-tree three dollars; _levari facias!_ The quotient is
unsatisfactory to Isaac and Jacob Cannon."

The eyes of the elder and smaller brother endeavored to have an
introduction to each other through the bridge of his nose.

"Oh, Brother Jacob," he chuckled, "what an executive help you air!
Captain, isn't he a perfect Marius?"

"Madam Cannon," observed the captain, "throws up the farm with this
payment, gentlemen. She has already moved her effects across the line to
son-in-law Johnson's. The bee-tree I know nothing about."

"Brother Jacob," spoke Isaac Cannon, "Moore takes the farm! Let him be
notified that his rent commences without day."

"Execution made, Brother Isaac," answered the Marius of the family.
"This morning, perceiving Patty Cannon about to move her effects, my
bailiff seized on her plough as security for the aforesaid bee-tree
spoiled, maimed, and destroyed, and Moore is ploughing to put in his
wheat with it already. Time is money to Isaac and Jacob Cannon."

"Ha, ha! what an executive comfort! Brother Jacob never adds an item to
profit and loss."

"Gentlemen," said Van Dorn, "I recommend you not to be charging
bee-trees to tenants in the vicinity of Johnson's Cross-roads. It's an
unusual item, and we are raising young men there who may not understand
it."

"Captain," said the elder Cannon, chuckling as if still in admiration of
Marius's subtlety, "I recollect now that our ferryman brought over a man
from Laurel this morning with some news. A woman with a broken shackle
reported there last night, and said she was the slave of Daniel Custis
of Princess Anne: she came from Broad Creek."

"Where did she go?"

"A Methodist preacher put her in his buggy and started to her master's
with her."

"Then she'll beat the wind," said Van Dorn; "these preachers are all
horse-jockeys, and can outswap the devil. _Hola! ya, ya!_ I must see to
this."

He strode out, with a cold eye glanced at Hulda.

"Come, young people," spoke the grand head of Jacob Cannon to Levin and
Hulda; "I will show you my museum."

He led the way to a warehouse overhanging the river and unlocked a door,
and told them to walk carefully till they could see in the dark of the
interior.

Levin kept Hulda's hand in his as they slowly saw emerge from the
shadows a great variety of dissimilar things heaped together, till the
house could hardly hold the vast aggregate of pots and kettles,
spinning-wheels and cradles, bedsteads and beds, harrows and ploughs,
chairs and gridirons, rakes and hoes, silhouettes and picture-frames,
hand-made quilts of calico and pillows of home-plucked geese feathers,
fishermen's nets and oars--whatever made the substance of living in an
old country without minerals and manufactures, in the early part of the
nineteenth century.

"Whare did you git' em, sir?" Levin asked.

"Executed of 'em," said the warrior head and stature of Jacob Cannon;
"pounced on 'em; satisfied judgments upon 'em. _Fi. fa.!_ We call
this Peale's Museum Number Two, or the Variegated Quotient."

"All these things taken from the poor?" asked Hulda. "How many miseries
they tell!"

"Mr. Cannon," said Levin, "what kin you do with 'em? People won't buy
'em. They're just a-rottin' to pieces."

"We keep' em to show all them who trespass on Isaac and Jacob Cannon,"
answered Marius, with easy grandeur, "that there is a judgment-day!"

Hulda's long-lashed gray eyes, with a look of more than childish
contempt, accompanied her words:

"I should think you would fear that day, Mr. Cannon, when you say the
prayer, 'Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive those who trespass
against us.'"

The wind from the river seemed to bend the old warehouse, and the noise
it made through the chinks and around the corners, slightly stirring the
loosely disposed pile of cottage and hut comforts, seemed to arouse low
wails among these as when they were torn from the chimney side and the
family.

"Where is my baby?" the cradle seemed to say, "that I received and
rocked warm from the womb of pain? Oh, I am hungry for his little
smile!"

"Why do I rest my busy wheel?" the spinner seemed to creak, "when I know
my children are without stockings? Who keeps me here idle while Mother
asks for me?"

"Where is the old gray head," sighed the feathers, sifting in the breeze
from a broken pillow-case, "that every night and in the afternoons dozed
on our bag of down, and picked us over once a year, and said her prayers
in us? Oh, is she sleeping on the cold, bare floor, and we so useless!"

The pot seethed to the kettle, "It is dinner-time, and the little boys
are crying for food, and still there is no one to lift me on the crane
and start the fire beneath me! What will they think of me, they gathered
around so many years and watched me boil, and poked their little fingers
in to taste the stewing meat? I want to go! I want to go!"

The kettle answered to the pot: "I never sung since the constable forced
me from grandmother's hand, and robbed her of the cup of tea."

The old quilt of many squares fluttered in the draught: "Take me to the
young wife who sewed me together and showed me so proudly, for I fear
she is a-cold since her young husband died!"

These household sounds the thrilled young lovers, standing so poor and
on the brink of what they knew not, seemed to hear in awe, and drew
closer to each other, like young Eve and Adam in the great wreck of
Paradise and at the voice of God.

Hand in hand they stepped forth into the bright light of day, and walked
along the sandy street beneath the tall locust, maple, and ailanthus
trees that grew in line along the front yards of the Cannon brothers.
Four large houses stood sidewise, end to end, here: first, Cannon's
business house; next, Isaac Cannon's comfortable home, where he dwelt, a
married man; and, third, the elegant frame mansion, with tall, airy
chimneys, of Jacob Cannon the bachelor, whose house, built for a bride,
had never yet been warmed by a fire; finally, the old, bow-roofed, low
dwelling of the mother of the Cannons, opposite which was the ferry
wharf, and Van Dorn talking to the negro ferryman.

"Levin," said pretty Hulda, not sad, but very grave, "this noble house
is like that noble-looking Mr. Cannon, hollow and cold. He lives with
his brother Isaac, and keeps his own dwelling empty and locked up,
because he loved money too much to find a wife."

"Let us love each other, Huldy," Levin said; "it is all we've got."

"It is all there is to get, my love," Hulda answered. "Yes, I do love
you, Levin. I will try to save you, if I can, because I love you, though
suffering may come to me."

"No," cried Levin, "I cannot leave you, dear. If I could now cross in
the ferry-boat, I wouldn't do it; I must go back with you."

As Captain Van Dorn came up from the wharf, blushing like a school-boy,
and tapping his white teeth together under the long flax of his
mustache, his attention was arrested by a proclamation pasted on a post:


      "_Five Hundred Dollars Reward, for_

      JOSEPH MOORE JOHNSON, KIDNAPPER.

  "_The above reward will be paid by me to any person or
  persons--and they will be exempted from detention--who
  will deliver to me the body of the above-named miscreant, that
  he may be brought to trial in Pennsylvania_.

      "JOSEPH WATSON, _Mayor of Philadelphia_."


"_Chis! he!_" Van Dorn sighed; "the end must soon be near. Now, young
people, come!"

As they passed Cannon's place, going out of town, the familiar voice of
Jacob was heard to cry:

"Owen Daw's escaped, Brother Isaac; but we'll clap it to him on a _de
bonis non_. I'll never take my eye off him till I die."

"Brother Jacob, what an executive help you air!"

As Van Dorn drove the horses up the slight ascent in the rear of the
ferry, past an ancient double puncheon house there, with an arch in the
centre, young Hulda--who now wore shoes and stockings, and a presentable
dress of English goods, and looked quite the woman out of her sincere
and sometimes proud and eloquent eyes--said to him, as she pointed back:

"Captain, it was there my father killed the traveller, where we see the
road beyond the ferry enter the pines."

"Yes," said Van Dorn, giving her a cold look; "we might see the place
but for the woods. It is at a hill, a short mile from the Nanticoke."

"Tell Levin about it, captain."

"_Quedo, quedo!_ It would not be pleasant."

"Yes," said Hulda; "if it was true, I can hear it: I want Levin to hear
it, too, so that no deceit shall be between us."

Her smooth, moist hair, gray, humid eyes, complexion born between the
rose and dew, and straight, lithe figure, and air of dignity and truth,
impressed Van Dorn curiously:

"How bold you grow, wild-flower! Cannot you stoop to re-create me? I,
too, would live without deceit. But I will not tell you that story."

"You are afraid," spoke Hulda, feeling that nothing but this man and
three miles of level road separated her from the vengeance of Patty
Cannon, and that she must assert herself strongly over him.

"_Ya, ya!_ Are you not harsh? Remember, you may be whipped by your
grandma."

"No, you will whip me, or kill me, if it is to be done. You dare not
give me to her to punish."

"Dare not, again? Why?"

"Because you are my guardian. Between us is an instinct different from
love, but strong; I feel it. I lean towards you, but not on you. What is
it?"

"_O Dios!_" lisped Van Dorn, his blush suspended and his warm blue eyes
fascinated by her. "Is this a child or Echo?"

"Tell me of my father's crime. I want Levin to know the wretched thing
he has affection for."

"_Ayme! ah!_ Well, listen, young lovers; and see what grisly things walk
in these pines! There was a man named Brereton; they call him Bruington
here, where their noses are twisted and their chins weak. He came from
old Lewes, off to the east by Cape Henlopen, and of a stout family, in
which was a grain of evil ever smoking through the blood. Do you
sometimes feel it, Hulda?"

"No, not evil like that."

"He was apprenticed to a blacksmith, and held the iron while the master
struck. One day a man came in the shop, whose horse had thrown a shoe,
to have a shoeing, and, when he paid for it, he took a handful of money
from his pocket, and one piece--a dollar--fell in the soft soot of the
shop, unperceived but by the boy: _chis!_ he covered it with his foot."

Van Dorn's whip-lash firmly covered a huge fly on the horse's ear, and
laid it dead.

"When the man departed, the boy raised his foot and uncovered the
dollar; his master said, 'Smart boy!' They divided the stolen dollar."

"Jimmy Phoebus says the fust step is half of a journey," Levin noted.

"The blacksmith's boy looked avariciously on travellers ever after, who
might possess a dollar. He took the empty shop of Patty Cannon's first
husband, years after that saint died, and worked on hobbles, clevises,
and chains to hold the kidnapped articles of commerce. Naturally he
kidnapped, too, and, while she was yet a child, Patty's daughter became
Brereton's wife, bestowed by the fond, appreciative mother. Master
Levin, if you fall into his path, Brereton's daughter may be bestowed on
you. _Hola!_ behold her in Hulda."

"I can't see any of that sin in Hulda, Captain; she ain't even ashamed."

"No," affirmed Hulda, looking sincerely at Van Dorn; "it is too true to
make me ashamed. I feel as if God's hand covered me like the silver
dollar under my father's foot, because he let me survive such parents."

As she spoke she took one of the silver shillings of 1815 and covered it
with her hand in Van Dorn's sight. Van Dorn spoke on rapidly:

"There were two brothers named Griffin from about Cambridge, in
Maryland; spoiled boys who had taken to the flesh trade, and they stole
men and gambled the proceeds away, and Brereton was their leader. One
day a traveller came by from Carolina, hunting contraband slaves, and he
was of your boastful sort, and dropped the hint that he had fifteen
thousand dollars on his body to be invested. No later had he spoken than
he felt his folly, from the burning eyes around him and watering mouths
telling him to sleep there and slaves would be fetched; so he started in
a fright for Laurel, by way of Cannon's Ferry, intending to deposit his
money or make them deal with him there. The word was passed to Brereton
by his wife or mother-in-law, and by Brereton to the Griffins, to mount
and intercept the gold. Some say," lisped Van Dorn, "that Mistress
Cannon, dressed in man's clothes, commanded the band."

A deep, chuckling interest, like the sound of a hidden brook, attended
Van Dorn's recital, and he was blushing like a girl.

"At Slabtown, a nondescript spot a mile above Cannon's, the
light-marching band crossed in a row-boat; they piled brush and bent
down saplings in the traveller's road, where he should almost reach the
brow of the hill in his buggy, and when the fleshmonger halted at the
obstacle, _chis, hola!_ they let him have it on both sides, and sent
icicles to his heart. He drew a pistol, but in a dying hand. 'Away!'
cried the assassins; 'he is not dead.' His horse, in fright at bursting
firearms in the evening shades, leaped the brushy barriers and galloped
to Laurel, and delivered there an ashy-visaged effigy, down whose beard
the red dye of his life dripped audibly, as he sat stiff in death in the
buggy. His name was only guessed; how happy he in that!"

"And what was the fate of the murderers?" Hulda asked, with less horror
than Levin showed.

"Three of them were arrested; one of the Griffins exposed his brother
and Captain Brereton; these two died on the gallows at Georgetown, young
Brereton exerting himself under the noose to prevent his injudicious
comrade saying too much on peerless Patty Cannon and her fair sisters,
and thinking on their interests more than on this living child. Ha!
Hulda _Brereton?_"

"The other Griffin also suffered death?" suggested Hulda, with a pale,
unevasive countenance.

"Yes, your fond grandma, then in her blazing charms, drew him to her
band again with the lure of Widow Brereton's hand; he killed a constable
to recommend himself the better, and died on the gallows at his native
Cambridge. _Hala hala!_ she gave your mother, wild-flower Hulda, to Joe
Johnson next to wife."

"It is an awful story," Levin said, "but Hulda never saw it."

"I can remember my father," said Hulda; "a large, strong man, with a
slow, heavy face, but he never smiled on me."

"Well, here is the cross-roads," said Van Dorn. "What shall I do with
this letter, bad wild-flower?"

"Read it, if you will, or take this English shilling and post it."

Van Dorn shrank back, rejecting the money.

"Will you not buy it back, Hulda," he whispered, "with love?"

"Never."

"You may pay for this letter this night with your life or modesty!"

"You dare not kill me," Hulda said.

"You will see," said Van Dorn.


CHAPTER XXVIII.

PACIFICATION.


Princess Anne had missed for several days some conspicuous citizens,
such as Daniel Custis and wife, Captain Phoebus, Levin Dennis, and the
free negro Samson--large components of a small town; but it had also
gained what everybody admitted to be the most beautiful woman in the
place except Mrs. Vesta Milburn--the brown-eyed, tall, roguish niece of
Meshach Milburn, whom Vesta had made a lady of in externals, corrected
some of her faults, such as the sniffle, and was daily teaching her the
mysteries of grammar and address, aided by the rector of the parish,
whose heart was roused to partial animation again by the young visitor.

Loyally William Tilghman had pressed his friendship on Vesta's
semi-social husband, determined to like him, and finding small
resistance there, and, happily, no suspicion; and this was so grateful
to Vesta that she indulged the hope that her cousin and late lover would
find compensation for her loss in Rhoda Holland.

Love came easily on as a topic of talk where Rhoda, with her
unconventional preference for that subject, introduced it.

"Mr. William"--she had got that far towards the inevitable
"William"--said Rhoda, one evening at Teackle Hall, as they sat in the
library, "do preachers love jus' like other folks? Misc Somers say they
is drea'fle sly-boots. She say thar was a preacher down yer to Girdle
Tree Hill that preached the Meal-an-the-Yum was a-goin' to happen right
off."

"Millennium," suggested Tilghman.

"Maybe so. Misc Somers call it 'the Meal-an-the-Yum,' I thought. Anyway,
they was all goin' to rise, right off, an' he with 'em. Lord sakes! they
had frills put on thar night-gowns to rise in. An' the night before they
was a-goin' up, that ar scamp run away with a widder an' her darter,
jilted the widder an' married the darter; an' they couldn't rise at
Girdle Tree Hill caze the preacher wa'n't thar, an' they didn't know
when."

"And I suppose Mrs. Somers tells it on him?" William Tilghman added.

"That she do. Now, was you ever in love, Mr. William?"

"I have been thinking, Rhoda, that when you are a good scholar, and
grandmother and you grow to like each other, as I believe you will, I
might fall in love with you."

"Lord sakes! Me loved by a preacher? Couldn't I never stay home from the
preachin'? But then, to hear your own ole man a-barkin' away at the
other gals, I think it would be right good!"

The subject had now gone to that length that in a few days, to
Grandmother Tilghman's slight indignation, Rhoda called the rector
"William," and he answered her, "Dear Rhoda."

The triple widow, however, had one lane to her consideration, up which
the artful Rhoda strayed as soon as she saw the gate ajar.

"Misc Tilghman," she said one day, "I been a-lookin' at you. I 'spect
you was a real beauty. If you wasn't a little quar, nobody would see you
was a ole woman now."

"I was a belle," spoke the blind old lady, emphatically. "General John
Eager Howard said he would rather talk with me than hear an oration from
Fisher Ames. Charles Carroll, of Carrollton, proposed to me when I was
old enough to be your grandmother, and after Susan Decatur, the
commodore's widow, had tried in vain to get an offer from him. Said I,
'Carroll, is this another Declaration of Independence? No,' said I,
'Carroll, I won't reduce the last signer, it may be, to obedience on a
wife going blind. That would be worse slavery than George the Third's!'
He said I was a Spartan widow."

"Every widow I ever see was a sparkin' widow," Rhoda naïvely concluded,
at which Mrs. Tilghman had to join in the laughter, and there was no
evil feeling.

Jack Wonnell now held the temporary post of cook and woodchopper at
Teackle Hall, and Roxy saw him every day, sewed his tattered clothing
up, put the germs of self-respect in him, and caused Vesta to say to her
husband, as they were sitting in his storehouse parlor one afternoon, in
the intermission of his chill and sweat:

"Such rapid changes have taken place here, Mr. Milburn, that they have
disturbed my judgment, and now I hardly know whether my oldest prejudice
is assured, as I see that white man the happy domestic servant of my
pure slave girl. She seems to have no greater affection than pity and
interest for him, while he is made more of a man by his undisguised
devotion to her. No man could work better than he does now."

"Love is so great, so occult," the husband said, his brown eyes
searching his wife's face over, "that its combinations have centuries
left to run before they shall beat every prejudice down, and prove, in
spite of sin and dispersion, that of one blood are all the nations
made."[4]


CHAPTER XXIX.

BEGINNING OF THE RAID.


The raid into Delaware was all organized when Levin and Hulda were
driven to Johnson's tavern, and the arrival of Van Dorn called forth
cheers and yells, as that blushing worthy threw his trim, athletic
figure out of the wagon and bowed to Joe Johnson, on the tavern porch:

"_O hala hala!_ do you go, son-in-law?"

"I'll ride with ye, Captain, a split of the Maryland way, but sprat for
that Delaware! I'll go in it no more. I'll stand whack with you,
however, fur the madges I give you and fur my stalling ken."

"_Quedito!_" lisped Van Dorn; "we never leave your interests out,
son-in-law. How is Aunt Patty?"

