Produced by Bruce Albrecht, Martin Pettit and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


THE WORLD PERIL OF 1910

BY

GEORGE GRIFFITH

AUTHOR OF
"THE ANGEL OF THE REVOLUTION," "A CONQUEST OF FORTUNE,"
"A MAYFAIR MAGICIAN," "HIS BETTER HALF," ETC. ETC.

LONDON

F. V. WHITE & CO. LTD.

14, BEDFORD STREET, STRAND, W.C.

1907


CONTENTS


   CHAP.                                             PAGE

  PROLOGUE--A RACE FOR A WOMAN                          1

      I. A MOMENTOUS EXPERIMENT                         9

     II. NORAH'S GOOD-BYE                              17

    III. SEEN UNDER THE MOON                           24

     IV. THE SHADOW OF THE TERROR                      31

      V. A GLIMPSE OF THE DOOM                         37

     VI. THE NOTE OF WAR                               47

    VII. CAUGHT!                                       55

   VIII. FIRST BLOOD                                   63

     IX. THE "FLYING FISH" APPEARS                     72

      X. FIRST BLOWS FROM THE AIR                      79

     XI. THE TRAGEDY OF THE TWO SQUADRONS              88

    XII. HOW LONDON TOOK THE NEWS                      98

   XIII. A CRIME AND A MISTAKE                        106

    XIV. THE EVE OF BATTLE                            115

     XV. THE STRIFE OF GIANTS                         123

    XVI. HOW THE FRENCH LANDED AT PORTSMOUTH          132

   XVII. AWAY FROM THE WARPATH                        143

  XVIII. A GLIMPSE OF THE PERIL                       151

    XIX. A CHANGE OF SCENE                            160

     XX. THE NIGHT OF TERROR BEGINS--                 167

    XXI. --AND ENDS                                   176

   XXII. DISASTER                                     182

  XXIII. THE OTHER CAMPAIGN BEGINS                    189

   XXIV. TOM BOWCOCK--PITMAN                          195

    XXV. PREPARING FOR ACTION                         201

   XXVI. THE FIRST BOMBARDMENT OF LONDON              208

  XXVII. LENNARD'S ULTIMATUM                          215

 XXVIII. CONCERNING ASTRONOMY AND OYSTERS             223

   XXIX. THE LION WAKES                               231

    XXX. MR PARMENTER SAYS                            239

   XXXI. JOHN CASTELLAN'S THREAT                      247

  XXXII. A VIGIL IN THE NIGHT                         254

 XXXIII. MR PARMENTER RETURNS                         261

  XXXIV. THE "AURIOLE"                                268

   XXXV. THE "AURIOLE" HOISTS THE WHITE ENSIGN        273

  XXXVI. A PARLEY AT ALDERSHOT                        281

 XXXVII. THE VERDICT OF SCIENCE                       288

XXXVIII. WAITING FOR DOOM                             295

  XXXIX. THE LAST FIGHT                               298

  EPILOGUE--"AND ON EARTH, PEACE!"                    305


THE WORLD PERIL OF 1910


PROLOGUE

A RACE FOR A WOMAN


In Clifden, the chief coast town of Connemara, there is a house at the
end of a triangle which the two streets of the town form, the front
windows of which look straight down the beautiful harbour and bay, whose
waters stretch out beyond the islands which are scattered along the
coast and, with the many submerged reefs, make the entrance so
difficult.

In the first-floor double-windowed room of this house, furnished as a
bed-sitting room, there was a man sitting at a writing-table--not an
ordinary writing-table, but one the dimensions of which were more suited
to the needs of an architect or an engineer than to those of a writer.
In the middle of the table was a large drawing-desk, and on it was
pinned a sheet of cartridge paper, which was almost covered with
portions of designs.

In one corner there was what might be the conception of an engine
designed for a destroyer or a submarine. In another corner there was a
sketch of something that looked like a lighthouse, and over against this
the design of what might have been a lantern. The top left-hand corner
of the sheet was merely a blur of curved lines and shadings and
cross-lines, running at a hundred different angles which no one, save
the man who had drawn them, could understand the meaning of.

In the middle of the sheet there was a very carefully-outlined drawing
in hard pencil of a craft which was different from anything that had
ever sailed upon the waters or below them, or, for the matter of that,
above them.

To the right hand there was a rough, but absolutely accurate, copy of
this same craft leaving the water and flying into the air, and just
underneath this a tiny sketch of a flying fish doing the same thing.

The man sitting before the drawing-board was an Irishman. He was one of
those men with the strong, crisp hair, black brows and deep brown eyes,
straight, strong nose almost in a line with his forehead, thin, nervous
lips and pointed jaw, strong at the angles but weak at the point, which
come only from one descent.

Nearly four hundred years before, one of the ships of the great Armada
had been wrecked on Achill Island, about twenty miles from where he sat.
Half a dozen or so of the crew had been saved, and one of these was a
Spanish gentleman, captain of Arquebusiers who, drenched and bedraggled
as he was when the half-wild Irish fishermen got him out of the water,
still looked what he was, a Hidalgo of Spain. He had been nursed back to
health and strength in a miserable mud and turf-walled cottage, and,
broken in fortune--for he was one of the many gentlemen of Spain who had
risked their all on the fortunes of King Philip and the Great Armada,
and lost--he refused to go back to his own country a beaten man.

And meanwhile he had fallen in love with the daughter of his nurse, the
wife of the fisherman who had taken him more than half dead out of the
raging Atlantic surf.

No man ever knew who he was, save that he was a gentleman, a Spaniard,
and a Catholic. But when he returned to the perfection of physical and
mental health, and had married the grey-eyed, dark-browed girl, who had
seemed to him during his long hours of sickness the guardian angel who
had brought him back across the line which marks the frontier between
life and death, he developed an extraordinary talent in boat-building,
which was the real origin of the wonderful sea-worthiness of small
craft which to this day brave, almost with impunity, the terrible seas
which, after an unbroken run of almost two thousand miles, burst upon
the rock-bound, island-fenced coast of Connemara.

The man at the table was the descendant in the sixth generation of the
unknown Spanish Hidalgo, who nearly four hundred years before had said
in reply to a question as to what his name was:

"Juan de Castillano."

As the generations had passed, the name, as usual, had got modified, and
this man's name was John Castellan.

"I think that will about do for the present," he said, getting up from
the table and throwing his pencil down. "I've got it almost perfect
now;" and then as he bent down again over the table, and looked over
every line of his drawings, "Yes, it's about all there. I wonder what my
Lords of the British Admiralty would give to know what that means. Well,
God save Ireland, they shall some day!"

He unpinned the paper from the board, rolled it up, and put it into the
top drawer of an old oak cabinet, which one would hardly have expected
to find in such a room as that, and locked the drawer with a key on his
keychain. Every general and every admiral will be compelled to obey the
orders of the Administration.

If the Administration be in the hands of secret traitors, the immense
military and naval power of the country will be used for its own
destruction. A compromise will be patched up with the Rebel States.
The leaders of the rebellion will be invited back to their old seats
of power. A united South combined with a Pro-slavery faction in the
North will rule the nation. And all this enormous evil will be
caused by the simplicity of honest men in falling into the trap set
for them by traitors and rogues.

REVIEWS AND LITERARY NOTICES.

_The Tariff-Question, considered in Regard to the Policy of England
and the Interests of the United States; with Statistical, and
Comparative Tables_. By ERASTUS B. BIGELOW. Boston: Little, Brown, & Co.
4to.

Under this modest title, the American public is presented with a work of
uncommon research, and of great practical utility and value.

Its author is well known as a skilful and most successful inventor, in
whose admirable power-looms nearly all the carpets of the world are now
woven.
On the subject of manufactures few can speak with more authority, whether
in reference to its general bearings or its minute details.

The work before us affords ample proof of his ability to discuss one of
the most important questions in political economy.

The hundred pages of text are followed by two hundred and thirty-four
pages of tabular statistics.

This large and well-arranged body of invaluable information, though styled
an appendix, was, in fact, the precursor of the argument, and constitutes
the solid base on which it rests. These tables are "not mere copies or
abstracts, but the result of labored and careful selection, comparison,
and combination." In this treasury of facts, derived for the most part
from official records, the commercial and industrial interests of the
United States and of England, especially, are presented in all their
most important aspects and relations. The amount of information here given
is immense; and knowing, as we do, the scrupulous care of the
collector, we cannot doubt its accuracy.

Independently of its connection with the author's argument, this feature
of the work cannot fail to give it value and a permanent place in every
library, office, counting-room, and workshop of the country.

In his discussion of the tariff question, Mr. Bigelow assumes it as a
settled principle of national policy that revenue should be raised
by duties on imports.

To clear the ground from ambiguity, he states exactly what he means
when he uses the terms "free-trade" and "protection," and then proceeds
to describe and explain the tariff-policy of Great Britain.

Not without good reason does he give this prominence to the action of
that great power. It is not merely that England stands at the head of
manufacturing and commercial nations, or that our business-connections
with her are intimate and extensive. The fact which makes English
policy so important an element in the discussion is found in the
persistent and too often successful efforts of that country to
shape American opinion and legislation on questions of manufacture
and trade. Nowhere else have we seen the utter fallacy of the
free-trade argument, as urged by Great Britain on other countries
upon the strength of her own successful example, so clearly shown.
The nature, object, extent, and motive of the tariff-reforms effected
by Sir Robert Peel and Mr."That was a fine shot you killed the drake with," said the Irishman,
looking at the bird he was carrying by the legs in his left hand.

"A good gun, and a wire cartridge, I fancy, were mainly responsible for
his death," laughed the Englishman. "See you've got the other."

"Yes, and missed yours," said the Irishman.

The other recognised the tone as that of a man to whom failure, even in
the most insignificant matter, was hateful, and he saw a quick gleam in
his eyes which he remembered afterwards under very different
circumstances.

But it so happened that the rivalry between them which was hereafter to
have such momentous consequences was to be manifested there and then in
a fashion much more serious than the hitting or missing of a brace of
wild fowl.

Out on the smooth waters of the bay, about a quarter of a mile from the
spit on which they stood, there were two boats. One was a light skiff,
in which a girl, clad in white jersey and white flannel skirt, with a
white Tam o' Shanter pinned on her head, was sculling leisurely towards
the town. From the swing of her body, the poise of her head and
shoulders, and the smoothness with which her sculls dropped in the water
and left it, it was plain that she was a perfect mistress of the art;
wherefore the two men looked at her, and admired.

The other craft was an ordinary rowing boat, manned by three lads out
for a spree. There was no one steering and the oars were going in and
out of the water with a total disregard of time. The result was that her
course was anything but a straight line. The girl's sculls made no
noise, and the youths were talking and laughing loudly.

Suddenly the boat veered sharply towards the skiff. The Englishman put
his hands to his mouth, and yelled with all the strength of his lungs.

"Look out, you idiots, keep off shore!"

But it was too late. The long, steady strokes were sending the skiff
pretty fast through the smooth water. The boat swerved again, hit the
skiff about midway between the stem and the rowlocks, and the next
moment the sculler was in the water. In the same moment two guns and two
ducks were flung to the ground, two jackets were torn off, two pairs of
shoes kicked away, and two men splashed into the water. Meanwhile the
sculler had dropped quietly out of the sinking skiff, and after a glance
at the two heads, one fair and the other dark, ploughing towards her,
turned on her side and began to swim slowly in their direction so as to
lessen the distance as much as possible.

The boys, horrified at what they had done, made such a frantic effort to
go to the rescue, that one of them caught a very bad crab; so bad,
indeed that the consequent roll of the boat sent him headlong into the
water; and so the two others, one of whom was his elder brother, perhaps
naturally left the girl to her fate, and devoted their energies to
saving their companion.

Both John Castellan and the Englishman were good swimmers, and the race
was a very close thing. Still, four hundred yards with most of your
clothes on is a task calculated to try the strongest swimmer, and,
although the student had swum almost since he could walk, his muscles
were not quite in such good form as those of the ex-athlete of
Cambridge who, six months before, had won the Thames Swimming Club
Half-mile Handicap from scratch.

Using side stroke and breast-stroke alternately they went at it almost
stroke for stroke about half a dozen yards apart, and until they were
within thirty yards or so of the third swimmer, they were practically
neck and neck, though Castellan had the advantage of what might be
called the inside track. In other words he was a little nearer to the
girl than the Englishman.

When circumstances permitted they looked at each other, but, of course,
neither of them was fool enough to waste his breath in speech. Still,
each clearly understood that the other was going to get the girl first
if he could.

So the tenth yard from the prize was reached, and then the Englishman
shook his head up an inch, filled his lungs, rolled on to his side, and
made a spurt with the reserve of strength which he had kept for the
purpose. Inch by inch he drew ahead obliquely across Castellan's course
and, less than a yard in front of him, he put his right hand under the
girl's right side.

A lovely face, beautiful even though it was splashed all over with wet
strands of dark chestnut hair, turned towards him; a pair of big blue
eyes which shone in spite of the salt water which made them blink,
looked at him; and, after a cough, a very sweet voice with just a
suspicion of Boston accent in it, said:

"Thank you so much! It was real good of you! I can swim, but I don't
think I could have got there with all these things on, and so I reckon I
owe you two gentlemen my life."

Castellan had swum round, and they took her under the arms to give her a
rest. The two boys left in the boat had managed to get an oar out to
their comrade just in time, and then haul him into the boat, which was
now about fifty yards away; so as soon as the girl had got her breath
they swam with her to the boat, and lifted her hands on to the gunwale.

"If you wouldn't mind, sir, picking up those oars," said the
Englishman, "I will get the young lady into the boat, and then we can
row back."

Castellan gave him another look which said as plainly as words: "Well, I
suppose she's your prize for the present," and swam off for the oars.
With the eager help of the boys, who were now very frightened and very
penitent, the Englishman soon had the girl in the boat; and so it came
about that an adventure which might well have deprived America of one of
her most beautiful and brilliant heiresses, resulted in nothing more
than a ducking for two men and one girl, a wet, but somehow not
altogether unpleasant walk, and a slight chill from which she had quite
recovered the next morning.

The after consequences of that race for the rescue were of course, quite
another matter.


CHAPTER I

A MOMENTOUS EXPERIMENT


On the first day of July, 1908, a scene which was destined to become
historic took place in the great Lecture Theatre in the Imperial College
at Potsdam. It was just a year and a few days after the swimming race
between John Castellan and the Englishman in Clifden Bay.

There were four people present. The doors were locked and guarded by two
sentries outside. The German Emperor, Count Herold von Steinitz,
Chancellor of the Empire, Field-Marshal Count Friedrich von Moltke,
grandson of the great Organiser of Victory, and John Castellan, were
standing round a great glass tank, twenty-five feet long, and fifteen
broad, supported on a series of trestles. The tank was filled with water
up to within about six inches of the upper edge. The depth was ten feet.
A dozen models of battleships, cruisers and torpedo craft were floating
on the surface of the water. Five feet under the surface, a grey,
fish-shaped craft with tail and fins, almost exactly resembling those of
a flying fish, was darting about, now jumping forward like a cat
pouncing on a bird, now drawing back, and then suddenly coming to a
standstill. Another moment, it sank to the bottom, and lay there as if
it had been a wreck. The next it darted up to the surface, cruised about
in swift curves, turning in and out about the models, but touching none.

Every now and then John Castellan went to a little table in the corner
of the room, on which there was a machine something like a typewriter,
and touched two or three of the keys. There was no visible connection
between them--the machine and the tank--but the little grey shape in
the water responded instantly to the touch of every key.

"That, I hope, will be enough to prove to your Majesty that as submarine
the _Flying Fish_ is quite under control. Of course the real _Flying
Fish_ will be controlled inside, not from outside."

"There is no doubt about the control," said the Kaiser. "It is
marvellous, and I think the Chancellor and the Field Marshal will agree
with me in that."

"Wonderful," said the Chancellor.

"A miracle," said the Field Marshal, "if it can only be realised."

"There is no doubt about that, gentlemen," said Castellan, going back to
the machine. "Which of the models would your Majesty like to see
destroyed first?"

The Kaiser pointed to the model of a battleship which was a very good
imitation of one of the most up-to-date British battleships.

"We will take that one first," he said.

Castellan smiled, and began to play the keys. The grey shape of the
_Flying Fish_ dropped to the bottom of the tank, rose, and seemed all at
once to become endowed with human reason, or a likeness of it, which was
so horrible that even the Kaiser and his two chiefs could hardly repress
a shudder. It rose very slowly, circled among the floating models about
two feet under the surface and then, like an animal smelling out its
prey, it made a dart at the ship which the Kaiser had indicated, and
struck it from underneath. They saw a green flash stream through the
water, and the next moment the model had crumbled to pieces and sank.

"Donner-Wetter!" exclaimed the Chancellor, forgetting in his wonder that
he was in the presence of His Majesty, "that is wonderful, horrible!"

"Can there be anything too horrible for the enemies of the Fatherland,
Herr Kanztler," said the Kaiser, looking across the tank at him, with a
glint in his eyes, which no man in Germany cares to see.

"I must ask pardon, your Majesty," replied the Chancellor. "I was
astonished, indeed, almost frightened--frightened, if your Majesty will
allow me to say so, for the sake of Humanity, if such an awful invention
as that becomes realised."

"And what is your opinion, Field Marshal?" asked the Kaiser with a
laugh.

"A most excellent invention, your Majesty, provided always that it
belongs to the Fatherland."

"Exactly," said the Kaiser. "As that very intelligent American officer,
Admiral Mahan, has told us, the sea-power is world-power, and there you
have sea-power; but that is not the limit of the capabilities of Mr
Castellan's invention, according to the specifications which I have
read, and on the strength of which I have asked him to give us this
demonstration of its powers. He calls it, as you know, the _Flying
Fish_. So far you have seen it as a fish. Now, Mr Castellan, perhaps you
will be kind enough to let us see it fly."

"With pleasure, your Majesty," replied the Irishman, "but, in case of
accident, I must ask you and the Chancellor and the Field Marshal to
stand against the wall by the door there. With your Majesty's
permission, I am now going to destroy the rest of the fleet."

"The rest of the fleet!" exclaimed the Field Marshal. "It is
impossible."

"We shall see, Feldherr!" laughed the Kaiser. "Meanwhile, suppose we
come out of the danger zone."

The three greatest men in Germany, and perhaps on the Continent of
Europe, lined up with their backs to the wall at the farther end of the
room from the tank, and the Irishman sat down to his machine. The keys
began to click rapidly, and they began to feel a tenseness in the air of
the room. After a few seconds they would not have been surprised if they
had seen a flash of lightning pass over their heads. The _Flying Fish_
had sunk to the bottom of the tank, and backed into one of the corners.
The keys of the machine clicked louder and faster. Her nose tilted
upwards to an angle of about sixty degrees. The six-bladed propeller at
her stem whirled round in the water like the flurry of a whale's fluke
in its death agony. Her side-fins inclined upwards, and, like a flash,
she leapt from the water, and began to circle round the room.

The Kaiser shut his teeth hard and watched. The Chancellor opened his
mouth as if he was going to say something, and shut it again. The Field
Marshal stroked his moustache slowly, and followed the strange shape
fluttering about the room. It circled twice round the tank, and then
crossed it. A sharp click came from the machine, something fell from the
body of the _Flying Fish_ into the tank. There was a dull sound of a
smothered explosion. For a moment the very water itself seemed aflame,
then it boiled up into a mass of seething foam. Every one of the models
was overwhelmed and engulfed at the same moment. Castellan got up from
the machine, caught the _Flying Fish_ in his hand, as it dropped towards
the water, took it to the Kaiser, and said:

"Is your Majesty convinced? It is quite harmless now."

"God's thunder, yes!" said the War Lord of Germany, taking hold of the
model. "It is almost superhuman."

"Yes," said the Chancellor, "it is damnable!"

"I," said the Field Marshal, drily, "think it's admirable, always
supposing that Mr Castellan is prepared to place this mysterious
invention at the disposal of his Majesty."

"Yes," said the Kaiser, leaning with his back against the door, "that
is, of course, the first proposition to be considered. What are your
terms, Mr Castellan?"

Castellan looked at the three men all armed. The Chancellor and the
Field Marshal wore their swords, and the Kaiser had a revolver in his
hip pocket. The Chancellor and the Field Marshal straightened up as the
Kaiser spoke, and their hands moved instinctively towards their sword
hilts. The Kaiser looked at the model of the _Flying Fish_ in his hand.
His face was, as usual, like a mask. He saw nothing, thought of nothing.
For the moment he was not a man: he was just the incarnation of an
idea.

"Field Marshal, you are a soldier," said Castellan, "and I see that your
hand has gone to your sword-hilt. Swords, of course, are the emblems of
military rank, but there is no use for them now."

"What do you mean, sir?" exclaimed the Count, clapping his right hand on
the hilt. After what he had seen he honestly believed that this Irishman
was a wizard of science who ought not to be trusted in the same room
with the Kaiser. Castellan went back to his machine and said:

"Draw your sword, sir, and see."

And then the keys began to click.

The Field Marshal's sword flashed out of the sheath. A second later the
Chancellor's did the same, and the Kaiser's right hand went back towards
his hip pocket.

Castellan got up and said:

"Your Majesty has a revolver. Be good enough, as you value your own
safety, to unload it, and throw the cartridges out of the window."

"But why?" exclaimed the Kaiser, pulling a Mauser repeating pistol out
of his hip-pocket. "Who are you, that you should give orders to me?"

"Only a man, your Majesty," replied Castellan, with a bow and a smile;
"a man who could explode every cartridge in that pistol of yours at once
before you had time to fire a shot. You have seen what has happened
already."

William the Second had seen enough. He walked to one of the windows
opening on the enclosed gardens, threw it open, dropped the pistol out,
and said:

"Now, let us have the proof of what you say."

"In a moment, your Majesty," replied Castellan, going back to his
machine, and beginning to work the keys rapidly. "I am here, an unarmed
man; let their Excellencies, the Chancellor and the Field Marshal,
attack me with their swords if they can. I am not joking. I am staking
my life on the success or failure of this experiment."

"Does your Majesty consent?" said the Field Marshal, raising his sword.

Our reporter has just forwarded an authentic statement, in which he vouches,
with every appearance of truth, that "Lord Melbourne dined at home on
Wednesday last." The neighbourhood is in an agonising state of
excitement.

FURTHER PARTICULARS.

(_Particularly exclusive_.)
Our readers will be horrified to learn the above is not the whole extent
of this alarming event. From a private source of the highest possible
credit, we are informed that his "Lordship also took tea."
FURTHEST PARTICULARS.

Great Heavens! when will our painful duties end? We tremble as we
write,--may we be deceived!

--but we are compelled to announce the agonising fact--"he also
supped!"
BY EXPRESS.

(_From our own reporter on the spot_!)
DEAR SIR,--"The dinner is fatally true! but, I am happy to state, there
are doubts about the tea, and you may almost wholly contradict the
supper."

SECOND EXPRESS.

"I have only time to say, things are not so bad!

The tea is disproved, and the supper was a gross exaggeration.

"N.B. My horse is dead!"
THIRD EXPRESS.

Hurrah! Glorious news! There is no truth in the above fearful rumour; it
is false from beginning to end, and, doubtless, had its vile origin from
some of the "adverse faction," as it is clearly of such a nature as
to convulse the country. To what meanness will not these Tories stoop,
for the furtherance of their barefaced schemes of oppression and
pillage! The facts they have so grossly distorted with their tortuous
ingenuity and demoniac intentions, are simply these:--A saveloy
was ordered by one of the upper servants (who is on board wages,
and finds his own kitchen fire), the boy entrusted with its delivery
mistook the footman for his lordship.

This is very unlikely, as the man is willing to make an affidavit he
had "just cleaned himself," and therefore, it is clear the boy must have
been a paid emissary. But the public will be delighted to learn, to
prevent the possibility of future mistakes--"John" has been denuded of
his whiskers--the only features which, on a careful examination,
presented the slightest resemblance to his noble master.

In fact, otherwise the fellow is remarkably good-looking.

* * * * *

HINTS TO NEW MEMBERS.

BY AN OLD TRIMMER.

It being now an established axiom that every member goes into Parliament
for the sole purpose of advancing his own private interest, and
not, as has been ignorantly believed, for the benefit of his country
or the constituency he represents, it becomes a matter of vast
importance to those individuals who have not had the advantage of
long experience in the house, to be informed of the mode usually
adopted by honourable members in the discharge of their legislative
duties.

With this view the writer, who has, for the last thirty years, done business
on both sides of the house, and always with the strictest regard
to the main chance, has collected a number of hints for the guidance of
juvenile members, of which the following are offered as a sample:--
HINT 1.

--It is a vulgar error to imagine that a man, to be a member of Parliament,
requires either education, talents, or honesty: all that it is necessary
for him to possess is--impudence and humbug!

HINT 2.--When a candidate addresses a constituency, he should promise
everything.

Some men will only pledge themselves to what their conscience considers
right.

Fools of this sort can never hope to be
[Illustration: RETURNED BY A LARGE MAJORITY.]
HINT 3.--Oratory is a showy, but by no means necessary, accomplishment
in the house. If a member knows when to say "Ay" or "No," it is quite
sufficient for all useful purposes.

HINT 4.

--If, however, a young member should be seized with, the desire of
speaking in Parliament, he may do so without the slighest regard
to sense, as the reporters in the gallery are paid for the purpose
of making speeches for honourable members; and on the following
morning he may calculate on seeing, in the columns of the daily
papers, a full report of his splendid
[Illustration: MAIDEN SPEECH.]

HINT 5.--A knowledge of the exact time to cry "Hear, hear!" is absolutely
necessary. A severe cough, when a member of the opposite side of the
house is speaking, is greatly to be commended; cock-crowing is also
a desirable qualification for a young legislator, and, if judiciously
practised, cannot fail to bring the possessor into the notice of his
party.

HINT 6.--The back seats in the gallery are considered, by several
members, as the most comfortable for taking a nap on.

HINT 7.--If one honourable member wishes to tell another honourable
member that he is anything but a gentleman, he should be particular to
do so within the walls of the house--as, in that case, the Speaker
will put him under arrest, to prevent any unpleasant consequences arising
from his hasty expressions.

HINT 8.--If a member promise to give his vote to the minister, he must
in honour do so--unless he happen to fall asleep in the smoking-room,
and so gets shut out from the division of the house.

HINT 9.--No independent member need trouble himself to understand the
merits of any question before the house. He may, therefore, amuse
himself at Bellamy's until five minutes before the Speaker's bell
rings for a division.

* * * * *

RATHER SUICIDAL.

"The health of the Earl of Winchilsea and the Conservative members
of the House of Peers," was followed, amid intense cheering, with the
glee of
"Swearing death to traitor slaves!"--_Times_.

* * * * *

NOVEL EXPERIMENT.--GREAT SCREW.

Several scientific engineers have formed themselves into a company,
and are about applying for an Act of Parliament to enable them to take
a lease of Joe Hume, for the purpose of opposing the Archimedean
Screw.
Public feeling is already in favour of the "Humedean," and the "Joe"
shares are rising rapidly

.

* * * * *

PUNCH'S INFORMATION FOR THE PEOPLE.--NO. 3.

One of the expedients adopted by the cheap-knowledge-mongers to convey
so-called "information" to the vulgar, has been, we flatter ourselves,
successfully imitated in our articles on the Stars and the
Thermometer.

They are by writers engaged expressly for the respective subjects,
because they will work cheaply and know but little of what they are
writing about, and therefore make themselves the better understood by the
equally ignorant. We do hope that they have not proved themselves
behindhand in popular humbug and positive error, and that the blunders
in "the Thermometer"[3] are equally as amusing as those of the then
big-wig who wrote the treatise on "Animal Mechanics," published by
our rival Society for Diffusing Useful Knowledge.

[3] One of these blunders the author must not be commended for; it is
attributable to a facetious mistake of the printer.

In giving the etymology of the Thermometer, it should have been "measure
of _heat_," and not "measure of _feet_." We scorn to deprive our devil
of a joke so worthy of him.

Another of their methods for obtaining cheap knowledge it is now our
intention to adopt. Having got the poorest and least learned authors
we could find (of course for cheapness) for our former pieces of
information, we have this time engaged a gentleman to mystify a
few common-place subjects, in the style of certain articles in the
"Penny Cyclopædia." As his erudition is too profound for ordinary
comprehensions--as he scorns gain--as the books he has hitherto published
(no, privated) have been printed at his own expense, for the greater
convenience of reading them himself, for nobody else does so--as,
in short, he is in reality a cheap-knowledge man, seeing that he scorns
pay, and we scorn to pay him--we have concluded an engagement with
him for fourteen years.

The subject on which we have directed him to employ his vast scientific
acquirements, is one which must come home to the firesides of the
married and the bosoms of the single, namely, the art of raising a
flame; in humble imitation of some of Young's Knights' Thoughts,
which are directed to the object of lightening the darkness of
servants, labourers, artisans, and chimney-sweeps, and in providing
guides to the trades or services of which they are already masters
or mistresses.

We beg to present our readers with

PUNCH'S GUIDE TO SERVICE;
OR,

[Illustration: THE HOUSEMAID'S BEST FRIEND.]
CHAPTER 1.

ON THE PROCESS AND RATIONALE OF LIGHTING FIRES.

Take a small cylindrical aggregation of parallelopedal sections of the
ligneous fibre (vulgarly denominated a bundle of fire-wood), and arrange
a fractional part of the integral quantity rectilineally along the
interior of the igneous receptacle known as a grate, so as to form an
acute angle (of, say 25°) with its base; and one (of, say 65°)
with the posterior plane that is perpendicular to it; taking care
at the same time to leave between each parallelopedal section an
insterstice isometrical with the smaller sides of any one of their
six quadrilateral superficies, so as to admit of the free circulation
of the atmospheric fluid.

Superimposed upon this, arrange several moderate-sized concretions
of the hydro-carburetted substance (_vulgo_ coal), approximating in
figure as nearly as possible to the rhombic dodecahedron, so that
the solid angles of each concretion may constitute the different
points of contact with those immediately adjacent.

Insert into the cavity formed by the imposition of the ligneous
fibre upon the inferior transverse ferruginous bar, a sheet of laminated
lignin, or paper, compressed by the action of the digits into an irregular
spheroid.

These preliminary operations having been skilfully performed, the process
of combustion may be commenced.

For this purpose, a smaller woody paralleloped--the extremities of which
have been previously dipped in sulphur in a state of liquefaction--must
be ignited and applied to the laminated lignin, or waste paper, and
so elevate its temperature to a degree required for its combustion,
which will be communicated to the ligneous superstructure; this
again raises the temperature of the hydro-carburet concretion, and
liberates its carburetted hydrogen in the form of gas; which gas,
combining with the oxygen of the atmosphere, enters into combustion,
and a general ignition ensues.

This, in point of fact, constitutes what is popularly termed--"lighting
a fire."
* * * * *

AN IMMINENT BREACH.

In an action lately tried at the Cork Assizes, a lady obtained
_fifteen hundred pounds damages_, for a breach of promise of marriage,
against a faithless lover.

Lady Morgan sends us the following trifle on the subject:--
What! _fifteen hundred!_--'tis a sum severe; The fine by far the injury
o'erreaches.
For _one_ poor _breach_ of promise 'tis too dear-- 'Twould be
sufficient for a _pair of breaches_!

* * * * *

SCHOOL OF DESIGN.

Several designing individuals, whose talents for _drawing_ on paper are
much greater than those of Charles Kean for drawing upon the stage,
met together at Somerset House, on Monday last, to distribute
prizes among their scholars.

Prince Albert presided, gave away the prizes with great suavity, and
made a speech which occupied exactly two seconds and a-half.

The first prize was awarded to Master Palmerston, for a successful _design_
for completely frustrating certain commercial _views_ upon China, and
for his new invention of _auto-painting_.

Prize: an order upon Truefit for a new wig.

Master John Russell was next called up.--This talented young gentleman
had designed a gigantic "penny loaf;" which, although too immense
for practical use, yet, his efforts having been exclusively directed
to fanciful design, and not to practical possibility, was highly
applauded.

Master Russell also evinced a highly precocious talent for _drawing_--his
salary. Prize: a splendidly-bound copy of the New Marriage Act.

The fortunate candidate next upon the list, was Master Normanby.

This young gentleman brought forward a beautiful design for a
new prison, so contrived for criminals to be excluded from light and
society, in any degree proportionate with their crimes. This young
gentleman was brought up in Ireland, but there evinced considerable
talent in _drawing_ prisoners out of durance vile. He was much
complimented on the salutary effect upon his studies, which his pupilage
at the school of design had wrought. Prize: an order from Colburn
for a new novel.

Master Melbourne, who was next called up, seemed a remarkably fine
boy of his age, though a little too old for his short jacket. He had
signalised himself by an exceedingly elaborate _design_ for the Treasury
benches. This elicited the utmost applause; for, by this plan, the seats
were so ingeniously contrived, that, once occupied, it would be a matter
of extreme difficulty for the sitter to be _absquatulated_, even by main
force. Prize: a free ticket to the licensed victuallers' dinner.

The Prince then withdrew, amidst the acclamations of the assembled
multitude.

* * * * *

A HINT TO THE NEW LORD CHAMBERLAIN.

There is always much difference of opinion existing as to the number
of theatres which ought to be licensed in the metropolis.

Our friend Peter Borthwick, whose mathematical acquirements are only
equalled by his "_heavy fathers_," has suggested the following formula
whereby to arrive at a just conclusion:--Take the number of theatres,
multiply by the public-houses, and divide by the dissenting chapels,
and the quotient will be the answer.

This is what Peter calls
[Illustration: COMING TO A DIVISION.]

* * * * *

VOCAL EVASION.

LADY B---- (who, it is rumoured, has an eye to the bedchamber) was
interrogating Sir Robert Peel a little closer than the wily minister
_in futuro_ approved of. After several very evasive answers, which had
no effect on the lady's pertinacity, Sir Robert made her a graceful
bow, and retired, humming the favourite air of-- 
[Illustration: "OH!

I CANNOT GIVE EXPRESSION."]
* * * * *

A PUN FROM THE ROW.

It is asserted that a certain eminent medical man lately offered to a
publisher in Paternoster-row a "Treatise on the Hand," which the
worthy bibliopole declined with a shake of the head, saying, "My
dear sir, we have got too many _treatises on our hands_ already

."

* * * * *

PLEASURES OF HOPE (RATHER EXPENSIVE).

The _Commerce_ states "the cost of the mansion now building for Mr.
Hope, in the Rue St.

Dominique, including furniture and objects of art, is estimated at
six hundred thousand pounds!"--[If this is an attribute of _Hope_, what
is reality?--ED. PUNCH.]
* * * * *

FASHIONS FOR THE MONTH.

We perceive that the severity of the summer has prevented the entire
banishment of furs in the fashionable _quartiers_ of the metropolis.
We noticed three fur caps, on Sunday last, in Seven Dials. Beavers are,
however, superseded by gossamers; the crowns of which are, among the
élite of St. Giles's, jauntily opened to admit of ventilation, in
anticipation of the warm weather. Frieze coats are fast giving way to
pea-jackets; waistcoats, it is anticipated, will soon be discarded,
and brass buttons are completely out of vogue.

We have not noticed so many highlows as Bluchers upon the understandings
of the promenaders of Broad-street. Ancle-jacks are, we perceive,
universally adopted at the elegant _soirées dansantes_, nightly
held at the "Frog and Fiddle," in Pye-street, Westminster

.

* * * * *

ARTISTIC EXECUTION.

We understand that Sir M.A. Shee is engaged in painting the portraits
of Sir Willoughhy Woolston Dixie and Mr.

John Bell, the lately-elected member for Thirsk, which are intended for
the exhibition at the Royal Academy. If Folliot Duff's account of
their dastardly conduct in the Waldegrave affair be correct, we cannot
_imagine_ two gentlemen more worthy the labours of the
[Illustration: HANGING COMMITTEE

.]
* * * * *

NEW PARLIAMENTARY RETURNS.

We have been informed, on authority upon which we have reason to place
much reliance, that several distinguished members of the upper and
lower houses of Parliament intend moving for the following important
returns early in the present session:-- 
IN THE LORDS.

Lord Palmerston will move for a return of all the _papillote_ papers
contained in the red box at the Foreign Office.

The Duke of Wellington will move for a return of the Tory taxes.

The Marquis of Downshire will move for a return of his political
honesty.

Lord Melbourne will move for a return of place and power.

The Marquis of Westmeath will move for a return of the days when he was
young.

The Marquis Wellesley will move for a return of the pap-spoons manufactured
in England for the last three years.

IN THE COMMONS.

Sir Francis Burdett will move for a return of his popularity in
Westminster.

Lord John Russell will move that the return of the Tories to office
is extremely inconvenient.

Captain Rous will move for a return of the number of high-spirited
Tories who were conveyed on stretchers to the different station-houses,
on the night of the ever-to-be-remembered Drury-lane dinner.

Sir E.L. Bulwer will move for a return of all the half-penny ballads
published by Catnach and Co. during the last year.

Morgan O'Connell will move for a return of all the brogues worn by the
bare-footed peasantry of Ireland.

Colonel Sibthorp will move for a return of his wits.

Peter Borthwick will move for a return of all the kettles convicted of
singing on the Sabbath-day.

Sir Robert Peel will move for a return of all the ladies of the
palace--to the places from whence they came.

Ben D'Israeli will move for a return of all the hard words in Johnson's
Dictionary.

* * * * *

RATHER OMINOUS!

The _Sunday Times_ states, that "several of the _heads_ of the
Conservative party held a conference at _Whitehall_ Gardens!" _Heads_ and
_conferences_ have been cut short enough at the same place ere now!

* * * * *

HEAVY LIGHTNESS.

A joke Col. Sibthorp to the journal sent-- Appropriate heading--"_Serious
Accident_."

* * * * *

A MATTER OF COURSE.

The match at cricket, between the Chelsea and Greenwich Pensioners, was
decided in favour of the latter. Captain Rous says, no great wonder,
considering the winners bad the majority of _legs_ on their side. The
Hyllus affair has made him an authority

.

* * * * *

THE DRAMA.

THE ITALIAN OPERA.

RETIREMENT OF RUBINI.

(_Exclusive_.)
N.B.

--PUNCH is delighted to perceive, from the style of this critique,
that, though anonymously sent, it is manifestly from the pen of
the elegant critic of the _Morning Post_.

[Illustration: O]On a review of the events of the past season, the
_souvenirs_ it presents are not calculated to elevate the
character of the arts _di poeta_ and _di musica_, of which the Italian
Opera is composed.

The only decided _nouveautés_ which made their appearance, were "Fausta,"
and "Roberto Devereux," both of them _jejune_ as far as regards
their _libretto_ and the _composita musicale_.

The latter opera, however, serving as it did to introduce a pleasing
_rifacciamento_ of the lamented Malibran, in her talented sister Pauline
(Madame Viardot), may, on that account, be remembered as a pleasing
reminiscence of the past season.

The evening of Saturday, Aug. 21st, will long be remembered by the _habitués_
of the Opera. From exclusive sources (which have been opened to us at a
very considerable expense) we are enabled to communicate--_malheureusement_--that
with the close of the _saison de_ 1841, the _corps opératique_ loses
one of its most brilliant ornaments.

That memorable epocha was chosen by Rubini for making a graceful _congé_
to a fashionable audience, amidst an abundance of tears--shed in the
choicest Italian--and showers of _bouquets_. The subjects chosen for
representation were _apropos_ in the extreme; all being of a
_triste_ character, namely, the _atta terzo_ of "Marino Faliero,"
the _finale_ of "Lucia di Lammermoor," and the last _parte_ of "La
Sonnambula:" these were the chosen vehicles for Rubini's _soirée
d'adieu_.

As this _tenor primissimo_ has, in a professional _regarde_, disappeared
from amongst us--as the last echoes of his _voix magnifique_ have died
away--as he has made a final exit from the public _plafond_ to the
_coulisses_ of private life--we deem it due to future historians of the
Italian Opera _de Londres_, to record our admiration, our opinions, and
our _regrets_ for this great _artiste_.

Signor Rubini is in stature what might be denominated _juste milieu_; his
_taille_ is graceful, his _figure_ pleasing, his eyes full of expression,
his hair bushy: his _comport_ upon the stage, when not excited by
passion, is full of _verve_ and _brusquerie_, but in passages which
the _Maestro_ has marked "_con passione_" nothing can exceed the
elegance of his attitudes, and the pleasing dignity of his gestures.
After, _par exemple_, the _recitativi_, what a pretty _empressement_
he gave (alas! that we must now speak in the past tense!) to the
_tonic_ or _key-note_, by _locking_ his arms in each other over his
_poitrine_--by that after expansion of them--that clever _alto_
movement of the toes--that apparent embracing of the _fumes des
lampes_--how touching! Then, while the _sinfonia_ of the _andante_
was in progress, how gracefully he turned _son dos_ to the delighted
auditors, and made an interesting _promenade au fond_, always
contriving to get his finely-arched nose over the _lumières_ at the
precise point of time (we speak in a musical sense) where the word
"_voce_" is marked in the score. His pantomime to the _allegri_ was
no less captivating; but it was in the _stretta_ that his beauty
of action was most exquisitely apparent; there, worked up by an
elaborate _crescendo_ (the _motivo_ of which is always, in the
Italian school, a simple progression of the diatonic scale), the
_furor_ with which this _cantratice_ hurried his hands into the
thick clumps of his picturesque _perruque_, and seemed to tear its
_cheveux_ out by the roots (without, however, disturbing the
celebrated side-parting a single hair)--the vigour with which he
beat his breast--his final expansion of arms, elevation of toes,
and the impressive _frappe_ of his right foot upon the stage
immediately before disappearing behind the _coulisses_--must be
fresh in the _souvenir_ of our _dilettanti_ readers.
But how shall we _parle_ concerning his _voix_? That exquisite
organ, whose _falsetto_ emulated the sweetness of flutes, and reached
to A flat _in altissimo_--the _voce media_ of which possessed an
unequalled _aplomb_, whose deep double G must still find a well-in-tune
echo in the _tympanum_ of every _amateur_ of taste. _That_, we must
confess, as critics and theoretical musicians, causes us considerable
_embarras_ for words to describe. Who that heard it on Saturday
last, has yet recovered the ravishing sensation produced by the
thrilling tremour with which Rubini _gave_ the _Notte d'Orrore_,
in Rossini's "Marino Faliero?" Who can forget the _recitativo con
andante et allegro_, in the last scene of "La Sonnambula;" or the
burst of anguish _con expressivissimo_, when accused of treason,
while personating his favourite _rôle_ in "Lucia di Lammermoor?"
Ah! those who suffered themselves to be detained from the opera on
Saturday last by mere illness, or other light causes, will, to
translate a forcible expression in the "Inferno" of Dante, "go down
with sorrow to the grave." To them we say, Rubini _est parti_--gone!--he
has sent forth his last _ut_--concluded his last _re_--his ultimate
note has sounded--his last _billet de banque_ is pocketed--he has,
to use an emphatic and heart-stirring _mot_, "_coupé son bâton!_"

It is due to the _sentimens_ of the audience of Saturday, to notice
the evident regret with which they received Rubini's _adieux_; for,
towards the close of the evening, the secret became known. Animated
_conversazioni_ resounded from almost every box during many of his
most charming _piano_ passages (and never will his _sotto-voce_ be
equalled)--the _beaux esprits_ of the pit discussed his merits with
audible _goût_; while the gallery and upper stalls remained in mute
grief at the consciousness of that being the _dernière fois_ they
would ever be able to hear the sublime _voce-di-testa_ of Italy's
prince of _tenori_.
Although this retirement will make the present _clôture_ of the
opera one of the most memorable _événemens_ in _les annales de
l'opéra_, yet some remarks are demanded of us upon the other
_artistes_. In "Marino Faliero," Lablache came the _Dodge_ with
remarkable success. Madlle.You have taken a very irregular course;
but a man who is not prepared to do that at a pinch seldom does anything
else. I have seen and heard enough to convince me for the present; and
so I shall have great pleasure, in fact I shall only be doing my duty,
in giving you both leave for a week.

"I will order the _Seagull_ up from Hull, she's about ready, and I think
I can put an Acting-Commander on board the _Cormorant_ for the present.
Now, you will just have time for an early lunch with me, and catch the
1.17, which will get you to town at 5.15, and you will probably find
somebody at the Admiralty then, because I know they're working overtime.
Anyhow, if you don't find Sir John Fisher there, I should go straight to
his house, if I were you; and even if you don't see him, you'll be able
to get an early appointment for to-morrow."

"That was a pretty good slice of luck meeting the noble Crocker, wasn't
it?" said Castellan, as the train began to move out of the station,
about three hours later. They had reserved a compartment in the corridor
express, and were able to talk State secrets at their ease.

"We're inside the law now, at any rate."

"Law or no law, it was good enough to risk a court-martial for," said
Erskine, biting off the end of a cigar. "There's no doubt about the
existence of the thing, and if it doesn't belong to us, which is a fact
that only my Lords of the Naval Council can know, it simply means, as
you must see for yourself, that the invasion of England, which has been
a naval and military impossibility for the last seven hundred years or
so, will not only become possible but comparatively easy. There's
nothing upon the waters or under them that could stand against a thing
like that."

"Oh, you're right enough there," said Castellan, speaking with his soft
West of Ireland brogue. "There's no doubt of that, and it's the very
devil. A dozen of those things would play havoc with a whole fleet, and
when the fleet's gone, or even badly hurt, what's to stop our good
friends over yonder landing two or three million men just anywhere they
choose, and doing pretty well what they like afterwards? By the Saints,
that would be a horrible thing. We've nothing on land that could stand
against them, though, of course, the boys would stand till they fell
down; but fall they would."

"Yes," said Erskine, seriously. "It wouldn't exactly be a walk over for
them, but I'm afraid there couldn't be very much doubt at the end, if
the fleet once went."

"I'm afraid not," replied Castellan, "and we can only hope that our
Lords of the Council will be of the same opinion, or, better still,
that the infernal thing we saw belongs to us."

"I hope so," said Erskine, gravely. "If it doesn't--well, I wouldn't
give half-a-crown for the biggest battleship in the British Navy."


CHAPTER IV

THE SHADOW OF THE TERROR


By a curious coincidence which, as events proved, was to have some
serious consequences, almost at the same moment that Commander Erskine
began to write his report on the strange vision which he and his
Lieutenant had seen, Gilbert Lennard came out of the Observatory which
Mr Ratliffe Parmenter had built on the south of the Whernside Hills in
Yorkshire.

Mr Ratliffe Parmenter had two ambitions in life, one of which he had
fulfilled. This was to pile millions upon millions by any possible
means. As he used to say to his associates in his poorer days, "You've
got to get there somehow, so get there"--and he had "got there." It is
not necessary for the purpose of the present narrative to say how he did
it. He had done it, and that is why he bought the Hill of Whernside and
about a thousand acres around it and built an Observatory on the top
with which, to use his own words, he meant to lick Creation by seeing
further into Creation than anyone else had done, and that is just what
his great reflector had enabled his astronomer to do.

When he had locked the door Lennard looked up to the eastward where the
morning star hung flashing like a huge diamond in splendid solitude
against the brightening background of the sky. His face was the face of
a man who had seen something that he would not like to describe to any
other man. His features were hard set, and there were lines in his face
which time might have drawn twenty or thirty years later. His lips made
a straight line, and his eyes, although he had hardly slept three hours
a night for as many nights, had a look in them that was not to be
accounted for by ordinary insomnia.

His work was over for the night, and, if he chose, he could go down to
the house three-quarters of a mile away and sleep for the rest of the
day, or, at any rate, until lunch time; and yet he looked another long
look at the morning star, thrust his hands down into his trousers
pockets and turned up a side path that led through the heather, and
spent the rest of the morning walking and thinking--walking slowly, and
thinking very quickly.

When he came in to breakfast at nine the next morning, after he had had
a shave and a bath, Mr Parmenter said to him:

"Look here, young man, I'm old enough to be your father, and so you'll
excuse me putting it that way; if you're going along like this I reckon
I'll have to shut that Observatory down for the time being and take you
on a trip to the States to see how they're getting on with their
telescopes in the Alleghanies and the Rockies, and maybe down South too
in Peru, to that Harvard Observatory above Arequipa on the Misti, as a
sort of holiday. I asked you to come here to work, not to wear yourself
out. As I've told you before, we've got plenty of men in the States who
can sign their cheques for millions of dollars and can't eat a dinner,
to say nothing of a breakfast, and you're too young for that.

"What's the matter? More trouble about that new comet of yours. You've
been up all night looking at it, haven't you? Of course it's all right
that you got hold of it before anybody else, but all the same I don't
want you to be worrying yourself for nothing and get laid up before the
time comes to take the glory of the discovery."

While he was speaking the door of the breakfast-room opened and Auriole
came in. She looked with a just perceptible admiration at the man who,
as it seemed to her, was beginning to show a slight stoop in the broad
shoulders and a little falling forward of the head which she had first
seen driving through the water to her rescue in the Bay of Connemara.
Her eyelids lifted a shade as she looked at him, and she said with a
half smile:

"Good morning, Mr Lennard; I am afraid you've been sacrificing yourself
a little bit too much to science. You don't seem to have had a sleep for
the last two or three nights. You've been blinding your eyes over those
tangles of figures and equations, parallaxes and cube roots and that
sort of thing. I know something about them because I had some struggles
with them myself at Vassar."

"That's about it, Auriole," said her father. "Just what I've been
saying; and I hope our friend is not going on with this kind of business
too long. Now, really, Mr Lennard, you know you must not, and that's all
there is to it."

"Oh, no, I don't think you need be frightened of anything of that sort,"
said Lennard, who had considerably brightened up as Auriole entered the
room; "perhaps I may have been going a little too long without sleep;
but, you see, a man who has the great luck to discover a new comet is
something like one of the old navigators who discovered new islands and
continents. Of course you remember the story of Columbus. When he
thought he was going to find what is now the country which has had the
honour--"

"I know you're going to say something nice, Mr Lennard," interrupted
Auriole, "but breakfast is ready; here it comes. If you take my advice
you will have your coffee and something to eat and tell us the rest of
it while you're getting something that will do you good. What do you
think, Poppa?"

"Hard sense, Auriole, hard sense. Your mother used to talk just like
that, and I reckon you've got it from her. Well now, here's the food,
let's begin. I've got a hunger on me that I'd have wanted five dollars
to stop at the time when I couldn't buy a breakfast."

They sat down, Miss Auriole at the head of the table and her father and
Lennard facing each other, and for the next few minutes there was a
semi-silence which was very well employed in the commencement of one of
the most important functions of the human day.

When Mr Parmenter had got through his first cup of coffee, his two
poached eggs on toast, and was beginning on the fish, he looked across
the table and said:

"Well now, Mr Lennard, I guess you're feeling a bit better, as I do, and
so, maybe, you can tell us something new about comets."

"I certainly am feeling better," said Lennard with a glance at Auriole,
"but, you see, I've got into a state of mind which is not unlike the
physical state of the Red Indian who starves for a few days and then
takes his meals, I mean the arrears of meals, all at once. When I have
had a good long sleep, as I am going to have until to-night, I might--in
fact, I hope I shall be able to tell you something definite about the
question of the comet."

"What--the question?" echoed Mr Parmenter. "About the comet? I didn't
understand that there was any question. You have discovered it, haven't
you?"

"I have made a certain discovery, Mr Parmenter," said Lennard, with a
gravity which made Auriole raise her eyelids quickly, "but whether I
have found a comet so far unknown to astronomy or not, is quite another
matter. Thanks to that splendid instrument of yours, I have found a
something in a part of the heavens where no comet, not even a star, has
even been seen yet, and, speaking in all seriousness, I may say that
this discovery contradicts all calculations as to the orbits and
velocities of any known comet. That is what I have been thinking about
all night."

"What?" said Auriole, looking up again. "Really something quite
unknown?"

"Unknown except to the three people sitting at this table, unless
another miracle has happened--I mean such a one as happened in the case
of the discovery of Neptune which, as of course you know, Adams at
Cambridge and Le Verrier at Paris--"

"Yes, yes," said Auriole, "two men who didn't know each other; both
looked for something that couldn't be seen, and found it. If you've done
anything like that, Mr Lennard, I reckon Poppa will have good cause to
be proud of his reflector--"

"And of the man behind it," added her father. "A telescope's like a gun;
no use without a good man behind it. Well, if that's so, Mr Lennard,
this discovery of yours ought to shake the world up a bit."

"From what I have seen so far," replied Lennard, "I have not the
slightest doubt that it will."

"And when may I see this wonderful discovery of yours, Mr Lennard," said
Auriole, "this something which is going to be so important, this
something that no one else's eyes have seen except yours. Really, you
know, you've made me quite longing to get a sight of this stranger from
the outer wilderness of space."

"If the night is clear enough, I may hope to be able to introduce you to
the new celestial visitor about a quarter-past eleven to-night, or to be
quite accurate eleven hours, sixteen minutes and thirty-nine seconds
p.m."

"I think that's good enough, Auriole," said her father. "If the heavens
are only kind enough, we'll go up to the observatory and, as Mr Lennard
says, see something that no one else has ever seen."

"And then," laughed Auriole, "I suppose you will have achieved the
second ambition of your life. You have already piled up a bigger heap of
dollars than anybody else in the world, and by midnight you will have
seen farther into Creation than anybody else. But you will let me have
the first look, won't you?"

"Why, certainly," he replied. "As soon as Mr Lennard has got the
telescope fixed, you go first, and I reckon that won't take very long."

"No," replied Lennard, "I've worked out the position for to-night, and
it's only a matter of winding up the clockwork and setting the
telescope. And now," he continued, rising, "if you will allow me, I will
say--well, I was going to say good-night, but of course it's
good-morning--I'm going to bed."

"Will you come down to lunch, or shall I have some sent up to you?"
said Auriole.

"No, thanks. I don't think there will be any need to trouble you about
that. When I once get to sleep, I hope I shall forget all things
earthly, and heavenly too for the matter of that, until about six
o'clock, and if you will have me called then, I will be ready for
dinner."

"Certainly," replied Auriole, "and I hope you will sleep as well as you
deserve to do, after all these nights of watching."

He did sleep. He slept the sleep of a man physically and mentally tired,
in spite of the load of unspeakable anxiety which was weighing upon his
mind. For during his last night's work, he had learnt what no other man
in the world knew. He had learnt that, unless a miracle happened, or
some almost superhuman feat of ingenuity and daring was accomplished,
that day thirteen months hence would see the annihilation of every
living thing on earth, and the planet Terra converted into a dark and
lifeless orb, a wilderness drifting through space, the blackened and
desolated sepulchre of the countless millions of living beings which now
inhabited it.


CHAPTER V

A GLIMPSE OF THE DOOM


After dinner Lennard excused himself, saying that he wanted to make a
few more calculations; and then he got outside and lit his pipe, and
walked up the winding path towards the observatory.

"What am I to do?" he said between his teeth. "It's a ghastly position
for a man to be placed in. Fancy--just a poor, ordinary, human being
like myself having the power of losing or saving the world in his hands!
And then, of course, there's a woman in the question--the Eternal
Feminine--even in such a colossal problem as this!

"It's mean, and I know it; but, after all, I saved her life--though, if
I hadn't reached her first, that other chap might have got her. I love
her and he loves her; there's no doubt about that, and Papa Parmenter
wants to marry her to a coronet. There's one thing certain, Castellan
shall not have her, and I love her a lot too much to see her made My
Lady This, or the Marchioness of So-and-so, just because she's beautiful
and has millions, and the other fellow, whoever he may be, may have a
coronet that probably wants re-gilding; and yet, after all, it's only
the same old story in a rather more serious form--a woman against the
world. I suppose Papa Parmenter would show me the door to-morrow morning
if I, a poor explorer of the realm of Space, dared to tell him that I
want to marry his daughter.

"And yet how miserable and trivial all these wretched distinctions of
wealth and position look now; or would look if the world only knew and
believed what I could tell it--and that reminds me--shall I tell her, or
them? Of course, I must before long; simply because in a month or so
those American fellows will be on it, and they won't have any scruples
when it comes to a matter of scare head-lines. Yes, I think it may as
well be to-night as any other time. Still, it's a pretty awful thing for
a humble individual like myself to say, especially to a girl one happens
to be very much in love with--nothing less than the death-sentence of
Humanity. Ah, well, she's got to hear it some time and from some one,
and why shouldn't she hear it now and from me?"

When he got back to the house, there was a carriage at the door, and Mr
Parmenter was just coming down the avenue, followed by a man with a
small portmanteau in his hand.

"Sorry, Mr Lennard," he said, holding out his hand, "I've just had a
wire about a company tangle in London that I've got to go and shake out
at once, so I'll have to see what you have to show me later on. Still,
that needn't trouble anyone. It looks as if it were going to be a
splendid night for star-gazing, and I don't want Auriole disappointed,
so she can go up to the observatory with you at the proper time and see
what there is to be seen. See you later, I have only just about time to
get the connection for London."

Lennard was not altogether sorry that this accident had happened.
Naturally, the prospect of an hour or so with Auriole alone in his
temple of Science was very pleasant, and moreover, he felt that, as the
momentous tidings had to be told, he would prefer to tell them to her
first. And so it came about.

A little after half-past eleven that night Miss Auriole was looking
wonderingly into the eye-piece of the great Reflector, watching a tiny
little patch of mist, somewhat brighter towards one end than the other;
like a little wisp of white smoke rising from a very faint spark that
was apparently floating across an unfathomable sea of darkness.

She seemed to see this through black darkness, and behind it a swarm of
stars of all sizes and colours. They appeared very much more wonderful
and glorious and important than the little spray of white smoke, because
she hadn't yet the faintest conception of its true import to her and
every other human being on earth: but she was very soon to know now.

While she was watching it in breathless silence, in which the clicking
of the mechanism which kept the great telescope moving so as to exactly
counteract the motion of the machinery of the Universe, sounded like the
blows of a sledge-hammer on an anvil, Gilbert Lennard stood beside her,
wondering if he should begin to tell her, and what he should say.

At last she turned away from the eye-piece, and looked at him with
something like a scared expression in her eyes, and said:

"It's very wonderful, isn't it, that one should be able to see all that
just by looking into a little bit of a hole in a telescope? And you tell
me that all those great big bright stars around your comet are so far
away that if you look at them just with your own eyes you don't even see
them--and there they look almost as if you could put out your hand and
touch them. It's just a little bit awful, too!" she added, with a little
shiver.

"Yes," he said, speaking slowly and even more gravely that she thought
the subject warranted, "yes, it is both wonderful and, in a way, awful.
Do you know that some of those stars you have seen in there are so far
away that the light which you see them by may have left them when
Solomon was king in Jerusalem? They may be quite dead and dark now, or
reduced into fire-mist by collision with some other star. And then,
perhaps, there are others behind them again so far away that their light
has not even reached us yet, and may never do while there are human eyes
on earth to see it."

"Yes, I know," she said, smiling. "You don't forget that I have been to
college--and light travels about a hundred and eighty-six thousand miles
a second, doesn't it? But come, Mr Lennard, aren't you what they call
stretching the probabilities a little when you say that the light of
some of them will never get here, as far as we're concerned? I always
thought we had a few million years of life to look forward to before
this old world of ours gets worn out."

"There are other ends possible for this world besides wearing out, Miss
Parmenter," he answered, this time almost solemnly. "Other worlds have,
as I say, been reduced to fire-mist. Some have been shattered to tiny
fragments to make asteroids and meteorites--stars and worlds, in
comparison with which this bit of a planet of ours is nothing more than
a speck of sand, a mere atom of matter drifting over the wilderness of
immensity. In fact, such a trifle is it in the organism of the Universe,
that if some celestial body collided with it--say a comet with a
sufficiently solid nucleus--and the heat developed by the impact turned
it into a mass of blazing gas, an astronomer on Neptune, one of our own
planets, wouldn't even notice the accident, unless he happened to be
watching the earth through a powerful telescope at the time."

"And is such an accident, as you call it, possible, Mr Lennard?" she
asked, jumping womanlike, by a sort of unconscious intuition, to the
very point to which he was so clumsily trying to lead up.

"I thought you spoke rather queerly about this comet of yours at
breakfast this morning. I hope there isn't any chance of its getting on
to the same track as this terrestrial locomotive of ours. That would be
just awful, wouldn't it? Why, what's the matter? You are going to be
ill, I know. You had better get down to the house, and go to bed. It's
want of sleep, isn't it? You'll be driving yourself mad that way."

A sudden and terrible change had come over him while she was speaking.
It was only for the moment, and yet to him it was an eternity. It might,
as she said, have been the want of sleep, for insomnia plays strange
tricks sometimes with the strongest of intellects.

More probably, it might have been the horror of his secret working on
the great love that he had for this girl who was sitting there alone
with him in the silence of that dim room and in the midst of the glories
and the mysteries of the Universe.

His eyes had grown fixed and staring, and looked sightlessly at her, and
his face shone ghastly pale in the dim light of the solitary shaded
lamp. Certainly, one of those mysterious crises which are among the
unsolved secrets of psychology had come upon him like some swift access
of delirium.

He no longer saw her sitting there by the telescope, calm, gracious, and
beautiful. He saw her as, by his pitiless calculations, he must do that
day thirteen months to come--with her soft grey eyes, starting,
horror-driven from their orbits, staring blank and wide and hideous at
the overwhelming hell that would be falling down from heaven upon the
devoted earth. He saw her fresh young face withered and horror-lined and
old, and the bright-brown hair grown grey with the years that would pass
in those few final moments. He saw the sweet red lips which had tempted
him so often to wild thoughts parched and black, wide open and gasping
vainly for the breath of life in a hot, burnt-out atmosphere.

Then he saw--no, it was only a glimpse; and with that the strange
trance-vision ended. What must have come after that would in all
certainty have driven him mad there and then, before his work had even
begun; but at that moment, swiftly severing the darkness that was
falling over his soul, there came to him an idea, bright, luminous, and
lovely as an inspiration from Heaven itself, and with it came back the
calm sanity of the sternly-disciplined intellect, prepared to
contemplate, not only the destruction of the world he lived in, but even
the loss of the woman he loved--the only human being who could make the
world beautiful or even tolerable for him.

The vision was blotted out from the sight of his soul; the darkness
cleared away from his eyes, and he saw her again as she still was. It
had all passed in a few moments and yet in them he had been down into
hell--and he had come back to earth, and into her presence.

Almost by the time she had uttered her last word, he had regained
command of his voice, and he began clearly and quietly to answer the
question which was still echoing through the chambers of his brain.

"It was only a little passing faintness, thank you; and something else
which you will understand when I have done, if you have patience to hear
me to the end," he said, looking straight at her for a moment, and then
beginning to walk slowly up and down the room past her chair.

"I am going to surprise you, perhaps to frighten you, and very probably
to offend you deeply," he began again in a quiet, dry sort of tone,
which somehow impressed her against all her convictions that he didn't
much care whether or not he did any or all of these things: but there
was something else in his tone and manner which held her to her seat,
silent and attentive, although she was conscious of a distinct desire to
get up and run away.

"Your guess about the comet, or whatever it may prove to be, is quite
correct. I don't think it is a new one. From what I have seen of it so
far, I have every reason to believe that it is Gambert's comet, which
was discovered in 1826, and became visible to the naked eye in the
autumn of 1833. It then crossed the orbit of the earth one month after
the earth had passed the point of intersection. After that, some force
divided it, and in '46 and '52 it reappeared as twin comets constantly
separating. Now it would seem that the two masses have come together
again: and as they are both larger in bulk and greater in density it
would appear that, somewhere in the distant fields of Space, they have
united with some other and denser body. The result is, that what is
practically a new comet, with a much denser nucleus than any so far
seen, is approaching our system. Unless a miracle happens, or there is a
practically impossible error in my calculations, it will cross the orbit
of the earth thirteen months from to-day, at the moment that the earth
itself arrives at the point of intersection."

So far Auriole had listened to the stiff scientific phraseology with
more interest than alarm; but now she took advantage of a little pause,
and said:

"And the consequences, Mr Lennard? I mean the consequences to us as
living beings. You may as well tell me everything now that you've gone
so far."

"I am going to," he said, stopping for a moment in his walk, "and I am
going to tell you something more than that. Granted that what I have
said happens, one of two things must follow. If the nucleus of the comet
is solid enough to pass through our atmosphere without being dissipated,
it will strike the surface with so much force that both it and the earth
will probably be transformed into fiery vapour by the conversion of the
motion of the two bodies into heat. If not, its contact with the oxygen
of the earth's atmosphere will produce an aërial conflagration which, if
it does not roast alive every living thing on earth, will convert the
oxygen, by combustion, into an irrespirable and poisonous gas, and so
kill us by a slower, but no less fatal, process."

"Horrible!" she said, shivering this time. "You speak like a judge
pronouncing sentence of death on the whole human race! I suppose there
is no possibility of reprieve? Well, go on!"

"Yes," he said, "there is something else. Those are the scientific
facts, as far as they go. I am going to tell you the chances now--and
something more. There is just one chance--one possible way of averting
universal ruin from the earth, and substituting for it nothing more
serious than an unparalleled display of celestial fireworks. All that
will be necessary is perfect calculation and illimitable expenditure of
money."

"Well," she said, "can't you do the calculations, Mr Lennard, and hasn't
dad got millions enough? How could he spend them better than in saving
the human race from being burnt alive? There isn't anything else, is
there?"

"There was something else," he said, stopping in front of her again. She
had risen to her feet as she said the last words, and the two stood
facing each other in the dim light, while the mechanism of the telescope
kept on clicking away in its heedless, mechanical fashion.

"Yes, there was something else, and I may as well tell you after all;
for, even if you never see or speak to me again, it won't stop the work
being done now. I could have kept this discovery to myself till it would
have been too late to do anything: for no other telescope without my
help would even find the comet for four months to come, and even now
there is hardly a day to be lost if the work is to be done in time. And
then--well, I suppose I must have gone mad for the time being, for I
thought--you will hardly believe me, I suppose--that I could make you
the price of the world's safety.

"From that, you will see how much I have loved you, however mad I may
have been. Losing you, I would have lost the world with you. If my love
lives, I thought, the world shall live: if not, if you die, the world
shall die. But just now, when you thought I was taken ill, I had a sort
of vision, and I saw you,--yes, you, Auriole as, if my one chance fails,
you must infallibly be this night thirteen months hence. I didn't see
any of the other millions who would be choking and gasping for breath
and writhing in the torture of the universal fire--I only saw you and my
own baseness in thinking, even for a moment, that such a bargain would
be possible.

"And then," he went on, more slowly, and with a different ring in his
voice, "there are the other men."

"Which other men?" she asked, looking up at him with a flush on her
cheeks and a gleam in her eyes.

"To be quite frank, and in such a situation as this, I don't see that
anything but complete candour is of any use," he replied slowly. "I need
hardly tell you that they are John Castellan and the Marquis of
Westerham. Castellan, I know, has loved you just as I have done, from
the moment we had the good luck to pick you out of the bay at Clifden.
Lord Westerham also wants you, so do I. That, put plainly, brutally, if
you like, is the situation. Of your own feelings, of course, I do not
pretend to have the remotest idea; but I confess that when this
knowledge came to me, the first thought that crossed my mind was the
thought of you as another man's wife--and then came the vision of the
world in flames. At first I chose the world in flames. I see that I was
wrong. That is all."

She had not interrupted even by a gesture, but as she listened, a
thousand signs and trifles which alone had meant nothing to her, now
seemed to come together and make one clear and definite revelation. This
strong, reserved, silent man had all the time loved her so desperately
that he was going mad about her--so mad that, as he had said, he had
even dreamed of weighing the possession of her single, insignificant
self against the safety of the whole world, with all its innumerable
millions of people--mostly as good in their way as she was.

Well--it might be that the love of such a man was a thing worth to weigh
even against a coronet--not in her eyes, for there was no question of
that now, but in her father's. But that was a matter for future
consideration. She drew herself up a little stiffly, and said, in just
such a tone as she might have used if what he had just been saying had
had no personal interest for her--had, in fact, been about some other
girl:

"I think it's about time to be going down to the house, Mr Lennard,
isn't it? I am quite sure a night's rest won't do you any harm. No, I'm
not offended, and I don't think I'm even frightened yet. It somehow
seems too big and too awful a thing to be only frightened at--too much
like the Day of Judgment, you know. I am glad you've told me--yes,
everything--and I'm glad that what you call your madness is over. You
will be able to do your work in saving the world all the better. Only
don't tell dad anything except--well--just the scientific and necessary
part of it. You know, saving a world is a very much greater matter than
winning a woman--at least it is in one particular woman's eyes--and
I've learnt somewhere in mathematics something about the greater
including the less. And now, don't you think we had better be going down
into the house? It's getting quite late."


CHAPTER VI

THE NOTE OF WAR


The _Official Gazette_, published November the 25th, 1909, contained the
following announcement:--


     "Naval Promotions. Lieutenant-Commander Francis Erskine, of H.M.
     Fishery Cruiser _Cormorant_, to be Captain of H.M. Cruiser
     _Ithuriel_. Lieutenant Denis Castellan, also of the _Cormorant_, to
     be First Lieutenant of the _Ithuriel_."


On the evening of the same day, Mr Chamberlain, the Prime Minister, rose
amidst the tense silence of a crowded House to make another
announcement, which was not altogether unconnected with the notice in
the _Gazette_.

"Sir," he said in a low, but vibrant and penetrating voice, which many
years before had helped to make his fame as an orator, "it is my painful
duty to inform this honourable House that a state of war exists between
His Majesty and a Confederation of European countries, including
Germany, Russia, France, Spain, Holland and Belgium."

He paused for a moment, and looked round at the hundreds of faces, most
of them pale and fixed, that were turned toward the front Treasury
Bench. Since Mr Balfour, now Lord Whittinghame, and Leader of the
Conservative Party in the House of Lords, had made his memorable speech
on the 12th of October 1899, informing the House of Commons and the
world that the Ultimatum of the South African Republic had been
rejected, and that the struggle for the mastery of South Africa was
inevitable, no such momentous announcement had been made in the House of
Commons.

Mr Chamberlain referred to that bygone crisis in the following terms:

"It will be within the memory of many Members of this House that, almost
exactly ten years ago to-day, the British Empire was challenged to fight
for the supremacy of South Africa. That challenge was accepted not
because there was any desire on the part of the Government or the people
of this country to destroy the self-government of what were then the
South African Republic and the Orange Free State, but because the
Government of her late Majesty, Queen Victoria, knew that the fate of an
empire, however great, depends upon its supremacy throughout its
dominions.

"To lose one of these, however small and apparently insignificant, is to
take a stone out of an arch with the result of inevitable collapse of
the whole structure. It is not necessary for me, sir, to make any
further allusion to that struggle, save than to say that the policy of
Her Majesty's Ministers has been completely justified by the
consequences which have followed from it.

"The Transvaal and Orange River Colonies have taken their place among
the other self-governing Colonies of the Empire. They are prosperous,
contented and loyal, and they will not be the last, I think, to come to
the help of the Mother Country in such a crisis as this. But, sir, I do
not think that I should be fulfilling the duties of the responsible
position which I have the honour to occupy if I did not remind this
House, and through this House the citizens of the British Empire, that
the present crisis is infinitely more serious than that with which we
were faced in 1899. Then we were waging a war in another hemisphere, six
thousand miles away. Our unconquered, and, as I hope it will prove,
unconquerable Navy, kept the peace of the world, and policed the ocean
highways along which it was necessary for our ships to travel. It is
true that there were menaces and threats heard in many quarters, but
they never passed beyond the region of insult and calumny.

"Our possible enemies then, our actual enemies now, were in those days
willing to wound, and yet afraid to strike. To-day, they have lost their
fear in the confidence of combination. To-day the war cloud is not six
thousand miles away in the southern hemisphere; it is here, in Europe,
and a strip of water, twenty-one miles broad, separates us from the
enemy, which, even as I am speaking, may already be knocking at our
gates. Even now, the thunder of the guns may be echoing along the shores
of the English Channel.

"This, sir, is a war in which I might venture to say the most ardent
member of the Peace Society would not hesitate to engage. For it
involves the most sacred duty of humanity, the defence of our country,
and our homes.

"We remember, sir, the words which Francis Drake wrote, and which have
remained true from his day until now: 'The frontiers of an island
country are the coasts of its possible enemies.' We remember also that
when the great Napoleon had massed nearly half a million men on the
heights above Boulogne, and more than a thousand pontoons were waiting
to carry that force to the Kentish shore, there was only one old English
frigate cruising up and down the Straits of Dover.

"Sir, there is on the heights of Boulogne a monument, built to
commemorate the assembly of the Grand Army, and collectors of coins
still cherish those productions of the Paris Mint, which bear the
legend, 'Napoleon, Emperor, London, 1804.' But, sir, the statue of
Napoleon which stands on the summit of that monument faces not westward
but eastward. The Grand Army could have crossed that narrow strip of
water. It could, no doubt, have made a landing on British soil, but
Napoleon, possibly the greatest military genius the world has ever seen,
anticipated Field-Marshal von Moltke, who said that he had found eight
ways of getting into England, but he had not found one of getting out
again, unless it were possible to pump the North Sea dry, and march the
men over. In other words, sir, the British Navy was then, as now,
paramount on seas; the oceans were our territories, and the coasts of
Europe our frontiers.

"Again, sir, we must not forget that those were the days of sails, and
that these are the days of steam. What was then a matter of days is now
only a matter of hours. It is two hundred and forty-two years since the
sound of hostile guns was heard in the city of London. To-morrow morning
their thunder may awaken us.

"It has been said, sir, that Great Britain plays the game of Diplomacy
with her cards face upwards on the table. That, in a sense, is true, and
His Majesty's Government propose to play the same game now. The demands
which have been presented by the Federation of European Powers, at the
head of which stands the German Emperor--demands which, it is hardly
necessary for me to say, were instantly rejected--are these: That
Gibraltar shall be given back to Spain; that Malta shall be dismantled,
and cease to be a British naval base; that the British occupation of
Egypt and the Soudan shall cease, and that the Suez Canal and the
Trans-Continental Railway from Cairo to the Cape shall be handed over to
the control of an International Board, upon which the British Empire
will be graciously allowed one representative.

"It is further demanded that Singapore, the Gate of the East, shall be
placed under the control of the same International Board, and that the
fortifications of Hong Kong shall be demolished. That, sir, would amount
to the surrender of the British Empire, an empire which can only exist
as long as the ocean paths between its various portions are kept
inviolate.

"Those proposals, sir, in plain English are threats, and His Majesty's
Government has returned the only possible answer to them, and that
answer is war--war, let us remember, which may within a few weeks, or
even days, be brought to our own doors. Whatever our enemies may have
said of us it is still true that Britain stands for peace, security, and
prosperity. We have used the force of arms to conquer the forces of
barbarism and semi-civilisation, but the most hostile of our critics may
be safely challenged to point to any country or province upon which we
have imposed the Pax Britannica, which is not now the better for it. It
is no idle boast, sir, to say that all the world over, the rule of His
Majesty means the rule of peace and prosperity. There are only two
causes in which a nation or an empire may justly go to war. One, is to
make peace where strife was before, and the other is to defend that
which has been won, and made secure by patient toil and endeavour, no
less than by blood and suffering. It is that which the challenge of
Europe calls upon us now to defend. Our answer to the leagued nations is
this: What we have fought for and worked for and won is ours. Take it
from us if you can.

"And, sir, I believe that I can say with perfect confidence, that what
His Majesty's Government has done His Majesty's subjects will enforce to
a man, and, if necessary, countersign the declaration of war in their
own blood.

"Let us remember, too, those weighty words of warning which the Laureate
of the Empire wrote nearly twenty years ago, of this Imperial
inheritance of ours:


     "'It is not made with the mountains, it is not one with the deep,
     Men, not gods, devised it, men, not gods, must keep.
     Men not children, servants, or kinsfolk called from afar,
     But each man born in the island broke to the matter of war.

     'So ye shall bide, sure-guarded, when the restless lightnings wake,
     In the boom of the blotting war-cloud, and the pallid nations quake.
     So, at the haggard trumpets, instant your soul shall leap,
     Forthright, accoutred, accepting--alert from the walls of sleep.
     So at the threat ye shall summon--so at the need ye shall send,
     Men, not children, or servants, tempered and taught to the end.'


"Sir, it has been said that poets are prophets. The hour of the
fulfilment of that prophecy has now come, and I shall be much mistaken
in my estimate of the temper of my countrymen and fellow-subjects of His
Majesty here in Britain, and in the greater Britains over sea, if,
granted the possibility of an armed invasion of the Motherland, every
man, soldier or civilian, who is able to use a rifle, will not, if
necessary, use it in the defence of his country and his home."

The Prime Minister sat down amid absolute silence. The tremendous
possibilities which he had summed up in his brief speech seemed to have
stunned his hearers for the time being. Some members said afterwards
that they could hear their own watches ticking. Then Mr John Redmond,
the Leader of the Irish Nationalist Party, rose and said, in a slow, and
deliberate voice, which contrasted strikingly with his usual style of
oratory:

"Sir, this is not a time for what has been with a certain amount of
double-meaning described as Parliamentary speeches. Still less is it a
time for party or for racial differences. The silence in which this
House has received the speech of the Prime Minister is the most eloquent
tribute that could be paid to the solemnity of his utterances. But, sir,
I have a reason for calling attention to one omission in that speech, an
omission which may have been made purposely. The last time that a
foeman's foot trod British soil was not eight hundred years ago. It was
in December 1796 that French soldiers and sailors landed on the shores
of Bantry Bay. Sir, the Ireland of those days was discontented, and, if
you please to call it so, disloyal. There are those who say she is so
now, but, sir, whatever our domestic difficulties and quarrels may be,
and however much I and the party which I have the honour to lead may
differ from the home policy of the Right Honourable gentleman who has
made this momentous pronouncement, it shall not be said that any of
those difficulties or differences will be taken advantage of by any man
who is worth the name of Irishman.

"As the Prime Minister has told us, the thunder of the enemy's guns may
even now be echoing along our southern coasts. We have, I hope, learnt a
little wisdom on both sides of the Irish Sea during the last twenty
years, and this time, sir, I think I can promise that, while the guns
are talking, there shall be no sound of dispute on party matters in
this House as far as we are concerned. From this moment, the Irish
Nationalist Party, as such, ceases to exist, at any rate until the war's
over.

"In 1796, the French fleet carrying the invading force was scattered
over the seas by one of the worst storms that ever was known on the west
coast of Ireland. As Queen Elizabeth's medal said of the Spanish Armada,
'God blew, and they were scattered.' With God's help, sir, we will
scatter these new enemies who threaten us with invasion and conquest.
Henceforth, there must be no more Englishmen, Irishmen, Scotchmen, or
Welshmen. We are just subjects of the King, and inhabitants of the
British Islands; and the man who does not believe that, and act upon his
belief, should get out of these islands as soon as he can, for he isn't
fit to live in them.

"I remember, sir, a car-driver in Galway, who was taking an English
tourist--and he was a politician as well--around the country about that
half-ruined city. The English tourist was inquiring into the troubles of
Ireland, and he asked him what was the greatest affliction that Ireland
suffered from, and when he answered him he described just the sort of
Irishman who won't be wanted in Ireland now. He said, 'It's the absentee
landlords, your honour. This unfortunate country is absolutely swarming
with them.'"

It was an anti-climax such as only an Irishman could have achieved. The
tension which had held every nerve of every member on the stretch while
the Prime Minister was speaking was broken. The Irish members, almost to
a man, jumped to their feet, as Mr Redmond picked up his hat, waved it
round his head, and said, in a tone which rang clear and true through
the crowded Chamber:

"God save the King!"

And then for the first time in its history, the House of Commons rose
and sang the National Anthem.

There was no division that night. The Prime Minister formally put the
motion for the voting of such credit as might be necessary to meet the
expenses of the war, and when the Speaker put the question, Ay or Nay,
every member stood up bareheaded, and a deep-voiced, thunderous "Ay"
told the leagued nations of Europe that Britain had accepted their
challenge.


CHAPTER VII

CAUGHT!


The events of that memorable night formed a most emphatic contradiction
to the prophecy in Macaulay's "Armada":


     "Such night in England ne'er had been, nor e'er again shall be."


The speeches in the House of Commons and in the House of Peers were
being printed even as they were spoken; hundreds of printing-presses
were grinding out millions of copies of newspapers. Thousands of
newsboys were running along the pavements, or with great bags of new
editions slung on their shoulders tearing through the traffic on
bicycles; but all the speeches in the two Houses of Parliament, all the
reports and hurriedly-written leaders in the papers just represented to
the popular mind one word, and that word was war.

It was true that for over a hundred years no year had passed in which
the British Empire had not been engaged in a war of some kind, but they
were wars waged somewhere in the outlands of the earth. To the
stop-at-home man in the street they were rather more matters of latitude
and longitude than battle, murder, and sudden death. The South African
War, and even the terrible struggle between Russia and Japan, were
already memories drifting out of sight in the rush of the headlong
current of twentieth-century life.

But this was quite another matter; here was war--not war that was being
waged thousands of miles away in another hemisphere or on another side
of the globe--but war within twenty-one miles of English land--within
two or three hours, as it were, of every Englishman's front door.

This went home to every man who had a home, or who possessed anything
worth living for. It was not now a case of sending soldiers, militia and
yeomanry away in transports, and cheering them as they went. Not now, as
Kipling too truly had said of the fight for South Africa:


     "When your strong men cheered in their millions, while your
       striplings went to the war."


Now it was the turn of the strong men; the turn of every man who had the
strength and courage to fight in defence of all that was nearest and
dearest to him.

As yet there was no excitement. At every theatre and every music-hall in
London and the great provincial cities and towns, the performances were
stopped as soon as the news was received by telegraph. The managers read
the news from the stage, the orchestras played the first bar of the
National Anthem, the audiences rose to their feet, and all over the
British Islands millions of voices sang "God save the King," and then,
obeying some impulse, which seemed to have inspired the whole land,
burst into the triumphant psalm of "Rule Britannia."

And when the theatres and music-halls closed, men and women went on
their way home quietly discussing the tremendous tidings which had been
officially announced. There was no attempt at demonstration, there was
very little cheering. It was too serious a matter for that. The men and
women of Britain were thinking, not about what they should say, but
about what they should do. There was no time for shouting, for
to-morrow, perhaps even to-night, the guns would be talking--"The
drumming guns which have no doubts."

The House rose at half-past eleven, and at ten minutes to twelve
Lieutenant Denis Castellan, came into the smoking-room of the Keppel's
Head Hotel, Portsmouth, with a copy of the last edition of the _Southern
Evening News_ in his hand, and said to Captain Erskine:

"It's all right, my boy. It's war, and you've got the _Ithuriel_. Your
own ship, too. Designer, creator, captain; and I'm your First Luff."

"I think that's about good enough for a bottle of the best, Castellan,"
said Erskine, in the quiet tone in which the officer of the finest
Service in the world always speaks. "Touch the button, will you?"

As Denis Castellan put his finger on the button of the electric bell, a
man got up from an armchair on the opposite side of the room, and said,
as he came towards the table at which Erskine was sitting:

"You will pardon me, I hope, if I introduce myself without the usual
formalities. My name is Gilbert Lennard."

"Then, I take it, you're the man who swam that race with my brother
John, in Clifden Bay, when Miss Parmenter was thrown out of her skiff.
But he's no brother of mine now. He's sold himself to the Germans, and,"
he continued, suddenly lowering his voice almost to a whisper, "come up
to my room, we'll have the bottle there, and Mr Lennard will join us.
Yes, waiter, you can take it up to No. 24, we can't talk here," he went
on in a louder tone. "There's a German spy in the room, and by the piper
that was supposed to play before Moses, if he's here when I come back,
I'll throw him out."

Everyone in the smoking-room looked up. Castellan walked out, looking at
a fair-haired, clean-shaven little man, sitting at a table in the
right-hand corner of the room from the door. He also looked up, and
glanced vacantly about the room; then as the three went out, he took a
sip of the whisky and soda beside him, and looked back on to the paper
that he was reading.

"Who's that chap?" asked Erskine, as they went upstairs.

"I'll tell you when we're a bit more to ourselves," replied Castellan;
and when they had got into his sitting-room, and the waiter had brought
the wine, he locked the door, and said:

"That is Staff-Captain Count Karl von Eckstein, of the German Imperial
Navy, and also of His Majesty, the Kaiser's, Secret Service. He knows a
little more than we do about every dockyard and fort on the South Coast,
to say nothing of the ships. That's his district, and thanks to the most
obliging kindness of the British authorities he has made very good use
of it."

"But, surely," exclaimed Lennard, "now that there is a state of war,
such a man as that could be arrested."

"Faith," said Denis Castellan, as he filled the glasses. "Law or no law,
he will be arrested to-night if he stops here long enough for me to lay
hands upon him. Now then, what's the news, Mr Lennard? I'm told that
you've just come back from the United States, what's the opinion of
things over there?"

Such news that Lennard had was, of course, even more terrible than the
news of war and invasion, which was now thrilling through England like
an electric shock, and he kept it to himself, thinking quite rightly
that the people of England had quite enough to occupy their attention
for the immediate present, and so he replied as he raised the glass
which Denis had filled for him:

"I am afraid that I have no news except this: that from all I have heard
in the States, if it does come to death-grips, the States will be with
us. But you see, of course, that I have only just got back, and this
thing has been sprung on us so suddenly. In fact, it was only this
morning that we got an aerogram from the Lizard as we came up Channel to
say that war was almost a certainty, and advising us to get into
Southampton as soon as we could."

"Well," said Erskine, taking up his glass, "that's all right, as far as
it goes. I've always believed that it's all rot saying that blood isn't
thicker than water. It is. Of course, relations quarrel more than other
people do, but it's only over domestic matters. Let an outsider start a
row, and he very soon sees what happens, and that's what I believe our
friends on the other side of the Channel are going to find out if it
comes to extremities. Well, Mr Lennard, I am very pleased that you have
introduced yourself to us to-night. Of course, we have both known you
publicly, and therefore we have all the more pleasure in knowing you
privately."

"Thanks," replied Lennard, putting his hand into the inside pocket of
his coat and taking out an envelope. "But to be quite candid with you,
although of course I am very pleased to make your acquaintance, I did
not introduce myself to you and Mr Castellan only for personal reasons.
I have devoted some attention to the higher chemistry as well as the
higher mathematics and astronomy, and I have also had the pleasure of
going through the designs of the cruiser which you have invented, and
which you are now to command. I have been greatly interested in them,
and for that reason I think that this may interest you. I brought it
here in the hope of meeting you, as I knew that your ship was lying
here."

Erskine opened the envelope, and took out a sheet of notepaper, on which
were written just a few chemical formulæ and about forty words.

Castellan, who was watching him keenly, for the first time since they
had sailed together through stress and storm under the White Ensign, saw
him start. The pupils of his eyes suddenly dilated; his eyelids and
eyebrows went up for an instant and came down again, and the rigid calm
of the British Naval Officer came back. He put the letter into his hip
pocket, buttoned it up, and said, very quietly:

"Thank you, Mr Lennard. You have done me a very great personal service,
and your country a greater one still. I shall, of course, make use of
this. I am afraid if you had sent it to the Ordnance Department you
wouldn't have heard anything about it for the next three months or more;
perhaps not till the war was over."

"And that is just why I brought it to you," laughed Lennard. "Well,
here's good luck to you and the _Ithuriel_, and all honour, and God save
the King!"

"God save the King!" repeated Erskine and Castellan, with that note of
seriousness in their tone which you can hear in the voice of no man who
has not fought, or is not going to fight; in short, to put his words
into action.

They emptied their glasses, and as they put them down on the table
again there came a knock at the door, sharp, almost imperative.

"Come in," said Erskine.

The head waiter threw the door open, and a Naval messenger walked in,
saluted, handed Erskine an official envelope, and said:

"Immediately, sir. The steam pinnace is down at the end of the Railway
Quay."

Erskine tore open the envelope and read the brief order that it
contained, and said:

"Very good. We shall be on board in ten minutes."

The messenger, who was a very useful-looking specimen of the handy man,
saluted and left the room. Castellan ran out after him, and they went
downstairs together. At the door of the hotel the messenger put two
fingers into his mouth, and gave three soft whistles, not unlike the
sounds of a boatswain's pipe. In two minutes a dozen bluejackets had
appeared from nowhere, and just as a matter of formality were asked to
have a drink at the bar. Meanwhile Denis Castellan had gone into the
smoking-room, where he found the sandy-haired, blue-eyed man still
sitting at his table in the corner, smoking his cigar, and looking over
the paper. He touched him on the shoulder and whispered, in perfectly
idiomatic German:

"I thought you were a cleverer man than that, Count. Didn't I give you a
warning? God's thunder, man. You ought to have been miles away by this
time; haven't you a motor that would take you to Southampton in an hour,
and put you on the last of the German liners that's leaving? You know it
will be a shooting or a hanging matter if you're caught here. Come on
now. My name's Castellan, and that should be good enough for you. Come
on, now, and I'll see you safe."

The name of Castellan was already well known to every German
confidential agent, though it was not known that John Castellan had a
brother who was a Lieutenant in the British Navy.

Captain Count Karl von Eckstein got up, and took his hat down from the
pegs, pulled on his gloves, and said deliberately:

"I am very much obliged to you, Mr Castellan, for your warning, which I
ought to have taken at first, but I hope there is still time. I will go
and telephone for my motor at once."

"Yes, come along and do it," said Castellan, catching him by the arm.
"You haven't much time to lose, I can tell you."

They went out of the smoking-room, turned to the left, and went into the
hall. Then Castellan snatched his hand away from Eckstein's arm, took
him by the shoulders, and pitched him forward into the middle of the
semicircle of bluejackets, who were waiting for him, saying:

"That's your man, boys. Take him down to the pinnace, and put him on
board. I'll take the consequences, and I think the owners will, too,
when they know the facts."

Von Eckstein tried to shout, but a hand about half the size of a
shoulder of mutton came down hard over his mouth and nose. Other hands,
with grips like vices, picked him off his feet, and out he went, half
stifled, along the yard, and up to the Railway Pier.

"Rather summary proceedings, weren't they, Castellan?"

Denis drew himself up, formally saluted his superior officer, and said,
with a curious mixture of fun and seriousness in his voice:

"That man's the most dangerous German spy in the South of England, sir,
and all's fair in war and the other thing. We've got him. In half an
hour he'd have been aboard a fast yacht he's got here in the harbour,
and across to Dieppe, with a portmanteau full of plans and photographs
of our forts that would be worth millions in men and money to the people
we've got to fight. I can't say it here, but you know why I know."

Captain Erskine nodded, and did his best to conceal an unofficial smile.

"That's right, Castellan," he said. "I'll take your word for it. Get
that chap on board, lads, as quick as you can. We'll follow at once."

Ship's Corporal Sandy M'Grath, the huge Scotsman, whose great fist had
stifled Count von Eckstein's attempt to cry out, touched his cap and
said: "Awa' wi' him, boys," and out they went at a run. Then Erskine
turned to Lennard, and said:

"We can do all this that you've given me on board the _Ithuriel_. It
isn't quite regular, but in consideration of this, if you like to take a
cruise, and see your own work done, I'll take the responsibility of
inviting you, only mind, there will probably be some fighting."

Even as he spoke two deep dull bangs shook the atmosphere and the
windows of the hotel shivered in their frames.

"I'll come," said Lennard. "They seem to have begun already."

"Begorra they have," said Denis Castellan, making a dash to the door.
"Come on. If that's so, there'll be blood for supper to-night, and the
sooner we're aboard the better."

The next moment the three were outside, and sprinting for the end of the
Railway Pier for all they were worth.


CHAPTER VIII

FIRST BLOOD


When they got to the end of the Railway Pier where the pinnace was lying
panting and puffing, a Flag-Lieutenant touched his cap to Erskine, took
him by the arm and led him aside. He took an envelope out of his pocket
and said, in a low tone:

"Here are your instructions, Erskine. They've jumped on us a bit more
quickly than we thought they would, but the Commander-in-Chief trusts to
you and your ship to do the needful. The position is this: one division
of the Russian, German and Dutch fleets is making a combined attack on
Hull and Newcastle. Two other divisions are going for the mouth of the
Thames, and the North Sea Squadron is going to look after them. The
French North Sea Squadron is making a rush on Dover, and will get very
considerably pounded in the process. Two French fleets from Cherbourg
and Brest are coming up Channel, and each of them has a screen of
torpedo boats and destroyers. The Southern Fleet Reserve is concentrated
here and at Portland. The Channel Fleet is outside, and we hope to get
it in their rear, so that we'll have them between the ships and the
forts. If we do, they'll have just about as hot a time of it as anybody
wants.

"As far as we've been able to learn, the French are going to try Togo's
tactics at Port Arthur, and rush Portsmouth with the small craft. You'll
find that it's your business to look after them. Sink, smash and
generally destroy. Go for everything you see. There isn't a craft of
ours within twenty miles outside. Good-bye, and good luck to you!"

"Good-bye!" said Erskine, as they shook hands, "and if we don't come
back, give my love to the Lords of the Admiralty and thank them for
giving me the chance with the _Ithuriel_. Bye-bye!"

Their hands gripped again and the captain of the _Ithuriel_ ran down the
steps like a boy going to a picnic.

The pinnace gave a little squeak from its siren and sped away down the
harbour between the two forts, in which the gunners were standing by the
new fourteen-inch wire-wound guns, whose long chases were prevented from
drooping after continuous discharge by an ingenious application of the
principle of the cantilever bridge, invented by the creator of the
_Ithuriel_. In the breech-chamber of each of them was a thousand-pound
shell, carrying a bursting charge of five hundred pounds of an explosive
which was an improvement on blasting gelatine, and the guns were capable
of throwing these to a distance of twelve miles with precision. They
were the most formidable weapons either ashore or afloat.

Just outside the harbour the pinnace swung round to the westward and in
a few minutes stopped alongside the _Ithuriel_.

As far as Lennard could see she was neither cruiser nor destroyer nor
submarine, but a sort of compound of all three. She did not appear to be
a steamer because she had no funnels. She was not exactly a submarine
because she had a signal-mast forward and carried five long,
ugly-looking guns, three ahead and two astern, of a type that he had
never seen before. Forward of the mast there was a conning-tower of oval
shape, with the lesser curves fore and aft. The breech-ends of the guns
were covered by a long hood of steel, apparently of great thickness, and
that was all.

As soon as they got on board Erskine said to Lennard:

"Come into the conning-tower with me. I believe we can make use of this
invention of yours at once. I've got a pretty well-fitted laboratory
down below and we might have a try. But you must excuse me a moment, I
will just run through this."

He opened the envelope containing his instructions, put them down on
the little desk in front of him and then read a note that was enclosed
with them.

"By Jove," he said, "they're pretty quick up at headquarters. You'll
have to excuse me a minute or two, Mr Lennard. Just stand on that side,
will you, please? Close up, we haven't too much room here. Good-bye for
the present."

In front of the desk and above the little steering-wheel there was a
mahogany board studded with two sets of ivory buttons, disposed in two
lines of six each. He touched one of these, and Lennard saw him
disappear through the floor of the conning-tower. Within a few moments
the portion of the floor upon which he had stood returned to its place,
and Lennard said to himself:

"If the rest of her works like that, she ought to be a lovely study in
engineering."

While Captain Erskine is communicating his instructions to his second in
command, and arranging the details of the coming fight, there will be
time to give a brief description of the craft on board of which Lennard
so unexpectedly found himself, and which an invention of his own was
destined to make even more formidable than it was.

To put it as briefly as possible, the _Ithuriel_ was a combination of
destroyer, cruiser, submarine and ram, and she had cost Erskine three
years of hard work to think out. She was three hundred feet long, fifty
feet broad, and thirty feet from her upper keel to her deck. This was of
course an abnormal depth for a vessel of her length, but then the
_Ithuriel_ was quite an abnormal warship. One-third of her depth
consisted of a sinking-chamber, protected by twelve-inch armour, and
this chamber could be filled in a few minutes with four thousand tons of
water. This is of course the same thing as saying she had two
waterlines. The normal cruising line gave her a freeboard of ten feet.
Above the sinking-tanks her vitals were protected by ten-inch armour. In
short, as regards armour, she was an entire reversal of the ordinary
type of warship, and she had the advantage of being impervious to
torpedo attack. Loaded torpedoes had been fired at her and had burst
like eggs against a wall, with no more effect than to make her heel over
a few degrees to the other side. Submarines had attacked her and got
their noses badly bruised in the process. It was, indeed, admitted by
the experts of the Admiralty that under water she was impregnable.

Her propelling power consisted of four sets of engines, all well below
the waterline. Three of these drove three propellers astern: the fourth
drove a suction screw which revolved just underneath the ram. This was a
mass of steel weighing fifty tons and curved upwards like the inverted
beak of an eagle. Erskine had taken this idea from the Russian
ice-breakers which had been designed by the Russian Admiral Makaroff and
built at Elswick. The screw was protected by a steel grating of which
the forward protecting girder completed the curve of the stem. Aft,
there was a similar ram, weighing thirty tons and a like protection to
the after-screws.

The driving power was derived from a combination of petrol and
pulverised smokeless coal, treated with liquid oxygen, which made
combustion practically perfect. There was no boilers or furnaces, only
combustion chambers, and this fact made the carrying of the great weight
of armour under the waterline possible. The speed of the _Ithuriel_ was
forty-five knots ahead when all four screws were driving and pulling,
and thirty knots astern when they were reversed. Her total capacity was
five thousand two hundred tons.

Behind the three forward guns was a dome-shaped conning-tower of
nine-inch steel, hardened like the rest of the armour by an improvement
on the Harvey process. Above the conning-tower were two searchlight
projectors, both capable of throwing a clear ray to a distance of four
miles and controlled from within the conning-tower.

"Well, I am afraid I have kept you waiting, Mr Lennard," said Erskine,
as the platform brought him up again into the conning-tower, in much
shorter time than was necessary to make this needful description of what
was probably the most formidable craft in the British Navy. "We're off
now. I've fitted up half a dozen shells with that diabolical invention
of yours. If we run across a battleship or a cruiser, we'll try them. I
think our friends the enemy will find them somewhat of a paralyser, and
there's nothing like beginning pretty strong."

"Nothing like hitting them hard at first, and I hope that those things
of mine will be what I think they are, and unless all my theories are
quite wrong, I fancy you'll find them all right."

"They would be the first theories of yours that have gone wrong, Mr
Lennard," replied Erskine, "but anyhow, we shall soon see. I have put
three of your shells in the forward guns. We'll try them there first,
and if they're all right we'll use the other three. I've got the after
guns loaded with my own shell, so if we come across anything big, we
shall be able to try them against each other. At present, my
instructions are to deal with the lighter craft only: destroyers and
that sort of thing, you know."

"But don't you fire on them?" said Lennard. "What would happen if they
got a torpedo under you?"

"Well," said Erskine, "as a matter of fact I don't think destroyers are
worth shooting at. Our guns are meant for bigger game. But it's no good
trying to explain things now. You'll see, pretty soon, and you'll learn
more in half an hour than I could tell you in four hours."

They were clear of the harbour by this time and running out at about ten
knots between the two old North and South Spithead forts on the top of
each of which one of the new fourteen-inch thousand-pounders had been
mounted on disappearing carriages.

"Now," he continued, "if we're going to find them anywhere, we shall
find them here, or hereabouts. My orders are to smash everything that I
can get at."

"Fairly comprehensive," said Lennard.

"Yes, Lennard, and it's an order that I'm going to fill. We may as well
quicken up a bit now. You understand, Castellan is looking after the
guns, and his sub., Mackenzie is communicating orders to my Chief
Engineer, who looks after the speed."

"And the speed?" asked Lennard.

"I'll leave you to judge that when we get to business," said Erskine,
putting his forefinger on one of the buttons on the left-hand side of
the board as he spoke.

The next moment Lennard felt the rubber-covered floor of the
conning-tower jump under his feet. All the coast lights were
extinguished but there was a half-moon and he saw the outlines of the
shore slip away faster behind them. The eastern heights of the Isle of
Wight loomed up like a cloud and dropped away astern.

"Pretty fast, that," he said.

"Only twenty-five knots," replied Erskine, as he gave the steering-wheel
a very gentle movement and swung the _Ithuriel's_ head round to the
eastward. "If these chaps are going to make a rush in the way Togo did
at Port Arthur, they've got to do it between Selsey Bill and Nettlestone
Point. If they're mad enough to try the other way between Round Tower
Point and Hurst Castle, they'll get blown out of the water in very small
pieces, so we needn't worry about them there. Our business is to keep
them out of this side. Ah, look now, there are two or three of them
there. See, ahead of the port bow. We'll tackle these gentlemen first."

Lennard looked out through the narrow semicircular window of six-inch
crystal glass running across the front of the conning-tower, which was
almost as strong as steel, and saw three little dark, moving spots on
the half-moonlit water, about two miles ahead, stealing up in line
abreast.

"Those chaps are trying to get in between the Spithead forts," said
Erskine. "They're slowed down to almost nothing, waiting for the clouds
to come over the moon, and then they'll make a dash for it. At least,
they think they will. I don't."

As he spoke he gave another turn to the steering-wheel and touched
another button. The _Ithuriel_ leapt forward again and swung about three
points to the eastward. In three minutes she was off Black Point, and
this movement brought her into a straight line with the three
destroyers. He gave the steering-wheel another half turn and her head
swung round in a short quarter circle. He put his finger on to the
bottom button on the right-hand side of the signal board and said to
Lennard:

"Hold tight now, she's going."

Lennard held tight, for he felt the floor jump harder under him this
time.

In the dim light he saw the nearest of the destroyers, as it seemed to
him, rush towards them sideways. Erskine touched another button. A
shudder ran through the fabric of the _Ithuriel_ and her bow rose above
five feet from the water. A couple of minutes later it hit the destroyer
amidships, rolled her over, broke her in two like a log of wood, amidst
a roar of crackling guns and a scream of escaping steam, went over her
and headed for the next one.

Lennard clenched his teeth and said nothing. He was thinking too hard to
say anything just then.

The second destroyer opened fire with her twelve-and six-pounders and
dropped a couple of torpedoes as the _Ithuriel_ rushed at her. The
_Ithuriel_ was now travelling at forty knots an hour. The torpedoes at
thirty. The combined speed was therefore nearly a hundred statute miles
an hour. Erskine saw the two white shapes drop into the water, their
courses converging towards him. A half turn of the wheel to port swung
the _Ithuriel_ out and just cleared them. It was a fairly narrow shave,
for one of them grated along her side, but the _Ithuriel_ had no angles.
The actual result was that one of the torpedoes deflected from its
course, hit the other one and both exploded. A mountain of foam-crowned
water rose up and the commander of the French destroyer congratulated
himself on the annihilation of at least one of the English warships, but
the next moment the grey-blue, almost invisible shape of the _Ithuriel_
leapt up out of the semi-darkness, and her long pointed ram struck
amidships, cut him down to the waterline, and almost before the two
halves of his vessel had sunk the same fate had befallen the third
destroyer.

"Well, what do you think of that?" said Erskine, as he touched a couple
more buttons and the _Ithuriel_ swung round to the eastward again.

"Well," said Lennard, slowly, "of course it's war, and those fellows
were coming in to do all the damage they could. But it is just a bit
terrible, for all that. It's just seven minutes since you rammed the
first boat: you haven't fired a shot and there are three big destroyers
and I suppose three hundred and fifty men at the bottom of the sea.
Pretty awful, you know."

"My dear sir," replied Erskine, without looking round, "all war is awful
and entirely horrible, and naval war is of course the most horrible of
all. There is no chance for the defeated: my orders do not even allow me
to pick up a man from one of those vessels. On the other hand, one must
remember that if one of those destroyers had got in, they could have let
go half a dozen torpedoes apiece among the ships of the Fleet Reserve,
and perhaps half a dozen ships and five or six thousand men might have
been at the bottom of the Solent by this time, and those torpedoes
wouldn't have had any sentiment in them. Hallo, there's another!"

A long, black shape surmounted by a signal-mast and four funnels slid up
and out of the darkness into a patch of moonlight lying on the water.
Erskine gave a quarter turn to the wheel and touched the two buttons
again. The _Ithuriel_ swung round and ran down on her prey. The two
fifteen-and the six twelve-pounder guns ahead and astern and on the
broadside of the destroyer crackled out and a hail of shells came
whistling across the water. A few of them struck the _Ithuriel_, glanced
off and exploded.

"There," said Erskine, "they've knocked some of our nice new paint off.
Now they're going to pay for it."

"Couldn't you give them a shot back?" said Lennard.

"Not worth it, my dear sir," said Erskine. "We keep our guns for bigger
game. We haven't an angle that a shell would hit. You might just as well
fire boiled peas at a hippopotamus as those little things at us. Of
course a big shell square amidships would hurt us, but then she's so
handy that I think I could stop it hitting her straight."

While he was speaking the _Ithuriel_ got up to full speed again. Lennard
shut his eyes. He felt a slight shock, and then a dull grinding. A crash
of guns and a roar of escaping steam, and when he looked out again, the
destroyer had disappeared. The next moment a blinding glare of light
streamed across the water from the direction of Selsey.

"A big cruiser, or battleship," said Erskine. "French or German. Now
we'll see what those shells of yours are made of."


CHAPTER IX

THE "FLYING FISH" APPEARS


A huge, black shape loomed up into the moonlight. As she came nearer
Lennard could see that the vessel carried a big mast forward with a
fighting-top, two funnels a little aft of it, and two other funnels a
few feet forward of the after mast.

Erskine put his glasses up to his eyes and said:

"That's the _Dupleix_, one of the improved _Desaix_ class. Steams
twenty-four knots. I suppose she's been shepherding those destroyers
that we've just finished with. I hope she hasn't seen what happened. If
she thinks that they've got in all right, we've got her. She has a heavy
fore and aft and broadside gunfire, two 6.4 guns ahead and astern and
amidships, in pairs, and as I suppose they'll be using melinite shells,
we shall get fits unless we take them unawares."

"And what does that mean?" asked Lennard.

"Show you in a minute," answered Erskine, touching three or four of the
buttons on the right-hand side as he spoke.

Another shudder ran through the frame of the _Ithuriel_ and Lennard felt
the deck sink under his feet. If he hadn't had as good a head on him as
he had, he would have said something, for the _Ithuriel_ sank until her
decks were almost awash. She jumped forward again now almost invisible,
and circled round to the south eastward. A big cloud drifted across the
moon and Erskine said:

"Thank God for that! We shall get her now."

Another quarter turn of the wheel brought the _Ithuriel's_ head at
right angles to the French cruiser's broadside. He took the transmitter
of the telephone down from the hooks and said:

"Are you there, Castellan?"

"Yes. What's that big thing ahead there?"

"It's the _Dupleix_. Ready with your forward guns. I'm going to fire
first, then ram. Stand by, centre first, then starboard and port, and
keep your eye on them. These are Mr Lennard's shells and we want to see
what they'll do. Are you ready?"

"Yes. When you like."

"Half speed, then, and tell Mackenzie to stand by and order full speed
when I give the word. We shall want it in a jump."

"Very good, sir. Is that all?"

"Yes, that's all."

Erskine put the receiver back on the hooks.

"That's it. Now we'll try your shells. If they're what I think they are,
we'll smash that fellow's top works into scrap-iron, and then we'll go
for him."

"I think I see," said Lennard, "that's why you've half submerged her."

"Yes. The _Ithuriel_ is designed to deal with both light and heavy
craft. With the light ones, as you have seen, she just walked over them.
Now, we've got something bigger to tackle, and if everything goes right
that ship will be at the bottom of the sea in five minutes."

"Horrible," replied Lennard, "but I suppose it's necessary."

"Absolutely," said Erskine, taking the receiver down from the hooks. "If
we didn't do it with them, they'd do it with us. That's war."

Lennard made no reply. He was looking hard at the now rapidly
approaching shape of the big French cruiser, and when men are thinking
hard, they don't usually say much.

The _Ithuriel_ completed her quarter-circle and dead head on to the
_Dupleix_, Erskine said, "Centre gun ready, forward--fire. Port and
starboard concentrate--fire."

There was no report--only a low, hissing sound--and then Lennard saw
three flashes of bluish-green blaze out over the French cruiser.

"Hit her! I think those shells of yours got home," said Erskine between
his clenched teeth. And then he added through the telephone, "Well
aimed, Castellan! They all got there. Load up again--three more shots
and I'm going to ram--quick now, and full speed ahead when you've
fired."

"All ready!" came back over the telephone, "I've told Mackenzie that
you'll want it."

"Good man," replied Erskine. "When I touch the button, you do the rest.
Now--are you ready?"

"Yes."

"Let her have it--then full speed. Ah," Erskine continued, turning to
Lennard, "he's shooting back."

The cruiser burst into a thunderstorm of smoke and flame and shell, but
there was nothing to shoot at. Only three feet of freeboard would have
been visible even in broad daylight. The signal mast had been
telescoped. There was nothing but the deck, the guns and the
conning-tower to be seen. The shells screamed through the air a good ten
feet over her and incidentally wrecked the Marine Hotel on Selsey Bill.

Erskine pressed the top button on the right-hand side three times. The
smokeless, nameless guns spoke again, and again the three flashes of
blue-green flame broke out on the Frenchman's decks.

"Good enough," said Erskine, taking the transmitter down from the hooks
again. "Now, Mr Lennard, just come for'ard and watch."

Lennard crept up beside him and took the glasses.

"Down guns--full speed ahead--going to ram," said Erskine, quietly, into
the telephone.

To his utter astonishment, Lennard saw the three big guns sink down
under the deck and the steel hoods move forward and cover the
emplacements. The floor of the conning-tower jumped under his feet again
and the huge shape of the French cruiser seemed to rush towards him.
There was a roar of artillery, a thunder of 6.4 guns, a crash of
bursting shells, a shudder and a shock, and the fifty-ton ram of the
_Ithuriel_ hit her forward of the conning-tower and went through the
two-inch armour belt as a knife would go through a piece of paper. The
big cruiser stopped as an animal on land does, struck by a bullet in its
vitals, or a whale when the lance is driven home. Half her officers and
men were lying about the decks asphyxiated by Lennard's shells. The
after barbette swung round, and at the same moment, or perhaps half a
minute before, Erskine touched two other buttons in rapid succession.
The _Dupleix_ lurched down on the starboard side, the two big guns went
off and hit the water. Erskine touched another button, and the
_Ithuriel_ ran back from her victim. A minute later the French cruiser
heeled over and sank.

"Good God, how did you do that?" said Lennard, looking round at him with
eyes rather more wide open than usual.

"That's the effect of the suction screw," replied Erskine. "I got the
idea from the Russian ice-breaker, the _Yermack_. The old idea was just
main strength and stupidity, charge the ice and break through if you
could. The better idea was to suck the water away from under the ice and
go over it--that's what we've done. I rammed that chap, pulled the water
away from under him, and, of course, he's gone down."

He gave the wheel a quarter-turn to starboard, took down the transmitter
and said: "Full speed again--in two minutes, three quarters and then
half."

"But surely," exclaimed Lennard, "you can do something to help those
poor fellows. Are you going to leave them all to drown?"

"I have no orders, except to sink and destroy," replied Erskine between
his teeth. "You must remember that this is a war of one country against
a continent, and of one fleet against four. Ah, there's another! A
third-class cruiser--I think I know her, she's the old _Leger_--they
must have thought they had an easy job of it if they sent her here. Low
free board, not worth shooting at. We'll go over her. No armour--what
idiots they are to put a thing like that into the fighting line!"

He took the transmitter down and said:

"Stand by there, Castellan! Get your pumps to work, and I shall want
full speed ahead--I'm going to run that old croak down--hurry up."

He put the transmitter back on the hooks and presently Lennard saw the
bows of the _Ithuriel_ rise quickly out of the water. The doomed vessel
in front of them was a long, low-lying French torpedo-catcher, with one
big funnel between two signal-masts, hopelessly out of date, and
evidently intended only to go in and take her share of the spoils.
Erskine switched off the searchlight, called for full speed ahead and
then with clenched teeth and set eyes, he sent the _Ithuriel_ flying at
her victim.

Within five minutes it was all over. The fifty-ton ram rose over the
_Leger's_ side, crushed it down into the water, ground its way through
her, cut her in half and went on.

"That ship ought to have been on the scrap-heap ten years ago," said
Erskine as he signalled for half-speed and swung the _Ithuriel_ round to
the westward.

"She's got a scrap-heap all to herself now, I suppose," said Lennard,
with a bit of a check in his voice. "I've no doubt, as you say, this
sort of thing may be necessary, but my personal opinion of it is that
it's damnable."

"Exactly my opinion too," said Erskine, "but it has to be done."

The next instant, Lennard heard a sound such as he had never heard
before. It was a smothered rumble which seemed to come out of the
depths, then there came a shock which flung him off his feet, and shot
him against the opposite wall of the conning-tower. The _Ithuriel_
heeled over to port, a huge volume of water rose on her starboard side
and burst into a torrent over her decks, then she righted.

Erskine, holding on hard to the iron table to which the signalling board
was bolted, saved himself from a fall.

"I hope you're not hurt, Mr Lennard," said he, looking round, "that was
a submarine. Let a torpedo go at us, I suppose, and didn't know they
were hitting twelve-inch armour."

"It's all right," said Lennard, picking himself up. "Only a bruise or
two; nothing broken. It seems to me that this new naval warfare of yours
is going to get a bit exciting."

"Yes," said Erskine, "I think it is. Halloa, Great Cæsar! That must be
that infernal invention of Castellan's brother's; the thing he sold to
the Germans--the sweep!"

As he spoke a grey shape leapt up out of the water and began to circle
over the _Ithuriel_. He snatched the transmitter from the hooks, and
said, in quick, clear tones:

"Castellan--sink--quick, quick as you can."

The pumps of the _Ithuriel_ worked furiously the next moment. Lennard
held his breath as he saw the waves rise up over the decks.

"Full speed ahead again, and dive," said Erskine into the transmitter.
"Hold tight, Lennard."

The floor of the conning-tower took an angle of about sixty degrees, and
Lennard gripped the holdfasts, of which there were two on each wall of
the tower. He heard a rush of overwhelming waters--then came darkness.
The _Ithuriel_ rushed forward at her highest speed. Then something hit
the sea, and a quick succession of shocks sent a shudder through the
vessel.

"I thought so," said Erskine. "That's John Castellan's combined airship
and submarine right enough, and that was an aërial torpedo. If it had
hit us when we were above water, we should have been where those French
chaps are now. You're quite right, this sort of naval warfare is getting
rather exciting."


CHAPTER X

FIRST BLOWS FROM THE AIR


The _Flying Fish_, the prototype of the extraordinary craft which played
such a terrible part in the invasion of England, was a magnified
reproduction, with improvements which suggested themselves during
construction, of the model whose performances had so astonished the
Kaiser at Potsdam. She was shaped exactly like her namesake of the deep,
upon which, indeed, her inventor had modelled her. She was one hundred
and fifty feet long and twenty feet broad by twenty-five feet deep in
her widest part, which, as she was fish-shaped, was considerably forward
of her centre.

She was built of a newly-discovered compound, something like
papier-maché, as hard and rigid as steel, with only about one-tenth the
weight. Her engines were of the simplest description in spite of the
fact that they developed enormous power. They consisted merely of
cylinders into which, by an automatic mechanism, two drops of liquid
were brought every second. These liquids when joined produced a gas of
enormously expansive power, more than a hundred times that of steam,
which actuated the pistons. There were sixteen of these cylinders, and
the pistons all connected with a small engine invented by Castellan,
which he called an accelerator. By means of this device he could
regulate the speed of the propellers which drove the vessel under water
and in the air from sixty up to two thousand revolutions a minute.

The _Flying Fish_ was driven by nine propellers, three of these,
four-bladed and six feet diameter, revolved a little forward amidships
on either side under what might be called the fins. These fins collapsed
close against the sides of the vessel when under water and expanded to a
spread of twenty feet when she took the air. They worked on a pivot and
could be inclined either way from the horizontal to an angle of thirty
degrees. Midway between the end of these and the stern was a smaller
pair with one driving screw. The eighth screw was an ordinary propeller
at the stern, but the outside portion of the shaft worked on a ball and
socket joint so that it could be used for both steering and driving
purposes. It was in fact the tail of the _Flying Fish_. Steering in the
air was effected by means of a vertical fin placed right aft.

She was submerged as the _Ithuriel_ was, by pumping water into the lower
part of her hull. When these chambers were empty she floated like a
cork. The difference between swimming and flying was merely the
difference between the revolutions of the screws and the inclination of
the fins. A thousand raised her from the water: twelve hundred gave her
twenty-five or thirty miles an hour through the air: fifteen hundred
gave her fifty, and two thousand gave her eighty to a hundred, according
to the state of the atmosphere.

Her armament consisted of four torpedo tubes which swung at any angle
from the horizontal to the vertical and so were capable of use both
under water and in the air. They discharged a small,
insignificant-looking torpedo containing twenty pounds of an explosive,
discovered almost accidentally by Castellan and known only to himself,
the German Emperor, the Chancellor, and the Commander-in-Chief. It was
this which he had used in tiny quantities in the experiment at Potsdam.
Its action was so terrific that it did not rend or crack metal or stone
which it struck. It overcame the chemical forces by which the substance
was held together and reduced them to gas and powder.

And now, after this somewhat formal but necessary description of the
most destructive fighting-machine ever created we can proceed with the
story.

There were twenty _Flying Fishes_ attached to the Allied Forces, all of
them under the command of German engineers, with the exception of the
original _Flying Fish_. Two of these were attached to the three
squadrons which were attacking Hull, Newcastle and Dover: three had been
detailed for the attack on Portsmouth: two more to Plymouth, two to
Bristol and Liverpool respectively, on which combined cruiser and
torpedo attacks were to be made, and two supported by a small swift
cruiser and torpedo flotilla for an assault on Cardiff, in order if
possible to terrorise that city into submission and so obtain what may
be called the life-blood of a modern navy. The rest, in case of
accidents to any of these, were reserved for the final attack on London.

When the _Ithuriel_ disappeared and his torpedo struck a piece of
floating wreckage and exploded with a terrific shock, John Castellan,
standing in the conning-tower directing the movements of the _Flying
Fish_, naturally concluded that he had destroyed a British submarine
scout. He knew of the existence, but nothing of the real powers of the
_Ithuriel_. The only foreigner who knew that was Captain Count Karl von
Eckstein, and he was locked safely in a cabin on board her.

He had been searching the under-waters between Nettlestone Point and
Hayling Island for hours on the look-out for British submarines and
torpedo scouts, and had found nothing, therefore he was ignorant of the
destruction which the _Ithuriel_ had already wrought, and as, of course,
he had heard no firing under the water, he believed that the three
destroyers supported by the _Dupleix_ and _Leger_ had succeeded in
slipping through the entrance to Spithead.

He knew that a second flotilla of six destroyers with three swift
second-class cruisers were following in to complete the work, which by
this time should have begun, and that after them came the main French
squadron, consisting of six first-class battleships with a screen of ten
first and five second-class cruisers, the work of which would be to
maintain a blockade against any relieving force, after the submarines
and destroyers had sunk and crippled the ships of the Fleet Reserve and
cut the connections of the contact mines.

He knew also that the _See Adler_, which was _Flying Fish II._, was
waiting about the Needles to attack Hurst Castle and the forts on the
Isle of Wight side, preparatory to a rush of two battleships and three
cruisers through the narrows, while another was lurking under Hayling
Island ready to take the air and rain destruction on the forts of
Portsmouth before the fight became general.

What thoroughly surprised him, however, was the absolute silence and
inaction of the British. True, two shots had been fired, but whether
from fort or warship, and with what intent, he hadn't the remotest
notion. The hour arranged upon for the general assault was fast
approaching. The British must be aware that an attack would be made, and
yet there was not so much as a second-class torpedo boat to be seen
outside Spithead. This puzzled him, so he decided to go and investigate
for himself. He took up a speaking-tube and said to his Lieutenant,
M'Carthy--one of too many renegade Irishmen who in the terrible times
that were to come joined their country's enemies as Lynch and his
traitors had done in the Boer War:

"I don't quite make it out, M'Carthy. We'll go down and get under--it's
about time the fun began--and I haven't heard a shot fired or seen an
English ship except that submarine we smashed. My orders are for twelve
o'clock, and I'm going to obey them."

There was one more device on board the _Flying Fish_ which should be
described in order that her wonderful manoeuvering under water may be
understood. Just in front of the steering-wheel in the conning-tower was
a square glass box measuring a foot in the side, and in the centre of
this, attached to top and bottom by slender films of asbestos, was a
needle ten inches long, so hung that it could turn and dip in any
direction. The forward half of this needle was made of highly magnetised
steel, and the other of aluminium which exactly counter-balanced it. The
glass case was completely insulated and therefore the extremely
sensitive needle was unaffected by any of the steel parts used in the
construction of the vessel. But let any other vessel, save of course a
wooden ship, come within a thousand yards, the needle began to tremble
and sway, and the nearer the _Flying Fish_ approached it, the steadier
it became and the more directly it pointed towards the object. If the
vessel was on the surface, it of course pointed upward: if it was a
submarine, it pointed either level or downwards with unerring precision.
This needle was, in fact, the eyes of the _Flying Fish_ when she was
under water.

Castellan swung her head round to the north-west and dropped gently on
to the water about midway between Selsey Bill and the Isle of Wight.
Then the _Flying Fish_ folded her wings and sank to a depth of twenty
feet. Then, at a speed of ten knots, she worked her way in a zigzag
course back and forth across the narrowing waters, up the channel
towards Portsmouth.

To his surprise, the needle remained steady, showing that there was
neither submarine nor torpedo boat near. This meant, as far as he could
see, that the main approach to the greatest naval fortress in England
had been left unguarded, a fact so extraordinary as to be exceedingly
suspicious. His water-ray apparatus, a recent development of the X-rays
which enabled him to see under water for a distance of fifty yards, had
detected no contact mines, and yet Spithead ought to be enstrewn with
them, just as it ought to have been swarming with submarines and
destroyers. There must be some deep meaning to such apparently
incomprehensible neglect, but what was it?

If his brother Denis had not happened to recognise Captain Count Karl
von Eckstein and haled him so unceremoniously on board the _Ithuriel_,
and if his portmanteau full of papers had been got on board a French
warship, instead of being left for the inspection of the British
Admiralty, that reason would have been made very plain to him.

Completely mystified, and fearing that either he was going into some
trap or that some unforeseen disaster had happened, he swung round, ran
out past the forts and rose into the air again. When he had reached the
height of about a thousand feet, three rockets rose into the air and
burst into three showers of stars, one red, one white, and the other
blue. It was the Tricolour in the air, and the signal from the French
Admiral to commence the attack. Castellan's orders were to cripple or
sink the battleships of the Reserve Fleet which was moored in two
divisions in Spithead and the Solent.

The Spithead Division lay in column of line abreast between Gilkicker
Point and Ryde Pier. It consisted of the _Formidable_, _Irresistible_,
_Implacable_, _Majestic_ and _Magnificent_, and the cruisers _Hogue_,
_Sutlej_, _Ariadne_, _Argonaut_, _Diadem_ and _Hawke_. The western
Division consisted of the battleships _Prince George_, _Victoria_,
_Jupiter_, _Mars_ and _Hannibal_, and the cruisers _Amphitrite_,
_Spartiate_, _Andromeda_, _Europa_, _Niobe_, _Blenheim_ and _Blake_.

It had of course been perfectly easy for Castellan to mark the position
of the two squadrons from the air, and he knew that though they were
comparatively old vessels they were quite powerful enough, with the
assistance of the shore batteries, to hold even Admiral Durenne's
splendid fleet until the Channel Fleet, which for the time being seemed
to have vanished from the face of the waters, came up and took the
French in the rear.

In such a case, the finest fleet of France would be like a nut in a
vice, and that was the reason for the remorseless orders which had been
given to him, orders which he was prepared to carry out to the letter,
in spite of the appalling loss of life which they entailed; for, as the
_Flying Fish_ sank down into the water, he thought of that swimming race
in Clifden Bay and of the girl whose marriage with himself, willing or
unwilling, was to be one of the terms of peace when the British Navy lay
shattered round her shores, and the millions of the Leagued Nations had
trampled the land forces of Britain into submission.

Just as she touched the water a brilliant flash of pink flame leapt up
from the eastern fort on the Hillsea Lines, followed by a sharp crash
which shook the atmosphere. A thin ray of light fell from the clouds,
then came a quick succession of flashes moving in the direction of the
great fort on Portsdown, until two rose in quick succession from
Portsdown itself, and almost at the same moment another from Hurst
Castle, and yet another from the direction of Fort Victoria.

"God bless my soul, what's that?" exclaimed the Commander-in-Chief,
Admiral Sir Compton Domville, who had just completed his final
inspection of the defences of Portsmouth Harbour, and was standing on
the roof of Southsea Castle, taking a general look round before going
back to headquarters. "Here, Markham," he said, turning to the Commander
of the Fort, "just telephone up to Portsdown at once and ask them what
they're up to."

An orderly instantly dived below to the telephone room. The Fort
Commander took Sir Compton aside and said in a low voice:

"I am afraid, sir, that the forts are being attacked from the air."

"What's that?" replied Sir Compton, with a start. "Do you mean that
infernal thing that Erskine and Castellan and the watch of the
_Cormorant_ saw in the North Sea?"

"Yes, sir," was the reply. "There is no reason why the enemy should not
possess a whole fleet of these craft by this time, and naturally they
would act in concert with the attack of the French Fleet. I've heard
rumours of a terrible new explosive they've got, too, which shatters
steel into splinters and poisons everyone within a dozen yards of it. If
that's true and they're dropping it on the forts, they'll probably smash
the guns as well. For heaven's sake, sir, let me beg of you to go back
at once to headquarters! It will probably be our turn next. You will be
safe there, for they're not likely to waste their shells on Government
buildings."

"Well, I suppose I shall be of more use there," growled Sir Compton.

At this moment the orderly returned, looking rather scared. He saluted
and said:

"If you please, sir, they've tried Portsdown and all the Hillsea forts
and can't get an answer."

"Good heavens!" said the Commander-in-Chief, "that looks almost as if
you were right, Markham. Signal to Squadron A to up-anchor at once and
telephone to Squadron B to do the same. Telephone Gilkicker to turn all
searchlights on. Now I must be off and have a talk with General
Hamilton."

He ran down to his pinnace and went away full speed for the harbour, but
before he reached the pier another flash burst out from the direction of
Fort Gilkicker, followed by a terrific roar. To those standing on the
top of Southsea Castle the fort seemed turned into a volcano, spouting
flame and clouds of smoke, in the midst of which they could see for an
instant whirling shapes, most of which would probably be the remains of
the gallant defenders, hurled into eternity before they had a chance of
firing a shot at the invaders. The huge guns roared for the first and
last time in the war, and the great projectiles plunged aimlessly among
the ships of the squadron, carrying wreck and ruin along the line.

"Our turn now, I suppose," said the Fort Commander, quietly, as he
looked up and by a chance gleam of moonlight through the breaking clouds
saw a dim grey, winged shape drift across the harbour entrance.

They were the last words he ever spoke, for the next moment the roof
crumbled under his feet, and his body was scattered in fragments through
the air, and in that moment Portsmouth had ceased to be a fortified
stronghold.


CHAPTER XI

THE TRAGEDY OF THE TWO SQUADRONS


It takes a good deal to shake the nerves of British naval officer or
seaman, but those on board the ships of the Spithead Squadron would have
been something more than human if they could have viewed the appalling
happenings of the last few terrible minutes with their accustomed
coolness. They were ready to fight anything on the face of the waters or
under them, but an enemy in the air who could rain down shells, a couple
of which were sufficient to destroy the most powerful forts in the
world, and who could not be hit back, was another matter. It was a
bitter truth, but there was no denying it. The events of the last ten
years had clearly proved that a day must come when the flying machine
would be used as an engine of war, and now that day had come--and the
fighting flying machine was in the hands of the enemy.

The anchors were torn from the ground, signals were flashed from the
flagship, the _Prince George_, and within four minutes the squadron was
under way to the south-eastward. After what had happened the Admiral in
command promptly and rightly decided that to keep his ships cramped up
in the narrow waters was only to court further disaster. His place was
now the open sea, and a general fleet action offered the only means of
preventing an occupation of almost defenceless Portsmouth, and the
landing of hostile troops in the very heart of England's southern
defences.

Fifteen first-class torpedo boats and ten destroyers ran out from the
Hampshire and Isle of Wight coasts, ran through the ships, and spread
themselves out in a wide curve ahead, and at the same time twenty
submarines crept out from the harbour and set to work laying contact
mines in the appointed fields across the harbour mouth and from shore to
shore behind the Spithead forts.

But the squadron had not steamed a mile beyond the forts before a series
of frightful disasters overtook them. First, a huge column of water rose
under the stern of the _Jupiter_. The great ship stopped and shuddered
like a stricken animal, and began to settle down stern first. Instantly
the _Mars_ and _Victorious_ which were on either side of her slowed
down, their boats splashed into the water and set to work to rescue
those who managed to get clear of the sinking ship.

But even while this was being done, the _Banshee_, the _Flying Fish_
which had destroyed the forts, had taken up her position a thousand feet
above the doomed squadron. A shell dropped upon the deck of the
_Spartiate_, almost amidships. The pink flash blazed out between her two
midship funnels. They crumpled up as if they had been made of brown
paper. The six-inch armoured casemates on either side seemed to crumble
away. The four-inch steel deck gaped and split as though it had been
made of matchboard. Then the _Banshee_ dropped to within five hundred
feet and let go another shell almost in the same place. A terrific
explosion burst out in the very vitals of the stricken ship, and the
great cruiser seemed to split asunder. A vast volume of mingled smoke
and flame and steam rose up, and when it rolled away, the _Spartiate_
had almost vanished.

But that was the last act of destruction that the _Banshee_ was destined
to accomplish. That moment the moon sailed out into a patch of clear
sky. Every eye in the squadron was turned upward. There was the airship
plainly visible. Her captain instantly saw his danger and quickened up
his engines, but it was too late. He was followed by a hurricane of
shells from the three-pound quick-firers in the upper tops of the
battleships. Then came an explosion in mid-air which seemed to shake the
very firmament itself. She had fifty or sixty of the terrible shells
which had wrought so much havoc on board, and as a dozen shells pierced
her hull and burst, they too exploded with the shock. A vast blaze of
pink flame shone out.

"Talk about going to glory in a blue flame," said Seaman Gunner
Tompkins, who had aimed one of the guns in the fore-top of the
_Hannibal_, and of course, like everybody else, piously believed that
his was one of the shells that got there. "That chap's gone to t'other
place in a red'un. War's war, but I don't hold with that sort of
fighting; it doesn't give a man a chance. Torpedoes is bad enough, Gawd
knows--"

The words were hardly out of his mouth when a shock and a shudder ran
through the mighty fabric of the battleship. The water rose in a
foam-clad mountain under her starboard quarter. She heeled over to port,
and then rolled back to starboard and began to settle.

"Torpedoed, by George! What did I tell you?" gasped Gunner Tompkins. The
next moment a lurch of the ship hurled him and his mates far out into
the water.

Even as his ship went down, Captain Barclay managed to signal to the
other ships, "Don't wait--get out." And when her shattered hull rested
on the bottom, the gallant signal was still flying from the upper yard.

It was obvious that the one chance of escaping their terrible unseen foe
was to obey the signal. By this time crowds of small craft of every
description had come off from both shores to the rescue of those who had
gone down with the ships, so the Admiral did what was the most practical
thing to do under the circumstances--he dropped his own boats, each with
a crew, and ordered the _Victorious_ and _Mars_ to do the same, and then
gave the signal for full speed ahead. The great engines panted and
throbbed, and the squadron moved forward with ever-increasing speed, the
cruisers and destroyers, according to signal, running ahead of the
battleships; but before full speed was reached, the _Mars_ was struck
under the stern, stopped, shuddered, and went down with a mighty lurch.

This last misfortune convinced the Admiral that the destruction of his
battleships could not be the work of any ordinary submarine, for at the
time the _Mars_ was struck she was steaming fifteen knots and the
underwater speed of the best submarine was only twelve, saving only the
_Ithuriel_, and she did not use torpedoes. The two remaining battleships
had now reached seventeen knots, which was their best speed. The
cruisers and their consorts were already disappearing round Foreland.

There was some hope that they might escape the assaults of the
mysterious and invisible enemy now that the airship had been destroyed,
but unless the submarine had exhausted her torpedoes, or some accident
had happened to her, there was very little for the _Prince George_ and
the _Victorious_, and so it turned out. Castellan's strict orders had
been to confine his attentions to the battleships, and he obeyed his
pitiless instructions to the letter. First the _Victorious_ and then the
flagship, smitten by an unseen and irresistible bolt in their weakest
parts, succumbed to the great gaping wounds torn in the thin
under-plating, reeled once or twice to and fro like leviathans
struggling for life, and went down. And so for the time being, at least,
ended the awful work of the _Flying Fish_.

Leaving the cruisers and smaller craft to continue their dash for the
open Channel, we must now look westward.

When Vice-Admiral Codrington, who was flying his flag on the
_Irresistible_, saw the flashes along the Hillsea ridge and Portsdown
height and heard the roar of the explosions, he at once up-anchor and
got his squadron under way. Then came the appallingly swift destruction
of Hurst Castle and Fort Victoria. Like all good sailors, he was a man
of instant decision. His orders were to guard the entrance to the
Solent, and the destruction of the forts made it impossible for him to
do this inside. How that destruction had been wrought, he had of course
no idea, beyond a guess that the destroying agent must have come from
the air, since it could not have come from sea or land without provoking
a very vigorous reply from the forts. Instead of that they had simply
blown up without firing a shot.

He therefore decided to steam out through the narrow channel between
Hurst Castle and the Isle of Wight as quickly as possible.

It was a risky thing to do at night and at full speed, for the Channel
and the entrance to it was strewn with contact mines, but one of the
principal businesses of the British Navy is to take risks where
necessary, so he put his own ship at the head of the long line, and with
a mine chart in front of him went ahead at eighteen knots.

When Captain Adolph Frenkel, who was in command of the _See Adler_, saw
the column of warships twining and wriggling its way out through the
Channel, each ship handled with consummate skill and keeping its
position exactly, he could not repress an admiring "Ach!" Still it was
not his business to admire, but destroy.

He rose to a thousand feet, swung round to the north-eastward until the
whole line had passed beneath him, and then quickened up and dropped to
seven hundred feet, swung round again and crept up over the _Hogue_,
which was bringing up the rear. When he was just over her fore part, he
let go a shell, which dropped between the conning-tower and the forward
barbette.

The navigating bridge vanished; the twelve-inch armoured conning-tower
cracked like an eggshell; the barbette collapsed like the crust of a
loaf, and the big 9.2 gun lurched backwards and lay with its muzzle
staring helplessly at the clouds. The deck crumpled up as though it had
been burnt parchment, and the ammunition for the 9.2 and the forward
six-inch guns which had been placed ready for action exploded, blowing
the whole of the upper forepart of the vessel into scrap-iron.

But an even worse disaster than this was to befall the great
twelve-thousand-ton cruiser. Her steering gear was, of course,
shattered. Uncontrolled and uncontrollable, she swung swiftly round to
starboard, struck a mine, and inside three minutes she was lying on the
mud.

Almost at the moment of the first explosion, the beams of twenty
searchlights leapt up into the air, and in the midst of the broad white
glare hundreds of keen angry eyes saw a winged shape darting up into the
air, heading southward as though it would cross the Isle of Wight over
Yarmouth. Almost simultaneously, every gun from the tops of the
battleships spoke, and a storm of shells rent the air.

But Captain Frenkel had already seen his mistake. The _See Adler's_
wings were inclined at an angle of twenty degrees, her propellers were
revolving at their utmost velocity, and at a speed of nearly a hundred
miles an hour, she took the Isle of Wight in a leap. She slowed down
rapidly over Freshwater Bay. Captain Frenkel took a careful observation
of the position and course of the squadron, dropped into the water,
folded his wings and crept round the Needles with his conning-tower just
awash, and lay in wait for his prey about two miles off the Needles.

The huge black hull of the _Irresistible_ was only a couple of hundred
yards away. He instantly sank and turned on his water-ray. As the
flagship passed within forty yards he let go his first torpedo. It hit
her sternpost, smashed her rudder and propellers, and tore a great hole
in her run. The steel monster stopped, shuddered, and slid sternward
with her mighty ram high in the air into the depths of the smooth grey
sea.

There is no need to repeat the ghastly story which has already been
told--the story of the swift and pitiless destruction of these miracles
of human skill, huge in size and mighty in armament and manned by the
bravest men on land or sea, by a foe puny in size but of awful
potentiality. It was a fight, if fight it could be called, between the
visible and the invisible, and it could only have one end. Battleship
after battleship received her death-wound, and went down without being
able to fire a shot in defence, until the _Magnificent_, smitten in the
side under her boilers, blew up and sank amidst a cloud of steam and
foam, and the Western Squadron had met the fate of the Eastern.

While this tragedy was being enacted, the cruisers scattered in all
directions and headed for the open at their highest speed. It was a
bitter necessity, and it was bitterly felt by every man and boy on board
them; but the captains knew that to stop and attempt the rescue of even
some of their comrades meant losing the ships which it was their duty at
all costs to preserve, and so they took the only possible chance to
escape from this terrible unseen foe which struck out of the silence and
the darkness with such awful effect.

But despite the tremendous disaster which had befallen the Reserve
Fleet, the work of death and destruction was by no means all on one
side. When he sank the _Leger_, Erskine had done a great deal more
damage to the enemy than he knew, for she had been sent not for fighting
purposes, but as a dépôt ship for the _Flying Fishes_, from which they
could renew their torpedoes and the gas cylinders which furnished their
driving power. Being a light craft, she was to take up an agreed
position off Bracklesham Bay three miles to the north-west of Selsey
Bill, the loneliest and shallowest part of the coast, with all lights
out, ready to supply all that was wanted or to make any repairs that
might be necessary. Her sinking, therefore, deprived John Castellan's
craft of their base.

After the _Dupleix_ had gone down, the _Ithuriel_ rose again, and
Erskine said to Lennard:

"There must be more of them outside, they wouldn't be such fools as to
rush Portsmouth with three destroyers and a couple of cruisers. We'd
better go on and reconnoitre."

The _Ithuriel_ ran out south-eastward at twenty knots in a series of
broad curves, and she was just beginning to make the fourth of these
when six black shapes crowned with wreaths of smoke loomed up out of the
semi-darkness.

"Thought so--destroyers," said Erskine. "Yes, and look there, behind
them--cruiser supports, three of them--these are for the second rush.
Coming up pretty fast, too; they'll be there in half an hour. We shall
have something to say about that. Hold on, Lennard."

"Same tactics, I suppose," said Lennard.

"Yes," replied Erskine, taking down the receiver. "Are you there,
Castellan? All right. We've six more destroyers to get rid of. Full
speed ahead, as soon as you like--guns all ready, I suppose? Good--go
ahead."

The _Ithuriel_ was now about two miles to the westward and about a mile
in front of the line of destroyers, which just gave her room to get up
full speed. As she gathered way, Lennard saw the nose of the great ram
rise slowly out of the water. The destroyer's guns crackled, but it is
not easy to hit a low-lying object moving at fifty miles an hour, end
on, when you are yourself moving nearly twenty-five. Just the same thing
happened as before. The point of the ram passed over the destroyer's
bows, crumpled them up and crushed them down, and the _Ithuriel_ rushed
on over the sinking wreck, swerved a quarter turn, and bore down on her
next victim. It was all over in ten minutes. The _Ithuriel_ rushed
hither and thither among the destroyers like some leviathan of the deep.
A crash, a swift grinding scrape, and a mass of crumpled steel was
dropping to the bottom of the Channel.

While the attack on the destroyers was taking place, the cruisers were
only half a mile away. Their captains had found themselves in curiously
difficult positions. The destroyers were so close together, and the
movements of this strange monster which was running them down so
rapidly, that if they opened fire they were more likely to hit their own
vessels than it, but when the last had gone down, every available gun
spoke, and a hurricane of shells, large and small, ploughed up the sea
where the _Ithuriel had_ been. After the first volley, the captains
looked at their officers and the officers looked at the captains, and
said things which strained the capabilities of the French language to
the utmost. The monster had vanished.

The fact was that Erskine had foreseen that storm of shell, and the
pumps had been working hard while the ramming was going on. The result
was that the _Ithuriel_ sank almost as soon as her last victim, and in
thirty seconds there was nothing to shoot at.

"I shall ram those chaps from underneath," he said. "They've too many
guns for a shooting match."

He reduced the speed to thirty knots, rose for a moment till the
conning-tower was just above the water, took his bearings, sank, called
for full speed, and in four minutes the ram crashed into the _Alger's_
stern, carried away her sternpost and rudder, and smashed her
propellers. The _Ithuriel_ passed on as if she had hit a log of wood and
knocked it aside. A slight turn of the steering-wheel, and within four
minutes the ram was buried in the vitals of the _Suchet_. Then the
_Ithuriel_ reversed engines, the fore screw sucked the water away, and
the cruiser slid off the ram as she might have done off a rock. As she
went down, the _Ithuriel_ rose to the surface. The third cruiser, the
_Davout_, was half a mile away. She had changed her course and was
evidently making frantic efforts to get back to sea.

"Going to warn the fleet, are you, my friend?" said Erskine, between
his teeth. "Not if I know it!"

He asked for full speed again and the terror-stricken Frenchmen saw the
monster, just visible on the surface of the water, flying towards them
in the midst of a cloud of spray. A sheep might as well have tried to
escape from a tiger. Many of the crew flung themselves overboard in the
madness of despair. There was a shock and a grinding crash, and the ram
bored its way twenty feet into the unarmoured quarter. Then the
_Ithuriel's_ screws dragged her free, and the _Davout_ followed her
sisters to the bottom of the Channel.


CHAPTER XII

HOW LONDON TOOK THE NEWS


The awaking of England on the morning of the twenty-sixth of November
was like the awaking of a man from a nightmare. Everyone who slept had
gone to sleep with one word humming in his brain--war--and war at home,
that was the terrible thought which robbed so many millions of eyes of
sleep. But even those who slept did not do so for long.

At a quarter to one a sub-editor ran into the room of the chief News
Editor of the _Daily Telegraph_, without even the ceremony of a knock.

"What on earth's the matter, Johnson?" exclaimed the editor. "Seen a
ghost?"

"Worse than that, sir. Read this!" said the sub-editor, in a shaking
voice, throwing the slip down on the desk.

"My God, what's this?" said the editor, as he ran his eye along the
slip. "'Portsmouth bombarded from the air. Hillsea, Portsmouth,
Gilkicker and Southsea Castle destroyed. Practically defenceless. Fleet
Reserve Squadrons sailing.'"

The words were hardly out of his mouth before another man came running
in with a slip. "'_Jupiter_ and _Hannibal_ torpedoed by submarine.
_Spartiate_ blown up by aërial torpedo.'" Then there came a gap, as
though the men at the other end had heard of more news, then
followed--"'_Mars_, _Prince George_, _Victorious_, all torpedoed.
Cruisers escaped to sea. No news of _Ithuriel_, no torpedo attack up to
present.'"

"Oh, that's awful," gasped the editor, and then the professional
instinct reasserted itself, for he continued, handing the slip back:
"Rush out an edition straight away, Johnson. Anything, if it's only a
half-sheet--get it on the streets as quick as you can--there'll be
plenty of people about still. If anything else comes bring it up."

In less than a quarter of an hour a crowd of newsboys were fighting in
the passage for copies of the single sheet which contained the momentous
news, just as it had come over the wire. The _Daily Telegraph_ was just
five minutes ahead, but within half an hour every London paper, morning
and evening, and all the great provincial journals had rushed out their
midnight specials, and from end to end of England and Scotland, and away
to South Wales, and over the narrow seas to Dublin and Cork, the shrill
screams of the newsboys, and the hoarse, raucous howls of the newsmen
were spreading the terrible tidings over the land. What the beacon fires
were in the days of the Armada, these humble heralds of Fate were in the
twentieth century.

"War begun--Portsmouth destroyed--Fleet sunk."

The six terrible words were not quite exact, of course, but they were
near enough to the truth to sound like the voice of Fate in the ears of
the millions whose fathers and fathers' fathers back through six
generations had never had their midnight rest so rudely broken.

Lights gleamed out of darkened windows, and front doors were flung open
in street after street, as the war-cry echoed down it. Any coin that
came first to hand, from a penny to a sovereign, was eagerly offered for
the single, hurriedly-printed sheets, but the business instincts of the
newsboys rose superior to the crisis, and nothing less than a shilling
was accepted. Streams of men and boys on bicycles with great bags of
specials slung on their backs went tearing away, head down and pedals
whirling, north, south, east and west into the suburbs. Newsagents flung
their shops open, and in a few minutes were besieged by eager, anxious
crowds, fighting for the first copies. There was no more sleep for man
or woman in London that night, though the children slept on in happy
unconsciousness of what the morrow was to bring forth.

What happened in London was happening almost simultaneously all over the
kingdom. For more than a hundred years the British people had worked and
played and slept in serene security, first behind its wooden walls, and
then behind the mighty iron ramparts of its invincible Fleets, and now,
like a thunderbolt from a summer sky, came the paralysing tidings that
the first line of defence had been pierced by a single blow, and the
greatest sea stronghold of England rendered defenceless--and all this
between sunset and midnight of a November day.

Was it any wonder that men looked blankly into each other's eyes, and
asked themselves and each other how such an unheard-of catastrophe had
come about, and what was going to happen next? The first and universal
feeling was one of amazement, which amounted almost to mental paralysis,
and then came a sickening sense of insecurity. For two generations the
Fleet had been trusted implicitly, and invasion had been looked upon
merely as the fad of alarmists, and the theme of sensational
story-writers. No intelligent person really trusted the army, although
its ranks, such as they were, were filled with as gallant soldiers as
ever carried a rifle, but it had been afflicted ever since men could
remember with the bane and blight of politics and social influence. It
had never been really a serious profession, and its upper ranks had been
little better than the playground of the sons of the wealthy and
well-born.

Politician after politician on both sides had tried his hand at scheme
after scheme to improve the army. What one had done, the next had
undone, and the permanent War Office Officials had given more attention
to buttons and braids and caps than to business-like organisations of
fighting efficiency. The administration was, as it always had been, a
chaos of muddle. The higher ranks were rotten with inefficiency, and the
lower, aggravated and bewildered by change after change, had come to
look upon soldiering as a sort of game, the rules of which were being
constantly altered.

The Militia, the Yeomanry, and the Volunteers had been constantly
snubbed and worried by the authorities of Pall Mall. Private citizens,
willing to give time and money in order to learn the use of the rifle,
even if they could not join the Yeomanry or Volunteers, had been just
ignored. The War Office could see no use for a million able-bodied men
who had learned to shoot straight, besides they were only "damned
civilians," whose proper place was in their offices and shops. What
right had they with rifles? If they wanted exercise, let them go and
play golf, or cricket, or football. What had they to do with the defence
of their country and their homes?

But that million of irregular sharpshooters were badly wanted now. They
could have turned every hedgerow into a trench and cover against the foe
which would soon be marching over the fields and orchards and
hop-gardens of southern England. They would have known every yard of the
ground, and the turn of every path and road, and while the regular army
was doing its work they could have prevented many a turning movement of
the superior forces, shot down the horses of convoys and ammunition
trains, and made themselves generally objectionable to the enemy.

Now the men were there, full of fight and enthusiasm, but they had
neither ammunition nor rifles, and if they had had them, ninety per
cent. would not have known how to use them. Wherefore, those who were
responsible for the land defences of the country found themselves with
less than three hundred thousand trained and half-trained men, of all
arms, to face invading forces which would certainly not number less than
a million, every man of which had served his apprenticeship to the grim
trade of war, commanded by officers who had taken that same trade
seriously, studied it as a science, thinking it of considerably more
importance than golf or cricket or football.

It had been said that the British Nation would never tolerate
conscription, which might or might not have been true; but now, when the
next hour or so might hear the foreign drums thrumming and the foreign
bugles blaring, conscription looked a very different thing. There wasn't
a loyal man in the kingdom who didn't bitterly regret that he had not
been taken in the prime of his young manhood, and taught how to defend
the hearth and home which were his, and the wife and children which were
so dear to him.

But it was too late now. Neither soldiers nor sharpshooters are made in
a few hours or days, and within a week the first battles that had been
fought on English ground for nearly eight hundred years would have been
lost and won, and nine-tenths of the male population of England would be
looking on in helpless fury.

There had been plenty of theorists, who had said that the British
Islands needed no army of home defence, simply because if she once lost
command of the sea it would not be necessary for an enemy to invade her,
since a blockade of her ports would starve her into submission in a
month--which, thanks to the decay of agriculture and the depopulation of
the country districts, was true enough. But it was not all the truth.
Those who preached these theories left out one very important factor,
and that was human nature.

For over a century the Continental nations had envied and hated Britain,
the land-grabber; Britain who had founded nations while they had failed
to make colonies; Britain, who had made the Seven Seas her territories,
and the coasts of other lands her frontiers. Surely the leaders of the
leagued nations would have been more or less than human had they
resisted, even if their people had allowed them to do it, the
temptation of trampling these proud Islanders into the mud and mire of
their own fields and highways, and dictating terms of peace in the
ancient halls of Windsor.

These were the bitter thoughts which were rankling in the breast of
every loyal British man during the remainder of that night of horrible
suspense. Many still had reason to remember the ghastly blunders and the
muddling which had cost so many gallant lives and so many millions of
treasure during the Boer War, when it took three hundred thousand
British troops to reduce eighty thousand undrilled farmers to
submission. What if the same blundering and muddling happened now? And
it was just as likely now as then.

Men ground their teeth, and looked at their strong, useless hands, and
cursed theorist and politician alike. And meanwhile the Cabinet was
sitting, deliberating, as best it might, over the tidings of disaster.
The House of Commons, after voting full powers to the Cabinet and the
Council of Defence, had been united at last by the common and immediate
danger, and members of all parties were hurrying away to their
constituencies to do what they could to help in organising the defence
of their homeland.

There was one fact which stood out before all others, as clearly as an
electric light among a lot of candles, and, now that it was too late, no
one recognised it with more bitter conviction than those who had made it
the consistent policy of both Conservative and Liberal Governments, and
of the Executive Departments, to discourage invention outside the
charmed circle of the Services, and to drive the civilian inventor
abroad.

Again and again, designs of practical airships--not gas-bags which could
only be dragged slowly against a moderate wind, but flying machines
which conquered the wind and used it as a bird does--had been submitted
to the War Office during the last six or seven years, and had been
pooh-poohed or pigeon-holed by some sapient permanent official--and now
the penalty of stupidity and neglect had to be paid.

The complete descriptions of the tragedy that had been and was being
enacted at Portsmouth that were constantly arriving in Downing Street
left no possibility of doubt that the forts had been destroyed and the
_Spartiate_ blown up by torpedoes from the air--from which fact it was
necessary to draw the terrible inference that the enemy had possessed
themselves of the command of the air.

What was the command of the sea worth after that? What was the fighting
value of the mightiest battleship that floated when pitted against a
practically unassailable enemy, which had nothing to do but drop
torpedoes, loaded with high explosives, on her decks and down her
funnels until her very vitals were torn to pieces, her ammunition
exploded, and her crew stunned by concussion or suffocated by poisonous
gas?

It was horrible, but it was true. Inside an hour the strongest
fortifications in England had been destroyed, and ten first-class
battleships and a cruiser had been sent to the bottom of the sea, and so
at last her ancient sceptre was falling from the hand of the Sea Queen,
and her long inviolate domain was threatened by the armed legions of
those whose forefathers she had vanquished on many a stricken field by
land and sea.

"Well, gentlemen," said the Prime Minister to the other members of the
Cabinet Council, who were sitting round that historic oval table in the
Council Chamber in Downing Street, "we may as well confess that this is
a great deal more serious than we expected it to be, and that is to my
mind all the better reason why we should strain every nerve to hold
intact the splendid heritage which our fathers have left to us--"

Boom! A shudder ran through the atmosphere as he spoke the last words,
and the double windows in Downing Street shook with the vibration. The
members of the Cabinet started in their seats and looked at each other.
Was this the fulfilment of the half prophecy which the Prime Minister
had spoken so slowly and so clearly in the silent, crowded House of
Commons?

Almost at the same moment the electric bell at the outer of the double
doors rang. The doors were opened, and a messenger came in with a
telegram which he handed to the Prime Minister, and then retired. He
opened the envelope, and for nearly five minutes of intense suspense he
mentally translated the familiar cypher, and then he said, as he handed
the telegram to the Secretary for War:

"Gentlemen, I deeply regret to say that the possible prospect which I
outlined in the House to-night has become an accomplished fact. Two
hundred and forty-three years ago London heard the sound of hostile
guns. We have heard them to-night. This telegram is from Sheerness, and
it tells, I most deeply regret to say, the same story, or something like
it, as the messages from Portsmouth. A Russo-German-French fleet of
battleships, cruisers and destroyers, assisted by four airships and an
unknown number of submarines, has defeated the Southern portion of the
North Sea Squadron, and is now proceeding in two divisions, one up the
Medway towards Chatham, and the other up the Thames towards Tilbury.
Garrison Fort is now being bombarded from the sea and the air, and will
probably be in ruins within an hour."


Faster--faster we go till the boat fairly rocks and swings from
side to side, half lifted with every throb of the engine.

Closer and closer we creep--harder and harder thump the cylinders--until
at last we close; our bow just lapping her stern!

So we run a few yards.

Little by little--so little that we test it by counting her windows--we
reach her wheel--pass it--lock her bow, and run nose and nose for
a hundred feet!

The stillness of death is upon both boats; not a sound but the creak
and shudder as they struggle on. Suddenly the hard voice of our old
pilot crashes through it like a broadaxe:

"Good-bye, Sen'tor! I'll send yer a tug!"--and he gives his bell
a merry click.

Our huge boat gives one shuddering throb that racks her from end to
end--one plunge--and then she settles into a steady rush and forges rapidly
and evenly ahead. Wider and wider grows the gap; and we wind out of
sight with the beaten boat five hundred yards behind us.

The cigar I take from my mouth, to make way for the deep, long sigh, is
chewed to perfect pulp. A wild, pent-up yell of half-savage triumph
goes up from the crowded deck; such as is heard nowhere besides,
save where the captured work rewards the bloody and oft-repeated
charge.

Cheer after cheer follows; and, as we approach the thin column of smoke
curling over the trees between us, Styles bestrides the prostrate
form of the still sleeping professor and makes the calliope yell and
shriek that classic ditty, "Old Gray Horse, come out of the
Wilderness!" at the invisible rival.

I doubt if heartier toast was ever drunk than that the colonel gave the
group around the wheel-house, when Styles "stood" the wine plighted the
pilot.

The veteran was beaming, the glengary sat jauntily on one side; and his
voice actually gurgled as he said:

"Egad! I'd miss my dinner for a week for this! Gentlemen, a toast!
Here's to the old boat! God bless her ---- _soul!_"

CHAPTER VI.

BOAT LIFE AFLOAT AND AGROUND.

The day after the race our trio exhausted all usual resources of boat
life. We lounged in the saloon and saw the young ladies manage their
beaux and the old ones their children; dropped into the card-rooms
and watched the innocent games--some heavy ones of "draw poker" with a
"bale better;" some light ones of "all fours," with only an occasional
old sinner deep in chess, or solitaire. For cards, conversation,
tobacco, yarns and the bar make up boat life; it being rare, indeed,
that the _ennui_ is attacked from the barricade of a book.

Then we roamed below and saw the negroes--our demons of the night before,
much modified by sunlight--tend the fires and load cotton. A splendidly
developed race are those Africans of the river boats, with shiny, black
skins, through which the corded and tense muscles seem to be
bursting, even in repose. Their only dress, as a general thing, is a
pair of loose pantaloons, to which the more elegant add a fancy colored
bandanna knotted about the head, with its wing-like ends flying in the
wind; but shirts are a rarity in working hours and their absence
shows a breadth of shoulder and depth of chest remarkable, when
contrasted with the length and lank power in the nether limbs. They
are a perfectly careless and jovial race, with wants confined to
the only luxuries they know--plenty to eat, a short pipe and a plug
of "nigger-head," with occasional drinks, of any kind and quantity
that fall to their lot.

Given these, they are as contented as princes; and their great eyes
roll like white saucers and their splendid teeth flash in constant
merriment.

As we got further down the river, the flats became less frequent and
high, steep bluffs took their place; and at every landing along
these we laid-by for cotton and took in considerable quantities of "the
king."

Some of the bluffs were from sixty to eighty feet in height; and
down these, the cotton came on slides. These, in most cases, were at
an angle of forty-five degrees, or less; strongly constructed of heavy
beams, cross-tied together and firmly pegged into the hard
bluff-clay.
A small, solid platform at the bottom completed the slide.

Scarcely would the plank be run out when the heavy bales came bounding
down the slide, gaining momentum at every yard of descent, till
at the bottom they had the velocity of a cannon-ball.

The dexterity and strength of the negroes were here wonderfully
displayed.

Standing at the edge of the boat--or at the foot of the slide, as the
conformation of the landing indicated--heavy cotton-hook in hand,
they watch the descending bale, as it bounds fiercely toward them; and
just at the right moment two men, with infinite dexterity of hand
and certainty of eye, strike their hooks firmly into the bagging--holding
on to the plunging mass and going with it halfway across the boat.

Full in front of it a third stands, like a _matador_ ready for the blow;
and striking his hook deep in the end, by a sudden and simultaneous twist
the three stand the bale upon end. Once stopped, two or three more jerks
of the hooks and it is neatly stowed away alongside, or on top of, its
fellows.

One constantly sees huge bales of from five to six hundred pounds
bound down a slide eighty feet high--scarcely touching the rail
more than three times in their steep descent--looking almost round
from the rapidity of their motion.

Yet two negroes drive their hooks into, and spin along with them; visibly
checking their speed, till the third one "heads up" and stops them
still, in half a boat's width.

Sometimes a hook slips, the bagging gives, or the footing yields, when
the mixed mass of man and bale rolls across the boat and goes under
together. But frightful as it looks to unaccustomed eyes, a more
serious accident than a ducking seldom occurs; and at that, the
banks resound with the yells of laughter Sambo sends after his
brother-in-water.

"We've pretty thoroughly done the boat," said Styles, about midday.
"Let's go up to the professor's den and see if his head aches from 'ze Van
Dorn.'"
So up we mounted, passing on the way the faro bank, that advertises
its neighborhood by most musical jingling of chips and half
dollars.

"Hello, Spring Chicken," cried Styles, to a youth in a blue sack
with shoulder straps, who sat at the door of a state-room near by.

"Look out for the tiger! I hear him about."
"No danger, me boy," responded the youth. "I'm too old a stager for
that."
"Aye, aye! we seen that before," put in his companion, a buttoned
middie of eighteen, innocent of beard. "A confounded pigeon came by here
just now, jingling his halves and pretending he'd won 'em. Wasting
time! Wasn't he, Styles? _We're_ too old birds to be caught with chaff."

"Look alive, my hearty," answered Staple, "You're pretty near the
beast, and mamma doesn't know you're out."

With which paternal admonition we ascended.

The professor was still in a deep sleep; having been transferred by
the aid of a deck hand, or two, to his bower. This was a box of a
state-room six feet by nine, in which was a most dilapidated
double-bass, a violin case and a French horn. Over the berth, a cracked
guitar hung by a greasy blue ribbon. Staple waked him without
ceremony--ordered Congress water, pulled out the instruments; and soon
we were in "a concord of sweet sounds," the like of which the mermaids
of the Alabama had not heard before.

Suddenly, in the midst of a roaring chorus, there was a short, heavy
jar that sent us pellmell across the state-room; then a series of grinding
jolts; and, amid the yelling of orders, jangling of bells and backing
of the wheels, the boat swung slowly round by the bows. We were hard
and fast aground!

Of all the unpleasant episodes of river travel, the worst by far is
to be grounded in the daytime. The dreary monotony of bank and stream as
you glide by increases ten-fold when lying, hour after hour, with
nothing to do but gaze at it.

Under this trial the jolliest faces grow long and dismal; quiet men become
dreadfully blue and the saturnine look actually suicidal. Even the negro
hands talk under their breath, and the broad _Yah! Yah!_ comes less
frequently from below decks.

Here we lay, two miles above Selma--hard and fast, with engines and
anchors equally useless to move us a foot--until midnight.

About sundown an up-boat passed just across our bows. Little is the
sympathy a grounded boat gets unless actually in danger. Every soul
aboard of her, from captain to cook's boy, seemed to think us fair
game, and chaff of all kinds was hailed from her decks. But she threw
us a Selma paper of that evening, and a hundred eager hands were
stretched over the side to catch it.

It fell at the feet of a slight, wiry man of about fifty, with twinkling
gray eyes, prominent features and fierce gray moustache.
There was something in his manner that kept the more ardent ones from
plucking it out of his fingers, as he stooped quietly to pick it up;
but few on board ever knew that their quiet fellow-passenger was
the most widely known "rebel of them all."
Many a man has read, with quickening breath, of the bold deeds of
Admiral Raphael Semmes; and some have traced his blazing track to the,
perhaps, Quixotic joust that ended his wild sea-kingship, never recalling
that impassive fellow-passenger. Yet it was he who, seated on the rail
of the "Southern Republic," read to the crowd that evening.

"What's the Washington news?"--"Anything more from Virginia!"--"What about
Tennessee convention?"--"Has Bragg commenced business?"--and a thousand
equally eager questions popped from the impatient crowd.

"There _is_ news, indeed!" answered Captain Semmes. "Listen, my friends,
for the war has commenced in earnest."
And here, on the quiet southern river, we first heard how Baltimore had
risen to drive out the troops; how there had been wild work made in
spite of the police, and how hot blood of her citizens had stained the
streets of the town. The account ended with the city still in frightful
commotion, the people arming and companies assembling at their armories;
and without even hinting the number of those hurt in the fight.

No more _ennui_ on board now.

All was as much excitement as if we were racing along again; and, through
the buzz and angry exclamations of the knots collected on all hands, we
could catch the most varied predictions of the result, and
speculations as to President Lincoln's real policy.

"Maryland must act at once. Egad, sir, _at once_, if she wants to come
to us, sir," said the colonel, haranguing his group. "If she
doesn't, egad! she'll be tied hand and foot in a week!

_Facilis descensus_, you know!"

"Pshaw, Baltimore's noted for mobs," said an Alabamian. "This is only a
little more than usual.

In a week she'll forget all about it."
"This is more than a mob," answered a Virginian quietly.

"Blood must come out of it; for the people will all go one way now, or
make two strong and bitter parties.

For my part, I believe Maryland will be with us before the boat gets off."

Late at night we swung loose and rushed past Selma, with the calliope
screaming "Dixie" and "ze Van Dorn;" for the professor was himself again
and waxed irate and red-patriotic over the news. We could get no more
papers, however; so suspense and speculation continued until we
reached Mobile.

There we heard of the quelling of the riot; of the course of the
citizens; of Mr. Lincoln's pledges to the Baltimore committee, that
no more troops should pass through the town; of his statement that
those already passed were only intended for the defense of the
Capital.

"Pretty fair pledges, Colonel," said Styles, when we got this last
news.

"Fair pledges!"

responded the colonel, with serious emphasis, "Egad, sir!--_we've lost a
State!

_"

CHAPTER VII.

MOBILE, THE GULF CITY.

Mobile was in a state of perfect ferment when we arrived. The news from
Maryland had made profound sensation and had dissipated the delusive
hopes--indulged there as well as in Montgomery--like mists before
the sun.

All now agreed that war must come. Many thought it already upon
them.
Groups, anxious and steadfast, filled the hotels, the clubs and the
post-office; and the sense of all was that Maryland had spoken not one
hour too soon; having spoken, the simple duty of the South was to
prevent harm to a hair of her head for words said in its defense.

Those who had been the hottest in branding the action of Virginia as
laggard, looked to her for the steadiest and most efficient aid, now
that the crisis faced them; while all felt she would meet the
calls of the hour with never a pause for the result. The sanguine counted
on Maryland, bound by every community of interest, every tie of sympathy--as
already one of the Confederate States. She was no longer neutral,
they said. She had put her lance in rest and rallied to the charge,
in the avowed quarrel that the troops attacked were on their way to
oppress her next sister. And nothing could follow but Virginia's bright
falchion must flash out, and the states must lock shields and press between
her and the giant she had roused.

The Gulf City had not been idle. The echo of the first gun at Charleston
had roused her people; and with a wonderful accord they had sprung to
arms.

Law books were thrown aside, merchants locked up their ledgers,
even students of theology forgot that they were men of peace--and
all enrolled themselves in the "crack" companies.

No wonder, when the very best blood of the state ran in the veins of
the humblest private; when men of letters and culture and wealth
refused any but "the post of honor," with musket on shoulder; when
the most delicate fingers of their fairest worked the flags that
floated over them, and the softest voices urged them to their
_devoir_; no wonder, then, that high on the roll of fame are now
written the names of the Mobile Cadets--of the Gulf City Guards--of
the Rifles--and enough others to make the list as long as Leporello's.

Not one in ten of the best born youth of Mobile remained at home;
the mechanics, the stevedores and men of every class flocked to
follow their example, so that the city alone gave two full regiments
and helped to fill up others.

The news from Virginia and Maryland had given but a fresh impetus to
these preparations; and, before my return to Montgomery, these regiments
had passed through, on their way to the new battle ground on the Potomac
frontier.

On the night of our arrival in the Gulf City, that escape valve for all
excitement, a dense crowd, collected in front of the Battle House and
Colonel John Forsyth addressed them from the balcony. He had just returned
from Washington with the southern commissioners and gave, he said,
a true narrative of the manner and results of their mission.

At this lapse of time it is needless to detail even the substance
of his speech; but it made a marked impression on the crowd, as the
surging sea of upturned faces plainly told.

John Forsyth, already acknowledged one of the ablest of southern
leaders, was a veritable Harry Hotspur.
His views brooked no delay or temporizing; and, as he spoke, in
vein of fiery elegance, shouts and yells of defiant approval rose in
full swell of a thousand voices. Once he named a noted Alabamian,
whom he seemingly believed to have played a double part in these
negotiations; and the excited auditory greeted his name with hisses
and execrations.

That they did their fellow-citizen injustice the most trying councils
of the war proved; for he soon after came South and wrought, with
all the grand power in him, during the whole enduring struggle.

Staple was tired of politics, and hated a crowd; so he soon lounged
off to the club, an institution gotten up with a delightful regard
to the most comfortable arrangement and the most accomplished _chef_
in the South.

There one met the most cordial hospitality, the neatest entertainment and
the very best wines in the Gulf section. The cook was an artist, as our
first supper declared; and play could be found, too, as needed;
for young Mobile was not slow, and money, in those days, was
plenty.

Altogether, the tone of Mobile society was more cosmopolitan than
that of any city of the South, save, perhaps, New Orleans.

It may be that its commercial connections, reaching largely abroad, produced
the effect; or that propinquity to and constant intercourse with its
sister city induced freer mode of thought and action. Located at the
head of her beautiful bay, with a wide sweep of blue water before her,
the cleanly-built, unpaved streets gave Mobile a fresh, cool aspect. The
houses were fine and their appointments in good, and sometimes
luxurious, taste.

The society was a very pleasure-loving organization, enjoying the gifts
of situation, of climate and of fortune to their full.

_On dit_, it sometimes forgot the Spartan code; but the stranger was never
made aware of that, for it ever sedulously remembered good taste.

Between the drives, dinners and other time-killers, one week slipped
around with great rapidity; and we could hardly realize it when the
colonel looked over his newspaper at breakfast and said:
"Last day, boys!

Egad! the cooking here _is_ a little different from Montgomery--but we
must take the 'Cuba' this evening."
So adieux were spoken, and at dusk we went aboard the snug, neat little
Gulf steamer of the New Orleans line. She was a trimmer craft than our
floating card-house of river travel, built for a little outside
work in case of necessity, or the chances of a norther.

We scudded merrily down the bay towards Fort Morgan, the grim sentinel
sitting dark and lonely at the harbor's mouth and showing a row
of teeth that might be a warning.

The fort was now put in thorough repair and readiness by Colonel
Hardee, of the regular army of the Confederate States.

I was following Styles down from the upper deck, when we heard high
voices from the end of the boat, and recognized one exclaiming:
"Curse you!

I'll cut your ear off!"
Round the open bar we found an excited crowd, in the center of which
was our worldly-minded middie of river-boat memory and "Spring Chicken,"
his colleague; both talking very loud, and the latter exhibiting
a bowie-knife half as long as himself.

By considerable talk and more elbowing, we made our way to the boys;
and, with the aid of a friendly stoker, got them both safely in my
state-room.

Once there, the man of the world--who, unlike the needy knife-grinder,
had a story--told it. After getting on the boat, Spring Chicken had been
taking mint with sugar and something; and he took it once too often.

Seeing this, the worldling tried to get him forward to his state-room;
but, as we passed the fort, a jolly passenger, who had also taken
mint, waved his hat at the fortification and cried out:
"Hurrah for Muggins!"

Spring Chicken stopped, balanced himself on his heels and announced
with much dignity--

"Sir, _I_ am Muggins!"
"Didn't know you, Muggins," responded the shouter, who fortunately had
not taken fighting whisky. "Beg pardon, Muggins! Hurrah for Peacock!
_Yah--a-h!_"
"See here, my good fellow, I'm Peacock!" repeated Spring Chicken.

"The thunder you are! You can't be two people!"
"Sir!" responded Spring Chicken, with even greater dignity, "I do
not--_hic_--desire to argue with you.

I am Peacock!"
The man laughed. "The Peacock I mean is a northern man----"
"_I'm_ a northern man," yelled the now irate Spring Chicken. "Curse you,
sir! what are my principles to you? I'll cut your ear off!" And it was
this peaceful proposition that attracted our attention, in time to prevent
any trouble with the ugly knife he drew from his back.

Spring Chicken had remained passive during the recital of the
more sober worldling.

Sundry muttered oaths had sufficed him until it was over, when he
made the lucid explanation:

"Reas'l didl't--_hic_--dam decoy--bet ol red--ev'ry cent--_hic_!"

This the worldling translated and the murder was out. When we lost sight
of the boys on the Southern Republic, they had ordered wine. At dinner
they had more; and--glowing therewith, as they sat over their
cigars on the gallery--did not "stop their ears," but, on the
contrary, "listed to the voice of the charmer."

When the stool pigeon once more stood in the doorway, rattling his half
dollars, they followed him into the den of the tiger.

"Faro" went against them; "odd-and-even" was worse; _rouge-et-noir_
worst of all; and at night they were sober and dead broke, an unpleasant
but not infrequent phase of boat life.

"Didl't have aly wash to spout," remarked Spring Chicken, with his
head under his arm.

"Yes--we owed our wine bill," continued the middie, whose worldliness
decreased as he got sober, "and our trunk was in pawn to the nigger
we owed a quarter for taking care of it. So as soon as the boat
touched, I ran for'ard and jumped off, while he waited to keep the
things in sight till I came back."
"So he was in pawn, too, egad!" said the colonel.
"Thasso, ol' cock!" hiccoughed Spring Chicken.
"And when I got the money and we went up town, we met the cussed
decoy again, and we were fools enough to go again----"
"Williz molley--damniz--_hic_--eyes!" interpolated the other.
"----And we got broke again--and this fellow that hollowed Muggins
looked like the decoy, but he wasn't. That's the whole truth,
Mr.
Styles."
"Mussput--_hic_--fi dollus on-jack?" remarked Spring Chicken. "See
yer, Styse--o'boy, damfattolman--Con'l is!" and he curled from the
lounge to the floor and slept peacefully.
"My young friend," remarked Styles gravely to the middie, as we
tucked the insensible Spring Chicken into his berth--"If you want
to gamble, you'll do it--so I don't advise you. But these amphibious
beasts are dangerous; so in future play with gentlemen and let them
alone."That must be
a perfect devil of a craft of yours. Can you sink anything with her?"

"Anything, sir," replied Erskine. "This is the most powerful fighting
ship in the world, but I could put you at the bottom of the Channel in
ten minutes."

"The Lord save us! It's a good job you're on our side."

"And it's a very great pity," said Erskine, "that the airships are not
with us too. I had a very narrow squeak in Spithead about three hours
ago from one of their aërial torpedoes. It struck part of a destroyer
that I'd just sunk, and although it was nearly fifty yards away, it
shook me up considerably."

"Have you any idea of the whereabouts and formation of the French Fleet?
I must confess that I haven't. These infernal airships have upset all
the plans for catching Durenne between the Channel Fleet and the
Reserve, backed up by the Portsmouth guns, so that we could jump out and
catch him between the fleet and the forts. Now I suppose it will have to
be a Fleet action at sea."

"If you care to leave your ship for an hour, sir," replied Erskine, "I
will take you round the French fleet and you shall see everything for
yourself. We may have to knock a few holes in something, if it gets in
our way, but I think I can guarantee that you shall be back on the
_Britain_ by the time you want to begin the action."

"Absolutely irregular," said Lord Beresford, stroking his chin, and
trying to look serious, while his eyes were dancing with anticipation.
"An admiral to leave his flagship on the eve of an engagement! Well,
never mind, Courtney's a very good fellow, and knows just as much about
the ship as I do, and he's got all sailing orders. I'll come. He's on
the bridge now, I'll go and tell him."

The Admiral ran up on to the bridge, gave Captain Courtney Commodore
Hoskins' letter, added a few directions, one of which was to keep on a
full head of steam on all the ships, and look out for signals, and five
minutes later he had been introduced to Lennard, and was standing beside
him in the conning-tower of the _Ithuriel_ listening to Erskine, as he
said into the telephone receiver:

"Sink her to three feet, Castellan, and then ahead full speed."

The pumps worked furiously for a few minutes, and the _Ithuriel_ sank
until only three feet of her bulk appeared above the water. Then the
Admiral felt the floor of the conning-tower shudder and tremble under
his feet. He looked out of the side porthole on the starboard bow, and
saw his own fleet dropping away into the distance and the darkness of
the November night. The water ahead curled up into two huge swathes,
which broke into foam and spray, which lashed hissing along the almost
submerged decks.

"You have a pretty turn of speed on her, I must say, Captain Erskine,"
said the Admiral, after he had taken a long squint through the
semicircular window. "I'm sorry we haven't got a score of craft like
this."

"And we should have had, your lordship," replied Erskine, "if the
Council had only taken the opinion that you gave after you saw the
plans."

"I'd have a hundred like her," laughed the Admiral, "only you see
there's the Treasury, and behind that the most noble House of Commons,
elected mostly by the least educated and most short-sighted people in
the nation, who scarcely know a torpedo from a common shell, and we
should never have got them. We had hard enough work to get this one as
an experiment."

"I quite agree with you, sir," said Erskine, "and I think Lennard will
too. There has never been an instance in history in which democracy did
not spell degeneration. It's a pity, but I suppose it's inevitable. As
far as my reading has taken me, it seems to be the dry-rot of nations.
Halloa, what's that? Torpedo gunboat, I think! Ah, there's the moon.
Now, sir, if you'll just come and stand to the right here, for'ard of
the wheel, I'll put the _Ithuriel_ through her paces, and show you what
she can do."

A long grey shape, with two masts and three funnels between them, loomed
up out of the darkness into a bright patch of moonlight. Erskine took
the receiver from the hooks and said:

"Stand by there, Castellan. Forward guns fire when I give the word--then
I shall ram."

The Admiral saw the three strangely shaped guns rise from the deck,
their muzzles converging on the gunboat. He expected a report, but none
came; only a gentle hiss, scarcely audible in the conning-tower. Then
three brilliant flashes of flame burst out just under the Frenchman's
topworks. Erskine, with one hand on the steering-wheel, and the other
holding the receiver, said:

"Well aimed--now full speed. I'm going over him."

"Over him!" echoed the Admiral. "Don't you ram under the waterline?"

"If it's the case of a big ship, sir," replied Erskine, "we sink and hit
him where it hurts most, but it isn't worth while with these small
craft. You will see what I mean in a minute."

As he spoke a shudder ran through the _Ithuriel_. The deck began to
quiver under the Admiral's feet; the ram rose six feet out of the water.
The shape of the gunboat seemed to rush towards them; the ram hit it
squarely amidships; then came a shock, a grinding scrape, screams of
fear from the terrified sailors, a final crunch, and the gunboat was
sinking fifty yards astern.

"That's awful," said the Admiral, with a perceptible shake in his voice.
"What speed did you hit her at?"

"Forty-five knots," replied Erskine, giving a quarter turn to the wheel,
and almost immediately bringing a long line of battleships, armoured
cruisers, protected cruisers and destroyers into view.

The French Channel Fleet was composed of the most powerful ships in the
navy of the Republic. The two portions from Brest and Cherbourg had now
united their forces. The French authorities had at last learned the
supreme value of homogeneity. The centre was composed of six ships of
the _Republique_ class, all identical in size, armour and armament, as
well as speed. They were the _Republique_, _Patrie_ flagship, _Justice_,
_Democratie_, _Liberte_ and _Verite_. They were all of fifteen thousand
tons and eighteen knots. To these was added the _Suffren_, also of
eighteen knots, but only twelve thousand seven hundred tons: she had
come from Brest with a flotilla of torpedo boats.

There were six armoured cruisers, _Jules Ferry_, _Leon Gambetta_,
_Victor Hugo_, _Jeanne d'Arc_, _Aube_ and _Marseillaise_. These were all
heavily armed and armoured vessels, all of them capable of manoeuvering
at a speed of over twenty knots. A dozen smaller protected and
unprotected cruisers hung on each flank, and a score of destroyers and
torpedo boats lurked in between the big ships.

The _Ithuriel_ ran quietly along the curving line of battleships and
cruisers, turned and came back again without exciting the slightest
suspicion.

Erskine would have dearly loved to sink a battleship or one or two
cruisers, just to show his lordship how it was done, but the Admiral
forbade this, as he wanted to get the Frenchmen, who still thought they
were going to easy victory, entangled in the shallows of the narrow
waters, and therefore with the exception of rolling over and sinking
three submarines which happened to get in the way, no damage was done.

The British Channel Fleet, even not counting the assistance of the
terrible _Ithuriel_, was the most powerful squadron that had ever put to
sea under a single command. The main line of battle consisted of the
flagship _Britain_, and seven ships of the _King Edward_ class, _King
Edward the Seventh_, _Dominion_, _Commonwealth_, _Hindustan_, _New
Zealand_, _Canada_ and _Newfoundland_; all over sixteen thousand tons,
and of nineteen knots speed. With the exception of the giant flagships,
of which there were five in existence--the _Britain_, _England_,
_Ireland_, _Scotland_ and _Wales_--and two nineteen thousand ton
monsters which had just been completed for Japan, these were the fastest
and most heavily-armed battleships afloat.

The second line was composed of the armoured cruisers, _Duke of
Edinburgh_, _Black Prince_, _Henry the Fourth_, _Warwick_, _Edward the
Third_, _Cromwell_, all of over thirteen thousand tons, and twenty-two
knots speed; the _Drake_, _King Alfred_, _Leviathan_ and _Good Hope_, of
over fourteen thousand tons and twenty-four knots speed; and the
reconstructed _Powerful_, and _Terrible_, of fourteen thousand tons and
twenty-two knots. There was, of course, the usual swarm of destroyers
and torpedo boats; and in addition must be counted the ten cruisers, ten
destroyers, and fifteen torpedo boats, which had escaped from Spithead
and the Solent. These had already formed a junction with the left wing
of the British force.

For nearly two hours the two great fleets slowly approached each other
almost at a right angle. As the grey dawn of the November morning began
to steal over the calm blue-grey water, they came in plain sight of each
other, and at once the signal flew from the foreyard of the _Britain_,
"Prepare for action--battleships will cross front column of line
ahead--cruisers will engage cruisers individually at discretion of
Commanders--destroyers will do their worst."


CHAPTER XV

THE STRIFE OF GIANTS


As it happened, it was a fine, cold wintry day that dawned as the two
great fleets drew towards each other. As Denis Castellan said, "It was a
perfect jewel of a day for a holy fight," and so it was. The French
fleet was advancing at twelve knots. Admiral Beresford made his fifteen,
and led the line in the _Britain_. Erskine had been ordered to go to the
rear of the French line and sink any destroyer or torpedo boat that he
could get hold of, but to let the battleships and cruisers alone, unless
he saw a British warship hard pressed, in which case he was to ram and
sink the enemy if he could.

One division of cruisers, consisting of the fastest and most powerful
armoured vessels, was to make a half-circle two miles in the rear of the
French Fleet. The ships selected for this service were the _Duke of
Edinburgh_, _Warwick_, _Edward III._, _Cromwell_ and _King Alfred_.
Outside them, two miles again to the rear, the _Leviathan_, _Good Hope_,
_Powerful_ and _Terrible_, the fastest ships in the Fleet, were to take
their station to keep off stragglers.

For the benefit of the non-nautical reader, it will be as well to
explain here the two principal formations in which modern fleets go into
action. As a matter of fact, they are identical with the tactics
employed by the French and Spanish on the one side and Nelson on the
other during the Napoleonic wars. Before Nelson's time, it was the
custom for two hostile fleets to engage each other in column of line
abreast, which means that both fleets formed a double line which
approached each other within gunshot, and then opened fire.

At Trafalgar, Nelson altered these tactics completely, with results that
everybody knows. The allied French and Spanish fleets came up in a
crescent, just in the same formation as Admiral Durenne was advancing on
Portsmouth. Nelson took his ships into action in column of line ahead,
in other words, in single file, the head of the column aiming for the
centre of the enemy's battle line.

The main advantage of this was, first, that it upset the enemy's
combination, and, secondly, that each ship could engage two, since she
could work both broadsides at once, whereas the enemy could only work
one broadside against one ship. These were the tactics which, with
certain modifications made necessary by the increased mobility on both
sides, Lord Beresford adopted.

With one exception, no foreigner had ever seen the new class of British
flagship, and that exception, as we know, was safely locked up on board
the _Ithuriel_, and his reports were even now being carefully considered
by the Naval Council.

There are no braver men on land and sea than the officers and crews of
the French Navy, but when the giant bulk of the _Britain_ loomed up out
of the westward in the growing light, gradually gathering way with her
stately train of nineteen-knot battleships behind her, and swept down in
front of the French line, many a heart stood still for the moment, and
many a man asked himself what the possibilities of such a Colossus of
the ocean might be.

They had not long to wait. As the British battleships came on from the
left with ever-increasing speed, the whole French line burst into a
tornado of thunder and flame, but not a shot was fired from the English
lines. Shells hurtled and screamed through the air, topworks were
smashed into scrap-iron, funnels riddled, and military masts
demolished; but until the _Britain_ reached the centre of the French
line not a British gun spoke.

Then the giant swung suddenly to starboard, and headed for the space
between the _Patrie_ and the _Republique_. The _Canada_, _Newfoundland_,
_New Zealand_ and _Hindustan_ put on speed, passed under her stern, and
headed in between the _Suffren_, _Liberte_, _Verite_ and _Patrie_, while
the _Edward VII._, _Dominion_ and _Commonwealth_ turned between the
_Justice_, _Democratie_, the _Aube_ and _Marseillaise_.

Within a thousand yards the British battleships opened fire. The first
gun from the _Britain_ was a signal which turned them all into so many
floating volcanoes. The _Britain_ herself ran between the _Patrie_ and
the _Republique_, vomiting storms of shell, first ahead, then on the
broadside and then astern. Her topworks were of course crumpled out of
all shape--that was expected, for the range was now only about five
hundred yards--but the incessant storm of thousand-pound shells from the
fourteen-inch guns, followed by an unceasing hail of three hundred and
fifty pound projectiles from the 9.2 quick-firers, reduced the two
French battleships to little better than wrecks. The _Britain_ steamed
through and turned, and again the awful hurricane burst out from her
sides and bow and stern. She swung round again, but now only a few
dropping shots greeted her from the crippled Frenchmen.

"I don't think those chaps have much more fight left in them," said the
Admiral to the Captain as they passed through the line for the third
time. "We'll just give them one more dose, and then see how the other
fellows are getting on."

Once more the monster swept in between the doomed ships; once more her
terrible artillery roared. Two torpedo boats, five hundred yards ahead,
were rushing towards her. A grey shape rose out of the water, flinging
up clouds of spray and foam, and in a moment they were ground down into
the water and sunk. The hastily-fired torpedoes diverged and struck the
two French battleships instead of the _Britain_. Two mountains of foam
rose up under their sterns, their bows went down and rose again, and
with a sternward lurch they slid down into the depths.

The _Britain_ swung round to port, and poured a broadside into the
_Liberte_, which had just crippled the _Hindustan_, and sunk her with a
torpedo. The _New Zealand_ was evidently in difficulties between the
_Liberte_ and the _Verite_. Her upper works were a mass of ruins, but
she was still blazing away merrily with her primary battery. The Admiral
slowed down to ten knots, and got between the two French battleships;
then her big guns began to vomit destruction again, and in five minutes
the two French battleships, caught in the triangular fire and terribly
mauled, hauled their flags down, and so Lord Beresford's scheme was
accomplished. The _Dominion_ and _Edward VII._ had got between their
ships at the expense of a severe handling, and were giving a very good
account of them, and the _Canada_ had sunk the _Suffren_ with a lucky
shell which exploded in her forward torpedo room and blew her side out.

It was broad daylight by this time, and it was perfectly plain, both to
friend and foe, that the French centre could no longer be counted upon
as a fighting force. One of the circumstances which came home hardest
afterwards to the survivors of the French force was the fact that, as
far as they knew, not a single British battleship or cruiser had been
struck by a French destroyer or torpedo boat. The reason for this was
the very simple fact that Erskine had taken these craft under his
charge, and, while the big ships had been thundering away at each other,
he had devoted himself to the congenial sport of smashing up the smaller
fry. He sent the _Ithuriel_ flying hither and thither at full speed,
tearing them into scrap-iron and sending them to the bottom, as if they
had been so many penny steamers. He could have sent the battleships to
the bottom with equal ease, but orders were orders, and he respected
them until his chance came.

The _Verite_ was now the least injured of the French battleships. To
look at she was merely a floating mass of ruins, but her engines were
intact, and her primary battery as good as ever. Her captain, like the
hero that he was, determined to risk his ship and everything in her in
the hope of destroying the monster which had wrought such frightful
havoc along the line. She carried two twelve-inch guns ahead, a 6.4 on
each side of the barbette, and four pairs of 6.4 guns behind these, and
the fire of all of them was concentrated ahead.

As the _Britain_ came round for the third time every one of the guns was
laid upon her. He called to the engine-room for the utmost speed he
could have, and at nineteen knots he bore down upon the leviathan. The
huge guns on the _Britain_ swung round, and a tempest of shells swept
the _Verite_ from end to end. Her armour was gashed and torn as though
it had been cardboard instead of six-and eleven-inch steel; but still
she held on her course. At five hundred yards her guns spoke, and the
splinters began to fly on board the _Britain_. The Captain of the
_Verite_ signalled for the last ounce of steam he could have--he was
going to appeal to the last resort in naval warfare--the ram. If he
could once get that steel spur of his into the _Britain's_ hull under
her armour, she would go down as certainly as though she had been a
first-class cruiser.

When the approaching vessels were a little more than five hundred yards
apart, the _Ithuriel_, who had settled up with all the destroyers and
torpedo boats she could find, rose to the north of the now broken French
line. Erskine took in the situation at a glance. He snatched the
receiver from the hooks, shouted into it:

"Sink--full speed--ram!"

The _Ithuriel_ dived and sprang forward, and when the ram of the
_Verite_ was within a hundred yards of the side of the _Britain_ his own
ram smashed through her stern, cracked both the propeller shafts, and
tore away her rudder as if it had been a piece of paper. She stopped
and yawed, broadside on to the _Britain_. The chases of the great guns
swung round in ominous threatening silence, but before they could be
fired the Tricolor fluttered down from the flagstaff, and the _Verite_,
helpless for all fighting purposes, had surrendered.

It was now the turn of the big armoured cruisers. They were practically
untouched, for the heaviest of the fighting had fallen on the
battleships. A green rocket went up from the deck of the _Britain_, and
was followed in about ten seconds by a blue one. The inner line of
cruisers made a quarter turn to port, and began hammering into the
crippled battleships and cruisers indiscriminately, while the
_Leviathan_, _Good Hope_, _Powerful_ and _Terrible_ took stations
between the Isle of Wight and the Sussex coast.

The _Ithuriel_ rose to her three-foot freeboard, and put in some very
pretty practice with her pneumatic guns on the topworks of the cruisers.
The six-funnelled _Jeanne d'Arc_ got tired of this, and made a rush at
her at her full speed of twenty-three knots, with the result that the
_Ithuriel_ disappeared, and three minutes afterwards there came a shock
under the great cruiser's stern which sent a shudder through her whole
fabric. The engines whirled furiously until they stopped, and a couple
of minutes later her captain recognised that she could neither steam nor
steer. Meanwhile, the tide was setting strongly in towards Spithead, and
the disabled ships were drifting with it, either to capture or
destruction.

The French centre had now, to all intents and purposes, ceased to exist.
Four out of six battleships were sunk, and one had surrendered, and the
_Jeanne d'Arc_ had gone down.

On the British side the _Hindustan_ had been sunk, and the _Dominion_,
_Commonwealth_ and _Newfoundland_ very badly mauled, so badly indeed
that it was a matter of dry-dock as quickly as possible for them. All
the other battleships, including even the _Britain_ herself, were
little better than wrecks to look at, so terrible had been the
firestorms through which they had passed.

But for the presence of the _Ithuriel_, the British loss would of course
have been much greater. It is not too much to say that her achievements
spread terror and panic among the French torpedo flotilla. Under
ordinary circumstances they would have taken advantage of the confusion
of the battleship action to attack the line of armoured cruisers behind,
but between the two lines there was the ever-present destroying angel,
as they came to call her, with her silent deadly guns, her unparalleled
speed, and her terrible ram. No sooner did a destroyer or torpedo boat
attempt to make for a cruiser, than a shell came hissing along the
water, and blew the middle out of her, or the ram crashed through her
sides, and sent her in two pieces to the bottom.

The result was that when the last French cruiser had hauled down her
flag, Admiral Beresford found himself in command of a fleet which was
still in being. Of the French battleships the _Justice_ and the
_Democratie_ were still serviceable, and of the cruisers, the _Jules
Ferry_, _Leon Gambetta_, _Victor Hugo_, _Aube_ and _Marseillaise_ were
still in excellent fighting trim, although of course they were in no
position to continue the struggle against the now overwhelming force of
British battleships and armoured cruisers. This was what Admiral
Beresford had fought for: to break the centre and put as many
battleships as possible out of action. His orders had been to spare the
cruisers as much as possible, because, he said, with a somewhat grim
laugh, they might be useful later on.

The idea of their escaping to sea through the double line of British
cruisers, to say nothing of the _Ithuriel_, with her speed of over fifty
miles an hour, and her ability to ram them in detail before they were
halfway across the Channel, was entirely out of the question. To have
attempted such a thing would have been simply a form of collective
suicide, so the flags were hauled down, and all that was left of the
fleet surrendered.

Another circumstance which had placed the French fleet at a tremendous
disadvantage was the absence of the three _Flying Fishes_, which were to
have co-operated with the invading fleet, but of course neither Admiral
Durenne, who had gone down with his ship, nor any other of his officers
knew that the _Banshee_ had been blown up in mid-air, or that the
_Ithuriel_ had destroyed the dépôt ship, and so forced Castellan, after
his mad waste of ammunition in the destruction of Portsmouth, to wing
his way to Kiel, with the _See Adler_, in order to replenish his
magazines. Had those two amphibious craft been present at the battle,
the issue might have been something very different.

The whole fight had only taken a couple of hours from the firing of the
first shot to the hauling down of the last flag. Admiral Beresford made
direct for Portsmouth to get his lame ducks into dock if possible, and
to discover the amount of damage done. As they steamed in through the
Spithead Forts, flags went up all along the northern shore of the Isle
of Wight, and the guns on the Spithead Forts and Fort Monckton, which
the _Banshee_ had been commissioned to destroy, roared out a salute of
welcome.

The signal masts of the sunk battleships showed where their shattered
hulls were lying, and as the _Britain_ led the way in between them, Lord
Beresford rubbed his hands across his eyes, and said to his Commodore,
who was standing on what was left of the navigating bridge:

"Poor fellows, it was hardly fair fighting. We might have had something
very like those infernal craft if we'd had men of decent brains at the
War Office. Same old story--anything new must be wrong in Pall Mall.
Still we've got something of our own back this morning. I hope we shall
be able to use some of the docks; if I'm not afraid our lame ducks will
have to crawl round to Devonport as best they can. The man in command of
those airships must have been a perfect devil to destroy a defenceless
town in this fashion. The worst of it is that if they can do this sort
of thing here they can do it just as easily to London or Liverpool, or
Manchester or any other city. I hope there won't be any more bad news
when we get ashore."


CHAPTER XVI

HOW THE FRENCH LANDED AT PORTSMOUTH


All the ships able to take their place in the fighting-line were left
outside. The French prisoners were disembarked and their places taken by
drafts from the British warships, who at once set about making such
repairs as were possible at sea. Admiral Beresford boarded the
_Ithuriel_, which, until the next fight, he proposed to use as a
despatch-boat, and ran up the harbour.

He found every jetty, including the North and South Railway piers, mere
masses of smoking ruins: but the Ordnance Dépôt on Priddy's Hard had
somehow escaped, probably through the ignorance of the assailants. He
landed at Sheer Jetty opposite Coaling Point, and before he was half-way
up the steps a short, rather stout man, in the undress uniform of a
General of Division, ran down and caught him by the hand. After him came
a taller, slimmer man with eyes like gimlets and a skin wrinkled and
tanned like Russian leather.

The first of the two men was General Sir John French, Commander-in-Chief
at Aldershot, and the second was General Sir Ian Hamilton, Commander of
the Southern Military District.

"Bravo, Beresford!" said General French, quietly. "Scooped the lot,
didn't you?"

"All that aren't at the bottom of the Channel. Good-morning, Hamilton.
I've heard that you're in a pretty bad way with your forts here,"
replied the Admiral. "By the way, how are the docks? I've got a few lame
ducks that want looking after badly."

"We've just been having a look round," replied General Hamilton. "The
town's in an awful state, as you can see. The Naval and Military
barracks, and the Naval School are wrecked, and we haven't been able to
save very much from the yards, but I don't think the docks are hurt
much. The sweeps went more for the buildings. We can find room for half
a dozen, I think, comfortably."

"That's just about what I want," said the Admiral. "We've lost the
_Hindustan_ and _New Zealand_. The _Canada_ and _Newfoundland_ are
pretty badly mauled, and I've got half a dozen Frenchmen that would be
all the better for a look over. The _Britain_, _Edward VII._, _Dominion_
and _Commonwealth_ are quite seaworthy, although, as you see, they've
had it pretty hot in their topworks. The cruiser squadron is practically
untouched. We've got the _Verite_, _Justice_ and _Democratie_, but the
_Verite_ has got her propellers and rudders smashed. By the way, that
ship of Erskine's, the _Ithuriel_, has turned out a perfect demon. She
smashed up the first attack, sank nine destroyers and two cruisers, one
of them was that big chap the _Dupleix_, before we came on the scene.
During the action she wiped out I don't know how many destroyers and
torpedo boats, sank the _Jeanne d'Arc_ and saved my ship from being
rammed by crippling the _Verite_ just in the nick of time. If we only
had a squadron of those boats and made Erskine Commodore, we'd wipe the
fleets of Europe out in a month. Now that's my news. What's yours?"

"Bad enough," replied General French. "A powerful combined fleet of
Germans and French, helped by some of these infernal things that seem as
much at home in the air as they are in the water, are making a combined
attack on Dover, and we seem to be getting decidedly the worst of it.
Dover Castle is in flames, and nearly all the forts are in a bad way; so
are the harbour fortifications. The Russians and Dutch are approaching
London with a string of transports behind them, and four airships above
them. Their objectives are supposed to be Tilbury and Woolwich on one
hand, and Chatham on the other. By the way, weren't there any transports
behind this French Fleet that you've settled up with?"

He had scarcely uttered the last word when a helio began to twinkle from
the hill above Foreland.

"That's bad news," said the Admiral, "but wait now, there's something
else. It's a good job the sun's come out, though it doesn't look very
healthy."

The message that the helio twinkled out was as follows:


     "Thirty large vessels, apparently transports, approaching from
     direction of Cherbourg and Brest about ten miles south-east by
     south."


"Very good," said the Admiral, rubbing his hands. "Of course they think
we're beaten. I've got five French cruisers that they'll recognise. I'll
get crews aboard them at once and convoy those transports in, and the
Commanders will be about the most disgusted men in Europe when they get
here."

Acting on the principle that all is fair in love and war, Admiral
Beresford and the two Generals laid as pretty a trap for the French
transports as the wit of man ever devised. Ten minutes' conversation
among them sufficed to arrange matters. Then the Admiral, taking a list
of the serviceable docks with him, went back on board the _Ithuriel_ and
ran out to the Fleet. He handed over the work of taking care of the lame
ducks to Commodore Courtney of the _Britain_; then from the damaged
British ships he made up the crews of the French cruisers, the _Jules
Ferry_, _Leon Gambetta_, _Victor Hugo_, _Aube_ and _Marseillaise_. He
took command of the squadron on board the _Victor Hugo_, and to the
amazement of officers and men alike, he ordered the Tricolor to be
hoisted. At the same time, the White Ensign fluttered down from all the
British ships that were not being taken into the dockyard and was
replaced by the Tricolor. A few minutes afterward the French flag rose
over Fort Monckton and upon a pole mast which had been put up amidst
the ruins of Southsea Castle.

The French prisoners of course saw the ruse and knew that its very
daring and impudence would command success. Some of them wrung their
hands and danced in fury, others wept, and others cursed to the full
capability of the French language, but there was no help for it. What
was left of Portsmouth was already occupied by twenty thousand men of
all arms from the Southern Division. The prisoners were disarmed and
their ships were in the hands of the enemy to do what they pleased with,
and so in helpless rage they watched the squadron of cruisers steam out
to meet the transports, flying the French flag and manned by British
crews. It meant either the most appalling carnage, or the capture of the
First French Expeditionary Force consisting of fifty thousand men, ten
thousand horses, and two hundred guns.

The daringly original stratagem was made all the easier of achievement
by the fact that the Commanders of the French transports, counting upon
the assistance of the airships and the enormous strength of the naval
force which had been launched against Portsmouth, had taken victory for
granted, and when the first line came in sight of land, and officers and
men saw the smoke-cloud that was still hanging over what twenty-four
hours before had been the greatest of British strongholds, cheer after
cheer went up. Portsmouth was destroyed and therefore the French Fleet
must have been victorious. All that they had to do, therefore, was to
steam in and take possession of what was left. At last, after all these
centuries, the invasion of England had been accomplished, and Waterloo
and Trafalgar avenged!

Happily, in the turmoil of the fight and the suddenness in which the
remains of the French Fleet had been forced to surrender, the captain of
the _Victor Hugo_ had forgotten to sink his Code Book. The result was
that when the cruiser squadron steamed out in two divisions to meet the
transports, the French private signal, "Complete victory--welcome,"
was flying from the signalyard of the _Victor Hugo_. Again a mighty
cheer thundered out from the deck of every transport. The cruisers
saluted the transports with seventeen guns, and then the two divisions
swung out to right and left, and took their stations on either flank of
the transports.

And so, all unsuspecting, they steamed into Spithead, and when they saw
the British ships lying at anchor, flying the Tricolor and the same flag
waving over Fort Monckton and Southsea Castle, as well as from half a
dozen other flagstaffs about the dockyards, there could be no doubt as
to the magnitude and completeness of the victory which the French Fleet
had gained, and moreover, were not those masts showing above the waters
of Spithead, the masts of sunken British battleships.

Field-Marshal Purdin de Trevillion, Commander of the Expeditionary
Force, accompanied by his staff, was on board the Messageries liner
_Australien_, and led the column of transports. In perfect confidence he
led the way in between the Spithead Forts, which also flew the Tricolor
and saluted him as he went past. As the other vessels of the great
flotilla followed in close order, Fort Monckton and the rest of the
warships saluted; and then as the last transport entered the narrow
waters, a very strange thing happened. The cruisers that had dropped
behind spread themselves out in a long line behind the forts; the
British ships slipped their moorings and steamed out from Stokes Bay and
made a line across to Ryde. Destroyers and torpedo boats suddenly dotted
the water with their black shapes, appearing as though from nowhere;
then came down every Tricolor on fort and ship, and the White Ensign ran
up in its place, and the same moment, the menacing guns swung round and
there was the French flotilla, unarmed and crowded with men, caught like
a flock of sheep between two packs of wolves.

Every transport stopped as if by common instinct. The French Marshal
turned white to the lips. His hands went up in a gesture of despair,
and he gasped to his second-in-command, who was standing beside him:

"Mon Dieu! Nous sommes trahis! Ces sacrés perfides Anglais! We are
helpless, like rats in a trap. With us it is finished, we can neither
fight nor escape."

While he was speaking, the huge bulk of the _Britain_ steamed slowly
towards the _Australien_, flying the signal "Do you surrender?" Within
five hundred yards, the huge guns in her forward barbette swung round
and the muzzles sank until the long chases pointed at the _Australien's_
waterline. The Field-Marshal knew full well that it only needed the
touch of a finger on a button to smash the _Australien_ into fragments,
and he knew too that the first shot from the flagship would be the
signal for the whole Fleet to open fire, and that would mean massacre
unspeakable. He was as brave a man as ever wore a uniform, but he knew
that on the next words he should speak the lives of fifty thousand men
depended. He took one more look round the ring of steel which enclosed
him on every side, and then with livid lips and grinding teeth gave the
order for the flag to be hauled down. The next moment he unbuckled his
sword and hurled it into the sea; then with a deep groan he dropped
fainting to the deck.

It would be useless to attempt to describe the fury and mortification
with which the officers and men of the French Force saw the flags one by
one flutter down from end to end of the long line of transports, but it
was plain even to the rawest conscript that there was no choice save
between surrender and massacre. They cursed and stamped about the decks
or sat down and cried, according to temperament, and that, under the
circumstances, was about all they could do.

Meanwhile, a steam pinnace came puffing out from the harbour, and in a
few minutes General French was standing on the promenade deck of the
_Australien_. The Field Marshal had already been carried below. A
grey-haired officer in the uniform of a general came forward with his
sword in his hand and said in excellent English, but with a shake in his
voice:

"You are General French, I presume? Our Commander, Field-Marshal Purdin
de Trevillion had such an access of anger when he found how we had been
duped that he flung his sword into the sea. He then fainted, and is
still unconscious. You will, therefore, perhaps accept my sword instead
of his."

General French touched the hilt with his hand, and said:

"Keep it. General Devignes, and I hope your officers will do the same. I
will accept your parole for all of them. You are the Field-Marshal's
Chief-of-Staff, I believe, and therefore, of course, your word is his. I
am very sorry to hear of his illness."

"You have my word," replied General Devignes, "for myself and those of
my officers who may be willing to give their parole, but for those who
prefer to remain prisoners I cannot, of course, answer."

"Of course not," replied General French, with a rather provoking genial
smile. "Now I will trouble you to take your ships into the harbour. I
will put a guard on each as she passes; meanwhile, your men will pile
arms and get ready to disembark. We cannot offer you much of a welcome,
I'm afraid, for those airships of yours have almost reduced Portsmouth
to ruins, to say nothing of sending ten of our battleships and cruisers
to the bottom. I can assure you, General, that the losses are not all on
your side."

"No, General," replied the Frenchman, "but for the present, at least,
the victory is on yours."

Then transport after transport filed into the harbour, and General
Hamilton and his staff took charge of the disembarkation. Six of the
British lame ducks had been got safely into dock, and every available
man was slaving away in deadly earnest to repair the damage done in
those terrible two hours. Repairs were also being carried out as
rapidly as possible on the cruisers and battleships lying in Spithead,
and as shipload after shipload of the disarmed French soldiers were
landed, they were set to work, first at clearing up the dockyards and
getting them into something like working order, and then clearing up the
ruins of the three towns.

The news of Admiral Beresford's magnificent coup had already reached
London, and the reply had come back terse and to the point:


     "Excellently well done. Congratulate Admiral Beresford and all
     concerned. We are hard pressed at Dover, and London is threatened.
     Send _Ithuriel_ to Dover as soon as possible, and let her come on
     here when she has given any possible help. Land and sea defence of
     south and south-east at discretion of yourself, Domville and
     Beresford.                                             CONNAUGHT."


By some miracle, the Keppel's Head, perhaps the most famous naval
hostelry in the south of England, had escaped the shells from the
airships, and so General French had made it his headquarters for the
time being. Sir Compton Domville had received a rather serious injury
from a splinter in the left arm during the destruction of the Naval
Barracks, but he had had his wounds dressed and insisted, against the
advice of the doctors, in driving down to the Hard and talking matters
over with General French. They were discussing the disposition of the
French prisoners and the huge amount of war material which had been
captured, when the telegram was delivered. They had scarcely read it
when there was a knock at the door and an orderly entered, and said:

"Captain Erskine, of the _Ithuriel_, would be pleased to see the General
when he's at liberty."

"The very man!" said General French. "This is the young gentleman," he
continued, turning to Admiral Domville, "who practically saved us from
two torpedo attacks, won the Fleet action for us, and saved Beresford
from being rammed at the moment of victory."

The door opened again, and Erskine came in. He saluted and said:

"General, if I may suggest it, I shall not be much more use here, and my
lieutenant, Denis Castellan, has just had a telegram from his aunt and
sister, who are in London, saying that things are pretty bad there. I
fancy I might be of some use if you would let me go, sir."

"Let you go!" laughed the General. "Why, my dear sir, you've got to go.
Here's a telegram that I've just had from His Royal Highness the
Commander-in-Chief, saying that Dover and London are in a bad way, and
telling me to send you round at once. When can you start?"

"Well, sir," replied Erskine, after a moment's thought, "we're not
injured in any way, but it will take a couple of hours, I'm afraid, to
replenish our motive power, and fill up with shell, and added to that, I
should like to have a good overhaul of the machinery."

"Just listen to that, now!" exclaimed Admiral Beresford, who had entered
the room while he was speaking. "Here's a man who has done nearly as
much single-handed as the rest of us put together and fought through as
stiff a Fleet action as the hungriest fire-eater in the navy wants to
see, and tells you he isn't injured, while half of us are knocked to
scrap-iron. I wish we had fifty _Ithuriels_, there'd be very little
landing on English shores."

"I don't think you have very much to complain of in the French landing
at Portsmouth, Beresford," laughed Sir Compton Domville. "I don't want
to flatter you, but it was an absolute stroke of genius. We shall have
to set those fellows to work on the forts and yards, and get some guns
into position again. It isn't exactly what they came for but they'll
come in very useful. But that can wait. Here's the wire from the
Commander-in-Chief. Captain Erskine, you are to get round to Dover and
London as soon as possible, and, I presume, do all the damage you can on
the way. General French is going to London as soon as a special can be
got ready for him."

"May I ask a great favour, sir?" said Erskine.

"Anything, after what you've done," replied Sir Compton. "What is it?"

General French and Lord Beresford nodded in agreement, and Erskine
continued, addressing Lord Beresford: "That Mr Lennard, whom your
lordship met on board the _Ithuriel_, has given me the formula of a new
high explosive. Absurdly simple, but simply terrific in its effect. I
made up half a dozen shells with it and tried them. I gave the _Dupleix_
three rounds. They seem to reduce steel to dust, and, as far as we could
see every man on the decks dropped as if he had been struck by
lightning. From what we have done with them I think they will be of
enormous value. Now Mr Lennard is very anxious to get to London and the
north of England, and if General French could find him a place in his
special--"

"My dear sir," interrupted the General, "I shall be only too delighted
to know your maker of thunderbolts. Is he here now?"

"Yes, sir, he's in the smoking-room with Lieutenant Castellan. And that
reminds me, if I am to go to London, I hope you will allow me to hand
over the German spy that we caught here as soon as convenient."

"Bring them both in," said General French. "Sir Compton and General
Hamilton will court-martial your spy this morning, and, I hope, shoot
him this evening."

Within an hour, Lennard, who had something more serious now to think
about than even war, was flying away Londonwards in General French's
special, with a letter of introduction from Denis Castellan to his aunt
and sister, and an hour after the special had started, the _Ithuriel_
had cleared the narrow waters and was tearing up the Channel at fifty
miles an hour, to see what havoc she could work on the assailants of
London and Dover.


CHAPTER XVII

AWAY FROM THE WARPATH


When Lennard entered the little drawing-room in the house in Westbourne
Terrace, where Norah Castellan and her aunt were staying, he had decided
to do something which, without his knowing it, probably made a very
considerable difference in his own fortunes and those of two or three
other people.

During his brief but exciting experiences on board the _Ithuriel_, he
had formed a real friendship for both Erskine and Castellan, and he had
come to the conclusion that Denis's sister and aunt would be very much
safer in the remote seclusion of Whernside than in a city which might
within the next few days share the fate of Portsmouth and Gosport. He
was instantly confirmed in this resolution when Mrs O'Connor and her
niece came into the room. Never had he seen a more perfect specimen of
the Irishwoman, who is a lady by Nature's own patent of nobility, than
Mrs O'Connor, and, with of course one exception, never had he seen such
a beautiful girl as Norah Castellan.

He was friends with them in half an hour, and inside an hour he had
accepted their invitation to dine and sleep at the house and help them
to get ready for their unexpected journey to the North the next morning.

He went back to the Grand and got his portmanteau and Gladstone bag and
returned to Westbourne Terrace in time for afternoon tea. Meanwhile, he
had bought the early copies of all the evening papers and read up the
condition of things in London, which, in the light of his experiences at
Portsmouth, did not appear to him to be in any way promising. He gave
Norah and her aunt a full, true and particular account of the assault on
Portsmouth, the doings of the _Ithuriel_, the great Fleet action, and
the brilliant _ruse de guerre_ which Admiral Beresford had used to
capture the First French Army Corps that had landed in England--and
landed as prisoners.

The news in the afternoon papers, coupled with what he already knew of
the tactics of the enemy, impressed Lennard so gravely that he succeeded
in persuading Mrs O'Connor and Norah to leave London by the midnight
sleeping-car train from St Pancras for Whernside, since no one knew at
what time during the night John Castellan or his lieutenants might not
order an indiscriminate bombardment of London from the air. He was also
very anxious, for reasons of his own, to get back to his work at the
observatory and make his preparations for the carrying out of an
undertaking compared with which the war, terrible as it was and would
be, could only be considered as the squabblings of children or lunatics.

His task was not one of aggression or conquest, but of salvation, and
the enemy he was going to fight was an invader not of states or
countries, but of a whole world, and unless the assault of this invader
from the outer wilderness of Space were repelled, the result would not
be merely the destruction of ships and fortresses, or the killing of a
few hundreds or thousands of men on the battlefield; it would mean
nothing less than a holocaust which would involve the whole human race,
and the simultaneous annihilation of all that the genius of man had so
laboriously accumulated during the slow, uncounted ages of his progress
from the brute to the man.

They left the train at Settle at six o'clock the next morning, and were
at once taken charge of by the station-master, who had had his
instructions by telephone from the Parmenter mansion on the slopes of
Great Whernside. He conducted them at once to the Midland Hotel, where
they found a suite of apartments, luxuriously furnished, with fires
blazing in the grates, and everything looking very cosy under the soft
glow of the shaded electric lights. Baths were ready and breakfast would
be on the table at seven. I merely mention it to illustrate PETER's
character. At the University Steeple-Chase Meeting, which took place at
the end of our third October term, SHEEF had entered his animals
for several races.

He was a good rider, and confidently anticipated success. To
celebrate the occasion, he had arranged a big dinner-party, and had
invited some twenty of us to dine with him. I had been unable to go
to the races myself, but at the appointed hour I turned up at SHEEF's
rooms. I found the table brilliantly laid, waiters hanging about, and
dozens of Champagne in readiness. SHEEF was there, but, beside
myself, no other guest had appeared.

And not a single one came. I forget what excuse the miserable host made,
but the result was that we two solemnly dined at a table laid for ten
times our number. I think I shall remember that ghastly festivity as long
as I live. The next day all Cambridge knew that SHEEF had not only
pulled one of his horses openly and disgracefully, but had wilfully
misled both his friends and the book-makers as to the horse he
intended to ride in a race for which entries were made at the post.

I never heard that he stood to win more than £50 by the transaction.
And for this paltry sum (paltry, that is, to a man of his means)
he had wrecked his reputation, and all the possibilities of his
career.

I see him slinking about London sometimes. Last year he passed, with
much discredit, through the Bankruptcy Court.

He has been a Director of countless Companies, for the stock of fools
seems to be inexhaustible.

There can only be one end for such a man as SHEEF. The cool, callous,
and calculating knave may get clear through to the end; but SHEEF
always was stupidly good-natured, and good-nature hangs like a millstone
round the neck of rascality.

I cannot myself detest him as I ought to do. He was so near to
completely successful respectability.
But crookedness ruined him, in spite of his better wishes.

Was it altogether his own fault?

That, as Mr. BRET HARTE observes, lets me out.

I remain as before, DIOGENES ROBINSON.

* * * * *
A DANGEROUS TITLE.

(_TO MR. JOSEPH HATTON, AUTHOR OF "CIGARETTE PAPERS."_)
Cigarette Papers, JOSEPH, when properly stuffed, Are meant, I suppose, to
be zealously puffed.

When we take them in hand, a consuming desire Attacks us to set the gay
trifles on fire.
Yet, the brand being good (here's the point of my joke), They are
always enjoyed ere they vanish in smoke.

* * * * *
FROM AN X.J.P. TO LORD CHIEF JUSTICE PUNCH.--Sir,--Why complain of
"the Licence of the Bar?" Of course it goes with, and is a part of,
every Licence to a Public-house granted by the Middlesex Magistrates.Norah took her hands and said:

"I think it would more likely be mine, after what Mr Lennard has been
telling us of yourself and your father."

At this moment Lennard saved the situation as far as he was concerned by
making the other introductions, and Mrs O'Connor took the hand which
wielded the terrible power of millions and experienced a curious sort of
surprise at finding that it was just like other hands, and that the
owner of it was bending over hers with one of those gestures of simple
courtesy which are the infallible mark of the American gentleman. In a
few minutes they were all as much at home together as though they had
known each other for weeks. Then came the preparation of Norah and her
aunt for the motor ride, and then the ride itself.

The sun had risen clearly, and there was a decided nip of frost in the
keen Northern air. The roads were hard and clean, and the
twenty-five-mile run over them, winding through the valleys and climbing
the ridges with the heather-clad, rock-crowned hills on all sides, now
sliding down a slope or shooting along a level, or taking a rise in what
seemed a flying leap, was by far the most wonderful experience that
Norah and her aunt had ever had.

Auriole drove the first car, and had Norah sitting beside her on the
front seat. Her aunt and the mechanician were sitting in the tonneau
behind. Mr Parmenter drove the second car with Lennard beside him. His
tonneau was filled with luggage.

At the end of the eighteenth mile the cars, going at a quite illegal
speed, jumped a ridge between two heather-clad moors, which in South
Africa would have been called a nek, and dived down along a white road
leading into a broad forest track, sunlit now, but bordered on either
side by the twilight of towering pines and firs through which the
sunlight filtered only in little flakes, which lay upon the last year's
leaves and cones, somewhat as an electric light might have fallen on a
monkish manuscript of the thirteenth century.

Then came two more miles on hard, well-kept roads, so perfectly graded
that the upward slope was hardly perceptible.

"We're on our own ground now and I guess I'll let her out," said Miss
Auriole. "Don't be frightened, Norah. These things look big and strong,
but it's quite wonderful what they'll do when there's a bit of human
sense running them. See that your goggles are right and twist your veil
in a bit tighter, I'm going to give you a new sensation."

She waved her hand to her father in the car behind and put on the fourth
speed lever, and said: "Hold tight now."

Norah nodded, for she could hardly breathe as it was. Then the pines and
firs on either side of the broad drive melted into a green-grey blur.
The road under them was like a rapidly unwinding ribbon. The hilltops
which showed above the trees rose up now to the right hand and now to
the left, as the car swung round the curves. Every now and then Norah
looked at the girl beside her, controlling the distance-devouring
monster with one hand on a little wheel, her left foot on a pedal and
her right hand ready to work the levers if necessary.

The two miles of the drive from the gates to the front door of Whernside
House, a long, low-lying two-storeyed, granite-built house, which was
about as good a combination of outward solidity and indoor comfort as
you could find in the British Islands, was covered in two and a half
minutes, and the car pulled up, as Norah thought, almost at full speed
and stopped dead in front of the steps leading up from the broad road to
the steps leading up to the terrace which ran along the whole southward
front of Whernside House.

"I reckon, Miss Castellan--"

"If you say Miss Castellan, I shall get back to Settle by the first
conveyance that I can hire."

"Now, that's just nice of you, Norah. What I was going to say, if I
hadn't made that mistake, was, that this would be about the first time
that you had covered two miles along a road at fifty miles an hour, and
that's what you've just done. Pretty quick, isn't it? Oh, there's Lord
Westerham on the terrace! Come for lunch, I suppose. He's a very great
man here, you know. Lord-Lieutenant of the West Riding of Yorkshire,
fought through the Boer War, got made a Colonel by some miracle when he
was only about twenty-eight, went to Lhassa, and now he's something like
Commander-in-Chief of the Yeomanry and Volunteers round here--and
without anything of that sort, he's just about the best sort of man you
want to meet. Come along, I'll introduce you."

The two cars stopped at the steps leading up to the terrace, a man in
khaki, with a stretch of a dozen ribbons across the left side of his
tunic, came bareheaded down the steps and opened the side door of
Auriole's motor-car. Auriole pushed her goggles up and held out her
gauntleted hand, and said:

"What! Lord Westerham! Well now, this is nice of you. Come to lunch, of
course. And how's the recruiting going on?"

Then without waiting for a reply, she went on: "Norah, dear, this is
Lord Westerham, Lord-Lieutenant of this part of the County of York,
Colonel commanding the West Riding Yeomanry and lots of other things
that I don't understand."

Norah pushed her goggles up and tilted her hat back. Auriole saw a flash
of recognition pass like lightning between their eyes. She noticed that
Norah's cheeks were a little bit brighter than even the speed of the car
could account for. She saw, too, that there was a flush under the tan of
Lord Westerham's face, and to her these were signs of great comfort.

"I don't know how this particular miracle has been arranged," said Lord
Westerham, as he gave his hand to Norah and took her out of the car,
"but a re-introduction is, if you will allow me to say so, Miss
Parmenter, rather superfluous. I have known Miss Castellan for quite two
years, at least, I had the pleasure of meeting her in Connemara, and we
have fished and shot and sailed together until we became almost
friends."

Auriole's eyes, observant at all times, had been working hard during the
last two or three minutes, and in those few minutes she had learned a
great deal. Arthur Lennard, who also had his eyes wide open, had learnt
in his own slow, masculine way about as much, and perhaps a little more.
He and Lord Westerham had been school-fellows and college chums and good
friends for years, but of late a shadow had come between them, and it's
hardly necessary to say that it was the shadow of a woman. He knew
perfectly well by this time that Lord Westerham was, in the opinion of
Mr Parmenter, the husband-designate, one might say, of Auriole. Young as
he was, he already had a distinguished record as a soldier and an
administrator, but he was also heir to one of the oldest Marquisates in
England with a very probable reversion to a dukedom.

This was what he had been thinking of that night in the observatory when
he told Auriole of the fate that was approaching the world. No one knew
better than he how brilliant a figure she would make in Society as the
Marchioness of Westerham, granted always that the Anglo-Saxon would do
now as he had ever done, fling the invader back upon his own shores or
into the sea which he had crossed: but that swift flash of recognition
seen as his car came up behind Auriole's, and the slight but most
significant change which had come over the features of both of them as
he handed her out of the car, had instantly banished the shadow and made
him a happier man than he had been for a good many months past.

Still he was one of those hard-headed, practical men who rightly
consider that the very worst enemy either to friendship between man and
man, or love between man and woman, is an unexplained misunderstanding,
and so in that moment he decided to "have it out" with his lordship on
the first possible opportunity.


CHAPTER XVIII

A GLIMPSE OF THE PERIL


The morning was spent in a general overhaul of the observatory and the
laboratory in which Lennard had discovered and perfected the explosive
which had been used with such deadly effect in the guns of the
_Ithuriel_. Lunch was an entirely delightful meal, and when it was over
Auriole took Mrs O'Connor and Norah up to her own particular domain in
the house to indulge in that choicest of feminine luxuries, a good long
talk. Mr Parmenter excused himself and disappeared into his study to get
ready for the evening mail, and so Lord Westerham and Lennard were left
to their own devices for a couple of hours or so. This was just what
Lennard wanted, and so he proposed a stroll and a smoke in the Park.

They lit their cigars and walked for a few minutes along a pine-shaded
path. His lordship had an intuitive idea that his companion had
something to say to him--albeit he was very far from imagining what that
something was to be--and so he thought he had better let him begin. When
they were out of sight or hearing of anyone, Lennard slowed down his
pace a little and said somewhat abruptly:

"Westerham, I am going to ask you a question which you will probably
think a rather impertinent one, and, moreover, whether you choose to
answer it or not, I hope you will not for the present ask me why I ask
it. Now there are a good many 'asks' in that, but as the matter is
somewhat important to both of us, I wanted to put the thing plainly,
even at the expense of a little tautology."

Lord Westerham, in addition to being a gentleman and a soldier, was also
one of the most frankly open-minded men that another honest man could
wish to have anything to do with, and so, after a long pull at his
cigar, he looked round and said:

"My dear Lennard, we were school-fellows once, and we managed to worry
through Cambridge together--you with a great deal more kudos than I
did--and we have been very good friends since, so there can't be any
question of impertinence between us, although there might be some
unpleasantness for one or both of us. But, anyhow, whatever it is, out
with it. Honestly, I don't think you could offend me if you tried."

"That's just what I thought you would say," replied Lennard. "And I
think you are about the only man I should like to ask such a question;
but after what you've just said I'll put it just as shortly as it can be
made."

"And the question is?" asked Lord Westerham, blowing a long stream of
blue smoke up through the still air towards the tops of the pine trees.

There was a little pause, during which Lennard bit off about half an
inch of the end of his cigar, spat it out, and took two or three more
puffs from what was left. Then he said, in a dry, almost harsh tone:

"The question is quite a short one, Westerham, and you can answer it by
a simple yes or no. It's just this: Do you intend to make Miss Parmenter
Marchioness of Westerham or not? Other things of course being equal, as
we used to say at school."

Somewhat to Lennard's astonishment, Lord Westerham's cigar shot from his
lips like a torpedo from a tube, and after it came an explosion of
laughter, which fully accounted for its sudden ejectment. His lordship
leant up against a convenient pine and laughed till he was almost
speechless.

"What the devil's the matter with you, Westerham?" said Lennard, with a
note of anger in his voice. "You'll excuse my saying so, but it seems
hardly a question for a sort of explosion like that. I have been asking
you a question which, as you might have seen, concerns me rather
closely."

Lord Westerham sobered down at once, although his voice was still
somewhat tremulous with suppressed laughter when he said:

"My dear chap, I'm very sorry. It was beastly rude of me to laugh, but
I'm quite sure you'll forgive me when you know the facts or, at least,
_the_ fact, and that is as follows, as they say in the newspapers. When
I tell you that your sweetheart drove my sweetheart up to the house
to-day from Settle--"

"What, Norah Castellan!" exclaimed Lennard. "I didn't even know that you
had met her before."

"Haven't I!" replied Lord Westerham. "Look here, it was this way."

And then he began a story of a fishing and shooting trip to Connemara,
where he had rented certain salmon streams and shooting moors from a
squire of the county, named Lismore, who was very much in love with
Norah Castellan, and how he had fished and shot and yachted with her and
the brother who had sold his diabolical inventions to the enemies of
England, until he had come to love the sister as much as he hated the
brother. And when he had done, Lennard told him of the swimming race in
Clifden Bay, and many other things to which Lord Westerham listened with
an interest which grew more and more intense as every minute passed;
until when Lennard stopped, he crossed the road and held out his hand
and said:

"I've got the very place to suit you. A cannel-coal mine near Bolton in
Lancashire with a perpendicular shaft, twelve hundred feet deep. The
very place to do your work. It's yours from to-day, and if the thing
comes off, Papa Parmenter shall give a couple of hundred thousand dowry
instead of buying the mine. I don't think he'll kick at that. Now, let's
go back and have a whisky-and-soda. I've got to be off recruiting
to-morrow."

"I wish I could join the Yeomanry and come with you, if you would have
me," laughed Lennard, whose spirits had been rising rapidly during the
last half-hour or so, "only I reckon, as Mr Parmenter would put it, that
I shall have all my work cut out getting ready to give our celestial
invader a warm reception. To begin with, it won't exactly be child's
play building a cannon twelve hundred feet long."

"I wonder what they'd think of a proposition like that at the War
Office?" laughed Lord Westerham in reply. "Several permanent officials
would certainly faint on the spot."

A sharp frost set in during the night, and the sky was brilliantly
clear. After dinner, when the ladies had left the table, Lennard said to
Mr Parmenter:

"I am going to renew my acquaintance with our celestial visitor
to-night. I shall want a couple of hours to run over my calculations and
verify the position of the comet up to date; and then, say at eleven
o'clock, I should like you and Lord Westerham to come up to the
observatory and have a somewhat serious talk."

The owner of the great reflector looked up quickly over his wine-glass
and said:

"Look here, Mr Lennard, I guess this poor old country of yours has about
enough serious matters on hand just now without worrying about comets.
What's the trouble now?"

"My dear sir," replied Lennard, gravely, "this is a matter which not
only England, but every other country in the world, will have to trouble
about before very long."

"Say, that sounds pretty serious," said Mr Parmenter. "What's the worry
with this old comet of yours, anyhow?"

Lord Westerham smiled, and Lennard could not help smiling too as he
replied:

"It is too long a story to tell now, sir, and what is more, I cannot
tell it until I have reverified my observations and figures, and,
besides, the ladies will be expecting us. I shall be quite ready for you
by eleven. By the way, I haven't told you yet that those shells were a
perfect success, from our point of view, at least. It seems rather
curious how that all came about, I must say. Here's Denis Castellan, the
brother of the traitor, a British naval officer, and like his sister an
acquaintance of Westerham's. I discover the explosive, tell you about
it, you tell Westerham, and send me off to try it on the _Ithuriel_, and
here I come back from London with Miss Castellan and her aunt."

"Quite an excellent arrangement of things on the part of the Fates,"
remarked Lord Westerham, with a meaning which Mr Parmenter did not
understand.

"Why, yes," said their host, "quite like a piece out of a story, isn't
it? And so that explosive got its work in all right, Mr Lennard?"

"As far as we could see," replied Lennard. "It tore steel armour into
shreds as if it had been cardboard, and didn't leave a living thing
anywhere within several yards of the focus of the explosion. Erskine and
Castellan are filling up with it, and I expect we shall hear something
about it from London before long. I am glad to say that Lord Beresford
told me that after what he had seen of our fire, Government and private
gun factories were going to work night and day turning out pneumatic
guns to use it. The effect of it on land if a battery once gets within
reach of large masses of men will be something frightful."

"Sounds pretty useful," said Lord Westerham, who was one of those
soldiers who rightly believe that the most merciless methods of waging
war are in the end most merciful.

By nine o'clock Lennard was in the equatorial chamber of the
observatory, taking his first observations since he had left for
Portsmouth the week before. The ghostly shape pictured on the great
reflector was bigger and brighter now, although, to his great comfort,
none of the scientific papers had made any mention of its discovery by
other observers. When he had noted its exact position, he went to his
desk and plunged into a maze of calculations.

Precisely at eleven there was a tap at the door and Mr Parmenter and
Lord Westerham came in. Lord Westerham, as the guest, had the first look
at the approaching World Peril; then Mr Parmenter took a long squint
into the eye-piece and then they sat down, and Lennard told Mr
Parmenter, in the cold, precise language of science, the story which he
had already told to Auriole and Lord Westerham.

The millionaire, who had listened with an attention that even he had
never given to any subject before, smoked in silence for a few moments
after Lennard had finished, and then he said quietly:

"Well, I reckon that's about the biggest order that two or three human
beings have ever been called upon to fill. One thing's certain. It'd
make these fighting fellows feel pretty foolish if they could be got to
believe it, which they couldn't. No disrespect to you, Lord Westerham,
because I take it you do believe it."

"Certainly I do," he replied. "Lennard was never known to make a mistake
in figures, and I am perfectly certain that he would not make any in
working out such a terrific problem as this. I think I may also say that
I have equal confidence in his plan for saving humanity from the
terrible fate which threatens it."

"That's good hearing," said Mr Parmenter, drily. "Personally, I don't
quite feel that I've finished up with this old world yet, and if it's a
question of dollars--as far as I'm concerned, as I've got a few millions
hanging around loose, I might as well use them to help to save the human
race from being burnt to death as to run corners and trusts, which
won't be much use anyhow if we can't stop this comet, or whatever it is.
Now, Mr Lennard, what's your plan for the scientific salvation of the
world?"

"There is nothing new about the idea," replied Lennard, "except its
application to the present circumstances. Of course you have read Jules
Verne's _Journey to the Moon_? Well, my plan is simply to do the same
thing on a much bigger scale, only instead of firing men and dogs and
chickens out of my cannon, I am going to fire something like a ton and a
half of explosives.

"The danger is in the contact of the nucleus of the comet with the
earth's atmosphere. If that can be prevented there is no further cause
for alarm; so, to put the matter quite shortly, my projectile will have
an initial velocity of ten miles a second, and therefore a range that is
practically infinite, for that velocity will carry it beyond the sphere
of the earth's attraction.

"Hence, if the gun is properly trained and fired at precisely the right
moment, and if the fuse does its work, the projectile will pass into the
nucleus of the comet, and, before the heat has time to melt the shell,
the charge will explode and the nucleus--the only dangerous part--will
either be blown to fragments or dissipated in gas. Therefore, instead of
what I might be allowed to call a premature Day of Judgment, we shall
simply have a magnificent display of celestial fireworks, which will
probably amount to nothing more than an unparalleled shower of shooting
stars, as they are popularly called.

"The details of the experiment will be practically the same as those
Jules Verne described--I mean as regards the making and firing of the
cannon--only, as we haven't time to get a big enough hole dug, I should
strongly advise the acceptance of Lord Westerham's very opportune
offer."

"That's so," said Mr Parmenter, quietly, "but I've got a sort of fancy
for running this business myself. My reflector discovered this comet,
thanks, of course, to the good use you made of it, and it seems to me
that I'm in a way responsible for making it harmless if that can be
done, and so I'm not disposed to take that convenient colliery as a gift
from anyone, no, not even you, Lord Westerham. You see, my lord, all
that I can do here is just finding the dollars, and to a man in your
position, doing his best to get as many men and horses and guns together
for the defence of his country, money is money. Will you take a quarter
of a million pounds for that colliery?"

"No, I won't, Mr Parmenter," laughed Lord Westerham. "In the first
place, the colliery isn't worth a tenth of that, and this country can
very well afford to pay for her own defence. Besides, you must remember
that you will have to pay for the work: I mean casing the pit-shaft,
smelting the metal and building the shell, to say nothing of the
thousand and one other expenses of which Lennard can tell you more than
I. For one thing, I expect you will have a hundred thousand or so to pay
in damage to surrounding property after that cannon has gone off. In
other words, if you do save the world you'll probably have to pay pretty
stiffly for doing it. They're excellent business people in Lancashire,
you know."

"I don't quite see the logic of that, Lord Westerham," replied Mr
Parmenter a little testily. "If we can put this business through, the
dollars couldn't be much better used, and if we can't they won't be much
use to me or anyone else. It's worth doing, anyhow, if it's only to show
what new-world enterprise helped with old-world brains can do in
bringing off a really big thing, and that's why I want to buy that
colliery."

"Well, Mr Parmenter," laughed Lord Westerham again, "we won't quarrel
over that. I'm not a business man, but I believe it's generally
recognised that the essence of all business is compromise. I'll meet you
half way. For the present you shall take the pit for nothing and pay all
expense connected with making a cannon of it. If that cannon does its
work you shall pay me two hundred thousand pounds for the use of it--and
I'll take your I.O.U. for the amount now. Will that suit you?"

"That's business," said Mr Parmenter, getting up and going to Lennard's
desk. "There you are, my lord," he continued, as he came back with a
half sheet of notepaper in his hand, "and I only hope I shall have to
pay that money."


CHAPTER XIX

A CHANGE OF SCENE


The _Ithuriel_ had orders to call at Folkestone and Dover in order to
report the actual state of affairs there to the Commander-in-Chief by
telegraph if Erskine could get ashore or by flash-signal if he could
not, and incidentally to do as much damage as he could without undue
risk to his craft if he considered that circumstances demanded it.

He arrived off Folkestone just before dusk, and, as he expected, found
that there were half a dozen large transports, carrying probably eight
thousand men and a proportionate number of horses and quick-firing guns,
convoyed by four cruisers and ten destroyers, lying off the harbour.
There were evidently no airships with the force, as, if there had been,
they would certainly have been hovering over the town and shelling
Shorncliffe Barracks and the forts from the air. A brisk artillery duel
was proceeding between the land batteries and the squadron, and the
handsome town was already in flames in several places.

Erskine, of course, recognised at once that this attack was simultaneous
with that on Dover; the object of the enemy being obviously the capture
of the shore line of railway between the two great Channel ports, which
would provide the base of a very elongated triangle, the sides of which
would be roughly formed by the roads and railways running to the
westward and southward through Ashford and Maidstone, and to the
northward and eastward through Canterbury, Faversham and Sittingbourne,
and meeting at Rochester and Chatham, where the land forces of the
invaders would, if all went well, co-operate with the sea forces in a
combined attack on London, which would, of course, be preceded by a
bombardment of fortified positions from the air.

Knowing what he did of the disastrous results of the battle of
Portsmouth, he came to the conclusion that it was his duty to upset this
plan of attack at all hazards, so he called Castellan up into the
conning-tower and asked his advice on the situation.

"I see just what you mean, Erskine," replied the Lieutenant, when he had
taken a good look at the map of Kent, "and it's my opinion that you'll
do more to help London from here and Dover just now than you will from
the Thames. Those French cruisers are big ones, though I don't quite
recognise which they are, and they carry twice or three times the metal
that those miserable forts do--which comes of trusting everything to the
Fleet, as though these were the days of wooden walls and sails instead
of steam battleships, fast cruisers and destroyers, to say nothing of
submarines and airships. These Frenchies here don't know anything about
the hammering they've got at Portsmouth and the capture of the
transports, so they'll be expecting that force to be moving on London by
the Brighton and South Coast line instead of re-building our forts and
dockyards; so you go in and sink and smash everything in sight. That's
just my best advice to you."

"It seems pretty rough on those chaps on the transports, doesn't it?"
said Erskine, with a note of regret in his voice. "We sha'n't be able to
pick up any of them. It will be pretty like murder."

"And what's that?" exclaimed Castellan, pointing to the fires in the
town. "Don't ye call shelling a defenceless watering-place and burning
unarmed people to death in their own homes murder? What if ye had your
sister, or your mother, or your sweetheart there? How would ye feel
about murder then?"

Denis Castellan spoke feelingly, for his captain possessed not only a
mother, but also a very charming sister in connection with whom he
cherished certain not altogether ill-founded hopes which might perchance
be realised now that war had come and promotion was fairly sure for
those who "got through all right."

Learned to work the wary dogcart Artfully through King's Parade;
Dress, and steer a boat, and sport with Amaryllis in the shade:
Struck, at Brown's, the dashing hazard; Or (more curious sport than
that) Dropped, at Callaby's, the terrier Down upon the prisoned rat.

I have stood serene on Fenner's Ground, indifferent to blisters, While
the Buttress of the period Bowled me his peculiar twisters:
Sung 'We won't go home till morning'; Striven to part my backhair straight;
Drunk (not lavishly) of Miller's Old dry wines at 78:-
When within my veins the blood ran, And the curls were on my brow,
I did, oh ye undergraduates, Much as ye are doing now.

Wherefore bless ye, O beloved ones:- Now unto mine inn must I, Your 'poor
moralist,' {51a} betake me, In my 'solitary fly.'

BEER.

In those old days which poets say were golden - (Perhaps they laid the
gilding on themselves:
And, if they did, I'm all the more beholden To those brown dwellers
in my dusty shelves, Who talk to me "in language quaint and olden"
Of gods and demigods and fauns and elves, Pans with his pipes, and
Bacchus with his leopards, And staid young goddesses who flirt with
shepherds:)
In those old days, the Nymph called Etiquette (Appalling thought
to dwell on) was not born.

They had their May, but no Mayfair as yet, No fashions
varying as the hues of morn.
Just as they pleased they dressed and drank and ate, Sang hymns to
Ceres (their John Barleycorn) And danced unchaperoned, and laughed
unchecked, And were no doubt extremely incorrect.

Yet do I think their theory was pleasant:
And oft, I own, my 'wayward fancy roams' Back to those times, so different
from the present; When no one smoked cigars, nor gave At-homes, Nor
smote a billiard-ball, nor winged a pheasant, Nor 'did' their hair
by means of long-tailed combs, Nor migrated to Brighton once a-year,
Nor--most astonishing of all--drank Beer.

No, they did not drink Beer, "which brings me to" (As Gilpin said) "the
middle of my song." Not that "the middle" is precisely true, Or else
I should not tax your patience long:
If I had said 'beginning,' it might do; But I have a dislike to quoting
wrong:
I was unlucky--sinned against, not sinning - When Cowper wrote down
'middle' for 'beginning.'
So to proceed. That abstinence from Malt Has always struck me as
extremely curious.
The Greek mind must have had some vital fault, That they should
stick to liquors so injurious - (Wine, water, tempered p'raps with Attic
salt) - And not at once invent that mild, luxurious, And artful
beverage, Beer.

How the digestion Got on without it, is a startling question.

Had they digestions? and an actual body Such as dyspepsia might make
attacks on?
Were they abstract ideas--(like Tom Noddy And Mr. Briggs)--or men, like
Jones and Jackson?
Then Nectar--was that beer, or whiskey-toddy?

Some say the Gaelic mixture, _I_ the Saxon:
I think a strict adherence to the latter Might make some Scots less
pigheaded, and fatter.

     Besides, Bon Gaultier definitely shews That the real beverage for
     feasting gods on Is a soft compound, grateful to the nose And
     also to the palate, known as 'Hodgson.' I know
                                                  a man--a tailor's son--who rose To be a peer: and this I would lay
odds on, (Though in his Memoirs it may not appear,) That that man
owed his rise to copious Beer.

O Beer! O Hodgson, Guinness, Allsop, Bass!
Names that should be on every infant's tongue!
Shall days and months and years and centuries pass, And still your
merits be unrecked, unsung?

     Oh!

I have gazed into my foaming glass, And wished that lyre could yet
again be strung Which once rang prophet-like through Greece, and taught
her Misguided sons that "the best drink was water."
How would he now recant that wild opinion, And sing--as would that I could
sing--of you!
I was not born (alas!) the "Muses' minion," I'm not poetical, not even
blue:
And he (we know) but strives with waxen pinion, Whoe'er he is that
entertains the view Of emulating Pindar, and will be Sponsor at last to
some now nameless sea.

     
     Oh!

when the green slopes of Arcadia burned With all the lustre of the
dying day, And on Cithaeron's brow the reaper turned, (Humming, of
course, in his delightful way, How Lycidas was dead, and how concerned
The Nymphs were when they saw his lifeless clay; And how rock told
to rock the dreadful story That poor young Lycidas was gone to glory:)

What would that lone and labouring soul have given, At that soft
moment, for a pewter pot!
How had the mists that dimmed his eye been riven, And Lycidas and
sorrow all forgot!

If his own grandmother had died unshriven, In two short seconds
he'd have recked it not; Such power hath Beer.

     The heart which Grief hath canker'd Hath one unfailing remedy--the
Tankard.

Coffee is good, and so no doubt is cocoa; Tea did for Johnson and
the Chinamen:
When 'Dulce et desipere in loco' Was written, real Falernian winged
the pen.

When a rapt audience has encored 'Fra Poco' Or 'Casta Diva,' I have
heard that then The Prima Donna, smiling herself out, Recruits her
flagging powers with bottled stout.

     But what is coffee, but a noxious berry, Born to keep used-up
Londoners awake?

What is Falernian, what is Port or Sherry, But vile concoctions to make
dull heads ache?
Nay stout itself--(though good with oysters, very) - Is not a thing your
reading man should take.
He that would shine, and petrify his tutor, Should drink draught Allsop
in its "native pewter."
But hark! a sound is stealing on my ear - A soft and silvery sound--I
know it well.
Its tinkling tells me that a time is near Precious to me--it is the
Dinner Bell.

O blessed Bell! Thou bringest beef and beer, Thou bringest good things
more than tongue may tell:
Seared is (of course) my heart--but unsubdued Is, and shall be,
my appetite for food.

I go. Untaught and feeble is my pen:

     But on one statement I may safely venture; That few of our most
     highly gifted men Have more appreciation of the trencher.

I go. One pound of British beef, and then What Mr. Swiveller called a
"modest quencher;" That home-returning, I may 'soothly say,' "Fate
cannot touch me: I have dined to-day."

ODE TO TOBACCO.

Thou who, when fears attack, Bid'st them avaunt, and Black Care, at
the horseman's back Perching, unseatest; Sweet when the morn is grey;
Sweet, when they've cleared away Lunch; and at close of day Possibly
sweetest:

I have a liking old For thee, though manifold Stories, I know, are
told, Not to thy credit; How one (or two at most) Drops make a cat
a ghost - Useless, except to roast - Doctors have said it:
How they who use fusees All grow by slow degrees Brainless as
chimpanzees, Meagre as lizards; Go mad, and beat their wives; Plunge
(after shocking lives) Razors and carving knives Into their
gizzards.

Confound such knavish tricks!

Yet know I five or six Smokers who freely mix Still with their
neighbours; Jones--who, I'm glad to say, Asked leave of Mrs.

J.) - Daily absorbs a clay After his labours.

Cats may have had their goose Cooked by tobacco-juice; Still why deny
its use Thoughtfully taken?
We're not as tabbies are:
Smith, take a fresh cigar!
Jones, the tobacco-jar!
Here's to thee, Bacon!

DOVER TO MUNICH.

Farewell, farewell! Before our prow Leaps in white foam the noisy channel,
A tourist's cap is on my brow, My legs are cased in tourists'
flannel:

Around me gasp the invalids - (The quantity to-night is fearful) - I
take a brace or so of weeds, And feel (as yet) extremely cheerful.

The night wears on:- my thirst I quench With one imperial pint of porter;
Then drop upon a casual bench - (The bench is short, but I am
shorter) -
Place 'neath my head the harve-sac Which I have stowed my little all
in, And sleep, though moist about the back, Serenely in an old
tarpaulin.

* * *
Bed at Ostend at 5 A.M.
Breakfast at 6, and train 6.30.
Tickets to Konigswinter (mem.
The seats objectionably dirty).

And onward through those dreary flats We move, with scanty space
to sit on, Flanked by stout girls with steeple hats, And waists
that paralyse a Briton; -
By many a tidy little town, Where tidy little Fraus sit knitting;
(The men's pursuits are, lying down, Smoking perennial pipes, and
spitting;)
And doze, and execrate the heat, And wonder how far off Cologne is,
And if we shall get aught to eat, Till we get there, save raw
polonies:
Until at last the "grey old pile" Is seen, is past, and three hours
later We're ordering steaks, and talking vile Mock-German to an
Austrian waiter

.

* * *
Konigswinter, hateful Konigswinter!
Burying-place of all I loved so well!

Never did the most extensive printer Print a tale so dark as thou could'st
tell!

In the sapphire West the eve yet lingered, Bathed in kindly light
those hill-tops cold; Fringed each cloud, and, stooping rosy-fingered,
Changed Rhine's waters into molten gold; -
While still nearer did his light waves splinter Into silvery shafts
the streaming light; And I said I loved thee, Konigswinter, For the
glory that was thine that night.

And we gazed, till slowly disappearing, Like a day-dream, passed the
pageant by, And I saw but those lone hills, uprearing Dull dark shapes
against a hueless sky.

Then I turned, and on those bright hopes pondered Whereof yon gay fancies
were the type; And my hand mechanically wandered Towards my left-hand
pocket for a pipe.

Ah! why starts each eyeball from its socket, As, in Hamlet, start the
guilty Queen's?
There, deep-hid in its accustomed pocket, Lay my sole pipe, smashed to
smithereens!

* * *
On, on the vessel steals; Round go the paddle-wheels, And now the
tourist feels As he should; For king-like rolls the Rhine, And the
scenery's divine, And the victuals and the wine Rather good.

From every crag we pass'll Rise up some hoar old castle; The hanging
fir-groves tassel Every slope; And the vine her lithe arms stretches O'er
peasants singing catches - And you'll make no end of sketches, I should
hope.

We've a nun here (called Therese), Two couriers out of place, One Yankee,
with a face Like a ferret's:
And three youths in scarlet caps Drinking chocolate and schnapps -
A diet which perhaps Has its merits.

And day again declines:
In shadow sleep the vines, And the last ray through the pines Feebly
glows, Then sinks behind yon ridge; And the usual evening midge Is
settling on the bridge Of my nose.

And keen's the air and cold, And the sheep are in the fold, And Night walks
sable-stoled Through the trees; And on the silent river The floating
starbeams quiver; - And now, the saints deliver Us from fleas

.

* * *
Avenues of broad white houses, Basking in the noontide glare; - Streets,
which foot of traveller shrinks from, As on hot plates shrinks the
bear; -
Elsewhere lawns, and vista'd gardens, Statues white, and cool
arcades, Where at eve the German warrior Winks upon the German
maids; -
Such is Munich:- broad and stately, Rich of hue, and fair of form;
But, towards the end of August, Unequivocally WARM.

There, the long dim galleries threading, May the artist's eye
behold, Breathing from the "deathless canvass" Records of the years
of old:

Pallas there, and Jove, and Juno, "Take" once more "their walks abroad,"
Under Titian's fiery woodlands And the saffron skies of Claude:

There the Amazons of Rubens Lift the failing arm to strike, And the
pale light falls in masses On the horsemen of Vandyke;
And in Berghem's pools reflected Hang the cattle's graceful shapes,
And Murillo's soft boy-faces Laugh amid the Seville grapes;
And all purest, loveliest fancies That in poets' souls may dwell
Started into shape and substance At the touch of Raphael. - 
Lo!

her wan arms folded meekly, And the glory of her hair Falling as a
robe around her, Kneels the Magdalene in prayer;
And the white-robed Virgin-mother Smiles, as centuries back she smiled,
Half in gladness, half in wonder, On the calm face of her Child:-
And that mighty Judgment-vision Tells how man essayed to climb Up the
ladder of the ages, Past the frontier-walls of Time;
Heard the trumpet-echoes rolling Through the phantom-peopled sky,
And the still voice bid this mortal Put on immortality

.

* * *
Thence we turned, what time the blackbird Pipes to vespers from
his perch, And from out the clattering city Pass'd into the silent
church;
Marked the shower of sunlight breaking Thro' the crimson panes o'erhead,
And on pictured wall and window Read the histories of the dead:

Till the kneelers round us, rising, Cross'd their foreheads and were
gone; And o'er aisle and arch and cornice, Layer on layer, the
night came on.

CHARADES.

I.

She stood at Greenwich, motionless amid The ever-shifting crowd of
passengers.

I marked a big tear quivering on the lid Of her deep-lustrous eye, and
knew that hers Were days of bitterness. But, "Oh! what stirs" I said
"such storm within so fair a breast?" Even as I spoke, two apoplectic
curs Came feebly up: with one wild cry she prest Each singly to her heart,
and faltered, "Heaven be blest!"
Yet once again I saw her, from the deck Of a black ship that steamed
towards Blackwall.
She walked upon MY FIRST. Her stately neck Bent o'er an object
shrouded in her shawl:
I could not see the tears--the glad tears--fall, Yet knew they fell.

And "Ah," I said, "not puppies, Seen unexpectedly, could lift the pall
From hearts who KNOW what tasting misery's cup is, As Niobe's, or mine,
or Mr. William Guppy's."
* * *
Spake John Grogblossom the coachman to Eliza Spinks the cook:
"Mrs. Spinks," says he, "I've foundered: 'Liza dear, I'm overtook.

Druv into a corner reglar, puzzled as a babe unborn; Speak the word, my
blessed 'Liza; speak, and John the coachman's yourn."
Then Eliza Spinks made answer, blushing, to the coachman John:
"John, I'm born and bred a spinster: I've begun and I'll go on.

Endless cares and endless worrits, well I knows it, has a wife:
Cooking for a genteel family, John, it's a goluptious life!

"I gets 20 pounds per annum--tea and things o' course not reckoned, -
There's a cat that eats the butter, takes the coals, and breaks MY
SECOND:
There's soci'ty--James the footman;--(not that I look after him;
But he's aff'ble in his manners, with amazing length of limb;) -
"Never durst the missis enter here until I've said 'Come in':
If I saw the master peeping, I'd catch up the rolling-pin.

Christmas-boxes, that's a something; perkisites, that's something too; And
I think, take all together, John, I won't be on with you."
John the coachman took his hat up, for he thought he'd had enough; Rubbed
an elongated forehead with a meditative cuff; Paused before the
stable doorway; said, when there, in accents mild, "She's a fine young
'oman, cook is; but that's where it is, she's spiled."
* * *
I have read in some not marvellous tale, (Or if I have not, I've
dreamed) Of one who filled up the convivial cup Till the company
round him seemed
To be vanished and gone, tho' the lamps upon Their face as aforetime
gleamed:
And his head sunk down, and a Lethe crept O'er his powerful brain,
and the young man slept.

Then they laid him with care in his moonlit bed:
But first--having thoughtfully fetched some tar - Adorned him with
feathers, aware that the weather's Uncertainty brings on at nights
catarrh.

They staid in his room till the sun was high:
But still did the feathered one give no sign Of opening a peeper--he
might be a sleeper Such as rests on the Northern or Midland line.

At last he woke, and with profound Bewilderment he gazed around;
Dropped one, then both feet to the ground, But never spake a word:

Then to my WHOLE he made his way; Took one long lingering survey;
And softly, as he stole away, Remarked, "By Jove, a bird!"

II.

If you've seen a short man swagger tow'rds the footlights at Shoreditch,
Sing out "Heave aho! my hearties," and perpetually hitch Up, by an ingenious
movement, trousers innocent of brace, Briskly flourishing a cudgel
in his pleased companion's face;
If he preluded with hornpipes each successive thing he did, From a
sun-browned cheek extracting still an ostentatious quid; And
expectorated freely, and occasionally cursed:- Then have you beheld,
depicted by a master's hand, MY FIRST.

O my countryman! if ever from thy arm the bolster sped, In thy school-days,
with precision at a young companion's head; If 'twas thine to lodge
the marble in the centre of the ring, Or with well-directed pebble
make the sitting hen take wing:

Then do thou--each fair May morning, when the blue lake is as glass, And
the gossamers are twinkling star-like in the beaded grass; When
the mountain-bee is sipping fragrance from the bluebell's lip, And
the bathing-woman tells you, Now's your time to take a dip:
When along the misty valleys fieldward winds the lowing herd, And
the early worm is being dropped on by the early bird; And Aurora
hangs her jewels from the bending rose's cup, And the myriad voice
of Nature calls thee to MY SECOND up:-
Hie thee to the breezy common, where the melancholy goose Stalks,
and the astonished donkey finds that he is really loose; There amid
green fern and furze-bush shalt thou soon MY WHOLE behold, Rising
'bull-eyed and majestic'--as Olympus queen of old:
Kneel,--at a respectful distance,--as they kneeled to her, and try
With judicious hand to put a ball into that ball-less eye:
Till a stiffness seize thy elbows, and the general public wake -
Then return, and, clear of conscience, walk into thy well-earned
steak.

III.

Ere yet "knowledge for the million" Came out "neatly bound in boards;"
When like Care upon a pillion Matrons rode behind their lords:
Rarely, save to hear the Rector, Forth did younger ladies roam;
Making pies, and brewing nectar From the gooseberry-trees at home.

They'd not dreamed of Pan or Vevay; Ne'er should into blossom burst At the
ball or at the levee; Never come, in fact, MY FIRST:
Nor illumine cards by dozens With some labyrinthine text, Nor work
smoking-caps for cousins Who were pounding at MY NEXT.

Now have skirts, and minds, grown ampler; Now not all they seek to do
Is create upon a sampler Beasts which Buffon never knew:
But their venturous muslins rustle O'er the cragstone and the snow, Or
at home their biceps muscle Grows by practising the bow.

Worthier they those dames who, fable Says, rode "palfreys" to the
war With gigantic Thanes, whose "sable Destriers caracoled" before;
Smiled, as--springing from the war-horse As men spring in modern
'cirques' - They plunged, ponderous as a four-horse Coach, among
the vanished Turks:-
In the good times when the jester Asked the monarch how he was, And
the landlady addrest her Guests as 'gossip' or as 'coz'; When the
Templar said, "Gramercy," Or, "'Twas shrewdly thrust, i' fegs," To
Sir Halbert or Sir Percy As they knocked him off his legs:
And, by way of mild reminders That he needed coin, the Knight Day
by day extracted grinders From the howling Israelite:
And MY WHOLE in merry Sherwood Sent, with preterhuman luck,
Missiles--not of steel but firwood - Thro' the two-mile-distant
buck.

IV.

Evening threw soberer hue Over the blue sky, and the few Poplars that
grew just in the view Of the hall of Sir Hugo de Wynkle:
"Answer me true," pleaded Sir Hugh, (Striving to woo no matter who,)
"What shall I do, Lady, for you?
'Twill be done, ere your eye may twinkle.

Shall I borrow the wand of a Moorish enchanter, And bid a decanter contain
the Levant, or The brass from the face of a Mormonite ranter?
Shall I go for the mule of the Spanish Infantar - (That _R_, for the sake
of the line, we must grant her,) - And race with the foul fiend, and
beat in a canter, Like that first of equestrians Tam o' Shanter?
I talk not mere banter--say not that I can't, or By this MY FIRST--(a
Virginia planter Sold it me to kill rats)--I will die instanter."
The Lady bended her ivory neck, and Whispered mournfully, "Go for--MY
SECOND." She said, and the red from Sir Hugh's cheek fled, And "Nay,"
did he say, as he stalked away The fiercest of injured men:
"Twice have I humbled my haughty soul, And on bended knee I have
pressed MY WHOLE - But I never will press it again!"

V.

On pinnacled St. Mary's Lingers the setting sun; Into the street
the blackguards Are skulking one by one:
Butcher and Boots and Bargeman Lay pipe and pewter down; And with
wild shout come tumbling out To join the Town and Gown.

And now the undergraduates Come forth by twos and threes, From the broad
tower of Trinity, From the green gate of Caius:
The wily bargeman marks them, And swears to do his worst; To turn to
impotence their strength, And their beauty to MY FIRST.

But before Corpus gateway MY SECOND first arose, When Barnacles the
freshman Was pinned upon the nose:
Pinned on the nose by Boxer, Who brought a hobnailed herd From Barnwell,
where he kept a van, Being indeed a dogsmeat man, Vendor of terriers,
blue or tan, And dealer in MY THIRD.

'Twere long to tell how Boxer Was 'countered' on the cheek, And
knocked into the middle Of the ensuing week:
How Barnacles the Freshman Was asked his name and college; And how
he did the fatal facts Reluctantly acknowledge.

He called upon the Proctor Next day at half-past ten; Men whispered that
the Freshman cut A different figure then:- That the brass forsook his
forehead, The iron fled his soul, As with blanched lip and visage wan
Before the stony-hearted Don He kneeled upon MY WHOLE.

VI.

Sikes, housebreaker, of Houndsditch, Habitually swore; But so surpassingly
profane He never was before, As on a night in winter, When--softly as
he stole In the dim light from stair to stair, Noiseless as boys who in
her lair Seek to surprise a fat old hare - He barked his shinbone,
unaware Encountering MY WHOLE.

As pours the Anio plainward, When rains have swollen the dykes, So,
with such noise, poured down MY FIRST, Stirred by the shins of Sikes.

The Butler Bibulus heard it; And straightway ceased to snore, And
sat up, like an egg on end, While men might count a score:
Then spake he to Tigerius, A Buttons bold was he:
"Buttons, I think there's thieves about; Just strike a light and
tumble out; If you can't find one, go without, And see what you may
see."

But now was all the household, Almost, upon its legs, Each treading
carefully about As if they trod on eggs.
With robe far-streaming issued Paterfamilias forth; And close behind
him,--stout and true And tender as the North, - Came Mrs. P., supporting
On her broad arm her fourth.

Betsy the nurse, who never From largest beetle ran, And--conscious
p'raps of pleasing caps - The housemaids, formed the van:
And Bibulus the Butler, His calm brows slightly arched; (No mortal
wight had ere that night Seen him with shirt unstarched;) And Bob,
the shockhaired knifeboy, Wielding two Sheffield blades, And James
Plush of the sinewy legs, The love of lady's maids:
And charwoman and chaplain Stood mingled in a mass, And "Things,"
thought he of Houndsditch, "Is come to a pretty pass."At any rate it might be possible, in spite of sunken ships and shattered
fortifications, to prevent, at least for a while, the pollution of
English soil by the presence of hostile forces, and to get on with the
mobilisation of regulars, militia, yeomanry and volunteers, which, as
might have been expected, this sudden declaration of war found in the
usual state of hopeless muddle and chaos.

But, even in the event of complete victory by sea, there would still be
those terrible cruisers of the air to be reckoned with, and they were
known to be as efficient as submarines as they were as airships.

Still, much had been done, and it was no use going to meet trouble
halfway. Moreover, Beresford's guns were beginning to talk down yonder
to the southward, and it was time for what was left of the North Sea
Squadron and the Home Fleet to reform and manoeuvre, so as to work to
the north-eastward, and get the enemy between the two British forces.

A very curious thing came to pass now. The French and German Fleets,
though still much superior to the defenders, had during that first awful
hour of the assault received a terrible mauling, especially from the
large guns of the _England_ and the _Scotland_--sisters of the
_Britain_, and the flagships respectively of the North Sea Squadron and
the Home Fleet--and the totally unexpected and inexplicable loss of
their reserve; but the guns booming to the south-westward could only be
those of Admiral Durenne's victorious fleet. He would bring them
reinforcements more than enough, and with him, too, would come the three
_Flying Fishes_, which had been commissioned to destroy Portsmouth and
the battleships of the British Reserve. There need be no fear of not
getting the transports across now, and then the march of victory would
begin.

In a few minutes the fighting almost entirely ceased. The ships which
had been battering each other so heartily separated as if by mutual
consent, and the French and German admirals steamed to the
south-westward to join their allies and sweep the Strait of Dover clear
of those who had for so many hundred years considered--yes, and kept
it--as their own sea-freehold.

At the same time private signals were flashed through the air to the
_Flying Fishes_ to retire on Calais, replenish their ammunition and
motive power, which they had been using so lavishly, and return at
daybreak.

Thus what was left of Dover, its furiously impotent soldiery, and its
sorely stricken inhabitants, had a respite at least until day dawned and
showed them the extent of the ruin that had been wrought.

It was nearly midnight when the three fleets joined, and just about
eight bells the clouds parted and dissolved under the impact of a stiff
nor'-easter, which had been gathering strength for the last two hours.
The war smoke drifted away, and the moon shone down clearly on the now
white-crested battlefield.

By its light and their own searchlights the French and German admirals,
steaming as they thought to join hands with their victorious friends,
saw the strangest and most exasperating sight that their eyes had ever
beheld. The advancing force was a curiously composed one. Trained, as
they were, to recognise at first sight every warship of every nation,
they could nevertheless hardly believe their eyes. There were six
battleships in the centre of the first line. One was the _Britain_,
three others were of the _Edward the Seventh_ class; two were French. Of
the sixteen cruisers which formed the wings, seven were French--and
every warship of the whole lot was flying the White Ensign!

Did it mean disaster--almost impossible disaster--or was it only a _ruse
de guerre_?

They were not left very long in doubt. At three miles from a direction
almost due south-east of Dover, the advancing battleships opened fire
with their heavy forward guns, and the cruisers spread out in a fan on
either side of the French and German Fleets. The _Britain_, as though
glorying in her strength and speed, steamed ahead in solitary pride
right into the midst of the Allies, thundering and flaming ahead and
from each broadside. The _Braunschweig_ had the bad luck to get in her
way. She made a desperate effort to get out of it; but eighteen knots
was no good against twenty-five. The huge ram crashed into her vitals as
she swerved, and reeling and pitching like some drunken leviathan, she
went down with a mighty plunge, and the _Britain_ ploughed on over the
eddies that marked her ocean grave.

This was the beginning of the greatest and most decisive sea-fight that
had been fought since Trafalgar. The sailors of Britain knew that they
were fighting not only for the honour of their King and country, but, as
British sailors had not done for a hundred and four years, for the very
existence of England and the Empire. On the other hand, the Allies knew
that this battle meant the loss or the keeping of the command of the
sea, and therefore the possibility or otherwise of starving the United
Kingdom into submission after the landing had been effected.

So from midnight until dawn battleship thundered against battleship, and
cruiser engaged cruiser, while the torpedo craft darted with flaming
funnels in and out among the wrestling giants, and the submarines did
their deadly work in silence. Miracles of valour and devotion were
achieved on both sides. From admiral and commodore and captain in the
conning-towers to officers and men in barbettes and casemates, and the
sweating stokers and engineers in their steel prisons--which might well
become their tombs--every man risked and gave his life as cheerfully as
the most reckless commander or seaman on the torpedo flotillas.

It was a fight to the death, and every man knew it, and accepted the
fact with the grim joy of the true fighting man.

Naturally, no detailed description of the battle of Dover would be
possible, even if it were necessary to the narrative. Not a man who
survived it could have written such a description. All that was known to
the officials on shore was that every now and then an aerogram came,
telling in broken fragments of the sinking of a battleship or cruiser on
one side or the other, and the gradual weakening of the enemy's defence;
but to those who were waiting and watching so anxiously along the line
of cliffs, the only tidings that came were told by the gradual
slackening of the battle-thunder, and the ever-diminishing frequency of
the pale flashes of flame gleaming through the drifting gusts of smoke.

Then at last morning dawned, and the pale November sun lit up as sorry a
scene as human eyes had ever looked upon. Not a fourth of the ships
which had gone into action on either side were still afloat, and these
were little better than drifting wrecks.

All along the shore from East Wear Bay to the South Foreland lay the
shattered, shell-riddled hulks of what twelve hours before had been the
finest battleships and cruisers afloat, run ashore in despair to save
the lives of the few who had come alive through that awful battle-storm.
Outside them showed the masts and fighting-tops of those which had sunk
before reaching shore, and outside these again lay a score or so of
battleships and a few armoured cruisers, some down by the head, some by
the stern, and some listing badly to starboard or port--still afloat,
and still with a little fight left in them, in spite of their gashed
sides, torn decks, riddled topworks and smashed barbettes.

But, ghastly as the spectacle was, it was not long before a mighty cheer
went rolling along the cliffs and over the ruined town for, whether flew
the French or German flag, there was not a ship that French or German
sailor or marine had landed on English soil save as prisoners.

The old Sea Lion had for the first time in three hundred and fifty years
been attacked in his lair, and now as then he had turned and rent the
insolent intruder limb from limb.

The main German Fleet and the French Channel Fleet and North Sea
Squadrons had ceased to exist within twenty-four hours of the
commencement of hostilities.

Once more Britain had vindicated her claim to the proud title of Queen
of the Seas; once more the thunder of her enemies' guns had echoed back
from her white cliffs--and the echo had been a message of defeat and
disaster.

If the grim game of war could only have been played now as it had been
even five years before, the victory would have already been with her,
for the cable from Gibraltar to the Lizard had that morning brought the
news from Admiral Commerell, Commander-in-Chief in the Mediterranean,
that he had been attacked by, and had almost destroyed, the combined
French Mediterranean and Russian Black Sea Fleets, and that, with the
aid of an Italian Squadron, he was blockading Toulon, Marseilles and
Bizerta. The captured French and Russian ships capable of repair had
been sent to Malta and Gibraltar to refit.

This, under the old conditions, would, of course, have meant checkmate
in the game of invasion, since not a hostile ship of any sort would have
dared to put to sea, and the crowded transports would have been as
useless as so many excursion steamers, but--


CHAPTER XXII

DISASTER


About eight o'clock, as the half-wrecked victors and vanquished were
slowly struggling into the half-ruined harbour, five winged shapes
became visible against the grey sky over Calais, rapidly growing in
size, and a few minutes later two more appeared, approaching from the
north-east. They, alas, were the heralds of a fate against which all the
gallantry and skill of Britain's best sailors and soldiers would fight
in vain.

The two from the north-east were, of course, the _Flying Fish_ and the
_See Adler_; the others were those which had been ordered to load up at
the Calais depot, and complete that victory of the Allied Fleets which
the science and devotion of British sailors had turned into utter
defeat.

John Castellan, standing in the conning-tower of the _Flying Fish_,
looking down over sea and land through his prismatic binoculars,
suddenly ground his teeth hard together, and sent a hearty Irish curse
hissing between them. He had a complete plan of the operations in his
possession, and knew perfectly what to expect--but what was this?

Dover and its fortifications were in ruins, as they ought to have been
by this time; but the British Flag still floated over them! The harbour
was almost filled with mutilated warships, and others were slowly
steaming towards the two entrances; but every one of these was flying
the White Ensign of England! There was not a French or German flag to be
seen--and there, all along the coast, which should have been in the
possession of the Allies by now, lay the ragged line of helpless hulks
which would never take the sea again.

What had happened? Where were the splendid fleets which were to have
battered the English defence into impotence? Where was the Reserve,
which was to have convoyed the transports across the narrow waters?
Where were the transports themselves and the half million men, horses
and artillery which to-day they were to land upon the stricken shores of
Kent?

With that marvellous intuition which is so often allied with the Keltic
genius, he saw in a flash all, or something like all, that had really
happened as a consequence of the loss of the depot ship at Spithead, and
the venting of his own mad hatred of the Saxon on the three defenceless
towns. The Channel Fleet had come, after all, in time, and defeated
Admiral Durenne's fleet; the Reserve cruisers had escaped, and
Portsmouth had been re-taken!

Would that have happened if he had used the scores of shells which he
had wasted in mere murder and destruction against the ships of the
Channel Fleet? It would not, and no one knew it better than he did.

Still, even now there was time to retrieve that ghastly mistake which
had cost the Allies a good deal more than even he had guessed at. He was
Admiral of the Aërial Squadrons, and, save under orders from
headquarters, free to act as he thought fit against the enemy. If his
passion had lost victory he could do nothing less than avenge defeat.

He ran up his telescopic mast and swerved to the southward to meet the
squadron from Calais, flying his admiral's flag, and under it the
signal:

"I wish to speak to you."

The _Flying Fish_ and the _See Adler_ quickened up, and the others
slowed down until they met about two thousand feet above the sea.
Castellan ran the _Flying Fish_ alongside the Commodore of the other
Squadron, and in ten minutes he had learned what the other had to tell,
and arranged a plan of operations.

Within the next five minutes three of the seven craft had dropped to
the water and disappeared beneath it. The other four, led by the _Flying
Fish_, winged their way towards Dover.

The aërial section of the squadron made straight for the harbour. The
submarine section made south-westward to cut off the half dozen "lame
ducks" which were still struggling towards it. With these, unhappily,
was the _Scotland_, the huge flagship of the North Sea Squadron, which
still full of fight, was towing the battleship _Commonwealth_, whose
rudder and propellers had been disabled by a torpedo from a French
submarine.

She was, of course, the first victim selected. Two _Flying Fishes_
dived, one under her bows and one under her stern, and each discharged
two torpedoes.

No fabric made by human hands could have withstood the shock of the four
explosions which burst out simultaneously. The sore-stricken leviathan
stopped, shuddered and reeled, smitten to death. For a few moments she
floundered and wallowed in the vast masses of foaming water that rose up
round her--and when they sank she took a mighty sideward reel and
followed them.

The rest met their inevitable fate in quick succession, and went down
with their ensigns and pennants flying--to death, but not to defeat or
disgrace.

The ten British submarines which were left from the fight had already
put out to try conclusions with the _Flying Fishes_; but a porpoise
might as well have tried to hunt down a northern diver. As soon as each
_Flying Fish_ had finished its work of destruction it spread its wings
and leapt into the air--and woe betide the submarine whose periscope
showed for a moment above the water, for in that moment a torpedo fell
on or close to it, and that submarine dived for the last time.

Meanwhile the horrors of the past afternoon and evening were being
repeated in the crowded harbour, and on shore, until a frightful
catastrophe befell the remains of the British Fleet.

John Castellan, with two other craft, was examining the forts from a
height of four thousand feet, and dropping a few torpedoes into any
which did not appear to be completely wrecked. The captain of another
was amusing himself by dispersing, in more senses than one, the
helpless, terror-stricken crowds on the cliffs whence they had lately
cheered the last of Britain's naval victories, and the rest were
circling over the harbour at a height of three thousand feet, letting go
torpedoes whenever a fair mark presented itself.

Of course the fight, if fight it could be called, was hopeless from the
first; but your British sailor is not the man to take even a hopeless
fight lying down, and so certain gallant but desperate spirits on board
the _England_, which was lying under what was left of the Admiralty
Pier, got permission to dismount six 3-pounders and remount them as a
battery for high-angle fire. The intention, of course, was, as the
originator of the idea put it: "To bring down a few of those flying
devils before they could go inland and do more damage there."

The intention was as good as it was unselfish, for the ingenious officer
in charge of the battery knew as well as his admiral that the fleet was
doomed to destruction in detail--but the first volley that battery fired
was the last.

A few of the shells must have hit a French _Flying Fish_, which was
circling above the centre of the harbour, and disabled the wings and
propellors on one side, for she lurched and wobbled for an instant like
a bird with a broken wing. Then she swooped downwards in a spiral
course, falling ever faster and faster, till she struck the deck of the
_Britain_.

What happened the next instant no one ever knew. Those who survived said
that they heard a crashing roar like the firing of a thousand cannon
together; a blinding sheet of flame overspread the harbour; the water
rose into mountains of foam, ships rocked and crashed against each
other--and then came darkness and oblivion.

When human eyes next looked on Dover Harbour there was not a ship in it
afloat.

Dover, the great stronghold of the south-east, was now as defenceless as
a fishing village, and there was nothing to prevent a constant stream of
transports filled with men and materials of war being poured into it, or
any other port along the eastern Kentish coast. Then would come seizure
of railway stations and rolling stock, rapid landing of men and horses
and guns, and the beginning of the great advance.

On the whole, John Castellan was well satisfied with his work. He
regretted the loss of his consort; but she had not been wasted. The
remains of the British fleets had gone with her to destruction.

Certainly what had been done had brought nearer the time when he, the
real organiser of victory, the man who had made the conquest of England
possible, would be able to claim his double reward--the independence of
Ireland, and the girl whom he intended to make the uncrowned Queen of
Erin.

It was a splendid and, to him, a delicious dream as well; but between
him and its fulfilment, what a chaos of bloodshed, ruin and human misery
lay! And yet he felt not a tremor of compunction or of pity for the
thousands of brave men who would be flung dead and mangled and tortured
into the bloody mire of battle, for the countless homes that would be
left desolate, or for the widows and the fatherless whose agony would
cry to Heaven for justice on him.

No; these things were of no account in his eyes. Ireland must be free,
and the girl he had come to love so swiftly, and with such consuming
passion, must be his. Nothing else mattered. Was he not Lord of the Air,
and should the desire of his heart be denied him?

Thus mused John Castellan in the conning-tower of the _Flying Fish_, as
he circled slowly above the ruins of Dover, while the man who had
beaten him in the swimming-race was sitting in the observatory on
far-off Whernside, verifying his night's observations and calculating
for the hundredth time the moment of the coming of an Invader, compared
with which all the armed legions of Europe were of no more importance
than a swarm of flies.

When he had satisfied himself that Dover was quite defenceless he sent
one of the French _Flying Fishes_ across to Calais with a letter to the
District Commander, describing briefly what had taken place, and telling
him that it would be now quite safe for the transports to cross the
Straits and land the troops at Portsmouth, Newhaven, Folkestone, Dover
and Ramsgate.

He would station one of his airships over each of these places to
prevent any resistance from land or sea, and would himself make a
general reconnaissance of the military dispositions of the defenders. He
advised that the three _Flying Fishes_, which had been reserved for the
defence of the Kiel Canal, should be telegraphed for as convoys, as
there was now no danger of attack, and that the depot of torpedoes and
motive power for his ships should be transferred from Calais to Dover.

As soon as he had despatched this letter, Castellan ordered two of his
remaining ships to cruise northward to Ramsgate, keeping mainly along
the track of the railway, one on each side of it, and to wreck the first
train they saw approaching Dover, Deal, Sandwich and Ramsgate from the
north. The other two he ordered to take the Western Coast line as far as
Portsmouth, and do the same with trains coming east.

Then he swung the _Flying Fish_ inland, and took a run over Canterbury,
Ashford, Maidstone, Tonbridge, Guildford and Winchester, to Southampton
and Portsmouth, returning by Chichester, Horsham and Tunbridge Wells.

It was only a tour of observation for the purpose of discovering the
main military dispositions of the defenders--who were now concentrating
as rapidly as possible upon Folkestone and Dover--but he found time to
stop and drop a torpedo or two into each town or fort that he passed
over--just leaving cards, as he said to M'Carthy--as a promise of
favours to come.

He also wrecked half a dozen long trains, apparently carrying troops,
and incidentally caused a very considerable loss of good lives and much
confusion, to say nothing of the moral effect which this new and
terrible form of attack produced upon the nerves of Mr Thomas Atkins.

When he got back to Dover he found a letter waiting for him from the
General informing him that the transports would sail at once, and that
his requests would be complied with.


CHAPTER XXIII

THE OTHER CAMPAIGN BEGINS


It was on the day following the destruction of Dover that the news of
the actual landing of the French and German forces had really taken
place at the points selected by Castellan reached Whernside. The little
house party were at lunch, and the latest papers had just come over from
Settle. Naturally what they contained formed the sole topic of
conversation.

"Really, Arnold, I think even you must confess that things are a great
deal more serious than anyone could have imagined a few days ago. The
very idea--an invasion accomplished in forty-eight hours--Portsmouth,
Dover, Sheerness and Tilbury destroyed, and French and German and
Russian soldiers actually in arms on English soil. The thing would be
preposterous if it were not true!

"And what are we to do now, I should like to know? The Fleet doesn't
exist--we have no army in the Continental sense of the word, which of
course is the real military sense, thanks to a lot of politicians
calling themselves statesmen who have been squabbling about what an army
ought to be for the last ten years.

"You will be able to put a million trained and half-trained--mostly
half-trained--men into the field, to face millions of highly-trained
French, German, Russian and Austrian troops, led by officers who have
taken their profession seriously, and not by gentlemen who have gone
into the army because it was a nice sort of playground, where you could
have lots of fun, and a little amateur fighting now and then. I wonder
what they will do now against the men who have made war a science
instead of sport!

"I should like to know what the good people who have made such a fuss
about the 'tyranny of Conscription' will say now, when they find that we
haven't trained men enough to defend our homes. Just as if military
service was not the first duty a man owes to his country and to his
home. A man has no right to a country nor a home if he isn't able to
defend them. Kipling was perfectly right when he said:


             'What is your boasting worth
     If you grudge a year of service to the lordliest life on earth?'"


This little lecture was delivered with trembling lips, flushed cheeks
and flashing eyes by Lady Margaret Holker, Lord Westerham's sister, who
had joined the party that morning to help her brother in his recruiting.

She was an almost perfect type of the modern highly-bred Englishwoman,
who knows how to be entirely modern without being vulgarly "up-to-date."
She was a strong contrast to her brother, in that she was a bright
brunette--not beautiful, perhaps not even pretty, but for all that
distinctly good-looking. Her hair and eyebrows were black, her eyes a
deep pansy-blue. A clear complexion, usually pale but decidedly flushed
now, and, for the rest, somewhat irregular features which might have
been almost plain, but for that indefinable expression of combined
gentleness and strength which only the careful selection of long descent
can give.

As for her figure, it was as perfect as absolute health and abundant
exercise could make it. She could ride, shoot, throw a fly and steer a
yacht better than most women and many men of her class; but for all that
she could grill steaks and boil potatoes with as much distinction as she
could play the piano and violin, and sing in three or four languages.

She also had a grip, not on politics, for which she had a wholesome
contempt, but on the affairs of the nations--the things which really
mattered. And yet withal she was just an entirely healthy young
Englishwoman, who was quite as much at home in the midst of a good
swinging waltz as she was in an argument on high affairs of State.

"My dear Madge," said her brother, who had been reading the reports in
the second morning edition of the _Times_ aloud, "I am afraid that,
after all, you are right. But then, you must not forget that a new enemy
has come into the field. I hardly like to say so in Miss Castellan's
presence, but it is perfectly clear that, considering what the Fleet
did, there would have been no invasion if it had not been for those
diabolical contrivances that John Castellan took over to the German
Emperor."

"You needn't have any hesitation in saying what you like about him
before me, Lord Westerham," said Norah, flushing. "It's no brother he is
of mine now, as I told him the day he went aboard the German yacht at
Clifden. I'd see him shot to-morrow without a wink of my eyes. The man
who does what he has done has no right to the respect of any man nor the
love of any woman--no, not even if the woman is his sister. Think of all
the good, loyal Irishmen, soldiers and sailors, that he has murdered by
this time. No, I have no brother called John Castellan."

"But you have another called Denis," said Auriole, "and I think you may
be well content with him!"

"Ah, Denis!" said Norah, flushing again, but for a different reason,
"Denis is a good and loyal man; yes, I am proud of him--God bless him!"

"And I should reckon that skipper of his, Captain Erskine, must be a
pretty smart sort of man," said Mr Parmenter, who so far had hardly
joined in the conversation, and who had seemed curiously indifferent to
the terrible exploits of the _Flying Fishes_ and all that had followed
them. "That craft of his seems to be just about as business-like as
anything that ever got into the water or under it. I wonder what he is
doing with the Russian and German ships in the Thames now. I guess he
won't let many of them get back out of there. Quite a young man, too,
according to the accounts."

"Oh, yes," said Lady Margaret, "he isn't twenty-nine yet. I know him
slightly. He is a son of Admiral Erskine, who commanded the China
Squadron about eight years ago, and died of fever after a pirate hunt,
and he is the nephew of dear old Lady Caroline Anstey, my other mother
as I call her. He is really a splendid fellow, and some people say as
good-looking as he is clever; although, of course, there was a desperate
lot of jealousy when he was promoted Captain straight away from
Lieutenant-Commander of a Fishery cruiser, but I should like to know how
many of the wiseacres of Whitehall could have designed that _Ithuriel_
of his."

"It's a pity she can't fly, though, like those others," said Mr
Parmenter, with a curious note in his voice which no one at the table
but Lennard understood. "She's a holy terror in the water, but the other
fellow's got all the call on land. If they get a dozen or so of these
aërial submarines as you might call them, in front of the invading
forces, I can't see what's going to stop a march on London, and right
round it. Your men are just as brave as any on earth, and a bit more
than some, if their officers are a bit more gentlemen and sportsmen than
soldiers; but no man can fight a thing he can't hit back at, and so I
reckon the next thing we shall hear of will be the siege of London. What
do you think, Lennard?"

Lennard, who had hardly spoken a word during the meal, looked up, and
said in a voice which Lady Madge thought curiously unsympathetic:

"I shouldn't think it would take more than a fortnight at the outside,
even leaving these airships out of the question. We haven't three
hundred thousand men of all sorts to put into the field, who know one
end of a gun from another, or who can sit a horse; and now that the
sea's clear the enemy can land two or three millions in a fortnight."

"All our merchant shipping will be absolutely at their mercy, and they
will simply have to take them over to France and Germany and load them
up with men and horses, and bring them over as if they were coming to a
picnic. But, of course, with the airships to help them the thing's a
foregone conclusion, and to a great extent it is our own fault. I
thoroughly agree with what Lady Margaret says about conscription. If we
had had it only five years ago, we should now have three million men,
instead of three hundred thousand, trained and ready to take the field.
Though, after all--"

"After all--what?" said Lady Margaret, looking sharply round at him.

"Oh, nothing of any importance," he said. "At least, not just at
present. I daresay Lord Westerham will be able to explain what I might
have said better than I could. There's not time for it just now, I've
got to get a train to Bolton in an hour's time."

"And I'll have to be in Glasgow to-night," said Mr Parmenter, rising. "I
hope you won't think it very inhospitable of us, Lady Margaret: but
business is business, you know, and more so than usual in times like
these.

"Now, I had better say good-bye. I have a few things to see to before Mr
Lennard and I go down to Settle, but I've no doubt Auriole will find
some way of entertaining you till you want to start for York."

At half-past two the motor was at the door to take Mr Parmenter and
Lennard to Settle. That evening, in Glasgow, Mr Parmenter bought the
_Minnehaha_, a steel turbine yacht of two thousand tons and twenty-five
knots speed, from Mr Hendray Chinnock, a brother millionaire, who had
laid her up in the Clyde in consequence of the war the day before. He
re-engaged her officers and crew at double wages to cover war risks, and
started for New York within an hour of the completion of the purchase.

Lennard took the express to Bolton, with letters and a deed of gift from
Lord Westerham, which gave him absolute ownership of the cannel mine
with the twelve-hundred-foot vertical shaft at Farnworth.

That afternoon and evening Lady Margaret was more than entertained, for
during the afternoon she learned the story of the approaching cataclysm,
in comparison with which the war was of no more importance than a mere
street riot; and that night Auriole, who had learned to work the great
reflector almost as well as Lennard himself, showed her the
ever-growing, ever-brightening shape of the Celestial Invader.


CHAPTER XXIV

TOM BOWCOCK--PITMAN


Lennard found himself standing outside the Trinity Street Station at
Bolton a few minutes after six that evening.

Of course it was raining. Rain and fine-spun cotton thread are Bolton's
specialities, the two chief pillars of her fame and prosperity, for
without the somewhat distressing superabundance of the former she could
not spin the latter fine enough. It would break in the process.
Wherefore the good citizens of Bolton cheerfully put up with the dirt
and the damp and the abnormal expenditure on umbrellas and mackintoshes
in view of the fact that all the world must come to Bolton for its
finest threads.

He stood for a moment looking about him curiously, if with no great
admiration in his soul, for this was his first sight of what was to be
the scene of the greatest and most momentous undertaking that human
skill had ever dared to accomplish.

But the streets of Bolton on a wet night do not impress a stranger very
favourably, so he had his flat steamer-trunk and hat-box put on to a cab
and told the driver to take him to the Swan Hotel, in Deansgate, where
he had a wash and an excellent dinner, to which he was in a condition to
do full justice--for though nation may rage against nation, and worlds
and systems be in peril, the healthy human digestion goes on making its
demands all the time, and, under the circumstances, blessed is he who
can worthily satisfy them.

Then, after a cup of coffee and a meditative cigar, he put on his
mackintosh, sent for a cab, and drove to number 134 Manchester Road,
which is one of a long row of small, two-storeyed brick houses, as clean
as the all-pervading smoke and damp will permit them to be, but not
exactly imposing in the eyes of a new-comer.

When the door opened in answer to his knock he saw by the light of a
lamp hanging from the ceiling of the narrow little hall a small, slight,
neatly-dressed figure, and a pair of dark, soft eyes looked up
inquiringly at him as he said:

"Is Mr Bowcock at home?"

"Yes, he is," replied a voice softly and very pleasantly tinged with the
Lancashire accent. Then in a rather higher key the voice said:

"Tom, ye're wanted."

As she turned away Lennard paid his cabman, and when he went back to the
door he found the passage almost filled by a tall, square-shouldered
shape of a man, and a voice to match it said:

"If ye're wantin' Tom Bowcock, measter, that's me. Will ye coom in? It's
a bit wet i' t' street."

Lennard went in, and as the door closed he said:

"Mr Bowcock, my name is Lennard--"

"I thou't it might be," interrupted the other. "You'll be Lord
Westerham's friend. I had a wire from his lordship's morning telling me
t' expect you to-night or to-morrow morning. You'll excuse t' kitchen
for a minute while t' missus makes up t' fire i' t' sittin'-room."

When Lennard got into the brightly-lighted kitchen, which is really the
living-room of small Lancashire houses, he found himself in an
atmosphere of modest cosy comfort which is seldom to be found outside
the North and the Midland manufacturing districts. It is the other side
of the hard, colourless life that is lived in mill and mine and forge,
and it has a charm that is all its own.

There was the big range, filling half the space of one of the
side-walls, its steel framings glittering like polished silver; the high
plate-rack full of shining crockery at one end by the door, and the low,
comfortable couch at the other; two lines of linen hung on cords
stretched under the ceiling airing above the range, and the solid deal
table in the middle of the room was covered with a snow-white cloth, on
which a pretty tea-service was set out.

A brightly polished copper kettle singing on the range, and a daintily
furnished cradle containing a sleeping baby, sweetly unconscious of wars
or world-shaking catastrophes, completed a picture which, considering
his errand, affected Gilbert Lennard very deeply.

"Lizzie" said the giant, "this is Mr Lennard as his lordship telegraphed
about to-day. I daresay yo can give him a cup of tay and see to t' fire
i' t' sittin'-room. I believe he's come to have a bit of talk wi' me
about summat important from what his lordship said."

"I'm pleased to see you, Mr Lennard," said the pleasant voice, and as he
shook hands he found himself looking into the dark, soft eyes of a
regular "Lancashire witch," for Lizzie Bowcock had left despair in the
heart of many a Lancashire lad when she had put her little hand into big
Tom's huge fist and told him that she'd have him for her man and no one
else.

She left the room for a few minutes to see to the sitting-room fire, and
Lennard turned to his host and said:

"Mr Bowcock, I have come to see you on a matter which will need a good
deal of explanation. It will take quite a couple of hours to put the
whole thing before you, so if you have any other engagements for
to-night, no doubt you can take a day off to-morrow--in fact, as the pit
will have to stop working--"

"T' 'pit stop working, Mr Lennard!" exclaimed the manager. "Yo' dunno
say so. Is that his lordship's orders? Why, what's up?"

"I will explain everything, Mr Bowcock," replied Lennard, "only, for her
own sake, your wife must know nothing at present. The only question is,
shall we have a talk to-night or not?"

"If it's anything that's bad," replied the big miner with a deeper note
in his voice, "I'd soonest hear it now. Mysteries don't get any t'
better for keepin'. Besides, it'll give me time to sleep on't; and
that's not a bad thing to do when yo've a big job to handle."

Mrs Bowcock came back as he said this, and Lennard had his cup of tea,
and they of course talked about the war. Naturally, the big miner and
his pretty little wife were the most interested people in Lancashire
just then, for to no one else in the County Palatine had been given the
honour of hearing the story of the great battle off the Isle of Wight
from the lips of one who had been through it on board the now famous
_Ithuriel_.

But when Tom Bowcock came out of the little sitting-room three hours
later, after Lennard had told him of the approaching doom of the world
and had explained to him how his pit-shaft was to be used as a means of
averting it--should that, after all, prove to be possible--his interest
in the war had diminished very considerably, for he had already come to
see clearly that this was undeniably a case of the whole being very much
greater than the part.

Tom Bowcock was one of those men, by no means rare in the north, who
work hard with hands and head at the same time. He was a pitman, but he
was also a scientific miner, almost an engineer, and so Lennard had
found very little difficulty in getting him to grasp the details of the
tremendous problem in the working out of which he was destined to play
no mean part.

"Well, Measter Lennard," he said, slowly, as they rose from the little
table across which a very large amount of business had been transacted.
"It's a pretty big job this that yo've putten into our hands, and
especially into mine; but I reckon they'll be about big enough for it;
and yo've come to t' right place, too. I've never heard yet of a job as
Lancashire took on to as hoo didn't get through wi'.

"Now, from what yo've been telling me, yo' must be a bit of an early
riser sometimes, so if yo'll come here at seven or so i' t' mornin',
I'll fit yo' out wi' pit clothes and we'll go down t' shaft and yo' can
see for yoursel' what's wantin' doin'. Maybe that'll help yo' before yo'
go and make yo'r arrangements wi' Dobson & Barlow and t'other folk as
yo'll want to help yo'."

"Thank you very much, Mr Bowcock," replied Lennard. "You will find me
here pretty close about seven. It's a big job, as you say, and there's
not much time to be lost. Now, if Mrs Bowcock has not gone to bed, I'll
go and say good-night."

"She's no'on to bed yet," said his host, "and yo'll take a drop o'
summat warm before yo' start walkin' to t' hotel, for yo'll get no cab
up this way to-neet. She'll just have been puttin' t' youngster to
bed--"

Tom Bowcock stopped suddenly in his speech as a swift vision of that
same "youngster" and his mother choking in the flames of the Fire-Mist
passed across his senses. Lennard had convinced his intellect of the
necessity of the task of repelling the Celestial Invader and of the
possibility of success; but from that moment his heart was in the work.

It had stopped raining and the sky had cleared a little when they went
to the door half an hour later. To the right, across the road, rose a
tall gaunt shape like the skeleton of an elongated pyramid crowned with
two big wheels. Lights were blazing round it, for the pit was working
night and day getting the steam coal to the surface.

"Yonder's t' shaft," said Tom, as they shook hands. "It doesn't look
much of a place to save the world in, does it?"


CHAPTER XXV

PREPARING FOR ACTION


The next day was a busy one, not only for Lennard himself but for others
whose help he had come to enlist in the working out of the Great
Experiment.

He turned up at Bowcock's house on the stroke of seven, got into his pit
clothes, and was dropped down the twelve-hundred-foot shaft in the cage.
At the bottom of the shaft he found a solid floor sloping slightly
eastward, with three drives running in fan shape from north-east and
south-east. There were two others running north and north-west.

After ten minutes' very leisurely walk round the base of the shaft,
during which he made one or two observations by linear and perpendicular
compass, he said to Tom Bowcock:

"I think this will do exactly. The points are absolutely correct. If we
had dug a hole for ourselves we couldn't have got one better than this.
Yes, I think it will just do. Now, will you be good enough to take me to
the surface as slowly as you can?"

"No, but yo're not meanin' that, Measter Lennard," laughed the manager.
"'Cause if I slowed t' engines down as much as I could you'd be the rest
o' t' day getting to t' top."

"Yes, of course, I didn't mean that," said Lennard, "but just
slowly--about a tenth of the speed that you dropped me into the bowels
of the earth with. You see, I want to have a look at the sides."

"Yo' needna' trouble about that, Mr Lennard, I can give yo' drawin's of
all that in t' office, but still yo' can see for yo'rself by the
drawin's afterwards."

The cage ascended very slowly, and Lennard did see for himself. But when
later on he studied the drawings that Tom Bowcock had made, he found
that there wasn't as much as a stone missing. When he had got into his
everyday clothes again, and had drunk a cup of tea brewed for him by Mrs
Bowcock, he said as he shook hands with her husband:

"Well, as far as the pit is concerned, I have seen all that I want to
see, and Lord Westerham was just as right about the pit as he was about
the man who runs it. Now, I take it over from to-day. You will stop all
mining work at once, close the entrances to the galleries and put down a
bed of concrete ten feet thick, level. Then you will go by the drawings
that I gave you last night.

"At present, the concreting of the walls in as perfect a circle as you
can make them, not less than sixteen feet inner diameter, and building
up the concrete core four feet thick from the floor to the top, is your
first concern. You will tell your men that they will have double wages
for day work and treble for night work, and whether they belong to the
Volunteers or Yeomanry or Militia they will not be called to the Colours
as long as they keep faith with us; if the experiment turns out all
right, every man who sees it through shall have a bonus of a thousand
pounds.

"But, remember, that this pit will be watched, and every man who signs
on for the job will be watched, and the Lord have mercy on the man who
plays us false, for he'll want it. You must make them remember that, Mr
Bowcock. This is no childish game of war among nations; this means the
saving or the losing of a world, and the man who plays traitor here is
not only betraying his own country, but the whole human race, friends
and enemies alike."

"I'll see to that, Mr Lennard. I know my chaps, and if there's one or
two bad 'uns among 'em, they'll get paid and shifted in the ordinary
way of business. But they're mostly a gradely lot of chaps. I've been
picking 'em out for his lordship for t' last five yeers, and there isn't
a Trade Unionist among 'em. We give good money here and we want good
work and good faith, and if we don't get it, the man who doesn't give it
has got to go and find another job.

"For wages like that they'd go on boring t' shaft right down through t'
earth and out at t' other side, and risk finding Owd Nick and his people
in t' middle. A' tell yo' for sure. Well, good-mornin', yo've a lot to
do, and so have I. A'll get those galleries blocked and bricked up at
once, and as soon as you can send t' concrete along, we'll start at t'
floor."

Lennard's first visit after breakfast was to the Manchester and County
Bank in Deansgate, where he startled the manager, as far as a Lancashire
business man can be startled, by opening an account for two hundred and
fifty thousand pounds, and depositing the title-deeds of the whole of
Lord Westerham's properties in and about Bolton.

When he had finished his business at the Bank, he went to the offices of
Dobson & Barlow, the great ironworkers, whose four-hundred-and-ten-foot
chimney towers into the murky sky so far above all other structures in
Bolton that if you are approaching the town by road you see it and its
crest of smoke long before you see Bolton itself.

The firm had, of course, been advised of his coming, and he had written
a note over-night to say when he would call. The name of Ratliffe
Parmenter was a talisman to conjure with in all the business circles of
the world, and so Lennard found Mr Barlow himself waiting for him in his
private office.

He opened the matter in hand very quietly, so quietly indeed that the
keen-sighted, hard-headed man who was listening to him found that for
once in his life he was getting a little out of his depth.

Never before had he heard such a tremendous scheme so quietly and
calmly set forth. Bessemer furnaces were to be erected at once all round
the pit mouth, meanwhile the firm was to contract with a Liverpool firm
for an unlimited supply of concrete cement of the finest quality
procurable. The whole staff of Dobson & Barlow's works were to be
engaged at an advance of twenty-five per cent. on their present wages
for three months to carry out the work of converting the shaft of the
Great Lever pit into the gigantic cannon which was to hurl into Space
the projectile which might or might not save the human race from
destruction.

Even granted Lennard's unimpeachable credentials, it was only natural
that the great iron-master should exhibit a certain amount of
incredulity, and, being one of the best types of the Lancashire business
man, he said quite plainly:

"This is a pretty large order you've brought us, Mr Lennard, and
although, of course, we know Mr Parmenter to be good enough for any
amount of money, still, you see, contracts are contracts, and what are
we to do with those we've got in hand now if you propose to buy up for
three months?"

"Yes," replied Lennard, "I admit that that is an important point. The
question is, what would it cost you to throw up or transfer to other
firms the contracts that you now have in hand?"

There was a silence of two or three minutes between them, during which
Mr Barlow made a rapid but comprehensive calculation and Lennard took
out his cheque-book and began to write a cheque.

"Counting everything," said Mr Barlow, leaning back in his chair and
looking up at the ceiling, "the transfer of our existing contracts to
other firms of equal standing, so as to satisfy our customers, and the
loss to ourselves for the time that you want--well, honestly, I don't
think we could do it under twenty-five thousand pounds. You understand,
I am saying nothing about the scientific aspect of the matter, because
I don't understand it, but that's the business side of it; and that's
what it's going to cost you before we begin."

Lennard filled in the cheque and signed it. He passed it across the
table to Mr Barlow, and said:

"I think that is a very reasonable figure. This will cover it and leave
something over to go on with."

Mr Barlow took the cheque and looked at it, and then at the calm face of
the quiet young man who was sitting opposite him.

The cheque was for fifty thousand pounds. While he was looking at it,
Lennard took the bank receipt for a quarter of a million deposit from
his pocket and gave it to him, saying:

"You will see from this that money is really no object. As you know, Mr
Parmenter has millions, more I suppose than he could calculate himself,
and he is ready to spend every penny of them. You will take that just as
earnest money."

"That's quite good enough for us, Mr Lennard," replied Mr Barlow,
handing the bank receipt back. "The contracts shall be transferred as
soon as we can make arrangements, and the work shall begin at once. You
can leave everything else to us--brickwork, building, cement and all the
rest of it--and we'll guarantee that your cannon shall be ready to fire
off in three months from now."

"And the projectile, Mr Barlow, are you prepared to undertake that
also?" asked Lennard.

"Yes, we will make the projectile according to your specification, but
you will, of course, supply the bursting charge and the charge of this
new powder of yours which is to send it into Space. You see, we can't do
that; you'll have to get a Government permit to have such an enormous
amount of explosives in one place, so I'll have to leave that to you."

"I think I shall be able to arrange that, Mr Barlow," replied Lennard,
as he got up from his seat and held his hand out across the table. "As
long as you are willing to take on the engineering part of the business,
I'll see to the rest. Now, I know that your time is quite as valuable as
mine is, and I've got to get back to London this afternoon. To-morrow
morning I have to go through a sort of cross-examination before the
Cabinet--not that they matter much in the sort of crisis that we've got
to meet.

"Still, of course, we have to have the official sanction of the
Government, even if it is a question of saving the world from
destruction, but there won't be much difficulty about that, I think; and
at any rate you'll be working on freehold property, and not even the
Cabinet can stop that sort of work for the present. As far as everything
connected with the mine is concerned, I hope you will be able to work
with Mr Bowcock, who seems a very good sort of fellow."

"If we can't work with Tom Bowcock," replied Mr Barlow, "we can't work
with anyone on earth, and that's all there is about it. He's a big man,
but he's good stuff all through. Lord Westerham didn't make any bad
choice when he made him manager. And you won't dine with me to-night?"

"I am sorry, but I must be back to London to-night. I have to catch the
12-15 and have an interview in Downing Street at seven, and when I've
got through that, I don't think there will be any difficulty about the
explosives."

"According to all accounts, you'll be lucky if you find Downing Street
as it used to be," said Mr Barlow. "By the papers this morning it looks
as if London was going to have a pretty bad time of it, what with these
airships and submarines that sink and destroy everything in sight. Now
that they've got away with the fleet, it seems to me that it's only a
sort of walk over for them."

"Yes, I'm afraid it will have to be something like that for the next
month or so," replied Lennard, thinking of a telegram which he had in
his pocket. "But the victory is not all on one side yet. Of course, you
will understand that I am not in a position to give secrets away, but as
regards our own bargain, I am at liberty to tell you that while you are
building this cannon of ours there will probably be some developments in
the war which will be, I think, as unexpected as they will be startling.

"In fact, sir," he continued, rising from his seat and holding out his
hand across the table, "I am neither a prophet nor the son of a prophet,
but when the time comes, I think you will find that those who believe
that they are conquering England now will be here in Bolton faced by a
foe against which their finest artillery will be as useless as an
air-gun against an elephant.

"All I ask you to remember now is that at eleven p.m. on the twelfth of
May, the leaders of the nations who are fighting against England now
will be standing around me in the quarry on the Belmont Road, waiting
for the firing of the shot which I hope will save the world. If it does
not save it, they will be welcome to all that is left of the world in an
hour after that."

"You are talking like a man who believes what he says, Mr Lennard,"
replied Mr Barlow, "and, strange and all as it seems, I am beginning to
believe with you. There never was a business like this given into human
hands before, and, for the sake of humanity, I hope that you will be
successful. All that we can do shall be done well and honestly. That you
can depend on, and for the rest, we shall depend on you and your
science. The trust that you have put in our hands to-day is a great
honour to us, and we shall do our best to deserve it. Good-morning,
sir."


CHAPTER XXVI

THE FIRST BOMBARDMENT OF LONDON


When Lennard got out of the train at St Pancras that evening, he found
such a sight as until a day or so ago no Londoner had ever dreamed of.
But terrible as the happenings were, they were not quite terrible enough
to stop the issue of the evening newspapers.

As the train slowed down along the platform, boys were running along it
yelling:

"Bombardment of London from the air--dome of St Paul's smashed by a
shell--Guildhall, Mansion House, and Bank of England in ruins--orful
scenes in the streets. Paper, sir?"

He got out of the carriage and grabbed the first newspaper that was
thrust into his hand, gave the boy sixpence for it, and hurried away
towards the entrance. He found a few cabmen outside the station; he
hailed one of the drivers, got in, and said:

"Downing Street--quick. There's a sovereign; there'll be another for you
when I get there."

"It's a mighty risky job, guv'nor, these times, driving a keb through
London streets. Still, one's got to live, I suppose. 'Old up there--my
Gawd, that's another of those bombs! You just got out of there in time,
sir."

Even as though it had been timed, as it might well have been, a torpedo
dropped from a ghostly shape drifting slowly across the grey November
clouds. Then there came a terrific shock. Every pane in the vast roof
and in the St Pancras Hotel shivered to the dust. The engine which had
drawn Lennard's train blew up like one huge shell, and the carriages
behind it fell into splinters.

If that shell had only dropped three minutes sooner the end of the World
war of 1910 would have been very different to what it was; for, as
Lennard learned afterwards, of all the porters, officials and
passengers, who had the misfortune to be in the great station at that
moment, only half a hundred cripples, maimed for life, escaped.

"I wonder whether that was meant for me," said Lennard as the frightened
horse sprang away at a half gallop. "If that's the case, John Castellan
knows rather more than he ought to do, and, good Lord, if he knows that,
he must know where Auriole is, and what's to stop him taking one of
those infernal things of his up to Whernside, wrecking the house and the
observatory, and taking her off with him to the uttermost ends of the
earth if he likes?

"There must be something in it or that shell would not have dropped just
after I got outside the station. They watched the train come in, and
they knew I was in it--they must have known.

"What a ghastly catastrophe it would be if they got on to that scheme of
ours at the pit. Fancy one of those aërial torpedoes of his dropping
down the bore of the cannon a few minutes before the right time! It
would mean everything lost, and nothing gained, not even for him.

"Ah, good man Erskine," he went on, as he opened the paper, and read
that every cruiser, battleship and transport that had forced the
entrance to the Thames and Medway had been sunk. "That will be a bit of
a check for them, anyhow. Yes, yes, that's very good. Garrison Fort,
Chatham and Tilbury, of course, destroyed from the air, but not a ship
nor a man left to go and take possession of them."

While he was reading his paper, and muttering thus to himself, the cab
was tearing at the horse's best speed down Gray's Inn Road. It took a
sudden swing to the right into Holborn, ran along New Oxford Street, and
turned down Charing Cross Road, the horse going at a full gallop the
whole time.

Happily it was a good horse, or the fate of the world might have been
different. There was no rule of the road now, and no rules against
furious driving. London was panic-stricken, as it might well be. As far
as Lennard could judge the aërial torpedoes were being dropped mostly in
the neighbourhood of Regent Street and Piccadilly, and about Grosvenor
Place and Park Lane. He half expected to find Parliament Street and
Westminster in ruins, but for some mysterious reason they had been
spared.

The great City was blazing in twenty places, and scarcely a minute
passed without the crash of an explosion and the roar of flame that
followed it, but a magic circle seemed to have been drawn round
Westminster. There nothing was touched, and yet the wharves on the other
side of the river, and the great manufactories behind them, were blazing
and vomiting clouds of flame and smoke towards the clouds as though the
earth had been split open beneath them and the internal fires themselves
let loose.

When the cabman pulled up his sweating and panting horse at the door of
Number 2 Downing Street, Lennard got out and said to the cabman:

"You did that very well, considering the general state of things. I
don't know whether you'll live to enjoy it or not, but there's a
five-pound note for you, and if you'll take my advice you will get your
wife and family, if you have one, into that cab, and drive right out
into the country. It strikes me London's going to be a very good place
to stop away from for the next two or three days."

"Thank 'ee, sir," said the cabman, as he gathered up the five-pound note
and tucked it down inside his collar. "I don't know who you are, but
it's very kind of you; and as you seem to know something, I'll do as
you say. What with these devil-ships a-flyin' about the skies, and
dropping thunderbolts on us from the clouds, and furreners a-comin' up
the Thames as I've heard, London ain't 'ealthy enough for me, nor the
missus and the kids, and thanks for your kindness, sir, we're movin'
to-night, keb an' all.

"Oh, my Gawd, there's another! 'Otel Cecil and Savoy this time, if I've
got my bearin's right. Well, there's one thing, t'ain't on'y the pore
what's sufferin' this time; there'll be a lot of rich people dead afore
mornin'. A pal of mine told me just now that Park Lane was burnin' from
end t' end. Good-evenin', sir, and thenk you."

As the cab drove away Lennard stood for a few moments on the pavement,
watching two columns of flame soaring up from the side of the Strand.
Perhaps the most dreadful effects produced by the aërial torpedoes were
those which resulted from the breaking of the gas mains and the
destruction of the electric conduits. Save for the bale-fires of ruin
and destruction, half London was in darkness. Miles of streets under
which the gas mains were laid blew up with almost volcanic force. The
electric mains were severed, and all the contents dislocated, and if
ever London deserved the name which James Thompson gave it when he
called it "The City of Dreadful Night," it deserved it on that evening
of the 17th of November 1909.

Lennard was received in the Prime Minister's room by Mr Chamberlain,
Lord Whittinghame, Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman, Lord Milner and General
Lord Kitchener.

It was perhaps the strangest meeting that had ever taken place in that
room, not even saving the historic meeting of 1886. There was very
little talking. Even in the House of Commons the flood of talk had ebbed
away in such a fashion that it made it possible for the nation's
business to be got through at a wonderful speed. The fact of the matter
was that the guns were talking--talking within earshot of Palace Yard
itself, and so men had come to choose their words and make them few.

After the introductions had been made the man who really held the fate
of the world in his hands took a long envelope out of the breast-pocket
of his coat, and proceeded to explain, somewhat as a schoolmaster might
explain to his class, the doom which would overwhelm humanity on the
12th May 1910.

He was listened to in absolute silence, because his hearers were men who
had good reason for believing that silence is often worth a good deal
more than speech. When he had finished the rustle of his papers as he
handed them to the Prime Minister was distinctly audible in the solemn
silence. The Prime Minister folded them up, and said:

"There is no necessity for us to go into the figures again. I think we
are prepared to take them on the strength of your reputation, Mr
Lennard.

"We have asked you here to-night as an adviser, as a man who in more
ways than one sees farther than we can. Now, what is your advice? You
are aware, I presume, that the German Emperor, the Czar of Russia and
the French President landed at Dover this morning, and have issued an
ultimatum from Canterbury, calling upon us to surrender London, and
discuss terms of peace in the interests of humanity. Now, you occupy a
unique point of view. You have told us in your letters that unless a
miracle happens the human race will not survive midnight of the 12th of
May next. We believe that you are right, and now, perhaps, you will be
good enough to let us have your opinions as to what should be done in
the immediate present."

"My opinion is, sir, that for at least forty days you must fight, no
matter how great the odds may appear to be. Every ditch and hedgerow,
every road and lane, every hill and copse must be defended. If London
falls, England falls, and with it the Empire."

"But how are we to do it?" exclaimed Lord Kitchener. "With these
infernal airships flying about above it, and dropping young earthquakes
from the clouds? There are no braver men on earth than ours, but it
isn't human nature to keep steady under that kind of punishment. Look
what they've done already in London! What is there to prevent them, for
instance, from dropping a shell through the roof of this house, and
blowing the lot of us to eternity in little pieces? It's not the
slightest use trying to shoot back at them. You remember what happened
to poor Beresford and the rest of his fleet in Dover Harbour. If you
can't hit back, you can't fight."

"That certainly appears to be perfectly reasonable," said Sir Henry
Campbell-Bannerman. "Personally, I must confess, although with the
greatest reluctance, that considering the enormous advantage possessed
by the enemy in this combination of submarine and flying machine, we
have no other alternative but to surrender at discretion. It is a
pitiful thing to say, I am well aware, but we are fighting forces which
would never have been called into being in any other war. I agree with
Lord Kitchener that you cannot fight an enemy if you cannot hit him
back. I am afraid there is no other alternative."

"No," added Lord Whittinghame, "I am afraid there is not. By to-morrow
morning there will be three millions of men on British soil, and we
haven't a million to put against them--to say nothing of these horrible
airships: but, Mr Lennard, if the world is only going to live about six
months or so, what is the use of conquering the British Empire? Surely
there must be another alternative."

"Yes, my lord," replied Lennard, "there is another. I've no doubt your
lordship has one of your motors within call. Let us go down to
Canterbury, yourself, Lord Kitchener and myself, and I will see if I
can't convince the German Emperor that in trying to conquer Britain he
is only stabbing the waters. If I only had him at Whernside, I would
convince him in five minutes."

"Then we'd better get hold of him and take him there," said Lord
Kitchener. "But I'm ready for the Canterbury journey."

"And so am I," said Lord Whittinghame, "and the sooner we're off the
better. I've got a new Napier here that's good for seventy-five miles an
hour, so we'd better be off."


CHAPTER XXVII

LENNARD'S ULTIMATUM


Within five minutes they were seated in the big Napier, with ninety
horse-power under them, and a possibility of eighty miles an hour before
them. A white flag was fastened to a little flagstaff on the left-hand
side. They put on their goggles and overcoats, and took Westminster
Bridge, as it seemed, in a leap. Rochester was reached in twenty-five
minutes, but at the southern side of Rochester Bridge they were held up
by German sentries.

"Not a pleasant sort of thing on English soil," growled Lord Kitchener
as Lord Whittinghame stopped the motor.

"Is the German Emperor here yet?" asked Lennard in German.

"No, Herr, he is at Canterbury," replied the sentry. "Would you like to
see the officer?"

"Yes," said Lennard, "as soon as possible. These gentlemen are Lord
Whittinghame and Lord Kitchener, and they wish to meet the Emperor as
soon as possible."

The sentry saluted and retired, and presently a captain of Uhlans came
clattering across the street, clicked his heels together, touched the
side of his helmet, and said:

"At your service, gentlemen. What can I do for you?"

"We wish to get into communication with the German Emperor as soon as
possible," replied Lord Whittinghame. "Is the telegraph still working
from here to Canterbury?"

"It is," replied the German officer; "if you will come with me to the
office you shall be put into communication with His Majesty at once; but
it will be necessary for me to hear what you say."

"We're only going to try and make peace," said Lord Kitchener, "so you
might as well hear all we've got to say. Those infernal airships of
yours have beaten us. Will you get in? We'll run you round to the
office."

"I thank you," replied the captain of the Uhlans, "but it will be better
if I walk on and have the line cleared. I will meet you at the office.
Adieu."

He stiffened up, clicked his heels again, saluted, and the next moment
he had thrown his right leg across the horse which the orderly had
brought up for him.

"Not bad men, those Uhlans," said Lord Kitchener, as the car moved
slowly towards the telegraph station. "Take a lot of beating in the
field, I should say, if it once came to cold steel."

They halted at the post-office, and the captain of Uhlans, who was in
charge of all the telegraph lines of the south-east, was requested to
send the following telegram, which was signed by Lord Whittinghame and
Lord Kitchener.


     "Acting as deputation from British Government we desire interview
     with your Majesty at Canterbury, with view to putting end to
     present bloodshed, if possible, also other important news to
     communicate."


This telegram was despatched to the Kaiser at the County Hotel,
Canterbury, and while they were waiting for the reply a message came in
from Whitstable addressed to "Lennard, oyster merchant, Rochester,"
which was in the following terms:


     "Oyster catch promises well. Advised large purchase
     to-morrow.--ROBINSON & SMITH."


"That seems rather a frivolous sort of thing to send one nowadays,"
said Lennard, dropping the paper to the floor after reading the telegram
aloud. "I have some interest in the beds at Whitstable, and my agents,
who don't seem to know that there's a war going on, want me to invest. I
think it's hardly good enough, when you don't know whether you'll be in
little pieces within the next ten minutes."

"I don't see why you shouldn't take on a contract for supplying our
friends the enemy," laughed Lord Kitchener, as the twinkle of an eye
passed between them, while the captain of Uhlans' back was turned for an
instant.

"I'm afraid they would be confiscated before I could do that," said
Lennard. "I shan't bother about answering it. We have rather more
serious things than oysters to think about just now."

The sounder clicked, and the German telegraphist, who had taken the
place of the English one, tapped out a message, which he handed to the
captain of Uhlans.

"Gentlemen, His Imperial Majesty will be glad to receive you at the
County Hotel, Canterbury. I will give you a small flag which shall
secure you from all molestation."

He handed the paper to Lord Whittinghame as he spoke. The Imperial
message read:


     "Happy to meet deputation. Please carry German flag, which will
     secure you from molestation _en route_. I am wiring orders for
     suspension of hostilities till dawn to-morrow. I hope we may make
     satisfactory arrangements.--WILHELM."


"That is quite satisfactory," said Lord Whittinghame to the captain of
Uhlans. "We shall be much obliged to you for the flag, and you will
perhaps telegraph down the road saying that we are not to be stopped. I
can assure you that the matter is one of the utmost urgency."

"Certainly, my lord," replied the captain. "His Majesty's word is given.
That is enough for us."

Ten minutes later the big Napier, flying the German flag on the
left-hand side, was spinning away through Chatham, and down the straight
road to Canterbury. They slowed up going through Sittingbourne and
Faversham, which were already in the hands of the Allied forces, thanks
to John Castellan's precautions in blocking all railroads to Dover, and
the German flag was saluted by the garrisons, much to Lord Kitchener's
quietly-expressed displeasure, but he knew they were playing for a big
stake, and so he just touched his cap, as they swung through the narrow
streets, and said what he had to say under his breath.

Within forty minutes the car pulled up opposite the County Hotel,
Canterbury. The ancient city was no longer English, save as regarded its
architecture. Everywhere, the clatter of German hoofs sounded on the
streets, and the clink and clank of German spurs and swords sounded on
the pavements. The French and Austrians were taking the westward routes
by Ashford and Tonbridge in the enveloping movement on London. The War
Lord of Germany had selected the direct route for himself.

As the motor stopped panting and throbbing in front of the hotel
entrance, a big man in the uniform of the Imperial Guard came out,
saluted, and said:

"Lord Whittinghame and Lord Kitchener, with Mr Lennard, I presume?"

"Yes, that's so," said Lord Kitchener, opening the side door and getting
out. "Colonel von Folkerström, I believe. I think we've met before. You
were His Majesty's _attaché_ with us during the Boer War, I think. This
is Lord Whittinghame, and this is Mr Lennard. Is His Majesty within?"

"His Majesty awaits you, gentlemen," replied the Colonel, formally. And
then as he shook hands with Lord Kitchener he added, "I am sorry, sir,
that we should meet as enemies on English soil."

"Just the fortune of war and those damned airships of yours, Colonel,"
laughed Lord Kitchener in reply. "If we'd had them this meeting might
have been in Berlin or Potsdam. Can't fight against those things, you
know. We're only human."

"But you English are just a little more, I think," said the Colonel to
himself. "Gottes willen! What would my August Master be thinking now if
this was in Berlin instead of Canterbury, and here are these Englishmen
taking it as quietly as though an invasion of England happened every
day." And when he had said this to himself he continued aloud:

"My lords and Mr Lennard, if you will follow me I will conduct you into
His Majesty's presence."

They followed the Colonel upstairs to the first floor. Two sentries in
the uniform of the 1st Regiment of Cuirassiers were guarding the door:
their bayoneted rifles came up to the present, the Colonel answered the
salute, and they dropped to attention. The Colonel knocked at the door
and a harsh voice replied:

"Herein."

The door swung open and Lennard found himself for the first but not the
last time in the presence of the War Lord of Germany.

"Good-evening, gentlemen," said the Kaiser. "You will understand me when
I say I am both glad and sorry to see you."

"Your Majesty," replied Lord Whittinghame, in a curiously serious tone,
"the time for human joy and sorrow is so fast expiring that almost
everything has ceased to matter, even the invasion of England."

The Kaiser's brows lifted, and he stared in frank astonishment at the
man who could say such apparently ridiculous words so seriously. If he
had not known that he was talking to the late Prime Minister, and the
present leader of the Unionist party in the House of Lords, he would
have thought him mad.

"Those are very strange words, my lord," he replied. "You will pardon me
if I confess that I can hardly grasp their meaning."

"If your Majesty has an hour to spare," said Lord Whittinghame, "Mr
Lennard will make everything perfectly plain. But what he has to say,
and what he can prove, must be for your Majesty's ears alone."

"Is it so important as that?" laughed the Kaiser.

"It is so important, sire," said Lord Kitchener, "that the fate of the
whole world hangs upon what you may say or do within the next hour. So
far, you have beaten us, because you have been able to bring into action
engines of warfare against which we have been unable to defend
ourselves. But now, there is another enemy in the field, against which
we possess the only means of defence. That is what we have come to
explain to your Majesty."

"Another enemy!" exclaimed the Kaiser, "but how can that be. There are
no earthly powers left sufficiently strong that we would be powerless
against them."

"This is not an earthly enemy, your Majesty," replied Lennard, speaking
for the first time since he had entered the room. "It is an invader from
Space. To put it quite plainly, the terms which we have come to offer
your Majesty are: Cessation of hostilities for six months, withdrawal of
all troops from British soil, universal disarmament, and a pledge to be
entered into by all the Powers of Europe and the United States of
America that after the 12th of May next there shall be no more war. Your
fleets have been destroyed as well as ours, your armies are here, but
they cannot get away, and so we are going to ask you to surrender."

"Surrender!" echoed the Kaiser, "surrender, when your country lies open
and defenceless before us? No, no. Lord Whittinghame and Lord Kitchener
I know, but who are you, sir--a civilian and an unknown man, that you
should dictate peace to me and my Allies?"

"Only a man, your Majesty," said Lord Whittinghame, "who has convinced
the British Cabinet Council that he holds the fate of the world in the
hollow of his hands. Are you prepared to be convinced?"

"Of what?" replied the Kaiser, coldly.

"That there will be no world left to conquer after midnight on the 12th
of May next, or to put it otherwise, that unless our terms are accepted,
and Mr Lennard carries out his work, there will be neither victors nor
vanquished left on earth."

"Gentlemen," replied the Kaiser, "you will pardon me when I say that I
am surprised beyond measure that you should have come to me with a
schoolboy's tale like that. The eternal order of things cannot be
interrupted in such a ridiculous fashion. Again, I trust you will
forgive me when I express my regret that you should have wasted so much
of your own time and mine on an errand which should surely have appeared
to you fruitless from the first.

"Whoever or whatever this gentleman may be," he continued with a wave of
his hand towards Lennard, "I neither know nor care; but that yourself
and Lord Kitchener should have been deceived so grossly, I must confess
passes the limits of my imagination. Frankly, I do not believe in the
possibility of such proofs as you allude to. As regards peace, I propose
to discuss terms with King Edward in Windsor--not before, nor with
anyone else. Gentlemen, I have other matters to attend to, and I have
the honour to bid you good-evening."

"And that is your Majesty's last word?" said Lord Kitchener. "You mean a
fight to the finish?"

"Yes, my lord," replied the Kaiser, "whether the world finishes with the
fight or not."

"Very well then," said Lennard, taking an envelope from the
breast-pocket of his coat, and putting it down on the table before the
Emperor. "If your Majesty has not time to look through those papers,
you will perhaps send them to Berlin and take your own astronomer's
report upon them. Meanwhile, you will remember that our terms are:
Unconditional surrender of the forces invading the British Islands or
the destruction of the world. Good-night."


CHAPTER XXVIII

CONCERNING ASTRONOMY AND OYSTERS


In spite of the bold front that he had assumed during the interview, the
strain, not exactly of superstition but rather of supernaturalism which
runs so strongly in the Kaiser's family, made it impossible for him to
treat such a tremendous threat as the destruction of the world as an
alternative to universal peace by any means as lightly as he appeared to
his visitors to do; and when the audience was over he picked up the
envelope which Lennard had left upon the table, beckoned Count von
Moltke into his room behind, locked the door, and said:

"Now, Count, what is your opinion of this? At first sight it looks
ridiculous; but whoever this Lennard may be, it seems hardly likely that
two men like Lord Whittinghame and Lord Kitchener, two of the
coolest-headed and best-balanced men on earth, should take the trouble
to come down here as a deputation from the British Cabinet only to make
themselves ridiculous. Suppose we have a look at these papers?
Everything is in train for the advance. I daresay you and I understand
enough of mathematics between us to find out if there is anything
serious in them, and if so, they shall go to Herr Döllinger at once."

"I think it would be at least worth while to look through them, your
Majesty," replied the Count. "Like yourself, I find it rather difficult
to believe that this mysterious Mr Lennard, whoever he is, has been able
to impose upon the whole British Cabinet, to say nothing of Lord
Kitchener, who is about the best engineer and mathematician in the
British Army."

So the Count and the Kaiser sat down, and went through the elaborate and
yet beautifully clear calculations and diagrams, page by page, each
making notes as he went on. At the end of an hour the Kaiser looked over
his own notes, and said to von Moltke:

"Well, what is your opinion, Count?"

"I am not an astronomer, your Majesty, but these calculations certainly
appear to me to be correct as far as they go--that is, granted always
that the premisses from which Mr Lennard starts are correct. But
certainly I think that your Majesty will be wise in sending them as soon
as possible to Herr Döllinger."

"That is exactly the conclusion that I have come to myself," replied the
Kaiser. "I will write a note to Herr Döllinger, and one of the airships
must take it across to Potsdam. We can't afford to run any risks of that
infernal submarine ram or whatever she is. I would almost give an Army
corps for that ship. There's no doubt she's lost us three fleets, a
score of transports, and twenty thousand men in the last three days, and
she's just as much a mystery as ever. It's the most extraordinary
position a conquering army was ever put into before."

The Kaiser was perfectly right. There could be no doubt that up to the
present the invading forces had been victorious, thanks of course mainly
to the irresistible advantage of the airships, but also in no small
degree to the hopeless unpreparedness of the British home armies to meet
an invasion, which both military and naval experts had simply refused to
believe possible.

The seizure of the line from Dover to Chatham had been accomplished in a
single night. A dozen airships patrolled the air ahead of the advancing
German forces, which of course far outnumbered the weak and
hastily-collected British forces which could be brought against them,
and which, attacked at once by land and from the air, never really had a
chance.

It was the most perfectly conducted invasion ever planned. The
construction trains which went in advance on both lines carried sections
of metals of English gauge, already fastened to sleepers, and ready to
lay down. Every little bridge and culvert had been known and was
provided for. Not a bolt nor a fishplate had been forgotten, and
moreover John Castellan's operations from the air had reduced the
destruction to a minimum, and the consequence was that twelve hours
after the Kaiser had landed at Dover he found himself in his
headquarters at Canterbury, whence the British garrison had been forced
to retire after heavy fighting along the lines of wooded hills behind
Maidstone.

It was the old, old story, the story of every war that England had gone
into and "muddled through" somehow; but with two differences. Her
soldiers had never had to fight an enemy in the skies before, and--there
was no time now to straighten out the muddle, even if every able-bodied
man in the United Kingdom had been trained soldiers, as the invaders
were.

But there was another element in the situation. Incredible as it might
seem to those ignorant of the tremendous forces brought into play, the
home fleets of Europe had been destroyed, practically to a ship, within
three days and nights. The narrow seas were deserted. On the morning of
the seventeenth, four transports attempting to cross from Hamburg to
Ramsgate, carrying a force of men, horses and light artillery, which was
intended to operate as a flying column along the northern shores of
Kent, had been rammed and sent to the bottom within fifteen minutes half
way between land and land, and not a man nor an animal had escaped.

There was no news from the expeditions which had been sent against Hull
and Newcastle--all the cables had been cut, save the transatlantic
lines, the cutting of which the United States had already declared they
would consider as an unfriendly act on the part of the Allies, and the
British cable from Gibraltar to the Lizard which connected with Palermo
and Rome, and so formed the link of communication between Britain and
the Mediterranean.

The British Mediterranean Fleet was coming home, so were the West Indian
and North American squadrons, while the squadron in the China seas was
also ordered home, via the Suez Canal, to form a conjunction with our
Italian Allies. Of course, these ships would in due time be dealt with
by the aërial submarines, but meanwhile commerce with Europe had become
impossible. Imports had stopped at most of the great ports through sheer
terror of this demon of the sea, which appeared to be here, there and
everywhere at the same time; and with all these powerful squadrons
converging upon the shores of Britain the problem of feeding and
generally keeping fit for war some three millions of men and over half a
million horses would soon begin to look distinctly serious.

Castellan's vessels had hunted in vain for this solitary vessel, which
single-handed, marvellous as it seemed, kept the narrow waters clear of
invaders. The truth of this matter, however, was very simple. The
_Ithuriel_ was nearly twice as fast in the water as the _Flying Fishes_,
and she carried guns with an effective range of five miles, whereas they
only carried torpedoes.

For instance, during the battle of Sheerness, in which the remaining
units of the North Sea Squadron had, with the _Ithuriel's_ aid, attacked
and destroyed every German and Russian battleship and transport,
Erskine's craft had done terrible execution without so much as being
seen until, when the last of the German Coast Defence ships had gone
down with all hands in the Great Nore, off the Nore lighthouse, whence
she was shelling Garrison Fort, the _Ithuriel_ had risen above the water
for a few moments, and Denis Castellan had taken a cockshot with the
three forward guns at a couple of _Flying Fishes_ that were circling
over the town and fort and river mouth.

The shells had time-fuses, and they were timed to the tenth of a
second. They burst simultaneously over the airships. Then came a rending
of the atmosphere, and descending streams of fire, which burst with a
rapid succession of sharp reports as they touched the airships. Then
came another blaze of light which seemed to darken the wintry sun for a
moment, and then another quaking of the air, after which what was left
of the two _Flying Fishes_ fell in little fragments into the water,
splashing here and there as though they had been shingle ballast thrown
out of a balloon.

True, Garrison Fort had been blown up by the aërial torpedoes, and the
same fate was befalling the great forts at Tilbury, but their gallant
defenders did not die in vain, and, although the remainder of the aërial
squadron were able to go on and do their work of destruction on London,
whither the _Ithuriel_ could not follow them, the wrecks of six
battleships, a dozen destroyers and ten transports strewed the
approaches to the Thames and the Medway, while nearly thirty thousand
soldiers and sailors would never salute the flag of Czar or Kaiser
again.

In all the history of war no such loss of men, ships and material had
ever taken place within the short space of three days and a few hours.
Four great fleets and nearly a hundred thousand men had been wiped out
of existence since the assault on Southern England had begun, and even
now, despite the airships, had the millions of Britain's able-bodied
men, who were grinding their teeth and clenching their fists in impotent
fury, been trained just to shoot and march, it would have been possible
to take the invaders between overwhelming masses of men--who would hold
their lives as nothing in comparison with their country's honour--and
the now impassable sea, and drive them back into it. But although men
and youths went in their tens of thousands to the recruiting stations
and demanded to be enlisted, it was no use. Soldiers are not made in a
day or a week, and the invaders of England had been making them for
forty years.

While the Kaiser and Count von Moltke were going through Lennard's
papers, and coming to the decision to send them to Potsdam, Lord
Whittinghame's motor, instead of returning to Chatham, was running up to
Whitstable to answer the telegram which Lennard had received at
Rochester. The German flag cleared them out of Canterbury. It was
already known that they had been received by the Kaiser, and therefore
their persons were sacred. In consequence of the loss of the squadron
attacking the Thames and Medway, and the destruction of the Ramsgate
flotilla, the country was not occupied by the enemy north of the great
main road through Canterbury and Faversham, and that was just why the
_Ithuriel_ was lying snugly in the mouth of the East Swale River, about
three miles from the little town, with a shabby-looking lighter beside
her, from which she was taking in an extra complement of her own shells
and material for making Lennard's explosive, as well as a full load of
fuel for her engines. They pulled up at the door of the Bear and Key
Hotel, and as the motor came to a standstill a man dressed in the
costume of an ordinary worker on the oyster-beds came up, touched his
sou'wester, and said:

"Mr Lennard's car, gentlemen?"

"Yes, I'm here," said Lennard, shortly; "we've just left the Emperor at
Canterbury. How about those oysters? I should think you ought to do well
with them in Canterbury. Got plenty?"

"Yes, sir," replied the man. "If you will come down to the wharf I will
be able to show you a shipment that I can send along to-night if the
train comes from Canterbury."

"I think we might as well have a drop of something hot first, it's
rather cold riding."

The others nodded, and they went into the hotel without removing their
caps or goggles. They asked a waiter to show them into a private room,
as they had some business to do, and when four glasses of hot whisky and
water had been put on the table, Lennard locked the door and said:

"My lords, allow me to have the pleasure of introducing to you
Lieutenant Denis Castellan of His Majesty's cruiser _Ithuriel_."

Lord Whittinghame's and Lord Kitchener's hands went out together, and
the former said:

"Delighted to meet you, Mr Castellan. You and Captain Erskine have done
magnificently for us in spite of all our troubles. In fact, I don't know
what we should have done without you and this wonderful craft of yours."

"With all due deference to the Naval Council," said "K. of K," rather
bluntly, "it's a pity they didn't put down a dozen of her. But what
about these oysters that you telegraphed to Mr Lennard about?"

"There is only one oyster in question at present, my lord," said Denis,
with an entirely Irish smile, "but it's rather a big one. It's the
German Emperor's yacht, the _Hohenzollern_. She managed to run across,
and get into Ramsgate, while we were up here in the Thames--that's the
worst of there being only one of us, as we can only attend to one piece
of business at a time. Now, she's lying there waiting the Kaiser's
orders, in case he wants to take a trip across, and it seems to me that
she'd be worth the watching for a day or two--she'd be a big prize, you
know, gentlemen, especially if we could catch her with the War Lord of
Germany on board her. I don't think myself that His Majesty would have
any great taste for a trip to the bottom of the North Sea, just when he
thinks he's beginning the conquest of England so nicely, and, by the
Powers, we'd send him there if he got into one of his awkward tempers
with us."

Lord Kitchener, who was in England acting as Chief-of-the-Staff to the
Duke of Connaught, and general adviser to the Council of National
Defence, took Lord Whittinghame to the other end of the room, and said
a few words to him in a low tone, and he came back and said:

"It is certainly worth trying, even if you can only catch the ship; but
we don't think you'll catch the Kaiser. The fact is, you seem to have
established such a holy terror in these waters that I don't think he
would trust his Imperial person between here and Germany. If he did go
across, he'd probably go in an airship. But if you can bring the
_Hohenzollern_ up to Tilbury--of course, under the German flag--I think
we shall be able to make good use of her. If she won't come, sink her."

"Very good, my lords," said Denis, saluting. "If she's not coming up the
Thames to-morrow night with the _Ithuriel_ under her stern, ye'll know
that she's on the bottom in pieces somewhere. And now," he continued,
taking a long envelope from an inner pocket, "here is the full report of
our doings since the war began, with return of ships sunk, crippled and
escaped; number of men landed, and so on, according to instructions. We
will report again to-morrow night, I hope, with the _Hohenzollern_."

They shook hands and wished him good-night and good luck, and in half an
hour the _Ithuriel_ was running half-submerged eastward along the coast,
and the motor was on its way to Faversham by the northern road, as there
were certain reasons why it should not go back through Canterbury.


CHAPTER XXIX

THE LION WAKES


At daybreak on the nineteenth, to the utter amazement of everyone who
was not "in the know," the Imperial yacht, _Hohenzollern_, was found off
Tilbury, flying the Imperial German Ensign and the Naval flag, as well
as a long string of signals ordering the aërial bombardment of London to
cease, and all the _Flying Fishes_ to return at once to Canterbury.

The apparent miracle had been accomplished in an absurdly easy fashion.
About nine a.m. on the eighteenth a German orderly went into the
post-office at Dover and handed in an official telegram signed "Von
Roon," ordering the _Hohenzollern_ to come round at once to Dover, as
she was considered too open to attack there.

There was something so beautifully natural and simple in the whole
proceeding that, although there were about a dozen German officers and
non-commissioned officers in the room at the time that the orderly came
and went without suspicion, the telegram was taken by the clerk, read
and initialled by the Censor, and passed.

A few minutes later the orderly, marching in perfectly correct German
fashion and carrying a large yellow envelope, walked out through the
town northwards and climbed the hill to the eastward of the ruined
castle. The envelope with its official seal took him past the sentries
without question, but, instead of delivering it, he turned down a bypath
to Fan Bay, under the South Foreland, gained the beach, took off his
uniform in a secluded spot under the cliffs, and went for a swim. The
uniform was never reclaimed, for when he reached the submerged
_Ithuriel_ Denis Castellan had a rub down and put his own on.

The captain of the _Hohenzollern_ was only too glad to obey the order,
for he also thought that it would be better protected from the dreaded
ocean terror in Dover, so he lost no time in obeying the order; with the
result that, just as he was entering the deserted Downs, the said terror
met him and ordered him to the right-about under pain of instant
sinking.

After that the rest was easy. The captain and officers raged and
stormed, but not even German discipline would have prevented a mutiny if
they had not surrendered. It was known that the _Ithuriel_ took no
prisoners. In five minutes after the irresistible ram had hit them they
would be at the bottom of the sea, and so the Hohenzollern put about and
steamed out into the North Sea, with the three wicked forward guns
trained upon her, and the ram swirling smoothly through the water fifty
yards from her stern.

At nightfall the course was altered for the mouth of the Thames. And so,
with all lights out and steered by a thin shifting ray from her captor's
conning-tower, the Kaiser's yacht made its strange way to Tilbury.

The instant she dropped her anchor a couple of destroyers ran out from
the Gravesend shore and ranged alongside her. The next minute a British
captain and three lieutenants followed by a hundred bluejackets had
boarded her. The German Commander and his officers gave up their swords,
devoutly hoping that they would never meet their War Lord again, and so
the incident ended.

It will be easily understood that the Kaiser was about the most
infuriated man in the United Kingdom when the _Flying Fishes_ arrived at
Canterbury and the Commander of the squadron described the arrival of
the _Hohenzollern_ in the Thames and asked for orders.

In the first place no one knew better than William the Second how
priceless was the prize won by the impudent audacity of these two young
British sailors. In his private apartments on board there were his own
complete plans of the campaign--not only for the conquest of Britain,
but afterwards for the dismemberment of the British Empire, and its
partition among the Allies--exact accounts of the resources of the chief
European nations in men, money and ships, plans of fortifications, and
even drafts of treaties. In fact, it was such a haul of Imperial and
International secrets as had never been made before; and that evening
the British Cabinet held in their possession enough diplomatic
explosives to blow the European league of nations to pieces.

Erskine and Castellan were honoured by an autograph letter from the
King, thanking them heartily for their splendid services up to the
present stage of the war, and wishing them all good luck for the future.
Then the _Ithuriel_ slipped down the Thames, towing half a dozen
shabby-looking barges behind her, and for some days she disappeared
utterly from human ken.

What she was really doing during these days was this. These barges and
several others which she picked up now and then were filled with
ammunition for her guns and fuel for her engines, and she dropped them
here and there in obscure creeks and rock-bound bays from Newcastle to
the Clyde, where they lay looking like abandoned derelicts, until such
times as they might be wanted.

Meanwhile, very soon after the loss of the _Hohenzollern_, the Kaiser
received two messages which disquieted him very seriously. One of these
came by airship from Potsdam. It was an exhaustive report upon the
papers which Lennard had left with him on that momentous night as it
turned out to be, on which the War Lord had rejected the ultimatum of
the Man of Peace. It was signed by Professor Döllinger and endorsed by
four of the greatest astronomers of Germany.

Briefly put, its substance amounted to this: Mr Lennard's calculations
were absolutely correct, as far as they went. Granted the existence of
such a celestial body as he designated _Alpha_ in the document, and its
position _x_ on the day of its alleged discovery; its direction and
speed designated _y_ and _z_, then at the time of contact designated
_n_, it would infallibly come into contact with the earth's atmosphere,
and the consequences deduced would certainly come to pass, viz., either
the earth would combine with it, and be transformed into a
semi-incandescent body, or the terrestrial atmosphere would become a
fire mist which would destroy all animal and vegetable life upon the
planet within the space of a few minutes.

The second communication was a joint-note from the Emperor of Austria,
the President of the Hague Council, the President of the French
Republic, and the Tsar of Russia, protesting against the bombardment of
London or any other defenceless town by the airships. The note set forth
that these were purely engines of war, and ought not to be used for
purposes of mere terrorism and murder. Their war employment on land or
water, or against fortified positions, was perfectly legitimate, but
against unarmed people and defenceless towns it was held to be contrary
to all principles of humanity and civilisation, and it was therefore
requested by the signatories that, in order to prevent serious
differences between the Allies, it should cease forthwith.

The result of this communication was of course a Council of War, which
was anything but a harmonious gathering, especially as several of the
older officers agreed with the tone of it, and told the Kaiser plainly
that they considered that there was quite enough in the actual business
of war for the _Flying Fishes_ to do; and the Chancellor did not
hesitate to express the opinion that the majority of the peoples of
Europe, and possibly large numbers of their own soldiers, who, after
all, were citizens first and soldiers afterwards, would strongly resent
such operations, especially when it became known that the Emperor's own
Allies had protested against it; the result of the Council was that
William the Second saw that he was clearly in a minority, and had the
good sense to issue a General Order there and then that all aërial
bombardments, save as part of an organised attack, should cease from
that day.

The events of the next twenty days were, as may well be imagined, full
of momentous happenings, which it would require hundreds of pages to
describe in anything like detail, and therefore only quite a brief
sketch of them can be given here. This will, however, be sufficient to
throw a clear light upon the still more stupendous events which were to
follow.

In consequence of the almost incredible destruction and slaughter during
these first four awful days and nights of the war, both sides had lost
the command of the sea, and the capture of the _Hohenzollern_ in broad
daylight less than a dozen miles from the English coast had produced
such a panic among the rank and file of the invaders, and the
reinforcements of men waiting on the other side of the Channel and the
North Sea, that communication save by airship had practically stopped.

The consequence of this was that, geographically, the Allied armies,
after the release of the prisoners from Portsmouth and Folkestone,
amounted to some three million men of all arms, with half a million
horses, and two thousand guns--it will be remembered that a vast number
of horses, guns and stores had gone to the bottom in the warships which
the _Ithuriel_ had sunk--were confined within a district bounded by the
coast-line from Ramsgate to the Needles, and thence by a line running
north to Southampton; thence, across Hampshire to Petersfield, and via
Horsham, Tunbridge Wells, Ashford, and over Canterbury, back to
Ramsgate.

In view of the defeat and destruction of the expedition against London,
the troops that had been thrown forward to Chatham and Rochester to
co-operate with it were re-called, and concentrated between Ashford and
Canterbury. The rest of England, Scotland and Ireland was to the present
a closed country to them. The blockade on Swansea and Liverpool had been
raised by the _Ithuriel_, and there was nothing to prevent any amount of
supplies from the west and south being poured in through half a hundred
ports.

Thus the dream of starving the British Islands out had been dissipated
at a stroke. True, the dockyards of Devonport and Milford Haven had been
destroyed by the airships, but copies of the plans of the _Ithuriel_ had
been sent to Liverpool, Barrow, Belfast, the Clyde and the Tyne, and
hundreds of men were working at them night and day. Scores of
battleships, cruisers and destroyers, belonging both to Britain and
other countries, which were nearing completion, were being laboured at
with feverish intensity, so that they might be fitted for sea in
something like fighting trim; submarines were being finished off by
dozens, and Thorneycroft's and Yarrow's yards were, like the rest,
working to their full capacity.

The blind frenzy of rage which had swept like an epidemic over the whole
kingdom during the first days of disaster had died away and in its place
had come the quiet but desperate resolve that if Britain was to be
conquered she should be depopulated as well.

All male employment, save that which was necessary to produce coal and
iron, to keep the shipyards and the gun factories going, and the
shipping on the west coast running, was stopped. In thousands of cases,
especially in the north, the places of the men were taken by the women;
and, in addition to these, every woman and girl, from the match-girls of
Whitechapel to the noblest and wealthiest in the land, found some work
to do in the service of their country.

Every day, thousands and tens of thousands of the sons of England,
Scotland, Ireland and Wales were taken in hand by "Mr Sergeant
What's-'is-Name," and drilled into shape with miraculous speed; and
every day, as detachment after detachment went to the battle front,
which now extended from North Foreland to Portland Bill, the magic of
patriotism and the long-inherited habits of order and obedience changed
the raw recruit into the steady-nerved, strong-hearted soldier, who
learnt his duty in the grim school of battle, and was ready to do it to
the end.

In less than a month Britain had become a military nation. It seemed at
the time and afterwards a miracle, but it was merely the outcome of
perfectly natural causes.

After all, every British man has a strain of fighting blood in him. Even
leaving out his ancient ancestry, he remains the descendant of families
who have given soldier-sons to their country during five hundred years
of almost ceaseless war in one part of the world or the other. He is
really born with battle-smoke in his nostrils, and the beat of the
battle-drum in his heart--and he knows that, neither on land nor sea has
he ever been finally beaten.

Remember, too, that this was to him a holy war, the holiest in which the
sword can be drawn. He was fighting for freedom, for the possession of
his land, for the protection of wife and child and kindred, and the
heritage which his fathers of old time had handed down to him. Was it
any wonder, then, that within the space of a few weeks the peaceful
citizens of Britain, like the fabled harvest of the dragon's teeth,
seemed to spring as men full-armed from the very ground? Moreover, this
was no skirmishing with sharpshooters over a vast extent of country, six
thousand miles away from home, as it had been in South Africa. This was
home itself. There was no right or wrong here, nothing for politicians
to wrangle about for party purposes. Here, in a little corner of little
England, two mighty hosts were at death-grips day and night, the one
fighting for all that is dearest and most sacred to the heart of man;
and the other to save itself from what could be nothing less than
irretrievable disaster.


CHAPTER XXX

MR PARMENTER SAYS


Happily for the defenders of Britain the fleet of aërial submarines,
from which so much had been expected for offensive purposes during the
proposed "triumphal march" on London, soon became of little or no use in
the field.

The reason was this: As, day after day and week after week, that awful
struggle continued, it became absolutely necessary for the Allies to
obtain men and material to make good the fearful losses which the valour
and devotion of what was now a whole nation in arms had inflicted upon
them, and so all but four were despatched to guard the route between
Dover and Calais--eight under the water and eight in the air--and so
make it possible for the transports to cross. Of course, this meant that
thousands of fresh men and hundreds of horses and guns could be poured
into Kent every day; but it also meant that the greater portion of the
defenders' most terrible foes were rendered harmless--and this was not
the least of the good work that the _Ithuriel_ had done.

Of course, that famous "sea-devil," as the invaders called her, was
mostly on the spot or thereabouts, and every now and then a crowded
transport would lurch over and go down, or a silent, flameless shot
would rise up out of some unknown part of the waters and a shell would
burst with a firmament-shaking concussion close to one of the
airships--after which the airship would burst with a still more
frightful shock and distribute herself in very small fragments through
the shuddering atmosphere; but this only happened every other day or so,
for Erskine and his lieutenant knew a good deal better than to run too
many risks, at least just now.

So, for twelve weeks of bitter, bloody and unsparing strife the grim,
unceasing struggle for the possession of the Capital of the World went
on, and when the eighteenth of March dawned, the outposts of the Allies
were still twelve to fourteen miles from the banks of the Thames. How
desperate had been that greatest of all defences since man had made war
on man may be dimly guessed from the fact that it cost the invaders two
months of incessant fighting and more than a million men before they
planted their guns along the ridges of the North Downs and the Surrey
Hills.

Meanwhile Gilbert Lennard passed his peaceful though anxious days
between Bolton and Whernside, while Auriole, Margaret Holker, Norah
Castellan and Mrs O'Connor, with hundreds of other heroines, were doing
their work of mercy in the hospital camps at the different bases behind
the fighting front. Lord Westerham, who had worked miracles in the way
of recruiting, was now in his glory as one of General French's Special
Service Officers, which, under such a Commander, is about as dangerous a
job as a man can find in the whole bloody business of war.

And still, as the pitiless human strife went on with its ceaseless
rattle of rifle fire, and the almost continuous roar of artillery, day
by day the Invader from Space grew bigger and brighter in the great
reflector, and day by day the huge cannon, which, in the decisive moment
of the world's fate, was to do battle with it, approached completion.

At midnight on the twelfth of March Tom Bowcock had announced that all
was ready for the casting. Lennard gave the order by electric signal.
The hundred converters belched their floods of glowing steel into what
had once been Great Lever pit; night was turned into day by a vast glow
that shot up to the zenith, and the first part of the great work was
accomplished.

At breakfast the next morning Lennard received the following cablegram
from Pittsburg:


     "All ready. Crossing fourteenth. Give particulars of comet away
     when you like. Pittsburg Baby doing well. How's yours?--PARMENTER."


In order to understand the full meaning of Mr Parmenter's curt cablegram
it will be necessary to go back for a little space to the day when he
made his hurried departure from the Clyde in the _Minnehaha_. It will be
remembered that he had that morning received a cablegram from New York.
This message had read thus:


     "Complete success at last. Craft built and tried. Action and speed
     perfect. Dollars out, hurry up.
                                                            "HINGESTON."


Now the signer of this cablegram, Newson Hingeston, was an old college
friend of Mr Parmenter's, and therefore a man of about his own age. He
was a born mathematician and engineer, and, like many another before
him, the dream of his life had been the conquest of the air by means of
vessels which flew as a bird flew, that is to say by their own inherent
strength, and without the aid of gas-bags or buoyancy chambers, which
he, like all the disciples of Nadar, Jules Verne, Maxim and Langley, had
looked upon as mere devices of quackery, or at the best, playthings of
rich people, who usually paid for their amusement with their lives.

His father died soon after he left college, and left him a comfortable
little estate on the north-western slopes of the Alleghanies, and a
fortune in cash and securities of a million dollars. The estate gave him
plenty to live upon comfortably, so he devoted his million to the
realisation of his ideal. Ratliffe Parmenter, who only had a few hundred
thousand dollars to begin with, laughed at him, but one day, after a
long argument, just as a sort of sporting bet, he signed a bond to pay
two million dollars for the first airship built by his friend that
should fly in any direction, independently of the wind, and carry a dead
weight of a ton in addition to a crew of four men.

Newson Hingeston registered the bond with all gravity, and deposited it
at his bank, and then their life-ways parted. Parmenter plunged into the
vortex of speculation, went under sometimes, but always came to the top
again with a few more millions in his insatiable grasp, and these
millions, after the manner of their kind, had made more millions, and
these still more, until he gave up the task of measuring the gigantic
pile and let it grow.

Meanwhile, his friend had spent the best twenty-five years of his life,
all his fortune, and every dollar he could raise on his estate, in
pursuit of the ideal which he had reached a few minutes later than the
eleventh hour. Then he had sent that cable. Of course, he wanted the two
millions, but what had so suddenly happened in England had instantly
convinced him that he was now the possessor of an invention which many
millions would not buy, and which might decide the fate of the world.

Within twelve hours of his arrival at his friend's house, Ratliffe
Parmenter was entirely convinced that Newson Hingeston had been
perfectly justified in calling him across the Atlantic, for the very
good reason that he spent the greater part of the night taking flying
leaps over the Alleghanies, nerve-shuddering dives through valleys and
gorges, and vast, skimming flights over dim, half-visible plains and
forests to the west, soaring and swooping, twisting and turning at
incredible speeds, in fact, doing everything that any bird that ever
flew could do.

When they got back to the house, just as dawn was breaking, and Mr
Parmenter had shaken hands with Hiram Roker, a long, lean, slab-sided
Yankee, who was Hingeston's head engineer and general manager, and had
fought the grim fight through failure to success at his side for twenty
years, he said to his friend:

"Newson, you've won, and I guess I'll take that bond up, and I'd like to
do a bit more than that. You know what's happening over the other side.
There's got to be an Aërial Navigation Trust formed right away,
consisting of you, myself and Hiram there, and Max Henchell, my partner,
and that syndicate has to have twenty of these craft of yours, bigger if
possible, afloat inside three months. The syndicate will commence at
once with a capital of fifty millions, and there'll be fifty more behind
that if wanted."

"It's a great scheme," Hingeston replied slowly, "but I'm afraid the
time's too short."

"Time!" exclaimed Mr Parmenter. "Who in thunder thinks about time when
dollars begin to talk? You just let me have all your plans and sections,
drawings and the rest of your fixings in time to catch the ten o'clock
train to Pittsburg. I'll run up and talk the matter over with Henchell.
The War Department shifted the responsibility, and declared that no
reason existed; that the place was provisioned and impregnable, and
that the responsibility rested alone with the officer in command, who was
now a prisoner with his whole force.

This hardly satisfied the public clamor; and so ill-omened a commencement
augured badly for the success of the campaign for position, in which
both armies were now manoeuvring. The real details of these preliminary
movements are scarcely clear to this day. General Bragg's friends
declare that he forced Rosecrans to the position; his enemies,
that Rosecrans first out-generaled him and then laid himself open
to destruction, while Bragg took no advantage of the situation.

However this may be, we know that on the morning of the 19th September,
'63, the battle of Chickamauga was commenced by the enemy in a series
of obstinate division engagements, rather than in a general battle; Bragg's
object being to gain the Chattanooga road in the enemy's rear, and his
to prevent it. The fighting was heavy, stubborn and fierce, and
its brunt was borne by Walker, Hood and Cleburne. Night fell on an
undecided field, where neither had advantage; and the enemy perhaps had
suffered more heavily than we.

All that night he worked hard to strengthen his position; and our
attack--which was to have commenced just at dawn--was delayed from some
misapprehension of orders. At length Breckinridge and Cleburne
opened the fight, and then it raged with desperate, bloody obstinacy,
until late afternoon.

At that time the Confederate right had been repulsed; but
Longstreet's left had driven the enemy before it. Then the whole southern
line reformed; moving with steady, resistless sweep upon the confident
enemy. He fought obstinately--wavered--rallied--then broke again
and fled toward Chattanooga. The rout was complete and the enemy so
demoralized that Longstreet--feeling that he could be crushed while
panic-struck--ordered Wheeler to intercept his flight. It was stated that
Longstreet's order was countermanded by General Bragg; but--whatever
the reason--there was no pursuit!

The fruits of the hard-won victory were 8,000 prisoners, 50 pieces of
artillery, near 20,000 muskets--_plus_ a loss of life barren of results.
For, instead of crushing the enemy and completely relieving the state
and the Georgia frontier, the failure to press Rosecrans at the
moment left him free communication with his rear and full time to
recuperate.

Instead of pressing on, General Bragg took position on Missionary Ridge;
and criticism of the hour declared that he thus invested the Federals in
the town, which--by a rapid advance--might already have been his,
without a fight.

It is neither the intent, nor within the scope of these papers--even
did their author possess the ability for it--to enter into detailed
criticism of military events; far less to reopen those acrimonious
partisanships, so bootless at the time and worse than useless now.

But, to comprehend the state of public feeling at the South, it is
essential to have the plain data, upon which it was based; and to have
plainly stated the causes to which popular opinion ascribed certain
results.

After Chickamauga, there was very general--and seemingly not causeless--discontent.
The eternal policy of massing great armies, at any sacrifice; fighting
terrible battles; and then failing to close the grasp upon their
fruits--apparently already in hand--had worn public patience so
threadbare, that it refused to regard Chickamauga as anything more
than another of those aimless killings, which had so often drenched
the West, to no avail.

Strong and open expression was made of the popular wish for General Bragg's
removal; but Mr. Davis refused--as ever--to hear the people's voice,
in a matter of policy. He retained General Bragg, and the people held
him responsible for what they claimed was the result--Lookout Mountain!

_Fas est ab hoste doceri._ Public clamor at the North declared that
loss of command should reward Rosecrans for loss of the battle;
and, in mid-October, he was superseded by General Grant.

Like all popular heroes of the war, Grant had become noted, rather
through hard-hitting than strategic combination. His zenith was mounted
on the capture of Vicksburg; a project which northern generals denounced
as bad soldiership and possible of success, only through an enemy's
weakness.

At this time, he was certainly not in high estimation of his own army,
because of dogged disregard of loss in useless assaults; and it will
be recalled that General McClernand was court-martialed for his
declaration that he "could not be expected to furnish brains for the
whole army!" The estimate of Grant's compeers is not refuted by any
evidence in the War Department that, from Shiloh to Appomattox,
he ever made one combination stamped by mark of any soldiership,
higher than courage and bull-dog tenacity.

Even scouting the generally-accepted idea, in the army of Vicksburg and
later in that of Chattanooga--that McPherson provided plans and details
of his campaigns; and dismissing McClernand's costly taunt as mere
epigram--this was the accepted estimate of General Grant's tactical
power.

But he inaugurated his command at Chattanooga with boldness and vigor.

He concentrated 25,000 troops in the town; opened his communications; and
then--to prevent any possible movement flanking him out of them--boldly
took the initiative.

Meantime, Longstreet had been detached by General Bragg, for that
badly-provided, badly-digested and wholly ill-starred expedition
to Knoxville; one which seemed to prove that the history of misfortune
was ever to repeat itself, in impracticable diversions at precisely
the wrong time.

For, even had this corps not been badly equipped and rationed, while almost
wholly lacking in transportation, it certainly depleted a
daily-weakening army, in the face of one already double its numbers
and daily increasing.

On November 18th--spite of management that forced him to subsist
on precarious captures--Longstreet reached the enemy's advanced
lines, at Knoxville; drove him into the city and completely isolated
him from communication.

Capitulation was a mere matter of time; but disastrous news from
the main army drove the Confederate to the alternative of assault,
or retreat.

Choosing the former, he made it with the same desperate gallantry displayed
at Gettysburg, or Corinth; illustrated by brilliant, but unavailing,
personal prowess. The strength of the enemy's works--and openness of
approach, with wire netting interlaced among the stumps of the new
clearing, was too much for the southern soldiers. Several times they
reached the works, fighting hand-to-hand; but finally Longstreet
fell back, in good order and carrying his subsistence.

He chose his own line of retreat, too; and with such good judgment as
to be within reach of any new combination of Bragg--from whom he was
now cut off--or, failing that, to keep his rear open through Virginia,
to Lee's army.

Meantime, Grant massed troops in Chattanooga, sufficient in his judgment
to crush Bragg; and, learning of the latter's detachment of Longstreet's
corps, determined to strike early and hard. On the 25th he attacked with
his whole force, in two grand columns under Thomas, Sherman and
Hooker.

The little southern army of less than forty thousand was judiciously
posted; having advantage of being attacked. The terrible shock of the
double attack was successfully repulsed on the right by Hardee, on the
left by Buckner. Broken, reeling--shattered--he was hurled back, only
to form again with splendid courage. Once more checked and
driven back, after desperate fighting on both sides, the Federals
made a third advance with steady, dogged valor.

Then constancy was rewarded; they broke the Confederate center; swung
it in disorder upon the wings; and, holding the ground so hotly won,
had the key to the position.

Still the day was not wholly lost to the South, had her men not given
way to causeless panic. Left and right followed center--lost all order
and fell back almost in flight. Then the scattered and demoralized
army was saved from utter ruin, only by the admirable manner in which
Cleburne covered that rout-like retreat, day after day; finally beating
back Thomas' advance so heavily that pursuit was abandoned.

Missionary Ridge cost the South near 8,000 men; all the Chickamauga
artillery and more; and the coveted key-position to the situation. But
it cost, besides, what could even less be spared; some slight abatement
in the popular confidence in our troops, under all trials heretofore.

Reasoning from their dislike to General Bragg, people and press
declared that the men had been badly handled through the whole
campaign; yet--so inured were they to the ragged boys fighting
successfully both the enemy and our own errors--there came general
bad augury from the panic of Missionary Ridge.

Mr. Davis had visited Bragg's army, after the howl that went up on his
failure to press Rosecrans. On his return, the President appeared satisfied
and hopeful; he authorized statement that the delay after Chickamauga
was simply strategic; and the impression went abroad that Bragg
and he had affected combinations now, which would leave Grant only the
choice between retreat and destruction.

If these tactics meant the detaching of Longstreet--said thoughtful
critics--then are combination and suicide convertible terms!

Neither was public feeling much cheered by the aspect of the war
in Virginia. Lee and Meade coquetted for position, without definite
result; the former--weakened by Longstreet's absence--striving to slip
between Meade and Washington; the latter aiming to flank and mass behind
Lee, on one of the three favorite routes to Richmond. The fall and
winter wore away with these desultory movements; producing many a
sharp skirmish, but nothing more resultful.

These offered _motif_ for display of dash and military tact on both
sides; that at Kelly's Ford, on the Rapidan--where the Federals
caught the Confederates unprepared--showing the hardest hitting with
advantage on the Union side. The compliment was exchanged, by a
decisive southern success at Germania Ford; but the resultless fighting
dispirited and demoralized the people, while it only harassed and
weakened the army.

Both looked to the great shock to come; forces for which were gathering,
perhaps unseen and unheard, yet felt by that morbid prescience which comes
in the supreme crises of life.

The trans-Mississippi was now absolutely cut off from participation in the
action of the eastern Confederacy; almost equally so from communication
with it. Still that section held its own, in the warfare peculiar to
her people and their situation.

Quick concentrations; sharp, bloody fights--skirmishes in extent,
but battles in exhibition of pluck and endurance--were of constant
occurrence. Kirby Smith--become almost a dictator through failure of
communication--administered his department with skill, judgment and
moderation. Husbanding his internal resources, he even established--in
the few accessible ports, defiant of blockade--a system of foreign
supply; and "Kirby Smithdom"--as it came to be called--was, at this
time, the best provisioned and prepared of the torn and stricken sections
of the Confederacy.

Note has been made of the improvement of Federal cavalry; and of their
raids, that struck terror and dismay among the people.

During the winter of '63-'64, Averill penetrated the heart of Virginia,
scattering destruction in his path; and, though he retired before cavalry
sent to pursue him--he even shot his horses as they gave out, in the
forced flight--his expedition had accomplished its object. It had
proved that no point of harassed territory was safe from Federal
devastation; that the overtaxed and waning strength of the South was
insufficient to protect them now!

Gradually--very gradually--this blight of doubt and dissatisfaction began
to affect the army; and--while it was no longer possible to fill
their places by new levies--some of the men already at the front began
to skulk, and even to desert.

Though still uncondoned, the crime of these was roughly urged upon
them; for imagination brought to the ears of all, the shriek of the
distant wife, insulted by the light of her burning roof and turned starving
and half-clothed, into the snowy midnight! And all the more honor was
it to the steadfast that they held out--dogged but willing--to the
bitter end; fighting as man had not fought before--not only against
their enemy--not only against their own natural impulses--but against
hope, as well!

For the mass of that grand, tattered and worn army never faltered; and
only their enduring patriotism--backed as it was by selfless energy
of their home people--availed to make up for the lost opportunities
of the Government!

In Congress was vacillation, discord, vacuity; while the people were
goaded to the absurd charge, that some of its members were traitors!
But the great diplomat has graven the truth, that an error may be worse
than a crime; and the errors of the Confederate Congress--from _alpha_
to _omega_--were born of weakness and feeble grasp on the prompt
occasions of a great strife, like this which so submerged their
littleness.

It is in some sort at the door of Congress that the head of the government,
harassed by overwork, distracted by diverse trifles--each one too vital
to entrust to feeble subordinates; buffeted by the gathering surge
without and dragged down by the angry undertow within, lost his influence,
and with it his power to save!

The beginning of the end had come upon the South. Her stoutest and bravest
hearts still,
"Like muffled drums, were beating Funeral marches to the grave!"

CHAPTER XXXV.

THE UPPER AND NETHER MILLSTONES.

From the earliest moment General Grant assumed command in the West, the
old idea of bisecting the Confederacy seems to have monopolized
his mind.

     The oft-tried theory of "drilling the heart of the Rebellion"--by
     cutting through to the Atlantic seaboard--had never been lost sight
     of, but in Grant's hands it was to be given practical power and
     direction.
     
     To effect that object, it was essential to make North Georgia the
objective point; and North Georgia--now as ever--offered a stubborn
and well-nigh insurmountable barrier.

     But the northern War Department was now fully impressed with the
     importance of crushing the spine of the Confederacy; and the fact
     was as clearly realized in the North, as in the South, that the
     vital cord of Confederate being ran from Atlanta to Richmond!
     Therefore, every facility of men and material was furnished
     the commander, who at that moment stood out--in reflected lights
     from Vicksburg and Missionary Ridge--as the military oracle of the
     North; and he was urged to press this design of the campaign to a
     vigorous and speedy issue.
     
     During the winter of 1863-64, General Grant incubated his grand
scheme, and with the month of February brought forth a quadruple
brood of ridiculous mice.

     His plan--in itself a good and sound one--was to secure a permanent
     base nearer than the Mississippi. To accomplish this he must
     first secure Mobile, as a water base, and connect that with some
     defensible point inland. At the same time that this attempt was
     made--and while the troops guarding the passway into Georgia might
     be diverted--Thomas, commanding the Chattanooga lines, was to
advance against that point.

     The plan was undoubtedly sound, but the general's want of balance
     caused him to overweight it, until its own ponderousness was its
     destruction. On the 1st of February, Sherman, with a
     splendidly-appointed force of 35,000 infantry, and corresponding
     cavalry and artillery, marched out of Vicksburg; to penetrate
     to Mobile, or some other point more accessible, on the line of
     the proposed new base. Simultaneously a heavy force approached the
     city from New Orleans; Smith and Grierson, with a strong body of
     cavalry, penetrated Northern Mississippi; and Thomas made his
demonstration referred to.

     Any candid critic will see that four converging columns, to be
     effective, should never have operated so far away from their point
     of convergence, and so far separated from each other. The enterprise
     was gigantic; but its awkwardness equaled its strength, and its own
     weight broke its back.
     
     Sherman, harassed by cavalry and skirmishers--advanced in solid
column; while Polk, with his merely nominal force, was unable to
meet him.

     But the latter fell back in good order; secured his supplies, and
     so retarded his stronger adversary, that he saved all the rolling-stock
     of the railroads. When he evacuated Meridian, that lately busy
     railroad center was left a worthless prize to the captor.
     
     Meantime Forrest had harassed the cavalry force of Smith and
     Grierson, with not one-fourth their numbers; badly provided and
     badly mounted.
     Yet he managed to inflict heavy loss and retard the enemy's march;
     but finally--unable to wait the junction of S. D. Lee, to give
     the battle he felt essential--Forrest, on the 20th February, faced
     the Federal squadrons. Confident of an easy victory over the ragged
     handful of dismounted skirmishers, the picked cavalry dashed gaily
on.

     Charge after charge was received only to be broken--and Forrest was
     soon in full pursuit of the whipped and demoralized columns.
     Only once they turned, were heavily repulsed, and then continued
     their way to Memphis.
     
     This check of his co-operating column and the utter fruitlessness
     of his own march, induced a sudden change of Sherman's intent. He
     fell rapidly back to Vicksburg; his army perhaps more worn, broken
and demoralized by the desultory attentions of ours, than it would
have been by a regular defeat.

     Meantime the New Orleans-Pensacola expedition had danced on and
     off Mobile without result. Thomas had been so heavily repulsed
     on the 25th, that he hastily withdrew to his lines at Chickamauga--and
     the great campaign of General Grant had resulted in as insignificant
     a fizz as any costly piece of fireworks the war produced.
     

     On the contrary, history will give just meed to Forrest, Lee
     and Polk for their efficient use of the
                                                       handfuls of ill-provided men, with whom alone they could oppose
separate and organized armies.

They saved Alabama and Georgia--and so, for the time, saved the
Confederacy.

There could be no doubt that the sole safety of the invading columns
was their numerical weakness.

General Grant's practice of a perfectly sound theory was clearly
a gross blunder; and had Polk been in command of two divisions more--had
Lee been able to swoop where he only hovered--or had Forrest's ragged
boys been only doubled in number--the story told in Vicksburg would have
been even less flattering to the strategic ability of the
commander.

As it was, he had simply made a bad failure, and given the South two
months' respite from the crushing pressure he was yet to apply. For the
pet scheme of the North was but foiled--not ruined; and her whole power
sang but the one refrain--_Delenda est Atlanta!_
And those two months could not be utilized to much effect by the
South.
Worn in resources, supplies--in everything but patient endurance, she
still came forth from the dark doubts the winter had raised, hopeful, if
not confident; calm, if conscious of the portentous clouds lowering
upon her horizon.

Meanwhile, Grant, elevated to a lieutenant-generalcy, had been transferred
to the Potomac frontier; and men, money, supplies--without stint or
limit--had been placed at his disposal.

On the 1st February, Mr. Lincoln had called for 500,000 men; and on
the 14th March for 200,000 more!

General Grant, himself, testified to the absolute control given him, in
a letter to Mr. Lincoln, under date of 1st May, '64--from Culpeper
C.
H., which concludes: "I have been astonished at the readiness with
which everything asked for has been granted without any explanation
being asked.

Should my success be less than I desire and expect, the least I can say
is, that the fault is not with you."
With these unlimited resources, he was given almost unlimited power; and
the jubilant North crowed as loudly as it had before Manassas, the
Seven Days, or Fredericksburg.

In Richmond all was quiet.Still, after all, I suppose I mustn't blame him too much,
for wasn't I in just the same mind myself once--to save the world if she
would make it heaven for me, to--well--turn it into the other place if
she wouldn't. But she very soon cured me of that madness.

"I wonder if she could cure this scoundrel if she condescended to try,
which I am pretty certain she would not. I wonder what she'll look like
when she reads this letter. I've never seen her angry yet, but I know
she would look magnificent. Well, I shall do nothing till Mr Parmenter
gets back. Still, it's a pity that I've got to gravitate between here
and Bolton for the next seven weeks. If I wasn't, I'd ask him for one of
those airships and I'd hunt John Castellan through all the oceans of air
till I ran him down and smashed him and his ship too!"

At this moment the butler came to him and informed him that his dinner
was ready and to ask him what wine he would drink.

"Thank you, Simmons," he replied. "A pint of that excellent Burgundy of
yours, please. By the way, have the papers come yet?"

"Just arrived, sir," said Mr Simmons, making the simple announcement
with all the dignity due to the butler to a millionaire.

He went at once into the dining-room and opened the second edition of
the _Times_, which was sent every day to Settle by train and thence by
motor-car to Whernside House.

Of course he turned first to the "Latest Intelligence" column. It was
headed, as he half expected it to be, "The Great Turning Movement: The
Enemy in Possession of Aldershot and advancing on Reading."

The account itself was one of those admirable combinations of brevity
and impartiality for which the leading journal of the world has always
been distinguished. What Lennard read ran as follows:

"Four months have now passed since the invading forces of the Allies,
after destroying the fortifications of Portsmouth and Dover by means
never yet employed in warfare, set foot on English soil. There have been
four months of almost incessant fighting, of heroic defence and
dearly-bought victory, but, although it is not too much to say in sober
language that the defending troops, regulars, militia, yeomanry and
volunteers, have accomplished what have seemed to be something like
miracles of valour and devotion, the tide of conquest has nevertheless
flowed steadily towards London.

"Considering the unanimous devotion with which the citizens of this
country, English, Scotch, Irish and Welsh, have taken up arms for the
defence of their Motherland, there can be no doubt but that, if the war
had been fought under ordinary conditions, the tide of invasion would by
this time have been rolled back to our coasts in spite of the admitted
superiority of the invaders in the technical operations of warfare, and
their enormous advantage in numbers to begin with. But the British
forces have had to fight under conditions which have never before been
known in warfare. Their enemies have not been only those of the land and
sea: they have had to fight foes capable of raining destruction upon
them from the air as well, and it may well be believed that the leaders
of the invading hosts would be the first to admit that without this
enormous advantage not even the progress that they have so far made
would have been possible.

"The glories of Albuera and Waterloo, of Inkermann and Balaklava, have
over and over again been eclipsed by the whole-souled devotion of the
British soldiery, fighting, as no doubt every man of them believes, with
their backs to the wall, not for ultimate victory perhaps but for the
preservation of those splendid traditions which have been maintained
untarnished for over a thousand years. It is no exaggeration to say that
of all the wars in the history of mankind this has been the deadliest
and the bloodiest. Never, perhaps, has so tremendous an attack been
delivered, and never has such an attack been met by so determined a
resistance. Still, having due regard to the information at our disposal,
it would be vain to deny that, tremendous as the cost must have been,
the victory so far lies with the invaders.

"After a battle which has lasted almost continuously for a fortnight; a
struggle in which battalion after battalion has fought itself to a
standstill and the last limits of human endurance have been reached, the
fact remains that the enemy have occupied the whole line of the North
Downs, Aldershot has ceased to be a British military camp, and is now
occupied by the legions of Germany, France and Austria.

"Russia, in spite of the disastrous defeat of the united German and
Russian expedition against Sheerness, Tilbury and Woolwich, is now
preparing a force for an attack on Harwich which, if it is not defeated
by the same means as that upon the Thames was defeated by, will have
what we may frankly call the deplorable effect of diverting a large
proportion of the defenders of London from the south to the north, and
this, unless some other force, at present unheard of, is brought into
play in aid of the defenders, can only result in the closing of the
attack round London--and after that must come the deluge.

"That this is part of a general plan of operations appears to be quite
clear from the desperate efforts which the French, German and Austrian
troops are making to turn the position of General French at Reading, to
outflank the British left which is resting on the hills beyond
Faversham, and, having thus got astride the Thames, occupy the
semicircle of the Chiltern Hills and so place the whole Thames valley
east of Reading at their mercy.

"In consequence of the ease with which the enemy's airships have
destroyed both telegraphic and railway communication, no definite
details are at present to hand. It is only known that since the attack
on Aldershot the fighting has not only been on a colossal scale, but
also of the most sanguinary description, with the advantage slowly but
surely turning in favour of the invaders. Such news as reaches us comes
entirely by despatch rider and aerogram. We greatly regret to learn,
through the former source, that yesterday evening Lord Westerham, the
last of the six special Service officers attached to General French's
staff, was either killed or captured in a gallant attempt to carry
despatches containing an accurate account of the situation up to date
from Reading to Windsor, whence it was to be transmitted by the
underground telephone cable to His Majesty at Buckingham Palace."

"That reads pretty bad," said Lennard, when Mr Simmons had left the
room, "especially Westerham being killed or taken prisoner; I don't like
that at all. I wish we'd been able to collar His Majesty of Germany on
that trip to Canterbury as Lord Kitchener suggested, and put him on
board the _Ithuriel_. He'd have made a very excellent hostage in a case
like this. I must say that, altogether, affairs do not look very
promising, and we've still two months all but a day or two. Well, if Mr
Parmenter doesn't get across with his aërial fleet pretty soon, I shall
certainly take steps to convince him and his Allies, who are fighting
for a few islands when the whole world is in peril, that my ultimatum
was anything but the joke he seemed to take it for."

He finished his wine, drank a cup of coffee and smoked a meditative
cigar in the library, and then went up to the observatory.

It was a lovely night from his point of view; clear, cool and almost
cloudless. The young moon was just rising to the eastward, and as he
looked up at that portion of the south-western sky from which the
Celestial Invader was approaching he could almost persuade himself that
he saw a dim ghostly shape of the Spectre from Space.

But when he got to the telescope the Spectre was no longer there. The
field of the great reflector was blank, save for the few far-away
star-mists, and here and there a dimly-distant star, already familiar to
him through many nights of watching.

What had happened? Had some catastrophe occurred in the outer realms of
Space in which some other world had been involved in fiery ruin, or had
the comet been dragged away from its orbit by the attraction of one of
those dead suns, those derelicts of Creation which, dark and silent,
drift for age after age through the trackless ocean of Immensity?

There was no cooler-headed man alive than Gilbert Lennard when it came
to a matter of his own profession and yet the world did not hold a more
frightened man than he was when he went to re-adjust the machinery which
regulated the movement of the great telescope, and so began his search
for the lost comet all over again. One thing only was certain--that the
slightest swerve from its course might make the comet harmless and send
it flying through Space millions of miles away from the earth, or bring
the threatening catastrophe nearer by an unknown number of days and
hours. And that was the problem, here, alone, and in the silence of the
night, he had to solve. The great gun at Bolton and the other at
Pittsburg might by this time be useless, or, worse still, they might not
be ready in time.

It was curious that, even face to face with such a terrific crisis, he
had enough human vanity left to shape a half regret that his
calculations would almost certainly be falsified.

That, however, was only the sensation of a moment. He ran rapidly over
his previous calculations, did about fifteen minutes very hard
thinking, and in thirty more he had found the comet. There it was: a few
degrees more to the northward, and more inclined to the plane of the
earth's orbit; brighter, and therefore nearer; and now the question was,
by how much?

Confronted with this problem, the man and the lover disappeared, and
only the mathematician and the calculating machine remained. He made his
notes and went to his desk. The next three hours passed without any
consciousness of existence save the slow ticking of the astronomical
clock which governed the mechanism of the telescope. The rest was merely
figures and formulæ, which might amount to the death-sentence of the
human race or to an indefinite reprieve.

When he got up from his desk he had learnt that the time in which it
might be possible to save humanity from a still impending fate had been
shortened by twelve days, and that the contact of the comet with the
earth's atmosphere would take place precisely at twelve o'clock,
midnight, on the thirtieth of April.

Then he went back to the telescope and picked up the comet again. Just
as he had got its ominous shape into the centre of the field a score of
other shapes drifted swiftly across it, infinitely vaster--huge winged
forms, apparently heading straight for the end of the telescope, and
only two or three yards away.

His nerves were not perhaps as steady as they would have been without
the shock which he had already received, and he shrank back from the
eye-piece as though to avoid a coming blow. Then he got up from his
chair and laughed.

"What an ass I am! That's Mr Parmenter's fleet; but what monsters they
do look through a telescope like this!"


CHAPTER XXXIII

MR PARMENTER RETURNS


Just at the north of the summit on the top of which the observatory was
built there was an oval valley, or perhaps it might be better described
as an escarpment, a digging away by the hand of Nature of a portion of
the mountain summit by means of some vast landslide or glacier action
thousands of years ago.

As he closed the door of the main entrance to the observatory behind
him, he saw these strange, winged shapes circling in the air some three
miles away, just dimly visible in the moonlight and starlight. They were
hovering about in middle air as though they were birds looking for a
foothold. He ran back, switched the electric current off the aerograph
machines at the base of the observatory, and turned it on to the
searchlight which was on the top of the equatorial dome. A great fan of
white light flashed out into the sky, he spelt out "Welcome" in the
dot-and-dash code, and then the searchlight fell upon the valley.

"Thanks," came the laconic answer from the foremost airship; and then
Lennard saw twenty-five winged shapes circle round the observatory and
drop to rest one by one in perfect order, just as a flock of swans might
have done, and, as the last came to earth, he turned the switch and shut
off the searchlight.

He walked down to the hollow, and in the dim light saw something that he
had hardly believed possible for human eyes to see. There, in a space
of, perhaps, a thousand yards long and five hundred yards wide, lay, in
a perfect oval, a fleet of ships. By all appearances they had no right
to be on land. There was no visible evidence that they could rise from
the solid earth after once touching it, any more than the albatross can
do from a ship's deck.

A light flashed out from a ship lying at the forward end of the ellipse
for a moment into the sky and then it swung slowly round until it rested
on the path from the observatory to the valley, and Lennard for a moment
felt himself blinded by its rays. Then it lifted and a most welcomely
familiar voice said:

"Well, Mr Lennard, here we are, you see, just a bit ahead of time, and
how's the comet?"

A ladder, obviously of American design, shot out from the side of the
airship as Mr Parmenter spoke, and as soon as the lower end touched the
ground he walked down it with his hand outstretched. Lennard walked to
the foot of the ladder and took his hand, and said in a low voice:

"This is all very wonderful, Mr Parmenter, but I am glad that you are
here ahead of time, because the comet is too; and very considerably, I
am sorry to say."

"Eh, what's that you say, Mr Lennard?" replied the millionaire in a
hurried whisper. "Nothing serious, I hope. We haven't come too late,
have we? I mean too late to stop the war and save the world."

"I don't know about stopping the war," replied Lennard, "but, if no
accident happens or is arranged for, we can save the world still, I
think."

"Accident arranged for?" echoed Mr Parmenter. "What do you mean by that?
Are you talking about John Castellan and those Flying Fish things of
his? I reckon we've got enough here to send him and his _Flying Fishes_
into the sea and make them stop there. We've heard all about what
they've been doing in the States, and I've got about tired of them. And
as for this old invasion of England, it's got to stop right away, or
we'll make more trouble for these Germans and Frenchmen and Russians
and Austrians than they ever dreamt of.

"Look at that fleet, sir. Twenty-five aërial battleships with a hundred
and fifty miles an hour speed in them. Here to London in one hour and
twenty-five minutes or less, and guns--you just take a look at those
exaggerated peashooters we've got on deck, and believe me, sir, that if
we get one of John Castellan's _Flying Fishes_ within six thousand yards
of the end of one of those things it will do no more flying, except in
very small pieces."

"I'm delighted to hear it, Mr Parmenter," replied Lennard, in a low
tone, "for to tell you the truth, we haven't many weeks left now.
Something that I can so far neither calculate nor explain has changed
the orbit of the comet and it's due here at midnight on the thirtieth of
April."

"Great Scott, and this is the nineteenth of March! Not six weeks! I
guess we'll have to hurry up with those cannons. I'll send a cable to
Pittsburg to-morrow. Anyhow, I reckon the comet can wait for to-night."

While Mr Parmenter had been speaking two other men had come down the
ladder from the deck of the airship and he continued:

"Now, let me introduce you. This is my old friend and college chum,
Newson Hingeston, the man who invented the model we built this fleet on.
This is Mr Hiram Roker, chief engineer of the fleet and Lord High
Admiral of the air, when Mr Hingeston is not running his own ships."

Lennard shook hands with Mr Hingeston and Hiram, and was going to say
very complimentary things about the fleet which had literally dropped
from the clouds, when Mr Parmenter interrupted him again and said:

"You'll excuse me, Mr Lennard, but you'll be better able to talk about
these ships when you've had a trip in one of them. We've just crossed
the Atlantic in thirty hours, above the clouds, and to-morrow night or
morning, if it's cloudy when we've been through things generally, we're
going to London in the flagship here--I've called her the _Auriole_,
because she is the daisy of the whole fleet--biggest, fastest and
prettiest. You just wait till you see her in daylight. Now we'll go down
to the house and hear your news. We're thirty hours behind the times."

It need hardly be said that no one went to bed for the remainder of that
night at Whernside. In one sense it was as busy a time as had been since
the war began. The private telephone and telegraph wires between
Whernside House and Settle and the aerograph apparatus at the
observatory were working almost incessantly till dawn, sending and
receiving messages between this remote moorland district and London and
the seat of war, as well as Bolton and Pittsburg.

The minutes and the hours passed swiftly, as all Fate-laden time does
pass, and so the grey morning of a momentous day dawned over the western
Yorkshire moors. Just as they were beginning to think about breakfast
one of Lennard's assistants came down from the observatory with a copy
of an aerogram which read:


     "Begins. PARMENTER, Whernside. Pleased to hear of your arrival.
     Proposition laid before His Majesty in Council and accepted. Hope
     to see you and your friends during the day.--CHAMBERLAIN. Ends."


"Well, I guess that's all right, gentlemen," said Mr Parmenter, as he
handed the aerogram across the big table littered with maps, plans and
drawings of localities terrestrial and celestial.

The aerogram passed round and Mr Parmenter continued: "You see,
gentlemen, although the United States has the friendliest of feelings
towards the British Empire, still, as the President told me the day
before yesterday, this invasion of Britain is not our fight, and he does
not see his way to making formal declaration of war; so he just gave me
a permit for these ships to leave American territory on what the
Russians and others call a scientific expedition in order to explore the
upper regions of the air and demonstrate the possibility of navigating
the air without using gas as lifting power--and that's just how we've
got here with our clearance papers and so on all in order; and that
means, gentlemen, that we are here, not as citizens of the United States
or any other country, but just as a trading company with something to
hire out.

"John Castellan, as you will remember from what has been said, sold his
_Flying Fishes_ to the German Emperor. Mr Lennard has proved to us by
Castellan's own handwriting that he is prepared to sell them back to the
British Government at a certain price--and that price is my daughter.
Our answer to that is the hiring of our fleet to the British Government,
and that offer has been accepted on terms which I think will show a very
fair profit when the war is over and we've saved the world."

"I don't think it will take very long to stop the war," said the creator
of the aërial battle-fleet, in his quiet voice. "Saving the world is, of
course, another matter which no doubt we can leave safely in the hands
of Mr Lennard. And now," he continued more gravely, "when is the news of
the actual coming of the comet to be made public? It seems to me that
everything more or less hangs upon that. The German Emperor, and,
therefore, his Allies and, no doubt, half the astronomers of Europe,
have been informed of Mr Lennard's discovery. They may or may not
believe it, and if they don't we can't blame them because it was only
given to them without exact detail."

"And a very good thing too," laughed Lennard, "considering the eccentric
way in which the comet is behaving. But everything is settled now,
unless, of course, some other mysterious influence gets to work; and,
another thing, it's quite certain that before many days the comet must
be discovered by other observatories."

"Then, Mr Lennard," said Mr Parmenter, "we've been first in the field
so far and I reckon we'd better stop there. Pike's Peak, Washington and
Arequipa are all on to it. Europe and Australia will be getting there
pretty soon, so I don't think there's much the matter with you sending a
message to Greenwich this morning. The people there will find it all
right and we can run across from London when we've had our talk with the
Prime Minister and post them up in any other details they want. I'll
send a wire to Henchell and tell him to hurry up with his gun at
Pittsburg and send on news to all the American observatories. Then we'll
have breakfast and, as it's a cloudy morning, I think we might start
right away for London in the _Auriole_ and get this business fixed up.
The enemy doesn't know we're here at all, and so long as we keep above
the clouds there's no fear of anyone seeing us. The world has only
forty-four more days to live, so we might as well save one of those days
while we can."

The result of the somewhat informal council of war, for, in sober truth,
it was nothing else, was that the commanders of the airships were
invited to breakfast and the whole situation was calmly and plainly
discussed by those who from the morning would probably hold the fate of
the world in their hands. Not the least important of the aerograms which
had been received during the early morning had been one, of course in
code, from Captain Erskine of the _Ithuriel_ from Harwich, welcoming the
aërial fleet and giving details of his movements in conjunction with it
for the next ten days. The aerogram also gave the positions of the
lighters loaded with ammunition which he had deposited round the English
shores in anticipation of its arrival.

Soon after eight o'clock a heavy mist came down over Whernside and its
companion heights, and Mr Parmenter went to one of the windows of the
big dining-room and said:

"I reckon this will just about fit us, Mr Lennard, so, if you've got
your portmanteau packed, have it sent up to the _Auriole_ at once, and
we'll make a start."

Within thirty minutes the start was made, and with it began the most
marvellous experience of Gilbert Lennard's life, not even excepting his
battle-trip in the conning-tower of the _Ithuriel_.


CHAPTER XXXIV

THE "AURIOLE"


"All aboard, I think, Captain Roker," said Mr Parmenter, as he walked
last to the top of the gangway ladder, and stood square-footed on the
white deck of the _Auriole_.

"All aboard, sir," replied Hiram Roker, "and now I reckon you'll have to
excuse me, because I've got to go below just to see that everything's in
working order."

"That's all right, Mr Roker. I know where your affections are centred in
this ship. You go right along to your engines, and Mr Hingeston will see
about the rest of us. Now then, Mr Lennard, you come along into the
conning-tower, and whatever you may have seen from the conning-tower of
the _Ithuriel_, I reckon you'll see something more wonderful still
before we get to London. You show the way, Newson. See, here it is, just
about the same. We've stolen quite a lot of ideas from your friend
Erskine; it's a way we've got on our side, you know. But this is going
to be one of the exceptions; if we win we are going to pay."

Lennard followed Mr Parmenter down the companion-way into the centre
saloon of the _Auriole_, and through this into a narrow passage which
led forward. At the end of this passage was a lift almost identical with
that on the _Ithuriel_. He took his place with Mr Parmenter and Mr
Hingeston on this and it rose with them into a little oval chamber
almost exactly like the conning-tower of the _Ithuriel_, with the
exception that it was built entirely of hardened papier-maché and glass.

"You see, Mr Lennard," said Mr Parmenter, "we don't want armour here.
Anything that hits us smashes us, and that's all there is to it. Our
idea is just to keep out of the way and do as much harm as we can from
the other side of the clouds. And now, Newson, if you're ready, we might
as well get to the other side and have a look at the sun. It's sort of
misty and cheerless down here."

"Just as easy as saying so, my dear Ratliffe. I reckon Hiram's got about
ten thousand horse-power waiting to be let loose; so we may as well let
them go. Hold on, Mr Lennard, and don't breathe any more than you can
help for a minute or two."

Lennard, remembering his cruise in the _Ithuriel_, held on, and also,
after filling his lungs, held his breath. Mr Hingeston took hold of the
steering-wheel, also very much like that of the _Ithuriel_, with his
left hand, and touched in quick succession three buttons on a
signal-board at his right hand.

At the first touch nothing happened as far as Lennard could see or hear.
At the second, a soft, whirring sound filled the air, growing swiftly in
intensity. At the third, the mist which enveloped Whernside began, as it
seemed to him, to flow downwards from the sky in long wreaths of
smoke-mingled steam which in a few moments fell away into nothingness. A
blaze of sunlight burst out from above--the earth had vanished--and
there was nothing visible save the sun and sky overhead, and an
apparently illimitable expanse of cloud underneath.

"There's one good thing about airships," said Mr Hingeston, as he took a
quarter turn at the wheel, "you can generally get the sort of climate
and temperature you want in them." He put his finger on a fourth button
and continued: "Now, Mr Lennard, we have so far just pulled her up above
the mist. You'll have one of these ships yourself one day, so I may as
well tell you that the first signal means 'Stand by'; the second, 'Full
power on lifting fans'; the third, 'Stand by after screws'; and the
fourth--just this--"

He pushed the button down as he spoke, and Lennard saw the brilliantly
white surface of the sunlit mist fall away before and behind them. A few
moments later he heard a sort of soft, sighing sound outside the
conning-tower. It rose quickly to a scream, and then deepened into a
roar. Everything seemed lost save the dome of sky and the sun rising
from the eastward. There was nothing else save the silver-grey blur
beneath them. As far as he was concerned for the present, the earth had
ceased to exist for him five minutes ago.

He didn't say anything, because the circumstances in which he found
himself appeared to be more suitable for thinking than talking; he just
stood still, holding on to a hand-grip in the wall of the conning-tower,
and looked at the man who, with a few touches of his fingers, was
hurling this aërial monster through the air at a speed which, as he
could see, would have left the _Ithuriel_ out of sight in a few minutes.

In front of Hingeston as he sat at the steering-wheel were two dials.
One was that of an aneroid which indicated the height. This now
registered four thousand feet. The other was a manometer connected with
the speed-gauge above the conning-tower, and the indicator on this was
hovering between one hundred and fifty and a hundred and sixty.

"Does that really mean we're travelling over a hundred and fifty miles
an hour?" he said.

"Getting on for a hundred and sixty," said Mr Parmenter, taking out his
watch. "You see, according to that last wire I sent, we're due in the
gardens of Buckingham Palace at ten-thirty sharp, and so we have to
hustle a bit."

"Well," replied Lennard, "I must confess that I thought that my little
trip in the _Ithuriel_ took me to something like the limits of everyday
experience; but this beats it. Whatever you do on the land or in the
water you seem to have something under you--something you can depend on,
as it were--but here, you don't seem to be anywhere. A friend of mine
told me that, after he had taken a balloon trip above the clouds and
across the Channel, but he was only travelling forty miles an hour. He
had somewhat a trouble to describe that, but this, of course, gets
rather beyond the capabilities of the English language."

"Or even the American," added Mr Hingeston, quietly.

"Why, yes," said Mr Parmenter, rolling a cigarette, "I believe we
invented the saying about greased lightning, and here we are something
like riding on a streak of it."

"Near enough!" laughed Lennard. "We may as well leave it at that, as you
say. Still, it is very, very wonderful."

And so it was. As they sped south the mists that hung about the northern
moors fell behind, and broken clouds took their place. Through the gaps
between these he could see a blur of green and grey and purple. A few
blotches of black showed that they were passing over the Lancashire and
Midland manufacturing towns; then the clouds became scarcer and an
enormous landscape spread out beneath them, intersected by white roads
and black lines of railways, and dotted by big patches of woods, long
lines of hedgerows and clumps of trees on hilltops. Here and there the
white wall of a chalk quarry flashed into view and vanished; and on
either side towns and villages came into sight ahead and vanished astern
almost before he could focus his field-glasses upon them.

At about twenty minutes after the hour at which they had left Whernside,
Mr Hingeston turned to Mr Parmenter and said, pointing downward with the
left hand:

"There's London, and the clouds are going. What are we to do? We can't
drop down there without being seen, and if we are that will give half
the show away. You see, if Castellan once gets on to the idea that
we've got airships and are taking them into London, he'll have a dozen
of those _Flying Fishes_ worrying about us before we know what we're
doing. If we only had one of those good old London fogs under us we
could do it."

"Then what's the matter with dropping under the smoke and using that for
a fog," said Mr Parmenter, rather shortly. "The enemy is still a dozen
miles to southward there; they won't see us, and anyhow, London's a big
place. Why, look there now! Talking about clouds, there's the very thing
you want. Oceans of it! Can't you run her up a bit and drop through it
when the thing's just between us and the enemy?"

As he spoke, Lennard saw what seemed to him like an illimitable sea of
huge spumy billows and tumbling masses of foam, which seemed to roll and
break over each other without sound. The silent cloud-ocean was flowing
up from the sou'west. Mr Hingeston took his bearings by compass, slowed
down to fifty miles an hour, and then Lennard saw the masses of cloud
rise up and envelop them.

For a few minutes the earth and the heavens disappeared, and he felt
that sense of utter loneliness and isolation which is only known to
those who travel through the air. He saw Mr Hingeston pull a lever with
his right hand and turn the steering-wheel with his left. He felt the
blood running up to his head, and then came a moment of giddiness. When
he opened his eyes the _Auriole_ was dropping as gently as a bird on the
wing towards the trees of the garden behind Buckingham Palace.

"I reckon you did that quite well, Newson," said Mr Parmenter, looking
at his watch. "One hour and twenty-five minutes as you said. And now I'm
going to shake hands with a real king for the first time."


CHAPTER XXXV

THE "AURIOLE" HOISTS THE WHITE ENSIGN


Rather to Mr Parmenter's surprise his first interview "with a real king"
was rather like other business interviews that he had had; in fact, as
he said afterwards, of all the business men he had ever met in his
somewhat varied career, this quiet-spoken, grey-haired English gentleman
was about the best and 'cutest that it had ever been his good fortune to
strike.

The negotiations in hand were, of course, the hiring of the Syndicate's
fleet of airships to the British Empire during the course of the war.
His Majesty had summoned a Privy Council at the Palace, and again Mr
Parmenter was somewhat surprised at the cold grip and clear sight which
these British aristocrats had in dealing with matters which he thought
ought to have been quite outside their experience. Like many Americans,
he had expected to meet a sort of glorified country squire, fox-hunter,
grouse-killer, trout and salmon-catcher, and so on; but, as he admitted
to Lennard later on, from His Majesty downwards they were about the
hardest crowd to do business with that he had ever struck.

The terms he offered were half a million a week for the services of
twenty-five airships till the war was ended. Two were retained as
guardians for Whernside House and the observatory, and three for the
Great Lever colliery, and this left twenty, not counting the original
_Columbia_, which Mr Parmenter had bought as his aërial yacht, available
for warlike purposes.

The figure was high, as the owners of the aërial battle-fleet admitted,
but war was a great deal dearer. They guaranteed to bring the war to a
stop within fourteen days, by which time Britain would have a new fleet
in being which would be practically the only fleet capable of action in
western waters with the exception of the Italian and the American. Given
that the Syndicate's airships, acting in conjunction with the _Ithuriel_
and the twelve of her sisters which were now almost ready for launching,
could catch and wipe out the _Flying Fishes_, either above the waters or
under them, the result would be that the Allies, cut off from their base
of supplies, and with no retreat open to them, would be compelled to
surrender; and Mr Parmenter did not consider that five hundred thousand
pounds a week was too much to pay for this.

At the conclusion of his speech, setting forth the position of the
Syndicate, he said, with a curious dignity which somehow always comes
from a sense of power:

"Your Majesty, my Lords and gentlemen, I am just a plain American
business man, and so is my friend, the inventor of these ships. We have
told you what we believe they can do and we are prepared to show you
that we have not exaggerated their powers. There is our ship outside in
the gardens. If your Majesty would like to take a little trip through
the air and see battle, murder and sudden death--"

"That's very kind of you, Mr Parmenter," laughed His Majesty, "but, much
as I personally should like to come with you, I'm afraid I should play a
certain amount of havoc with the British Constitution if I did. Kings of
England are not permitted to go to war now, but if you would oblige me
by taking a note to the Duke of Connaught, who has his headquarters at
Reading, and then, if you could manage it under a flag of truce, taking
another note to the German Emperor, who, I believe, has pitched his camp
at Aldershot, I should be very much obliged."

"Anything your Majesty wishes," replied Mr Parmenter. "Now we've fixed
up the deal the fleet is at your disposal and we sail under the British
flag; though, to be quite honest, sir, I don't care about flying the
white flag first. We could put up as pretty a fight for you along the
front of the Allies as any man could wish to see."

"I am sorry, Mr Parmenter," laughed His Majesty, "that the British
Constitution compels me to disappoint you, but, as some sort of
recompense, I am sure that my Lords in Council will grant you permission
to fly the White Ensign on all your ships and the Admiral's flag on your
flagship, which, I presume, is the one in which you have come this
morning. It is unfortunate that I can only confer the honorary rank of
admiral upon Mr Hingeston, as you are not British subjects."

"Then, your Majesty," replied Mr Parmenter, "if it pleases you, I hope
you will give that rank to my friend Newson Hingeston, who, as I have
told you, has been more than twenty years making these ships perfect. He
has created this navy, so I reckon he has got the best claim to be
called admiral."

"Does that meet with your approval, my lords?" said the King.

And the heads of the Privy Council bowed as one in approval.

"I thank your Majesty most sincerely," said Hingeston, rising. "I am an
American citizen, but I have nothing but British blood in my veins, and
therefore I am all the more glad that I am able to bring help to the
Motherland when she wants it."

"And I'm afraid we do want it, Mr Hingeston," said His Majesty. "Make
the conditions of warfare equal in the air, and I think we shall be able
to hold our own on land and sea. Your patent of appointment shall be
made out at once, and I will have the letters ready for you in half an
hour. And now, gentlemen, I think a glass of wine and a biscuit will not
do any of us much harm."

The invitation was, of course, in a certain sense, a command, and when
the King rose everyone did the same. While they were taking their wine
and biscuits in the blue drawing-room overlooking St James's Park, His
Majesty, who never lost his grip of business for a moment, took Lennard
aside and had a brief but pregnant conversation with him on the subject
of the comet, and as a result of this all the Government manufactories
of explosives were placed at his disposal, and with his own hand the
King wrote a permit entitling him to take such amount of explosives to
Bolton as he thought fit. Then there came the letters to the Duke of
Connaught and the German Emperor, and one to the Astronomer Royal at
Greenwich.

Then His Majesty and the members of the Council inspected the aërial
warship lying on the great lawn in the gardens, and with his own hands
King Edward ran the White Ensign to the top of the flagstaff aft; at the
same moment the Prince of Wales ran the Admiral's pennant up to the
masthead. Everyone saluted the flag, and the King said:

"There, gentlemen, the _Auriole_ is a duly commissioned warship of the
British Navy, and you have our authority to do all lawful acts of war
against our enemies. Good-morning! I shall hope to hear from you soon."

"I'm sorry, your Majesty," said Mr Parmenter, "that we can't fire the
usual salute. These guns of ours are made for business, and we don't
have any blank charges."

"I perfectly understand you, Mr Parmenter," replied His Majesty with a
laugh. "We shall have to dispense with the ceremony. Still, those are
just the sort of guns we want at present. Good-morning, again."

His Majesty went down the gangway and Admiral Hingeston, with Mr
Parmenter and Lennard, entered the conning-tower. The lifting-fans began
to whirr, and as the _Auriole_ rose from the grass the White Ensign
dipped three times in salute to the Royal Standard floating from the
flagstaff on the palace roof. Then, as the driving propellers whirled
round till they became two intersecting circles of light, the _Auriole_
swept up over the tree-tops and vanished through the clouds. And so
began the first voyage of the first British aërial battleship.

The Duke of Connaught had his headquarters at Amersham Hall School on
the Caversham side of the Thames, which was, of course, closed in
consequence of the war, and half an hour after the _Auriole_ had left
the grounds of Buckingham Palace she was settling to the ground in the
great quadrangle of the school. The Duke, with Lord Kitchener and two or
three other officers of the Staff, were waiting at the upper end where
the headmaster's quarters were. As the ship grounded, the gangway ladder
dropped and Mr Parmenter said to Lennard:

"That's Lord Kitchener, I see. Now, you know him and I don't, so you'd
better go and do the talking. We'll come after and get introduced."

"Ah, Mr Lennard," said Lord Kitchener, holding out his hand. "You're
quite a man of surprises. The last time I went with you to see the
Kaiser in a motor-car, and now you come to visit His Royal Highness in
an airship. Your Royal Highness," he continued, turning to the Duke,
"this is Mr Lennard, the finder of this comet which is going to wipe us
all out unless he wipes it out with his big gun, and these will be the
other gentlemen, I presume, whom His Majesty has wired about."

"Yes," replied Lennard, after he had shaken hands. "This is Mr Parmenter
whose telescope enabled me to find the comet, and this is Mr--or I ought
now to say Admiral--Hingeston, who had the honour of receiving that rank
from His Majesty half an hour ago."

"What!" exclaimed the Duke. "Half an hour! Are you quite serious,
gentlemen? The telegram's only just got here."

"Well, your Royal Highness," said Mr Parmenter, "that may be because we
didn't come full speed, but if you would get on board that flagship,
sir, we'd take you to Buckingham Palace and back in half an hour, or, if
you would like a trip to Aldershot to interview the German Emperor, and
then one to Greenwich, we'll engage to have you back here safe by dinner
time."

"Nothing would delight me more," replied the Duke, smiling, "but at
present my work is here and I cannot leave it. Lord Kitchener, how would
you like that sort of trip?"

"If you will give me leave till dinner-time, sir," laughed K. of K.,
"there's nothing I should like better."

"Oh, that goes without saying, of course," replied the Duke, "and now,
gentlemen, I understand from the King's telegram that there are one or
two matters you want to talk over with us. Will you come inside?"

"If your Royal Highness will excuse me," said Admiral Hingeston, "I
think I'd better remain on board. You see, we may have been sighted, and
if there are any of those _Flying Fishes_ about you naturally wouldn't
want this place blown to ruins; so, while you are having your talk, I
reckon I'll get up a few hundred feet, and be back, say, in half an
hour."

"Very well," said the Duke. "That's very kind of you. Your ship
certainly looks a fairly capable protector. By the way, what is the
range of those guns of yours? I must say they have a very business-like
look about them."

"Six thousand yards point blank, your Royal Highness," replied the
Admiral, "and, according to elevation, anything up to fifteen miles;
suppose, for instance, that we were shooting at a town. In fact, if we
were not under orders from His Majesty to fly the flag of truce I would
guarantee to have all the Allied positions wrecked by to-morrow morning
with this one ship. As you will see from the papers which Mr Parmenter
and Mr Lennard have brought, nineteen other airships are coming south
to-night and, unless the German Emperor and his Allies give in, the war
will be over in about six days."

"And when you come back to dinner to-night, Admiral Hingeston, you will
have my orders to bring it to an end within that time."

"I sincerely hope so, sir," replied Admiral Hingeston, as he raised his
right hand to the peak of his cap. "I can assure you, that nothing would
please me better."

As the lifting-fans began to spin round and the _Auriole_ rose from the
gravelled courtyard, Lord Kitchener looked up with a twinkle in his
brilliant blue eyes and said:

"I wonder what His Majesty of Germany will think of that thing when he
sees it. I suppose that means the end of fighting on land and sea--at
least, it looks like it."

"I hope to be able to convince your lordship that it does before
to-morrow morning," said Lennard, as they went towards the dining-room.

Then came half an hour's hard work, which resulted in the allotment of
the aërial fleet to positions from which the vessels could co-operate
with the constantly increasing army of British citizen-soldiers who were
now passing southward, eastward and westward, as fast as the crowded
trains could carry them. Every position was worked out to half a mile.
The details of the newly-created fleet in British waters and of those
ships which were arriving from the West Indies and the Mediterranean
were all settled, and, as the clock in the drawing-room chimed half-past
eleven, the _Auriole_ swung down in a spiral curve round the
chimney-pots and came to rest on the gravel.

"There she is; time's up!" said Lord Kitchener, rising from his seat. "I
suppose it will only take us half an hour or so to run down to
Aldershot. I wonder what His Majesty of Germany will say to us this
time. I suppose if he kicks seriously we have your Royal Highness's
permission to haul down the flag of truce?"

"Certainly," replied the Duke. "If he does that, of course, you will
just use your own discretion."


CHAPTER XXXVI

A PARLEY AT ALDERSHOT


Lord Kitchener had probably never had so bitter an experience as he had
when the _Auriole_ began to slow down over the plain of Aldershot. Never
could he, or any other British soldier, have dreamt six months ago that
the German, Austrian, French and Russian flags would have been seen
flying side by side over the headquarters of the great camp, or that the
vast rolling plains would be covered, as they were now, by hosts of
horse, foot and artillery belonging to hostile nations.

He did not say anything, neither did the others; it was a time for
thinking rather than talking; but he looked, and as Lennard watched his
almost expressionless face and the angrily-glittering blue eyes, he felt
that it would go ill with an enemy whom K. of K. should have at his
mercy that day.

But all the bitterness of feeling was by no means on one side. It so
happened that the three Imperial leaders of the invaders and General
Henriot, the French Commander-in-Chief, were holding a Council of War at
the time when the _Auriole_ made her appearance. Of course, her arrival
was instantly reported, and as a matter of fact the drilling came to a
sudden momentary stop at the sight of this amazing apparition. The three
monarchs and the great commander immediately went outside, and within a
few moments they were four of the angriest men in England. A single
glance, even at that distance, was enough to convince them that, at
anyrate in the air, the _Flying Fishes_ would be no match for an equal
or even an inferior number of such magnificent craft as this.

"God's thunder!" exclaimed the Kaiser, using his usual expletive. "She's
flying the White Ensign and an admiral's pennant, and, yes, a flag of
truce."

"Yes," said the Tsar, lowering his glasses, "that is so. What has
happened? I certainly don't like the look of her; she's an altogether
too magnificent craft from our point of view. In fact it would be
decidedly awkward if the English happened to have a fleet of them. They
would be terribly effective acting in co-operation with that submarine
ram. Let us hope that she has come on a message of peace."

"I understood, your Majesty," said the Kaiser, shortly, "that we had
agreed to make peace at Windsor, and nowhere else."

"Of course, I hope we shall do so," said the Tsar, "but considering our
numbers, and the help we have had from Mr Castellan's fleet, I'm afraid
we are rather a long time getting there, and we shall be longer still if
the British have any considerable number of ships like this one."

"Airships or no airships," replied William the Second, "whatever message
this ship is bringing, I will listen to nothing but surrender while I
have an Army Corps on English soil. They must be almost beaten by this
time; they can't have any more men to put in the field, while we have
millions. To go back now that we have got so far would be worse than
defeat--it would be disaster. Of course, your Majesty can have no more
delusions than I have on that subject."

A conversation on almost similar terms had been taking place meanwhile
between the Emperor of Austria and General Henriot. Then the _Auriole_,
after describing a splendid curve round the headquarters, dropped as
quietly as a bird on the lawn in front, the gangway ladder fell over
along the side, and Lord Kitchener, in the parade uniform of a general,
descended and saluted the four commanders.

"Good-morning, your Majesties. Good-morning, General Henriot."

"I see that your lordship has come as bearer of the flag of truce this
time," said the Kaiser, when salutes had been exchanged, "and I trust
that in the interests of humanity you have come also with proposals
which may enable us to put an honourable end to this terrible conflict,
and I am sure that my Imperial brothers and the great Republic which
General Henriot represents will be only too happy to accede to them."

The others nodded in approval, but said nothing, as it had been more or
less reluctantly agreed by them that the War Lord of Germany was to be
the actual head and Commander-in-Chief of the Allies. K. of K. looked at
him straight in the eyes--not a muscle of his face moved, and from under
his heavy moustache there came in the gentlest of voices the astounding
words:

"Yes, I have come from His Majesty King Edward with proposals of
surrender--that is to say, for your surrender, and that of all the
Allied Forces now on British soil."

William the Second literally jumped, and his distinguished colleagues
stared at him and each other in blank amazement. By this time Lennard
had come down the gangway ladder, and was standing beside Lord
Kitchener. Mr Parmenter and the latest addition to the British Naval
List were strolling up and down the deck of the _Auriole_ smoking cigars
and chatting as though this sort of thing happened every day.

"I see that your Majesty hardly takes me seriously," said Lord
Kitchener, still in the same quiet voice, "but if your Majesties will do
Mr Lennard and myself the favour of an interview in one of the rooms
here, which used to belong to me, I think we shall be able to convince
you that we have the best of reasons for being serious."

"Ah, yes, Mr Lennard," replied the Kaiser, looking at him with just a
suspicion of anxiety in his glance. "Good-morning. Have you come to tell
us something more about this wonderful comet of yours? It seems to me
some time making itself visible."

Before daylight next morning, the cannon again woke the wearied and
battle-worn ranks, sleeping on their arms on the field they had
won; and sent a fresh impulse to the hearts of their brothers,
toiling steadily on to join them in the great fight to come.

Heavy firing and sharp skirmishing for position filled the forenoon; but
then the masses of hostile infantry joined in the shock of battle,
more terrible than the one of the year before.

The men were more disciplined and hardened on both sides; and the Federal
leaders, feeling that their only hope lay in victory now, hurled
brigade after brigade against the now vindictive and battle-thirsty
Confederates.

Line after line emerges from enveloping clouds of smoke, charging the
fronts that Longstreet and Jackson steadily oppose to them. Line after
line melts before that inevitable hail, rolling back scattered and impotent
as the spume the angry ocean throws against a granite headland!

Broken again and again, the Federals, with desperate gallantry, hurl
against the unflinching crescent that pours its ceaseless rain of fire
through them; while the great guns behind its center thunder and
roll
"In the very glee of war,"
sending death-winged bolts tearing and crushing through them.

Through the carnival of death Hood has sent his Texans and Georgians
at a run--their wild yells rending the dull roar of the fight;
their bayonets flashing in a jagged line of light like hungry teeth!

Jackson has swung gradually round the enemy's right; and Stephen Lee's
artillery has advanced from the center--ever tearing and crashing through
the Federal ranks, scattering terror and death in its unswerving
path!

The slaughter has been terrific. Federal and Southron have fought well
and long.

Piles of mangled and gory dead lie so mingled that gray and blue are
undistinguished.

But the wild impetuosity of the "ragged rebels"--nerved by the memories
of this field's old glories--toned up by the Seven Days, and delirious
with the glow of present victory--sweeps the Federal back and
doubles his line.

It breaks--fresh regiments pour in with deadly shot and fearful yell;
the Federal line melts into confusion--rout! and the Second Manassas
is won.
The victory was as complete as that of the year before; an absolute
rout was only saved the Federals by falling back to the reserve
under Franklin, when the retreat became more orderly, as there was
no pursuit.This is
not warfare; it is only abduction, possibly seasoned with murder, and we
call those things crimes in England, and if such a crime were permitted
by those in whose employment John Castellan presumably is, we should
punish them as well as him."

"What!" exclaimed the Kaiser, clenching his fists, "do you, a civilian,
an ordinary citizen, dare to say such words to us? Lord Kitchener, can
you permit such an outrage as this?"

"The other outrage would be a much greater one, especially if it were
committed with the tacit sanction of the three greatest Powers in
Europe," replied K. of K., quietly. "That is one of our chief reasons
for asking for the surrender of the _Flying Fishes_. There is no telling
what harm this wild Irishman of yours might do if he got on the loose,
not only here but perhaps in your own territories, if he were allowed to
commit a crime like this, and then went, as he would have to do, into
the outlaw business."

"I think that there is great justice in what Lord Kitchener says,"
remarked His Majesty of Austria. "We must not forget that if this man
Castellan did run amok with any of those diabolical contrivances of his,
he would be just as much above human law as he would be outside human
reach. I must confess that that appears to me to be one of the most
serious features in the situation. Your Majesties, as well as the
French Government, are aware that I have been all along opposed to the
use of these horrible engines of destruction, and now you see that their
very existence seems to have called others into being which may be even
more formidable."

"Mr Lennard can tell your Majesties more about that than I can," said K.
of K., with one of his grimmest smiles.

"As far as the air is concerned," said Lennard, very quietly, "we can
both out-fly and out-shoot the _Flying Fishes_; while as regards the
water, eleven more _Ithuriels_ will be launched during the week. We have
twenty-five airships ready for action over land or sea, and, for my own
part, I think that if your Majesties knew all the details of the
situation you would consider the terms which his lordship has put before
you quite generous. But, after all," he continued, in a suddenly changed
tone, "it seems, if you will excuse my saying so, rather childish to
talk about terms of peace or war when the world itself has less than six
weeks to live if John Castellan manages to carry out his threat."

"And you feel absolutely certain of that, Mr Lennard?" asked the Tsar,
in a tone of very serious interest. "It seems rather singular that none
of the other astronomers of Europe or America have discovered this
terrible comet of yours."

"I have had the advantage of the finest telescope in the world, your
Majesty," replied Lennard, with a smile, "and of course I have published
no details. There was no point in creating a panic or getting laughed at
before it was necessary. But now that the orbit has altered, and the
catastrophe will come so much sooner, any further delay would be little
short of criminal. In fact, we have to-day telegraphed to all the
principal observatories in the world, giving exact positions for
to-night, corrected to differences of time and latitude. We shall hear
the verdict in the morning, and during to-morrow. Meanwhile we are
going to Greenwich to get the observatory there to work on my
calculations, and if your Majesties would care to appoint an officer of
sufficient knowledge to come with us, and see the comet for himself, he
will, I am sure, be quite welcome."

"A very good suggestion, Mr Lennard," said Lord Kitchener, "very."

"Then," replied the Tsar, quickly, "as astronomy has always been a great
hobby with me, will you allow me to come? Of course, you have my word
that I shall see nothing on the journey that you don't want me to see."

"We shall be delighted," said the British envoy, cordially, "and as for
seeing things, you will be at perfect liberty to use your eyes as much
as you like."

The Tsar's august colleagues entered fully into the sporting spirit in
which he had made his proposal, and a verbal agreement to suspend all
hostilities till his return was ratified in a glass of His Majesty of
Austria's Imperial Tokay.


CHAPTER XXXVII

THE VERDICT OF SCIENCE


Although the Tsar had made trips with John Castellan in the _Flying
Fish_, he had never had quite such an aërial experience as his trip to
Greenwich. The _Auriole_ rose vertically in the air, soared upward in a
splendid spiral curve, and vanished through the thin cloud layer to the
north-eastward. Twenty minutes of wonder passed like so many seconds,
and Admiral Hingeston, beside whom he was standing in the conning-tower,
said quietly:

"We're about there, your Majesty."

"Greenwich already," exclaimed the Tsar, pulling out his watch. "It is
forty miles, and we have not been quite twenty minutes yet."

"That's about it," said the Admiral, "this craft can do her two miles a
minute, and still have a good bit in hand if it came to chasing
anything."

He pulled back a couple of levers as he spoke and gave a quarter turn to
the wheel. The great airship took a downward slide, swung round to the
right, and in a few moments she had dropped quietly to the turf of
Greenwich Park alongside the Observatory.

Lennard's calculations had already reached the Astronomer Royal, and he
and his chief assistant had had time to make a rapid run through them,
and they had found that his figures, and especially the inexplicable
change in the orbit, tallied almost exactly with observations of a
possibly new comet for the last two months or so.

They were not quite prepared for the coming of an Imperial--and
hostile--visitor in an airship, accompanied by the discoverer of the
comet, the millionaire who owned the great telescope, and an American
gentleman in the uniform of a British admiral; but those were
extraordinary times, and so extraordinary happenings might be expected.
The astronomer and his staff, being sober men of science, whose business
was with other worlds rather than this one, accepted the situation
calmly, gave their visitors lunch, talked about everything but the war,
and then they all spent a pleasant and instructive afternoon in a
journey through Space in search of the still invisible Celestial
Invader.

When they had finished, the two sets of calculations balanced
exactly--to the millionth of a degree and the thousandth of a second. At
ten seconds to twelve, midnight, May the first, the comet, if not
prevented by some tremendously powerful agency, would pierce the earth's
atmosphere, as Lennard had predicted.

"It is a marvellous piece of work, Mr Lennard, however good an
instrument you had. As an astronomer I congratulate you heartily, but as
citizens of the world I hope we shall be able to congratulate you still
more heartily on the results which you expect that big gun of yours to
bring about."

"I'm sure I hope so," said Lennard, toying rather absently with his
pencil.

"And if the cannon is not fired, and the Pittsburg one does not happen
to be exactly laid, for there is a very great difference in longitude,
what will be the probable results, Mr Astronomer?" asked the Tsar, upon
whom the lesson of the afternoon had by no means been lost.

"If the comet is what Mr Lennard expects it to be, your Majesty," was
the measured reply, "then, if this Invader is not destroyed, his
predictions will be fulfilled to the letter. In other words, on the
second of May there will not be a living thing left on earth."

At three minutes past ten that evening the Tsar looked into the
eye-piece of the Greenwich Equatorial, and saw a double-winged yellow
shape floating in the centre of the field of vision. He watched it for
long minutes, listening to the soft clicking of the clockwork, which was
the only sound that broke the silence. During the afternoon he had seen
photographs of the comet taken every night that the weather made a clear
observation possible. The series tallied exactly with what he now saw.
The silvery Capitoline dome at Washington floats up from among its garden
trees, seeming to grow higher and higher as we recede from it.
Quickly dominating the low and mean buildings which encumber and try
to hide it in its own neighborhood, it gradually rises superior to the
whole city, growing greater as Washington grows less.

The first part of the course is over the loop of road newly acquired and
still improving by the company--a loop hanging downward from Baltimore,
so as to sweep over Washington, and confer upon the through traveler the
gift of an excursion through the capital. This loop swings southwardly
from Baltimore to a point near Frederick, Washington being set
upon it like a bead in the midst. The older road, like a mathematical
chord, stretches still between the first points, but is occupied with the
carrying of freight. The tourist notices the stout beams of the bridges,
the new look of the sleepers, and the sheen of the double lines
of fresh steel rail: he observes some heavy mason-work at the Monocacy
River. Two hours have passed: at Frederick Junction he joins a road whose
cuttings are grass-grown, whose quarried rocks are softened with
lichen. He is struck by the change, and with reason, for he is now being
carried under the privileges of the first railroad charter granted
in America.

We may not here undertake the story of the iron track, though it is from
this very road that such a story must take its departure, and
though we cannot grant that that story would be exceeded by any in
the range of the author's skill as a matter of popular interest.So
spoke the man who had worked for fourteen years to win one battle, and
crush a whole people at a single stroke--after which he made the best
of friends with them, and loyal subjects of his Sovereign.

They took their leave of the astronomer and his staff, and a few minutes
later the _Auriole_, still flying the flag of truce, cleared the
tree-tops and rose into the serene starlit atmosphere above them.

When the airship had gained a height of a thousand feet, and was heading
south-west towards Aldershot at a speed of about a hundred miles an
hour, the Admiral noticed a shape not unlike that of his own vessel, on
his port quarter, making almost the same direction as he was. The Tsar
and Lord Kitchener were sitting one on either side of him, as he stood
at the steering-wheel, as the ominous shape came into view.

"I'm afraid that's one of your _Flying Fishes_, your Majesty, taking
news from the Continent to Aldershot. Yes, there goes her searchlight.
She's found us out by now. She knows we're not one of her crowd, and so
I suppose we shall have to fight her. Yes, I thought so, she means
fight. She's trying to get above us, which means dropping a few of those
torpedoes on us, and sending us across the edge of eternity before we
know we've got there."

"You will, of course, do your duty, Admiral," replied the Tsar very
quietly, but with a quick tightening of the lips. "It is a most
unfortunate occurrence, but we must all take the fortune of war as it
comes. I hope you will not consider my presence here for a moment.
Remember that I asked myself."

"There won't be any danger to us, your Majesty," replied the Admiral,
with a marked emphasis on the "us." "Still, we have too many valuable
lives on board to let him get the drop on us."

As he spoke he thrust one lever on the right hand forward, and pulled
another back; then he took the telephone receiver down from the wall,
and said:

"See that thing? She's trying to get the drop on us. Full speed ahead:
I'm going to rise. Hold on, gentlemen."

They held on. The Tsar saw the jumping searchlights, which flashed up
from the little grey shape to the southward, suddenly fall away and
below them. The Admiral touched the wheel with his left hand, and the
_Auriole_ sprang forward. The other tried to do the same, but she seemed
to droop and fall behind. Admiral Hingeston took down the receiver again
and said:

"Ready--starboard guns--now: fire!"

Of course, there was no report; only a brilliant blaze of light to the
southward, and an atmospheric shock which made the _Auriole_ shudder as
she passed on her way. The Tsar looked out to the spot where the blaze
of flame had burst out. The other airship had vanished.

"She has gone. That is awful," he said, with a shake in his voice.

"As I said before, I'm sorry, your Majesty," replied the Admiral, "but
it had to be done. If he'd got the top side of us we should have been in
as little pieces as he is now. I only hope it's John Castellan's craft.
If it is it will save a lot of trouble to both sides."

The Tsar did not reply. He was too busy thinking, and so was Lord
Kitchener.

That night there were divided counsels in the headquarters of the Allies
at Aldershot, and the Kaiser and his colleagues went to bed between two
and three in the morning without having come to anything like a definite
decision. As a matter of fact, within the last few hours things had
become a little too complicated to be decided upon in anything like a
hurry.

While the potentates of the Alliance were almost quarrelling as to what
was to be done, the _Auriole_ paid a literally flying visit to the
British positions, and then the hospitals. At Caversham, Lennard found
Norah Castellan taking her turn of night duty by the bedside of Lord
Westerham, who had, after all, got through his desperate ride with a
couple of bullets through his right ribs, and a broken left arm; but he
had got his despatches in all the same, though nearly two hours
late--for which he apologised before he fainted. In one of the wards at
Windsor Camp he found Auriole, also on night duty, nursing with no less
anxious care the handsome young Captain of Uhlans who had taken Lord
Whittinghame's car in charge in Rochester. Mrs O'Connor had got a
badly-wounded Russian Vice-Admiral all to herself, and, as she modestly
put it, was doing very nicely with him.

Meanwhile the news of the truce was proclaimed, and the opposing
millions laid themselves down to rest with the thankful certainty that
it would not be broken for at least a night and a day by the whistle of
the life-hunting bullet or the screaming roar and heart-shaking crash of
the big shell which came from some invisible point five or six miles
away. In view of this a pleasant little dinner-party was arranged for at
the Parmenter Palace at eight the next evening. There would be no
carriages. The coming and parting guests would do their coming and going
in airships. Mr Parmenter expressed the opinion that, under the
circumstances, this would be at once safer and more convenient.

But before that dinner-party broke up, the world had something very
different from feasting and merrymaking, or even invasion and military
conquest or defeat, to think of.

The result of Lennard's telegrams and cables had been that every
powerful telescope in the civilised world had been turned upon that
distant region of the fields of Space out of which the Celestial Invader
was rushing at a speed of thousands of miles a minute to that awful
trysting-place, at which it and the planet Terra were to meet and
embrace in the fiery union of death.

From every observatory, from Greenwich to Arequipa, and from Pike's Peak
to Melbourne, came practically identical messages, which, in their
combined sense, came to this:

"Lennard's figures absolutely correct. Collision with comet apparently
inevitable. Consequences incalculable."


CHAPTER XXXVIII

WAITING FOR DOOM


This was the all-important news which the inhabitants of every town
which possessed a well-informed newspaper read the next morning. It was,
in the more important of them, followed by digests of the calculations
which had made this terrific result a practical certainty. These, again,
were followed by speculations, some deliberately scientific, and some
wild beyond the dreams of the most hopeless hysteria.

Men and women who for a generation or so had been making large incomes
by prophesying the end of the world as a certainty about every seven
years--and had bought up long leaseholds meanwhile--now gambled with
absolute certainty on the shortness of the public memory, revised their
figures, and proved to demonstration that this was the very thing they
had been foretelling all along.

First--outside scientific circles--came blank incredulity. The ordinary
man and woman in the street had not room in their brains for such a
tremendous idea as this--fact or no fact. They were already filled with
a crowd of much smaller and, to them, much more pressing concerns, than
a collision with a comet which you couldn't even see except through a
big telescope: and then that sort of thing had been talked and written
about hundreds of times before and had never come to anything, so why
should this?

But when the morning papers dated--somewhat ominously--the twenty-fifth
of March, quarter day, informed their readers that, granted fine
weather, the comet would be visible to the naked eye from sunset to
sunrise according to longitude that night, the views of the man and the
woman who had taken the matter so lightly underwent a very considerable
change.

While the comet could only be seen, save by astronomers, in the
photographs that could be bought in any form from a picture-postcard to
a five-guinea reproduction of the actual thing, there was still an air
of unconvincing unreality about. Of course it might be coming, but it
was still very far away, and it might not arrive after all. Yet when
that fateful night had passed and millions of sleepless eyes had seen
the south-western stars shining through a pale luminous mist extended in
the shape of two vast filmy wings with a brighter spot of yellow flame
between them, the whole matter seemed to take on a very different and a
much more serious aspect.

The fighting had come to a sudden stop, as though by a mutually tacit
agreement. Not even the German Emperor could now deny that Lennard had
made no idle threat at Canterbury when he had given him the destruction
of the world as an alternative to the conquest of Britain. Still, he did
not quite believe in the possibility of that destruction even yet, in
spite of what the Tsar had told him and what he had learned from other
sources. He still wanted to fight to a finish, and, as Deputy European
Providence, he had a very real objection to the interference of
apparently irresponsible celestial bodies with his carefully-thought-out
plans for the ordering of mundane civilisation on German commercial
lines. Whether they liked it or not, it must be the best thing in the
end for them: otherwise how could He have come to think it all out?

Meanwhile, to make matters worse from his point of view, John Castellan
had refused absolutely to accept any modification of the original terms,
and he had replied to an order from headquarters to report himself and
the ships still left under his control by loading the said ships with
ammunition and motive power and then disappearing from the field of
action without leaving a trace as to his present or future whereabouts
behind him, and so, as far as matters went, entirely fulfilling the
Tsar's almost prophetic fears.

And then, precisely at the hour, minute and second predicted, five
hours, thirty minutes and twenty-five seconds, a.m., on the 31st of
March, the comet became visible in daylight about two and a half degrees
south-westward of the Morning Star. Twenty-four hours later the two
wings came into view, and the next evening the Invader looked like some
gigantic bird of prey swooping down from its eyrie somewhere in the
heights of Space upon the trembling and terrified world. The
professional prophets said, with an excellent assumption of absolute
conviction, that it was nothing less awful than the Destroying Angel
himself _in propria persona_.

At length, when excitement had developed into frenzy, and frenzy into an
almost universal delirium, two cablegrams crossed each other along the
bed of the Atlantic Ocean. One was to say that the Pittsburg gun was
ready, and the other that the loading of the Bolton Baby--feeding, some
callous humorist of the day called it--was to begin the next morning.
This meant that there was just a week--an ordinary working week, between
the human race and something very like the Day of Judgment.

The next day Lennard set all the existing wires of the world thrilling
with the news that the huge projectile, charged with its thirty
hundredweight of explosives, was resting quietly in its place on the top
of a potential volcano which, loosened by the touch of a woman's hand,
was to hurl it through space and into the heart of the swiftly-advancing
Invader from the outmost realms of Space.


CHAPTER XXXIX

THE LAST FIGHT


It so happened that on the first night the German Emperor saw the comet
without the aid of a telescope he was attacked by one of those fits of
hysteria which, according to ancient legend, are the hereditary curse of
the House of Brandenburg. He had made possible that which had been
impossible for over a thousand years--he had invaded England in force,
and he had established himself and his Allies in all the greatest
fortress-camps of south-eastern England. After all, the story of the
comet might be a freak of the scientific imagination; there might be
some undetected error in the calculations. One great mistake had been
made already, either by the comet or its discoverer--why not another?

"No," he said to himself, as he stood in front of the headquarters at
Aldershot looking up at the comet, "we've heard about you before, my
friend. Astronomers and other people have prophesied a dozen times that
you or something like you were going to bring about the end of the
world, but somehow it never came off; whereas it is pretty certain that
the capture of London will come off if it is only properly managed. At
anyrate, I am inclined to back my chances of taking London against yours
of destroying it."

And so he made his decision. He sent a telegram to Dover ordering an
aerogram to be sent to John Castellan, whose address was now, of course,
anywhere in the air or sea; the message was to be repeated from all the
Continental stations until he was found. It contained the first
capitulation that the War Lord of Germany had ever made. He accepted the
terms of his Admiral of the Air and asked him to bring his fleet the
following day to assist in a general assault on London--London once
taken, John Castellan could have the free hand that he had asked for.

In twelve hours a reply came back from the Jotunheim in Norway.
Meanwhile, the Kaiser, as Generalissimo of the Allied Forces,
telegraphed orders to all the commanders of army corps in England to
prepare for a final assault on the positions commanding London within
twenty-four hours. At the same time he sent telegraphic orders to all
the centres of mobilisation in Europe, ordering the advance of all
possible reinforcements with the least delay. It was his will that four
million men should march on London that week, and, in spite of the
protests of the Emperor of Austria and the Tsar, his will was obeyed.

So the truce was broken and the millions advanced, as it were over the
brink of Eternity, towards London. But the reinforcements never came.
Every transport that steamed out of Bremen, Hamburg, Kiel, Antwerp,
Brest or Calais, vanished into the waters; for now the whole squadron of
twelve _Ithuriels_ had been launched and had got to work, and the
British fleets from the Mediterranean, the China Seas and the North
Atlantic, had once more asserted Britain's supremacy on the seas. In
addition to these, ten first-class battleships, twelve first and fifteen
second-class cruisers and fifty destroyers had been turned out by the
Home yards, and so the British Islands were once more ringed with an
unbreakable wall of steel. One invasion had been accomplished, but now
no other was possible. The French Government absolutely refused to send
any more men. The Italian armies had crossed the Alps at three points,
and every soldier left in France was wanted to defend her own fortresses
and cities from the attack of the invader.

"He is not always bright. A man with so good a heart as his must be
saddened sometimes, at least with others' woes, and he does not always
escape woes of his own."
This sentiment affected me, and irritated me a little besides, for I felt
that it was in my own vein, and that it was I who had a right to the
observation. I immediately quoted an extract from an Icelandic
Saga to the effect that dead bees give a stinging quality to the very
metheglin of the gods. We exchanged these remarks in crossing the
vestibule of the hotel: a carriage was standing there for my
friend.

"I am sorry to leave you. I have a meeting with a Prussian engineer
about bridges and canals and the waterworks of Vauban, and everything
that would least interest you. I must cross immediately to Kehl. I leave
you to finish the geography of Strasburg."
"I know Strasburg by heart, and am burning to get out of it. I want to
cross the Rhine, for the sake of boasting that I have set foot in
the Baden territory. By the by, how have I managed to come so far
without a passport?"
"_This_ did it," said my engineer, tapping the tin box, which a waiter
had restored to me in a wonderful state of polish. "I put a plan
or two in it, with some tracing muslin, and allowed a spirit-level
to stick out. You were asleep. I know all the officials on this
route.
I had only to tap the box and nod. You passed as my assistant. Nobody
could have put you through but I."

"You are a vile conspirator," said I affectionately, "and have all
the lower traits of the Yankee character. But I will use you to
carry me to Kehl, as Faust used Mephistopheles. By the by, your carriage
is a comfortable one and saves my time. I have two hours before I need
return to the train."
"It is double the time you will need."
EDWARD STRAHAN.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]

FROM THE POTOMAC TO THE OHIO.

[Illustration: VIEW NEAR ANTIETAM, MARYLAND.]
An old writer who dearly loved excursions, Francis Rabelais, inserted in
one of his fables an account of a country where the roads were in motion.
He called the place the Island of Odes, from the Greek [Greek: odss],
a "road," and explained: "For the roads travel, like animated things;
and some are wandering roads, like planets, others passing roads,
crossing roads, connecting roads.

And I saw how the travelers, messengers and inhabitants of the land
asked, Where does this road go to? and that? They were answered, From
the south to Faverolles, to the parish, to the city, to the river.
Then hoisting themselves on the proper road, without being otherwise
troubled or fatigued, they found themselves at their place of destination."

This fancy sketch, thrown off by an inveterate joker three hundred
years ago, is justified curiously by any of our modern railways; but to
see the picture represented in startling accuracy you should find some
busy "junction" among the coal-mountains. Here you may observe, from
your perch upon the hill, an assemblage of roads actively reticulating
and radiating, winding through the valleys, slinking off misanthropically
into a tunnel, or gayly parading away elbow-in-elbow with the
streams.

These avenues, upon minute inspection, are seen to be obviously moving:
they are crawling and creeping with an unbroken joint-work of black
wagons, the rails hidden by their moving pavement, and the road
throughout advancing, foot by foot, into the distance.

It is hardly too fanciful--on seeing its covering slide away,
its switches swinging, its turn-tables revolving, its drawbridges
opening--to declare that such a road is an animal--an animal
proving its nature, according to Aristotle, by the power to move
itself. Nor is it at all censurable to ask of a road like this where
it "goes to."

The notion of what Rabelais calls a "wayfaring way," a _chemin
cheminant_, came into our thoughts at Cumberland.

But Cumberland was not reached until after many miles of interesting
travel along a route remarkable for beauties, both natural and
improved.

A coal-distributor is certain, in fact, to be a road full of attractions
for the tourist; for coal, that Sleeping Beauty of our era, always chooses
a pretty bed in which to perform its slumber of ages.

The road which delivers the Cumberland coal, however, is truly
exceptional for splendor of scenery, as well as for historical
suggestiveness and engineering science. It has recently become, by
means of certain lavish providences established for the blessing
of travelers at every turn, a tourist route and a holiday delight."I am
only the bearer of a message, and here it is."

Then he handed the Kaiser an envelope bearing the Royal Arms.

"I am instructed to take your reply back as soon as possible," he
continued. Then he saluted again and walked away towards the _Auriole_.

The Kaiser opened the envelope and read--an invitation to lunch from his
uncle, Edward of England, and a request to bring his august colleagues
with him to talk matters over. There was no hint of battle, victory or
defeat. It was a quite commonplace letter, but all the same it was one
of those triumphs of diplomacy which only the first diplomatist in
Europe knew how to achieve. Then he too laughed as he folded up the
letter and went to Lord Kitchener and said:

"This is only an invitation to lunch, and you have told me you are not
here to propose or take terms. That, of course, was official, but
personally--"

K. of K. stiffened up, and a harder glint came into his eyes.

"I can say nothing personally, your Majesty, except to ask you to
remember my reply to Cronje."

The Kaiser remembered that reply of three words, "Surrender, or fight,"
and he knew that he could not fight, save under a penalty of utter
destruction. He went back into his room, brought back the joint note
which he had just received, and gave it to Lord Kitchener, just as it
was, without even putting it into an envelope, saying:

"That is our answer. We are beaten, and those who lose must pay."

Lord Kitchener looked over the note and said, in a somewhat dry tone:

"This, your Majesty, I read as absolute surrender."

"It is," said William the Second, his hand instinctively going to the
hilt of his sword. Lord Kitchener shook his head, and said very quietly
and pleasantly:

"No, your Majesty, not that. But," he said, looking up at the four flags
which were still flying above the headquarters, "I should be obliged if
you would give orders to haul those down and hoist the Jack instead."

There was no help for it, and no one knew better than the Kaiser the
strength there was behind those quietly-spoken words. The awful lesson
of the night before had taught him that this beautiful cruiser of the
air which lay within a few yards of him could in a few moments rise into
the air and scatter indiscriminate death and destruction around her, and
so the flags came down, the old Jack once more went up, and Aldershot
was English ground again.

Wherefore, not to enter into unnecessary details, the _Auriole_, instead
of making the place a wilderness as Lord Kitchener had quite determined
to do, became an aërial pleasure yacht. Orderlies were sent to the
Russian, Austrian and French headquarters, and an hour later the chiefs
of the Allies were sitting in the deck saloon of the airship, flying at
about sixty miles an hour towards London.

The lunch at Buckingham Palace was an entirely friendly affair. King
Edward had intended it to be a sort of international shake-hands all
round. The King of Italy was present, as the _Columbia_ had been
despatched early in the morning to bring him from Rome, and had picked
up the French President on the way back at Paris. The King gave the
first and only toast, and that was:

"Your Majesties and Monsieur le President, in the name of Humanity, I
ask you to drink to Peace."

They drank, and so ended the last war that was ever fought on British
soil.


EPILOGUE

"AND ON EARTH, PEACE!"


On the morning of the thirtieth of April, the interest of the whole
world was centred generally upon Bolton, and particularly upon the
little spot of black earth enclosed by a ring of Bessemer furnaces in
the midst of which lay another ring, a ring of metal, the mouth of the
great cannon, whose one and only shot was to save or lose the world. At
a height of two thousand feet, twenty airships circled at varying
distances round the mouth of the gun, watching for the one _Flying Fish_
which had not been accounted for in the final fight.

The good town of Bolton itself was depopulated. For days past the comet
had been blazing brighter and brighter, even in the broad daylight, and
the reports which came pouring in every day from the observatories of
the world made it perfectly clear that Lennard's calculations would be
verified at midnight.

Mr Parmenter and his brother capitalists had guaranteed two millions
sterling as compensation for such destruction of property as might be
brought about by the discharge of the cannon, and, coupled with this
guarantee, was a request that everyone living within five miles of what
had been the Great Lever pit should leave, and this was authorised by a
Royal Proclamation. There was no confusion, because, when faced with
great issues, the Lancashire intellect does not become confused. It just
gets down to business and does it. So it came about that the people of
Bolton, rich and poor, millionaire and artisan, made during that
momentous week a general flitting, taking with them just such of their
possessions as would be most precious to them if the Fates permitted
them to witness the dawn of the first of May.

The weather, strangely enough, had been warm and sunny for the last
fortnight, despite the fact that the ever-brightening Invader from Space
gradually outshone the sun itself, and so on all the moors round Bolton
there sprang up a vast town of tents and ready-made bungalows from
Chorley round by Darwen to Bury. Thousands of people had come from all
parts of the kingdom to see the fate of the world decided. What was left
of the armies of the Allies were also brought up by train, and all the
British forces were there as well. They were all friends now for there
was no more need for fighting, since the events of the next few hours
would decide the fate of the human race.

As the sun set over the western moors a vast concourse of men and women,
representing almost every nationality on earth, watched the coming of
the Invader, brightening now with every second and over-arching the
firmament with its wide-spreading wings. There were no sceptics now. No
one could look upon that appalling Shape and not believe, and if
absolute confirmation of Lennard's prophecy had been wanted it would
have been found in the fact that the temperature began to rise _after_
sunset. That had never happened before within the memory of man.

The crowning height of the moors which make a semicircle to the
north-west of Bolton is Winter Hill, which stands about half-way between
Bolton and Chorley, and, roughly speaking, would make the centre of a
circle including Bolton, Wigan, Chorley and Blackburn. It rises to a
height of nearly fifteen hundred feet and dominates the surrounding
country for fully fifteen miles, and on the summit of this rugged,
heather-clad moor was pitched what might be called without exaggeration
the headquarters of the forces which were to do battle for humanity. A
huge marquee had been erected in an ancient quarry just below the
summit; from the centre pole of this flew the Royal Standard of England,
and from the other poles the standards of every civilised nation in the
world.

The front of the marquee opened to the south eastward, and by the
unearthly light of the comet the mill chimneys of Bolton, dominated by
the great stack of Dobson & Barlow's, could be seen pointing like black
fingers up to the approaching terror. In the centre of the opening were
two plain deal tables. There was an instrument on each of them, and from
these separate wires ran on two series of poles and buried themselves at
last in the heart of the charge of the great cannon. Beside the
instruments were two chronometers synchronised from Greenwich and
beating time together to the thousandth part of a second, counting out
what might perhaps be the last seconds of human life on earth.

We judge the existing case by these eternal principles. We may fail, and
fail ignominiously; but, in our failure, nobody can say that we
violated any sacred form of the ever-glorious Constitution of the
United States.

The Constitution has in it no provisions to secure its own existence
by unconstitutional means. It is therefore our duty, as lawyers as well
as legislators, to allow the gentlemen who have repudiated it,
because they were defeated in an election, to enjoy all its benefits.Beside him stood Lady Margaret
and Norah Castellan, and with them were the two men who had done so much
to change defeat into victory; the captain and lieutenant of the
ever-famous _Ithuriel_.

Never before had there been such a gathering of all sorts and conditions
of men on one spot of earth; but as the hours went on and dwindled into
minutes, all differences of rank and position became things of the past.
In the presence of that awful Shape which was now flaming across the
heavens, all men and women were equal, since by midnight all might be
reduced at the same instant to the same dust and ashes. The ghastly
orange-green glare shone down alike on the upturned face of monarch and
statesman, soldier and peasant, millionaire and pauper, the good and the
bad, the noble and the base, and tinged every face with its own ghastly
hue.

Five minutes to twelve!

There was a shaking of hands, but no words were spoken. It is about nine
hundred feet long; its two ends are curved in opposite directions,
and at its farther extremity it splits curiously into two bridge-branches,
one of which supports the road running up the Shenandoah, while
the other carries the main road along the Potomac.

Neither word nor look of love had
passed his lips or lightened his eyes; and even now, as he stood beside
her, looking at her face, beautiful still even in that ghastly light,
his glance was as steady as if he had been looking through the eye-piece
of his telescope.

Auriole had her right forefinger already resting on a little white
button, ready at a touch to send the kindling spark into the mighty mass
of explosives which lay buried at the bottom of what had been the Great
Lever pit. Lennard also had his right forefinger on another button, but
his left hand was in his coat pocket and the other forefinger was on the
trigger of a loaded and cocked revolver. There were several other
revolvers in men's pockets--men who had sworn that their nearest and
dearest should be spared the last tortures of the death-agony of
humanity.

The chronometers began to tick off the seconds of the last minute. The
wings of the comet spread out vaster and vaster and its now flaming
nucleus blazed brighter and brighter. A low, vague wailing sound seemed
to be running through the multitudes which thronged the semicircle of
moors. It was the first and perhaps the last utterance of the agony of
unendurable suspense.

At the thirtieth second Lennard looked up and said in a quiet,
passionless tone:

"Ready!"

At the same moment he saw, as millions of others thought they saw, a
grey shape skimming through the air from the north-east towards Bolton.
It could not be a British airship, for the fleet had already scattered,
as the shock of the coming explosion would certainly have caused them to
smash up like so many shells. It was John Castellan's _Flying Fish_ come
to fulfil the letter of his threat, even at this supreme moment of the
world's fate.

Again Lennard spoke.

"Twenty seconds."

And then he began to count.
The nodding precipice, cut into a rough and tortured profile by the
engineers, lays its shadow to sleep on the whizzing roofs of the
cars as they glitter by, (Shadows always seem to print themselves
with additional distinctness upon any moving object, like a waterfall
or a foaming stream.)

There are a village and a bridge at the Point, and the mountain-range,
broken in two by the river, recovers itself gracefully and loftily on
the other side.

[Illustration: POTOMAC TUNNEL, NEAR HARPER'S FERRY.]
For half an hour more, as we rush to meet the course of the
Potomac, the broad ledges that heave the bed of the river into
mounds, and the ascending configuration of the shore, seem to speak
of something grand, and directly we are in the cradle of romance,
at Harper's Ferry.

I don't think
there's any doubt about that."

"It's good of you to say so," said Norah. "Poor John! With all his
learning and genius to come to that--"

"We all have to get there some time, Norah, and after all, whether he's
right or wrong, a man can't die better than for what he believes to be
the truth and the right. We may think him mistaken, he thought he was
right, and he has proved it. God rest his soul!"

"Amen!" said Norah, and she leant over again and kissed him on the
brow.

Then came ten seconds more of mute and agonised suspense, and men's
fingers tightened their grip on the revolvers. Then the upturned
straining eyes looked upon such a sight as human eyes will never see
again save perchance those which, in the fulness of time, may look upon
the awful pageantry of the Last Day.

High up in the air there was a shrill screaming sound which seemed
something like an echo of the roar of the great gun. Something like a
white flash of light darted upwards straight to the heart of the
descending Invader. Then the whole heavens were illumined by a blinding
glare. The nucleus of the comet seemed to throw out long rays of
many-coloured light. A moment later it had burst into myriads of faintly
gleaming atoms.

The watching millions on earth instinctively clasped their hands to
their ears, expecting such a sound as would deafen them for ever; but
none came, for the explosion had taken place beyond the limits of the
earth's atmosphere. The whole sky was now filled from zenith to horizon
with a pale, golden, luminous mist, and through this the moon and stars
began to shine dimly.

Then a blast of burning air swept shrieking and howling across the
earth, for now the planet Terra was rushing at her headlong speed of
nearly seventy thousand miles an hour through the ocean of fire-mist
into which the shattered comet had been dissolved. Then this passed. The
cool wind of night followed it, and the moon and stars shone down once
more undimmed through the pure and cloudless ether.

Until now there had been silence. Men and women looked at each other and
clasped hands; and then Tom Bowcock, standing just outside the marquee
with his arm round his wife's shoulders, lifted up his mighty baritone
voice and sang the lines:


     "Praise God from whom all blessings flow!"


Under the leadership of Mr. Foote--who wasted the precious time
of Congress in windy personal diatribes against Mr. Davis and his
"pets"--nothing was done to combine and strengthen the rapidly
sundering elements of Confederate strength.
But the man who, under Providence, had wrought it, seemed deaf and blind
to all this. He only felt a soft trembling clasp round his right hand,
and he only heard Auriole's voice whispering his name.

The next moment a stronger grip pulled his left hand out of his coat
pocket, bringing the revolver with it, and Mr Parmenter's voice, shaken
by rare emotion, said, loudly enough for all in the marquee to hear:

"We may thank God and you, Gilbert Lennard, that there's still a world
with living men and women on it, and there's one woman here who's going
to live for you only till death do you part. She told me all about it
last night. You've won her fair and square, and you're going to have
her. I did have other views for her, but I've changed my mind, because I
have learnt other things since then. But anyhow, with no offence to this
distinguished company, I reckon you're the biggest man on earth just
now."

Soon after daybreak on the first of May, one of the airships that had
been guarding Whernside dropped on the top of Winter Hill, and the
captain gave Lennard a cablegram which read thus:


     "LENNARD, Bolton, England: Good shot. As you left no pieces for us
     to shoot at we've let our shot go. No use for it here. Hope it will
     stop next celestial stranger coming this way. America thanks you.
     Any terms you like for lecturing tour.--HENCHELL."


Lennard did not see his way to accept the lecturing offer because he had
much more important business on hand: but a week later, after a
magnificent and, if the word may be used, multiple marriage ceremony
had been performed in Westminster Abbey, five airships, each with a
bride and bridegroom on board, rose from the gardens of Buckingham
Palace and, followed by the cheers of millions, winged their way
westward. Thirty-five hours later there was such a dinner-party at the
White House, Washington, as eclipsed all the previous glories even of
American hospitality.

The mind must revert, in contrast, to those ravished hearths and stricken
homes and decimated camps, where the South wrought and suffered and
sang--sang words that rose from men's hearts, when the ore of genius
fused and sparkled in the hot blast of their fervid patriotism!

Every poem of the South is a National Hymn!--bought not with dollars, but
with five hundred wrongs and ten times five hundred precious lives!

To one who has not studied the subject, the vast number of southern
war poems would be most surprising, in view of restricted means for
their issue. Every magazine, album and newspaper in the South ran
over with these effusions and swelled their number to an almost
countless one.THE END




COLSTON AND COY. LIMITED, PRINTERS, EDINBURGH