Charles Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.

FIVE THOUSAND AN HOUR

How Johnny Gamble Won the Heiress

BY GEORGE RANDOLPH CHESTER


Author of

THE MAKING OF BOBBY BURNIT, THE EARLY BIRD, GET-RICH-QUICK
WALLINGFORD


ILLUSTRATIONS BY HENRY RALEIGH


CONTENTS


    I   WHICH INTRODUCES JOHNNY GAMBLE AND HIS LAST HUNDRED DOLLARS

   II   IN WHICH STRANGERS BECOME OLD FRIENDS

  III   IN WHICH JOHNNY GAMBLE MIXES BUSINESS AND PLEASURE

   IV   IN WHICH GRESHAM FINDS JOHNNY'S OLD PARTNER ACCOMMODATING

    V   IN WHICH JOHNNY DISPLAYS TALENT AS A TRUE PROMOTER

   VI   IN WHICH CONSTANCE DECIDES ON A FAIR GAME

  VII   IN WHICH JOHNNY DREAMS OF A MAGNIFICENT TWENTY-STORY HOTEL

 VIII   IN WHICH CONSTANCE SHOWS FURTHER INTEREST IN JOHNNY'S
        AFFAIRS

   IX   IN WHICH JOHNNY MEETS A DEFENDER OF THE OLD ARISTOCRACY

    X   IN WHICH JOHNNY IS SINGULARLY THRILLED BY A LITTLE
        CONVERSATION OVER THE TELEPHONE

   XI   IN WHICH JOHNNY EXECUTES SOME EXCEEDINGLY RAPID BUSINESS
        DEALS

  XII   IN WHICH JOHNNY EVEN DOES BUSINESS AT THE BABIES' FUND FAIR

 XIII   IN WHICH JOHNNY BUYS A PRESENT AND HATCHES A SCHEME

  XIV   IN WHICH JOHNNY TRIES TO MIX BUSINESS WITH SKAT

   XV   IN WHICH WINNIE CHAPERONS THE ENTIRE PARTY TO CONEY ISLAND

  XVI   IN WHICH JOHNNY PLANS A REHEARSAL BETWEEN OLD FRIENDS

 XVII   IN WHICH THE STRAW SAILOR HAT OF JOHNNY PLAYS AN
        EMBARRASSING ROLE

XVIII   IN WHICH THE ENTIRE WOBBLES FAMILY FOR ONCE GETS TOGETHER

  XIX   IN WHICH THE COLONEL, MESSRS. COURTNEY, WASHER AND OTHERS
        SIT IN A LITTLE GAME

   XX   IN WHICH JOHNNY ASKS HIMSELF WHAT IS A MILLION DOLLARS,
        ANYWAY

  XXI   IN WHICH CONSTANCE AVAILS HERSELF OF WOMAN'S PRIVILEGE TO
        CHANGE HER MIND

 XXII   IN WHICH PAUL GRESHAM PROPOSES A VERY PRACTICAL ARRANGEMENT

XXIII   IN WHICH THE BRIGHT EYES OF CONSTANCE "RAIN INFLUENCE"

 XXIV   IN WHICH JOHNNY DEMANDS SPOT CASH AT ONCE

  XXV   IN WHICH JOHNNY KEEPS ON DOING BUSINESS TILL THE CLOCK
        STRIKES FOUR


FIVE THOUSAND AN HOUR


CHAPTER I

WHICH INTRODUCES JOHNNY GAMBLE AND HIS LAST HUNDRED DOLLARS


About the time the winner of the Baltimore Handicap flashed under
the wire, Johnny Gamble started to tear up a bundle of nice pink
tickets on Lady S. Just then Ashley Loring came by swiftly in the
direction of the betting shed. Loring stopped and wheeled when he
caught sight of him as did most men who knew him.

"Hello, Johnny! I didn't know you had run over. How are you picking
them to-day?" he asked.

"With a dream book," answered Gamble, smiling; "but I ate lobster
last night."

"I didn't know that you cared for the ponies."

"I don't; and it's mutual. Thought I'd take one more whirl, though,
before the Maryland governor also closes the tracks for ever. How
are you doing?"

"I'm working on a new system," stated the tall young man with
elation. "With this scheme, all you have to do is to bet on the
right horse. What did you have in the handicap?"

"The off bay over there," replied Gamble, indicating a team attached
to a sprinkling wagon, away on the farther side of the course. "Have
one of her calling cards, Loring," and he proffered one of the ex-
tickets.

"Lady S?" translated Loring. "I cut her acquaintance three bets
ago." And, turning just then toward the grandstand, he smiled up
into one of the boxes and lifted his hat.

Glancing in that direction, Gamble was shocked to find himself
looking squarely into the dark eyes of a strikingly beautiful young
woman who stood with her hands resting upon the rail.

"What do you know about Collaton?" he asked; and, in spite of
himself, he looked again. The young lady this time was laughing with
a group of likable young idlers, all of whom Gamble knew; and, since
the startling stranger was occupied, he could indulge in a slightly
more open inspection.

"I saw Collaton on the track to-day and he was making some big
bets," replied Loring with a frown. "He's not broke, Johnny. He's
merely been letting you hold the bag."

"Well, help me let go. Loring, I must dissolve that partnership."

The young lawyer shook his head.

"No way to do it so long as the books remain lost. Unless one of you
buys outright the practically defunct Gamble-Collaton Irrigation
Company and assumes all its liabilities, you will remain
responsible, since Collaton possesses no visible property. I'm sure
that he stung you, Johnny."

"Stung me! I'm swelled up yet."

"It's your own fault. You trusted him too much."

"He trusted me. I sold land."

"Of course he trusted you. Everybody does. Meantime he was out West
incurring obligations. You should have gone into bankruptcy and
settled at twenty cents on the dollar when you had a chance, as I
advised you."

"Couldn't. I look in the glass when I shave. Anyhow, it's all paid
now."

"How do you know, with the books lost? You started in with an equal
amount of money. When that was gone Collaton announced himself
broke--and let you foot the bills. If he only raked off half of what
he spent he got back his own and a tidy fortune besides. Your only
chance is to have that enormous land deal turn out a winner."

"It's worse than Lady S. Tore up my ticket long ago."

"Quite a plunge on a long shot, with a welsher like Collator! making
the book," commented Loring. "He stripped you clean."

"I have my appetite," insisted Gamble with a grin. His cheeks were
ruddy and his skin as flawless as a babe's, and his eyes--
exceptionally large--were as clear as they were direct.

"An appetite like yours only makes it worse to be broke," laughed
Loring.

"There's a plenty of money in New York if I want any," responded
Gamble. "I don't need money, anyhow, Ashley. I have my mother fixed-
-and there's nobody else. Besides, I'm not broke. I have a hundred.
Do you know a good horse?"

"Nautchautauk," advised Loring, and they both turned in the
direction of the betting shed. "The price will probably be short;
but I look on it as an investment."

"You can't invest a hundred dollars," argued Gamble.

"You don't mean to say that a hundred's all you have in the world!"
returned Loring. "I thought you'd saved a good deal more than that
out of the wreck."

"I did; but my brother was broke," replied Gamble carelessly, and
stopped in front of a blackboard. The price on Nautchautauk was one
and a half to two. "I don't want a bet," he remarked, shaking his
head at the board; "I need an accident. I wonder if that goat Angora
has horns and a beard?"

"People try fifty-to-one shots just before they cut their throats,"
warned Loring.

"Hide my safety-razor then. Angora carries my hundred. I'll feed a
sawbuck apiece to ten books."

Loring lost sight of him for a few moments, but found him outside,
by and by, in conversation with "Colonel" Bouncer, a heavily-jowled
man with grizzled hair and very friendly eyes which, however, could
look quite cold enough on occasion. The colonel was staring up at
the box occupied by the young lady to whom Loring had bowed.

"Bless my soul, I'm getting near-sighted!" he was saying as Loring
joined them. "Isn't that Paul Gresham up there with Miss Joy?"

"Is that her name?" asked Gamble eagerly. "Well, I believe it."

The colonel turned from him impatiently.

"You know Gresham, don't you, Loring? Is that he up there in that
box?"

"That is Saint Paul all right," answered Loring with a smile, as he
glanced up at the prim and precise Gresham, who had now succeeded in
fencing Miss Joy in a corner, away from the other young men.

"Thanks," said the colonel, and walked away abstractedly, his eyes
still turning in the direction of the box, although he did not even
start to go up into the grandstand.

"The colonel is still bargain-hunting," observed Loring with a
laugh. "His shoe-manufacturing business has increased to the point
that he must have more space--and he must have it at once. The only
available ground is Gresham's adjoining property, which Gresham long
ago gave up trying to sell him. The colonel is crazy to buy it now,
but he's afraid to let Gresham know he must have it, for fear Saint
Paul will run up the price on him. In consequence, he trails the man
round like a love-sick boy after an actress. When he finds Gresham
he only looks at him--and goes away. That's only half of the laugh,
however. Gresham wants to sell as badly as the colonel wants to buy,
but he doesn't know where to find a fancy market. Queer case, isn't
it?"

"Yes," replied Gamble. "Who's Miss Joy?"

"For heaven's sake, Johnny, don't say you're hit too--even at long
distance!"

"Hit!" repeated Gamble--"I'm flattened out. I'm no lady-fusser,
Ashley, but I'm going to buy a new necktie."

"You don't even know she's rich, do you?" asked Loring, looking at
him with a curious smile.

"Of course I do!" asserted Johnny. "I saw her eyes. Who is she?"

"That's Miss Constance Joy--an orphan worth an exact million
dollars; although I believe there is some sort of a string to it,"
Loring told him. "She lives with her aunt, who is Mrs. Pattie
Boyden, and she's so pretty that even women forgive her. Anything
else you want to know?"

"Yes. Why do I want to bite Paul Gresham?"

"Hush!" admonished Loring. "He is the remnant of one of our very
best imported families, and he needs the money. He sells a piece of
father's property every year, and he haunts Miss Joy like a
pestilence. I think he's mixed up in her million some way or other.
Aunt Pattie approves of him very much; she is strong for family."

"I'll bite him yet," decided Gamble. "Say, Loring, how am I going to
make a stringless million?"

"If I knew that, I wouldn't be your lawyer," declared Loring.
"Excuse me, Johnny; there's a client of mine."


CHAPTER II

IN WHICH STRANGERS BECOME OLD FRIENDS


Into the box where Miss Constance Joy--slender and dark and tall--
entertained her bevy of admirers, there swished a violently-gowned
young woman of buxom build and hearty manner, attended by a young
man who wore a hundred-dollar suit and smiled feebly whenever he
caught an eye. In his right hand he carried Miss Polly Parsons'
gloves and parasol; in his left, her race-card and hand-bag. Round
his shoulders swung her field-glasses; from his right pocket
protruded her fan and from his left her auto veil. She carried her
own vanity box.

"If you aren't the darlingest thing in the world!" she greeted Miss
Joy, whose face had lighted with a smile of both amusement and
pleasure. "You certainly are some Con! Every time I see you in a new
gown I change my dressmaker. Hello, boys!" She shook hands cordially
with all of them as soon as she had paid her brief respects to Mrs.
Pattie Boyden, who was pleasant and indulgent enough in her
greeting, though not needlessly so.

"You're looking as happy as ever, Polly," observed Constance.

"I'm as happy as a mosquito in a baby's crib," avowed Polly. "I've
added three thousand to-day to the subscription list for our Ocean
View Baby Hotel. Where's that list, Sammy?"

Sammy Chirp passed a few things from his right to his left hand and
searched a few pockets; passed a few things from his left to his
right hand, dropped the lady's handkerchief and picked it up, smiled
feebly upon everybody, and then at last produced the subscription
list, which Miss Joy read most interestedly.

"That's splendid, Polly!" she approved. "Another day's work as good
as this, and we'll be able to buy our hotel."

Paul Gresham, standing stiffly between her and Polly, looked down at
her and smiled correctly.

"I guess we'd better go, don't you think?" he remarked to the other
young men.

"You're safe enough," retorted Polly. "You're safe any place with
your check-book. Besides, we don't want to double names on this
list. We'll spring another one when we're ready to equip and run the
place. Oh, there's Johnny Gamble! Hello, Johnny!" And she leaned far
over the rail to call to him.

It was strange how quickly Johnny Gamble was able to distinguish a
sound coming from that direction, and he looked up immediately.
"Come right up here, Johnny," she commanded him. "I have a great
surprise in store for you."

"Go any place you say if it's not too hot there," he cheerfully
assured her, and started off towards the staircase.

"When I get Johnny Gamble's name this list is closed," said Polly
confidently.

"I'll bet with you on that," offered Bruce Townley. "Johnny probably
hasn't enough money to buy a tin rattle for your babies' hotel."

"No!" she protested, shocked. "I'm so used to seeing him with money
that I don't think I'd know him if he had it shaved off."

"He was too honest, as usual," supplemented Val Russel, lounging
carelessly against the rail. "Here comes Ashley Loring. He can tell
you all about it. Johnny Gamble hasn't a cent left, has he, Loring?"

"It would be most unprofessional to discuss Mr. Gamble's private
affairs," said Loring reprovingly as he came into the box. "Aside
from a mere detail like that, I don't mind saying that Johnny Gamble
has just bet the last hundred dollars he has in the world on an
absolutely criminal long shot."

"I hope he wins!" stated Polly heartily. "I think he's the only real
gentleman I ever knew."

"Well, I like that!" protested Val Russel, laughing.

"I don't mean a slam at you boys," she hastily corrected. "You're a
nice clean bunch; but I know so much about Johnny. He helps people,
then hides so he can't be thanked. He's the one man out of a
thousand that both women and men can absolutely trust."

"That's rather a broad statement," objected Paul Gresham, who had
eyed Polly with fastidious distaste every time she spoke. He was a
rather silent young man with a thin high-arched nose and eyebrows
that met, and was so flawlessly dressed that he sat stiffly.

"I'll make it two in a thousand, Mr. Gresham," said Polly
pleasantly. "I hadn't noticed you; and whatever I am I try to be
polite."

The four other young men, who were used to Polly's sweeping
generalities, laughed; for Polly had their hearty approval.

Johnny Gamble arrived.

"Where's the surprise?" he demanded with a furtive glance in the
direction of Miss Joy, a glance which Gresham jealously resented.

"Me!" Polly gaily told him, thrusting her subscription list into the
pocket of Sammy Chirp. "You haven't seen me since I got back."

"You're no surprise--you're a gasp!" he informed her, heartily glad
to see her. "That sunset bonnet is a maraschino."

"Pinkest one they had," she complacently assured him. "I want you to
meet some friends of mine, Johnny." And, with vast pride in her
acquaintanceship with all parties concerned, she introduced him to
Constance and Aunt Pattie.

Johnny Gamble and Constance Joy, for just a moment, looked upon each
other with the frank liking which sometimes makes strangers old
friends. Gresham saw that instant liking and stiffened. Johnny
Gamble, born in a two-room cottage and with sordid experiences
behind him of which he did not like to think in this company,
dropped his eyes; whereupon Miss Constance Joy, who had been cradled
under silken coverlets, studied him serenely. She had little enough
opportunity to inspect odd types at close range--and this was a very
interesting specimen. His eyes were the most remarkable blue she had
ever seen.

"Cousin Polly has been telling us most pleasant things about you,"
she observed.

"Your cousin Polly?" he inquired, perplexed.

"Yes; we're cousins now," announced Polly happily. "It's the first
time I ever had any relations, and I'm tickled stiff!"

"So am I!" agreed Johnny heartily, figuring vaguely that somebody or
other must have married.

"You are just in the nick of time, Gamble," Gresham quietly stated
with a deliberate intention of humiliating this child of no one.
"Miss Polly has a subscription list which she wants you to
complete."

"He's too late," replied Polly with a flash of her eyes in Gresham's
direction. "Mr. Loring just closed up that list," and she winked
vigorously at Loring.

"Loring's my friend," Gamble said with a cheerful laugh. "I have
check-writer's cramp. Who's to get the loving cup?"

"The loving cup's a bottle," Polly returned. "This is a baby's
benefit. It's Constance's pet scheme and I'm crazy about it. We've
found a big, hundred-room summer hotel, with two hundred acres of
ground, on a high bluff overlooking the ocean; and we're going to
turn it into a free hotel for sickly babies and their mothers. Isn't
that some scheme?"

"I'm so strong for it I ache!" announced Mr. Gamble with fervor.
"Put me down for--" He checked himself ruefully. "I forgot I was
broke!" Gresham shrugged his shoulders in satisfaction.

"You'll take something for that," Polly confidently comforted her
friend Gamble. "There's G. W. Mason & Company, Johnny. Take me over
to him and watch me fool him when he says he has no check-book with
him. I have check blanks on every bank in town. Bring along my hand-
bag and my subscription list, Sammy."

When they had gone, with the feebly pleased Sammy dutifully bringing
up the rear, Gresham looked after them with relief.

"Handicap day brings out some queer people," he observed.

"If you mean Mr. Gamble I think him delightful," Constance quickly
advised him. "I'm inclined to agree with Polly that he is very much
a gentleman."

"He would be quite likely to appeal to Polly," remarked Aunt Pattie
as she arose for a visit to a near-by box.

"You mean Cousin Polly," corrected Constance sweetly.

Gresham was very thoughtful. He was more logically calculating than
most people thought him.

It was Polly's cousinship which puzzled Johnny Gamble. "When you
picked a cousin you made some choice," he complimented her. "How did
you do it?"

"They made me," she explained. "You know that Billy Parsons was the
only man I ever wanted to marry--or ever will, I guess. His folks
met me once and wouldn't stand for me at all; then Billy took sick
and went out of his head. He cried for me so that the doctor said he
had to have me; so I canceled the best engagement I ever had. I
wasn't a star, but I was featured and was making an awful hit. I
went right to the house, though, and stayed two months--till Billy
died. Then I went back to work; but I hated it. Well, along toward
the last they'd got so friendly that I was awful lonesome. It wasn't
long till they got lonesome too. They're old, you know; and Billy
was all they had. So they came after me and I went with them; and
they adopted me and we all love each other to death. Constance's my
cousin now--and she stands it without batting an eyelash. She's
about the cream of the earth, Johnny!"

He drew in his breath sharply.

"You're a lucky kid!" he told her.

There was something in the intensity of his tone which made her look
up at him, startled.

"Now don't you fall in love with her, Johnny!" she begged.

"Why not?" he demanded. "I never tried it; but I bet I can do it."

"That's the trouble," she expostulated; "it's too easy. You can fall
in all right, but how will you get out?"

"I don't want out," he assured her. "I play marbles for keeps."

"All right then; take to pickles and perfume. Look here, Johnny; if
none of her own set can ring her with an orange wreath what can an
outsider do?"

"How do I know till I try?" he inquired. "I get you, Polly. You mean
I'm not in her class; but, you see, I want her!"

"So do the others," she objected.

"They're not used to hard work," he earnestly informed her. "Say, I
need a million dollars."

"Take enough while you're at it! What do you want it for?"

"Her stack's that high."

"She'd never count it."

"I know; but Aunt Pattie and I would. I have to have it, Polly."

"Then you'll get it," she resignedly admitted. "Why, Johnny, I
believe you could get Constance, too!" she added with suddenly
accelerated belief in him. "Well, I'm certainly for you. Tell me,
what can I do to help you?"

"Poison Gresham for me."

"Give me your fifteen cents," she directed. "He's about as popular
with her as a flea with a dog; but he goes with the furniture. He
was wished on her by her Aunt Gertrude."

"Why did her aunt hate her?"

"She hated everybody; so she went in for charity. She made six
wills, each time leaving all her money to a different public
institution; but they each one did something she didn't like before
she could die. The last time she decided to give Constance a chance,
made a new will and took sick the same night. Constance has the
interest on her million till she marries Gresham; then she gets it
all. If she marries anybody else before Gresham dies the money goes
to a home for blind cats, or something like that."

"Healthy soul, wasn't she?" commiserated Johnny. "But why Gresham?"

"The bug for family. Aunt Gertrude's father didn't make his tobacco-
trust money fast enough for her to marry Gresham's father, who would
have been a lord if everybody in England had died. Constance is to
bring aristocracy into the family now."

"Tell her to tear up that million. I'll get her another one,"
offered Johnny easily.

"You'll need some repairs before you start," she suggested. "They
tell me you're down and out."

"Tell them to guess again!" he indignantly retorted. "I own all the
to-morrows in the world. There's money in every one of them."

"I've got an awful big bank-account that needs exercise," she
offered. "Now, look here, Johnny, don't yell like I'd hit you with a
brick. You told me to help myself once when I needed it, and I did.
You ought to let me get even. All right, then; be stingy! Where's
Sammy?" She had been feeling in both sleeves with a trace of
annoyance, and now she turned to discover Sammy a few paces back,
idly watching a policeman putting an inebriated man off the track.
"Sammy!" she called him sharply. He came, running and frightened.
"I've lost my handkerchief," she informed him. "Go get it." Sammy
smiled gratefully and was gone.

"Where did you find it?" asked Johnny, indicating the departing
messenger. "Follow you home one cold night, or did a friend give it
to you?"

"Oh, no," she said carelessly; "it just sticks around. I can't get
rid of it, so I've trained it to be handy when I need it."

She fastened upon Colonel Mason just as the horses came to the post,
and she was suplying him with a check blank just as they got away
from the barrier. Gamble turned to the track and distinguished his
long shot off in the lead. He smiled grimly at that irony, for he
had seen long-shot horses raise false hopes before. Mildly
interested, he watched Angora reach the quarter pole, still in the
lead. Rather incredulously, he saw her still in the lead at the
half. He was eager about it when she rounded the three-quarters with
nothing but daylight before her; and as she came down the stretch,
with Nautchautauk reaching out for her flanks, he stuck the ash-end
of his cigar in his mouth and did not see the finish. He knew, by
the colossal groan from the grandstand, however, that Angora had
beaten the favorite; and, though he was not in the least excited, he
felt through all his pockets for his tickets, forgetting that he had
taken them out at the beginning of the race and still held them in
his hand; also, he forgot completely that he was supposed to be
escorting Polly, and immediately sauntered down to the betting shed-
-to collect the largest five thousand and one hundred dollars in
captivity.


CHAPTER III

IN WHICH JOHNNY MIXES BUSINESS AND PLEASURE


A general desire to bet on the last race had sent all the occupants
of the Boyden box, except Constance, Polly and Gresham, down to the
betting shed when Gamble returned; and he was very glad there was
room enough for him to sit down and enjoy himself. He had evil
designs upon Gresham.

"This is my lucky day," he observed, smiling upon Miss Joy. "I began
this afternoon to pile up an exact million. A near horse gave me a
five-thousand-dollar start."

"If you keep on at the rate of five thousand dollars an hour you'll
have your million in two hundred hours," Constance figured for him.

"I won't work Sundays, evenings, holidays or birthdays," he
objected.

"How fussy!" commented Polly. "Which was the kind horse?"

"A goat by the name of Angora," he replied.

"That race should call for an inquiry," sternly stated Gresham.

"You must have bet on the favorite," returned Gamble, and laughed
when Gresham winced. Not a shade of Gresham's expression was
escaping him now.

"We all did," acknowledged Constance smilingly. "This is the first
time I ever bet on the races; and I sent down to bet on every horse
in this last one, so I'll be sure to win just once. I suppose you
attend the races frequently, Mr. Gamble?"

"I'll give you one more guess," he returned. "I don't like to walk
home."

"You won't have to walk this time," she reminded him.

"Not while I ride!" asserted Polly stoutly.

"I'm so glad you won, Johnny. I guess you'll stay in Baltimore now."

"And give this back? I'll get an injunction against myself first.
Polly, I owe you twenty-five hundred dollars. Here's the money."

"This is so sudden," she coyly observed. "My memory's poor, though,
Johnny."

"It's a promise I made myself: If I won this bet half of the
winnings belonged to the babies' hotel."

"Wait, Johnny," objected Polly, pushing the money away from her.
"I'd rather have you on the new subscription list, by and by, for
the furnishing and remodeling fund."

"I'll go on both of them," he offered, putting the money in her lap.
"You ought to know that I stick."

"Yes, you do," she sighed, and passed him the list, covertly
pointing out Gresham's name as she did so and showing the amount
opposite it to be one hundred dollars.

"Mr. Gamble wants to make sure that you'll get it," sneered Gresham,
and laughed. He was anxious to belittle Gamble in the eyes of
Constance.

"If Johnny Gamble puts his name down it's as good as paid!" flared
Polly. "By the way, Mr. Gresham, I have that Corn Exchange check
blank for you now."

She handed him the blank and her fountain-pen; and, with some slight
reluctance, Mr. Gresham paid his subscription.

"Thanks," said Polly briskly. "Johnny, did you say I should put you
on the other list for the same amount?"

Constance leaned hastily forward, with the impulse to interfere
against so foolhardy a thing, but caught herself; and, leaning back,
she looked at Johnny Gamble in profile and smiled. There was
something fascinating about the fellow's clear-eyed assurance as he
cheerfully answered: "If you please, Polly."

"It will take you four hundred hours now to make your million,"
Gresham advised him, with scarcely concealed contempt.

"I'm no loafer," Gamble declared.

They all laughed at that.

"I beg your pardon," apologized Gresham. "Let's see. How long will
it take you to make your million at the rate of five thousand an
hour? How many hours a day?"

"About seven on regular days; three on Saturdays."

Both the girls were still laughing at the absurdity of it all.

"Counting off for Sundays, you should have your million in about
forty days," persisted Gresham, figuring it with pencil and paper.

Johnny studied the problem carefully.

"All right; I'll do it," he announced, and looked at his watch.

"Bravo!" applauded Constance. "If you could succeed in that you
would display a force which nothing could resist."

Gresham looked at her with a quick frown.

"And if he failed he would display a presumption which nothing could
forgive," he paraphrased. "If it's not asking too much, Mr. Gamble,
I'm curious to know how you propose to accumulate your million." And
he smiled across at Miss Joy, who turned to Gamble, waiting
interestedly for his reply.

"Work a lot of neglected stunts. I never wanted to make a million
till now. I know how, though. I think I'll start with real estate."
And he watched Gresham narrowly.

"That's a dismal enough opening," announced Gresham with a pained
expression. "It is impossible to secure a decent price for property,
especially when you want to sell it."

"If you want to get rid of some I'll buy it," offered Gamble
promptly.

"I want cash." And again Gresham smiled over at Constance. The
slight trace of a frown flitted across her brow. She had always
thought of Gresham as a man of perfect breeding.

"Name the right figure. I'll make a deal with you on the spot."

"This is scarcely the place for business," Gresham reproved him.

"I beg pardon," Gamble quickly said, and looked at Constance, a
trifle abashed.

"Please go ahead," that young lady urged. "This is more fun than the
races."

"Thanks." He smiled gratefully, "Now, Gresham, let's get down to
statistics. These are working hours. Here's twenty-five hundred."

"What for?" asked Gresham, looking at the money avariciously.

"To show confidence in the dealer. You have a vacant lot up-town.
What's it worth?"

"Forty thousand dollars," recited Graham.

"If you want forty it's worth thirty," Gamble sagely concluded.
"I'll split it with you. Give you thirty-five."

Gresham shook his head; but Gamble, watching him closely, saw that
he was figuring.

"I can't let the property go for less than its value."

"I don't want you to. I offered you thirty-five."

"On what terms?" inquired Gresham cautiously.

"Thirty days cash. This twenty-five hundred is a first payment. I
want a renewable option. If I don't cross over with the balance in
thirty days, spend the money."

"What do you mean by a renewable option?" asked Gresham, hesitating.

"When this option runs out I get another at the same price--and
twice more after that."

"Nonsense!" exclaimed Gresham, turning away. "Why, I'd be letting
you tie up my property for four months."

"I'm offering you over eighty per cent, a year. You'd rather stay
tied."

Gresham pondered that problem for a moment.

"By Jove, you're right!" he said. "I'm selfish enough to hope that
you can't pay for it in thirty days." He reflected that in all
probability this reckless person was playing another long shot.
"I'll take you."

Gamble piled the money into his hands, and with Polly's fountain-
pen, wrote a clear and concise statement of the option upon the back
of an unimportant letter. Gresham, as soon as he had finished
counting the money with caressing fingers, read and reread the
option cautiously--and signed it.

Polly reached out for it.

"Let me witness this," she requested with a glance of meaning at her
friend Johnny; and, writing the word "Witnesses" in its proper
place, she signed her name and passed the paper to Miss Joy. "Come
in, Constance; the water's fine," she invited. "Be a witness with me
and let's all be in vulgar trade."

Constance signed the paper gravely, puckering her lips adorably as
she made a careful business of it. She gave the paper to Mr. Gamble,
and he felt foolish enough to kiss the signature. She found another
paper upon her lap and opened it mechanically. It was the
subscription list. Suddenly she burst into laughter.

"This last donation is from Angora!" she exclaimed. "That's a
generous subscription, Mr. Gamble; but I don't know whether to thank
you or the horse."

"Thank the goat, whoever that is," he suggested, smiling into her
eyes. Great Scott, what eyes they were! "Polly, Colonel Bouncer is
over there by the band stand. I'll give you a nickel's worth of
peanuts if you'll tell him what I'm doing."

Then he thought of all his little child had told him about how Jesus
had died to save us.

He thought he had never loved her so much. But he began to see that
he had far more reason to love Jesus who had suffered much
more to save him from the "bottomless pit." And then he thought
of the promise he so carefully made to his daughter.

What could he do but kneel down and cry to God to have mercy upon
him?

If they meet in heaven, do you think that daughter will be sorry
that she sacrificed her life for her father's sake? Can you not
imagine that tears often filled the eyes of that father when he
spoke of his sainted little one?

You would say that he would have been a very wicked man if he had not
loved the memory of his child. But is it not a thousand times more
wicked for you not to love Him who has loved you so much more than
that little one loved her father?

How can you help loving such a precious Savior? Will you not
ask Him to forgive you and help you to live for Him the rest of
your life?

--_The Way of Faith_

"FORGOTTEN MY SOUL"

"Mother, you have forgotten my soul," so said a little girl, three
years old as her kind and careful mother was about to lay her in
bed. She had just risen from repeating the Lord's prayer.

"But, Mother," she said, "you have forgotten my soul."
"What do you mean, Anna?"
"Why,

'Now I lay me down to sleep, I pray the Lord my soul to keep!
If I should die before I wake, I pray the Lord my soul to take.'
"We have not said that."

The child meant nothing more, yet her words were startling. And,
oh!
from how many rosy lips might they come with mournful
significance!

[Illustration]
You, fond mother, so busy hour after hour preparing and adorning
garments for their pretty little form, have you forgotten the soul?

Do you commend it earnestly to the care of its God and Savior?

Are you leading it to commit itself, in faith and love to his keeping?

--Selected.

PREVAILING PRAYER OF A CHILD
At the close of a prayer-meeting, the pastor observed a little girl
about twelve years of age remaining upon her knees, when most of
the congregation had retired.

Thinking the child had fallen asleep, he touched her and told
her it was time to return home. To his surprise he found that she
was engaged in prayer, and he said: "All things whatsoever ye shall
ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive."

She looked up at the pastor earnestly, and inquired: "Is that so?

Does God say that?"
[Illustration]

He took up a Bible and read the passage aloud. She immediately began
praying: "Lord, send my father here; Lord, send my father to the
chapel."

Thus she continued for about half an hour, attracting by her earnest
cry the attentions of persons who had lingered about the door.

At last a man rushed into the chapel, ran up the aisle and sank upon
his knees by the side of his child, exclaiming: "What do you want
of me?" She threw her arms about his neck, and began to pray: "Oh,
Lord, convert my father!"

Soon the man's heart was melted and he began to pray for himself.
The child's father was three miles from the chapel when she began
praying for him.

He was packing goods in a wagon and felt impressed with an
irresistible impulse to return home.

Driving rapidly to his house, he left the goods in his wagon and
hastened to the chapel, where he found his daughter crying mightily
to God in his behalf; and he was led there to the Savior.

--_Foster's Encyclopedia_

THE DYING NEWS BOY
In a dark alley in the great city of New York, a small, ragged boy
might be seen.

He appeared to be about twelve years old, and had a careworn
expression on his countenance.

The cold air seemed to have no pity as it pierced through his
ragged clothes, and made the flesh beneath blue and almost frozen.

[Illustration: "I am dying now, because I feel so queer; and I can
hardly see you.

I can kinder see the angels holding out their hands for me to come
to that beautiful place they call heaven."]

This poor boy had once a happy home. His parents died a year
before, and left him without money or friends. He was compelled
to face the cold, cruel world with but a few cents in his pocket.

He tried to earn his living by selling newspapers and other
such things.

This day everything seemed to go against him, and in despair he
threw himself down in the dark alley, with his papers by his side.

A few boys gathered around the poor lad, and asked in a kind way
(for a street Arab): "Say, Johnny, why don't you go to the lodges?"
(The lodge was a place where almost all the boys stayed at night,
costing but a few cents.)

But the poor little lad could only murmur that he could not stir, and
called the boys about him, saying: "I am dying now, because I feel
so queer: and I can hardly see you.

Gather around me closer boys. I cannot talk so loud.

I can kinder see the angels holding out their hands for me to come to
that beautiful place called heaven.

Goodbye, boys. I am to meet father and mother." And, with these
last words on his lips, the poor lad died.

Next morning the passers-by saw a sight that would soften the
most hardened heart. There, lying on the cold stone, with his head
against the hard wall, and his eyes staring upward, was the
poor little frozen newsboy. He was taken to the chapel near by, and
was interred by kind hands. And those who performed this act will
never forget the poor forsaken lad.

--_Golden Dawn_ 

NEW SHOES
"I wonder if there can be a pair of shoes in it!"

Little Tim sat on the ground close beside a very ugly dark-colored
stone jug.

He eyed it sharply, but finding it quite impossible to see through
its sides, pulled out the cork and peered anxiously in.

"Can't see nothin', but it's so dark in there I couldn't see if
there was anything.

I've a great mind to break the hateful old thing."

He sat for awhile thinking how badly he wanted a pair of shoes to
wear to the Sunday School picnic.

His mother had promised to wash and mend his clothes, so that he
might go looking very neat indeed; but the old shoes were far past
all mending and how could he go barefoot?

Then he began counting the chances of his father being very angry
when he should find his jug broken.

He did not like the idea of getting a whipping for it, as was very
likely, but how could he resist the temptation of making sure about
those shoes?

The more he thought of them, the more he couldn't.

He sprang up and hunted around until he found a good size brick-bat,
which he flung with such vigorous hand and correct aim that the
next moment the old jug lay in pieces before his eyes.

How eagerly he bent over them in the hope of finding not only what
he was so longing for but, perhaps, other treasure! But his poor
little heart sank as he turned over the fragments with trembling
fingers. Nothing could be found among the broken bits, wet on the
inside with a bad-smelling liquid.

Tim sat down again and sobbed as he had never sobbed before; so
hard that he did not hear a step beside him until a voice said:
"Well, what's all this?"

He sprang up in great alarm. It was his father, who always
slept late in the morning, and was very seldom awake so early as
this.

[Illustration]

"Who broke my jug?" he asked. "I did," said Tim, catching his breath
half in terror and half between his sobs.

"Why did you?" Tim looked up.

The voice did not sound quite so terrible as he had expected. The
truth was his father had been touched at sight of the forlorn
figure, so very small and so sorrowful, which had bent over the
broken jug.

"Why," he said, "I was looking for a pair of new shoes.

I want a pair of shoes awful bad to wear at the picnic.

All the other chaps wear shoes."
"How came you to think you'd find shoes in a jug?"
"Why Mama said so. I asked her for some new shoes and she said
they had gone into the black jug, and that lots of other things had
gone into it, too--coats and hats, and bread and meat and things--and
I thought if I broke it I'd find them all, and there ain't a thing
in it--and Mama never said what wasn't so before--and I thought
'twould be so--sure."

And Tim, hardly able to sob out the words, feeling how keenly his
trust in mother's word had added to his great disappointment, sat
down again, and cried harder than ever.

His father seated himself on a box in the disorderly yard and
remained quiet for so long a time that Tim at last looked timidly
up.

"I am real sorry I broke your jug, Father.

I'll never do it again."

"No, I guess you won't," he said, laying a hand on the rough little
head as he went away leaving Tim overcome with astonishment that
his father had not been angry with him.

Two days after, on the very evening before the picnic, he handed
Tim a parcel, telling him to open it.

"New shoes! new shoes!" he shouted.

"Oh, Father, did you get a new jug and were they in it?"

"No, my boy, there isn't going to be a new jug. Your mother was right
all the time--the things all went into the jug; but you see getting
them out is no easy matter so I am going to keep them out after
this."

--_New York Observer_

LITTLE JENNIE'S SICKNESS AND DEATH
Little Jennie was eight years old, March 30, 1886.

The April following she was taken very sick, and from that time
until June 4, she seemed a little suffering angel.

Then Jesus, who had so blessedly sustained her during all her
sufferings took her to Himself. She would say, when able to
talk: "Mama, I do not care what I suffer, God knows best." When
she was very low, we would often see her dear lips moving, and
listening, hear her praying.

She would finish her prayer and after saying "Amen" having noticed
that we were listening to her, would look up into our faces to see
if we wanted anything.

This patience and devotion characterized her whole life.

Often, when she was at play with her sister, who was the older
by five years, when some little trouble would arise, she would
take her sister by the hand and say: "Kitty, let's tell Jesus."

Then bowing her little head, she would pour out her whole heart in
prayer to God, with the fervency that is shown by a true Christian.

About three weeks after she was taken ill her little body was
paralyzed and drawn all out of shape it seemed. Then in a few
days her little limbs were so we could almost straighten them.

What suffering she endured all that time, no one knows but those
who were with her.

May 25th, which was Tuesday, while suffering terribly, she said:
"Mama, play and sing." I took my guitar, and without stopping to
think what to sing, began that beautiful song in the Gospel Hymns:
"Nearer my home, today, than I have been before." I could praise God
just then, for I was filled with His Spirit.

She lay there looking at me with her little blue eyes and trying in
her weak voice to help me. At last she seemed soothed by the music.

But we knew that Jesus in his infinite love, had quieted her for a
time, because we were willing to submit to His will.

We had said all the time: "Lord, not my will, but thine."
She rested quite well until about three o'clock in the afternoon;
then suddenly she spoke and her voice sounded quite strong.

She said: "Oh, Mama see those people, how funny they look!

They look like poles." She was lying so that she could look out of the
window and as she spoke her eyes seemed to rest on some object
there.

Then she spoke louder; "OH, MAMMA, COME AND SEE THE LITTLE
CHILDREN! I never saw so many in my life."

I sat down on the front of the bed and said: "Jennie, is there
any there that you know?"

She looked them over so earnestly, then said: "No, not one." I asked
her how they looked. She said: "Mama, every one has a gold crown
on its head, and they are all dressed in white." I thought that Jesus
was coming for her then.

After telling me that there were none that she knew she sank back
on the pillows exhausted. But in a few moments she raised up again
and said: "Oh, Mama, hear that music! Did you ever hear such
grand music?
Now, do not shut the windows tonight, will you?"

I told her that I would not.

The next morning she called Kittie into the room and said: "Kittie,
I want to tell you what I saw last night."

She then proceeded to tell her the same as she had told me the
evening before.

Then she said: "Now, Kittie, you will forgive me for ever being cross
to you won't you?"
Kittie answered, "Little darling, you have never been cross to me.

Will you forgive me, sister, for being cross to you?"

"Darling sister," she said, "that is all right."

Thursday night she was paralyzed in her left side so that she had
no use of it.

Friday all day she lay unconscious, and that night the same.

Saturday, about ten o'clock, she commenced to whisper.

We could hear her say: "Papa, Mama."

We tried to understand her, but at first could not.
She kept whispering plainer, and finally we heard her say: "Take--me--
upstairs.

I--want--to--lie--on--my--own--bed--once--more." But of course
we could not move her. Suddenly she said aloud: "I am going to die!
kiss me quick, Mama."

I bent down and kissed her, and she looked so wretched. I said:
"Jennie, you will not have to go alone; Jesus will take you."

She answered: "I know it. I wish that He would come this minute. Kiss
me again, Mama."
I did so; then she wished us to sing.

Again, without giving one thought, I commenced singing the same
words that I sang the Tuesday before.

She raised her right hand arm's length, and began to wave it and bow
her head. Oh! she was so happy.

Then she said: "Play." They brought the guitar, and she continued
to wave her little hand, while I played and sang the whole piece.
One of her aunts, standing near the bed took hold of her hand to
stop it, but it moved just the same; and I said: "Ollie, let go of
her hand, that is the Lord's doings."

After I finished, she kissed her father, mother, and sister and
bade them goodbye; then called four other very dear friends and
told them goodbye after kissing them.

She then called for a book and wanted the music teacher, who was
present, to play and sing a piece which she dearly loved.

Before she was sick she would have little prayer meetings, and her
sweet little face would shine with happiness.

She would say: "Oh, Mama, how the Lord has blessed me."
[Illustration: "They brought the guitar, and she continued to wave
her little hand, while I played and sang the whole piece."]

While the dear teacher was playing and singing her favorite she
was waving her little hand. We sang three or four other pieces
around her bed.

We all thought that Jesus would take her then.

Oh, what joy!

it was heaven below.

Jesus was there and the room was filled with glory on account of
of His presence.

Two of her aunts said that it seemed as though they were in heaven.

She never spoke after that, but would try to make us understand by
motioning when she wanted anything.

Sometimes it would take us a long time, but she would be so patient.

She was ready and waiting. She had peace that the world cannot give,
and, praise God! that the world cannot take away. The dear little one
lived until the next Tuesday afternoon, and went to Jesus about
three o'clock. That was the time she saw the vision the Tuesday
before.

Tuesday morning before daylight she tried to tell me something. I said
"Sing?" She looked so happy and bowed her head.
I began singing: "I am Jesus' little lamb." She bowed her head again.

In the forenoon she kept looking at her aunts, Ollie and Belle, and
pointing up.

Oh! it meant so much. It seemed to me that she was saying, that it
meant: "Meet me in heaven."

Finally she motioned for me to raise the window curtain.

I did so and she looked out the window so eagerly, as though she was
expecting to see the little children.

Then the little blue eyes closed to open no more in this world, but
in heaven.

--Mrs. L. Jones.

SHE DIED FOR HIM

[Illustration]

A poor emigrant had gone to Australia to "make his fortune," leaving
a wife and little son in England.

When he had made some money, he wrote home to his wife: "Come out
to me here; I send the money for your passage; I want to see you
and my boy."

The wife took ship as soon as she could, and started for her new
home. One night, as they were all asleep there sounded the dreaded
cry of "Fire, fire!" Everyone rushed on deck and the boats were soon
filled. The last one was just pushing off then a cry of "there are
two more on deck," arose. They were the mother and her son.
Alas! "Only room for one," the sailors shouted.

Which was to go? The mother thought of her far away home, her
husband looking out lovingly and longingly for his wife. Then she
glanced at the boy, clinging frightened to her skirts. She could not
let him die. There was no time to lose. Quick! quick! The flames
were getting around. Snatching the child, she held him to her a
moment.

"Willie, tell Father I died for you!" Then the boy as lowered into
the sailor's willing arms. She died for him.

--Selected.

"I DON'T LOVE YOU NOW, MOTHER"
A great many years ago, I knew a lady who had been sick for two
years, as you have seen many a one, all the while slowly dying with
consumption.

She had one child--a little boy named Henry.

One afternoon I was sitting by her side and it seemed as if she
would cough her life away.

Her little boy stood by the post of the bed, his blue eyes filled
with tears to see her suffer so.

By and by the terrible cough ceased.

Henry came and put his arms around his mother's neck, nestled his
head in his mother's bosom, and said, "Mother, I do love you; I
wish you wasn't sick."

An hour later, the same loving, blue-eyed boy came in all aglow,
stamping the snow off his feet.

"Oh, Mother, may I go skating? it is so nice--Ed and Charlie are
going."

"Henry," feebly said the mother, "the ice is not hard enough yet."

"But, Mother," very pettishly said the boy, "you are sick all the
time-- how do you know?"

"My child, you must obey me," gently said his mother.

"It is too bad," angrily sobbed the boy, who an hour ago had so
loved his mother.

"I would not like to have my little boy go," said the mother, looking
sadly at the little boy's face, all covered with frowns; "you said
you loved me--be good."

"No, I don't love you now, Mother," said the boy, going out and slamming
the door.

Again that dreadful coughing came upon her, and _we_ thought
no more of the boy. After the coughing had commenced, I noticed tears
falling thick upon her pillow, but she sank from exhaustion into
a light sleep.

In a little while muffled steps of men's feet were heard coming
into the house, as though carrying something; and they were carrying
the almost lifeless body of Henry.

Angrily had he left his mother and gone to skate--disobeying her;
and then broken through the ice, sunk under the water, and now
saved by a great effort, was brought home barely alive to his
sick mother.

I closed the doors feeling more danger for her life than the child's
and coming softly in, drew back the curtains from the bed. She spoke,
"I heard them--it is Henry; oh, I knew he went--is he dead?"

But she never seemed to hear the answer I gave her. She commenced
coughing--she died in agony--strangled to death. The poor mother!
The boy's disobedience killed her.

After a couple of hours I sought the boy's room.

[Illustration]

"Oh, I wish I had not told mother I did not love her. Tomorrow I will
tell her I do," said the child sobbing painfully. My heart ached;
tomorrow I knew we must tell him she was dead. We did not till the
child came fully into the room, crying, "Mother, I do love you."

Oh!

may I never see agony like that child's, as the lips he kissed gave
back no kiss, as the hands he took fell lifeless from his hand,
instead of shaking his hand as it always had, and the boy knew she
was dead.

"Mother, I do love you now," all the day he sobbed and cried, "O
Mother, Mother, forgive me." Then he would not leave his mother.
"Speak to me, Mother!"

but she could never speak again, and he--the last words she had
ever heard him say, were, "Mother, I don't love you now."

That boy's whole life was changed; sober and sad he was ever after.
He is now a gray haired old man, with one sorrow over his one
act of disobedience, one wrong word embittering all his life--with
those words ever ringing in his ears, "Mother, I don't love you
now."

"I know; I didn't have the right chances when I was young!"

Polly gazed upon him admiringly.

"I've seen swift love affairs before, but you've set a new record!"
she exclaimed. "Well, I'm for you, Johnny. Since poor Billy's
parents adopted me and made me a cousin of Constance, I can trot up
her stone steps any minute; and she treats me as if I'd had my first
bottle in a pink-silk boudoir. I'll make it my business to run up
there twice a day and boost for you."

"Don't be too strong!" Johnny hastily warned her. "Boost half of the
time if you want to, but be sure and knock the other half."

"I guess it would be better," soberly agreed Polly--"even with
Constance. Here's your terminal station. Pick out your corner and
drive a claim stake."

Polly obligingly drove slowly around three sides of the huge new
terminal. Directly opposite the main entrance was a vacant plot of
ground, with a frontage of an entire block and a depth of four
hundred feet. Big white signs upon each corner told that it was for
sale by Mallard & Tyne. They stopped in front of this location,
while both Johnny and Polly ranged their eyes upward, by successive
steps, to the roof garden which surmounted the twentieth story of
Johnny's imaginary Terminal Hotel.

"It's a nifty-looking building, Johnny!" she complimented him as
they turned to each other with sheepish smiles.

"I'm going to tear it down and put up a better one," he briskly told
her. "I'll hand you a piece of private information. If the big
railroad company which built this terminal station doesn't own that
blank space it's a fool--and I don't think it is. If it does the
property will be held for ever for the increase in value. Let's look
at these other blocks. The buildings on the one next to it are worth
about a plugged nickel apiece--and that would make exactly as good a
location."

"But, Johnny; you couldn't build a hotel in forty days!"

"Build it! I don't want to. I only want to promote it."

"Does a promoter never build?" asked Polly.

"Not if he can escape," replied Johnny. "All a promoter ever wants
to do is to collect the first ninety-nine years' profits and promote
something else. Drive me up to the address on that real estate sign
and I'll pay you whatever the clock says and let you go."

"The clock says a one-pound box of chocolates," she promptly
estimated. "Wait, though. I did send for some!" And she looked back
into the tonneau. "Why, drat it all! I mislaid Sammy!" she gasped.


CHAPTER VI

IN WHICH CONSTANCE DECIDES ON A FAIR GAME


By three o'clock Johnny Gamble had acquired so much hotel
information that his head seemed stuffed. Every bright-eyed
financier in the city had nursed the happy thought of a terminal
hotel and had made tentative plans--and had jerked back with
quivering tentacles; for all the property in that neighborhood was
about a thousand degrees Fahrenheit. The present increase of value
and that of the next half-century had been gleefully anticipated,
and the fortunate possessor of a ninety-nine-year lease on a peanut
stand felt that he was providing handsomely for his grandchildren.

Mr. Gamble detailed these depressing facts to his friend Loring with
much vigor and picturesqueness.

"The trouble with New York is that everybody wants to collect the
profits that are going to be made," Loring sagely concluded.

"It's the only way they can get even," Johnny informed him. "Well,
that's the regular handicap. Guess I'll have to take it."

"You don't mean to try to promote a hotel against such inflated
values!" protested Loring.

"Why not?" returned Johnny. "That section has to have a hotel. The
sporty merchants of the Middle West will pay the freight."

"I guess so," agreed Loring thoughtfully. "Well, good luck to you,
Johnny! By the way, President Close of the Fourth National, has
called you up twice this afternoon. I suppose he's gone, by now."

"No, I think he stays to sweep out for the gold-dust," surmised
Johnny, and telephoned to the bank. Mr. Close, however, had gone
home an hour before.

"He's sensible," approved Loring, putting away his papers. "This
weather would tempt a mole outdoors. I'm going to the ball game.
Better come along."

"Too frivolous for me," declared Johnny, eying his little book
regretfully. "There's a thirty-five-thousand-dollar day almost gone.
All I can credit myself with is a flivver. I'm going to stay right
here on the job and figure hotel."

At three-thirty Loring returned.

"So you're not going to the game, Johnny?" he observed with a sly
smile.

"At five thousand an hour! Nev-ver!"

"Too bad," regretted Loring still smiling. "I just saw Constance and
Polly. They're going out."

Johnny promptly slammed several sheets of figures into a drawer.

"Is there room for me in your car?" he asked anxiously.

"Val Russel and Bruce Townley are with me. There's plenty of room--
but you really ought to stay here and figure on your hotel," Loring
advised him.

"I can figure any place," stated Johnny briskly, and put away his
little book. "Are we ready?"

The eyes of Constance Joy lighted with pleasure as she saw the group
which filed into the box adjoining the one in which she sat with
Polly Parsons, Paul Gresham, Colonel Bouncer, and Sammy Chirp; and
Gresham watched her discontentedly as she shook hands with Gamble.
He did not like the cordiality of that hand-shake, nor yet the
animation of her countenance. Neither did he like her first
observation, which consisted not of any remarks about health or the
weather, but about Johnny's intimate personal affairs.

"How is the million dollars coming on?" she had interestedly
inquired, and then sat down in Gresham's own chair, next to the
dividing rail. "You know, I promised to keep score for you."

"You may mark me a goose-egg for today," replied Johnny, sitting
comfortably beside her with only the thin board partition between
them.

Gresham, his dark eyebrows meeting in a sinister line across his
forehead, smiled with grim satisfaction.

"People with money seem to be watching it on Mondays," he observed.

"They have to sleep some time," Polly quickly reminded him. "Your
day for a nap was Saturday."

"I'm guilty," admitted Gresham with a frowning glance at Johnny. "My
trance--day before yesterday--cost me fifteen thousand. I shan't
forget it soon."

"I'll bet you never will!" Polly agreed.

"Johnny was awake that day," declared Colonel Bouncer, laughing
heartily and reaching over to slap Gamble affectionately on the
shoulder. "He's fifteen thousand better off; and I guess he won't
forget that in a hurry."

"I've forgotten it now," asserted Johnny. "Colonel, I want to talk
with you about some stock in a big hotel opposite the new terminal
station."

"Bless my soul--NO!" almost shouted the colonel. "I nearly got
tangled up in my friend Courtney's terminal hotel scheme--and I'm
scared yet."

"Courtney?" repeated Johnny. "That's the name they gave me at
Mallard & Tyne's office this afternoon. They told me that he has
tied up the only available block the railroad company overlooked."

"Tied it up!" exploded the colonel. "Bless my soul, it has him tied
up! Courtney's company blew so high that none of the pieces has come
down yet. Meantime his enthusiasm is likely to cost him a round two
and a quarter million dollars."

He must have had a high fever," commented Johnny. "How could a man
be so forgetful of that much money?"

"He thought his friends were game," explained the colonel; "and, in
spite of his long and sucessful business experience, he over-looked
the difference between a promise and a promissory note. He nailed
his stock subscribers down with hasty conversation only, and then
rushed off and grabbed the six collected parcels of that block, for
fear it might get away before he had his company legally organized."

"And now he can't unspike it," guessed Johnny smilingly. "Watch out,
Colonel!"

There was a lively scramble in the two boxes as the first foul tip
of the season whizzed directly at them. Gamble, who had captained
his village nine, had that ball out of the air and was bowing
jovially to the applause before Gresham had quite succeeded in
squeezing himself down behind the door of the box.

Naturally it was Polly who led the applause; and Constance shocked
the precise Gresham by joining in heartily.

She was looking up at Johnny with sparkling eyes and flushed cheeks
when Gresham came out of his cyclone cellar--and, if he had disliked
Gamble before, now he hated him.

It is a strange feature of the American national game that the more
perfectly it is played the duller it is. This was a pitchers'
battle; and the game droned along, through inning after inning, with
seldom more than three men to bat in each half, while the score
board presented a most appropriate double procession of naughts.
Spectators, warmly praising that smoothly oiled mechanical process
of one, two, three and out, and telling each other that this was a
great game, nevertheless yawned and dropped their score cards, and
put away their pencils, and looked about the grandstand in search of
faces they knew.

In such a moment Colonel Bouncer, who had come into this box because
of a huge admiration for Polly and an almost extravagant respect for
Constance, and who had heartily wished himself out of it during the
last two or three innings, now happily discovered a familiar face
only a few rows back of him. "By George, Johnny, there's Courtney
now!" he announced.

Gamble looked with keen interest.

"Do you mean that gentleman with the ruddy face and the white
beard?" he inquired.

"That's the old pirate," asserted the colonel.

"Why, that's the man you wanted to introduce me to at the race-track
in Baltimore Saturday."

"Bless my heart, so I did!" he remembered. "I thought it might
relieve him to tell his troubles to you. It isn't too late yet. Come
on up and I'll introduce you--that is, unless you want to watch this
game."

"I'm pleased to pass up this game till somebody makes an error,"
Johnny willingly decided. "If they'll hand out a base on balls and a
safe bunt and hit a batter, so as to get three men on bases with two
out, and then muft a high fly out against the fence, and boot the
ball all over the field while four of the Reds gallop home--I'll
stay and help lynch the umpire; otherwise not. Show me to your
friend Courtney." He turned to take courteous leave of the others
and his eyes met the friendly glance of Constance.

"Let's catch Mr. Courtney at the end of the game," he suggested to
the colonel; and then, turning directly to Constance, he added with
a laugh: "I think I'll play hooky. I don't want to break up the
party."

"If you think you see an opportunity for that million, the official
scorer insists upon saying good-by," she laughed in return, and held
out her hand.

Johnny shook the hand with both pleasure and reluctance, and
obediently left.

"I'm offering my pet vanity parasol against a sliver of chewing-gum
on Johnny," Polly confided to Loring. "I could see it in his eye
that Mr. Courtney will be invited to help him make that million."

"Somebody ought to warn Courtney," Gresham commented sarcastically.

"Why warn him?" demanded Loring. "I'll guarantee that any
proposition Johnny makes him will be legitimate."

"No doubt," agreed Gresham. "A great many sharp practices are
considered legitimate nowadays."

"I object, also, to the term 'sharp practices'," responded Loring
warmly. "I don't believe there's a man in New York with a straighter
and cleaner record than Gamble's. Every man with whom he has ever
done business, except possibly yourself, speaks highly of him and
would trust him to any extent; and he does not owe a dollar in the
world."

"Doesn't he?" snarled Gresham. "There's an unsatisfied attachment
for fifteen thousand dollars resting against him at the Fourth
National Bank at this very moment."

Loring's indignation gave way immediately to grave concern.

"So that's why Close was trying to get him on the 'phone all
afternoon!" he mused.

"Mr. Gresham," called Polly sharply, "how do you come to know about
this so quickly?"

Gresham cursed himself and the blind hatred which had led him into
making this slip; and he was the more uncomfortable because not only
Loring and Polly but Constance had turned upon him gravely
questioning eyes.

"Such things travel very rapidly in commercial circles," he lamely
explained.

"I had no idea that you were a commercial circle," retorted Polly.
"I wonder who's crooked." Gresham laughed shortly. "It isn't
Johnny!" she indignantly asserted. "I know how Johnny's fifteen
thousand was saved from this attachment, but I wouldn't tell where
it is--even here."

Polly and Loring looked at each other understandingly.

"I suppose that was an old Gamble-Collaton account," Loring surmised
with another speculative glance at Gresham. "I am quite certain that
Johnny knows nothing whatever of this claim--let alone the
attachment. The operations of his big irrigation failure were so
extensive that, with the books lost, he can never tell when an
additional claim may be filed against him. If suit is made in an
obscure court, and Collaton, who hasn't a visible dollar, answers
summons and confesses judgment for the firm, Johnny has no
recourse."

"Except to repudiate payment," suggested Gresham with a shrug of his
shoulders.

"I wish he would," returned Loring impatiently. "I wish he would let
me handle his affairs in my own way."

"He won't," Polly despaired.

"Tell me, Mr. Loring," interposed Constance, who had been silently
thoughtful all this while; "would this unpaid attachment at Mr.
Gamble's bank interfere with his present success if Mr. Courtney--or
any one else whom Mr. Gamble might try to interest--were to hear of
it?"

"It might--and very seriously," returned Loring.

The long somnolent game was suddenly awakened by two blissful
errors, which gave the audience something to jeer at. A tally
slipped home for Boston. A sharp double play redeemed the errors and
closed the inning. The first man up for the Yankees drove a clean
two-bagger down the right foul line; the second man laid down his
life nobly with a beautiful bunt; the Boston pitcher gave a correct
imitation of Orville Wright and presented free rides to the next two
Highlanders; big Sweeney stalked to bat--and the congregation
prayed, standing. Under cover of all this quivering excitement, and
with Gresham more absorbed than ever upon the foul which might yet
slay him, Constance turned to Polly with an intent decisiveness
which was quite new to her.

"Arrange it so that I may go home in Mr. Loring's car," she
directed.

"Three cheers!" approved Polly, with a spiteful glance at Gresham.

Mr. Courtney, a live-looking elderly gentleman who kept himself more
carefully groomed than many a young man, had shaken hands with Mr.
Gamble quite cordially, had studied him through and through and
through in about half a second of time, and had finished the hand-
shake more cordially than he had begun it.

"The colonel has been saying all sorts of kind things about you,"--
he very graciously stated.

"So he has about you," returned Johnny, smiling into Mr. Courtney's
eyes and liking him.

"I suppose so," admitted Mr. Courtney. "The colonel's always blowing
about his friends, so we mustn't trust each other too far."

"That's a good way to start anyhow," laughed Johnny. "The colonel's
been telling me you're so trusting that you stung yourself."

"How's that?" asked Mr. Courtney, looking at the colonel in
perplexity. "I don't quite understand."

"On that hotel deal," the colonel affably reminded him, and was
unkind enough to laugh.

"You old reprobate!" protested Courtney. "I don't see why you want
to publish my disgrace."

"You deserve it," chuckled the colonel. "It won't hurt for Johnny to
know it though. He's the shrewdest young man of my acquaintance, and
he might be able to figure a way out of your dilemma for you."

"I might even be able to make some money out of it myself," Johnny
frankly acknowledged.

"Jump right in and welcome, young man," invited Courtney. "If you
can pull me out whole I don't care how much you make."

"We'll consider that a bargain," offered Gamble.

"All right," returned Courtney, smiling. "We'll shake hands on it in
the good old-fashioned way." And they did so, under Colonel
Bouncer's earnestly interested approval.

"Tell him your troubles," urged the colonel. "If it were my case,
Ben, I'd be yelling for help as long as I had breath in my body."

"It's very simple," explained Courtney. "I imagined that a big hotel
at the new terminal station would be the best investment in New
York. I spoke to a number of my financially active friends about it
and they were enthusiastic. I had verbal promises in one day's work
of all the money necessary to finance the thing. I found that the
big vacant plot across from the station was held at a prohibitive
price. Mallard & Tyne had, with a great deal of labor, collected the
selling option on the adjoining block, fronting the terminal. They
held it at two and a quarter millions. My friends, at an infernal
luncheon, authorized me, quite orally, indeed, to secure the cheaper
site without a moment's delay, especially since it was rumored that
Morton Washer was contemplating the erection of a hotel upon that
very spot."

"I see the finish," laughed Johnny. "Mad with fear, you dashed right
down there and broke yourself! Then Union Pacific fell off an
eighth; they killed an insurrecto in Mexico; the third secretary of
a second-rate life-insurance company died and Wall Street put crape
on the door. All your friends got cold feet and it was the other
fellow who had urged you to buy that property. The colonel says you
dropped a hundred and twenty-five thousand. That's a stiff option.
Can't you get any of it back?"

"Get it back!" groaned Courtney. "They're after the balance. It
wasn't an option--it was a contract. If I don't pay the remainder at
the end of the ninety days they'll sue me; and I have several
million dollars' worth of property that I can't hide."

Gamble shrugged his shoulders resignedly.

"Your only chance is to build or sell," he decided. "It's your
property, all right. Have you offered it?"

"Old Mort Washer wants it--confound him! I've discovered that the
day after I bought this ground he told my friends that he intended
to buy the big piece and build in competition; and they ran like
your horse--Angora--last Saturday, Gamble. Now Washer offers to buy
this ground for two and an eighth millions--just the amount for
which I will be sued."

"Leaving you to try to forget the hundred and twenty-five thousand
you've already spent," figured Gamble. "Nice cheery thought of
Washer's! Of course you applauded?"

"With a brick--if I'd had one!" declared Courtney still angry.

Johnny smiled and looked thoughtfully out over the sunlit
greensward. There were electrifying plays down there; but, "fan"
though he was, he did not see them. Something in the tingle of it,
however, seemed to quicken his faculties.

"Sell me that block, Mr. Courtney," he suggested with a sudden
inspiration.

The mad mob rose to its feet just then and pleaded with Sweeney to
"Hit 'er out!" Shrieks, howls and bellows resounded upon every hand;
purple-faced fans held their clenched fists tight to their breasts
so that they could implore the louder.

"On what terms?" shouted Courtney into Johnny's ear.

"I'll take over your contract," yelled Johnny beneath Courtney's hat
brim.

"On what terms?" repeated Courtney at the top of his voice.

"Bless your heart, Sweeney, slam it!" shrieked the now crimson-
visaged colonel. He was standing on his chair, with distended eyes,
and waving his hat violently.

"Your original price!" loudly called Johnny. "Pay you fifteen
thousand now, fifty thousand in thirty days and the balance in
sixty."

Sweeney fanned. The atrocious tumult was drowned, in the twinkling
of an eyelash, in a dismal depthless gulf of painful silence. One
could have heard a mosquito wink.

"Where's my security?" bellowed Courtney in Johnny's ear, so
vociferously that all the grandstand turned in that direction and
three park policemen headed for the riot.

"Just come outside and I'll tell you," whispered Johnny with a grin.

"Ashley, how do you like your car?" asked Polly in the groaning calm
which followed Sweeney's infamous strike-out.

"I'm just designing a private medal for the builder," replied
Loring.

"Self-cranker, isn't it?"

"Self-cranker, automatic oiler, and supplies its own gasolene. Why?"

"Well, Constance is talking of buying one, and mine is a little too
muscular for her. Suppose you take her for a spin after the game and
deliver her safely to her Aunt Pattie. I'll take the boys back in my
car."

"I'm cheating you in the exchange, but my conscience doesn't hurt me
in the least," accepted Loring with alacrity.

"I've never been in your car, Ashley," insinuated Gresham. "You
might invite me to try it out too."

"At five-thirty to-morrow evening," Ashley coolly advised him. "I'd
be very glad to have you come along now; but the car is engaged for
a strictly private demonstration."

Since the others were prepared to guy him unmercifully if he
persisted, Gresham hinted no more and, very much to his discomfort,
saw Loring gaily drive away with Constance.

On Riverside Drive, Loring spent the first fifteen minutes in
extolling the virtues of his car and Constance listened with patient
attention; but during the first convenient silence she surprised
Loring with a bit of crisp business talk.

"Would you mind telling me the history of Mr. Gamble's partnership
with Mr. Collaton?" she asked.

"I guess I heard what you said," he returned doubtfully, and he
looked at her in astonishment. "Of course you know that Johnny is a
client of mine."

"I know that he is a friend of yours also," she reminded him.

"On that basis I'll tell you anything you want to know," laughed
Loring. "Johnny was doing an excellent business in real estate
speculation when this man Collaton came to him with an enormous
irrigation scheme. They formed a partnership. Collaton went out West
to superintend the reclaiming of some thousands of acres of arid
land, while Johnny stayed here to sell rose-bordered farms to
romantic city home seekers. Collaton spent money faster than Johnny
could get it, and operations had to be discontinued. Johnny has been
paying the debts of the concern ever since. Every time he thinks he
has them cleared off, a new set bobs up; and, since the books and
all the papers are lost, he can't prove or disprove anything. Johnny
can't even dissolve the partnership so long as there are indefinite
outstanding accounts. Now, Constance, I'm not a good lawyer or I
would not, even in strict confidence like this, say the following,
to wit and namely: I think Collaton is a plain ordinary sneak-
thief."

They were both silent for a little time.

"Doesn't it seem rather strange that the people who hold claims
against Mr. Gamble should just happen to attach his bank-account on
the very day he was expected to make a deposit, and for the
identical amount?" Constance asked in a puzzled way.

Loring gave her a startled glance.

"It does seem strange," he admitted.

"It would almost seem as if these people had been informed by some
one who knew Mr. Gamble's circumstances quite intimately," she went
on.

"That is a very delicate matter to discuss," Loring, with
professional caution, gravely reminded her, fearing that she might
mention Gresham's name.

"You are quite right," she agreed. "What does Mr. Gamble think about
it all?"

"Johnny does a lot of thinking and a lot of talking, but you can't
hear what he thinks," replied Loring with a smile. "He is outwardly
assuming--and where Collaton is certain to have it repeated to him--
that Collaton was merely unfortunate; but I believe he is only
waiting for a proof--and then I imagine he will drop on Collaton and
whoever is helping him like a ton of pig-iron."

"I hope he does!" declared Constance with such sudden vindictiveness
that Loring laughed.

"You seem to have acquired a violent partisanship," he charged her
with a curious smile.

"Yes, I have," she admitted with a slight flush. "I like fair play.
I believe I have a very even temper, but it angers me to see any one
so open and manly and generous as Mr. Gamble made a victim of mean
trickery."

"He's a handsome boy too," commented Loring, grinning.

"Well, suppose he is," she petulantly laughed.

"He has a right to be," granted Loring, looking at her with renewed
admiration. With a slight flush of confusion upon her she was even
more charming than he had ever thought her before. "If I had so
tantalizingly pretty a girl so interested in my fortunes I wouldn't
care whether they perfected aeroplanes or not," he ventured with the
freedom of an old friend.

"You may come down now, thank you," she sweetly informed him. "Can't
you get Mr. Gamble to make you his receiver or trustee, or
something, for the irrigation company?"

"I might now," mused Loring. "He's so interested in the impulsive
attempt to make his million dollars that I think I could persuade
him. He seems to be really serious about that million."

"Of course he's serious about it," asserted Constance almost
indignantly. "Don't you suppose he can do it?"

"Well, this is the age of financial miracles," acknowledged Loring,
but with a shake of his head. "He can't do it, though, if Collaton
gobbles up all he makes and injures his credit besides."

Constance drew a deep breath.

"I wish you to act as my agent, Ashley," she said crisply. "Mr.
Gamble is certain to make some money, is he not?"

"Johnny will always make money," he assured her.

"If you bring in a bill against him for money you have expended,
after you have wound up the Gamble-Collaton affairs, he will, of
course, pay it."

"As quickly as he can find a fountain-pen and a check-book."

"I wish to loan him some money without his knowledge. I want you to
take fifteen thousand dollars early to-morrow morning and pay that
attachment, or whatever it is, at his bank. Naturally I do not want
Mr. Gamble to know that I am interested; and I look to you to manage
it so that, when the money is returned to me, he shall imagine that
you have advanced the funds."

"I can arrange that easily enough," Loring promised her. "Constance,
I suppose I ought to advise you that this is silly; but I'm glad
you're doing it. Moreover, I feel certain that, if this entanglement
is straightened out, Johnny may take a new interest in the
irrigation company and, by handling it himself, may recover all his
losses."

"I sincerely hope so," returned Constance earnestly. "You know I've
taken a queer interest in this quixotic attempt of Mr. Gamble's to
make his million. It's like a fascinating game, and I almost feel as
if I were playing it myself--I'm so eager about it."

"And your spirit of fair play is aroused," Loring said.


CHAPTER VII

IN WHICH JOHNNY DREAMS OF A MAGNIFICENT TWENTY-STORY HOTEL


The other terminal hotel projects had been kept very quiet, indeed,
lest the jealous promoters of similar enterprises might be whetted
into greediness; but no such modesty seemed to attend the plans of
the Terminal Hotel Company; in fact, it seemed to court publicity--
and, since Johnny Gamble was known and liked by a host of newspaper
men, it received plenty of attention. After the ball game Johnny
rode down to Mr. Courtney's club with him to dinner; and when he was
through talking to Courtney he immediately called on his newspaper
friends.

When Loring arrived at the office in the morning he found Johnny
immersed in a pile of papers--and gloating.

"Say, Johnny, I want you to give me power of attorney to wind up the
Gamble-Collaton Irrigation Company," was Loring's morning greeting.

"Go as far as you like," Johnny told him without looking up from a
glowing account of the magnificent new hostelry.

"Good for you!" approved Loring. "I'd expected to have half an
hour's wrestle with you--and I couldn't afford it, for this is my
busy day. I want you to understand this, Johnny: If I take that old
partnership off your hands you're to ask no questions."

"Go twice as far as you like," offered Johnny indifferently." I've
forgotten there ever was a Gamble-Collaton Irrigation Company.
Listen to this, Loring: 'Surmounting the twentieth story of the
magnificent new structure there will be a combined roof garden, cafe
and theater, running continuous vaudeville--'"

"This agreement, entered into this twenty-fifth day of April," began
the discordantly hurried voice of Loring. He was dictating to his
stenographer a much more comprehensive agreement than a mere power
of attorney; and as soon, as it was ready Johnny signed it without a
question.

"Get this, Ashley?" he remarked, handing back Loring's pen and
reading gleefully from another paper: "'A subway entrance into the
new terminal station is being negotiated--'"

"All right," said Loring, putting on his hat. "Good-by!"--and he was
gone.

If Loring professed but slight interest in the flamboyant plans for
the new hotel, there were others who were painfully absorbed in the
news of the project. Gresham, for one, read the account with
contracted brows at his late breakfast; and at noon, inspired by a
virtuous sense of duty, he sauntered over to Courtney's club.

"I see you're involved in another hotel proposition," he ventured.

"I hope involved is not the word," returned Courtney with rather a
wry smile.

"Is your company fully organized?" asked Gresham with a trace of
more than polite interest.

"I think not," answered Courtney. "I'm not in a position to state,
however, as the matter is out of my hands. I am taking some stock in
it, of course; but I have nothing to do with the organization of the
company, since I have sold the ground to Mr. Gamble."

"Gamble?" repeated Gresham. "Oh, is that so?"

His tone was so deprecative that Courtney was sharply awakened by
it.

"Do you know anything against Gamble?" he quite naturally inquired.

"Not a thing," Gresham hastily assured him. "Anyhow, you have sold
him the property and are fully secured?"

"I've sold it to him under contract," replied Courtney, ready, in
view of his recent experiences, to become panic-stricken at a
moment's notice.

"Of course, if anything happens you can reclaim the property,"
Gresham considered. "It forms its own security; but still, any one
holding a private claim against Gamble might try to attach it and
give you a nasty entanglement."

"There doesn't seem to be any danger of that," argued Courtney,
looking worried, nevertheless. "He was able to show me an extremely
clean bill of health. The only drawback I could find in his record
was the payment of some debts which were not rightly his and which
he might have evaded."

"Did he refer you to the Fourth National Bank?" inquired Gresham
quietly.

"No. Say, Gresham, what have you up your sleeve? Gamble paid me
fifteen thousand dollars this morning, as per agreement. I would
scarcely think he would risk that much money on a bluff."

"He paid you the fifteen thousand, then?" said Gresham with a smile.
"Mr. Courtney, one does not like to mix in these affairs; but you
and my father were friends and, though I regret to do so, I feel it
my duty to advise you to call up the Fourth National Bank."

"Thanks!" gratefully acknowledged Courtney, and hurried down to the
telephone booth. He came back in a few moments, and his manner was
distinctly cool. "I 'phoned to Mr. Close," he stated. "He tells me
that an attachment was laid against Mr. Gamble's account at his bank
yesterday for fifteen thousand dollars, and was returned to the
server marked 'no funds'; but that this morning the executor of Mr.
Gamble's interests in the Gamble-Collaton Irrigation Company
deposited fifteen thousand dollars for the specific purpose of
meeting this attachment. Mr. Close informs me that, though he could
not, of course, guarantee Mr. Gamble's solvency, he would take Mr.
Gamble's unsupported word on any proposition. I have known Joe Close
for years, and I never knew him to be so enthusiastic about any man
who possessed no negotiable securities. I thank you for your well-
intentioned interference in my behalf, Mr. Gresham, but I think I
shall cling to Mr. Gamble nevertheless."

"I certainly should if I were in your place," Gresham hastily
assured him with such heartiness as he could assume. "I am delighted
to learn that the rumor I heard of Mr. Gamble's insolvency is
unfounded."

"By the way, where did you hear the rumor?" inquired Courtney with a
frown.

"Really, I've forgotten," Gresham confessed.

"One should not forget such things if one repeats such rumors,"
Courtney reproved him.

Gresham went away both puzzled and annoyed. It was three o'clock
before he found Collaton; and that featureless young man, whose lack
of visible eyebrows and lashes was a constant annoyance to the
fastidious Gresham, was in a high state of elation.

"Well, we get back your fifteen thousand," he exulted after they
were safely in Gresham's apartments. "Of course Jacobs gets five
thousand for engineering the deal, but that gives us five thousand
apiece. Jacobs was told--about eleven o'clock--that the money was
there."

"Keep my share; but why didn't you send me word?" snarled Gresham.
"I nearly put my foot in it by having a man with whom Gamble is
doing business inquire about him at the Fourth National. In place of
injuring his credit, we've strengthened it."

"Good work!" approved Collaton. "I hope he makes all kinds of
money."

"I don't!" snapped Gresham. "Did you read the papers this morning?"

"I read the racing and base-ball returns."

"There was more to interest you in the news. Gamble has a big hotel
proposition on--and I want it stopped. Can you get another
attachment against him for about fifty thousand dollars?"

"It's risky!" And Collaton looked about him furtively. "It's easy
enough to fake an old note for money--"

"You must not say 'fake' to me. I will not countenance any crooked
business."

"To dig up an old note for money I am supposed to have borrowed and
spent--"

"Not supposed."

"For money I borrowed and spent on the work out there--and have a
quiet suit entered by one of my pet assassins in Fliegel's court,
have the summons served and confess judgment. Johnny is sucker
enough to confess judgment, too, rather than repudiate a debt which
he can not prove he does not owe; but I've already milked that
scheme so dry that I'm afraid of it."

"You're afraid of everything," Gresham charged him with the scorn
one coward feels for another. "Your operations out there were spread
over ten thousand acres of ground; and it would take a dozen experts
six months, without any books or papers to guide them, to make even
an approximate estimate of your legitimate expenditures."

"I don't know," hesitated Collaton with a shake of his head--"I only
touched the high places in the actual work out there. I believe I
was a sucker at that, Gresham. If I had buckled down to it, like
Gamble does, we could have made a fortune out of that scheme. He's a
wonder!"

"He has wonderful luck," corrected Gresham. "I tried my best to
scare Courtney away from him with that attachment, but he insisted
on clinging to his Johnny Gamble; so we'll hand him enough of Johnny
by laying a fifty-thousand-dollar attachment against his property."

"You're a funny cuss," said Collaton, puzzled. "If you wanted to
soak him for this fifty thousand why did you try to scare Courtney
off?"

"Can't you understand that I'm not after the money?" demanded
Gresham. "I've explained that to you before. I want Gamble broke,
discredited, and so involved that he can never transact any business
in New York."

"What's he done to you?" inquired Collaton. "He must be winning a
stand-in with your girl."

"My private affairs are none of your concern!" Gresham indignantly
flared.

"All right, governor," assented Collaton a trifle sullenly. "I'll
fake that note for you to-night; and--"

"I told you I would not have anything to do with any crooked work,"
Gresham sharply reprimanded him.

"Oh, shut up!" growled Collaton. "You give me the cramps. You're a
worse crook than I am!"


CHAPTER VIII

IN WHICH CONSTANCE SHOWS FURTHER INTEREST IN JOHNNY'S AFFAIRS


On Wednesday morning Mr. Courtney, sitting as rigidly at his desk as
if he were in church, was handed the card of Morton Washer. He laid
the card face down and placed a paper-weight on it, as if he feared
it might get away. The Professor's conversation engaged him deeply.
Vivaldi's familiarity with French speculative literature, and with
its sources in the experiential philosophy of the English school,
gave Odo his first clear conception of the origin and tendency of
the new movement.

This coordination of scattered ideas was aided by his readings in the
Encyclopaedia, which, though placed on the Index in Piedmont, was
to be found behind the concealed panels of more than one private
library. From his talks with Alfieri, and from the pages of Plutarch,
he had gained a certain insight into the Stoical view of reason as
the measure of conduct, and of the inherent sufficiency of virtue
as its own end. He now learned that all about him men were
endeavouring to restore the human spirit to that lost conception
of its dignity; and he longed to join the band of new crusaders
who had set out to recover the tomb of truth from the forces of
superstition.

The distinguishing mark of eighteenth-century philosophy was its
eagerness to convert its acquisitions in every branch of knowledge
into instruments of practical beneficence; and this quality appealed
peculiarly to Odo, who had ever been moved by abstract theories only
as they explained or modified the destiny of man. Vivaldi, pleased
by his new pupil's eagerness to learn, took pains to set before him
this aspect of the struggle.

"You will now see," he said, after one of their long talks about
the Encyclopaedists, "why we who have at heart the mental and social
regeneration of our countrymen are so desirous of making a concerted
effort against the established system.

It is only by united action that we can prevail. The bravest mob
of independent fighters has little chance against a handful of
disciplined soldiers, and the Church is perfectly logical in seeing
her chief danger in the Encyclopaedia's systematised marshalling
of scattered truths.

As long as the attacks on her authority were isolated, and as
it were sporadic, she had little to fear even from the assaults
of genius; but the most ordinary intellect may find a use and become
a power in the ranks of an organised opposition.

Seneca tells us the slaves in ancient Rome were at one time so numerous
that the government prohibited their wearing a distinctive dress
lest they should learn their strength and discover that the city
was in their power; and the Church knows that when the countless
spirits she has enslaved without subduing have once learned their
number and efficiency they will hold her doctrines at their mercy.

--The Church again," he continued, "has proved her astuteness in
making faith the gift of grace and not the result of reason.

By so doing she placed herself in a position which was well-nigh
impregnable till the school of Newton substituted observation for
intuition and his followers showed with increasing clearness the
inability of the human mind to apprehend anything outside the range
of experience.

The ultimate claim of the Church rests on the hypothesis of an intuitive
faculty in man.

Disprove the existence of this faculty, and reason must remain the
supreme test of truth.

Against reason the fabric of theological doctrine cannot long hold
out, and the Church's doctrinal authority once shaken, men will no
longer fear to test by ordinary rules the practical results of her
teaching.

We have not joined the great army of truth to waste our time in
vain disputations over metaphysical subtleties.

Our aim is, by freeing the mind of man from superstition to relieve
him from the practical abuses it entails.

As it is impossible to examine any fiscal or industrial problem
without discovering that the chief obstacle to improvement lies in
the Church's countless privileges and exemptions, so in every
department of human activity we find some inveterate wrong taking
shelter under the claim of a divinely-revealed authority.

This claim demolished, the stagnant current of human progress will
soon burst its barriers and set with a mighty rush toward the wide
ocean of truth and freedom..."

That general belief in the perfectibility of man which cheered the
eighteenth-century thinkers in their struggle for intellectual
liberty coloured with a delightful brightness this vision of a
renewed humanity.

It threw its beams on every branch of research, and shone like an
aureole round those who laid down fortune and advancement to purchase
the new redemption of mankind.

Foremost among these, as Odo now learned, were many of his own
countrymen.

In his talks with Vivaldi he first explored the course of Italian
thought and heard the names of the great jurists, Vico and Gravina,
and of his own contemporaries, Filangieri, Verri and Beccaria.

Vivaldi lent him Beccaria's famous volume and several numbers of
the "Caffe," the brilliant gazette which Verri and his associates
were then publishing in Milan, and in which all the questions of
the day, theological, economic and literary, were discussed with a
freedom possible only under the lenient Austrian rule.

"Ah," Vivaldi cried, "Milan is indeed the home of the free spirit, and
were I not persuaded that a man's first duty is to improve the
condition of his own city and state, I should long ago have
left this unhappy kingdom; indeed I sometimes fancy I may yet serve
my own people better by proclaiming the truth openly at a distance
than by whispering it in their midst."
It was a surprise to Odo to learn that the new ideas had already
taken such hold in Italy, and that some of the foremost thinkers
on scientific and economic subjects were among his own countrymen.

Like all eighteenth-century Italians of his class he had been taught
to look to France as the source of all culture, intellectual and
social; and he was amazed to find that in jurisprudence, and in
some of the natural sciences, Italy led the learning of Europe.

Once or twice Fulvia showed herself for a moment; but her manner
was retiring and almost constrained, and her father always contrived
an excuse for dismissing her.

This was the more noticeable as she continued to appear at the
meetings of the Honey-Bees, where she joined freely in the conversation,
and sometimes diverted the guests by playing on the harpsichord or
by recitations from the poets; all with such art and grace, and
withal so much simplicity, that it was clear she was accustomed to
the part.

Odo was thus driven to the not unflattering conclusion that she had
been instructed to avoid his company; and after the first disappointment
he was too honest to regret it.

He was deeply drawn to the girl; but what part could she play in
the life of a man of his rank?

The cadet of an impoverished house, it was unlikely that he would
marry; and should he do so, custom forbade even the thought of
taking a wife outside of his class.

Had he been admitted to free intercourse with Fulvia, love might
have routed such prudent counsels; but in the society of her father's
associates, where she moved, as in a halo of learning, amid the
respectful admiration of middle-aged philosophers and jurists, she
seemed as inaccessible as a young Minerva.

Odo, at first, had been careful not to visit Vivaldi too often;
but the Professor's conversation was so instructive, and his library
so inviting, that inclination got the better of prudence, and the
young man fell into the habit of turning almost daily down the lane
behind the Corpus Domini.

Vivaldi, too proud to betray any concern for his personal safety,
showed no sign of resenting the frequency of these visits; indeed,
he received Odo with an increasing cordiality that, to an older
observer, might have betokened an effort to hide his apprehension.

One afternoon, escaping later than usual from the Valentino, Odo
had again bent toward the quiet quarter behind the palace.

He was afoot, with a cloak over his laced coat, and the day being
Easter Monday the streets were filled with a throng of pleasure-seekers
amid whom it seemed easy enough for a man to pass unnoticed.

Odo, as he crossed the Piazza Castello, thought it had never presented
a gayer scene.

Booths with brightly-striped awnings had been set up under the
arcades, which were thronged with idlers of all classes; court-coaches
dashed across the square or rolled in and out of the palace-gates;
and the Palazzo Madama, lifting against the sunset its ivory-tinted
columns and statues, seemed rather some pictured fabric of Claude's
or Bibbiena's than an actual building of brick and marble.

The turn of a corner carried him from this spectacle into the
solitude of a by-street where his own tread was the only sound.

He walked on carelessly; but suddenly he heard what seemed an echo
of his step.

He stopped and faced about.

No one was in sight but a blind beggar crouching at the side-door
of the Corpus Domini.

Odo walked on, listening, and again he heard the step, and again
turned to find himself alone.

He tried to fancy that his ear had tricked him; but he knew too
much of the subtle methods of Italian espionage not to feel a
secret uneasiness. His better judgment warned him back; but the desire
to spend a pleasant hour prevailed.

He took a turn through the neighbouring streets, in the hope of
diverting suspicion, and ten minutes later was at the Professor's
gate.

It opened at once, and to his amazement Fulvia stood before him.

She had thrown a black mantle over her head, and her face looked
pale and vivid in the fading light.

Surprise for a moment silenced Odo, and before he could speak the
girl, without pausing to close the gate, had drawn him toward her
and flung her arms about his neck.

In the first disorder of his senses he was conscious only of seeking
her lips; but an instant later he knew it was no kiss of love that
met his own, and he felt her tremble violently in his arms.

He saw in a flash that he was on unknown ground; but his
one thought was that Fulvia was in trouble and looked to him for
aid.

He gently freed himself from her hold and tried to shape a soothing
question; but she caught his arm and, laying a hand over his mouth,
drew him across the garden and into the house.

The lower floor stood dark and empty. He followed Fulvia up the
stairs and into the library, which was also empty.

The shutters stood wide, admitting the evening freshness and a
drowsy scent of jasmine from the garden.

Odo could not control a thrill of strange anticipation as he found
himself alone in this silent room with the girl whose heart had so
lately beat against his own.

She had sunk into a chair, with her face hidden, and for a moment
or two he stood before her without speaking.

Then he knelt at her side and took her hands with a murmur of
endearment.

At his touch she started up. "And it was I," she cried, "who persuaded
my father that he might trust you!" And she sank back sobbing.

Odo rose and moved away, waiting for her overwrought emotion to
subside.

At length he gently asked, "Do you wish me to leave you?"
She raised her head. "No," she said firmly, though her lip still
trembled; "you must first hear an explanation of my conduct; though
it is scarce possible," she added, flushing to the brow, "that you
have not already guessed the purpose of this lamentable comedy."

"I guess nothing," he replied, "save that perhaps I may in some way
serve you."

"Serve me?" she cried, with a flash of anger through her tears.
"It is a late hour to speak of service, after what you have
brought on this house!"
Odo turned pale. "Here indeed, madam," said he, "are words that
need an explanation."
"Oh," she broke forth, "and you shall have it; though I think to any
other it must be writ large upon my countenance." She rose and
paced the floor impetuously. "Is it possible," she began again,
"you do not yet perceive the sense of that execrable scene?

Or do you think, by feigning ignorance, to prolong my humiliation?
Oh," she said, pausing before him, her breast in a tumult, her
eyes alight, "it was I who persuaded my father of your discretion
and prudence, it was through my influence that he opened himself
to you so freely; and is this the return you make?

Alas, why did you leave your fashionable friends and a world in
which you are so fitted to shine, to bring unhappiness on an obscure
household that never dreamed of courting your notice?"

As she stood before him in her radiant anger, it went hard with Odo
not to silence with a kiss a resentment that he guessed to be mainly
directed against herself; but he controlled himself and said
quietly:
"Madam, I were a dolt not to perceive that I have had the misfortune
to offend; but when or how, I swear to heaven I know not; and till
you enlighten me I can neither excuse nor defend myself."

She turned pale, but instantly recovered her composure. "You are
right," she said; "I rave like a foolish girl; but indeed I scarce
know if I am in my waking senses"--She paused, as if to check a
fresh rush of emotion.

"Oh, sir," she cried, "can you not guess what has happened?

You were warned, I believe, not to frequent this house too openly;
but of late you have been an almost daily visitor, and you never
come here but you are followed.

My father's doctrines have long been under suspicion, and to be
accused of perverting a man of your rank must be his ruin.

He was too proud to tell you this, and profiting today by his
absence, and knowing that if you came the spies would be at your
heels, I resolved to meet you at the gate, and welcome you in such
a way that our enemies should be deceived as to the true cause of
your visits."

Her voice wavered on the last words, but she faced him proudly, and
it was Odo whose gaze fell.

Never perhaps had he been conscious of cutting a meaner figure; yet
shame was so blent in him with admiration for the girl's nobility
and courage, that compunction was swept away in the impulse that
flung him at her feet.

"Ah," he cried, "I have been blind indeed, and what you say abases me
to earth.

Yes, I was warned that my visits might compromise your father; nor
had I any pretext for returning so often but my own selfish pleasure
in his discourse; or so at least," he added in a lower voice,
"I chose to fancy--but when we met just now at the gate, if you
acted a comedy, believe me, I did not; and if I have come day after
day to this house, it is because, unknowingly, I came for you."

The words had escaped him unawares, and he was too sensible of
their untimeliness not to be prepared for the gesture with which
she cut him short.

"Oh," said she, in a tone of the liveliest reproach, "spare me this
last affront if you wish me to think the harm you have already done
was done unknowingly!"

Odo rose to his feet, tingling under the rebuke.

"If respect and admiration be an affront, madam," he said, "I cannot
remain in your presence without offending, and nothing is left me
but to withdraw; but before going I would at least ask if there is
no way of repairing the harm that my over-assiduity has caused."

She flushed high at the question. "Why, that," she said, "is in part,
I trust, already accomplished; indeed," she went on with an effort,
"it was when I learned the authorities suspected you of coming here
on a gallant adventure that I devised the idea of meeting you at
the gate; and for the rest, sir, the best reparation you can make
is one that will naturally suggest itself to a gentleman whose time
must already be so fully engaged."

And with that she made him a deep reverence, and withdrew to the
inner room.

2.5.

When the Professor's gate closed on Odo night was already falling and
the oil-lamp at the end of the arched passage-way shed its weak
circle of light on the pavement.

This light, as Odo emerged, fell on a retreating figure which
resembled that of the blind beggar he had seen crouching on the
steps of the Corpus Domini. He ran forward, but the man hurried
across the little square and disappeared in the darkness.

Odo had not seen his face; but though his dress was tattered, and
he leaned on a beggar's staff, something about his broad rolling
back recalled the well-filled outline of Cantapresto's cassock.

Sick at heart, Odo rambled on from one street to another, avoiding
the more crowded quarters, and losing himself more than once
in the districts near the river, where young gentlemen of his
figure seldom showed themselves unattended.

The populace, however, was all abroad, and he passed as unregarded
as though his sombre thoughts had enveloped him in actual darkness.

It was late when at length he turned again into the Piazza Castello,
which was brightly lit and still thronged with pleasure-seekers.

As he approached, the crowd divided to make way for three or four
handsome travelling-carriages, preceded by linkmen and liveried
out-riders and followed by a dozen mounted equerries.

The people, evidently in the humour to greet every incident of the
streets as part of a show prepared for their diversion, cheered
lustily as the carriages dashed across the square; and Odo, turning
to a man at his elbow, asked who the distinguished visitors might
be.

"Why, sir," said the other laughing, "I understand it is only an
Embassage from some neighbouring state; but when our good people
are in their Easter mood they are ready to take a mail-coach for
Elijah's chariot and their wives' scolding for the Gift of Tongues."

Odo spent a restless night face to face with his first humiliation.

Though the girl's rebuff had cut him to the quick, it was the vision
of the havoc his folly had wrought that stood between him and sleep.

To have endangered the liberty, the very life, perhaps, of a man he
loved and venerated, and who had welcomed him without heed of personal
risk, this indeed was bitter to his youthful self-sufficiency. The
thought of Giannone's fate was like a cold clutch at his heart;
nor was there any balm in knowing that it was at Fulvia's request
he had been so freely welcomed; for he was persuaded that, whatever
her previous feeling might have been, the scene just enacted must
render him forever odious to her.

Turn whither it would, his tossing vanity found no repose; and
dawn rose for him on a thorny waste of disillusionment.

Cantapresto broke in early on this vigil, flushed with the
importance of a letter from the Countess Valdu. The lady summoned
her son to dinner, "to meet an old friend and distinguished visitor";
and a verbal message bade Odo come early and wear his new uniform.
He was too well acquainted with his mother's exaggerations to attach
much importance to the summons; but being glad of an excuse
to escape his daily visit at the Palazzo Tournanches, he sent Donna
Laura word that he would wait on her at two.

On the very threshold of Casa Valdu, Odo perceived that unwonted
preparations were afoot.
Slosher, who is now in Europe, was almost brutal in his
determination to purchase the property," she stated with painful
repression. "The present Mrs. Slosher is a pretty doll, and he is
childishly infatuated with her; but his millions can not buy
everything she demands."

Ignorant of social interplay as Johnny Gamble was, he somehow
divined that William G. Slosher's doll was the neighborhood reason
for everything.

"If you were only certain of what you intend to build there--" she
suggested, to break the helpless silence.

"I have an apartment-house in mind," he told her.

"That would be very large and very high, no doubt," she guessed,
looking pleased.

"It's the only kind that would pay," Johnny Gamble hastily assured
her. "It would be expensive--no suite less than three thousand a
year and nobody allowed to do anything."

"I'll consider the matter," she said musingly.

"What about the price?" asked Johnny, whose mind had been fixed upon
that important detail.

"Oh, yes--the price," agreed Miss Purry indifferently; "I've been
holding it at two hundred thousand. I shall continue to hold it at
that figure."

"Then that's the price," decided Johnny. "Can't we come to an
agreement now?"

"To-morrow afternoon at three," she dryly insisted.

He saw that she meant to-morrow afternoon at three.

"Can't I arrange with you for a twenty-four-hour option?" he begged,
becoming anxious.

"I shall not bind myself in any way," she declared. "To-morrow
afternoon at three."

"That's a beautiful piece of property," commented Johnny as they
drove by. "By George, the apartment-house will shut those people off
from the river!"

"That's the only reason she'd be willing to sell," replied Val.
"What set you hunting up this property?"

"The De Luxe Apartments Company intends confining its operations to
this quarter. They'll go scouting among the listed properties first-
-and they may not find this one until I am asking them two hundred
and fifty for it."

That afternoon, Johnny, always prompt, was ahead of time at the
final committee meeting of the Babies' Fund Fair, but Constance Joy
did not seem in the least surprised at his punctuality.

"I was in hopes you'd come early," she greeted him. "I want to show
you the score board of your game."

"Honest, did you make one?" he asked, half-incredulous of his good
fortune, as she led the way into the library; and his eyes further
betrayed his delight when she showed him the score board itself.

"See," she pointed out, "you were to make five thousand dollars an
hour for two hundred working hours, beginning on April twenty-second
and ending May thirty-first."

Johnny examined the board with eager interest. It was ruled into
tiny squares, forty blocks long and seven deep.

"I want to frame that when we're through," he said, admiring the
perfect drawing.

"Suppose you lose?" she suggested, smiling to herself at his
unconscious use of the word "we".

"No chance," he stoutly returned. "I have to paste a five-thousand-
dollar bill in each one of those blocks."

"You've kept your paste brush busy," she congratulated him,
marveling anew at how he had done it, as she glanced at the record
which she had herself set down. "I have the little squares crossed
off up to two hundred and sixty-five thousand dollars."

"The money's in Loring's bank," he cheerfully assured her. "That
pays me up to next Tuesday, May second, at two o'clock. This is two
o'clock, Thursday. I have twenty-four working hours to loaf."

"Lazy!" she bantered him. "That isn't loafing time; it's only a
safety margin."

Her eagerness about it pleased Johnny very much. When he had his
million he intended to ask her to marry him; and it was pleasant to
have her, all unaware of his purpose, of course, taking such an
acute interest in this big game.

"If a man plays too safe he goes broke," objected Johnny seriously,
still intent on the diagram, however. "I notice that none of these
Sundays or Saturday afternoons have money in them. According to my
plan I also allowed for two possible holidays; but why are those two
special days left white?"

"Well," hesitated Constance, flushing slightly, "May thirtieth is
Decoration Day; and then I allowed for a possible birthday."

"Birthday?" he repeated, perplexed. "Whose?"

"Oh, anybody's," she hastily assured him. "You can move the date to
suit. You know you said you weren't going to work on Sundays,
evenings, holidays or birthdays."

"I have but one birthday this year, and it comes in the fall," he
answered, laughing; then suddenly a dazzling light blinded him.
"It's the score keeper's!" he guessed.

In spite of all her efforts to prevent it Constance blushed
furiously. "I had intended to give a little party on the
nineteenth," she confessed.

"I'm coming!" he emphatically announced.

Aunt Pattie Boyden swept into the room, and Johnny immediately felt
that he had on tight shoes. He had once made a fatal error before
Aunt Pattie; he had confessed to having been a voter before he owned
a dress suit.

Paul Gresham arrived, and Aunt Pattie was as the essence of violets.
Paul, though American-born, was a second cousin of Lord Yawpingham.
Johnny and Paul sat and inwardly barked at each other. Johnny almost
barked outwardly.

Val Russel and Bruce Townley came, and everybody breathed a sigh of
relief.

"Well, Johnny," said Val, "I just now saw your newest speculation
driving down the Avenue in a pea-green gown and a purple hat."

"I never had a speculation like that," denied Johnny.

"Sounds like a scandal," decided Bruce Townley.

"You might as well tell it, Val," laughed Constance with a
mischievous glance at Johnny.

"It hasn't gone very far as yet," replied Val, enjoying Johnny's
discomfort, "but it promises well. Johnny and I called upon a
wealthy spinster, away upon Riverside Drive, this morning,
ostensibly to buy real estate."

Val, leaning his cheek upon his knuckles with his middle finger upon
his temple, imitated Miss Purry's languishing air so perfectly that
Aunt Pattie and Gresham, both of whom knew the lady, could see her
in the flesh--or at least in the bone.

"'Ostensible' is a good word in that neighborhood," opined Gresham
lightly. "Were you trying to buy Miss Purry's vacant riverfront
property?"

Notwithstanding his seeming nonchalance, Gresham betrayed an earnest
interest which Constance noted, and she turned to Johnny with a
quick little shake of her head, but he was already answering, and
she frowned slightly.

Mrs. Follison arrived, and after her the rest of the committee came
trooping by twos and threes,--a bright, busy, chattering mob which
stopped all personal conversation.

Last of all came Polly Parsons, accompanied by Ashley Loring and
Sammy Chirp, and by the fluffy little orphan whom she had been
keeping in school for the last three years.

"I know I'm late," declared Polly defiantly; "but I don't adopt a
sister every day. I stopped at Loring's office to do it, and I'm so
proud I'm cross-eyed. Sister Winnie, shake hands with everybody and
then run out in the gardens with Sammy."

Dutifully, Winnie, in her new role of sister, shook hands with
everybody and clenched their friendship with her wide blue eyes and
her ingenuous smile; and, dutifully, Sammy Chirp, laden with her
sun-hat and parasol and fan, her vanity box and lace hand-bag, took
her out into the gardens, and the proceedings began as they usually
did when Polly Parsons arrived. Subcommittees took cheerful and
happy possession of the most comfortable locations they could find,
and Constance Joy walked Ashley Loring out through the side porch.

"There's a very cozy and retired seat in the summer-house," she
informed him. "I wish to have a tete-a-tete with you on a most
important business matter."

"You may have a tete-a-tete with me on any subject whatsoever,"
laughed Loring. "I suppose it's about those Johnny Gamble
attachments, however."

"It's about that exactly," she acknowledged. "What have you learned
of the one for fifty thousand dollars which was attempted to be laid
against Mr. Gamble's interest in that hotel property yesterday?"

"Very little," he confessed. "It is of the same sort as the one we
discussed the other day."

Constance nodded. "Fraudulent, probably," she guessed.

"I think so myself," agreed Loring. "Trouble is, nobody can locate
the Gamble-Collaton books."

"Perhaps they have been destroyed," mused Constance.

"I doubt it," returned Loring. "It would seem the sensible thing to
do; but, through some curious psychology which I can not fathom,
crooks seldom make away with documentary evidence."

"Who is helping Mr. Collaton?" asked Constance abruptly after a
little silence.

"I do not know," answered Loring promptly, looking her squarely in
the eye.

"Some one of our mutual acquaintance," she persisted shrewdly.
"Twice, now, attachments have been served on Mr. Gamble when the
news of his having attachable property could only have come from our
set."

They had turned the corner of the lilac screen and found a little
summer-house occupied by Sammy and Winnie, and the low mellow voice
of Winnie was flowing on and on without a break.

"It's the darlingest vanity purse I ever saw," she babbled. "Sister
Polly bought it for me this morning. She's the dearest dear in the
world! I don't wonder you're so crazy about her. How red your hand
is next to mine! Madge Cunningham says that I have the whitest and
prettiest hands of any girl in school--and she's made a special
study of hands. Isn't that the cunniest sapphire ring? Sister Polly
sent it to me on my last birthday; so now you know what month I was
born in. Jeannette Crawley says it's just the color of my eyes. She
writes poetry. She wrote some awfully sweet verses about my hair.
'The regal color of the flaming sun', she called it. She's
dreadfully romantic; but the poor child's afraid she will never have
a chance on account of her snub nose. We thought her nose was cute
though. Miss Grazie, our professor of ancient history, said my nose
was of the most perfect Greek profile she had ever seen--just like
that on the features of Clytie, and with just as delicately formed
nostrils. We set the funniest trap for her once. Somebody always
told the principal when we were going to sneak our fudge nights, and
we suspected it was one of the ugly girls--they're always either the
sweetest or the meanest girls in school, you know. We had a signal
for it, of course--one finger to the right eye and closing the left;
and one day, when we were planning for a big fudge spree that night,
I saw Miss Grazie watching us pass the sign. There isn't much
escapes my eyes. Sure enough, that night Miss Porley made a raid.
Well, on Thursday, Madge Cunningham and myself, without saying a
word to anybody, stayed in Miss Grazie's room after class and gave
each--other the fudge signal; and sure enough, that night--"

Constance and Loring tiptoed away, leaving the bewildered Sammy
smiling feebly into the eyes of Winnie and floundering hopelessly in
the maze of her information.

"I have it," declared Constance. "That lovely little chatterbox has
given me an idea."

"Is it possible?" chuckled Loring. "Poor Sammy!"

"He was smiling," laughed Constance. "Here comes the chairman of the
floor-walkers' committee."

Gresham, always uneasy in the absence of Constance, who was too
valuable a part of his scheme of life to be left in charge of his
friends, had come into the garden after them on the pretext of
consulting the general committee.

"Do you know anything about the Garfield Bank?" Constance asked
Gresham in the first convenient pause.

"It is very good as far as I have heard," he replied after careful
consideration. "Are there any rumors out against it?"

"Quite the contrary," she hastily assured him. "It is so convenient,
however, that I had thought of opening a small account there. Mr.
Gamble transferred his funds to that bank to-day--and if he can
trust them with over two hundred and fifty thousand dollars I should
think I might give them my little checking account."

When they were alone again Loring turned to her in surprise.

"I have Johnny's money in my name. I didn't know he had opened an
account with the Garfield Bank," he wondered.

"Neither did I," she laughed. "I told a fib! I laid a trap!"


CHAPTER X

IN WHICH JOHNNY IS SINGULARLY THRILLED BY A LITTLE CONVERSATION OVER
THE TELEPHONE


Mr. Gamble, on his arrival the following afternoon, found Miss Purry
very coldly regretful that she had already disposed of her property
for a working-girls' home, at a hundred and seventy-five thousand
dollars, having made a twenty-five-thousand-dollar reduction by way
of a donation to the cause. Johnny drove back into the city rapidly-
-for he was now only sixteen hours ahead of his schedule. He was
particularly out of sorts because Miss Purry had mentioned that the
De Luxe Apartments Company had been after the plot. It is small
satisfaction to a loser to have his judgment corroborated.

There was a Bronx project, involving the promotion of a huge
exclusive subdivision, which he had hoped to launch; but during his
call on Miss Purry that scheme went adrift through the sudden
disagreement of the uncertain Wobbles brothers who owned the land.
It was a day of failures; and at four o'clock he returned to the
office and inscribed, upon the credit side of his unique little day-
book, the laconic entry:

"April 28. Two flivvers. $0."

Loring, pausing behind him and looking over his shoulder, smiled--
and added a climax. "Jacobs attached your account at the Garfield
Bank to-day on that fifty-thousand-dollar note."

"That's my first good laugh to-day," returned Johnny. "I have no
funds there."

"Gresham thought you had," said Loring quietly. "A trap was laid to
make him think so, and he walked right into it."

"As soon as I have any place to keep a goat I'll get Gresham's,"
declared Johnny. "So he's really in on it."

"He's scared," stated Loring.

"I hope he's right," returned Johnny. "I do wish they'd let me
alone, though, till Thursday, June first."

On Saturday, the twenty-ninth, and on Monday, the first of May,
Johnny Gamble was compelled reluctantly to enter "flivvers" against
his days' labors; and on Tuesday at two o'clock Constance called him
up.

"Guilty!" he acknowledged as soon as he heard her voice. "I'm caught
up with my schedule. At four o'clock I'll be ten thousand dollars
behind. Everything I touch crawls right back in its shell."

"They'll come out again," she encouraged him. "I didn't call you up,
as your score keeper, to tell you that from this hour you will be
running in debt to yourself, but that one of your projects has come
to life again."

"Which one is that?" he eagerly inquired.

"The property owned by that lady on Riverside Drive. I see by this
morning's paper that the working-girls' home is not to be built. I
suppose you already know it, however."

"I overlooked that scandal," he confessed. "Wasn't the building to
be ugly enough?"

"This was a little obscure paragraph," she told him. "It was rather
a joking item, based upon the fact that there is a great deal of ill
feeling among the neighbors, who clubbed together and bought the
option to prevent a building of this character from being erected.
I'm so glad you didn't know about it!"

Her enthusiasm was contagious. Johnny himself was glad. It seemed
like a terrific waste of time to have to wait a month before he
could tell her what he thought of her; but he had to have that
million!

"You're a careful score keeper," he complimented her. "I'll go right
after that property. Does the item say who controls it now?"

"I have the paper before me. I'll read you the names," she returned
with businesslike preparedness: "Mr. James Jameson-Guff, Mr. G. W.
Mason, Mr. Martin Sheats, Mr. Edward Kettle."

"All the neighbors," he commented. "They don't like honest working-
girls, I guess. That's a fine crowd of information you've handed me.
I ought to give you a partnership in that million."

"You just run along or you'll be too late!" she urged him. "I'll
take my commission in the five-thousand-dollar hours you donate to
the Babies' Fund Fair. By the way, from whom do you suppose that
option was purchased?"

"Gresham?" inquired Johnny promptly and with such a thrill of
startled intensity in his tone that Constance could not repress a
giggle.

"No, James Collaton," she informed him. "That's all the news. Hurry,
now! Report to me, won't you, as soon as you find out whether you
can secure the property? I haven't made an entry on my score board
since last Wednesday night. Good-by."

"Good-by," said Johnny reluctantly; but he held the telephone open,
trying to think of something else to say until he heard the click
which told him that she had hung up.

Last Wednesday night! Why, that was the night he had given the
dinner in celebration of his passing the quarter-of-a-million mark;
and after he had taken her home from the dinner she had sat up to
rule and mark that elaborate score board! Somehow his lungs felt
very light and buoyant.

Collaton, though? How did he get into the deal? Suddenly Johnny
remembered Val Russel's joking at the committee meeting. Gresham
again!

"Loring, I don't think I can wait till June first to get after the
scalps of Gresham and Collaton," he declared as he prepared to go
out. "I want to soak them now."

James Jameson-Guff, so christened by his wife, but more familiarly
known among his associates as Jim Guff, received Johnny with a frown
when he understood his errand.

"You're too late," he told Johnny. "We've turned the option over to
our wives to do with as they pleased. We're to have a swell yacht
club out there now. I think that's a graft, too!"

"If you get stung again, Mr. Guff, let me know," offered Johnny,
"and I'll have you a bona fide apartment-house proposition in short
order."

"Nyagh!" observed Mr. Guff.

Johnny dutifully reported to his score keeper the result of his
errand and, that evening, to explain it more fully he went out to
her house; but he found Gresham there and nobody had a very good
time.

On the following morning he saw in the papers that the Royal Yacht
Club, a new organization, the moving spirit of which was one Michael
T. O'Shaunessy, was to have magnificent headquarters on Riverside
Drive--and he immediately went to see Mr. Guff. Mike O'Shaunessy was
a notorious proprietor of road houses and "clubs" of shady
reputation, and there was no question as to what sort of place the
Royal Yacht Club would be.

Mr. Guff was furious about it.

"I knew it," he said. "The women have just telephoned me an
authorization to send for this Jacobs blackguard and buy back the
option."

"Jacobs?" inquired Johnny, "Not Abraham Jacobs?"

"That's the one," corroborated Guff. "Why, do you know him?"

"He is a professional stinger," Johnny admitted. "He stung me, and
Collaton helped."

"I've no doubt of it," responded Guff. "It was a put-up job in the
first place. By the way, Gamble, you used to be in partnership with
Collaton yourself."

"That's true enough," admitted Johnny. "Possibly I'd better give you
some references."

"Give them to the women," retorted Guff.

An hour later Johnny telephoned Guff.

"Did you repurchase the option from Jacobs?" he inquired.

"Yes!" snapped Guff, and hung up.

The facts that the De Luxe Apartments Company was hot after the
property and that he himself was now four hours behind his schedule,
with nothing in sight, drove Johnny on, in spite of his dismal
forebodings.

Mrs. Guff he found to be a hugely globular lady, with a globular
nose, the lines on either side of which gave her perpetually an
expression of having just taken quinine. In view of her recent
experiences she was inclined to call the police the moment Johnny
stated his errand, but he promptly referred her to some gentlemen of
unimpeachable commercial standing; namely, Close, Courtney, Bouncer
and Morton Washer. She coolly telephoned them in his presence and
was satisfied.

"You must understand, however," she said to him severely, "the only
way in which we will release this option is that nothing but a
first-class apartment-house, of not less than ten stories in height
and with no suites of less than three thousand a year rental, shall
be erected."

"I'll sign an agreement to that effect," he promptly promised.

"And how much do you offer us for the property?"

"Two hundred thousand," he returned, making a conservative guess at
the amount they must have paid for the two options.

A deepening of the quinine expression told him that he had undershot
the mark.

"Two hundred and ten thousand," he quickly amended.

A chocolate-cream expression struggled feebly with the quinine; and
Johnny, who could translate the lines of the human countenance into
dollars and cents with great accuracy, knew instantly that their two
options had cost them thirty thousand dollars, and that he was
offering the four ladies a profit of one thousand two hundred and
fifty dollars' worth of gowns or diamonds each.

"That will be the most I can give," he still further amended. "I am
prepared to write you a check at any moment."

"I think I can call a meeting at once," she informed him, and did so
by telephone.

Mrs. Sheats, who came over presently, was an angular woman who kept
the expression of her mouth persistently sweet, no matter what her
state of mind might be; and she was very glad indeed that, so long
as Miss Purry insisted on permitting a building of any sort to be
erected opposite the Slosher residence, they were protecting that
estimable lady in her absence by insuring a structure of dignity and
class.

Mrs. Kettle, who was a placid lady of mature flesh and many teeth,
and who carried ounces upon ounces of diamonds without visible
effort, bewailed the innovation that Miss Purry was forcing on them,
but felt a righteous glow that, under the circumstances, they were
doing so nobly on behalf of Mrs. Slosher.

Mrs. Mason, who was a little, dry, jerky woman whose skin creaked
when she rubbed it, whose voice scratched and whose whole
personality suggested the rasp of saw-filing, was in her own
confession actuated by less affectionate motives.

"I'm glad of it!" she snapped. "Mrs. Slosher is always talking about
their superb river view and the general superiority of the Slosher
location, the Slosher residence, the Slosher everything! I'm glad of
it!"

The other ladies felt that Mrs. Mason was very catty.

At four o'clock that afternoon Johnny entered in his book:

"May third. To seven hours--nine hours behind schedule--$35,000. To
Purry speculation, $210,000."

To offset this was:

"May third. To a chance, $0."


CHAPTER XI

IN WHICH JOHNNY EXECUTES SOME EXCEEDINGLY RAPID BUSINESS DEALS


Sitting tight and watching the hands of his watch go round, with a
deficit of five thousand dollars an hour piling up against him, was
as hard work as Johnny Gamble had ever done; and yet he knew that,
if he succumbed to impatience and went to the De Luxe Apartments
Company before they came to him, he would relinquish a fifty per
cent, advantage. He saw another day slipping past him, with a total
deficit of sixteen hours behind his schedule--or an appalling
shortage of eighty thousand dollars--when, at one o'clock on
Thursday, the expected happened--and a brisk little man, with a
mustache which would have been highly luxuriant if he had not kept
it bitten off as closely as he could reach it, dropped in, inquired
for Loring, jerked a chair as close to him as he could get it and
said, in one breath: "Want to sell your river-view property?"

"Certainly," replied Loring, in whose name the property stood. "Mr.
Gamble is handling that for me. Mr. Chase, Mr. Gamble."

Mr. Chase, holding to his chair, jumped up, hurried over to Johnny
and once more jerked the chair close up.

"How much do you want for it?" he asked.

"Two hundred and seventy-five thousand."

"Too much. I understand it's restricted to apartment-house purposes
alone?"

"Yes."

"Not less than ten stories, and a minimum rental of three thousand
dollars a suite?"

"Yes."

"You can't sell it for that price with those restrictions."

"We can build on it," replied Johnny calmly.

"You won't," asserted Mr. Chase with equal conviction. "You bought
it to sell. I'll give you two hundred and fifty thousand."

"No," refused Johnny quite bravely, though with a panicky feeling as
he thought of that appallingly swift schedule.

"All right," said Chase. "I'll hold the offer open at that figure
for forty-eight hours. I think you'll come to it."

"I doubt it," responded Johnny, smiling; but he was afraid he would.

In less than an hour he received an unexpected call from Mrs. Guff,
who was in such secret agitation that she quivered like jelly
whenever she breathed.

"Mr. Guff and myself have decided to take Miss Purry's river-view
property off your hands, Mr. Gamble," was the glad tidings she
conveyed to him, smiling to share his delight. "We can't think of
letting that river view slip by us."

"I'm glad to hear it," he announced with gratification, as he
thought of Mr. Chase. "Have you secured the consent of your partners
in the option to waive the apartment-house requirements?"

"Oh, no!" she ejaculated, shocked that any one should think that
possible. "We have decided to build the apartment-house and to live
there."

"To live there!" he repeated, remembering the elaborate Guff
residence.

"Yes, indeed!" she enthusiastically exclaimed. "You know the
property slopes down to the river beautifully, and exquisite,
private, terraced gardens could be built there. We could take the
entire lower floor of the apartment building for ourselves, with a
private driveway arched right through it; and we could take the
first three floors of the rear part for our own use, with wonderful
Venetian balconies overlooking the terraces and the river. The
remaining apartments would have entrances on the two front corners,
leaving us all the effect of a Venetian palace. Don't you think
that's clever?"

"It is clever!" he repeated with smiling emphasis, and mentally
raising Chase's ultimatum ten per cent.

"I suppose you'll want to charge us more for the property than you
paid for it," she suggested with a faint hope that maybe he might
not, since he had bought it so recently--and through them.

"That's what I'm in business for," he blandly acknowledged. "I can
let you have the property for two hundred and seventy-five thousand
dollars."

"How much did you say?" she gasped.

"Two hundred and seventy-five thousand."

"Why, it's an outrage!" she puffed. "You paid only two hundred and
ten thousand for it yesterday."

"I'm not telling you its cost to me yesterday, but its value to-
day," he reminded her.

Mrs. Guff had helped her husband to his business success in the
early days--and she had driven bargains with supply men which had
made them glad when she was ill.

"You may keep the property," she wheezed. "Nobody will pay that
price--not even William Slosher; and he'll buy anything if his wife
pouts for it in the ridiculous French clothes she's brought back
with her."

"So the Sloshers are back?" he guessed, with an understanding, at
last, of her agitation.

"They came last night," she admitted, inflating with a multitude of
feelings. "The most ungrateful people in the world! So far from
being thankful for the time and pains and money we spent to protect
them, they're viciously angry and are making threats--positive
threats--that they will disgrace the entire neighborhood!"

"Do you refuse this property at two hundred and seventy-five
thousand?" Mr. Gamble interestedly wanted to know.

"Certainly I do!" she emphatically declared, positive that no human
being would pay that absurd increase in valuation.

"Then the price is withdrawn," he told her; and she left him,
puzzling mightily over that last remark.

It has been held in this state that a marriage was legal, where the
woman intended present marriage, though the man did not, where
they had assumed the relation of husband and wife, and his conduct
had been such as to justify her in believing that he had intended
present marriage. Marriages by consent only, are not rendered void
by a provision punishing parties for solemnizing marriages in any
other manner than that prescribed by law.

[Sidenote: Under age.]
[Sidenote: Consent of parent.]

Such license must not in any case be granted where either party is
under the age necessary to render the marriage absolutely valid,
nor shall it be granted where either party is a minor, without the
previous consent of the parent or guardian of such minor, nor where
the condition of either party is such as to disqualify him from
making any other civil contract. [§3379.]

[Sidenote: Proof of age.]
Unless such clerk is acquainted with the age and condition of the
parties for the marriage of whom the license is applied for,
he must take the testimony of competent and disinterested witnesses
on the subject. [§3380.]
[Sidenote: Record.]
He must cause due entry of the application for the issuing of the
license to be made in a book to be procured and kept for that
purpose, stating that he was acquainted with the parties and knew
them to be of competent age and condition, or that the requisite
proof of such fact was made known to him by one or more witnesses,
stating their names, which book shall constitute a part of the
records of his office.
[§3381.]

[Sidenote: Proof of consent of parent.]
If either party is a minor, the consent of the parent or guardian
must be filed in the clerk's office after being acknowledged by the
said parent or guardian, or proved to be genuine, and a memorandum
of such facts must also be entered in said book. [§3382.]

[Sidenote: Penalty.]

If the clerk of the district court grants a license contrary to the
provisions of the preceding sections, he is guilty of a misdemeanor,
and if a marriage is solemnized without such license being procured,
the parties so married and all persons aiding in such marriage are
likewise guilty of a misdemeanor. [§3883.]

The punishment provided for misdemeanors is imprisonment in the
county jail not more than one year, or by fine not exceeding five
hundred dollars, or by both fine and imprisonment.

[Sidenote: Who may solemnize.]

Marriages must be solemnized either:

1. By a justice of the peace or mayor of the city or incorporated
town wherein the marriage takes place;
2.

By some judge of the supreme or district court of this state; 
3.

By some officiating minister of the gospel ordained or licensed
according to the usages of his denomination. [§3384.]

[Sidenote: Certificate]
After the marriage has been solemnized the officiating minister or
magistrate shall, on request, give each of the parties a certificate
thereof. [§3385.]

[Sidenote: Penalty.]
Marriages solemnized with the consent of parties in any other manner
than is herein prescribed, are valid, but the parties themselves,
and all other parties aiding or abetting, shall forfeit to the
school fund the sum of fifty dollars each. [§3386.]

[Sidenote: Return.]
The person solemnizing marriage shall forfeit a like amount, unless
within ninety days after the ceremony he shall make return thereof
to the clerk of the district court. [§3387.]

[Sidenote: Register of marriages.]

The clerk of the district court shall keep a register containing
the names of the parties, the date of the marriage, and the name
of the person by whom the marriage was solemnized, which, or a
certified transcript therefrom, is receivable in all courts and
places as evidence of the marriage and the date thereof. [§3388]
The register of marriages kept by the clerk is always sufficient
to establish marriage, in the absence of evidence to the contrary,
but record evidence is not indispensable.

The fact of marriage may be shown in various ways. It may be proved
by the admissions or uncontradicted testimony of either party, or
a legal presumption may be raised by the testimony of either husband
or wife with proof of continued cohabitation.

The evidence of witnesses who were present and witnessed the marriage
is always sufficient.

[Sidenote: Peculiar mode.]
These provisions so far as they relate to procuring licenses and to
the solemnizing of marriages, are not applicable to members of any
particular denomination having, as such, any peculiar mode of
entering the marriage relation [§3389].

"Where is she?"

"Round here some place, giving orders to Sammy Chirp. Why are you
loafing this afternoon? You're supposed to be making five thousand
dollars an hour, but I don't see any chance for it here."

"It's a holiday," he retorted. "You're loafing yourself. I see it's
on the program that you're to sell a quarter's worth of violets and
a smile, for five dollars a throw at the boutonniere booth. Notice
how I said boutonniere?"

"You got it out of a book," charged Polly disdainfully. "I called
Constance over from the candy booth to take my place because a gray-
haired rusher came back seven times to have me pin violets on his
coat--and I couldn't smile any more. There he goes now. That's his
second trip for Constance."

"This is a cruel world. I suppose it would fuss her all up if I
dropped him out of a window," Johnny observed wistfully.

"Constance doesn't need help. Just watch her!" And Polly grinned
appreciatively as Constance, recognizing and sorting the tottering
lady-killer at a glance, took his money handed him a nosegay and a
pin, and returned to the back of the booth to arrange her stock:

A huge blot of orange and a thin streak of lavender paused on the
other side of the palms. Johnny wondered to see these two enemies
together, but no man could know the satisfaction they took in it.

"The violet booth," read the big blot of orange, adjusting her gold
lorgnette to the bridge of her globular nose and consulting her
catalogue. "Friday afternoon: Polly Parsons and Mrs. Arthur
Follison. That is not Mrs. Follison in the booth, is it?"

"Oh, no, Mrs. Guff!" protested the thin streak of lavender in a
rasping little lavender voice. "Mrs. Follison, though not a doll-
face--indeed, far from it--is of most aristocratic bearing."

"I suppose that person in the booth, then, is the adopted actress,"
guessed Mrs. Guff. "Any one can tell that's beauty and movement of
the professional type."

Johnny looked at Polly with hasty concern, but that young lady was
enjoying the joke on Constance and gripped his arm for silence.

"One can quite understand how poor Billy Parsons might become
infatuated with her doll-face," returned Miss Purry pityingly, since
she was herself entirely free from the crime of doll-facedness; "but
that the Parsons should adopt such a common person merely because
Billy died before he could marry her was inconsiderate of the rest
of our class."

"The artfulness of her!" exclaimed the thick one, lorgnetting the
graceful Constance with a fishy eye as the temporary flower girl
joyously greeted Ashley Loring and Val Russel and Bruce Townley,
pinned bouquets upon them and exchanged laughing banter with them.

"Dreadful!" agreed the shocked thin one. "Those are the very wiles
by which doll-faced stage women insnare our most desirable young
men."

Constance looked about just then in search of Polly, and her eyes
lighted as they saw Johnny standing with her.

"Oh, Polly!" she called.

"Coming, Constance!" returned the hearty and cheery voice of Polly
from just behind the critics.

The ladies in lavender and orange were still gasping when Johnny
Gamble passed them with Polly. He had made up his mind about the
river-front property.

Loud acclaim hailed Polly and Johnny, for where they went there was
zest of life; and the boys, knowing well that Johnny never wore
flowers, made instant way for him at the violet booth.

"I'll take some blue ones, lady," announced Johnny gamely, intending
to wear them with defiance.

"I'll give you the nearest we have, mister," laughed Constance, and
promptly decorated him.

Since this was the closest her face and eyes had ever been to him,
he forgot to pay her and had to be reminded of that important duty
by Polly and all the boys in unison. There was a faint evasive trace
of perfume about her, more like the freshness of morning or the
delicacy of starlight than an actual essence, he vaguely thought
with a groping return to his poetic inclination. He felt the warmth
of her velvet cheek, even at its distance of a foot away, and there
seemed to be a pulsing thrill in the very air which intervened. For
a startled instant he found himself gazing deep down into her brown
eyes. In that instant her red lips curved in a fleeting smile--a
smile of the type which needs moist eyes to carry its tenderness. It
was all over in a flash, only a fragment of a second, which seemed a
blissful pulsing eternity; and at its conclusion he thought that her
finger quivered as it brushed his own, where he held out the lapel
of his coat, and her cheek paled ever so slightly--but these were
dreams, he knew.

"I'm next, I think," grated a usually suave voice which now had a
decided tinge of unpleasantness; and Paul Gresham, selecting a bunch
of violets from the tray, held them out toward Constance, impatient
to end the all too pretty tableau.

"Next and served," Polly briskly told him; and, taking the
boutonniere from his fingers, she whisked it into place and pinned
it and extracted his money--all apparently in one deft operation.

"Thanks," said Gresham, blinking with the suddenness of it all and
sweeping with a glance of gloomy dissatisfaction, Polly, the
bouquet, Constance and Johnny. "I thought you were to be in the
caramel booth, Constance."

"I'm just going back," she informed him, pausing to straighten
Johnny's lapel, patting it in place and stepping back to view the
result with a critical eye. It seemed to need another coaxing bend
and another pat, both of which she calmly delivered.

A handsome passing couple caught Johnny's eye--a keen and vigorous-
looking elderly gentleman, and Springtime come among them in the
pink and white of apple blossoms--sweet and fresh and smiling; as
guileless as the May itself, but competent!

"Excuse me," said Johnny, and tore himself away from the girl whose
natural beauty made Mrs. Slosher an exquisite work of art. "Beg your
pardon, Mr. Slosher."

Mr. Slosher turned and smiled.

"Hello, Mr. Gamble!" he greeted him, while Mrs. Slosher gave him a
bright and cheery little nod. "I played old-fashioned army poker
with Colonel Bouncer and Ben Courtney and Mort Washer and Joe Close
last night--and the old robbers skinned me out of thirty-two
dollars. They spoke of you during the game and I guess you could get
backing to any amount in that crowd."

"Thanks for the tip," returned Johnny. "I may need it."

"You're going to give us our apartment-house property, aren't you?"
Mrs. Slosher knew by his very appearance.

"It's only a matter of closing the deal," Johnny told her with a
perfectly justifiable smile which Constance, from a distance,
criticized severely. He drew an envelope from his pocket and took
from it a paper which he passed to Mr. Slosher.

It was a written offer from the De Luxe Apartments Company for three
hundred thousand dollars.

"That makes my offer, then--at five per cent, advance--three hundred
and fifteen thousand," figured Slosher. "Is that a bargain?"

Johnny, glancing contentedly about the big inclosure, saw Jim Guff
waiting impatiently for a chance to speak with him.

"It's a bargain," he agreed, and pretty little Mrs. Slosher nodded
her head vehemently with innocent joy.

Gresham passed them by and tipped his hat to Mrs. Slosher, including
Mr. Slosher in the greeting. A pleasant idea struck Johnny.

"You scarcely intend to build your colored apartment-house under
your own name?" he suggested.

"Indeed, no!" laughed Mrs. Slosher happily. "All we wish is the
result. We ask for no credit."

"Moreover," warned Mr. Slosher, "I wouldn't care to have my purpose
known until after I have sold my own residence. I am a little
worried, however, about the detail you suggest. No man of any
consequence would injure the good will of his fellows by standing
sponsor for such a venture."

"I think I know your man," stated Gamble with pleasant anticipation.
"I'll tell you about him if you'll be careful not to let him or
anybody else know that I recommended him."

"I can figure out sufficient reasons for that," replied Slosher. "Is
he reliable?"

"He can give you security--and I suppose you had better exact it,"
advised Johnny. "He is the man who first secured the option from
Miss Purry."

"What is his name?"

"Collaton," and Johnny gazed serenely after Gresham.

"I'll send for him in the morning," decided Mr. Slosher.

When Johnny returned to the violet booth he found there Winnie and
Sammy Chirp, the latter with all his pockets and both his arms full
of Winnie's purchases and personal belongings, inextricably mixed
with similar articles belonging to Polly; and there was a new note
of usefulness which redeemed somewhat the feebleness of his smile.
Loring was helping Sammy to adjust his burdens; and Winnie, with the
aid of the mirror in her vanity box, was trying the effect of
violets close to her eyes. Johnny waited patiently for Loring to get
through and then, despite Polly's protest, dragged him away.

"I've arranged for the first dent in Gresham and Collaton," he
announced, and outlined the program which later on was carried out
to the letter. "I've fixed to have some valuable property placed in
Collaton's name, with Gresham as security. When that is done I want
you to go to Jacobs and play a mean trick on him. Make him serve
that attachment on Collaton's ostensible property. Collaton, having
confessed judgment on the note, can not fight it--and Gresham will
have to foot the bill."

Self-contained and undemonstrative as Loring was in public, he,
nevertheless, gave way to an uncontrollable burst of laughter which
humiliated him beyond measure when he discovered the attention he
had attracted.


CHAPTER XIII

IN WHICH JOHNNY BUYS A PRESENT AND HATCHES A SCHEME


Johnny, relying like a lost mariner on Polly Parsons and Constance
Joy to help him pick out a present for his only mother, approached
Lofty's with a diffidence amounting to awe. In that exclusive shop
he would meet miles of furbelowed femininity, but he would not have
ventured unprotected into those fluffed and billowed aisles for
anything short of a penance.

Being a philosopher, however, he kept his mind active in as many
other directions as possible, like a child deliberately feasting
upon thoughts of Santa Claus though on the way to a promised
spanking.

"There's a hoodoo on this block," Johnny observed as they were
caught in the traffic crush almost in front of their destination.

"Lofty and Ersten must be the hoodooers, then," laughed Polly.
"Everybody else has gone away."

Johnny looked at the towering big Lofty establishment, which
occupied half the block, and at the dingy little ladies' tailoring
shop, down around the other corner, with speculative curiosity.
About both, as widely different as they were, there was the same
indefinable appearance of prosperity, as if the solid worth from
within shone heavily through.

"Lofty's couldn't move and Ersten wouldn't," supplemented Constance.

"Not that Dutchman!" returned Polly, laughing again as she peered
into the low dark windows of the ladies' tailoring shop. "I was in
the other day, and he told me three times that he would be right
there to make my walking frocks for the next thirteen years."

"He was having a quarrel with Mr. Schnitt about the light in the
workroom when I was in," observed Constance, "but he told me the
same thing, in his enjoyable German way, and he seemed almost angry
about it."

"That's the extent of his lease," guessed Johnny shrewdly. "They're
trying to get it away from him."

"I wonder why," speculated Constance.

"It's as simple as spending money," Johnny announced. "Lofty intends
building an extension."

"They won't tear down Ersten's shop," Polly confidently asserted.

"They'll move him in a wheelbarrow some night," Johnny prophesied.
"If I could grab his lease I could play a few hours."

Both the girls laughed at him for that speech.

"You'll be gray before the thirty-first of May," warned Polly.

"It turns anybody gray to dig up a million," agreed Johnny. "It's a
good guess, though, Polly. I counted seven new white ones this
morning."

"That's a strange coincidence," commented Constance, with a secretly
anxious glance at his hair. "You're just seven hours behind your
schedule."

Johnny shook his head.

"That schedule goes round like an electric fan," he soberly
declared.

"And there's no switch," Constance reminded him.

"Gresham," Johnny suggested with a smile.

Polly cast a sidelong glance at the pretty cousin into whose family
she had been adopted. The subject of Gresham was a painful one; and
Johnny felt his blundering bluntness keenly.

"There isn't any Gresham," laughingly asserted Polly. "There never
was any Gresham. Let's go to Coney Island to-night."

Both Constance and Johnny gave Polly a silent but sincere vote of
thanks.

Willis Lofty, who continued the progressive fortune of his father by
prowling about the vast establishment with a microscopic eye,
approached Polly with more than a shopkeeper's alacrity.

"You promised to send for me to be your clerk the next time you came
in," he chided her.

"I didn't come in this time," she gaily returned. "Mr. Gamble is the
customer," and she introduced Constance and the two gentlemen. "Mr.
Gamble wants to buy a silk shawl for a blue-eyed mother with gray
wavy hair and baby-pink cheeks."

"There are a lot of pretty shawls here," Constance added, "but none
of them seems quite good enough for this kind of a mother."

Young Lofty, himself looking more like a brisk and natty college
youth who had come in to buy a gift for his own mother than the
successful business man he was, glanced at the embarrassed Johnny
with thorough understanding.

"Be mother's little woman, dear," said Mrs. Mayfield as she kissed
the rosy face. Her husband added: "I leave the children in
your care, Bess; be a little mother to them."
Bess waved her old sun-bonnet vigorously, and held up the baby Rose,
that she might watch them to the last. Old Daddy Jim and Mammy
had been detailed by Mr. Mayfield to keep an unsuspected watch on
the little nestlings, and were to sleep at the house.

Thus two days went by, when Daddy Jim and Mammy begged to be allowed
to go to the quarters where the Negroes lived, to see their daughter,
"Jennie, who was pow'ful bad wid the toothache."

They declared they would be back by evening, so Bess was willing.

She put the little girls to bed and persuaded Rob to go; then seated
herself by the table with her mother's work-basket, in quaint
imitation of Mrs.

Mayfield's industry in the evening time. But what was this?

Her feet touched something cold!

She bent down and felt around with her hand. A pool of water was
spreading over the floor. She knew what it was; the Mississippi
had broken through the levee.

What should she do? Mammy's stories of how homes had been washed
away and broken in pieces were in her mind. "Oh, if I had a
boat!"

she exclaimed. "But there isn't anything of the sort on the place."
She ran wildly out to look for Mammy; and stumbled over something
sitting near the edge of the porch.

A sudden inspiration took her. Here was her boat! a very large,
old-fashioned, oblong tub. The water was now several inches
deep on the porch and she contrived to half-float, half-row the
tub into the room.

Without frightening the children she got them dressed in the warmest
clothes they had. She lined the oblong tub with a blanket, and
made ready bread and cold meat left from supper.

With Rob's assistance she dragged the tub upstairs. There was a single
large window in the room, and they set the tub directly by it, so
that when the water rose the tub would float out.

There was no way for the children to reach the roof, which was a very
steep, inclined one.

It did not seem long before the water had very nearly risen to the top
of the stairs leading from below.

Bess flung the window open, and made Rob get into their novel boat;
then she lifted in Kate, and finally baby Rose, who began to cry,
was given into Rob's arms, and now the little mother, taking the
basket of food, made ready to enter, too; but, lo!

there was no room for her with safety to the rest.

Bess paused a moment, drew a long breath, and kissed the children
quietly. She explained to Rob that he must guard the basket, and
that they must sit still.

"Goodbye, dears. Say a prayer for sister, Rob.

If you ever see father and mother, tell them I took care of you."
Then the water seized the insecure vessel, and out into the dark
night it floated.

[Illustration: ]
The next day Mr.

Mayfield, who, with his neighbors, scoured the broad lake of eddying
water that represented the Mississippi, discovered the tub lodged
in the branches of a sycamore with the children weeping and chilled,
but safe.

And Bess? Ah, where was Bess, the "little mother," who in that brief
moment resigned herself to death?

They found her later, floating on the water with her brave childish
face turned to the sky; and as strong arms lifted her into the boat,
the tears from every eye paid worthy tribute to the "little mother."

--_Detroit Free Press_

ROBBIE GOODMAN'S PRAYER

"What can be the matter with Walter," thought Mama Ellis as she sat
sewing in her pleasant sitting-room. "He came in so very quietly,
closed the door gently and I think I even heard him go to the
closet to hang up his books.

Oh! dear. I hope he isn't going to have another attack of 'Grippe,'"
and Mrs.

Johnny's half consisted in stating that
he had come to see Mr. Ersten in reference to his lease. Mr.
Ersten's half consisted in flatly declining to discuss that subject
on the premises.

"Here--I make ladies' suits," he explained. "If you come about such
a business, with good recommendations from my customers, I talk with
you. Otherwise not."

"I'll talk any place you say," consented Johnny. "Where do you
lunch?"

"At August Schoppenvoll's," replied Mr. Ersten with no hint of an
intention to disclose where August Schoppenvoll's place might be.
"At lunch-time I talk no business; I eat."

The speculator studied those forbidding bushy brows in silence for a
moment. Beneath them, between heavy lids, glowed a pair of very
stern gray eyes; but at the outward corner of each eye were two
deep, diverging creases, which belied some of the sternness.

"Where do you sleep?" Johnny asked.

"I don't talk business in my sleep," asserted Mr. Ersten stoutly,
and then he laughed with considerable heartiness, pleased immensely
with his own joke and not noticing that it was more than half
Johnny's. After all, Johnny had only implied it; he had said it!
Accordingly he relented a trifle. "From four to half-past five, at
Schoppenvoll's, I play skat," he added.

"Thank you," said Johnny briskly, and started for the nearest
telephone directory. "I'll drop in on you."

"Well," returned Ersten resignedly, "it won't do you any good."

Johnny grinned and went out, having first made a swift but careful
estimate of Ersten's room, accommodations and requirements. Outside,
he studied the surrounding property, then called on a real estate
firm.

At four-ten he went into the dim little basement wine-room of
Schoppenvoll. He had timed this to a nicety, hoping to arrive just
after the greetings were over and before the game had begun, and he
accomplished that purpose; for, with the well-thumbed cards lying
between them and three half-emptied steins of beer on the table,
Ersten was opposite a pink-faced man with curly gray hair, whose
clothes sat upon his slightly portly person with fashion-plate
precision. It was this very same suit about which Ersten was talking
when Johnny entered.

After a little he began to repeat after her; as he went on his heart
was interested, and he broke out into an earnest prayer for himself;
bewailed his sins, confessed and promised to forsake them; entered
into covenant with God; light broke out in his darkness; how long
he prayed he did not know; he seemed to have forgotten his child
in his prayer.

When he came to himself he raised his head from the bed on which he
had rested it; there lay the little speaker, a lovely smile was upon
the face, her hand was in that of the father, but she had gone to
be among the angels.

--_Power of Prayer_ by Prime.

LOST TREASURES

"Come, Mamie, darling," said Mrs. Peterson, "before you go into the
land of dreams you will kneel at my knee and thank your heavenly
Father for what he has given you today."Schoppenvoll, a tall, straight-
backed man with the dignity of a major, a waving gray pompadour, and
a clean-cut face that might have belonged to a Beethoven, set down
the tray at the very edge of the table and slid it gently into
place. An overgrown fat boy, with his sleeves rolled to his
shoulders, brought three shining glasses, three bottles of Glanzen
Wasser and a corkscrew.

It was at this most inopportune time that Johnny Gamble spoke.

"Well, Mr. Ersten," he cheerfully observed, "I've come round to make
you an offer for that lease."

Mr. Ersten, his gnarled eyebrows bent upon the sacred ceremony about
to be performed, looked up with a grunt--and immediately returned to
his business. Mr. Kurzerhosen glanced round for an instant in
frowning appeal. Mr. Schoppenvoll paid no attention whatever to the
interruption. He gave an exhibition of cork-pulling which a
watchmaker might have envied for its delicacy; he poured the tall
glasses half-full of the clear amber fluid and opened the bottles of
Glanzen Wasser. The three friends, Schoppenvoll now sitting, clinked
their steins solemnly and emptied them. Ersten wiped the foam from
his bristling gray mustache.

"About that lease I have nothing to say," he told Johnny, fixing a
stern eye upon him. "I will not sell it."

The other gentlemen of the party looked upon the stranger as an
unforgivable interloper.

"I'm prepared to make you a very good offer for it," insisted
Johnny. "I have a better location for you, not half a block away,
and I've taken an option on a long-time lease for it."

The stolid boy removed the steins. The three gentlemen poured the
Glanzen Wasser into their wine.

"I will not sell the lease," announced Ersten with such calm
finality that Johnny apologized for the intrusion and withdrew. As
he went out, Ersten and Kurzerhosen and Schoppenvoll, in blissful
forgetfulness of him, raised their glasses for the first delicious
sip of the Rheinthranen, of which there were only two hundred and
eighty precious bottles left in the world.

Outside, Johnny hailed a passing taxi. He called on Morton Washer,
on Ben Courtney, on Colonel Bouncer, and even on Candy-King Slosher;
but to no purpose. Finally he descended upon iron-hard Joe Close.

"Do you know anybody who knows Louis Ersten, the ladies' tailor?" he
asked almost automatically.

"Ersten?" replied Close unexpectedly. "I've quarreled with him for
thirty years. He banks with me."

"Start a quarrel for me," requested Johnny. "I've been down to look
him over. I can do business with him if he'll listen."

Close smiled.

"I doubt it," he rejoined. "Ersten has just lost the coat cutter who
helped him build up his business, and he's soured on everything in
the world but Schoppenvoll's and skat and Rheinthranen."

"Could I learn to play skat in about a day?" inquired Johnny.

"You have no German ancestors, have you?" retorted Close.

"No."

"Then you couldn't learn it in a thousand years!"

"I have to find his weak spot," Johnny persisted. "If you'll just
make him talk with me I'll do the rest."

Close shook his head and sighed.

"I'll try," he agreed, "but I feel about as hopeful as I would be of
persuading a bull to sleep in a red blanket."

Johnny had caught Close as he was leaving his club for home, and
they went round immediately to Schoppenvoll's. At exactly five-
thirty Ersten emerged from the wine-room with Kurzerhosen.

"Hello, Louis!" hailed the waiting Close. "Jump into the taxi here,
and I'll take you down to your train."

Ersten and Kurzerhosen looked at each other.

"Always we walk," declared Ersten.

"There's room for both of you," laughed Close, shaking hands with
Kurzerhosen.

Ersten sighed.

"Always we walk," he grumbled, but he climbed in.

When they were started for the terminal Ersten leaned forward, with
his bushy brows lowering, and glared Close sternly in the eye.

"I will not sell the lease!" he avowed before a word had been
spoken.

"We know that," admitted Close; "but why?"

Ersten hesitated a moment.

"Oh, well; I tell you," he consented with an almost malignant glance
in the direction of Johnny. "All my customers know me in that
place."

"Your customers would find you anywhere," Close complimented him.

"Maybe they do," admitted Ersten. "My cousin, Otto Gruber, had a
fine saloon business. He moved across the street--and broke up."

"It was not the same," Close assured him. "In saloons, men want to
feel at home. In your business, your customers come because they get
the best--and they care nothing for the shop itself."

"They like the place," asserted Ersten. "I've made a good living
there for almost forty years. Why should I move?"

"Because you would be nearer Fifth Avenue," Johnny ventured to
interject, and spoke to the chauffeur, who drew up to the curb.
"This is the place I have in mind, Mr. Ersten."

"They come to me where I am," insisted Ersten, refusing to look,
with unglazed eyes.

"You have no such show-windows," persisted Johnny.

"My customers know my goods inside."

"There's a big light gallery--twice the size of your present
workrooms."

Ersten's cheeks suddenly puffed and his forehead purpled, while
every hair on his head and face stuck straight out.

"My workroom is good enough!" he exploded. "I told it to Schnitt!"

"Is Schnitt your coat cutter?" asked Johnny, remembering what
Constance and Close had said.

Ersten glowered at him.

"He was. Thirty-seven years he worked with me; then he tried to run
my business. He is gone. Let him go!"

"He objected to the light in the workroom, didn't he?" went on the
cross-examiner, carefully piecing the situation together bit by bit.

"He could see for thirty-seven years, till everybody talks about
moving; then he goes crazy," blurted Ersten.

"Won't you look at this place?" he was urged. "Let me show it to you
to-morrow."

"I stay where I am," sullenly declared Ersten, still angry. "We miss
my train."

Close told the driver to go on. Before Ersten alighted at the
terminal, Johnny made one more attempt upon him.

"If a majority of your best customers insisted that they liked the
new shop better would you look at the other place?" he asked.

"My customers don't run my business either!" he puffed.

"Good-by," stated Mr. Kurzerhosen, who had been looking steadily at
the opposite side of the street throughout the journey. "I thank
you."

Close stared at Johnny in silence for a moment after their guests
had gone.

"I told you so," he said. "You'll have to give him up as a bad job."

"He's beginning to look like a good job," asserted Johnny. "He can
be handled like wax, but you have to melt him. Schnitt's the real
reason. Do you know Schnitt?"

"I am happy to say I do not," laughed Close. "One like Ersten is
enough."

"Somebody must lead me to him," declared Johnny. "I'm going to see
Schnitt in the morning. I'd call to-night if I didn't have to be the
big works at a Coney Island dinner party."

"I don't see how Schnitt can help you," puzzled Close.

"He's the tack in the tire. I can see what happened as well as if I
had been there. Ersten knew he ought to move. Lofty tried to buy him
and Schnitt tried to force him. Then he got his Dutch up. Schnitt
left on account of it. Now Ersten won't do anything."

"You can't budge him an inch," prophesied the banker. "I know him."

"I'll coax him," stated Johnny determinedly. "There's a profit in
him, and I have to have it!"


CHAPTER XV

IN WHICH WINNIE CHAPERONS THE ENTIRE PARTY TO CONEY ISLAND


At the last minute, Aunt Pattie Boyden fortunately contracted a
toothache--and the Coney Island party was compelled to go
unchaperoned. They tried to be regretful and sympathetic as the six
of them climbed into the big touring car, but Ashley Loring found
them a solace.

"Never you mind," he soothed them--"Polly will chaperon us."

"You've lost your address book," declared that young lady
indignantly. "Polly Parsons is not the person you have in mind. I'll
be old soon enough without that! The chaperon of this party is my
adopted sister, Winnie."

"Oh, fun!" accepted the nominee with delight. "We had a course in
that at school." And Winnie, in all the glory of her fluffy
youthfulness, toyed carefully with the points of her Moorish collar.
"I was elected chaperon of the Midnight Fudge Club, and the girls
all said that I fooled Old Meow oftener than anybody!"

Thereafter there was no lull in the conversation; for Winnie, once
started on school reminiscences, filled all gaps to overflowing; and
Sammy Chirp, he of the feeble smile, whose diffidence had denied him
the gift of language, gazed on her in rapt and happy stupefaction.

Meanwhile, Johnny Gamble found himself gazing as raptly at Constance
until the chaperon, in a brief interlude between reminiscences,
caught him at it. She reached over and touched him on the back of
the hand with the tip of one soft pink finger. Immediately she held
that finger to her right eye and closed her left one, and Johnny
felt himself blushing like a school-boy.

There was a trace of resentment in his embarrassment, he found. The
strain of being compelled to make a million dollars, before he could
tell this only desirable young woman in the world that he loved her,
was beginning to oppress him. He wanted to tell her now; but it was
a task beyond him to ask her to forfeit her own fortune until he
could replace it by another. Times were hard, he reflected.

He was now twelve hours behind his schedule and possessed of sixty
thousand dollars less than he should have. At nine o'clock to-morrow
morning that deficit would begin to pile up again at the rate of
five thousand dollars an hour. By comparison their auto seemed slow,
and he spoke to the driver about it. How well Constance Joy was in
sympathy with him and followed his thought, was shown by the fact
that she heartily agreed with him, though they were already
exceeding the Brooklyn speed limit.

"I not only want to be the chaperon but the dictator of this tour,"
declared Winnie when they alighted at the big playground. "I've
never been here before, and I don't want anybody to tell me anything
I'm going to see."

"It's your party," announced Johnny promptly. "Let's be plumb vulgar
about it." And he thrust a big roll of bills into her hands.

"You're a darling!" she exclaimed, her eyes glistening with delight.
"May I kiss him, girls?"

"Ask Johnny," laughed Polly, but Johnny had disappeared behind the
others of the party.

It took Winnie five minutes to chase him down, and she caught him,
with the assistance of Constance, in the thickest crowd and in the
best-lighted space on Surf Avenue, where Constance held him while he
received his reward.

"It's a new game," Johnny confessed, though blushing furiously.
"I'll be 'it' any time you say."

"Once is enough," asserted Winnie, entirely unruffled. "Your face is
scratchy. Come on, you folks; I'm going to buy you a dinner." And,
leading the way into the first likely-looking place, she ordered a
comprehensive meal which started with pickles and finished with pie.

Her party was a huge success, for it laughed its way from one end of
Coney to the other. It rode on wooden horses; on wobbling camels; in
whirling tubs; on iron-billowed oceans; down trestled mountains;
through painted caves--on everything which had rollers, or runners,
or supporting arms. It withstood shocks and bumps and dislocations
and dizziness--and it ran squarely into Heinrich Schnitt!

Three tables, placed end to end at the rail of a Shoot-the-Chutes
lake, were required to accommodate Heinrich Schnitt's party. First,
there was Heinrich himself, white as wax and stoop-shouldered and
extremely clean. At the other end of the table sat Mama Schnitt, who
bulged, and always had butter on her thumb. To the right of Heinrich
sat Grossmutter Schnitt, in a black sateen dress, with her back
bowed like a new moon and her little old face withered like a dried
white rose.

Next sat young Heinrich Schnitt and his wife, Milly, who was very
fashionable and wore a lace shirt-waist--though she was not so
fashionable that she was ashamed of any of the rest of the party.

Between young Heinrich and Milly sat their little Henry and little
Rosa and little Milly and the baby, all stiffly starched and round-
faced and red-cheeked. Besides these were Carrie, whose husband was
dead; and Carrie's Louis; and Willie Schnitt with Flora Kraus, whom
he was to marry two years from last Easter; and Lulu, who was
pretty, and went with American boys in the face of broken-hearted
opposition.

In front of each member of the party--except the baby--was a glass
of beer and a "hot dog", and down the center of the long table were
three pasteboard shoe boxes, full of fine lunch, flanking Flora
Kraus' fancy basket of potato salad and fried chicken, as well
prepared as any those Schnitts could put up.

It was Constance who, walking quietly with Johnny, discovered
Heinrich Schnitt in the midst of his throng and casually remarked
it.

"There's the nice old German who cuts my coats," she observed.

"Schnitt!" exclaimed Johnny, so loudly that she was afraid Schnitt
might hear him. "Let me hear you talk to him."

She looked at him in perplexity for a moment.

"Oh, yes; the lease," she remembered. "I'll introduce you and you
can ask him about it."

"Don't mention it!" hastily objected Johnny. "You may introduce me,
but you do the talking."

"All right, boss," she laughingly agreed, and turned straight over
to the head of the Schnitts' table, where she introduced her
companion in due form.

"I want my walking suit," she demanded.

Heinrich's face had lighted with pleasure at the sight of Constance,
but there was a trace of sadness in his voice.

"You must tell Louis Ersten," he politely advised her.

"I did," protested Constance. "He's holding it back on account of
the coat, and that's your affair."

"It is Louis Ersten's," insisted Heinrich with dignity. "I have
retired from business."

"You don't mean to say you've left Ersten?" returned Constance in
surprise.

"I have retired from business," reiterated Heinrich.

"Ersten wouldn't give papa enough room," broke in Mama Schnitt
indignantly, "so he quits, and he don't go back till he does."

"So I don't ever go back," concluded Heinrich.

"Well, we got enough that papa don't have to work any more,"
asserted Mama Schnitt with proper pride and a glance at Flora Kraus;
"but he gets lonesome. That's why we make him come down to Coney to-
day and enjoy himself. He was with Louis Ersten thirty-seven years."

A wave of homesickness swept over Heinrich.

"I take it easy in my old days," he stoutly maintained, but with
such inward distress that, without a protest, he allowed the waiter
to remove his half-emptied glass of beer.

"I'm glad you can take it easy," declared Constance, "but Ersten's
customers will miss you very much--and I am sure Ersten will, too."

"We worked together thirty-seven years," said Schnitt wistfully.

"I'm sure it's only obstinacy," commented Constance when she and
Johnny had rejoined their party. "Why, Mr. Schnitt and Mr. Ersten
have grown up together in the business, and they seemed more like
brothers than anything else. I'd give anything to bring them
together again!"

"I'll ask you for it some time," asserted Johnny confidently.

He caught a flash of challenge in her eyes and realized that he was
moving faster than his schedule would permit,

"I'm going to bring them together, you know," he assured her in
confusion.

"I do hope so," she demurely replied.

"We're wasting an awful lot of time!" called Winnie. "The Canals of
Venice! We haven't been in this." And she promptly bought six
tickets.

In the bustle of taking boats an officious guard succeeded, for the
thousandth time that day, in the joyful duty of separating a party;
and Constance and Johnny were left behind to enjoy the next boat all
to themselves.

It was dim and cool in there--all narrow gravity canals, and quaint
canvas buildings, and queer arches, and mellow lights, with little
dark curves and long winding reaches, and a restfulness almost like
solemnity.

It was the first time Johnny had been in such close companionship
with Constance as this strange isolation gave them, and he did not
know what to say. After all, what was the use of saying? They were
there, side by side, upon the gently flowing water, far, far away
from all the world; and it would seem almost rude to break that
bliss with language, which so often fails to interpret thought.

Constance's hand was drooping idly across her knee and, by an
uncontrollable impulse, Johnny's hand, all by itself, slid over and
gently clasped the whiter and slenderer one. It did not draw away;
and, huddled up on their low narrow seat, bumping against the wooden
banks and floating on and on, they cared not whither, they stared
into oblivion in that semi-trancelike condition that sometimes
accompanies the peculiar state in which they found themselves.

"Oh-ho-o-o-o!" rang the clear voice of Winnie from a parallel canal
just behind them.

Constance, flushing violently, attempted to jerk her hand away; but
Johnny, animated by a sudden aggressiveness, clasped it tightly and
held it--captive--up to view.

At that interesting moment another sharp turn in the canal brought
them face to face with an approaching boat in which were Paul
Gresham and Jim Collaton!

"I said it was a girl," charged Collaton, studying the green pallor
of Gresham's face with wondering interest as they stepped out into
the glare of the million electric bulbs.

"That is not a topic for you to discuss," returned Gresham, looking
up the brilliantly lighted board walk around the bend of which
Johnny Gamble, with Constance on one arm and Winnie on the other,
was gaily following Polly, that young lady being escorted by the
attentive Loring and the submissive Sammy.

"That's what you said before," retorted Collaton, his eyebrows and
lashes even more invisible in this illumination than in broad day-
light. "It's time, though, for a showdown. You drag me into dark
corners and talk over schemes to throw the hooks into Johnny Gamble-
-and I tell you I'm afraid of him!"

"You're mistaken," asserted Gresham dryly. "It was I who told you
that you were afraid of him."

"I admitted it all right," sulkily answered Collaton. "He's awake
now, I tell you; and he's not a safe man to fool with. He turned our
last trick against us, and that's enough hint for me."

"Your trick, you mean," corrected Gresham.

"Our trick, I said!" insisted Collaton, suddenly angry. "Look here,
Gresham, I won't stand any monkey business from you! If there's ever
any trouble comes out of this you'll get your share of it, and don't
you forget it! You've had me lay attachments against the Gamble-
Collaton Irrigation Company on forged notes. Since I had nothing,
Johnny paid them, because he was square. The last attachment,
though--for fifty thousand--he held off until I got that Slosher
Apartment scheme in my own name, and turned it against me; and you
had to pay it, because you had stood good for me."

[Sidenote: Marriage]
Marriage was regarded by the common law as a civil contract and
might be entered into legally by a boy of fourteen or a girl of
twelve years of age, provided they were under no legal disability
to contract marriage.

This was called the age of consent, or discretion, and a marriage
contracted prior to this time was inchoate only, and might be
repudiated by either party upon arriving at the legal age. If one of
the parties was above and the other under the required age, the
marriage might still be disaffirmed by either.

If after reaching the age of consent the parties continued to live
together as husband and wife, this would be regarded as an affirmance
of the marriage.

[Sidenote: What constitutes.]
The mutual consent of the parties themselves, followed by cohabitation,
was sufficient to constitute a legal marriage, without the observance
of any formalities. The formal ceremonies provided by statute for
the celebration of marriages, and the penalties imposed upon
clergymen and others who married those who had not complied with
these formalities, were solely for the purpose of providing a
convenient and certain proof of marriage, should it be afterwards
necessary to establish that fact by evidence, rather than to
invalidate marriages which would otherwise be legal.

[Sidenote: Dissolution of marriage.]
Having established the marriage relation, it could only be dissolved
by death or divorce granted by act of parliament, or, in this
country after the declaration of independence, by act of legislature.

No absolute divorce could be granted for any cause arising after the
marriage, but a separation might be decreed in case of adultery by
either party.

[Sidenote: Subjection of married women.]
By the rules of the common law, the person and property of women were
under the absolute control of their husbands. The maxim, _Uxor non
est juris, sed sub potestate viri_, "a wife is not her own mistress,
but is under the power of her husband," is but an expression of the
actual legal status of a woman from the instant she entered the
matrimonial state, until released therefrom by death or divorce.

[Sidenote: Legally dead.]

Marriage was the act by which she ceased to have a legal existence,
by which, we are told, her very being became incorporated or consolidated
into that of her husband. From the time her identity became thus
merged, she was presumed by the law to be under the protection and
influence of her husband, to be so absolutely and entirely one person
with him, that she had henceforth no life in law apart from his.

[Sidenote: Unity of person.]
The legal fiction of the unity of the persons of husband and wife
dates back to feudal times, and may, perhaps, have been a necessity
of the age and of the peculiar social and political systems of that
period.

Like many another law having its inception in a sincere desire to
secure the greatest good to the greatest number, and apparently
necessary for that purpose at the period of social development which
gave it birth, it existed for centuries after it had ceased to
result in any benefit or afford any protection, and after the reason
for its being had passed away and been forgotten.

[Sidenote: Power of husband.]
We are told that at marriage the husband "adopted his wife and her
circumstances together." He might exercise his power over her
person by restraining her of her liberty in case of gross misbehavior,
or by giving her moderate chastisement in the same degree that he
might administer correction to his children.

An early decision of one of our state courts interpreted this to
mean that a man might whip his wife with a switch as large as his
finger, but not larger than his thumb, without being guilty of an
assault.

[Sidenote: Disabilities.]
Husband and wife being one person could not contract nor enter into
a business partnership with each other; neither could one convey
property to the other without the intervention of a third party.

The wife was incapable of receiving a legacy unless it was willed
to another person as trustee, for her use and benefit, and if a
legacy were paid directly to her, the husband could compel the
executor to pay it again to him.

[Sidenote: Wife's power to contract.]
The wife had no power to contract a legal debt nor to bind herself
by any kind of an agreement, neither could she make her husband
liable for any debt or contract, except for necessaries.

These, the husband was under obligation to provide, and in
contracting for them, the law assumed that the wife was acting
as his agent.

[Sidenote: Release of dower.]

She might release her right of dower in lands of her husband, but
only when examined separately she acknowledged that the conveyance
or release was not secured by his influence or coercion.

[Sidenote: Wife's earnings.]
Her earnings though acquired by her individual labor and in a
business separate and apart from her husband belonged to him, and
he could collect them by action.

This was the law though husband and wife were living apart.

They could be subjected to the payment of his debts, by his creditors,
and if he died without a will they descended to his heirs as other
personal property.

They were not considered the property of the wife, even in equity,
without a clear, express, irrevocable gift, or some distinct
affirmative act of the husband, divesting himself of them and setting
them apart for her separate use.

[Sidenote: Power of conveyance and devise.]
A wife had no power to convey her real property, nor could she devise
her personal property by will, without the consent of her husband.

[Sidenote: Domicile.]

The husband had the legal right to establish his home or domicile
in any part of the world where "his interests, his tastes, his
convenience, or possibly, his caprice might suggest," and it was
the wife's duty to follow him.

If she refused to accompany him, no matter upon what ground she
based her refusal, she was guilty of desertion.

A promise by the husband before marriage as to the establishment of
the place of residence of the family, created a moral obligation
only and was a mere nullity in law.

Whenever there was a difference of opinion between husband and wife
in regard to the location of the common home, the will of the wife
had to yield to that of the husband.

This law of domicile was based upon the grounds of the "identity
of the husband and wife, the subjection of the wife to the husband,
and the duty of the wife to make her home with her husband."

[Sidenote: Witness.]
Neither husband nor wife was competent as a witness to testify
either for or against the other in civil or criminal cases.

[Sidenote: Husband entitled to society of wife.]
The husband was entitled to the society and services of his wife
and he might bring an action for damages against anyone who harbored
her, or persuaded or enticed her to leave him or live separate from
him.

If injuries were wrongfully inflicted upon her, two actions
might be brought against the party responsible for the wrong, one
by husband and wife for the personal injury to the wife, and one
by the husband for loss of the wife's services.

In either case, the amount recovered belonged to the husband.

[Sidenote: Suits at law.]

The wife could neither sue or be sued unless her husband was
joined with her in the suit.

A judgment recovered against her alone was void, because she was
unknown to the law apart from her husband.

One entered in her favor became the property of her husband.

[Sidenote: Wife as executor.]
The consent of the husband was necessary to enable a married woman
to act as executor, administrator, guardian or trustee.

[Sidenote: Duty of husband.]

[Sidenote: Liable for anti-nuptial contracts.]
[Sidenote: Torts of wife.]
The husband became responsible for the maintenance of the wife
according to her rank and station, and if he failed to make suitable
provision for her, tradesmen might furnish her with necessaries at
her request and could collect payment from the husband.

He was liable for all of her debts contracted before marriage, and
this was the case, though he may have received no property with her.

He was responsible for certain wrongs committed by her after
marriage, such as libel and slander, and judgment could be recovered
against him.

If a wrong were committed jointly by both, action might be brought
against the husband alone. When a judgment was recovered upon
contract, or because of the wrongful act of the wife, if the husband
failed to pay it, he might be imprisoned.

[Sidenote: Widow's quarantine.]
After the death of the husband the law gave the widow a right to
remain forty days in his house, during which time her dower might
be assigned.

This right was known as the "widow's quarantine."

[Sidenote: Custody of children.]
The father was legally entitled to the custody of his children,--the
right of the mother was never recognized, it being expressly stated
by Blackstone that "a mother, as such, is entitled to no power, but
only to reverence and respect."

He might by will appoint a guardian for them after his death, though
yet unborn, and might apprentice them or give them into the custody
of others without the consent of the mother.

[Sidenote: Property rights.]
[Sidenote: Wife's paraphernalia]
All personal property belonging to the wife vested absolutely in
the husband at marriage.

He could will it to whom he pleased or, if he died without a will,
it descended to his heirs.

Even her wearing apparel and ornaments known by the term "paraphernalia,"
belonged to the husband.

During his life he had the power to sell or give them away, but he
could not devise them by will.

If they remained in the possession of the wife while the husband
lived, she was entitled to them over and above her dower, but even
then creditors of the husband might claim them, if there chanced
to be a deficiency of other assets with which to pay the debts of
the estate.

[Sidenote: Choses in action.]
The wife's choses in action, or evidences of money or property due
to her, such as notes, bonds, contracts or the like, belonged to
the husband if he reduced them to possession during her life, and
they could be taken for his debts.

He might bequeath them by will, but if he died without a will they
descended to his heirs.

If he failed to reduce them to possession while the wife lived,
after his death they would revert to her heirs.

If she outlived her husband they belonged to her.

After the husband's death the wife took one-third of his personal
estate if there were children, and one-half if there were no
children.

[Sidenote: Real property of wife.]

[Sidenote: Curtesy.]
[Sidenote: Dower.]
The husband was entitled to the control, use and enjoyment, together
with the rents and profits of his wife's real estate during the
marriage, and if a living child were born, he had, after the wife's
death, a life estate in such property and might retain possession
of it while he lived.

This was known as the husband's title by curtsy.

The wife took a dower, or life estate in one-third of the husband's
lands after his death, whether there were children or not.

This estate of dower was forfeited should the husband be found guilty
of treason, but his interest in her lands was not disturbed by
the treason of the wife.

His life interest in her real estate attached to trust estates, but
she could claim no interest in trust estates of her husband.

If the wife owned leases of land they could be sold or assigned by the
husband during marriage. If he survived his wife they belonged to
him, if she survived him, they belonged to her, provided he had
not disposed of them while living.

[Sidenote: Descent of property.]
Personal property descended to males and females in equal shares,
but the oldest son was entitled to the whole of his father's real
property.

[Sidenote: Unity of person in criminal law.]

The unity of husband and wife was not so strongly affirmed by
the common law when it dealt with their relation to criminal
matters.

When a wife committed an offense against the state she possessed
a separate and distinct life and personalty, for the purposes of
punishment.

It is true that she was still inferior and this distinction was
recognized and emphasized by the difference in the penalties imposed
for the commission of the same crimes, these penalties being in
inverse ratio to the importance of the criminal.

[Sidenote: Theft, burglary, etc.]
[Sidenote: Presumption of innocence.]

If a wife committed theft, burglary or other offenses in the company
or presence of her husband, the law presumed that she acted under
compulsion and held her not guilty, but this presumption did not
extend to cases of murder or treason, and it might always be overcome
by proof that she acted independently.

The exception in cases of murder or treason, we are informed, was
not alone because of the magnitude of the crimes, but rather on
account of "the husband having broken through the most sacred tie
of social community by rebellion against the state, had no right
to that obedience from a wife which he himself, as a subject, had
forgotten to pay."

[Sidenote: Murder of wife.]
[Sidenote: Murder of husband.]
If a man murdered his wife it was as if he had murdered a stranger,
and he might avail himself of the benefit of clergy, and secure
immunity from punishment, provided he could read, but women were
denied all benefit of clergy because of their sex, and because they
"were not called upon to read."

If a wife killed her husband it was a much more serious offense,
he being her lord, and she was guilty of treason and subject to the
same punishment as if she had killed the king.

[Sidenote: Petit treason.]

In cases of petit treason the penalty depended upon the sex of the
criminal, men being sentenced to be drawn and hanged, while women
were drawn and burnt alive.

[Sidenote: Larceny, bigamy, etc.]
In larceny, bigamy, manslaughter and other crimes, men might claim
the benefit of clergy and by taking holy orders, escape all punishment,
except branding in the hand and a few months imprisonment, while
women might receive sentence of death and be executed for the first
offense.

Later the law was changed so that in cases of simple larceny under
the value of ten shillings, they might be burned in the hand and
whipped, stocked or imprisoned for any time not exceeding one year.

The disability of sex and of ignorance were both finally removed and
all men and women admitted to benefit of clergy.

[Sidenote: Adultery and seduction.]

[Sidenote: Rape.]

By the common law, adultery and seduction were not classed with
crimes, but were only civil injuries for which compensation might
be recovered by husband, father or guardian, but the woman, who
might be wronged, had no right of action for the injury to herself,
and the State did not recognize any wrong to society by an injury
to the person of one who was civilly dead.

The crime of rape was punishable by death, and consent, though
proved, was no defense, if the offense was committed upon a child
under ten years of age.

[Sidenote: Right of appeal.]
Magna Charta, granted by King John, while redressing many
hardships and grievances incident to feudal times, and confirming and
securing to the people many rights and liberties, among which was the
right of the wife to dower in her husband's property, denied to
women the right of appeal except in case of the death of their
husbands.

The right of appeal was the privilege of private prosecution for
crime.

"Ersten, you offer him a month to rest his eyes, don't you?"

"I don't promise him I move!" bristled Ersten.

"We understand that," soothed Johnny, "all of us. Schnitt, you'll
take some of Mr. Ersten's work home with you from this place, won't
you?"

"Sure, I do that," consented Schnitt eagerly. "Louis, what is in the
shop?"

Ersten had a struggle of his own.

"All what was in when you left," he bravely confessed. "That coat
for Mrs. Follison gives me trouble for a week!"

"She's got funny shoulders," commented Schnitt with professional
impersonality. "It's the left one. You cut it--Let me see it."

There was a sibilant sound as of many suppressed sighs of relief
when Heinrich walked into the cutting room, but no man grinned or
gave more than a curt nod of greeting--for the forbidding eye of
Louis Ersten glared fiercely upon them. He strode across to the
table held sacred to himself and spread down a piece of cloth,
bounded by many curves. Heinrich Schnitt gave it but one
comprehensive glance.

"Na, na, na!" he shrilly commented. "Here it is wrong!" And,
grabbing up a slice of chalk, he made a deft swoop toward the
material. Suddenly his arm stayed in mid air and he laid down the
chalk with a muscular effort. "I think I take this home," he firmly
announced.

"Heinrich, you come back after the work. Just now we go with Mr.
Gamble to Schoppenvoll's and have a glass of Rheinthranen!" Ersten
said.

"The Rheinthranen!" repeated Heinrich in awe; and for the first time
his eyes moistened. "Louis, we was always friends!" And they shook
hands.

Johnny Gamble, keen as he was, did not quite understand it; but,
nevertheless, he had penetration enough to stroll nonchalantly out
into the show-room, where Louis and Heinrich presently joined him,
chattering like a Kaffe-klatsch; and they all walked round to
Schoppenvoll's.

While Schnitt thanked Johnny for his interference until that modest
young man blushed, Ersten argued seriously in whispers with
Shoppenvoll to secure a bottle of the precious wine that only he and
Schoppenvoll and Kurzerhosen had a right to purchase. Johnny drank
his with dull wonder. It tasted just like Rhine wine!

While Heinrich Schnitt was back in the cutting room, carefully
selecting every coat in the shop to take home with him, Ersten drew
Johnny near the door.

"I fool him!" he announced with grinning cuteness. "I move right
away. You get my lease for the best price what that smart-Aleck
Lofty offered me. And another word: Whenever you want a favor you
come to me!"

Johnny walked into the Lofty establishment with the feeling of a
Napoleon. "How much will you give me for the Ersten lease?" he
suggested out of a clear sky.

Young Willis Lofty sighed in sympathy with his bank-account.

"Have you really secured it?" he asked.

"I'm the winner," Johnny cheerfully assured him.

"If it's too much I'll build that tunnel," warned Lofty.

"Make me an offer."

"A hundred and twenty-five thousand."

"Nothing doing," stated Johnny with a smile. "There's no use fussing
up our time though. I can tell you, to the cent, how much I must
have. At four o'clock to-day I shall be nineteen hours behind my
schedule, and I want a day for a fresh start, which makes it twenty-
six. At five thousand an hour, that makes a hundred and thirty
thousand dollars. I paid Ersten a hundred thousand. Grand total: two
hundred and thirty thousand."

"I don't understand your figures," protested Lofty.

"It's a private code," laughed the leaseholder, "but that's the
price."

"I won't pay it," threatened the young merchant.

"Build your tunnel then," returned Johnny--but pleasantly,
nevertheless. "Don't let's be nervous, Lofty. I might ask you a lot
more, but that's the exact amount the system I'm playing calls for.
I don't want any more and I won't take any less!"

Lofty studied his face contemplatively for a moment and rang for his
treasurer.

"How did you get Ersten?" he was curious to know; and Johnny told
him, to their mutual enjoyment.

At the nearest drug store Johnny called up Constance.

"Heinrich Schnitt is fixing your coat!" he announced.

"Danke!" she cried. "Did you get the lease?"

"Yes, and sold it to Lofty," he enthusiastically informed her. "The
schedule is paid up until four o'clock to-morrow afternoon."

"Oh!" she gasped. "Wait a minute." He held the telephone while she
consulted the score board and did some figuring. "That makes five
hundred thousand of your million! Just half!"

"I'm coming around to see that diagram," he hastily stated.


CHAPTER XVII

IN WHICH THE STRAW SAILOR HAT OF JOHNNY PLAYS AN EMBARRASSING ROLE


"My dear," observed Mr. Courtney as he and his wife approached the
jessamine summer-house," do you pick your week-end guests from a
city directory or do you draw the names from a hat?" Constance Joy,
sitting in the summer-house with Johnny Gamble, rose and laughed
lightly as a warning.

"My dear," retorted Mrs. Courtney very sweetly indeed and all
unheeding of the laugh, "I pick them by a better system than you
employ when you invite stag parties. You usually need to be
introduced to your guests. Just whom would you like to have me send
home?"

"Paul Gresham for one," replied Courtney bluntly, "and the entire
Wobbles tribe, with their friend Birchard, for some more."

"I could be perfectly happy without them myself, Ben," sighed his
wife, "but the Wobbles bachelors invite themselves whenever they
please, and Paul Gresham was asked on account of Constance."

Constance, in the summer-house, laughed again, although less happily
than before, and dropped her portfolio as loudly as possible, while
Johnny Gamble merely grinned.

"That's what I wondered about," persisted the grizzled financier, as
oblivious to the noises from within the jessamine bower as his wife
had been. "I should have thought that on Constance's account you
would have dropped Gresham."

"How absurd!" laughed Mrs. Courtney. "Why, she is to marry him!"

"I don't believe it!" indignantly denied Courtney. "She got him in a
will with a million dollars, and it isn't enough!"

Constance's foot, twitching nervously, rustled a dry leaf, and her
heart popped into her throat lest the noise should be heard. The
time had passed for wishing to be discovered.

Johnny Gamble had ceased to grin and was looking scared.

"Mr. Gresham is of a very old family," Mr. Courtney's wife reminded
him.

"Age is no recommendation for an egg," her husband kindly informed
her. "Gresham is second cousin to Lord Yawpingham, and if they had
any sense of shame they'd murder each other for the relationship."

"Oh, Ben, I'm sure you're harsh," protested the optimistic Mrs.
Courtney.

"I'm so charitable as to be almost weak," he insisted with a grin.
"Seriously; though, Lucy, Gresham's not square. He tried to destroy
Johnny Gamble's credit with me two or three weeks ago in a most
underhanded manner."

There was a moment of silence, during which the pair in the bower
gazed straight up at nothing.

"You seem to like Mr. Gamble," mused Mrs. Courtney. "Everybody does,
however. Where is he from?"

"Some little town up the state," returned Courtney indifferently.
"He's a fine young fellow, square as a die and a hustler! He's going
to marry Constance Joy."

Johnny Gamble, turning the color of a tomato, dropped his sailor
straw hat, and its edge hit the tiled floor with a noise like the
blow of an ax. Constance could have murdered him for it. They missed
a lot of conversation just about then.

Courtney and his wife rounded the corner of the bower and paused a
moment before turning into it.

"Really, Ben," defended Mrs. Courtney, returning to the criticism
that her husband by now wished he had not made, "except for the
epidemic of Wobbleses this would have been a delightful week-end
party: Constance, Polly, fluffy little Winnie, Mrs. Follison and our
own two girls; Mr. Loring, Val Russel, Bruce Townley, Sammy Chirp,
Mr. Gamble and Mr. Gresham. For your entertainment you'll have Mr.
Washer, Mr. Close and Colonel Bouncer, with whom you will play poker
from the time they reach here this afternoon until they go away
Monday morning."

"It was a good party!" agreed Courtney, "By the way, I owe my poker
guests to Johnny Gamble. He asked if they would be here, and seemed
to want them. He's a live member! Did I ever tell you how he helped
me skin old Mort Washer?" And, changing his mind about entering the
jessamine bower, Mr. Courtney, explaining with great glee the
skinning of his friend Mort Washer, took the other path and the two
strolled away without having seen or heard the luckless
eavesdroppers.

The miserable pair in the bower, exhibiting various shades of red,
looked steadfastly out into the blue, blue sky for some minutes in
stupefied silence. Johnny presently picked up his sailor straw hat
and surveyed the nick in its brim with ingenuous interest.

"I bought that hat in Baltimore," he inanely observed.

Constance suddenly rose and walked straight out of there--alone!


CHAPTER XVIII

IN WHICH THE ENTIRE WOBBLES FAMILY FOR ONCE GET TOGETHER


Mr. Eugene Wobbles, who tried to live down his American ancestry in
London clubs and was, consequently, more British than any
Englishman, came to Mr. Courtney lazily apologetic.

"I fancy I'm going to give you a lot of bother, my dear Courtney,"
he observed, lounging feebly against the porch rail.

"I prefer bother to almost anything," returned his host pleasantly;
"it gives me something to do."

"Rather clever that," laughed Eugene, swinging his monocle with one
hand and stroking his drooping yellow mustache with the other.
"Really I never thought of bother in that way before. Keeps one
bothered, I think you said," and he gazed out over the broad lawn
where the young people were noisily congregating, in pleasant
contemplation of Courtney's wonderful new philosophy.

"What is this particular bother?" gently suggested Courtney after a
pause.

"Oh, yes," responded Eugene, "we were discussing that, weren't we?
I've a rotten memory; but my oldest brother, Tommy, can't even
remember his middle initial. Pretty good that, don't you think;
Tommy is a perfect ass in every respect." And idly considering
Tommy's perfection as an ass, he turned and gazed down into the
ravine where Courtney had built some attractive little waterfalls
and cave paths. "About how deep should you say it was down there,
Courtney?"

"Three hundred and fifty feet," answered Courtney. "I think you were
speaking about a little bother."

"Oh, yes, so I was," agreed Eugene. "Very good of you to remind me
of it. You know, Courtney, Mr. Gamble--who wants to buy some land of
ours--has made the remarkable discovery that we're all here
together. First time in years, I assure you. No matter how necessary
it may be for us to hold a complete family council, one of my
brothers--most unreliable people in the world, I think--is always
missing."

"And when they're all together I suppose you are somewhere else,"
suggested Courtney.

That proposition was so unique that Eugene was forced to spend
profound thought on it.

"Curious, isn't it?" he finally admitted. "A chap becomes so in the
habit of thinking that he is himself always present, wherever he
happens to be, that it's no end starting to reflect that sometimes
he isn't."

"I see," said Courtney, grasping eagerly at the light. "You merely
happen to be all here at the same time, and you think it advisable
to hold a family business meeting because the accident may never
occur again. Sensible idea, Eugene. The east loggia off the second-
floor hall is just the place. Assemble there and I'll send you any
weapons you want."

"Perfectly stunning how you Americans grasp things!" commented
Eugene, agape with admiration. "But I say, old chap, that's a joke
about the weapons. Really, we shan't need them."

"You're quite right; I was joking," returned Courtney gravely. "I'll
go right up and have some chairs and tables put out on the loggia."

"I knew it would be a deuced lot of bother for you," regretted
Eugene apologetically. "It's a lot of face in us to ask it. So
crude, you know. By the way, should you say that this Mr. Gamble
chap was all sorts reliable?"

"Absolutely," Courtney emphatically assured him.

"Ow," returned Eugene reflectively. "And his solicitor fellow,
Loring?"

"Perfectly trustworthy."

"Ow," commented Eugene, and fell into a study so deep that Courtney
was able to escape without being missed.

In the library, where he went to ring for a servant, he found
Constance Joy looking gloomily out of a window, with a magazine
upside down in her hands. She immediately rose.

"Don't let me disturb you," begged Courtney as he rang the bell. "Do
you know where I can find Johnny Gamble?"

"I really couldn't say," replied Constance sweetly. "I left him out
in the gardens a few minutes ago." And she made for the door,
confident that she had not spoken with apparent haste, embarrassment
or coldness.

"Won't you please tell him that Joe Close and Morton Washer and
Colonel Bouncer are coming out on the next train?" requested
Courtney. "You're sure to see him by and by, I know."

"With pleasure," lied Constance miserably, and hurried to finish her
escape. At the door, however, she suddenly turned and came back,
walking nonchalantly but hastily out through the windows upon the
side porch. A second later Paul Gresham and Billy Wobbles, the
latter walking with temperamental knees, passed through the hall.

Courtney looked after Constance in perplexity, but, a servant
entering, he gave orders for the furnishing of the loggia and went
up to make sure of the arrangements. He found Johnny Gamble in moody
solitude, studying with deep intensity the braiding of his sailor
straw hat.

"Hello, Johnny!" hailed Courtney cordially. "I was just asking Miss
Joy about you."

Johnny looked at him with reproachful eyes. Courtney was to blame
for his present gloom.

"Thanks," he returned. "What did she say?"

"Not much," replied Courtney, smiling slyly. "She didn't know where
you were, but she's looking for you."

"Where is she?" asked Johnny, jumping up with alacrity.

"She just went out on the side porch of the library," announced
Courtney. "Her message is from me, however. Washer and Close and the
colonel are coming out this noon."

"Thanks," replied Johnny starting away. "Did I understand you to say
the side porch of the library?"

A thin-legged figure stopped in the door and twitched.

"Mornin'," it observed. "I knew Eugene's intellect was woozing
again. Always announcing some plan for us to bore each other, don't
you know, and never having it come off."

"This is the place and the hour, Reggie," declared Mr. Courtney. "If
you'll just stay here I'll send you out a brandy and soda and some
cigars."

"Thanks awfully, old man," returned Reggie, looking dubiously out at
the loggia. It was enticing enough, with its broad, cool, tiled
flooring and its vine-hung arches and its vistas of the tree-clad
hills across the ravine; but it was empty. "I think I'll return when
the rest of them are together.", And Reggie, stumbling against the
door-jamb on his way out, wandered away, choosing the right-hand
passage because his body had happened to lurch in that direction.

"Johnny, if you say anything I'll be peevish," protested Courtney in
advance. "Please remember that the gentleman is a guest of mine."

"I was grinning at something else," Johnny soothed him, still
grinning, however.

"I apologize," observed Courtney. "Do you think the Wobbles family
will hold their conclave if each of them waits until all the others
are together?"

"I hope so," replied Johnny. "I'll make some money if they do."

"How rude!" expostulated Courtney with a laugh. "Business at a week-
end house-party!"

"Business is right," confessed Johnny. "They admit that you run the
best private exchange in America out here."

Courtney, enjoying that remark, laughed heartily.

"I'm glad they give me credit," he acknowledged. "Well, help
yourself to all the facilities. Where are you going?"

"Library porch," answered Johnny promptly. "Excuse me, I'm in a
hurry."

Constance Joy was not on the library porch. Instead, Johnny found
there Polly Parsons and her adopted sister Winnie, Ashley Loring and
Sammy Chirp. This being almost a family party for Johnny, he had no
hesitation in asking bluntly for Constance.

"This is her morning for Wobbling," returned Polly disdainfully. "A
while ago she was dodging the perfectly careless compliments of old
Tommy and trying not to see that his toupee was on crooked; and now
she's down toward the ravine some place, watching young Cecil
stumble. You could make yourself a very solid Johnny by trotting
right down there and breaking up the party."

"I think I'd rather have a messenger for that," calculated Johnny.
"His brothers wish to see Cecil up in the east loggia."

"Sammy will go," offered Winnie confidently; whereat Sammy, smiling
affably, promptly rose.

"Go with him, Winnie," ordered Polly. "Trot on now, both of you. I
want to talk sense."

Quite cheerfully Winnie gave Sammy her fan, her parasol, her vanity
box, her novel, her box of chocolates and her hat, stuffed a
handkerchief in his pocket and said: "Come on, Sammy; I'm ready."

"Constance showed me that schedule last night, Johnny," rattled
Polly. "You ought to see it, Loring. On Wednesday, at four o'clock,
he was exactly even with it; five hundred thousand dollars to the
good."

"I know," laughed Loring, "and he'll beat his schedule if the
Wobbleses will only hold steady for ten minutes."

"You don't mean to say that a Wobbles could be useful!" protested
Polly.

"Half a million dollars' worth," Loring informed her; then he drew
his chair closer and lowered his voice. "It's a funny story, Polly.
Two weeks ago Johnny took Courtney and Close and Washer and Colonel
Bouncer up to the Bronx in my machine and arranged to sell them a
subdivision for three and a half million dollars."

"Help!" gasped Polly. "Burglar!"

"They'll double their money," asserted Johnny indignantly. "Fanciest
neglected opportunity within a gallon of gasolene from Forty-second
Street."

"Trouble is, Johnny didn't own it and doesn't yet," laughed Loring.
"He's been trying to buy it from the Wobbleses ever since he
arranged to sell it."

"He'll get it," decided Polly confidently.

"Will they agree when they get together?" Loring worried.
"Individually each one needs the money, and each one is satisfied
with Johnny's offer of three million cash."

"Don't say another word," ordered Polly. "I have to figure this out.
Why, Johnny, if you carry this through it will finish your million,
and this is only the thirteenth of May. That's going some! You
weren't supposed to have it till the thirty-first. Polly's proud of
you!"

"I don't think you get the joke of this yet, though, Polly," Loring
went on. "The Wobbleses don't know that Johnny had already arranged
to sell their land, and the subdivision company doesn't know that
the beautiful Bronx tract is the Wobbles estate. In the meantime
both parties are here, and I'm lurking behind the scenery with all
the necessary papers ready to sign, seal and deliver."

"Hush!" commanded Polly; "I'm getting excited. It sounds like the
finish of the third act. Oh, lookee! Who's the graceful party with
Gresham?"

Both Johnny and Loring glanced up at a tall, suave, easy-moving
gentleman, whose clothing fitted him like a matinee idol's, whose
closely trimmed beard would have served as a model for the nobility
anywhere, and whose smile was sickening sweet.

"Eugene Wobbles' friend, Birchard," stated Johnny, who kept himself
well posted on Wobbles affairs. "He's always either with Gresham or
a Wobbles, and he travels for a living, I believe." And Johnny
suddenly rose.

Coming from the direction of the ravine were Constance and Cecil,
Winnie and Sammy, and passing Gresham and Birchard with the nod of
compulsion Johnny walked carelessly on to meet the quartet.

"Good morning, Cecil," he observed. "Your brothers are about to hold
a meeting in the east loggia, and I think they're looking for you."

"No doubt," admitted Cecil wearily. "It's barely possible that one
or two of them are already believing that they will go up. Do you
know, I think I shall establish a record for family promptness, if I
may be excused. Most annoying to be torn away from such a jolly
talk, I'm sure." And receiving the full and free permission of the
company to depart he did so, changing his mind twice about whether
to go through the rose arbor or round by the sun-dial.

Johnny swung in by the side of Constance.

"Some one told me you had a message for me," he blundered.

"Who said so?" she was cruel enough to ask.

Johnny turned pink, but he was brave and replied with the truth.

"Mr. Courtney," he admitted.

"So I imagined," she answered icily. "Mr. Washer and Mr. Close and
Colonel Bouncer are to arrive on the noon train. You'll excuse me,
won't you, please?" And she hurried on to the house by herself to
dress for luncheon.

Johnny Gamble tried to say "Certainly", but he dropped his sailor
straw hat. Constance heard it and every muscle in her body jumped
and stiffened. Johnny turned to business as a disappointed lover
turns to drink.

There seemed a conspicuous dearth of Wobbleses on the east loggia
that morning. Loring, pathetically faithful to his post, entertained
them in relays as Johnny brought them up: sometimes one, sometimes
two, and once or twice as many as three of them at one time; but
they all lost their feeble mooring and drifted away.

Luncheon-time passed; Washer and Bouncer and Close and Courtney went
into executive session; two o'clock came, three o'clock, four
o'clock, and still no meeting. At the latter hour Johnny, making his
tireless rounds but afflicted with despair, located Billy Wobbles,
the one with the jerky eyelids and impulsive knees, on the loggia
with Loring; Eugene was in the poker room trying numbly to discover
the difference between a four-flush and a deuce-high hand; Tommy,
his toupee well down toward his scanty white eyebrows, was boring
the Courtney girls to the verge of tears; Cecil, stumbling almost
rhythmically over his own calves, was playing tennis with Winnie and
Sammy and Mrs. Follison; and Reggie, the twitcher, was entertaining
Val Russel and Bruce Townley with a story he had started at nine
o'clock in the morning.

Suddenly Johnny was visited with a long-sought inspiration and
hurried down to the kennels, remembering with much self-scorn that
he had dragged each of the Wobbleses away from there at least once.

The master of the dogs was Irish and young, with eyes the color of a
six-o'clock sky on a sunny day, and he greeted Johnny with a white-
toothed smile that would have melted honey.

"I locked Beauty up, sir," he said with a touch of his cap,
referring to the gentle collie that had poked its nose confidingly
into Johnny's hand at every visit. "There was too much excitement
for her with all the strangers round, but she'll be glad to see you,
sir."

"Give Beauty my card and tell her I'll be back," directed Johnny
with a friendly glance in the direction of Beauty's summer
residence. "Didn't you say something this morning about a crowd of
setter puppies?"

"Yes, sir," replied the dog expert proudly. "Several of the
gentlemen have been down to see them, but the day has been so hot I
didn't care to bring them out. It's cool enough now, sir, if you'd
like to see them."

"I'll be back, in five minutes," returned Johnny hastily. "I'll say
hello to Beauty first."

Beauty barked and capered when she was let out, and expressed her
entire approval of Johnny in fluent dog language, looking after him
reproachfully when he hurried away.

Johnny first begged a puppy of Courtney, then he brought Eugene
Wobbles and Tommy Wobbles and Billy and Cecil and Reggie Wobbles
down in turns to pick it out for him. Each of the Wobbleses was
still there, deciding, when he brought another. When the last
Wobbles, including their friend Birchard, was in the inclosure
Johnny locked the gate and sent Loring on a brisk errand. That
energetic commercial attorney returned in a very few minutes, laden
with some papers and writing materials, and followed by a servant
carrying a wicker table.

"Gentlemen," said Johnny in a quite oratorical tone of voice,
"suppose we talk business."

The assembled Wobbleses turned in gasping surprise from the violent
family dispute over the puppies.

"Upon my soul, this is a most extraordinary thing!" exclaimed
Eugene, looking about him in amazement. "Why, the whole blooming
family is here, even Tommy. I say, Tommy, it's perfectly imbecile,
with all due respect to you, to prefer that little beggar with the
white star."

"I'll back him for a hundred pounds before any official committee,"
indignantly quavered Tommy, feeling in all the wrong pockets for his
betting-book.

"Gentlemen," interposed Johnny most crudely indeed, "I am here to
repeat my offer of three million dollars, cash, for your Bronx
property; one-half million dollars to-day, one million dollars next
Saturday, May twentieth, and the remaining million and a half the
following Saturday, May twenty-seventh, title to remain vested in
you until the entire amount is paid. Just to show that I mean
business I have brought each of you a certified check for one
hundred thousand dollars." And he distributed them like diplomas to
a class.

Tommy Wobbles, startled to find his toupee on straight, examined his
check with much doubt. "I say, you know," he expostulated, "this
can't be quite regular!"

"Why not?" inquired Johnny.

"Well--er--it's so very precipitate," responded Tommy, putting the
check in his pocket and taking it out again and folding and
unfolding it with uncertain fingers. "No time for deliberation and
dignity and such rot, you know."

"An advance cash payment of half a million dollars is so full of
dignity that its shoes squeak," announced Johnny. "As to delay, I
don't see any reason for it. You want to sell the property, don't
you?"

Eugene said yes, and the others looked doubtful.

"You're satisfied with the price?" demanded Johnny.

Since Eugene kept silent the others answered that they were.

"You know that by my plan you are perfectly secured until you are
fully paid; so there's no reason why we shouldn't wind up the
business at once."

"Should you say that this was regular, Birchard?" asked Eugene,
toying with his check lovingly. He had just finished figuring that
it was worth something like twenty thousand pounds!

"Quite regular indeed," Mr. Birchard smilingly assured him.
"Typically American for its directness and decision, but fully as
good a business transaction in every way as could be consummated in
London."

"Ow, I say," protested Eugene, but he seemed perfectly satisfied,
nevertheless.

"As I understand it," went on Mr. Birchard, "Mr. Gamble's
proposition is very simple. You are to execute a contract of sale to
him to-day, acknowledging receipt of half a million dollars' advance
payment, and are at the same time to execute a clear deed that will
be placed in the hands of your agent until Mr. Gamble completes his
payments. The deed will then be delivered to him and properly
recorded. Is this correct, Mr. Gamble?"

"I couldn't say it so well, but that's what I mean," replied Johnny.

"Then, gentlemen," continued Birchard, "I should advise you to sign
the papers at once and have the matter off your minds."

Loring had everything ready, but it was Johnny who really conducted
the meeting and manipulated the slow-moving Wobbleses so that they
concluded the business with small waste of time.

When it was finished Johnny thanked them with intense relief. The
Wobbles property was his, and he knew exactly where to sell it at a
half-million dollars' profit. His tremendous race for a million was
to be won, with a day or so of margin. There were a few technical
matters to look after, but in reality the prize was his. He could go
to Constance Joy now with a clear conscience and the ability to
offer her a fortune equal to the one she would have to relinquish if
she married him.

"By the way," said Johnny in parting, "who is your agent?"

"Why, I rather fancy it will be Mr. Birchard," replied Eugene. "Of
course nothing is decided as yet, since there are five of us and
four stubborn; but I rather fancy it will be Birchard. Eh, old
chap?"

"I trust so," responded Birchard with a pleasant smile at Johnny.


CHAPTER XIX

IN WHICH THE COLONEL, MESSRS. COURTNEY, WASHER AND OTHERS SIT IN A
LITTLE GAME


Morton Washer, having acquired a substantial jack-pot with the aid
of four hearts and little casino, boastfully displayed the winning
hand.

"Sometime, when you fellows grow up," he kindly offered, "I'll sit
down to a real game of poker with you."

Courtney, keeping the bank, dived ruefully into the box for his
fourth stack of chips.

"There's one thing I must say about Mort," he dryly observed: "he's
cheerful when he wins."

"He can brag harder and louder than any man I ever heard," admitted
iron-faced Joe Close.

Colonel Bouncer, puffing out his red cheeks and snarling
affectionately at his friend Washer, corroborated that statement
emphatically.

"He's bragged ever since he was a boy," he stated.

"I always had something to brag about, didn't I?" demanded Washer,
his intemperate little pompadour bristling, and his waxed mustache
as waspish as if he were really provoked.

"I don't know," objected the solemn-faced Courtney. "I stung you for
half a million on that hotel transaction. Give me an ace, Joe."

"Never!" snapped Morton Washer, picking up his cards as they fell.
"It was Johnny Gamble did that. I open this pot right under the guns
for the size of it and an extra sky-blue for luck. None of you old
spavins was ever able to get me single-handed. A young fellow like
Johnny Gamble--that's different. It's his turn. You fellows are all
afraid of my threes."

"The others might be, so I'll just help them stay out," stated
Courtney kindly as he doubled Washer's bet. "By the way, speaking of
Johnny Gamble, he was very anxious to get you fellows out here to-
day. Now I want to give you some solemn advice, Colonel; you'd
better keep away from this pot."

"Bless my soul, I have a rotten hand!" confessed Colonel Bouncer,
puffing his cheeks. "But you old bluffers can't drive me out of any
place; so I'll trail." And he measured up to Courtney's stack.
"What's Gamble's scheme, Ben?"

"I'll have to let Johnny tell you that himself," responded Courtney
as Johnny entered. "Coming into this scramble, Joe?"

"I'm a cautious man," hesitated Close, inspecting the faces of his
companions with calm interest. "I don't think you or Mort have
second cousins among your pasteboards, but the colonel is concealing
his feelings too carefully." And he threw down his cards.

"You're most unprofessional to say so," growled the colonel. "I
suppose you won't see that raise, Mort?"

"I'm not much interested," returned Washer indifferently, "so I'll
just tilt it another stack." And he did so with beautiful
carelessness. "On general principles I'm very favorable to any
enterprise Johnny Gamble offers. Isn't that so, Johnny?"

"I hope so," replied Johnny with a laugh as he approached the table
and, with perfectly blank eyes, looked down at the hand which Washer
conspicuously held up to him.

Courtney cast only a fleeting glance at Johnny, whose face it would
be impolite to read--also impossible--and concentrated his attention
upon his old friend, Washer.

"You infernal scoundrel, I believe you have them," he decided as
Washer folded his cards into the palm of his hand again.

Courtney turned for a careful inspection of the colonel. That
gentleman, daintily picking a fleck of dust from his cuff, looked
unconcernedly off into the sky, whistling softly, and Courtney,
pushing his hand into the discard, lighted a cigar, while the
colonel met Washer's raise and added a tantalizing white chip.

It was now Washer's turn for consideration, and he studied his only
remaining opponent with much interest.

"Give me one card, Joe; mostly kings," he requested as he pushed in
his one white chip. "What's your scheme, Johnny?" And he looked up,
quite indifferent to the card he was tossing away. He picked up the
one Close carefully dealt him and, without looking at it, slid it in
among the other four.

"I'm ready to close with you for that Bronx subdivision," responded
Johnny, acutely watching Colonel Bouncer as that gentleman asked for
one card, received it and studied its countenance with polite
admiration. "It's the proposition I've previously explained to all
of you, but had to lay aside because I couldn't nail down the
property."

"I suppose you have it now," observed Morton, pushing forward with
gentle little shoves of his middle finger a very tall stack of chips
arranged in three distinct and equal red, white and blue layers. He
had not yet looked at his fifth card, and at Colonel Bouncer he
directed but a brief and passing glance. Did he care what the
colonel held?

"I have the Wobbles estate in my pocket," replied Johnny, still
watching the colonel absorbedly. "I must get you together Monday if
possible."

"Wobbles!" exploded Courtney. "Did you buy that Bronx property at my
party from my guests to sell to us?"

"I did," confessed Johnny with a grin. "This is a lovely party."

The poker game suspended itself for a minute, while all four of the
gentlemen looked at him in contemplative admiration.

"He's a credit to the place," observed Joe Close. "Here's where the
Texas land grab was arranged, and the wool trust formed, and the
joker inserted into the rebate bill."

"Nevertheless, if Johnny Gamble sits in this game I'll cash in my
chips and quit," declared Morton Washer.

"He's good enough company for me," blustered Colonel Bouncer,
scrutinizing his cards one by one.

"I suppose so," agreed Washer with a smile at Johnny, "but he's so
full of young tricks and we're outclassed. What's that property
going to cost us?"

"Three and a half million," stated Johnny quietly.

Colonel Bouncer, having now made up his mind, deliberately and with
nice care measured up blue chips and red chips and white chips
matching Washer's, and added to them all the blue ones he had in his
possession.

"Taking any stock yourself, Johnny?" he softly asked.

"Can't afford it," confessed Johnny with a smile.

"The property's quite worth three and a half million," announced
Courtney decisively, watching the face of Morton Washer as that calm
player stared at the colonel's chips. "I'm willing to take a million
of the stock."

"I'll take a million; more if need be," offered Washer. "I've been
wanting in on that for some time. Colonel, what have you got?"

"Five cards," replied the colonel.

"You have threes," charged Washer.

"I'm conducting my business through an agent," laughed Bouncer.
"There it is," and he indicated the stack of blue chips.

"You have threes," insisted Washer. "The reason I'm so particular is
that I have threes myself, and I want to know which are the better."

"There is one clever way to find out," bantered the colonel
confidently. "You have a lot of chips. Why are you so stingy with
them?"

"That's the way I got them," countered Washer. "I'll donate though.
I'll do better than that: I'll tap you."

The colonel promptly counted his remaining red and white chips.
Washer as promptly measured up to them and to the blues.

"Told you the truth!" he exulted. "I said I had threes, and here
they are! Three tens and a king and another ten!" And he gleefully
spread down his cards. "I caught the pink one."

"Had mine all the time!" triumphed Colonel Bouncer, throwing down
his hand and putting both big arms round the pot. "Four elevens!"
And chuckling near to the apoplexy line he scraped the chips home,
while Washer inspected his excellent collection of jacks. "Now brag,
you old bluffer!" And, still chuckling, he began sorting the chips
into patriotic piles.

"Enjoy yourselves," granted Washer, concealing his intense chagrin
with as nonchalant an air as possible. "I give you my word those
chips are only loaned. Go on and laugh! You fellows make a lot of
fuss over a cheap little jack-pot. Johnny, must you see us Monday?"

"Can't delay it," replied Johnny, checking his own laughter for the
purpose. "I've paid five hundred thousand of the purchase price.
Another million must be paid in one week and the balance in two
weeks."

"That's pretty rapid work," remarked Close, with a frown, beginning
swiftly to figure interest.

"The Wobbleses are in a hurry to sail. I've looked into the title.
It's clear as a whistle. Can't we arrange a meeting at my office?"

They settled on a meeting at three-forty-five on Monday while Morton
Washer dealt.

"Bless my heart, Mort Washer, that's the fourth time you've turned
my first card and it's always a deuce!" complained the colonel. "If
you do it again I shall be compelled to give you an old-time,
school-day licking."

"You can't do it and you never saw the day you could," bristled
Washer, brandishing a bony little fist before the colonel's big
face.

"There's one more question I'd like to ask," Johnny interposed on
this violent quarrel. "Will it be necessary for me to offer any
stock outside this group?"

"I can't swing but a quarter of a million to save me; possibly only
two hundred thousand," regretted Bouncer.

"If you'd like to carry a little more I'll let you have the money,
Colonel," offered his bitter enemy of the bony fist.

"Thanks, Mort," returned the colonel gratefully. "However, it is not
necessary to display the fact to the entire gathering that I now
have a pair of those deuces."

Washer quickly reached over, snatched the colonel's cards, replaced
them with his own and went on dealing.

"I think we can handle it all among us, Johnny," figured Courtney.

Shortly afterward, Loring, in high glee, separated Polly from a
hilarious game of drop-the-handkerchief.

"Well, Polly, it's all over!" he exulted. "Johnny has been in to see
his financial backers. He has bought the Wobbles property and he has
made his million dollars."

"If Mr. Courtney hasn't any fireworks he must telephone for some
right away," declared Polly in delight, and suddenly her eyes
moistened. "I'm as dippy about Johnny as his own mother!" she added.

"And in just the same way," returned Loring, secretly glad to
recognize that fact. "When you can spare a little time for it,
Polly, you might become dippy about me."

"I am," she acknowledged, putting her hand upon his arm
affectionately.

"But you don't want to marry me," protested Loring, a trace of pain
contracting his brows. "I need you, Polly!"

"Please don't, Ashley," she begged. "It's a for-sure fact that I'm
never going to forget poor Billy. Don't let that stop us being pals,
though, please!"

"Certainly not," agreed Loring, with as much cheerfulness as she
could have wished, and burying deeply for the last time the hope
that he had cherished.

"Look here, Loring," charged Val Russel, striding over with Mrs.
Follison; "you'll kindly come into this game or give us back our
Polly."

"You'll have to do without your Polly for a minute, children,"
insisted that young woman. "She is to be the bearer of glad
tidings," and giving her eyes another dab she hurried away to the
house.

She found Constance alone in the library, instructing herself with
an article on mushroom culture.

"I can read your palm without looking at it, pretty lady," bubbled
Polly. "A large blond gentleman with handsome blue eyes and a
million dollars in his pocket is about to offer you a proposal of
marriage."

Constance, suppressing a rising resentment, turned the leaf of her
mushroom article. The next page began a startling political series,
which demanded of the public in violent headlines: "Who Spends Your
Money?" but Constance perused it carefully without noticing the
difference.

"I've had my palm read before," she presently observed.

"You don't seem to be alive to the shock I'm giving you," protested
Polly. "Really, girlie, I have some big news for you. Johnny Gamble
has finished the making of his million!"

"I wish that word million had never been invented!" suddenly flared
Constance. "I'm tired of hearing it. The very thought of it makes me
ill." How did Polly come to know it first?

"I wouldn't care what they'd call it if it would only buy as much,"
returned Polly, still good-naturedly. "And when a regular man like
Johnny Gamble hustles out and gets one, just so he can ask to marry
you, you ought to give a perfectly vulgar exhibition of joy!"

"You have put it very nicely," responded Constance. "If it would
only buy as much! Do you know that my name is seldom mentioned
except in connection with a million dollars? I must either marry one
man or lose a million, or marry another who has made a million for
that purpose."

"You ought to be ashamed of yourself!" charged Polly. She glared at
Constance a moment, bursting with more indignant things to say; but
there were so many of them that they choked her in their attempted
egress, and she swished angrily back to the lawn party, exploding
most of the way.

At just this inopportune moment Johnny Gamble found his way into the
peaceful library.

"Well, it's across!" he joyously confided, forgetting in his
happiness the rebuffs of the day. "I have that million!" and he
approached her with such an evident determination of making an
exuberant proposal then and there that Constance could have
shrieked. "I congratulate you," she informed him as she hastily
rose. "You deserve it, I am sure. Kindly excuse me, won't you?" and
she sailed out of the room.

Johnny, feeling all awkward joints like a calf, dropped his sailor
straw hat, and Constance heard it rolling after her. With an effort
she kept herself from running, knowing full well that if that hat
touched her skirt she would drop!

Johnny looked at the hat in dumb reproach, but when he left the room
he walked widely round it. He dared not touch it.

"Ow, I say, Mr. Gamble," drawled Eugene, passing him in the doorway,
"we've picked out the puppy."

While Johnny was still smarting from the burden of that information
and wondering what spot of the globe would be most endurable at the
present moment, Courtney came through the hall on some hostly
errand.

"Say, Johnny," he blundered in an excess of well-meaning, "why don't
you rest from business for a minute? Why aren't you out among some
of these shady paths with Constance Joy? You've cinched your
million, now go get the girl."

This was too much for the tortured Johnny, and the smoldering agony
within him burst into flame.

"Look here, Courtney!" he declared with a vehemence which really
seemed quite unnecessary, "I'm going to marry Constance Joy whether
she likes it or not!"

A flash of white at the head of the stairs caught Johnny's eye. It
was Constance! There was no hope that she had not heard!

"What's the matter?" asked Courtney, startled by the remarkable
change in his countenance.

"I've got the stomach ache!" groaned Johnny with clumsy evasion,
though possibly he was truthful after all.

"You must have some whisky," insisted Courtney, instantly concerned.

A servant came out of the library.

"I beg your pardon, sir," he remarked, "but I believe this must be
your hat, Mr. Gamble."

Johnny broke one of his most rigid rules. He said: "Damn!"


CHAPTER XX

IN WHICH JOHNNY ASKS HIMSELF WHAT IS A MILLION DOLLARS, ANYWAY


Johnny Gamble in the following days was, as Loring put it, a scene
of intense activity. It was part of his contract with the
improvement company that he put their subdivision plans under way;
and he planted himself in the center of the new offices while things
circled round him at high speed. His persistent use of the fast-gear
clutch came from the fact that he would not bind himself to work for
them more than two weeks.

"They're handing me a shameful salary for it," he confided to
Loring, "and I'm glad to get it because it pays up all my personal
expenses during my forty-days' stunt and leaves me my million
clear."

"Well," began Loring with a smile, "your million won't be"--he
suddenly checked himself and then went on--"won't be a nice pretty
sum of money unless it ends in the six round ciphers."

He had been about to tell Johnny that he owed fifteen thousand
dollars to Constance Joy. Loring reflected, however, that this could
be paid just as well after it was all over; that, if he told about
it now, Johnny would drop everything to make that extra fifteen
thousand; that, moreover, Constance had not yet given him permission
to mention the matter; and, besides, there seemed to be a present
coolness between Constance and Johnny which nobody understood. On
the whole, it was better to keep his mouth shut; and he did it.

"It's rather a nice-sounding word,--million," he added by way of
concealing his hesitation.

"I don't know," returned Johnny, full of his perplexity about
Constance. "I'm tired of hearing the word. Sometimes it makes me
sick to think of it."

"You ought to be ashamed of yourself!" reproached Loring with a
laugh.

"All right," agreed Johnny accommodatingly. "I'm used to that
anyhow. For one thing, I'm ashamed of being such a sucker. That old
partner of mine not only stung me for every cent I could scrape
together for two years, but actually had the nerve to try to sell
the big tract of land we irrigated with money."

"To sell it!" exclaimed Loring in surprise.

"That's all," returned Johnny. "He went to the Western Developing
Company with it two months ago and had them so worked up that they
looked into the title. They even sent a man out there to
investigate."

"Flivver, I suppose?" He and the farm-lads sat in the cow-stables when their work was
over, for the sake of the heat, and she carried their black bread
out there to them: a cold supper tasted better in a warm place, and
as his excellency knew, all the windows in the house were unglazed
save in the bailiff's parlour.

Her man would be in presently to pay his duty to his excellency; but
he had grown dull-witted since the rheumatism took him, and his
excellency must not take it ill if his talk was a little childish.

Thereupon Filomena excused herself, that she might put a clean shirt
on Jacopone, and Odo was left to his melancholy musings.

His mind had of late run much on economic abuses; but what was any
philandering with reform to this close contact with misery? It was
as though white hungry faces had suddenly stared in at the windows
of his brightly-lit life.

What did these people care for education, enlightenment, the religion
of humanity? What they wanted was fodder for their cattle, a
bit of meat on Sundays and a faggot on the hearth.

Filomena presently returned with her husband; but Jacopone had
shrunk into a crippled tremulous old man, who pulled a vague forelock
at Odo without sign of recognition. Filomena, it was clear,
was master at Pontesordo; for though Giannozzo was a man grown, and
did a man's work, he still danced to the tune of his mother's tongue.
It was from her that Odo, shivering over the smoky hearth, gathered
the details of their wretched state. Pontesordo being a part of
the ducal domain, they had led in their old days an easier life
than their neighbours; but the new taxes had stripped them as bare
as a mulberry-tree in June.

"How is a Christian to live, excellency, with the salt-tax doubled,
so that the cows go dry for want of it; with half a zecchin on every
pair of oxen, a stajo of wheat and two fowls to the parish, and not
so much as a bite of grass allowed on the Duke's lands?

In his late Highness's day the poor folk were allowed to graze their
cattle on the borders of the chase; but now a man dare not pluck a
handful of weeds there, or so much as pick up a fallen twig; though
the deer may trample his young wheat, and feed off the patch of
beans at his very door.

They do say the Duchess has a kind heart, and gives away money to
the towns-folk; but we country-people who spend our lives raising
fodder for her game never hear of her Highness but when one of
her game-keepers comes down on us for poaching or stealing wood.

--Yes, by the saints, and it was her Highness who sent a neighbour's
lad to the galleys last year for felling a tree in the chase; a
good lad as ever dug furrow, but he lacked wood for a new plough-share,
and how in God's name was he to plough his field without it?"

So she went on, like a torrent after the spring rains; but when he
named Momola she fell silent, and Giannozzo, looking sideways, drummed
with his heel on the floor.

Odo glanced from one to the other.

"She's dead, then?" he cried.

Filomena opened deprecating palms.

"Can one tell, excellency? It may be she is off with the gypsies."
"The gypsies? How long since?"
"Giannozzo," cried his mother, as he stood glowering, "go see that
the stable is locked and his excellency's horses bedded down."

He slunk out and she began to gather up the remains of Odo's
meagre supper.

"But you must remember when this happened."
"Holy Mother! It was the year we had frost in April and lost our
hatching for want of leaves. But as for that child of ingratitude,
one day she was here, the next she was gone--clean gone, as a nut
drops from the tree--and I that had given the blood of my veins to
nourish her!

Since then, God is my witness, we have had nothing but misfortune.
The next year it was the weevils in the wheat; and so it goes."

Odo was silent, seeing it was vain to press her. He fancied that the
girl must have died--of neglect perhaps, or ill usage--and that
they feared to own it.

His heart swelled, but not against them: they seemed to him no more
accountable than cowed hunger-driven animals.

He tossed impatiently on the hard bed Filomena had made up for him
in the bailiff's parlour, and was afoot again with the first light.

Stepping out into the farm-yard he looked abroad over the flat
grey face of the land. Around the keep stretched the
new-ploughed fields and the pollarded mulberry orchards; but these,
with the clustered hovels of the village, formed a mere islet
in the surrounding waste of marsh and woodland. The scene symbolised
fitly enough of social conditions of the country: the over-crowded
peasantry huddled on their scant patches of arable ground, while miles
of barren land represented the feudal rights that hemmed them
in on every side.

Odo walked across the yard to the chapel. On the threshold he stumbled
over a heap of mulberry-shoots and a broken plough-share.

Twilight held the place; but as he stood there the frescoes started
out in the slant of the sunrise like dead faces floating to the
surface of a river.

Dead faces, yes: plaintive spectres of his childish fears and
longings, lost in the harsh daylight of experience.

He had forgotten the very dreams they stood for: Lethe flowed between
and only one voice reached across the torrent.

It was that of Saint Francis, lover of the poor...

The morning was hot as Odo drove toward Pianura, and limping
ahead of him in the midday glare he presently saw the figure of a
hump-backed man in a decent black dress and three-cornered hat.

There was something familiar in the man's gait, and in the shape
of his large head, poised on narrow stooping shoulders, and as
the carriage drew abreast of him, Odo, leaning from the window,
cried out, "Brutus--this must be Brutus!"

"Your excellency has the advantage of me," said the hunchback, turning
on him a thin face lit by the keen eyes that had once searched
his childish soul.

Odo met the rebuff with a smile. "Does that," said he, "prevent
my suggesting that you might continue your way more comfortably
in my carriage?

The road is hot and dusty, and, as you see, I am in want of company."

The pedestrian, who seemed unprepared for this affable rejoinder,
had the sheepish air of a man whose rudeness has missed the mark.

"Why, sir," said he, recovering himself, "comfort is all a
matter of habit, and I daresay the jolting of your carriage
might seem to me more unpleasant than the heat and dust of the road,
to which necessity has long since accustomed me."

"In that case," returned Odo with increasing amusement, "you will
have the additional merit of sacrificing your pleasure to add to
mine."

The hunchback stared. "And what have you or yours ever done
for me," he retorted, "that I should sacrifice to your pleasure
even the wretched privilege of being dusted by the wheels of your
coach?"
"Why, that," replied Odo, "is a question I can scarce answer till you
give me the opportunity of naming myself.--If you are indeed Carlo
Gamba," he continued, "I am your old friend and companion Odo Valsecca."

The hunchback started. "The Cavaliere Valsecca!" he cried. "I had heard
that you were expected." He stood gazing at Odo. "Our next Duke!"

he muttered.

Odo smiled. "I had rather," he said, "that my past commended me
than my future.

It is more than doubtful if I am ever able to offer you a seat in
the Duke's carriage; but Odo Valsecca's is very much at your
service."

Gamba bowed with a kind of awkward dignity. "I am grateful for a
friend's kindness," he said, "but I do not ride in a nobleman's
carriage."

"There," returned Odo with perfect good-humour, "you have had
advantage of ME; for I can no more escape doing so than you can escape
spending your life in the company of an ill-tempered man." And
courteously lifting his hat he called to the postillion to drive
on.

The hunchback at this, flushing red, laid a hand on the carriage
door.

"Sir," said he, "I freely own myself in the wrong; but a smooth temper
was not one of the blessings my unknown parents bequeathed to me;
and I confess I had heard of you as one little concerned with your
inferiors except as they might chance to serve your pleasure."

It was Odo's turn to colour. "Look," said he, "at the fallibility
of rumour; for I had heard of you as something of a philosopher,
and here I find you not only taking a man's character on hearsay
but denying him the chance to prove you mistaken!"

"I deny it no longer," said Gamba stepping into the coach; "but as to
philosophy, the only claim I can make to it is that of being by
birth a peripatetic."

His dignity appeased, the hunchback proved himself a most engaging
companion, and as the carriage lumbered slowly toward Pianura he
had time not only to recount his own history but to satisfy Odo as
to many points of the life awaiting him.

Gamba, it appeared, owed his early schooling to a Jesuit priest
who, visiting the foundling asylum, had been struck by the child's
quickness, and had taken him home and bred him to be a clerk. The
priest's death left his charge adrift, with a smattering of scholarship
above his station, and none to whom he could turn for protection.
For a while he had lived, as he said, like a street-cat, picking
up a meal where he could, and sleeping in church porches and under
street-arcades, till one of the Duke's servants took pity on him
and he was suffered to hang about the palace and earn his keep by
doing the lacquey's errands.

The Duke's attention having been called to him as a lad of parts,
his Highness had given him to the Marquess of Cerveno, in whose
service he remained till shortly before that young nobleman's death.

The hunchback passed hastily over this period; but his reticence was
lit by the angry flash of his eyes. After the Marquess's death he had
lived for a while from hand to mouth, copying music, writing poetry
for weddings and funerals, doing pen-and-ink portraits at a scudo
apiece, and putting his hand to any honest job that came his way.

Count Trescorre, who now and then showed a fitful recognition of the
tie that was supposed to connect them, at length heard of the case
to which he was come and offered him a trifling pension.

This the hunchback refused, asking instead to be given some fixed
employment.

Trescorre then obtained his appointment as assistant to the Duke's
librarian, a good old priest engrossed in compiling the early history
of Pianura from the ducal archives; and this post Gamba had now
filled for two years.

"It must," said Odo, "be one singularly congenial to you, if, as I
have heard, you are of a studious habit.

Though I suppose," he tentatively added, "the library is not likely
to be rich in works of the new scientific and philosophic schools."

His companion received this observation in silence; and after a
moment Odo continued: "I have a motive in asking, since I have been
somewhat deeply engaged in the study of these writers, and my dearest
wish is to continue while in Pianura my examination of their theories,
and if possible to become acquainted with any who share their views."

He was not insensible of the risk of thus opening himself to a stranger;
but the sense of peril made him the more eager to proclaim himself
on the side of the cause he seemed to have deserted.

Gamba turned as he spoke, and their eyes met in one of those revealing
glances that lay the foundations of friendship.

"I fear, Cavaliere," said the hunchback with a smile, "that you
will find both branches of investigation somewhat difficult to
pursue in Pianura; for the Church takes care that neither the
philosophers nor their books shall gain a footing in our most
Christian state.

Indeed," he added, "not only must the library be free from heretical
works, but the librarian clear of heretical leanings; and since
you have honoured me with your confidence I will own that, the court
having got wind of my supposed tendency to liberalism, I live in
daily expectation of dismissal.

For the moment they are content to keep their spies on me; but were
it not for the protection of the good abate, my superior, I should
long since have been turned out."

"And why," asked Odo, "do you speak of the court and the Church as
one?"

"Because, sir, in our virtuous duchy the terms are interchangeable.
The Duke is in fact so zealous a son of the Church that if the latter
showed any leniency to sinners the secular arm would promptly
repair her negligence.

His Highness, as you may have heard, is ruled by his confessor, an
adroit Dominican. The confessor, it is true, has two rivals, the
Countess Belverde, a lady distinguished for her piety, and a
German astrologer or alchemist, lately come to Pianura, and calling
himself a descendant of the Egyptian priesthood and an adept of the
higher or secret doctrines of Neoplatonism.

These three, however, though ostensibly rivals for the Duke's
favour, live on such good terms with one another that they are suspected
of having entered into a secret partnership; while some regard
them all as the emissaries of the Jesuits, who, since the suppression
of the Society, are known to have kept a footing in Pianura, as
in most of the Italian states. As to the Duke, the death of the
Marquess of Cerveno, the failing health of the little prince, and
his own strange physical infirmities, have so preyed on his mind
that he is the victim of any who are unscrupulous enough to trade
on the fears of a diseased imagination.

His counsellors, however divided in doctrine, have at least one end
in common; and that is, to keep the light of reason out of the
darkened chamber in which they have confined him; and with
such a ruler and such principles of government, you may fancy that
poor philosophy has not where to lay her head."

"And the people?"

Odo pursued. "What of the fiscal administration? In some states where
liberty of thought is forbidden the material welfare of the subject
is nevertheless considered."

The hunchback shook his head. "It may be so," said he, "though I had
thought the principle of moral tyranny must infect every branch of
public administration.

With us, at all events, where the Church party rules, the privileges
and exemptions of the clergy are the chief source of suffering,
and the state of passive ignorance in which they have kept the
people has bred in the latter a dull resignation that is the surest
obstacle to reform.

Oh, sir," he cried, his eyes darkening with emotion, "if you could
see, as I do, the blind brute misery on which all the magnificence
of rank and all the refinements of luxury are built, you would feel,
as you drive along this road, that with every turn of the wheels
you are passing over the bodies of those who have toiled without
ceasing that you might ride in a gilt coach, and have gone hungry
that you might feast in Kings' palaces!"

The touch of rhetoric in this adjuration did not discredit it with
Odo, to whom the words were as caustic on an open wound.

He turned to make some impulsive answer; but as he did so he caught
sight of the towers of Pianura rising above the orchards and
market-gardens of the suburbs.

The sight started a new train of feeling, and Gamba, perceiving it,
said quietly: "But this is no time to speak of such things."

A moment later the carriage had passed under the great battlemented
gates, with their Etruscan bas-reliefs, and the motto of the house
of Valsecca--Humilitas--surmounted by the ducal escutcheon.

Though the hour was close on noon the streets were as animated as
at the angelus, and the carriage could hardly proceed for the crowd
obstructing its passage.

So unusual at that period was such a sight in one of the lesser
Italian cities that Odo turned to Gamba for an explanation. At the
same moment a roar rose from the crowd; and the coach turning
into the Corso which led to the ducal palace and the centre of the
town, Odo caught sight of a strange procession advancing from that
direction.

It was headed by a clerk or usher with a black cap and staff, behind
whom marched two bare-foot friars escorting between them a middle-aged
man in the dress of an abate, his hands bound behind him and his
head surmounted by a paste-board mitre inscribed with the title: A
Destroyer of Female Chastity.

While Polly was trying to get his number, Johnny Gamble sat face to
face with his old partner.

"You have your nerve to come to me," he said, as the eyebrowless
young man sat himself comfortably in Johnny's favorite leather arm-
chair.

"There's nobody else to go to," explained Collaton, with an attempt
at jauntiness. "I'm dead broke, and if I don't have two thousand
dollars to-morrow I'll quite likely be pinched."

"I'm jealous," stated Johnny. "I had intended to do it myself."

"I've been expecting you to," acknowledged Collaton. "That's one of
the reasons I came to you."

"I admire you," observed Johnny dryly. "You bled me for two years,
and yet you have the ingrowing gall to come and tell me you're
broke."

"Well, it's the truth," defended Collaton. "Look here, Johnny; I've
heard that you made a lot of money in the last few weeks, but you
haven't had any more attachments against you, have you?"

"You bet I haven't," returned Johnny savagely. "I've been waiting
for just one more attempt, and then I intended--"

"I know," interrupted Collaton. "You intended to beat Gresham and
Jacobs and me to a pulp; and then have us pinched for disorderly
conduct, and try to dig up the evidence at the trial."

"Well, something like that," admitted Johnny with a grin.

"I knew it," corroborated Collaton. "I told them when to stop."

"I guess you'll be a good witness," surmised Johnny. "How deep were
you in on this Birchard deal? How much did you get?"

"Did Gresham and Birchard pull something?" inquired Collaton with
such acute interest that Johnny felt sure he had taken no part in
that swindle.

"Well, yes," agreed Johnny with a wince, as he thought of his lost
million. "They did pull a little trick. Did you know Birchard very
well?"

"I wouldn't say what I know about Birchard except on a witness-
stand," chuckled Collaton, "but I can tell you this much: if he got
anything, throw it a good-by kiss; for he can rub himself out better
than any man I ever saw. He's practised hiding till he doesn't know
himself where he is half of the time."

"I've passed him up," stated Johnny. "The only people I'm after are
Gresham and Jacobs and you."

"I wonder if you wouldn't pin a medal on one of us if he'd give you
the other two," conjectured Collaton, smoothing his freckled cheek
and studying Johnny with his head on one side.

"We're not coining medals this year," declared Johnny, "but if it's
you you're talking about, and you'll give me Gresham and Jacobs,
I'll promise you a chance to stand outside the bars and look in at
them."

"It's a bet," decided Collaton promptly. "I split up with Gresham
two or three weeks ago at Coney Island, when he wanted me to go in
on a big scheme against you, and I suppose it was this Birchard
stunt. I told him I'd had enough. Your money began to look
troublesome to me. That was the day you were down there with the
girl."

"There's no girl in this," warned Johnny. "Now tell me just what you
can do."

"Will you wipe me off the slate?"

"Clean as a whistle," promised Johnny. "If my lawyer lets you be
convicted I'll go to jail in your place."

"It's like getting over-change by mistake," gratefully returned
Collaton. "I'm tired of the game, Johnny, and if I can get out of
this I'll stay straight the balance of my life."

"You'll die in the top tier, with the pentitentiary chaplain writing
your farewell letters," prophesied Johnny. "What did you say you
could do?"

"Well, I can incriminate not only Jacobs but Gresham in those phoney
attachments, and I can hand you the Gamble-Collaton books," set
forth Collaton. "Gresham got them away from me to take care of and
then held them over me as a threat; but I got them back yesterday by
offering to pound his head off. He's a bigger coward than I am."

"How much money did you say you wanted?" inquired Johnny.

"Five thousand," returned Collaton cheerfully.

"You said two."

"I have to have two and I need the rest. I thought maybe I could
sell you my interest in The Gamble-Collaton Irrigation Company.
There's several thousand acres of land out there, you know."

"I haven't laid a finger on you yet," Johnny reminded him, "but if
you make another offer to sell me that land I don't know how I'll
stand the strain."

"Well, say you give me the money for fun then," amended Collaton. "I
didn't know anything about this Birchard deal, but since you've
mentioned it I can piece together a lot of things that mean
something now. I'll help you chase that down, and you can afford to
spare me five thousand. Why, Johnny, I'm a poor sucker that has made
the unfortunate financial mistake of being crooked; and you're the
luckiest cuss in the world. To begin with, you're square; and that's
the biggest stroke of luck that can happen. Everybody likes you,
you're a swift money-maker, and you've got a girl--now don't get
chesty--that would make any man go out and chew bulldogs."

Johnny reflected over that statement and turned a trifle bitter. He
had no million dollars; he had no friends; he had no girl! He
contemplated calling the police.

The telephone bell rang.

"Hello, Polly," he said vigorously into the interrupting instrument,
and then Collaton, watching him anxiously, saw his face light up
like a Mardi Gras illumination. "Bring my Baltimore straw hat!"
jubilated Johnny. "Polly, I'll bring one if I have to go to
Baltimore to get it." He paused, and the transmitter in front of his
face almost glistened with reflected high-lights. "Engagements! For
to-day?" exulted Johnny. "I'm at liberty right now. How soon may I
come over?" He listened again with a wide-spread grin. Collaton
rolled a cigarette with black tobacco and brown paper, lighted it
and smiled comfortably. "Can't I talk to Constance a minute?"
implored Johnny, trying to push in the troublous tremolo stop. "Oh,
is she? All right; I'll be over in about twenty minutes. No, I won't
make it an hour, I said twenty minutes;" and still smiling with
imbecile delight he hung up the receiver and turned to Collaton with
a frown.

"I think I can raise that two thousand for you," he decided. "Now
tell me just what you know about Gresham and Birchard."


CHAPTER XXII

IN WHICH PAUL GRESHAM PROPOSES A VERY PRACTICAL ARRANGEMENT


"Mr. Gresham is calling," announced Aunt Pattie Boyden with some
trepidation; for Constance, besides being ill, had not been in the
best of humor during the last two weeks.

"Paul?" commented Constance with a pleased smile, which both
delighted and surprised Aunt Pattie. "I didn't expect him for half
an hour," and she completed her toilet by adorning herself with a
choice collection of Johnny Gamble's roses.

"You are looking your best, I must say," admired Aunt Pattie after a
critical survey, for she was particularly anxious about this visit
of Paul Gresham's.

"She ought to," interjected Polly, busy at the telephone; "that's
the third gown she's tried on. She's expecting particular company."

"Any one besides Paul?" inquired Aunt Pattie, elevating her
eyebrows.

"Lots of people," returned Constance with a gaiety she had not
exhibited for many days. "Mr. Gamble for one."

Aunt Pattie's countenance underwent an instant change, and it was
not a change for the better.

"Mr. Gamble!" she exclaimed, quite properly shocked. "I shouldn't
think he'd feel in the humor for social calls just now. He's lost
all his money."

"You wouldn't believe it if you had heard him laugh over the 'phone
just now when I told him to bring his straw hat," declared Polly.

"Who told you the news?" asked Constance, feeling sure of the
answer.

"Mr. Gresham," hesitated Aunt Pattie.

"I bet he couldn't keep his face straight," Polly vindictively
charged.

"You do Mr. Gresham an injustice, Polly," protested Aunt Pattie
severely.

"It isn't possible," insisted Polly. "If it were not giving him too
much credit for brains I'd swear he'd helped break Johnny."

"I'm afraid you don't give him quite enough credit for brains," said
Constance, and giving her roses a deft parting turn she went down-
stairs to meet Paul Gresham.

If Aunt Pattie had been pleased by the change in Constance, Gresham
was delighted. This was the first time she had really beamed on him
since she had met Johnny Gamble.

"You are always charming," he observed, taking pleasure in his own
gallantry, "but to-day you seem unusually so."

"That's pretty," dimpled Constance. "I wanted to look nice to-day."

Mr. Gresham's self-esteem arose several degrees. He smiled his
thanks of her compliment to the appointment he had made with her.

"My call to-day is rather a formal one," he told her, smiling, and
approaching the important subject-matter in hand directly but quite
easily, he thought. "It is in relation to the will of your Aunt
Gertrude, which has been the cause of some embarrassment to us both,
and to you particularly, I fear."

"Naturally," she assented, still smiling, however.

This was easy sailing. Gresham walked over and took the chair
nearest her.

"It is, of course, unnecessary to discuss the provisions made by
your Aunt Gertrude," he stated. "Even had such a will never been
written, I am quite sure that the result would have been the same,
and that to-day, after the long friendship which I have enjoyed with
you, I should be asking you, as I am now, to become my wife," and
taking her hand in his, he very gracefully kissed it.

Constance as gracefully drew it away.

"You have done your duty very nicely, Mr. Gresham," she said. "It
must have been as awkward for you to be compelled to make this
proposal as it is for me to be compelled to refuse it. It would be
wicked for us to marry."

"You are very harsh," he managed to protest. "I am sure that I
should not feel wicked in marrying you."

"Perhaps you haven't my sort of conscience," answered Constance,
laughing to conceal her intense hatred and contempt of him.

Gresham, adopting also the light manner of small talk, laughed with
her.

"Really it wouldn't be so bad," he urged. "We would make a very fair
couple when we were averaged. You are beautiful and accomplished
enough to make up for all the deficiencies I may have."

"You do say nice things to me," acknowledged Constance, "but there
is one deficiency you have overlooked. We do not love each other,
and that is fatal to Aunt Gertrude's rather impertinent plans. It
renders even a discussion of the matter impossible. I can not marry
you ever."

Gresham's lips turned dry.

"I believe you really mean that," he stumbled, unable quite to
comprehend it.

"Certainly I do," she assured him.

"But you don't understand," he protested. "You can't understand or
you would at least take time for more serious consideration. You are
relinquishing your entire fortune!"

"Making myself a penniless pauper," she mocked with a light-hearted
feeling that some one--description mentally evaded--would make a
fortune unnecessary.

"It is a million dollars," he insisted.

"A million--that sounds familiar!" and she laughed in remembrance of
her tilt with Polly.

Gresham swallowed three separate and very distinct times.

"A half-interest in that million is mine," he complained. "You can
not turn over your share to an absurd charity without also throwing
mine away. It is not fair."

"Fair?" repeated Constance. For an instant she felt her temper
surging, then caught herself and took refuge in burlesque. "The only
fair thing about it is that my Aunt Gertrude's will gave her
orphaned niece the choice between a title with riches and poverty
with freedom," and raising her eyes and hand toward heaven she
started to sweep from the room with queenly grace, stifling a giggle
as she went.

"Wait just a minute," begged Gresham, suppressing his anger. "We
should arrange in some way to keep the money. We can, at least, be
practical."

Constance, whose faculties were not so concentrated as his, heard a
rustle on the stairs and glancing out through the portieres into the
hall, saw Polly, without her hat, hurrying to the front door. The
bell had not rung, and she divined that Polly, out of the boudoir
window, had seen some particular company approaching.

"It seems impossible," she returned, and waited.

"Not quite," Gresham assured her with a smile. "There is one way we
could carry out the provisions of your aunt's will and still force
no repugnant companionship upon you."

"I think I see," replied Constance--"you mean that we part at the
altar," and in spite of all her efforts to keep her face straight
she finally laughed.

"Well, I didn't intend to put it quite in that melodramatic way,"
resented Gresham.

"Polly wins," declared Constance. "She bet me a five-pound box of
chocolates that you would make that proposal, but I didn't really
think you would do it."

MARRIAGE.

[Sidenote: Contract.]
Marriage is a civil contract requiring the consent of parties capable
of entering into other contracts, except as herein otherwise
declared.
[§3376.]

While marriage is defined to be a contract, it is rather a
status or relation assumed by the act of marriage. Society is
recognized as a third party to the agreement and as having a well
defined interest in the duties and obligations of such relation.

It is because of this interest, that the law defines the qualifications
of the parties, the terms, rights and obligations of the contract,
and also for what causes and in what manner it may be terminated. "It
stands alone and can be assimilated to no other contract."

[Sidenote: Between what ages valid.]
A marriage between a male person of sixteen and a female of fourteen
years of age is valid, but if either party has not attained the age
thus fixed, the marriage is a nullity or not at the option of such
party made known at any time before he or she is six months older
than the age thus fixed. [§3377.]

The common law rule fixing the age of consent to marriage at
fourteen for males and twelve for females is not repealed in Iowa.

The time in which the parties may disaffirm the marriage is merely
extended by the statute.

[Sidenote: License.]

Previous to any marriage within this state, a license for that purpose
must be obtained from the clerk of the district court of the county
wherein the marriage is to be solemnized. [§3378.] As under the
common law, no express form or ceremony is necessary to constitute
a valid marriage, any mutual agreement between the parties to assume
the relation of husband and wife, followed by cohabitation, being
sufficient, provided there is no legal disability on the part of
either existing at the time.

"I won't hurt Paul," promised Johnny, responding to her smile with a
suddenly relieved grin, and, taking Gresham daintily by the coat
sleeve with his thumb and forefinger, he led the unresisting cousin
of Lord Yawpingham to the front door. Polly opened it for him, and,
grabbing Gresham's silk hat, put it hastily askew and hindside
before upon his bewildered head.

Johnny did not strike him or shove him, but the graceful and self-
possessed Gresham, attempting desperately to recover those qualities
and to leave with dignity, stumbled over the door-mat and scrambled
wildly down the stone steps, struggling to retain his balance.

Colonel Bouncer, just starting up the steps with Loring, Sammy
Chirp, Winnie, Val Russel and Mrs. Follison, hastily and
automatically gave him a helping shove on the shoulder which sent
him sprawling to the walk, where he completed his interesting
exhibition by turning a back somersault.

"Glimmering gosh, Colonel!" protested Val, as he hurried to pick up
Gresham, laughing, however, as did the others, on account of the
neighbors. "Why did you do that?"

"I thought Johnny Gamble pushed him," humbly apologized the colonel.

Bruce Townley and the Courtney girls arrived, and in the gay
scramble for wraps Johnny had a moment with Constance.

"Well, I lose," he said regretfully. "There isn't much chance to
make that million between now and four o'clock to-morrow afternoon."

"What's the difference?" inquired Constance, smiling contentedly
into his eyes.

Only the presence of so many people prevented her fichu from being
mussed.

"There's a lot of difference," he asserted with a suddenly renewed
impulse, the world being greatly changed since she had refused
Gresham. "I set out to get it, and I won't give it up until four
o'clock to-morrow afternoon."

"If you want it so very badly I hope that you get it then," she
gently assured him.

Her shoulder happened to touch his arm and he pressed against it as
hard as he could. She resisted him.

"Ready, Constance?" called Polly.

"In just a minute," Johnny took it on himself to reply. "How does
the score board look by this time?"

Constance hesitated, then she blushed and drew from a drawer of the
library table the score board. The neatly ruled pasteboard had been
roughly torn into seven pieces--but it had been carefully pasted
together again!


CHAPTER XXIII

IN WHICH THE BRIGHT EYES OF CONSTANCE "RAIN INFLUENCE"


There being no cozy corners aboard Mr. Courtney's snow-white
Albatross in which a couple with many important things to say could
be free from prying observation, Johnny and Constance behaved like
normal human beings who were profoundly happy. They mingled with the
gaiety all the way out through the harbor to the open sea, and then
they drifted unconsciously farther and farther to the edge of the
hilarity, until they found themselves sitting in the very prow of
the foredeck with Mr. Courtney and his friend from the West. If they
could not exchange important confidences they could at least sit
very quietly, touching elbows.

Mr. Courtney's friend from the West was a strong old man with keen
blue eyes, who sat all through the afternoon in the same place,
talking in low tones with Courtney on such dry and interminable
subjects as railroads, mines, freight rates, stocks, bonds and board
meetings.

Constance wondered how an otherwise nice old man could reach that
age without having accumulated any lighter and more comprehensible
objects of interest, and she really doubted the possibility of any
man's understanding all the dry-as-dust business statistics with
which he was so handy. Suddenly, however, Johnny Gamble awoke from
his blissful lethargy and bent eagerly forward.

"Beg pardon, Mr. Boise," he interjected into the peaceful
conversational flow of the older men. "Did I understand you to say
that the S. W. & P. had secured a controlling interest in the
B. F. & N. W.?"

Constance looked at Johnny in dismay. If he, too, intended to talk
in nothing but the oral sign language, she had a wild idea of
joining the frivolous crowd on the afterdeck, where at least there
was laughter.

Mr. Boise looked at Johnny from under shaggy eyebrows.

"It's not generally known," he stated, struggling between a desire
to be pleasant to a fellow guest and a regret that he had fancied
Johnny absorbed too much in Constance to be interested in sotto voce
affairs.

"That's what that territory needs," Johnny briskly commented. "As
long as the S. W. & P. and the B. F. & N. W. were scrapping, the
Sancho Hills Basin had as good service with burros."

Both Boise and Courtney laughed.

"Be careful, Johnny," warned Courtney. "Mr. Boise is president of
the S. W. & P., and is now also virtually president of the B. F. &
N. W."

Constance sighed, but stuck gamely to her post. After all Johnny was
having a good time, and he actually seemed to understand what they
were talking about. There was no question that Johnny was a smart
man!

"I'm glad he is president of both," said Johnny, "for with
consolidation things will start humming out there."

"Thank you," laughed Boise, no longer regarding Johnny as an
impertinent interloper. "That's what we hope to do."

"The first thing you'll start will be a cut right across the Sancho
Hills Basin, which will shorten your haul to Puget Sound by five
hundred miles and open up a lot of rich new land."

Boise studied him with contracted brows.

"That's a good guess," he admitted. "You seem to know a lot about
that country."

"I own some land out there," grinned Johnny. Today his usually merry
face was very grave and he looked very thoughtful as he gave his
mother her kiss and allowed himself to be drawn upon her lap.

"What ails mother's Pet? Is he sick?" she asked anxiously.

"No, Mother dear, I'm not sick, but I feel so sad at heart.

You see," he continued in answer to her questioning look, "Robbie
Goodman and I always walk together going and coming from school, and
I have noticed that he has never worn any overcoat this winter,
but you know its been unusually warm and I thought perhaps his
mother did not make him wrap up like you did me, but this morning
it was so cold and he was just shivering, but he never had on any
overcoat--just his mittens and muffler and cap were his wraps.

Of course I noticed it, for nearly everyone else was all bundled
up; but I didn't say anything as I did not want to be impolite.

After awhile he said, 'My, I am so cold,' and I said: 'Where's
your overcoat?' Then he told me it was too small and his papa
can't buy him any this winter so he is afraid he will have to stop
school.

His mama says she would cut his papa's up for him, only then he would
not have any; and of course he must have one to wear when he goes
to the chapel and to see sick people. Even that one is thin and
patched.

He says he and his little sisters have been praying so hard for an
overcoat for him and shoes for them, but they did not come at
Christmas like they thought they would, and they are real
discouraged.

"Tonight, Mother," continued Walter, "he had an awful cold and
coughed just like our Harry did last year," and the long pent up
tears flowed from the child's eyes.

As mother and son dried their tears, the child looked up with perfect
confidence as he said, "The Lord will answer Robbie's prayer, won't
he. Mama?"
[Illustration]

"Yes darling," said Mrs. Ellis; and sent the child off to the play
room.

"By the way, my dear," remarked Mrs. Ellis as they sat chatting at the
tea-table after Walter had retired, "what has become of that preacher
Goodman who preached for us once on trial?"
"Oh, he has a mission down on the other side of the city, but
he lives on this side as Moore gives him the house rent free. I met
him the other day.

He looked very needy. The man had wonderful talents and might
have a rich congregation and improve himself; but he is persistent
in his ideas concerning this holiness movement, and of course a
large church like ours wants something to attract and interest
instead of such egotistical discourses.

I, for one, go to sleep under them." And Mr.
Ellis drew himself up with a pompous air as he went into the library,
whither his wife presently followed.

He had picked up a newspaper and was apparently absorbed, but Mrs.

Ellis had not had her say, so she continued "Walter was telling me
about the little boy. He--"
"Oh, yes," interrupted her husband, "he met me in the hall and poured
out the whole story. The child's nerves were all wrought up, too. He
should not be allowed to worry over such things.

He wants me to give up buying him the fur-trimmed overcoat and
get a coat and shoes for Goodman's children, as they were praying
so hard for them, but I have enough to do without clothing other
people's children.

If Goodman would quit his cranky notions and use his talents for people
who could understand him, instead of preaching to those
ragamuffins he might now be receiving a magnificent salary and clothing
himself and family decently."

"But Paul," said Mrs. Ellis, "Surely you would not have Mr.
When the railroad party had been dispersed by Winnie--who had
constituted herself rigid master of the revels--Constance and Johnny
found themselves tete-a-tete up in the prow for just a tiny moment.

"Do you suppose he'll decide on the Sage City and Salt Pool route?"
she anxiously inquired.

"I hope so," declared Johnny. "If he does, I think I see a chance to
make a little money."

"Maybe we'd better talk some more with him," she suggested, looking
about for Boise.

"We'll let him alone for a little bit," laughed Johnny. "We've
started him to thinking about it, and I have that appointment with
him at eight-thirty to-morrow morning. Boise does a day's work
before lunch."

Later, in the bustle of preparing for dinner, Boise sat down by
Constance.

"Are you still in favor of the Sage City and Salt Pool route for our
new cut-off?" he asked with a smile as he inspected her delicately
flushed cheeks and her bright eyes and her shining wavy hair.

"Really, I don't know very much about it," she modestly confessed,
"but I should think that an all-level route would be much the best."

At the pier that night at twelve-thirty the party, on account of the
lateness of the hour, very hurriedly dispersed. Johnny and Loring
secured a taxi and, with Polly and Constance, headed for Polly's
house where Constance had decided to spend the night.

As they crossed Seventh Avenue Johnny excitedly tapped on the glass
in front of him and poking his head out through the other forward
window, gave a sharp direction. The driver, a knobby-jawed and
hairy-browed individual, turned and tore down toward the big new
terminal station as fast as he could go.

"Gresham," explained Johnny briefly, peering keenly ahead.

"Well, what about him?" inquired Loring.

"He's jumping the town. I don't trust my detectives."

"Have you secured some proof?" eagerly inquired Loring.

"No, only evidence," laughed Johnny at his lawyer, and for the rest
of that brief ride neither the breathless girls nor the concentrated
men said anything. They only held tensely forward and helped hurry.

There were three taxis preceding them in the congested line which
turned in at the terminal station, and as the vehicles began to slow
down Johnny stood on the step.

"If I get in a mix-up you keep this taxi right round where it'll be
handy," he directed, and ran ahead just as Gresham, as fastidious as
ever, emerged at the entrance to the ticket lobby.

Gresham allowed a porter to take all of his hand luggage, with the
exception of one small black bag which he carefully carried himself.

"I guess these are those," observed Johnny in a pleasant
conversational tone of voice as he lifted the bag from Gresham's
hand.

Gresham made a desperate grab for the bag, but Johnny gave him a
shove with one strong forearm, opened the bag and, diving into it,
felt a tight square bundle of papers near the bottom. Giving them
one hasty glance he rushed back, closely followed by Gresham, to the
taxi where his friends sat quivering with excitement.

"Hide these," he ordered. "Get out of here, quick!" he told the
chauffeur. "Mr. Loring will tell you where to drive."

"They're hid all right," Polly assured him. "What are they?"

"Amalgamated Steel bonds representing Gresham's half of my million,"
rasped Johnny, throwing Gresham's weight off his arm. "Ask me the
rest of it the next time we meet. Just now I have to see to getting
this thief pinched."

"As your attorney I'll have to caution you, Johnny, that your action
is entirely illegal," Loring confidentially stated.

"They're my bonds, bought with my money," asserted Johnny.

"I know, but it has to be proved," argued Loring. "Your only way to
get possession of them is through the courts. Your present action
has no better legal status than highway robbery."

"I got the bonds, didn't I?" demanded Johnny. "Now you move. Here
comes a copper, and if he gets those bonds for evidence I won't see
them again for months."

A policeman appeared in the exact center of the perspective,
followed by a faithful emissary of the Ember Detective Agency.

"The bonds are no good to you just now unless Gresham assigns them,"
insisted Loring almost tearfully, and both Constance and Polly gave
up in despair.

"That's right," agreed Johnny, glancing over his shoulder at the
policeman and the indignant detective. Suddenly he pushed Gresham
headlong into the midst of the party and jumped in after him. "Hold
him, Loring!" he directed, and dismissed the stupefied Gresham from
his mind.

With remarkable deftness he had extracted a single bill from his
pocket and thrust it into the hand of the experienced chauffeur.

"Break the limit!" he tensely ordered.

"Where?" asked the chauffeur, whirling out of the line with a jerk.

"Any place," and the chauffeur, being a night worker and
understanding his business, accepted that direction with grinning
relish and left the depot policeman trying to remember the number of
his machine.

As they went up the incline from the ticket-lobby door Johnny
arranged the bewildered girls on the two little front seats, and
wedged the cowed Gresham carefully in between himself and Loring on
the back seat.

The chauffeur, knowing the only regular time-killing drive in the
city, hit out for Central Park. Gresham was incapable of thought or
action. As they crossed Forty-second Street Johnny touched his
driver on the shoulder, and that handy criminal came to an immediate
halt at the curb. Johnny opened the door. Gresham moved. Loring
quickly clutched him by the knee. The chauffeur looked back.

"Leave it to me," he suggested in most friendly tones. "You don't
need to change taxis."

"I'd feel more like a real sport if I hired two," Johnny argued,
studying his man intently.

"I've got two numbers and I'll switch 'em," offered the assistant
brigand.

"I think the police must know you by name," commented Johnny, "but
I'll take a chance," and giving Polly's address he climbed back.

"Shall we hide the bonds?" whispered Polly as she prepared to alight
at the Parsons home.

"Certainly not," replied Johnny. "I have to get them signed," and he
pressed the hand of Constance with proper warmth as he helped her
out.

Gresham made an attempt at that point to prove himself a man, but
Loring restrained him from that absurd idea with one hand while he
raised his hat with the other.

"Where next?" asked the driver huskily.

"The finest place for a kidnapping is Forty-second and Broadway,"
answered Johnny with his mind made up.

"I'll take you all the way," almost begged the chauffeur. "You're
the only sport that ever handed me enough for a night ride, and I'd
like to hand you good service."

"I don't know who else pays you," laughed Johnny, and his chauffeur,
with a mighty respect for his fare, drove to Forty-second and
Broadway, where Johnny paid him.

They walked to Johnny's apartments, and on their arrival Johnny
produced the bonds, spreading them out on his table.

"About the first thing is to sign these," he suggested to Gresham.

That abused young man, who had been in the constant expectation of
hearing himself yell for the police, but had been as constantly
disappointed, had walked along like a gentleman; now, at last, he
found his voice.

"This is an outrage!" he exclaimed.

"I know it," agreed Johnny. "It's even high-handed. Here's a
fountain-pen."

"I refuse," maintained Gresham. "Why should I assign my own personal
property to you?"

"Because your personal property is mine," Johnny informed him. "I
don't owe you any explanation, Gresham, but I'll make one. You
helped Birchard forge his power of attorney from the Wobbles
brothers, and you were with him in taxi 23406 when he collected my
million from the First National. You were seen again that night with
Birchard on the Boston Post Road, and from then on Birchard dropped
off the earth; but you didn't. You got Jacobs to buy you these
bonds, and Jacobs is a piker. He confessed and begged for mercy.
You're through."

Gresham held doggedly to the thought that never, under any
circumstances, must he admit a criminal action; for such a thing was
so far beneath him.

"I deny everything that you have said," he declared.

Johnny had a sudden frantic picture of this man touching the hand of
Constance, and he leaned across the table until his face was quite
close to Gresham's. The muscles in his jaws grew uncomfortably
nervous.

"Did you ever hear of the third degree?" he inquired. "Well, I'm
going to put you through it."

"The third degree?" faltered Gresham. "I don't quite understand what
you mean."

"You don't?" replied Johnny. "It begins this way"--and the watchful
Loring suddenly hung on Johnny's arm with his full weight.

"Don't!" implored Loring.

"I'm going to smash his head in!" husked Johnny, quivering with an
anger to which he had not given way for years.

"Wait a minute!" pleaded Loring, pulling on him with all his
strength. "Wait, I say! I want to help you, but you're in wrong.
Listen to me"--and he drew his reluctant client away from the table.
"I've no objections to your thrashing Gresham and I'd like to be
your proxy, but you'd better put it off. If you compel Gresham by
force to sign these bonds he can repudiate that action under
protection of the court and it will work against you."

Johnny Gamble controlled himself with an effort.

"They're my bonds," he persisted with his thoughts, however, more on
Constance than on business. "He'll sign them or I'll smash him."

Gresham, speaking above his panic of physical cowardice with a
tremulous effort, interpolated himself into the argument.

"I'll sign," he promised with stiff lips, and tried to write his
name on the cover of a magazine. The scrawl was so undecipherable
that he rose from the table and walked up and down the room in acute
distress, holding his right hand at the wrist and limbering it. "If
I sign," he presently bargained as he came to the table, "I must be
promised freedom from the distaste of a personal encounter."

Loring hastily complied, and Johnny, after having been prodded into
a recognition of the true situation, agreed with a disgusted snarl.

Gresham, with nerves much restored and a smile beginning to appear
upon his now oily features, carefully assigned each bond, and then,
secure in Johnny's promise, which he accepted at the par value all
men gave it, stood up and shook his finger warningly.

"A signature obtained under coercion is not worth the ink it took to
scrawl it," he triumphantly declared, having taken his cue from
Loring. "Any court in America will set aside this action."

"I know it," Johnny unexpectedly coincided. "I'm going to give you a
chance at it," and grabbing his telephone he called up Central
Police and asked for an officer to be sent to his rooms.

"Now, Loring, you disappear," directed Johnny briskly as he gathered
up the bonds. "I may have to dismiss you as my lawyer, but as my
friend you can hand these bonds to somebody who will lose them."

"As your lawyer I'd have to call you a blooming idiot," declared
Loring, "but as your friend I don't think Gresham will raise any
question about the bonds. They're yours, Johnny; but, nevertheless,
I'll forget where they are by the time the police come."

Gresham had been struggling with an intolerable lump in his throat.

"Gamble!" he abjectly pleaded, "I've signed the bonds. I admit that
they're yours. You're not going to have me arrested?"

Johnny turned on him with the sort of implacable enmity which
expresses itself in almost breathless quietness.

"I'm going to send you to the penitentiary for a thousand years," he
promised.

At the curb in front of his door he found a long gray torpedo
touring car throbbing with impatience, and at the wheel sat a plump
young lady in a vivid green bonnet and driving coat. In the tonneau
sat a more slender young lady all in gray, except for the brown of
her eyes and the pink of her cheeks and the red of her lips.

Johnny's Baltimore straw hat came off with a jerk.

"Out after the breakfast rolls?" he demanded as he shook hands with
them quite gladly.

"No, indeed; hunting a job," responded Polly. "This machine and the
services of its chauffeur and messenger girl are for rent to you
only, for the day, at the price of a nice party when you get that
million. We have to be in on the excitement."

"Hotel Midas," Johnny crisply directed, and jumped into the tonneau,
whereupon the chauffeur touched one finger to her bonnet, and the
machine leaped forward.

"You're lazy," chided Constance. "We've been waiting twenty minutes.
We were afraid you might be gone, but they told us that you had not
yet come down."

"If I'd known you were coming I'd have been at the curb before
daybreak," grinned Johnny. "You're in some rush this morning."

"There must be some rushing if you have that million dollars by four
o'clock," laughed Constance. "Polly and I want you to have it."

"You're right that I'll have to go some," he admitted.

Mamie came slowly towards her mother, and said, "I've been very naughty,
and I can't pray, Mama."
"If you've been naughty dear, that is the more reason that you need
to pray."

"But, Mama, I don't think God wants little girls to come to Him
when they are naughty."

"You are not naughty now, my dear, are you?"
"No, I am not naughty now."

"Well, then come at once."
"What shall I say to God about it, Mama?"
"You can tell God how very sorry you are."
"What difference will that make?"
"When we have told God that we are sorry, and when he has forgiven
us, then we are as happy as if we had not done wrong; but we cannot
undo the mischief."

"Then, Mama, I can never be quite as rich as if I had not had a
naughty hour today."

"Never, my dear; but the thought of your loss may help you to be
more careful in the future, and we will ask God to keep you from
sinning against him again."
--Selected

THE LITTLE GIRL WHO DIED TO SAVE HER FATHER'S LIFE
[Illustration]
My dear little friend: I want to tell you about a little girl in
Switzerland who died to save her father's life.

I hope it will lead you to think of Him who died a dreadful
death on the cross, that we might be saved from sin and sorrow here,
and at last dwell with Him in bright mansions in the skies.

This little girl lived near a deep ravine at the foot of one of
the mountains in Switzerland. A huge rock had fallen down the mountain
side, and lodged in the ravine, and thus made a natural bridge, so
that those who wished to pass from one side of the mountain to
the other, could cross the bridge.

The mother of the child was an earnest Christian, and often told her
daughter about the blessed Savior, who died in the place of sinners,
who deserved to be punished that they might be forgiven and saved
in heaven.

And she told her also that unless she came to Jesus, and trusted in
Him, she would be lost forever. At first the little girl did not
care very much about what her mother said, but at last the mother's
prayer was answered.

Her little one felt herself to be a lost sinner, and that Christ
alone could save her.

God's spirit taught her that Jesus had paid the debt, and that He
stood with open arms ready to receive her, and wash her sins away.

Then she felt sure that heaven would be her home forever. Her father
was not a Christian. He never gathered his loved ones around the
family altar.

One day when about to cross the deep ravine upon the rock bridge,
the mother saw that it was just ready to fall.

The frost had loosened it.

She told her little child that if she ever crossed it again it would
fall, and she would be dashed in pieces.

[Illustration]
The next day the father told his child that he was going over to
the other side across the bridge.

She told him it was not safe, but he only laughed at her. He said he
had been across it before she was born, and that he was not afraid.

When the dear little thing saw that he was determined to go she
asked if she could go with him.

While they were walking along together, she looked up into her father's
face, and said: "Father, if I should die, will you promise to
love Jesus and meet me in heaven?"
"Pshaw!"

he said, "what put such a wild thought into your head? You are not
going to die, I hope. You are only a wee thing and will live many
years."
"Yes, but if I should die, will you promise to love Jesus just as
I do, and meet me in heaven?"

"But you are not going to die. Don't speak of it," he said.

"But if I should die, do promise, Father, you will be a good
Christian and come up and live with Jesus and me in heaven."
"Yes, yes!"

he said at last.

When they came near the crossing-place, she said: "Father, please
stand here a minute." She loved him dearly and was willing
to run the risk of dying for him. Strange as it may seem she walked
quickly and jumped upon the loose rock, and down it went with the
girl. She was crushed to death.
The trembling parent crept to the edge, and eyes dimmed with tears,
gazed wildly upon the wreck.Next he went to the offices of the Western Developing Company, and
the president of that extensive concern waved him away with both
hands.

"If you've come about that Sancho Hills Basin land of yours, talk to
me about it in a theater lobby sometime," Washburn warned Johnny in
advance. "We discuss nothing but real business up here."

"I'll bet you five thousand acres of the land that this is real
business," Johnny offered. "The S. W. & P. has just secured control
of the B. F. & N. W., and intends to run the main line to Puget
Sound right square through the middle of my land. Now are you busy?"

"Sit down and have a cigar," invited Washburn, and slammed a call-
bell. "Billy," he told a boy, "if Mr. Rothberg comes in on that
appointment tell him I'll see him in a few minutes. Now, Johnny, how
do I know that the S. W. & P. will actually build that connecting
link through your land?"

"Ask Boise," directed Johnny confidently. "He's at the Hotel Midas,
and he has appointments in his room for the most of the morning."

"Has that grasping old monopolist gumshoed into town again?"
inquired Washburn, and promptly ordered his secretary to get Boise
on the telephone. "How much do you want for that land?" he asked
while he waited.

"Half a million dollars," stated Johnny. "No, I mean five hundred
and ten thousand," he hastily corrected, remembering his five-
thousand-dollar debt to Polly, and planning a five-thousand-dollar
betrothal blow-out that should be a function worth while.

"Half a million's a lot of money," Washburn soberly objected.

"I said half a million and ten thousand, spot cash and to-day,"
Johnny carefully corrected.

"You're joking."

"Am I smiling?" demanded Johnny. "Washburn, if I can't get that odd
ten thousand I'm in no hurry to sell."

Washburn's bell rang, but he went into the next room to talk to
Boise. He came back resigned.

"We'll need a few days for the formalities," he suggested.

"You don't need a minute," denied Johnny. "You looked up the title
weeks ago, and you know it's all right. The formalities can be
concluded in thirty minutes if you'll send your attorney down with
me."

"But what's the rush?" demanded Washburn, averse to paying out cash
with this speed.

"I want the money," explained Johnny.

"All right," gave in Washburn. "You may see Jackson at two o'clock
and wind up the business. He'll hand you a check."

"For five hundred and ten thousand?" inquired Johnny with proper
caution.

"For five hundred and ten thousand," repeated Washburn. "It's a
fool-sounding amount, but Boise said that if I wouldn't pay it he
would."

"May I speak to Boise a minute?" asked Johnny.

"This deal's closed," hastily cautioned Washburn with his hand on
the telephone.

"Of course it's closed," acknowledged Johnny. "I want to invite
Boise to a party."


CHAPTER XXV

IN WHICH JOHNNY KEEPS ON DOING BUSINESS TILL THE CLOCK STRIKES FOUR


The hired auto had plenty to do. It carried Johnny to court, where
he made a deposition against Gresham; it carried him to the office
of the Amalgamated Steel Company, where he had the bonds that
Gresham had transferred to him registered in his own name; it
carried him to the appointment with Washburn's lawyer, who destroyed
a full hour and a half of palpitating time; and it carried all of
them to Loring's office, into which they burst triumphantly at
twenty minutes of four.

At that hour Loring's office was crowded with loafers, the same
being Colonel Bouncer, Morton Washer, Joe Close, Ben Courtney, Val
Russel and Bruce Townley.

"This being a sporting event of some note, I gathered up a nice
little bunch of sports to see the finish," explained Val Russel with
a graceful bow. "Loring passed me the word that he expected you to
nose under the wire in record time. You must show us the million
dollars you were to have by four P. M., on Wednesday, May thirty-
first."

"I don't have to flash it for twenty minutes," claimed Johnny
happily. "At that hour I will show you a certificate of deposit on
Joe Close's bank for half a million in bonds, and a sure-enough
check for five hundred and ten thousand dollars."

"No fair!" objected Val. Homestead exempt--Family defined--Conveyance
or encumbrance--Liability for taxes and debts--What constitutes
homestead--Exemptions to head of family--Insurance--Personal
earnings--Pension money--Damages producing death 

CHAPTER X.

CRIMINAL LAW--ILLEGITIMATE CHILDREN.
Rape--Intent to commit--Compelling to marry--Carnal knowledge--Producing
miscarriage--Enticing female child--Seduction--Marriage a bar to
prosecution--Adultery--Evidence in cases of rape or
seduction--Bigamy--Lewdness--Houses of ill fame--Penalty for
prostitution--Incest--Illegitimate children--Support of--Rendered
legitimate by marriage of parents 

CHAPTER XI.

MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
Damages under prohibitory liquor law--Parties in actions
for seduction--In actions for injury to minor child--Married
women--When husband or wife deserts family--Husband or wife as
witness--Communications between husband and wife--Women eligible
to office--Police matrons--Right of suffrage 

CHAPTER XII.

CONCLUSION.
Common law in Iowa--Law will not always protect married women--It
may cause hardship and suffering--Change or modification needed
Common Law 

CHAPTER I.

SYNOPSIS OF COMMON LAW.

[Sidenote: Common law in force.]

Until a comparatively recent period the laws of England in force
at the time of the independence of the American colonies, relating
to married women, the mutual duties of husband and wife, their
property rights and the care and custody of children, were everywhere
in force in this country except in those states which were originally
settled by other nations than the English.

[Sidenote: Changes.]
The agitation of the last fifty years, caused by the demand for
equality in educational opportunities and in professional, business
and trade relations, as well as for the legal and political recognition
of women, has brought about great changes in these laws, until they
are in many instances almost entirely superseded by statutory
enactments more in accordance with the spirit of justice and in
greater harmony with the requirements of a higher form of civilization.

In many states they have reached a condition in which the legal
status of husband and wife is nearly, if not wholly, one of
equality.

[Sidenote: Basis of statue law.]
It must always be borne in mind, however, that the common law is
the foundation upon which almost the entire structure of our American
system of jurisprudence is based, although it is claimed that it
has only been recognized by our courts so far as it has been
"applicable to the habits and conditions of our society and in
harmony with the genius, spirit and objects of our institutions."

"Honestly, child, I don't know whether to scold you or kiss you,"
broke in Polly. "Sammy, come here."

Sammy came, not only obediently but humbly, though he never ceased
to smile; and he looked her squarely in the eyes.

Polly surveyed him long and earnestly.

"I guess it's the best thing that could have happened to both of
you, but I'll have a dreadful time looking after such a pair!"

"I'll look after my husband myself, if you please!" indignantly
protested Winnie.

Everybody laughed, and Polly started the popular ceremony of kissing
the bride.

Johnny Gamble came thoughtfully from behind the screen. He had not
heard the commotion, nor was he even now aware that Winnie and Sammy
had been added to the party. He had a broken comb in his hand.

"Bruce," said he, looking steadfastly at the comb, "did you ever
feel the need of a comb of your own in a public wash room?"

"I've sent a boy six blocks to buy one," responded Bruce with a
surge of recurrent indignation.

"It's the curse of the nation," Val earnestly assured him. "You are
ready for the theater. You have fifteen minutes to spare. You drop
into a gilded palace of crime to drink a highball. In your
earnestness you muss your hair. You retire to primp. A comb hangs
before you, with one serviceable tooth. A brush with eight bristles
hangs by its side. You smooth your hair with your towel and go away
saddened for ever!"

"The trouble is," said Colonel Bouncer, "that every man thinks he's
going to carry a neat little pocket-comb in a neat little case, and
he buys dozens of them; but he never has one with him."

"Thanks," acknowledged Johnny. "Now suppose you could step into any
barber shop, theater, hotel, saloon or depot wash room, drop a
nickel in a slot and take out a nice papier-mache comb, paraffined
and medicated and sealed in an oiled-paper wrapper. Would you do
it?"

"Just as fast as I could push the button," agreed Bruce with
enthusiasm.

"Well, I've just invented that comb," explained Johnny, smiling. "Do
you think there would be a good business in manufacturing it?"

Courtney, who had been considering the matter gravely, now nodded
his head emphatically.

"There's a handsome fortune in it," he declared. "It is one of those
little things of which there are enormous quantities used and thrown
away each day. If you want to organize a company to put it on the
market, Johnny, I'll take any amount of stock you think proper--not
only for the investment, but for the pure philanthropy of it."

"Also for the pure selfishness of it," laughed Joe Close. "Courtney
wants to be sure to find a private comb in every public wash room."

"When you get your factory going I wish you'd send a salesman to my
head supply man," requested Mort Washer. "I'll buy them by the ton,
and every guest who comes into one of my hotels will find a fresh
comb in an aseptic wrapper by the side of his individual soap."

"That will be up to Bruce," Johnny informed him. "Bruce intends to
manufacture this device at his papier-mache factory."

"Thanks," acknowledged Bruce. "I hadn't contemplated enlarging the
factory, but I see I shall need to."

"Johnny isn't kidding, Bruce," Val shrewdly warned him.

"Neither am I," maintained Bruce stoutly. "I'll have that comb on
the market so quickly that you can almost afford to wait for it.
Royalty, Johnny?"

"No," denied Johnny promptly. "I'll sell it to you outright for ten
thousand dollars, me to sign any sort of papers you need and you to
pay the patent lawyer."

"I'd be robbing you," protested Bruce. "I should think you'd want to
retain an interest in the manufacture, or at least a royalty.
There'd be a lot more money in it for you."

"Wait just a minute," directed Loring, sitting down at his
typewriting machine from which the neat operator had fled at the
very beginning of the social invasion.

(Analogus to our present method of commencing prosecutions by
information.)
According to Blackstone, even the disabilities of the wife were for
the most part intended for her protection and benefit, and he adds:
"So great a favorite is the female sex of the laws of England!"

[Sidenote: Reason for discrimination.]
The discrimination made by the common law between men and women, was
based alone upon the assumption that women were, and must be always
dependent by reason of their sex.
"I haven't a check-book with me, Johnny, but I'll send it up
to you from the office to-morrow."

"But, Bruce, that won't do!" hastily urged Constance. "He must have
the check right now. Don't you see he only has a million and ten
thousand dollars? He owes Polly five thousand and me fifteen
thousand, and if you give him ten thousand dollars for his invention
he'll have a million and how much? I'm all mixed up! But I do know
this: that he'll have his million dollars left exactly to the cent!"

"I--I see," stuttered Bruce in a fever of anxiety to help Johnny
achieve his million in the specified time. "I--I'm sorry I haven't
my check-book," and he looked about him hopelessly.

Just in front of his chest was suspended a check, already made out
in favor of Johnny Gamble, in the amount of ten thousand dollars,
properly dated and lacking only Bruce's signature. It was smiling
Sammy Chirp who had been quietly thoughtful enough to remember that
he and Bruce did business at the same bank.

WILLS AND LETTERS OF ADMINISTRATION.
Who may make wills--Of what property--Verbal wills--Wills in
writing--Revocation--Cancellation--Executors--Administration--Who
entitled--Time allowed 

CHAPTER VIII.

SETTLEMENT OF THE ESTATE--DESCENT AND DISTRIBUTION OF PROPERTY.

"Tough luck!" suddenly commented Val Russel. "It just occurs to me
that our friend Johnny will have to break into his million to pay
for his blow-out."

"I'm glad of it," snapped Morton Washer. "He took an eighth of that
million out of my pocket. There, take the words after me. I will
pray-- I learned how to pray in Sunday School and God has taught
me how to pray, too; my heart prays, and you must let your heart
pray.

Now say the words."
And she began in her simple language to pray to the Savior of sinners.

demanded Courtney,
gathering courage from the fact that Polly was not crushed.

"I don't know myself," boasted Johnny with an assumption of
masculine masterfulness which he knew he could never maintain. "Will
you marry me, Constance?"

"I decline to discuss that in public," declared Constance with well-
feigned haughtiness.

Johnny kissed her, anyhow, and the mob cheered.

"Listen!" ordered Constance.

The little clock above Loring's desk struck four.