"Oh, but there are always differences and exceptions," persisted the
doctor, who liked nothing better than to draw Miss Sampson out. "There
are some faces that take till thirty, at least, to bring out all their
possibilities of good looks, and wear on, then, till fifty. I've seen
'em. And the owners were no drones or do-nothings, either. What do you
say to that?"

"I say there's two ways of growing old. And growing old ain't always
growing ugly. Some folks grow old from the inside, out; and some from
the outside, in. There's old furniture, and there's growing trees!"

"And the trunk that is roughest below may branch out greenest a-top!"
said the doctor.

The talk Faith heard now and then, in her walks from home, or when some
of "the girls" came in and called her down into the parlor--about pretty
looks, and becoming dresses, and who danced with who at the "German"
last night, and what a scrape Loolie Lloyd had got into with mixing up
and misdating her engagements at the class, and the last new roll for
the hair--used to seem rather trivial to her in these days!

Occasionally, when Mr. Gartney had what nurse called a "good" day, he
would begin to ask for some of his books and papers, with a thought
toward business; and then Miss Sampson would display her carpetbag, and
make a show of picking up things to put in it. "For," said she, "when
you get at your business, it'll be high time for me to go about mine."

"But only for half an hour, nurse! I'll give you that much leave of
absence, and then we'll have things back again as they were before."

"I guess you will! And _further_ than they were before. No, Mr. Gartney,
you've got to behave. I _won't_ have them vicious-looking accounts
about, and it don't signify."

"If it don't, why not?" But it ended in the accounts and the carpetbag
disappearing together.

Until one morning, some three weeks from the beginning of Mr. Gartney's
illness, when, after a few days' letting alone the whole subject, he
suddenly appealed to the doctor.

"Doctor," said he, as that gentleman entered, "I must have Braybrook up
here this afternoon. I dropped things just where I stood, you know. It's
time to take an observation."

The doctor looked at his patient gravely.

"Can't you be content with simply picking up things, and putting them
by, for this year? What I ought to tell you to do would be to send
business to the right about, and go off for an entire rest and change,
for three months, at least."

"You don't know what you're talking about, doctor!"

"Perhaps not, on one side of the subject. I feel pretty certain on the
other, however."

Mr. Gartney did not send for Braybrook that afternoon. The next morning,
however, he came, and the tabooed books and papers were got out.

In another day or two, Miss Sampson _did_ pack her carpetbag, and go
back to her air-tight stove and solitary cups of tea. Her occupation in
Hickory Street was gone.


CHAPTER XI.

CROSS CORNERS.

"O thou that pinest in the imprisonment of the Actual, and criest
bitterly to the Gods for a kingdom, wherein to rule and create,
know this of a truth, the thing thou seekest is already with thee,
'here or nowhere,' couldst thou only see!"--CARLYLE.


"It is of no use to talk about it," said Mr. Gartney, wearily. "If I
live--as long as I live--I must do business. How else are you to get
along?"

"How shall we get along if you do _not_ live?" asked his wife, in a low,
anxious tone.

"My life's insured," was all Mr. Gartney's answer.

"Father!" cried Faith, distressfully.

Faith had been taken more and more into counsel and confidence with her
parents since the time of the illness that had brought them all so close
together. And more and more helpful she had grown, both in word and
doing, since she had learned to look daily for the daily work set before
her, and to perform it conscientiously, even although it consisted only
of little things. She still remembered with enthusiasm Nurse Sampson and
the "drumsticks," and managed to pick up now and then one for herself.
Meantime she began to see, indistinctly, before her, the vision of a
work that must be done by some one, and the duty of it pressed hourly
closer home to herself. Her father's health had never been fully
reëstablished. He had begun to use his strength before and faster than
it came. There was danger--it needed no Dr. Gracie, even, to tell them
so--of grave disease, if this went on. And still, whenever urged, his
answer was the same. "What would become of his family without his
business?"

Faith turned these things over and over in her mind.

"Father," said she, after a while--the conversation having been dropped
at the old conclusion, and nobody appearing to have anything more to
say--"I don't know anything about business; but I wish you'd tell me how
much money you've got!"

Her father laughed; a sad sort of laugh though, that was not so much
amusement as tenderness and pity. Then, as if the whole thing were a
mere joke, yet with a shade upon his face that betrayed there was far
too much truth under the jest, after all, he took out his portemonnaie
and told her to look and see.

"You know I don't mean that, father! How much in the bank, and
everywhere?"

"Precious little in the bank, now, Faithie. Enough to keep house with
for a year, nearly, perhaps. But if I were to take it and go off and
spend it in traveling, you can understand that the housekeeping would
fall short, can't you?"

Faith looked horrified. She was bringing down her vague ideas of money
that came from somewhere, through her father's pocket, as water comes
from Lake Kinsittewink by the turning of a faucet, to the narrow point
of actuality.

"But that isn't all, I know! I've heard you talk about railroad
dividends, and such things."

"Oh! what does the Western Road pay this time?" asked his wife.

"I've had to sell out my stock there."

"And where's the money, father?" asked Faith.

"Gone to pay debts, child," was the answer.

Mrs. Gartney said nothing, but she looked very grave. Her husband
surmised, perhaps, that she would go on to imagine worse than had really
happened, and so added, presently:

"I haven't been obliged to sell _all_ my railroad stocks, wifey. I held
on to some. There's the New York Central all safe; and the Michigan
Central, too. That wouldn't have sold so well, to be sure, just when I
was wanting the money; but things are looking better, now."

"Father," said Faithie, with her most coaxing little smile, "please just
take this bit of paper and pencil, and set down these stocks and things,
will you?"

The little smile worked its way; and half in idleness, half in
acquiescence, Mr. Gartney took the pencil and noted down a short list of
items.

"It's very little, Faith, you see." They ran thus:

     New York Central Railroad             20 shares.
     Michigan Central    "                 15   "
     Kinnicutt Branch    "                 10   "
     Mishaumok Insurance Co.               15   "
     Merchants Bank                        30   "

"And now, father, please put down how much you get a year in dividends."

"Not always the same, little busybody."

Nevertheless he noted down the average sums. And the total was between
six and seven hundred dollars.

"But that isn't all. You've got other things. Why, there's the house at
Cross Corners."

"Yes, but I can't let it, you know."

"What used you to get for it?"

"Two hundred and fifty. For house and land."

"And you own this house, too, father?"

"Yes. This is your mother's."

"How much rent would this bring?"

Mr. Gartney turned around and looked at his daughter. He began to see
there was a meaning in her questions. And as he caught her eye, he read,
or discerned without fully reading, a certain eager kindling there.

"Why, what has come over you, Faithie, to set you catechising so?"

Faith laughed.

"Just answer this, please, and I won't ask a single question more
to-night."

"About the rent? Why, this house ought to bring six hundred, certainly.
And now, if the court will permit, I'll read the news."

About a week after this, in the latter half of one of those spring days
that come with a warm breath to tell that summer is glowing somewhere,
and that her face is northward, Aunt Faith Henderson came out upon the
low, vine-latticed stoop of her house in Kinnicutt.

Up the little footpath from the road--across the bit of greensward that
lay between it and the stoop--came a quick, noiseless step, and there
was a touch, presently, on the old lady's arm.

Faith Gartney stood beside her, in trim straw bonnet and shawl, with a
black leather bag upon her arm.

"Auntie! I've come to make you a tiny little visit! Till day after
to-morrow."

"Faith Gartney! However came you here? And in such a fashion, too,
without a word of warning, like--an angel from Heaven!"

"I came up in the cars, auntie! I felt just like it! Will you keep me?"

"Glory! Glory McWhirk!" Like the good Vicar of Wakefield, Aunt Henderson
liked often to give the whole name; and calling, she disappeared round
the corner of the stoop, without ever a word of more assured welcome.

"Put on the teapot again, and make a slice of toast." The good lady's
voice, going on with further directions, was lost in the intricate
threading of the inner maze of the singular old dwelling, and Faith
followed her as far as the first apartment, where she set down her bag
and removed her bonnet.

It was a quaint, dim room, overbrowed and gloomed by the roofed
projection of the stoop; low-ceiled, high-wainscoted and paneled. All in
oak, of the natural color, deepened and glossed by time and wear. The
heavy beams that supported the floor above were undisguised, and left
the ceiling in panels also, as it were, between. In these highest
places, a man six feet tall could hardly have stood without bending. He
certainly would not, whether he could or no. Even Aunt Faith, with her
five feet, six-and-a-half, dropped a little of her dignity, habitually,
when she entered. But then, as she said, "A hen always bobs her head
when she comes in at a barn door." Between the windows stood an old,
old-fashioned secretary, that filled up from floor to ceiling; and over
the fireplace a mirror of equally antique date tilted forward from the
wall. Opposite the secretary, a plain mahogany table; and eight
high-backed, claw-footed chairs ranged stiffly around the room.

Aunt Henderson was proud of her old ways, her old furniture, and her
house, that was older than all.

Some far back ancestor and early settler had built it--the beginning of
it--before Kinnicutt had even become a town; and--rare exception to the
changes elsewhere--generation after generation of the same name and line
had inhabited it until now. Aunt Faith, exultingly, told each curious
visitor that it had been built precisely two hundred and ten years. Out
in the back kitchen, or lean-to, was hung to a rafter the identical gun
with which the "old settler" had ranged the forest that stretched then
from the very door; and higher up, across a frame contrived for it, was
the "wooden saddle" fabricated for the back of the placid, slow-moving
ox, in the time when horses were as yet rare in the new country, and
used with pillions, to transport I can't definitely say how many of the
family to "meeting."

Between these--the best room and the out-kitchen--the labyrinth of
sitting room, bedrooms, kitchen proper, milk room, and pantry,
partitioned off, or added on, many of them since the primary date of the
main structure, would defy the pencil of modern architect.

In one of these irregularly clustered apartments that opened out on
different aspects, unexpectedly, from their conglomerate center, Faith
sat, some fifteen minutes after her entrance into the house, at a little
round table between two corner windows that looked northwest and
southwest, and together took in the full radiance of the evening sky.

Opposite sat her aunt, taking care of her as regarded tea, toast, and
plain country loaf cake, and watching somewhat curiously, also, her
face.

Faith's face had changed a little since Aunt Henderson had seen her
last. It was not the careless girl's face she had known. There was a
thought in it now. A thought that seemed to go quite out from, and
forget the self from which it came.

Aunt Henderson wondered greatly what sudden whim or inward purpose had
brought her grandniece hither.

When Faith absolutely declined any more tea or cake, Miss Henderson's
tap on the table leaf brought in Glory McWhirk.

A tall, well-grown girl of eighteen was Glory, now--quite another Glory
than had lightened, long ago, the dull little house in Budd Street, and
filled it with her bright, untutored dreams. The luminous tresses had
had their way since then; that is, with certain comfortable bounds
prescribed; and rippled themselves backward from a clear, contented
face, into the net that held them tidily.

Faith looked up, and remembered the poor office girl of three years
since, half clad and hopeless, with a secret amaze at what "Aunt Faith
had made of her."

"You may give me some water, Glory," said Miss Henderson.

Glory brought the pitcher, and poured into the tumbler, and gazed at
Faith's pretty face, and the dark-brown glossy rolls that framed it,
until the water fairly ran over the table.

"There! there! Why, Glory, what are you thinking of?" cried Miss
Henderson.

Glory was thinking her old thoughts--wakened always by all that was
beautiful and _beyond_.

She came suddenly to herself, however, and darted off, with her face as
bright a crimson as her hair was golden; flashing up so, as she did most
easily, into as veritable a Glory as ever was. Never had baby been more
aptly or prophetically named.

Coming back, towel in hand, to stop the freshet she had set flowing, she
dared not give another glance across the table; but went busily and
deftly to work, clearing it of all that should be cleared, that she
might make her shy way off again before she should be betrayed into
other unwonted blundering.

"And now, Faith Gartney, tell me all about it! What sent you here?"

"Nothing. Nobody. I came, aunt. I wanted to see the place, and you."

The rough eyebrows were bent keenly across the table.

"Hum!" breathed Aunt Henderson.

There was small interior sympathy between her ideas and those that
governed the usual course of affairs in Hickory Street. Fond of her
nephew and his family, after her fashion, notwithstanding Faith's old
rebellion, and all other differences, she certainly was; but they went
their way, and she hers. She felt pretty sure theirs would sooner or
later come to a turning; and when that should happen, whether she should
meet them round the corner, or not, would depend. Her path would need to
bend a little, and theirs to make a pretty sharp angle, first.

But here was Faith cutting across lots to come to her! Aunt Henderson
put away her loaf cake in the cupboard, set back her chair against the
wall in its invariable position of disuse, and departed to the milk room
and kitchen for her evening duty and oversight.

Glory's hands were busy in the bread bowl, and her brain kneading its
secret thoughts that no one knew or intermeddled with.

Faith sat at the open window of the little tea room, and watched the
young moon's golden horn go down behind the earth rim among the purple,
like a flamy flower bud floating over, and so lost.

And the three lives gathered in to themselves, separately, whatsoever
the hour brought to each.

At nine o'clock Aunt Faith came in, took down the great leather-bound
Bible from the corner shelf, and laid it on the table. Glory appeared,
and seated herself beside the door.

For a few moments, the three lives met in the One Great Life that
overarches and includes humanity. Miss Henderson read from the sixth
chapter of St. John.

They were fed with the five thousand.


CHAPTER XII.

A RECONNOISSANCE.

"Then said his Lordship, 'Well God mend all!' 'Nay, Donald, we must
help him to mend it,' said the other."--Quoted by CARLYLE.

"Oh, leave these jargons, and go your way straight to God's work in
simplicity and singleness of heart!"--MISS NIGHTINGALE.


"Auntie," said Faith, next morning, when, after some exploring, she had
discovered Miss Henderson in a little room, the very counterpart of the
one she had had her tea in the night before, only that this opened to
the southeast, and hailed the morning sun. "Auntie, will you go over
with me to the Cross Corners house, after breakfast? It's empty, isn't
it?"

"Yes, it's empty. But it's no great show of a house. What do you want to
see it for?"

"Why, it used to be so pretty, there. I'd like just to go into it. Have
you heard of anybody's wanting it yet?"

"No; and I guess nobody's likely to, for one while. Folks don't make
many changes, out here."

"What a bright little breakfast room this is, auntie! And how grand you
are to have a room for every meal!"

"It ain't for the grandeur of it. But I always did like to follow the
sun round. For the most part of the year, at any rate. And this is just
as near the kitchen as the other. Besides, I kind of hate to shut up any
of the rooms, altogether. They were all wanted, once; and now I'm all
alone in 'em."

For Miss Henderson, this was a great opening of the heart. But she
didn't go on to say that the little west room had been her young
brother's, who long ago, when he was just ready for his Master's work in
this world, had been called up higher; and that her evening rest was
sweeter, and her evening reading holier for being holden there; or that
here, in the sunny morning hours, her life seemed almost to roll back
its load of many years, and to set her down beside her mother's knee,
and beneath her mother's gentle tutelage, once more; that on the little
"light stand" in the corner by the fireplace stood the selfsame basket
that had been her mother's then--just where she had kept it, too, when
it was running over with little frocks and stockings that were always
waiting finishing or mending--and now held only the plain gray knitting
work and the bit of sewing that Aunt Faith might have in hand.

A small, square table stood now in the middle of the floor, with a fresh
brown linen breakfast cloth upon it; and Glory, neat and fresh, also,
with her brown spotted calico dress and apron of the same, came in
smiling like a very goddess of peace and plenty, with the steaming
coffeepot in one hand, and the plate of fine, white rolls in the other.
The yellow print of butter and some rounds from a brown loaf were
already on the table. Glory brought in, presently, the last addition to
the meal--six eggs, laid yesterday, the water of their boiling just
dried off, and modestly took her own seat at the lower end of the board.

Aunt Faith, living alone, kept to the kindly old country fashion of
admitting her handmaid to the table with herself. "Why not?" she would
say. "In the first place, why should we keep the table about, half an
hour longer than we need? And I suppose hot cakes and coffee are as much
nicer than cold, for one body as another. Then where's the sense? We
take Bible meat together. Must we be more dainty about 'meat that
perisheth'?" So her argument climbed up from its lower reason to its
climax.

Glory had little of the Irish now about her but her name. And all that
she retained visibly of the Roman faith she had been born to, was her
little rosary of colored shells, strung as beads, that had been blessed
by the Pope.

Miss Henderson had trained and fed her in her own ways, and with such
food as she partook herself, physically and spiritually. Glory sat,
every Sunday, in the corner pew of the village church, by her mistress's
side. And this church-going being nearly all that she had ever had, she
took in the nutriment that was given her, to a soul that recognized it,
and never troubled itself with questions as to one truth differing from
another, or no. Indeed, no single form or theory could have contained
the "credo" of her simple, yet complex, thought. The old Catholic
reverence clung about her still, that had come with her all the way from
her infancy, when her mother and grandmother had taught her the prayers
of their Church; and across the long interval of ignorance and neglect
flung a sort of cathedral light over what she felt was holy now.

Rescued from her dim and servile city life--brought out into the light
and beauty she had mutely longed for--feeling care and kindliness about
her for the long-time harshness and oppression she had borne--she was
like a spirit newly entered into heaven, that needs no priestly
ministration any more. Every breath drew in a life and teaching purer
than human words.

And then the words she _did_ hear were Divine. Miss Henderson did no
preaching--scarcely any lip teaching, however brief. She broke the bread
of life God gave her, as she cut her daily loaf and shared it--letting
each soul, God helping, digest it for itself.

Glory got hold of some old theology, too, that she could but
fragmentarily understand but that mingled itself--as all we gather does
mingle, not uselessly--with her growth. She found old books among Miss
Henderson's stores, that she read and mused on. She trembled at the
warnings, and reposed in the holy comforts of Doddridge's "Rise and
Progress," and Baxter's "Saint's Rest." She traveled to the Holy City,
above all, with Bunyan's Pilgrim. And then, Sunday after Sunday, she
heard the simple Christian preaching of an old and simple Christian man.
Not terrible--but earnest; not mystical--but high; not lax--but liberal;
and this fused and tempered all.

So "things had happened" for Glory. So God had cared for this, His
child. So, according to His own Will--not any human plan or forcing--
she grew.

Aunt Faith washed up the breakfast cups, dusted and "set to rights" in
the rooms where, to the young Faith's eyes, there seemed such order
already as could not be righted, made up a nice little pudding for
dinner, and then, taking down her shawl and silk hood, and putting on
her overshoes, announced herself ready for Cross Corners.

"Though it's all cross corners to me, child, sure enough. I suppose it's
none of my business, but I can't think what you're up to."

"Not up to any great height, yet, auntie. But I'm growing," said Faith,
merrily, and with meaning somewhat beyond the letter.

They went out at the back door, which opened on a little footpath down
the sudden green slope behind, and stretched across the field,
diagonally, to a bar place and stile at the opposite corner. Here the
roads from five different directions met and crossed, which gave the
locality its name.

Opposite the stile at which they came out, across the shady lane that
wound down from the Old Road whereon Miss Henderson's mansion faced, a
gateway in a white paling that ran round and fenced in a grassy door
yard, overhung with pendent branches of elms and stouter canopy of
chestnuts, let them in upon the little "Cross Corners Farm."

"Oh, Aunt Faith! It's just as lovely as ever! I remember that path up
the hill, among the trees, so well! When I was a little bit of a girl,
and nurse and I came out to stay with you. I had my 'fairy house' there.
I'd like to go over this minute, only that we shan't have time. How
shall we get in? Where is the key?"

"It's in my pocket. But it mystifies me, what you want there."

"I want to look out of all the windows, auntie, to begin with."

Aunt Faith's mystification was not lessened.

The front door opened on a small, square hall, with doors to right and
left. The room on the left, spite of the bare floor and fireless
hearth, was warm with the spring sunshine that came pouring in at the
south windows. Beyond this, embracing the corner of the house
rectangularly, projected an equally sunny and cheery kitchen; at the
right of which, communicating with both apartments, was divided off a
tiny tea and breakfast room. So Faith decided, though it had very likely
been a bedroom.

From the entrance hall at the right opened a room larger than either of
the others--so large that the floor above afforded two bedrooms over
it--and having, besides its windows south and east, a door in the
farther corner beyond the chimney, that gave out directly upon the
grassy slope, and looked up the path among the trees that crossed the
ridge.

Faith drew the bolt and opened it, expecting to find a closet or a
passage somewhither. She fairly started back with surprise and delight.
And then seated herself plump upon the threshold, and went into a
midsummer dream.

"Oh, auntie!" she cried, at her waking, presently, "was ever anything so
perfect? To think of being let out so! Right from a regular, proper
parlor, into the woods!"

"Do you mean to go upstairs?" inquired Miss Henderson, with a vague
amaze in her look that seemed to question whether her niece had not
possibly been "let out" from her "regular and proper" wits!

Whereupon Faith scrambled up from her seat upon the sill, and hurried
off to investigate above.

Miss Henderson closed the door, pushed the bolt, and followed quietly
after.

It was a funny little pantomime that Faith enacted then, for the further
bewilderment of the staid old lady.

Darting from one chamber to another, with an inexplicable look of
business and consideration in her face, that contrasted comically with
her quick movements and her general air of glee, she would take her
stand in the middle of each one in turn, and wheeling round to get a
swift panoramic view of outlook and capabilities, would end by a
succession of mysterious and apparently satisfied little nods, as if at
each pause some point of plan or arrangement had settled itself in her
mind.

"Aunt Faith!" cried she, suddenly, as she came out upon the landing when
she had peeped into the last corner, and found Miss Henderson on the
point of making her descent--"what sort of a thing do you think it would
be for us to come here and live?"

Aunt Faith sat down now as suddenly, in her turn, on the stairhead.
Recovering, so, from her momentary and utter astonishment, and taking
in, during that instant of repose, the full drift of the question
propounded, she rose from her involuntarily assumed position, and
continued her way down--answering, without so much as turning her head,
"It would be just the most sensible thing that Henderson Gartney ever
did in his life!"

What made Faithie a bit sober, all at once, when the key was turned, and
they passed on, out under the elms, into the lane again?

Did you ever project a very wise and important scheme, that involves a
little self-sacrifice, which, by a determined looking at the bright side
of the subject, you had managed tolerably to ignore; and then, by the
instant and unhesitating acquiescence of some one to whose judgment you
submitted it, find yourself suddenly wheeled about in your own mind to
the standpoint whence you discerned only the difficulty again?

"There's one thing, Aunt Faith," said she, as they slowly walked up the
field path; "I couldn't go to school any more."

Faith had discontinued her regular attendance since the recommencement
for the year, but had gone in for a few hours on "French and German
days."

"There's another thing," said Aunt Faith. "I don't believe your father
can afford to send you any more. You're eighteen, ain't you?"

"I shall be, this summer."

"Time for you to leave off school. Bring your books and things along
with you. You'll have chance enough to study."

Faith hadn't thought much of herself before. But when she found her aunt
didn't apparently think of her at all, she began to realize keenly all
that she must silently give up.

"But it's a good deal of help, auntie, to study with other people. And
then--we shouldn't have any society out here. I don't mean for the sake
of parties, and going about. But for the improvement of it. I shouldn't
like to be shut out from cultivated people."

"Faith Gartney!" exclaimed Miss Henderson, facing about in the narrow
footway, "don't you go to being fine and transcendental! If there's one
word I despise more than another, in the way folks use it nowadays--it's
'Culture'! As if God didn't know how to make souls grow! You just take
root where He puts you, and go to work, and live! He'll take care of the
cultivating! If He means you to turn out a rose, or an oak tree, you'll
come to it. And pig-weed's pig-weed, no matter where it starts up!"

"Aunt Faith!" replied the child, humbly and earnestly, "I believe that's
true! And I believe I want the country to grow in! But the thing will
be," she added, a little doubtfully, "to persuade father."

"Doesn't he want to come, then? Whose plan is it, pray?" asked Miss
Henderson, stopping short again, just as she had resumed her walk, in a
fresh surprise.

"Nobody's but mine, yet, auntie! I haven't asked him, but I thought I'd
come and look."

Miss Henderson took her by the arm, and looked steadfastly in her dark,
earnest eyes.

"You're something, sure enough!" said she, with a sharp tenderness.

Faith didn't know precisely what she meant, except that she seemed to
mean approval. And at the one word of appreciation, all difficulty and
self-sacrifice vanished out of her sight, and everything brightened to
her thought, again, till her thought brightened out into a smile.

"What a skyful of lovely white clouds!" she said, looking up to the
pure, fleecy folds that were flittering over the blue. "We can't see
that in Mishaumok!"

"She's just heavenly!" said Glory to herself, standing at the back door,
and gazing with a rapturous admiration at Faith's upturned face. "And
the dinner's all ready, and I'm thankful, and more, that the custard's
baked so beautiful!"


CHAPTER XIII.

DEVELOPMENT.

"Sits the wind in that corner?"
                  MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING.

"For courage mounteth with occasion."
                               KING JOHN.


The lassitude that comes with spring had told upon Mr. Gartney. He had
dyspepsia, too; and now and then came home early from the counting room
with a headache that sent him to his bed. Dr. Gracie dropped in,
friendly-wise, of an evening--said little that was strictly
professional--but held his hand a second longer, perhaps, than he would
have done for a mere greeting, and looked rather scrutinizingly at him
when Mr. Gartney's eyes were turned another way. Frequently he made some
slight suggestion of a journey, or other summer change.

"You must urge it, if you can, Mrs. Gartney," he said, privately, to the
wife. "I don't quite like his looks. Get him away from business, at
_almost any_ sacrifice," he came to add, at last.

"At _every_ sacrifice?" asked Mrs. Gartney, anxious and perplexed.
"Business is nearly all, you know."

"Life is more--reason is more," answered the doctor, gravely.

And the wife went about her daily task with a secret heaviness at her
heart.

"Father," said Faith, one evening, after she had read to him the paper
while he lay resting upon the sofa, "if you had money enough to live on,
how long would it take you to wind up your business?"

"It's pretty nearly wound up now! But what's the use of asking such a
question?"

"Because," said Faith, timidly, "I've got a little plan in my head, if
you'll only listen to it."

"Well, Faithie, I'll listen. What is it?"

And then Faith spoke it all out, at once.

"That you should give up all your business, father, and let this house,
and go to Cross Corners, and live at the farm."

Mr. Gartney started to his elbow. But a sudden pain that leaped in his
temples sent him back again. For a minute or so, he did not speak at
all. Then he said:

"Do you know what you are talking of, daughter?"

"Yes, father; I've been thinking it over a good while--since the night
we wrote down these things."

And she drew from her pocket the memorandum of stocks and dividends.

"You see you have six hundred and fifty dollars a year from these, and
this house would be six hundred more, and mother says she can manage on
that, in the country, if I will help her."

Mr. Gartney shaded his eyes with his hand. Not wholly, perhaps, to
shield them from the light.

"You're a good girl, Faithie," said he, presently; and there was
assuredly a little tremble in his voice.

"And so, you and your mother have talked it over, together?"

"Yes; often, lately. And she said I had better ask you myself, if I
wished it. She is perfectly willing. She thinks it would be good."

"Faithie," said her father, "you make me feel, more than ever, how much
I _ought_ to do for you!"

"You ought to get well and strong, father--that is all!" replied Faith,
with a quiver in her own voice.

Mr. Gartney sighed.

"I'm no more than a mere useless block of wood!"

"We shall just have to set you up, and make an idol of you, then!" cried
Faith, cheerily, with tears on her eyelashes, that she winked off.

There had been a ring at the bell while they were speaking; and now Mrs.
Gartney entered, followed by Dr. Gracie.

"Well, Miss Faith," said the doctor, after the usual greetings, and a
prolonged look at Mr. Gartney's flushed face, "what have you done to
your father?"

"I've been reading the paper," answered Faith, quietly, "and talking a
little."

"Mother!" said Mr. Gartney, catching his wife's hand, as she came round
to find a seat near him, "are you really in the plot, too?"

"I'm glad there is a plot," said the doctor, quickly, glancing round
with a keen inquiry. "It's time!"

"Wait till you hear it," said Mr. Gartney. "Are you in a hurry to lose
your patient?"

"Depends upon _how_!" replied the doctor, touching the truth in a jest.

"This is how. Here's a little jade who has the conceit and audacity to
propose to me to wind up my business (as if she understood the whole
process!), and let my house, and go to my farm at Cross Corners. CLARA
DOTY BATES.

A COUNCIL OF HORSES.

On the large plains of South America, horses run wild in great
numbers.

They are caught by means of a lasso, which is a rope with a noose at one
end. This is thrown with great dexterity over the neck of the wild
horse.

The artist has called the picture which we here present "A Council
of Horses."

Do they not look as if they were taking advice of one another?
The white horse, with his erect neck and head, seems to be the
leader, or chief.

He is willing to hear what the others may have to say; but he means
that they shall follow him, after all.

And can horses really make known their wishes to one another? It would
almost seem so, though we cannot prove it.

Wild horses choose their own chiefs, and these give the signal of
departure.

If any extraordinary object appears, the chief commands a halt. He goes
to discover what it is, and, after his return, gives, by neighing,
the signal of confidence, of flight, or of combat.

Five sorts of neighing may be noticed: that of joyfulness, of desire, of
anger, of fear, and of sorrow. A feeling peculiar to the horse is
emulation.

Whoever has witnessed a horse-race can understand the ardor, vehemence,
and struggle for victory, which excite the energies of both horses and
men. The animals have often tried to hold their rivals back by the
teeth.

This has been known to happen when the horses are left entirely to
themselves, as on some of the Italian race-courses, where the horses
run without riders.

The horse has a strong memory. Franklin relates, that he had a horse that
conducted him through a hilly country where it was difficult to find
the road.

Every time Franklin himself was unable to tell which road to take,
he would leave the reins on the horse's neck, and the good beast,
left to itself, never failed to go right.

[Illustration]
The noblest conquest that man ever made over the animal creation is that
of the horse. Every thing in him breathes out vivacity and energy.
That need of continual movement, that impatience during repose, that
nervous motion of the lips, that stamping of the feet, all indicate a
pressing need of activity.

UNCLE CHARLES.

THE PET OF THE SHIP.

PART III.

One day when the ship was at anchor in one of the ports on the western
coast of South America, a number of sheep were brought on board. Whether
Dennis regarded them as intruders, or not, I cannot say; but his treatment
of them was anything but kind.

[Illustration]

The poor sheep stood in great fear of him, and fled in alarm whenever he
made a charge at them. One by one they began to disappear; and, at last,
only one--a little fellow whom the sailors afterward named Billy--was
left.

He was greatly distressed when the last of his companions was taken away,
and ran bleating about the deck in search of him. To add to his troubles,
that dreadful bully Dennis, who had been watching him for some
time, was now coming towards him.

He was frightened nearly to death.

What must have been his delight when he saw in Dennis's eyes a look
of pity, and heard his friendly grunt!

I don't know what Dennis said; but I do know, that, half an hour
afterwards, Billy had forgotten all about his troubles, and was
lying down with his head resting in Dennis's fat neck.

Even the rough sailors were pleased; and as they looked at Dennis,
who was fast asleep, they said, "Now that was a fine thing, and Dennis
was the pig to do it.

He was willing to fight with a flock of sheep; but, when it came to
quarrelling with one little fellow, he was too noble for that."
[Illustration]
Thenceforth Dennis and Billy were inseparable, and no pair ever agreed
better. There were times, however, when Dennis seemed a little vexed
with Billy, though he was always as kind as possible. I will tell you
of an instance.

Billy would always watch the crowd about Dennis, when the latter was
taking his bath, with a great deal of anxiety; and, if Dennis did not
appear very shortly, he would begin bleating loudly.

This would disgust Dennis immensely; but he couldn't bear to think that
Billy's feelings were hurt: so he would leave his nice bath, and push
his way through the men, until Billy could see him. Then he would
return to the pump, grunting in a manner that plainly showed his
feelings.

He was certainly saying, "I do wish that sheep had a little more of the
pig about him. If I am out of his sight for a moment, he begins to
cry, and take on in such a manner, that I must show myself to him; and
then I have all the trouble of making the sailors pump again."
But the sailors only waited to make Dennis beg a little. They had no
idea of not pumping again. They were always pleased when he showed
so much good feeling for Billy; and generally he got a larger
allowance of water to pay for it.

I believe that Dennis was not living when the ship reached California.
That ever he became food for his sailor friends no one can imagine.

Therefore his fate must remain a mystery, unless some of my readers happen
to know one of the crew of "The Vanderbilt," and can learn from him
something on the subject.

If they can, there are many, no doubt, who would be glad to hear from
them in the pages of "The Nursery." My little girls would, at least.
But, probably, Dennis has more of a place in their thoughts than he can
have in those of others.

C.E.C.

[Illustration] 

[Illustration] 
THE UNMOTHERLY HEN.

Now, my dear children, if you will be very quiet, I will tell you
a true story, which I sometimes tell my little daughter Fanny and
her cousin Grace, when they climb up on my knees just before going
to bed.

On a farm near Fishkill, where Fanny's
Aunt Jane lives, they raise a great
many chickens, turkeys, ducks, and geese. When
I was a boy, ever so many years ago, I
                                          used to have great fun hunting for eggs through the hay and straw
in the barns.

Well, last year one of the hens, instead of laying her eggs in
the hen-house or barn, like a well-mannered hen, stole off under
a wood-pile, and was not seen for three weeks, when she made her
appearance with a fine brood of chickens.

To keep her from straying away again, she was put into a coop. For
several days, she was a good mother to her children; but, after a
week or so, she began to act very strangely, and, when her children
came near her, she would peck and abuse them.

Would you believe it, children? in one day, this unmotherly hen had pecked
all but one of her chickens to death; and, when Aunt Jane found
this poor chap, he had but one eye, and all the toes were gone
from one foot; so that he had to stand on the other.

At first, Aunt Jane thought it would be a mercy to kill the little fellow,
and put him out of pain; but she finally determined that she would
try to cure him.

So she took him into the kitchen, and made him quite comfortable in a
box half filled with cotton-batting, and placed near the stove. She
gave him cracked-corn to eat, and plenty of water to drink, and, after
a while, he got so strong, that he hopped out of the box, and was just
as jolly a chicken as he could be, with only one eye to see with, and
only one foot and the stump of another to walk on.

Still he would not go out and play with other chickens of his age, but
persisted in hanging around the kitchen. One morning, when Aunt Jane
went into the breakfast-room, she found him on the table, helping himself
from a dish of stewed potatoes. Such impudence could no longer be
tolerated: so the saucy little cripple was banished to the barnyard
to learn manners.

And what do you think became of the unmotherly hen?

She lost all her friends. She was despised and hated by everybody on the
farm. She was pointed at as "that cruel, speckled hen," until life
became a burden to her. She was not permitted to have any more
chickens. When the cold weather came, she was sent to a poor woman
for a thanksgiving dinner; and it is to be hoped that all the hens
in the barnyard took warning from her fate.

C.R.W.

LANSINGBURGH. N.Y.

[Illustration: Outline Drawing by MR. HARRISON WEIR, as a drawing
lesson.]

THE CHILDREN'S VISIT TO THE LIGHTHOUSE.

Charlie and Georgie were staying at Appledore, one of the Isles of
Shoals, and, with two other little children, had many nice times
fishing and sailing.

The lighthouse is on White Island, which, as you see in the picture, is
a lonely and rocky place. It would be very dangerous for any
ship to come in from sea on that part of the coast, if it were not
for the friendly warning of the brilliant light.

One warm, sunny morning, Charlie and Georgie, with their papa and
mamma, and their two little friends, rowed across from Appledore, and
landed on the pebbly beach of White Island.

Here the children ran about, and picked up stones until they were
tired; and then the whole party seated themselves on some shaded rocks,
and ate their lunch of crackers and bananas.

While they were eating, an old white dog, belonging to the lighthouse
keeper, came up and made their acquaintance. Georgie shared his cake
with him; and it was amusing to see the old dog watching with eager
eyes every piece that went into any mouth but his own.

When lunch was over, the two older children, Charlie and Anna, led the
way; and all were soon climbing the winding stairs in the lighthouse
tower. When they reached the top, they found themselves in a small room
with windows on every side, and the great lamp in the centre. The lantern
is made of red-and-white glass, and turns around, so that first a
red, and then a white, light may be seen far out at sea.

The keeper explained how, after lighting the lamp, he wound up the
machinery which caused the lamp to revolve; and told them of the
lonely hours he had spent in the little room below the lamp, while
the waves dashed, and the storm beat outside.

[Illustration]
For many weeks in the winter he lives there all by himself, and
sees no one; but, in the summer time, there is hardly a day when
he does not have a boat full of visitors. He always gives them a hearty
welcome, and makes himself very agreeable. I suppose he feels as though
he must make the most of society while he can get it.

The children listened to his talk with great interest. With many thanks
for his kind attentions, they bade him "Good-by," and, intent on collecting
shells on another island near, stepped into their boat, and were
rowed away, leaving the man and his friendly dog to enjoy each other's
company.

CHARLIE'S MAMMA.

GOING AFTER COWS.

When Edward was eight years old, his mother told him he might go with John,
the hired man, to drive the cows from the pasture. How happy the little
boy was!

Every day he would be ready as soon as John gave the word; and off
they would go, through the woods, over hills and rocks, and gurgling
brooks, wherever the ding-dong of the distant cow-bells pointed the
way.

Sometimes they had a long search before they could find all the cows; for
the pasture was very large, and the cows would wander about in every
part of it, to find the best feeding-places.

[Illustration]
On the way home, Edward would run ahead of the cows, and open the bars;
and sometimes he would sit on the wall, and pat each cow as she came
through.

When the cows reached the barnyard, Edward would help milk. There was
one old cow which he called his own, and which he named Carrie. She
always stood very still while being milked, and that was one reason
why he liked her better than any of the rest.

After milking, he helped John to carry in the milk, and his mother
often gave him a mug full. Oh, how nice it was!

W.T.O.

[Illustration]
ROLY-POLY.

Roly-Poly is three years old, Three years old, and a trifle over:
Roly-Poly is round as a ball, Jolly as larks, and sweet as clover.

Roly-Poly has stars for eyes, A heavenly chin with a dimple in it,
Peaches for cheeks, the bud of a nose, And a tongue that is never
still a minute.

Roly-Poly gets up in the morning,-- Morning, quoth I? it's the crack
of the dawn!

-- Dresses himself in a boot and a stocking, Flies to his sister as swift
as a fawn.

Pulls at her eyes with his fat little fingers,-- Crazy for stories,
that's all the matter!-- "Oh! I am sleepy and cross," she cries; "You,
Roly-Poly, disperse and scatter!"
But Roly-Poly's a resolute tyrant; Father and mother are captives wholly:

So what can a poor big sister do But yield to a king like
Roly-Poly.

Roly-Poly's a man of business:
He canters to market on grandpa's cane, Orders a breakfast of peppermint-candy,
And gallops his pony home again.

Roly-Poly's a man of pleasure:
Sorrow and care are for grown-up stupids:
Pictures and kisses, toys and caresses, Fondling and fun, for dimpled
Cupids.

After the sun has gone out of the south, The night comes down on
his eyelids slowly; He topples asleep with his thumb in his mouth,--
What an iniquity, Roly-Poly!

OLIVE A. WADSWORTH.

ELSIE'S DUCKS.

Elsie was the daughter of poor parents, who lived on the borders of a
lake.

Once, when she was very ill with a fever, a good neighbor made her
a present of three young ducks.

Elsie was much pleased, and she soon began to get well.

Her mother would bring a large tub of water into the room where the
little invalid lay; and the three ducks would swim about, and
swallow the crumbs which Elsie threw to them.

As soon as she got well, she would drive the ducks down to the lake,
and let them swim.

They were so tame, that they would come out of the water at her call.

Sometimes her father and the rest of the family would get into a
boat, and he would row across the lake to the opposite side, where
some families lived who employed Elsie's mother to wash clothes for
them.

[Illustration]
At these times, the three ducks would follow the boat. Perhaps they did
not like to trust their dear Elsie on the water, unless they were
by to help her in case of need.

Sometimes old and young would join in a song; and then far over the lake
would be heard the words:

"Come to the sunset tree, the day is past and gone, The woodman's axe lies
free, and the reaper's task is done."
It was a very pretty sight, on a summer evening, when the bright clouds
over the setting sun threw their tints on the water, to see the
ducks swimming by the side of the little boat which contained Elsie
and the rest of the family.

It was so pretty a sight, that a good artist made a picture of the
scene. We give you a copy of it here.

IDA FAY.

[Illustration]

FISHING FOR TROUT.

The trout belongs to the salmon family.

Its flesh is generally of a pale pink or yellow color. It is one of the
handsomest fish to be found in our waters.

The variations of its tints are very beautiful; and the red spots
on its skin distinguish it from common fish.

I never had much luck in catching trout.

One summer I went from the city to try the trout-streams in Northern New
York. I had a handsome rod, and a line nicely baited with an artificial
fly; but, though I was very persevering, my success was small.

I remember sitting for hours on the slender bridge just below the Upper
Cascades of Buttermilk Fall, represented in the picture; but my
patience was not rewarded by the capture of a single trout.

I was sorry for this; for I had depended on getting one for my
dinner.

As I was about retiring, a little barefoot fellow, about twelve years old,
came along with a common fishing-pole, and hook baited with a worm,
and said, "Mister, I'll catch a trout for you."

--"Do it, then," said I.

He threw his line over a smooth spot in the pool below; and, before
he had been at it five minutes, he pulled up a noble trout, large
enough for a good dinner.

Another and another were pulled up in quick succession.

I did not know what to make of it; for I thought I had fished in a
very scientific way.

"Teach me the knack," said I. "Oh, it can't be taught," replied
the boy.
"Well, here is a dime for your trouble," said I, putting the fish
into my pail.

"Do you suppose I take pay for what I do for sport, mister?"

said little barefoot, waving back my hand with the air of a
prince.

After that we became good friends, and met often at the bridge; but I
never could learn his knack of catching trout.

ALFRED SELWYN.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]
WE THREE.

What fine times we have together!--Carlo, John, and Bella; by which last
I mean myself.

Carlo has the advantage of the other two of us sometimes; for he
has four legs, and can run faster than either John or I.

But then we can do a great many things that Carlo cannot do.

For example, John and I sometimes take our books, and sit down on the
rocks in the wood, under the thick trees, and read stories.

And then Carlo will lie down at our feet, and go to sleep; for he
cannot understand the nice stories which the other two friends enjoy
so much.

But wait till we go into the swamps after berries, or into the
wood-borders after hazel-nuts.

Then Carlo is wide awake, you may be sure. If he sees a snake, what
a noise he makes!

We can always tell by the tone of his bark when he has found a
snake.

And, when John climbs a tree after nuts, how anxiously Carlo will
stand underneath and watch him, so afraid is he that the little boy
will get a fall!

And how the good dog will jump and show his pleasure when he sees John
once more safe on the firm ground!

Oh! we have fine times together, we three, both in summer and winter;
for Carlo likes to see us skate on ice, and is fond of a snowballing
frolic.

In all our sleigh-rides he goes with us, and takes great care of us.

We are dear friends, we three, and I should no more think of striking
Carlo than of striking John.

BELLA.

  
PET, THE CANARY.
  
                       

A little girl by the name of Agnes, who lives in Maine, and who much
enjoys "The Nursery," has a beautiful, bright canary, which her
papa brought her one day in a paper-box. Agnes named him Pet.

The little fellow has become so tame, that he is allowed to stay out of
his cage as long as he wishes, always going to it of his own accord
when bedtime comes. One day I found no pins on my pin-cushion; and, seeing
them scattered around on the bureau, I wondered who could have done the
mischief. I soon found, by watching, that it was Pet's work.

Every day he took his stand on the pin-cushion, in front of the glass,
to pull out all the pins. I saw him once work a long time trying to
stick one back by tipping his head, first one side and then the other,
holding the pin tightly in his bill; but he soon gave it up.

Little Fannie, Agnes's two-year-old sister, often shares her lunch with
him; he sitting on the edge of the saucer, and helping himself
while she is eating.

As I write, he is sitting on the tassel of the shade, looking out of the
window. Some day I'll tell you more of Pet's pranks.

MAMMA.

[Illustration]
THE CAT SHOW.

It was at the Crystal Palace, in Sydenham, England.

I wish all the readers of "The Nursery" could have seen it.

There were over three hundred cats in cages. Each one had a nice red
cushion in the front-part of the cage, and in the back part a dish
of water or milk.

Each one had a ribbon around the neck, to which was attached a medal with
the number of the cage. The ribbons were of all colors.

The cats that had taken the first prize were known by a little blue
flag suspended over the front of the cage, and were the largest cats.

Very many of them were lazily sleeping on their cushions, as happy as if
they were in their own homes. They took little notice of the people who
were looking at them; and, as a placard on each cage ordered
spectators to "move on," no one could spend much time in trying to
attract their attention.

I can hardly tell you about all the cats, there were so many,--some all
white, some all black, and some all yellow; black-and-yellow,
black-and-white, black-and-gray, gray-and-white, black-and-yellow-and-white;
cats with long hair, and cats with short; cats with tails, and cats
without.

One large Russian cat, called the "Czar," was brown, with smooth, short,
shining fur, which looked like seal-skin.

Then there were kittens of all sizes and colors. In one cage was a
black mother-puss, with four perfectly white kittens, their eyes
not yet open.

Another black mother had two kittens,--one black, and one gray. A
black-and-yellow puss had one black, and one yellow kitten.

In some of the cages were two or three large kittens having a good time
together.

Some of them had balls to play with; some were climbing on the sides of
the cage or frolicking with one another; and others were running around
after their tails, in real kitten fashion.

Just before five o'clock, the baskets in which the cats were brought
were placed on the tops of the cages.

Some of the cats reached up and tried to get hold of them. They all
seemed to know that the show was over, and that they would soon be
able to run and jump about, with plenty of air and space.
I must not forget to tell you how quiet all these cats were. Not
one "Me-ow" was to be heard. When, out of sight of the cages, one
would never have known there was a cat in the building.
SALLIE'S MAMMA.

[Illustration: sheet music]
GOING THROUGH THE CORN.

Music by T. Crampton.
1. Right and left upstanding, See on either side, Blooming corn
expanding, Rippling like the tide.
With breath of Eden scented, On the breezes borne,...
All in love presented, Going through the corn.
2. Bath'd in light etherial, Ripening in the sun, Royal corn imperial,
Bread for every one.
'Tis God's own gift descending, For the poor and lorn,...
See the full ears bending, Going through the corn.
3. Thrush and blackbird singing In the coppice near, All the blue
sky ringing With their notes so clear!
The twitt'ring swallows skimming, Through the air of morn,...
Happy all, all hymning, Going through the corn.I'm going--down--in a nice--little
temper--to ask her--to send you--to Jericho!" Left foot foremost, a drop
between each few syllables, he came stumping, defiantly, down the
stairs, and appeared with all his eager story in his eyes.

"She plagues me, mamma! She tells me to see who'll get dressed first;
and if _she_ does, she says:

  "'The first's the best,
    The second's the same;
  The last's the worst
    Of all the game!'

"And if _I_ get dressed first--all but the buttoning, you know--she says:

  "'The last's the best,
    The second's the same;
  The first's the worst
    Of all the game!'

"And then she keeps telling me 'her little sister never behaved like me.'
I asked her where her little sister was, and she said she'd gone over
Jordan. I'm glad of it! I wish Mahala would go too!"

Mrs. Gartney smiled, and Faith could not help laughing outright.

Hendie burst into a passion of tears.

"Everybody keeps plaguing me! It's too bad!" he cried, with tumultuous
sobs.

Faith checked her laughter instantly. She took the indignant little
fellow on her lap, in despite of some slight, implacable struggle on his
part, and kissed his pouting lips.

"No, indeed, Hendie! We wouldn't plague you for all the world! And you
don't know what I've got for you, just as soon as you're ready for it!"

Hendie took his little knuckles out of his eyes.

"A bunch of great red cherries, as big as your two hands!"

"Where?"

"I'll get them, if you're good. And then you can go out in the front
yard, and eat them, so that you can drop the stones on the grass."

Hendie was soon established on a flat stone under the old chestnut
trees, in a happy oblivion of Mahala's injustice, and her little
sister's perfections.

"I'll tell you, mamma. I've been thinking we need not keep Mahala, if
you don't wish. She has been so used to do nothing but run round after
Hendie, that, really, she isn't much good about the house; and I'll take
Hendie's trundle bed into my room, and there'll be one less chamber to
take care of; and you know we always dust and arrange down here."

"Yes--but the sweeping, Faithie! And the washing! Parthenia never would
get through with it all."

"Well, somebody might come and help wash. And I guess I can sweep."

"But I can't bear to put you to such work, darling! You need your time
for other things."

"I have ever so much time, mother! And, besides, as Aunt Faith says, I
don't believe it makes so very much matter _what_ we do. I was talking
to her, the other day, about doing coarse work, and living a narrow,
common kind of life, and what do you think she said?"

"I can't tell, of course. Something blunt and original."

"We were out in the garden. She pointed to some plants that were coming
up from seeds, that had just two tough, clumsy, coarse leaves. 'What do
you call them?' said auntie. 'Cotyledons, aren't they?' said I. 'I don't
know what they are in botany,' said she; 'but I know the use of 'em.
They'll last a while, and help feed up what's growing inside and
underneath, and by and by they'll drop off, when they're done with, and
you'll see what's been coming of it. Folks can't live the best right
out at first, any more than plants can. I guess we all want some kind
of--cotyledons.'"

Mrs. Gartney's eyes shone with affection, and something that affection
called there, as she looked upon her daughter.

"I guess the cotyledons won't hinder your growing," said she.

And so, in a few days after, Mahala was dismissed, and Faith took upon
herself new duties.

It was a bright, happy face that glanced hither and thither, about the
house, those fair summer mornings; and it wasn't the hands alone that
were busy, as under their dexterous and delicate touch all things
arranged themselves in attractive and graceful order. Thought
straightened and cleared itself, as furniture and books were dusted and
set right; and while the carpet brightened under the broom, something
else brightened and strengthened, also, within.

It is so true, what the author of "Euthanasy" tells us, that exercise of
limb and muscle develops not only themselves, but what is in us as we
work.

"Every stroke of the hammer upon the anvil hardens a little what is at
the time the temper of the smith's mind."

"The toil of the plowman furrows the ground, and so it does his brow
with wrinkles, visibly; and invisibly, but quite as certainly, it
furrows the current of feeling, common with him at his work, into an
almost unchangeable channel."

Faith's life purpose deepened as she did each daily task. She had hold,
already, of the "high and holy work of love" that had been prophesied.

"I am sure of one thing, mother," said she, gayly; "if I don't learn
much that is new, I am bringing old knowledge into play. It's the same
thing, taken hold of at different ends. I've learned to draw straight
lines, and shape pictures; and so there isn't any difficulty in sweeping
a carpet clean, or setting chairs straight. I never shall wonder again
that a woman who never heard of a right angle can't lay a table even."


CHAPTER XVI.

"BLESSED BE YE, POOR."

"And so we yearn, and so we sigh,
  And reach for more than we can see;
And, witless of our folded wings,
  Walk Paradise, unconsciously."


October came, and brought small dividends. The expenses upon the farm
had necessarily been considerable, also, to put things in "good running
order." Mr. Gartney's health, though greatly improved, was not yet so
confidently to be relied on, as to make it advisable for him to think of
any change, as yet, with a view to business. Indeed, there was little
opportunity for business, to tempt him. Everything was flat. Mr. Gartney
must wait. Mrs. Gartney and Faith felt, though they talked of waiting,
that the prospect really before them was that of a careful, obscure
life, upon a very limited income. The house in Mishaumok had stood
vacant all the summer. There was hope, of course, of letting it now, as
the winter season came on, but rents were falling, and people were timid
and discouraged.

October was beautiful at Kinnicutt. And Faith, when she looked out over
the glory of woods and sky, felt rich with the great wealth of the
world, and forgot about economies and privations. She was so glad they
had come here with their altered plans, and had not struggled shabbily
and drearily on in Mishaumok!

It was only when some chance bit of news from the city, or a girlish,
gossipy note from some school friend found its way to Cross Corners,
that she felt, a little keenly, her denials--realized how the world she
had lived in all her life was going on without her.

It was the old plaint that Glory made, in her dark days of
childhood--this feeling of despondency and loss that assailed Faith now
and then--"such lots of good times in the world, and she not in 'em!"

Mrs. Etherege and Saidie were coming home. Gertrude Rushleigh, Saidie's
old intimate, was to be married on the twenty-eighth, and had fixed her
wedding thus for the last of the month, that Miss Gartney might arrive
to keep her promise of long time, by officiating as bridesmaid.

The family eclipse would not overshadow Saidie. She had made her place
in the world now, and with her aunt's aid and countenance, would keep
it. It was quite different with Faith--disappearing, as she had done,
from notice, before ever actually "coming out."

"It was a thousand pities," Aunt Etherege said, when she and Saidie
discussed with Mrs. Gartney, at Cross Corners, the family affairs. "And
things just as they were, too! Why, another year might have settled
matters for her, so that this need never have happened! At any rate, the
child shouldn't be moped up here, all winter!"

Mrs. Etherege had engaged rooms, on her arrival, at the Mishaumok House;
and it seemed to be taken for granted by her, and by Saidie as well,
that this coming home was a mere visit; that Miss Gartney would, of
course, spend the greater part of the winter with her aunt; and that
lady extended also an invitation to Mishaumok for a month--including
the wedding festivities at the Rushleighs'--to Faith.

Faith shook her head. She "knew she couldn't be spared so long."
Secretly, she doubted whether it would be a good plan to go back and get
a peep at things that might send her home discontented and unhappy.

But her mother reasoned otherwise. Faithie must go. "The child mustn't
be moped up." She would get on, somehow, without her. Mothers always
can. So Faith, by a compromise, went for a fortnight. She couldn't quite
resist her newly returned sister.

Besides, a pressing personal invitation had come from Margaret Rushleigh
to Faith herself, with a little private announcement at the end, that
"Paul was refractory, and utterly refused to act as fourth groomsman,
unless Faith Gartney were got to come and stand with him."

Faith tore off the postscript, and might have lit it at her cheeks, but
dropped it, of habit, into the fire; and then the note was at the
disposal of the family.

It was a whirl of wonderful excitement to Faith--that fortnight! So many
people to see, so much to hear, and in the midst of all, the gorgeous
wedding festival!

What wonder if a little dream flitted through her head, as she stood
there, in the marriage group, at Paul Rushleigh's side, and looked about
her on the magnificent fashion, wherein the affection of new relatives
and old friends had made itself tangible; and heard the kindly words of
the elder Mr. Rushleigh to Kate Livingston, who stood with his son
Philip, and whose bridal, it was well known, was to come next? Jewels,
and silver, and gold, are such flashing, concrete evidences of love! And
the courtly condescension of an old and world-honored man to the young
girl whom his son has chosen, is such a winning and distinguishing
thing!

Paul Rushleigh had finished his college course, and was to go abroad
this winter--between the weddings, as he said--for his brother Philip's
was to take place in the coming spring. After that--things were not
quite settled, but something was to be arranged for him meanwhile--he
would have to begin his work in the world; and then--he supposed it
would be time for him to find a helpmate. Marrying was like dying, he
believed; when a family once began to go off there was soon an end of
it!

Blushes were the livery of the evening, and Faith's deeper glow at this
audacious rattle passed unheeded, except, perhaps, as it might be
somewhat willfully interpreted.

There were two or three parties made for the newly married couple in the
week that followed. The week after, Paul Rushleigh, with the bride and
groom, was to sail for Europe. At each of these brilliant entertainments
he constituted himself, as in duty bound, Faith's knight and sworn
attendant; and a superb bouquet for each occasion, the result of the
ransack of successive greenhouses, came punctually, from him, to her
door. For years afterwards--perhaps for all her life--Faith couldn't
smell heliotrope, and geranium, and orange flowers, without floating
back, momentarily, into the dream of those few, enchanted days!

She stayed in Mishaumok a little beyond the limit she had fixed for
herself, to go, with the others, on board the steamer at the time of her
sailing, and see the gay party off. Paul Rushleigh had more significant
words, and another gift of flowers as a farewell.

When she carried these last to her own room, to put them in water, on
her return, something she had not noticed before glittered among their
stems. It was a delicate little ring, of twisted gold, with a
forget-me-not in turquoise and enamel upon the top.

Faith was half pleased, half frightened, and wholly ashamed.

Paul Rushleigh was miles out on the Atlantic. There was no help for it,
she thought. It had been cunningly done.

And so, in the short November days, she went back to Kinnicutt.

The east parlor had to be shut up now, for the winter. The family
gathering place was the sunny little sitting room; and with closed doors
and doubled windows, they began, for the first time, to find that they
were really living in a little bit of a house.

It was very pretty, though, with the rich carpet and the crimson
curtains that had come from Hickory Street, replacing the white muslin
draperies and straw matting of the summer; and the books and vases, and
statuettes and pictures, gathered into so small space, seemed to fill
the room with luxury and beauty.

Faith nestled her little workstand into a nook between the windows.
Hendie's blocks and picture books were stowed in a corner cupboard. Mr.
Gartney's newspapers and pamphlets, as they came, found room in a deep
drawer below; and so, through the wintry drifts and gales, they were
"close hauled" and comfortable.

Faith was happy; yet she thought, now and then, when the whistling wind
broke the stillness of the dark evenings, of light and music elsewhere;
and how, a year ago, there had always been the chance of a visitor or
two to drop in, and while away the hours. Nobody lifted the
old-fashioned knocker, here at Cross Corners.

By day, even, it was scarcely different. Kinnicutt was hibernating. Each
household had drawn into its shell. And the huge drifts, lying defiant
against the fences in the short, ineffectual winter sunlight, held out
little hope of reanimation. Aunt Faith, in her pumpkin hood, and Rob Roy
cloak, and carpet moccasins, came over once in two or three days, and
even occasionally stayed to tea, and helped make up a rubber of whist
for Mr. Gartney's amusement; but, beyond this, they had no social
excitement.

January brought a thaw; and, still further to break the monotony, there
arose a stir and an anxiety in the parish.

Good Mr. Holland, its minister of thirty years, whose health had been
failing for many months, was at last compelled to relinquish the duties
of his pulpit for a time; and a supply was sought with the ultimate
probability of a succession. A new minister came to preach, who was to
fill the pastor's place for the ensuing three months. On his first
Sunday among them, Faith heard a wonderful sermon.

I indicate thus, not the oratory, nor the rhetoric; but the _sermon_, of
which these were the mere vehicle--the word of truth itself--which was
spoken, seemingly, to her very thought.

So also, as certainly, to the long life-thought of one other. Glory
McWhirk sat in Miss Henderson's corner pew, and drank it in, as a soul
athirst.

A man of middle age, one might have said, at first sight--there was,
here and there, a silver gleam in the dark hair and beard; yet a fire
and earnestness of youth in the deep, beautiful eye, and a look in the
face as of life's first flush and glow not lost, but rather merged in
broader light, still climbing to its culmination, belied these tokens,
and made it as if a white frost had fallen in June--rising up before the
crowded village congregation, looked round upon the upturned faces, as
One had looked before who brought the bread of Life to men's eager
asking; and uttered the selfsame simple words.

It was a certain pause and emphasis he made--a slight new rendering of
punctuation--that sent home the force of those words to the people who
heard them, as if it had been for the first time, and fresh from the
lips of the Great Teacher.

       *       *       *       *       *

"'Blessed are the poor: _in spirit_: for theirs is the kingdom of
heaven.'

"Herein Christ spoke, not to a class, only, but to the world! A world of
souls, wrestling with the poverty of life!

"In that whole assemblage--that great concourse--that had thronged from
cities and villages to hear His words upon the mountainside--was there,
think you, _one satisfied nature_?

"Friends--are _ye_ satisfied?

       ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

"Or, does every life come to know, at first or at last, how something--a
hope, or a possibility, or the fulfillment of a purpose--has got
dropped out of it, or has even never entered, so that an emptiness
yawns, craving, therein, forever?

"How many souls hunger till they are past their appetite! Go on--down
through the years--needy and waiting, and never find or grasp that which
a sure instinct tells them they were made for?

"This, this is the poverty of life! These are the poor, to whom God's
Gospel was preached in Christ! And to these denied and waiting ones the
first words of Christ's preaching--as I read them--were spoken in
blessing.

"Because, elsewhere, he blesses the meek; elsewhere and presently, he
tells us how the lowly in spirit shall inherit the earth; so, when I
open to this, his earliest uttered benediction upon our race, I read it
with an interpretation that includes all humanity:

"'Blessed, in spirit, are the poor. Theirs is the kingdom of heaven.'

       ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

"What is this Kingdom of Heaven? 'It is within you.' It is that which
you hold, and live in spiritually; the _real_, of which all earthly,
outward being and having are but the show. It is the region wherein
little children 'do always behold the Face of my Father which is in
Heaven.' It is where we are when we shut our eyes and pray in the words
that Christ taught us.

       ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

"What matters, then, where your feet stand, or wherewith your hands are
busy? So that it is the spot where God has put you, and the work He has
given you to do? Your real life is within--hid in God with
Christ--ripening, and strengthening, and waiting, as through the long,
geologic ages of night and incompleteness waited the germs of all that
was to unfold into this actual, green, and bounteous earth!

       ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

"The narrower your daily round, the wider, maybe, the outreach. Isolated
upon a barren mountain peak, you may take in river and lake--forest,
field, and valley. A hundred gardens and harvests lift their bloom and
fullness to your single eye.

"There is a sunlight that contracts the vision; there is a starlight
that enlarges it to take in infinite space.

  "'God sets some souls in shade, alone.
  They have no daylight of their own.
  Only in lives of happier ones
  They see the shine of distant suns.

  "'God knows. Content thee with thy night.
  Thy greater heaven hath grander light,
  To-day is close. The hours are small.
  Thou sit'st afar, and hast them all.

  "'Lose the less joy that doth but blind;
  Reach forth a larger bliss to find.
  To-day is brief: the inclusive spheres
  Rain raptures of a thousand years.'"

Faith could not tell what hymn was sung, or what were the words of the
prayer that followed the sermon. There was a music and an uplifting in
her own soul that made them needless, but for the pause they gave her.

She hardly knew that a notice was read as the people rose before the
benediction, when the minister gave out, as requested, that "the Village
Dorcas Society would meet on Wednesday of the coming week, at Mrs.
Parley Gimp's."

She was made aware that it had fallen upon her ears, though heard
unconsciously, when Serena Gimp caught her by the sleeve in the church
porch.

"Ain't it awful," said she, with a simper and a flutter of importance,
"to have your name called right out so in the pulpit? I declare, if it
hadn't been for seeing the new minister, I wouldn't have come to meeting,
I dreaded it so! Ain't he handsome? He's old, though--thirty-five! He's
broken-hearted, too! Somebody died, or something else, that he was going
to be married to, ever so many years ago; and they say he hasn't hardly
spoken to a lady since. That's so romantic! I don't wonder he preaches
such low-spirited kind of sermons. Only I wish they warn't quite so. I
suppose it's beautiful, and heavenly minded, and all that; but yet I'd
rather hear something a little kind of cheerful. Don't you think so? But
the poetry was elegant--warn't it? I guess it's original, too. They say
he puts things in the _Mishaumok Monthly_. Come Wednesday, won't
you? We shall depend, you know."

To Miss Gimp, the one salient point, amidst the solemnities of the day,
had been that pulpit notice. She had put new strings to her bonnet for
the occasion. Mrs. Gimp, being more immediately and personally affected,
had modestly remained away from church.

Glory McWhirk went straight through the village, home; and out to her
little room in the sunny side of the low, sloping roof. This was her
winter nook. She had a shadier one, looking the other way, for summer.

"I wonder if it's all true!" she cried, silently, in her soul, while she
stood for a minute with bonnet and shawl still on, looking out from her
little window, dreamily, over the dazzle of the snow, even as her
half-blinded thought peered out from its own narrowness into the
infinite splendor of the promise of God--"I wonder if God will ever make
me beautiful! I wonder if I shall ever have a real, great joyfulness,
that isn't a make believe!"

Glory called her fancies so. They followed her still. She lived yet in
an ideal world. The real world--that is, the best good of it--had not
come close enough to her, even in this, her widely amended condition, to
displace the other. Remember--this child of eighteen had missed her
childhood; had known neither father nor mother, sister nor brother.

Don't think her simple, in the pitiful meaning of the word; but she
still enacted, in the midst of her plain, daily life, wonderful dreams
that nobody could have ever suspected; and here, in her solitary
chamber, called up at will creatures of imagination who were to her what
human creatures, alas! had never been. Above all, she had a sister here,
to whom she told all her secrets. This sister's name was Leonora.


CHAPTER XVII.

FROST-WONDERS.

"No hammers fell, no ponderous axes rung;
Like some tall palm, the mystic fabric sprung.
Majestic silence!"
                                            HEBER.


The thaw continued till the snow was nearly gone. Only the great drifts
against the fences, and the white folds in the rifts of distant
hillsides lingered to tell what had been. Then came a day of warm rain,
that washed away the last fragment of earth's cast-off vesture, and
bathed her pure for the new adornment that was to be laid upon her. At
night, the weather cooled, and the rain changed to a fine, slow mist,
congealing as it fell.

Faith stood next morning by a small round table in the sitting-room
window, and leaned lovingly over her jonquils and hyacinths that were
coming into bloom. Then, drawing the curtain cord to let in the first
sunbeam that should slant from the south upon her bulbs, she gave a
little cry of rapturous astonishment. It was a diamond morning!

Away off, up the lane, and over the meadows, every tree and bush was
hung with twinkling gems that the slight wind swayed against each other
with tiny crashes of faint music, and the sun was just touching with a
level splendor.

After that first, quick cry, Faith stood mute with ecstasy.

"Mother!" said she, breathlessly, at last, as Mrs. Gartney entered,
"look there! have you seen it? Just imagine what the woods must be this
morning! How can we think of buckwheats?"

Sounds and odors betrayed that Mis' Battis and breakfast were in the
little room adjoining.

"There is a thought of something akin to them, isn't there, under all
this splendor? Men must live, and grass and grain must grow."

Mr. Gartney said this, as he came up behind wife and daughter, and laid
a hand on a shoulder of each.

"I know one thing, though," said Faith. "I'll eat the buckwheats, as a
vulgar necessity, and then I'll go over the brook and up in the woods
behind the Pasture Rocks. It'll last, won't it?"

"Not many hours, with this spring balm in the air," replied her father.
"You must make haste. By noon, it will be all a drizzle."

"Will it be quite safe for her to go alone?" asked Mrs. Gartney.

"I'll ask Aunt Faith to let me have Glory. She showed me the walk last
summer. It is fair she should see this, now."

So the morning odds and ends were done up quickly at Cross Corners and
at the Old House, and then Faith and Glory set forth together--the
latter in as sublime a rapture as could consist with mortal cohesion.

The common roadside was an enchanted path. The glittering rime
transfigured the very cart ruts into bars of silver; and every coarse
weed was a fretwork of beauty.

"Bells on their toes" they had, this morning, assuredly; each footfall
made a music on the sod.

Over the slippery bridge--out across a stretch of open meadow, and then
along a track that skirted the border of a sparse growth of trees,
projecting itself like a promontory upon the level land--round its
abrupt angle into a sweep of meadow again, on whose farther verge rose
the Pasture Rocks.

Behind these rocks swelled up gently a slope, half pasture, half
woodland--neither open ground nor forest; but, although clear enough for
comfortable walking, studded pretty closely with trees that often
interlaced their branches overhead, and made great, pillared aisles,
among whose shade, in summer, wound delicious little footpaths that all
came out together, midway up, into--what you shall be told of presently.

Here, among and beyond the rocks, were oaks, and pines, and savins--each
needle-like leaf a shimmering lance--each clustering branch a spray of
gems--and the stout, spreading limbs of the oaks delineating themselves
against the sky above in Gothic frost-work.

Suddenly--before they thought it could be so near--they came up and out
into a broader opening. Between two rocks that made, as it were, a
gateway, and around whose bases were grouped sentinel evergreens, they
came into this wider space, floored with flat rock, the surface of a
hidden ledge, carpeted with crisp mosses in the summer, whose every cup
and hollow held a jewel now--and inclosed with lofty oaks and pines,
while, straight beyond, where the woods shut in again far closer than
below, rose a bold crag, over whose brow hung pendent birches that in
their icy robing drooped like glittering wings of cherubim above an
altar.

All around and underneath, this strange magnificence. Overhead, the
everlasting Blue, that roofed it in with sapphire. In front, the rough,
gigantic shrine.

"It is like a cathedral!" said Faith, solemnly and low.

"See!" whispered Glory, catching her companion hastily by the
arm--"there is the minister!"

A little way beyond them, at the right, out from among the clumps of
evergreen where some other of the little wood walks opened, a figure
advanced without perceiving them. It was Roger Armstrong, the new
minister. He held his hat in his hand. He walked, uncovered, as he would
have into a church, into this forest temple, where God's finger had just
been writing on the walls.

In my ignorance of things past I did not know that the candidate had
himself written the platform adopted by the Trenton Convention, and
in my ignorance of the future I did not then know that one of the boldest
and most remarkable political campaigns in America was to be conducted
on that platform, and that after the election and inauguration of the
nominee the chief business of the legislation was destined to be
the enactment into law of each of the planks of the platform, a
complete and itemized fulfilment of preëlection promises, unusual
in the history of American politics.

At the time of my first conversation with the nominee I only knew that
the Convention had been dominated by the reactionary elements in the
party, that under this domination it had stolen the thunder of the
progressive elements of the party and of the New Idea Republicans,
and that the platform had been practically ignored by the candidate
in his first campaign speech.

In these circumstances, and smarting as I was under the recollection
of recent defeat, it is not strange that I thought I detected the
old political ruse of dressing the wolf in sheep's clothing, of
using handsome pledges as a mask to deceive the gullible, and that
I assumed that this scholarly amateur in politics was being used
for their own purposes by masters and veterans in the old game of
thimblerig.

The candidate soon struck his gait and astonished me and all New
Jersey with the vigour, frankness, and lucidity of his speeches of
exposition and appeal.

No campaign in years in New Jersey had roused such universal interest.

There was no mistaking the character and enthusiasm of the greeting the
candidate received every place he spoke, nor the response his thrilling
speeches evoked all over the state. Those who had gathered the idea
that the head of the great university would appear pedantic and
stand stiff-necked upon an academic pedestal from which he would talk
over the heads of the common people were forced, by the fighting,
aggressive attitude of the Doctor, to revise their old estimates.

The campaign had only begun when the leading newspapers of the country,
particularly the large dailies of New York, were taking an interest
in the New Jersey fight.

Those of us who doubted Woodrow Wilson's sincerity and his sympathy
for the great progressive measures for which we had been fighting
in the New Jersey Legislature were soon put at ease by the developments
of his campaign and his sympathetic attitude toward the things we
had so much at heart.

No candidate for governor in New Jersey had ever made so striking
and moving an appeal.

Forgetting and ignoring the old slogans and shibboleths, he appealed to
the hearts and consciences of the people of the state. His homely
illustrations evoked expressions of delight, until it seemed as if this
newcomer in the politics of our state had a better knowledge of
the psychology of the ordinary crowd than the old stagers who had
spent their lives in politics.

His illustrations always went home.

For instance, speaking of progress, Doctor Wilson said that much
depended upon the action of the one who is supposed to be progressive.

"I can recall," he would say in trying to make his point, "the picture
of a poor devil of a donkey on a treadmill. He keeps on tramping,
tramping, tramping, but he never gets anywhere. But," he continued,
"there is a certain elephant that's tramping, too, and how much
progress is it making?"

And then, again, he would grow solemn when he spoke of the average man.
Turning aside from the humorous, he would strike a serious note like
this one:

You know that communities are not distinguished by exceptional men.
They are distinguished by the average of their citizenship. I often think
of the poor man when he goes to vote: a moral unit in his lonely
dignity.

The deepest conviction and passion of my heart is that the common people,
by which I mean all of us, are to be absolutely trusted. The peculiarity
of some representatives, particularly those of the Republican party,
is that when they talk about the people, they obviously do not
include themselves.

Now if, when you think of the people, you are not thinking about
yourself, then you do not belong in America.

When I look back at the processes of history, when I look back at the
genesis of America, I see this written over every page, that the
nations are renewed from the bottom, not from the top; that the
genius which springs up from the ranks of unknown men is the genius
which renews the youth and the energy of the people; and in every
age of the world, where you stop the courses of the blood from the
roots, you injure the great, useful structure to the extent that
atrophy, death, and decay are sure to ensue.

This is the reason that an hereditary monarchy does not work; that is the
reason that an hereditary aristocracy does not work; that is the
reason that everything of that sort is full of corruption and ready to
decay.

So I say that our challenge of to-day is to include in the partnership
all those great bodies of unnamed men who are going to produce our
future leaders and renew the future energies of America.

And as I confess that, as I confess my belief in the common man, I know
what I am saying. The man who is swimming against the stream knows the
strength of it.

The man who is in the mêlée knows what blows are being struck and
what blood is being drawn.

The man who is on the make is a judge of what is happening in
America, not the man who has made; not the man who has emerged from
the flood, not the man who is standing on the bank, looking on, but
the man who is struggling for his life and for the lives of those
who are dearer to him than himself.

                         That is the man
whose judgment will tell you what
is going on in America, and that is the man
                                      by whose judgment I for one wish to be guided--so that as the tasks
multiply and the days come when all will seem confusion and dismay,
we may lift up our eyes to the hills out of these dark valleys where
the crags of special privilege overshadow and darken our path, to
where the sun gleams through the great passage in the broken cliffs,
the sun of God, the sun meant to regenerate men, the sun meant to
liberate them from their passion and despair and to lift us to those
uplands which are the promised land of every man who desires liberty
and achievement.

Speaking for the necessity of corporate reform in business, he said:

I am not objecting to the size of these corporations.

Nothing is big enough to scare me. What I am objecting to is that the
Government should give them exceptional advantages, which enables them
to succeed and does not put them on the same footing as other people.
I think those great touring cars, for example, which are labelled
"Seeing New York," are too big for the streets.

You have almost to walk around the block to get away from them, and
size has a great deal to do with the trouble if you are trying to get out
of the way.

But I have no objection on that account to the ordinary automobile properly
handled by a man of conscience who is also a gentleman. I have no
objection to the size, power, and beauty of an automobile. I am interested,
however, in the size and conscience of the men who handle them, and
what I object to is that some corporation men are taking "joy-rides"
in their corporations.

Time and time again men were reminded of the great speeches of Lincoln and
thought they saw his fine spirit breathing through sentences
like these:
Gentlemen, we are not working for to-day, we are not working for
our own interest, we are all going to pass away.

But think of what is involved. Here are the tradition, and the fame, and
the prosperity, and the purity, and the peace of a great nation involved.
For the time being we are that nation, but the generations that are
behind us are pointing us forward to the path and saying:

"Remember the great traditions of the American people," and all those
unborn children that will constitute the generations that are ahead
will look back to us, either at those who serve them or at those who
betray them. Will any man in such circumstances think it worthy to stand
and not try to do what is possible in so great a cause, to save a
country, to purify a polity, to set up vast reforms which will
increase the happiness of mankind?

God forbid that I should either be daunted or turned away from a great
task like this.

Speaking of the candidate who opposed him:
I have been informed that he has the best of me in looks.

Now, it is not always the useful horse that is most beautiful.

If I had a big load to be drawn some distance I should select one of
those big, shaggy kinds of horses, not much for beauty but strong
of pull.

On one occasion, when he had been talking about his and Mr. Lewis's
different conceptions of the "constitutional governor", and telling
his audience how he, if elected, would interpret the election as a
mandate from the people to assist in and direct legislation in the
interests of the people of New Jersey at large, he paused an instant
and then in those incisive tones and with that compression of the
lips which marked his more bellicose words, he said curtly: "If you
don't want that kind of a governor, don't elect me."

Excerpts from the speeches cannot do justice to this remarkable campaign,
which Woodrow Wilson himself, after he had been twice elected
President of the United States, considered the most satisfying of
his political campaigns, because the most systematic and basic.

As Presidential candidate he had to cover a wide territory and touch
only the high spots in the national issues, but in his gubernatorial
campaign he spoke in every county of the state and in some counties several
times, and his speeches grew out of each other and were connected
with each other in a way that made them a popular treatise on
self-government.

He used no technical jargon and none of the stereotyped bombast of
the usual political campaign.

He had a theme which he wanted to expound to the people of New Jersey,
which theme was the nature and character of free government, how it
had been lost in New Jersey through the complicated involvements of
invisible government, manipulated from behind the scenes by adroit
representatives of the corporate interest working in conjunction
with the old political machines; how under this clever manipulation
legislators had ceased to represent the electorate and were, as he
called them, only "errand boys" to do the bidding of the real rulers
of New Jersey, many of whom were not even residents of the state,
and how free government could be restored to New Jersey through
responsible leadership.

He was making an application to practical politics of the fundamental
principles of responsible government which he had analyzed in his earlier
writings, including the book on "Congressional Government." Beneath the
concrete campaign issues in New Jersey he saw the fundamental
principles of Magna Charta and the Bill of Rights and the Declaration
of Independence and the Constitution of the United States.

His trained habit of thinking through concrete facts to basic principles
was serving him well in this campaign; his trained habit of clear
exposition in the Princeton lecture hall was serving him well.

People heard from him political speaking of a new kind; full
of weighty instruction and yet so simply phrased and so aptly illustrated
that the simplest minded could follow the train of reasoning; profound
in political philosophy and yet at every step humanized by one who
believed government the most human of things because concerned with
the happiness and welfare of individuals; sometimes he spoke in
parables, homely anecdotes so applied that all could understand;
sometimes he was caustic when he commented on the excessive zeal
of corporations for strict constitutionalism, meaning thereby only
such legislation and judicial interpretations as would defend their
property rights--how they had secured those rights being a question
not discussed by these gentlemen; sometimes, though not frequently,
there would be purple patches of eloquence, particularly when
descanting on the long struggle of the inarticulate masses for
political representation.

One of the surprises of the campaign to those who had known him as an
orator of classic eloquence was the comparative infrequency of rhetorical
periods. It was as if he were now too deeply engaged with actualities
to chisel and polish his sentences.

Of the many anecdotes which he told during the campaign one of his
favourites was of the Irishman digging a cellar, who when asked what
he was doing said: "I'm letting the darkness out." Woodrow Wilson told
the people of New Jersey that he was "letting the darkness out" of the
New Jersey political situation. "Pitiless publicity" was one of
his many phrases coined in the campaign which quickly found currency,
not only in New Jersey but throughout the country, for presently the
United States at large began to realize that what was going on in
New Jersey was symbolical of the situation throughout the country,
a tremendous struggle to restore popular government to the people.

Since the founders of the Republic expounded free institutions to the first
electorates of this country there had probably been no political
campaign which went so directly to the roots of free representative
government and how to get it as that campaign which Woodrow Wilson
conducted in New Jersey in the autumn of 1910.

CHAPTER VII
THE CRISIS OF THE CAMPAIGN

The crisis of the campaign came when George L.

Record, Progressive leader in the ranks of the Republican party in
Hudson County, uttered a ringing challenge to the Democratic candidate to
debate the issues of the campaign with him. The challenge contained an
alternative proposition that the Democratic candidate either meet Mr.
Record in joint debate in various parts of the state or that he answer
certain questions with reference to the control of the Democratic
party by what Mr. Record called the "Old Guard." Mr. Record's letter and
challenge created a profound sensation throughout the state and
brought hope and comfort to the ranks of the Republican party.

Record emphasized the Old Guard's control of the convention at which
Wilson was nominated, basing most of his questions upon this
character of political control, and openly challenging Wilson, the
Democratic candidate, to say whether the elements that were dominant
at Trenton in the Convention would be permitted by him, in case
of his election, to influence his action as governor.

For several days after the letter containing the challenge reached
the Democratic candidate, there was a great deal of apprehension
in the ranks of the Democratic party lest the candidate should
decide to ignore the Record challenge, thus giving aid and comfort
to the enemies of progressivism in the state, or, on the other hand,
that he would accept it and thus give Mr.

Record, who was a most resourceful public speaker and a leading exponent
of liberalism in the state, a chance to outwit him in public debate.

The latter practically demanded of the Democratic candidate that he
repudiate not only the Old Guard but the active management of his
campaign which had been taken over by James R.

Nugent, one of the leaders of Essex County, who daily accompanied
the Democratic candidate on his tour of the state.

For a time it looked as if Doctor Wilson would ignore entirely the
Record challenge.

It was plainly evident from all sides that what appeared to be his
reluctance to take a stand in the matter had turned support away
at a time when the sentiment of the state was rapidly flowing his
way.

I accompanied the candidate on an automobile tour of the state and
in our little talks I sought to find out, in a diplomatic way, just how
his mind was running on the Record challenge and how he intended to meet
it. In the automobile with us on this tour was James R.

Nugent, then the state chairman of the Democratic Committee. I ascertained
that even he knew nothing about the Princetonian's attitude toward the
Record challenge.

A significant remark which the candidate dropped "between meetings" gave
me the first intimation that the Democratic candidate was, to use
a baseball expression, "on to the Record curve" and that he would
answer him in so emphatic and overwhelming a fashion that the
Republican campaign would never entirely recover from the blow.

One day while we were seated in the tonneau of the automobile
discussing the Record challenge, Mr.

Wilson pointed his finger at Jim Nugent and said, very significantly:
"I intend to reply to Mr.

Record, but I am sure that it will hurt the feelings of this fine
fellow."
A few days later, without consulting any one, Mr. Wilson replied to
Record's challenge. It was a definite, clean-cut, unequivocal repudiation
of the Old Guard's control of the Democratic party, and a convincing
answer to every question that had been put to him. It rang true.
Old-line Republicans, after reading this conclusive reply, shook
their heads and said, regretfully, "Damn Record; the campaign's
over."

It was plainly evident that the crisis of the campaign had been safely
passed and that Mr.

Wilson was on his way to the governorship.

In his challenge Mr. Record had addressed to Doctor Wilson nineteen
questions. Mr. Wilson's reply was in part as follows:

You wish to know what my relations would be with the Democrats whose
power and influence you fear should I be elected governor, particularly
in such important matters as appointments and the signing of bills,
and I am very glad to tell you.

If elected I shall not either in the matter of appointments to office, or
assent to legislation, or in shaping any part of the policy of my
administration, submit to the dictation of any person, or persons,
"special interests," or organizations.

I will always welcome advice and suggestions from any citizens,
whether boss, leader, organization man, or plain citizen, and I shall
confidently seek the advice of influential and disinterested men
representative of the communities and disconnected from political
organizations entirely; but all suggestions and all advice will be
considered on its merits and no additional weight will be given to
any man's advice because of his exercising, or supposing that he
exercises, some sort of political influence or control.

I should deem myself for ever disgraced should I, in even the
slightest degree, coöperate in any such system.

I regard myself as pledged to the regeneration of the Democratic
party.

Mr.

Record also inquired: "Do you admit that the boss system exists
as I have described it?" "If so, how do you propose to abolish it?"
Mr. Wilson said:

Of course I admit it. Its existence is notorious. I have made it my
business for many years to observe and understand that system, and I
hate it as thoroughly as I understand it. You are quite right in
saying that the system is bipartisan; that it constitutes "the most
dangerous condition in the public life of our state and nation to-
day"; and that it has virtually, for the time being, "destroyed
representative government and in its place set up a government of
privilege."

I would propose to abolish it by the reforms suggested in the Democratic
platform, by the election to office of men who will refuse to submit to
it, and who will lend all their energies to break it up, and by pitiless
publicity.

Still hoping to corner the Governor, Mr. Record named the bosses:

In referring to the Board of Guardians, do you mean such Republican
leaders as Baird, Murphy, Kean, and Stokes? Wherein do the relations to
the special interests of such leaders differ from the relation to
the same interests of such Democratic leaders as Smith, Nugent, and
Davis?

Mr. Wilson, answering this, said:

"'I catch the murmur of its undertone
  That sigheth, ceaselessly,--alone! alone!
  And hear, afar, the Rivers gloriously
  Shout on their paths toward the shining sea!

  "'The voiceful Rivers, chanting to the sun;
  And wearing names of honor, every one;
  Outreaching wide, and joining hand with hand
  To pour great gifts along the asking land.

  "'Ah, lonely brook! creep onward through the pines!
  Press through the gloom, to where the daylight shines!
  Sing on among the stones, and secretly
  Feel how the floods are all akin to thee!

  "'Drink the sweet rain the gentle heaven sendeth;
  Hold thine own path, howeverward it tendeth;
  For, somewhere, underneath the eternal sky,
  Thou, too, shalt find the Rivers, by-and-by!'"

Faith's voice trembled with earnestness as she finished. When she looked
up from the paper as she refolded it, tears were running down Glory's
cheeks.

"Why, the little brook has overflowed!" cried Faith, playfully. If she
had not found this to say, she would have cried, herself.

"Miss Faith!" said Glory, "I ain't sure whether I was meant to tell; but
do you know what the minister has asked Miss Henderson? Perhaps she
won't; I'm afraid not; it would be _too_ good a time! but he wants her
to let him come and board with her! Just think what it would be for him
to be in the house with us all the time! Why, Miss Faith, it would be
just as if one of those great Rivers had come rolling along through the
dark woods, right among the little lonely brooks!"

Faith made no answer. She was astonished. Miss Henderson had said
nothing of it. She never did make known her subjects of deliberation
till the deliberations had become conclusions.

"Why, you don't seem glad!"

"I _am_ glad," said Faith, slowly and quietly. She was strangely
conscious at the moment that she said so, glad as she would be if Mr.
Armstrong were really to come so near, and she might see him daily, of a
half jealousy that Glory should be nearer still.

It was quite true that Mr. Armstrong had this wish. Hitherto, he had
been at the house of the elder minister, Mr. Holland. A unanimous
invitation had been given to Mr. Armstrong by the people to remain among
them as their settled pastor. This he had not yet consented to do. But
he had entered upon another engagement of six months, to preach for
them. Now he needed a permanent home, which he could not conveniently
have at Mr. Holland's.

There was great putting of heads together at the "Dorcas," about it.

Mrs. Gimp "would offer; but then--there was Serena, and folks would
talk."

Other families had similar holdbacks--that is the word, for they were
not absolute insuperabilities--wary mothers were waiting until it should
appear positively necessary that _somebody_ should waive objection, and
take the homeless pastor in; and each watched keenly for the critical
moment when it should be just late enough, and not too late, for her to
yield.

Meanwhile, Mr. Armstrong quietly left all this seething, and walked off
out of the village, one day, to Cross Corners, and asked Miss Henderson
if he might have one of her quaint, pleasant, old-fashioned rooms.

Miss Henderson was deliberating.

This very afternoon, she sat in the southwest tea parlor, with her
knitting forgotten in her lap, and her eyes searching the bright western
sky, as if for a gleam that should light her to decision.

"It ain't that I mind the trouble. And it ain't that there isn't house
room. And it ain't that I don't like the minister," soliloquized she.
"It's whether it would be respectable common sense. I ain't going to
take the field with the Gimps and the Leatherbees, nor to have them
think it, either. She's over here almost every blessed day of her life.
I might as well try to keep the sunshine out of the old house, as to
keep her; and I should be about as likely to want to do one as the
other. But just let me take in Mr. Armstrong, and there'd be all the
eyes in the village watching. There couldn't so much as a cat walk in or
out, but they'd know it, somehow. And they'd be sure to say she was
running after the minister."

Miss Henderson's pronouns were not precise in their reference. It isn't
necessary for soliloquy to be exact. She understood herself, and that
sufficed.

"It would be a disgrace to the parish, anyhow," she resumed, "to let
those Gimps and Leatherbees get him into their net; and they'll do it if
Providence or somebody don't interpose. I wish I was sure whether it was
a leading or not!"

By and by she reverted, at last, as she always did, to that question of
its being a "leading," or not; and, taking down the old Bible from the
corner shelf, she laid it with solemnity on the little light stand at
her side, and opened it, as she had known her father do, in the
important crises of his life, for an "indication."

The wooden saddle and the gun were not all that had come down to Aunt
Faith from the primitive days of the Puritan settlers.

The leaves parted at the story of the Good Samaritan. Bible leaves are
apt to part, as the heart opens, in accordance with long habit and holy
use.

That evening, while Glory was washing up the tea things, Aunt Faith put
on cloak and hood, and walked over to Cross Corners.

"No--I won't take off my things," she replied to Mrs. Gartney's advance
of assistance. "I've just come over to tell you what I'm going to do.
I've made up my mind to take the minister to board. And when the washing
and ironing's out of the way, next week, I shall fix up a room for him,
and he'll come."

"That's a capital plan, Aunt Faith!" said her nephew, with a tone of
pleased animation. "Cross Corners will be under obligation to you. Mr.
Armstrong is a man whom I greatly respect and admire."

"So do I," said Miss Henderson. "And if I didn't, when a man is beset
with thieves all the way from Jerusalem to Jericho, it's time for some
kind of a Samaritan to come along."

Next day, Mis' Battis heard the news, and had her word of comment to
offer.

"She's got room enough for him, if that's all; but I wouldn't a believed
she'd have let herself be put about and upset so, if it was for John the
Baptist! I always thought she was setter'n an old hen! But then, she's
gittin' into years, and it's kinder handy, I s'pose, havin' a minister
round the house, sayin' she should be took anyways sudden!"

Village comments it would be needless to attempt to chronicle.

April days began to wear their tearful beauty, and the southwest room at
the old house was given up to Mr. Armstrong.


CHAPTER XX.

PAUL.

"Standing, with reluctant feet,
Where the brook and river meet,
Womanhood and childhood fleet!"
                        LONGFELLOW.


Glory had not been content with the utmost she could find to do in
making the southwest room as clean, and bright, and fresh, and perfect
in its appointments as her zealous labor and Miss Henderson's nice,
old-fashioned methods and materials afforded possibility for. Twenty
times a day, during the few that intervened between its fitting up and
Mr. Armstrong's occupation of it, she darted in, to settle a festoon of
fringe, or to pick a speck from the carpet, or to move a chair a
hair's-breadth this way or that, or to smooth an invisible crease in the
counterpane, or, above all, to take a pleased survey of everything once
more, and to wonder how the minister would like it.

So well, indeed, he liked it, when he had taken full possession, that he
seemed to divine the favorite room must have been relinquished to him,
and to scruple at keeping it quite solely to himself.

In the pleasant afternoons, when the spring sun got round to his
westerly windows, and away from the southeast apartment, whither Miss
Henderson had betaken herself, her knitting work, and her Bible, and
where now the meals were always spread, he would open his door, and let
the pleasantness stray out across the passage, and into the keeping
room, and would often take a book, and come in, himself, also, with the
sunlight. Then Glory, busy in the kitchen, just beyond, would catch
words of conversation, or of reading, or even be called in to hear the
latter. And she began to think that there were good times, truly, in
this world, and that even she was "in 'em!"

April days, as they lengthened and brightened, brought other things,
also, to pass.

The Rushleigh party had returned from Europe.

Faith had a note from Margaret. The second wedding was close at hand,
and would she not come down?

But her services as bridesmaid were not needed this time; there was
nothing so exceedingly urgent in the invitation--Faith's intimacy was
with the Rushleighs, not the Livingstons--that she could not escape its
acceptance if she desired; and so--there was a great deal to be done in
summer preparation, which Mis' Battis, with her deliberate dignity,
would never accomplish alone; also, there was the forget-me-not ring
lying in her box of ornaments, that gave her a little troubled
perplexity as often as she saw it there; and Faith excused herself in a
graceful little note, and stayed at Cross Corners, helping her mother
fold away the crimson curtains, and get up the white muslin ones, make
up summer sacks for Hendie, and retouch her own simple wardrobe, which
this year could receive little addition.

One day, Aunt Faith had twisted her foot by a slip upon the stairs, and
was kept at home. Glory, of course, was obliged to remain also, as Miss
Henderson was confined, helpless, to her chair or sofa.

Faith Gartney and the minister walked down the pleasant lane, and along
the quiet road to the village church, together.

Faith had fresh, white ribbons, to-day, upon her simple straw bonnet,
and delicate flowers and deep green leaves about her face. She seemed
like an outgrowth of the morning, so purely her sweet look and fair
unsulliedness of attire reflected the significance of the day's own
newness and beauty.

"Do you know," said Mr. Armstrong, presently, after the morning greeting
had passed, and they had walked a few paces, silently, "do you know that
you are one of Glory's saints, Miss Faith?"

Faith's wondering eyes looked out their questioning astonishment from a
deep rosiness that overspread her face.

The minister was not apt to make remarks of at all a personal bearing.
Neither was this allusion to sainthood quite to have been looked for,
from his lips. Faith could scarcely comprehend.

"I found her this morning, as I came out to cross the field, sitting on
the doorstone with her Bible and a rosary of beautiful, small, variously
tinted shells upon her lap. I stopped to speak with her, and asked leave
to look at them. 'They were given to me when I was very little,' she
said. 'A lady sent them from Rome. The Pope blessed them!' 'They are
very beautiful,' I said, 'and a blessing, if that mean a true man's
prayer, can never be worthless. But,' I asked her, 'do you _use_ these,
Glory?' 'Not as she did once,' she said. She had almost forgotten about
that. She knew the larger beads stood for saints, and the smaller ones
between were prayers. 'But,' she went on, 'it isn't for my prayers I
keep them now. I've named some of my saints' beads for the people that
have done me the most good in my life, and been the kindest to me; and
the little ones are thoughts, and things they've taught me. This large
one, with the queer spots, is Miss Henderson; and this lovely
rose-colored one is Miss Faith; and these are Katie Ryan and Bridget
Foye; but you don't know about them.' And then she timidly told me that
the white one next the cross was mine. The child humbled me, Miss Faith!
It is nearly fearful, sometimes, to get a glimpse of what one is to some
trustful human soul, who looks through one toward the Highest!"

Faith had tears in her eyes.

"Glory is such a strange girl," said she. "She seems to have an instinct
for things that other people are educated up to."

"She has seized the spirit of the dead Roman calendar, and put it into
this rosary. Our saints _are_ the spirits through whom God wills to send
us of His own. Whatever becomes to us a channel of His truth and love we
must involuntarily canonize and consecrate. Woe, if by the same channel
ever an offense cometh!"

Perhaps Faith was nearly the only person in church, to-day, who did not
notice that there were strangers in the pew behind the Gimps. When she
came out, she was joined; and not by strangers. Margaret and Paul
Rushleigh came eagerly to her side.

"We came out to Lakeside to stay a day or two with the Morrises; and ran
away from them here, purposely to meet you. And we mean to be very good,
and go to church all day, if you will take us home with you meanwhile."

Faith, between her surprise, her pleasure, her embarrassment, the rush
of old remembrance, and a quick, apprehensive thought of Mis' Battis and
her probable arrangements, made almost an awkward matter of her reply.
But her father and mother came up, welcomed the Rushleighs cordially,
and the five were presently on their way toward Cross Corners, and
Faith had recovered sufficient self-possession to say something beyond
mere words of course.

Paul Rushleigh looked very handsome! And very glad, too, to see shy
Faith, who kept as invisible as might be at Margaret's other side, and
looked there, in her simple spring dress contrasted with Margaret's rich
and fashionable, though also simple and ladylike attire, like a field
daisy beside a garden rose.

Dinner was of no moment. There was only roast chicken, dressed the day
before, and reheated and served with hot vegetables since their coming
in, and a custard pudding, and some pastry cakes that Faith's fingers
had shaped, and coffee; but they drank in balm and swallowed sunshine,
and the essence of all that was to be concrete by and by in fruitful
fields and gardens. And they talked of old times! Three years old,
nearly! And Faith and Margaret laughed, and Mrs. His commando was a
little disposed to assume a marginal position, and it had to be
reassured. He was near enough for Benham to see his face. For a
time it looked anxious and thoughtful. Then he seemed to jump to his
decision. He unbuttoned and opened his coat wide as if defying the
soldiers.

"Shoot," he bawled, "Shoot, if you dare!"

A little uniform movement of the soldiers answered him. The small figure
of the officer away there was inaudible. The coat of the man below
flapped like the wings of a crowing cock before a breast of dirty
shirt, the hoarse voice cracked with excitement, "Shoot, if you dare.
Shoot, if you dare! See!"
Came the metallic bang of the carbines again, and in the instant
the leader collapsed in the road, a sprawl of clothes, hit by half
a dozen bullets.

It was an extraordinary effect. As though the figure had been deflated.
It was incredible that a moment before this thing had been a man, an
individual, a hesitating complicated purpose.

"Good God!" cried Benham, "but--this is horrible!"

The heap of garments lay still. The red hand that stretched out towards
the soldiers never twitched.

The spectacular silence broke into a confusion of sounds, women
shrieked, men cursed, some fled, some sought a corner from which they
might still see, others pressed forward. "Go for the swine!" bawled a
voice, a third volley rattled over the heads of the people, and in the
road below a man with a rifle halted, took aim, and answered the
soldiers' fire. "Look out!" cried White who was watching the
soldiers, and ducked.

"This isn't in the air!"
Came a straggling volley again, like a man running a metal hammer very
rapidly along iron corrugations, and this time people were dropping all
over the road. One white-faced man not a score of yards away fell with a
curse and a sob, struggled up, staggered for some yards with blood running
abundantly from his neck, and fell and never stirred again.
Another went down upon his back clumsily in the roadway and lay wringing
his hands faster and faster until suddenly with a movement like
a sigh they dropped inert by his side. A straw-hatted youth in a flannel
suit ran and stopped and ran again. He seemed to be holding something
red and strange to his face with both hands; above them his eyes were
round and anxious. Blood came out between his fingers. He went
right past the hotel and stumbled and suddenly sprawled headlong
at the opposite corner.

The majority of the crowd had already vanished into doorways and side
streets. But there was still shouting and there was still a remnant
of amazed and angry men in the roadway--and one or two angry women.
They were not fighting. Indeed they were unarmed, but if they had had
weapons now they would certainly have used them.

"But this is preposterous!" cried Benham. "Preposterous. Those soldiers
are never going to shoot again!

This must stop."
He stood hesitating for a moment and then turned about and dashed for
the staircase. "Good Heaven!" cried White. "What are you going to do?"

Benham was going to stop that conflict very much as a man might go to
stop a clock that is striking unwarrantably and amazingly. He was going
to stop it because it annoyed his sense of human dignity.

White hesitated for a moment and then followed, crying "Benham!"
But there was no arresting this last outbreak of Benham's all too
impatient kingship. He pushed aside a ducking German waiter who
was peeping through the glass doors, and rushed out of the hotel.

With a gesture of authority he ran forward into the middle of the
street, holding up his hand, in which he still held his dinner
napkin clenched like a bomb.

White believes firmly that Benham thought he would be able to
dominate everything.

He shouted out something about "Foolery!"
Haroun al Raschid was flinging aside all this sublime indifference
to current things....

But the carbines spoke again.
Benham seemed to run unexpectedly against something invisible. He
spun right round and fell down into a sitting position.Not for flowers, or strawberries, merely;
but for father's and mother's consent that, in a few weeks, when flowers
and strawberries should have fully come, there should be a marriage
feast made for her in the simple home, and she should go forth into the
gay world again, the bride of a wealthy New York banker.

Aunt Etherege and Saidie filled the house. With finery, with bustle,
with important presence.

Miss Gartney's engagement had been sudden; her marriage was to be
speedy. Half a dozen seamstresses, and as many sewing machines, were
busy in New York--hands, feet, and wheels--in making up the delicate
draperies for the _trousseau_; and Madame A---- was frantic with the
heap of elaborate dresses that was thrust upon her hands, and must be
ready for the thirtieth.

Mrs. Gartney and Faith had enough to do, to put the house and themselves
in festival trim. Hendie was spoiled with having no lessons, and more
toys and sugar plums than he knew what to do with. Mr. Selmore's comings
and goings made special ebullitions, weekly, where was only a continuous
lesser effervescence before. Mis' Battis had not been able to subside
into an armchair since the last day of May.

Faith found great favor in the eyes of her brother-in-law elect. He
pronounced her a "_naïve, piquante_ little person," and already there
was talk of how pleasant it would be, to have her in Madison Square, and
show her to the world. Faith said nothing to this, but in her heart she
clung to Kinnicutt.

Glory thought Miss Gartney wonderful. Even Mr. Armstrong spoke to Aunt
Faith of the striking beauty of her elder niece.

"I don't know how she _does_ look," Aunt Faith replied, with all her
ancient gruffness. "I see a great show of flounces, and manners, and
hair; but they don't look as if they all grew, natural. I can't make
_her_ out, amongst all that. Now, _Faith's_ just Faith. You see her
prettiness the minute you look at her, as you do a flower's."

"There are not many like Miss Faith," replied Mr. Armstrong. "I never
knew but one other who so wore the fresh, pure beauty of God's giving."

His voice was low and quiet, and his eye looked afar, as he spoke.

Glory went away, and sat down on the doorstone. There was a strange
tumult at her heart. In the midst, a noble joy. About it, a disquietude,
as of one who feels shut out--alone.

"I don't know what ails me. I wonder if I ain't glad! Of course, it's
nothing to me. I ain't in it. But it must be beautiful to be so! And to
have such words said! _She_ don't know what a sight the minister thinks
of her! I know. I knew before. It's beautiful--but I ain't in it. Only,
I think I've got the feeling of it all. And I'm glad it's real,
somewhere. Some way, I seem to have so much _here_, that never grows out
into anything. Maybe I'd be beautiful if it did!"

So talked Glory, interjectionally, with herself.

In the midst of these excited days, there came two letters to Mr.
Gartney.

One was from a gentleman in Michigan, in relation to some land Mr.
Gartney owned there, taken years ago, at a very low valuation, for a
debt. This was likely, from the rapid growth and improvement in the
neighborhood, to become, within a few years, perhaps, a property of some
importance.

The other letter was from his son, James Gartney, in San Francisco. The
young man urged his father to consider whether it might not be a good
idea for him to come out and join him in California.

James Gartney's proposal evidently roused his attention. It was a great
deal to think of, certainly; but it was worth thinking of, too. James
had married in San Francisco, had a pleasant home there, and was
prospering. Many old business friends had gone from Mishaumok, in the
years when the great flood of enterprise set westward across the
continent, and were building up name and influence in the Golden Land.
The idea found a place in his brain, and clung there. Only, there was
Faith! But things might come round so that even this thought need to be
no hindrance to the scheme.

Changes, and plans, and interests, and influences were gathering; all to
bear down upon one young life.

"More news!" said Mr. Gartney, one morning, coming in from his walk to
the village post office, to the pleasant sitting room, or morning room,
as Mrs. Etherege and Saidie called it, where Faith was helping her
sister write a list of the hundreds who were to receive Mr. and Mrs.
Selmore's cards--"At Home, in September, in Madison Square." "Whom do
you think I met in the village, this morning?"

Everybody looked up, and everybody's imagination took a discursive leap
among possibilities, and then everybody, of course, asked "Whom?"

"Old Jacob Rushleigh, himself. He has taken a house at Lakeside, for
the summer. And he has bought the new mills just over the river. That is
to give young Paul something to do, I imagine. Kinnicutt has begun to
grow; and when places or people once take a start, there's no knowing
what they may come to. Here's something for you, Faithie, that I dare
say tells all about it."

And he tossed over her shoulder, upon the table, a letter, bearing her
name, in Margaret Rushleigh's chirography, upon the cover.

Faith's head was bent over the list she was writing; but the vexatious
color, feeling itself shielded in her face, crept round till it made her
ear tips rosy. Saidie put out her forefinger, with a hardly perceptible
motion, at the telltale sign, and nodded at Aunt Etherege behind her
sister's back.

Aunt Etherege looked bland and sagacious.

Upstairs, a little after, these sentences were spoken in Saidie's room.

"Of course it will be," said the younger to the elder lady. "It's been
going on ever since they were children. Faith hasn't a right to say no,
now. And what else brought him up here after houses and mills?"

"I don't see that the houses and mills were necessary to the object.
Rather cumbersome and costly machinery, I should think, to bring to bear
upon such a simple purpose."

"Oh, the business plan is something that has come up accidentally, no
doubt. Running after one thing, people very often stumble upon another.
But it will all play in together, you'll see. Only, I'm afraid I shan't
have the glory of introducing Faithie in New York!"

"It would be as good a thing as possible. And I can perceive that your
father and mother count upon it, also. In their situation what a great
relief it would be! Of course, Henderson never could do so mad a thing
as take the child up by the roots, again, and transplant her to San
Francisco! And I see plainly he has got that in his own head."

A door across the passage at this moment shut, softly, but securely.

Behind it, in her low chair by her sewing table sat the young sister
whose fate had been so lightly decreed.

Was it all just so, as Saidie had said? Had she no longer a right to say
no? Only themselves know how easily, how almost inevitably, young
judgments and consciences are drawn on in the track beaten down for them
by others. Many and many a life decision has been made, through this
_taking for granted_ that bears with its mute, but magnetic power, upon
the shyness and irresolution that can scarcely face and interpret its
own wish or will.

It was very true, that, as Saidie Gartney had said, "this had been
going on for years." For years, Faith had found great pleasantness in
the companionship and evident preference of Paul Rushleigh. There had
been nobody to compare with him in her young set in Mishaumok. She knew
he liked her. She had been proud of it. The girlish fancy, that may be
forgotten in after years, or may, fostered by circumstance, endure and
grow into a calm and happy wifehood, had been given to him. And what
troubled her now? Was it that always, when the decisive moment
approaches, there is a little revulsion of timid feminine feeling, even
amidst the truest joy? Or was it that a new wine had been given into
Faith's life, which would not be held in the old bottles? Was she
uncertain--inconstant; or had she spiritually outgrown her old
attachment? Or, was she bewildered, now, out of the discernment of what
was still her heart's desire and need?

Paul was kind, and true, and manly. She recognized all this in him as
surely as ever. If he had turned from, and forgotten her, she would have
felt a pang. What was this, then, that she felt, as he came near, and
nearer?

And then, her father! Had he really begun to count on this? Do men know
how their young daughters feel when the first suggestion comes that they
are not regarded as born for perpetual daughterhood in the father's
house? Would she even encumber his plans, if she clung still to her
maidenly life?

By all these subtleties does the destiny of woman close in upon her.

Margaret Rushleigh's letter was full of delight, and eagerness, and
anticipation. She and Paul had been so charmed with Kinnicutt and
Lakeside; and there had happened to be a furnished house to let for the
season close by the Morrises, and they had persuaded papa to take it.
They were tired of the seashore, and Conway was getting crowded to
death. They wanted a real summer in the country. And then this had
turned up about the mills! Perhaps, now, her father would build, and
they should come up every year. Perhaps Paul would stay altogether, and
superintend. Perhaps--anything! It was all a delightful chaos of
possibilities; with this thing certain, that she and Faith would be
together for the next four months in the glorious summer shine and
bloom.

Miss Gartney's wedding was simple. The stateliness and show were all
reserved for Madison Square.

Mr. Armstrong pronounced the solemn words, in the shaded summer parlor,
with the door open into the sweeter and stiller shade without.

Faith stood by her sister's side, in fair, white robes, and Mr. Robert
Selmore was groomsman to his brother. A few especial friends from
Mishaumok and Lakeside were present to witness the ceremony.

And then there was a kissing--a hand-shaking--a well-wishing--a going
out to the simple but elegantly arranged collation--a disappearance of
the bride to put on traveling array--a carriage at the door--smiles,
tears, and good-bys--Mr., and Mrs., and Mr. Robert Selmore were off to
meet the Western train--and all was over.

Mrs. Etherege remained a few days longer at Cross Corners. As Mis'
Battis judiciously remarked, "after a weddin' or a funeral, there ought
to be somebody to stay a while and cheer up the mourners."

This visit, that had been so full of happenings, was to have a strange
occurrence still to mark it, before all fell again into the usual order.

Aunt Etherege was to go on Thursday. On Wednesday, the three ladies sat
together in the cool, open parlor, where Mr. Armstrong, walking over
from the Old House, had joined them. He had the July number of the
_Mishaumok_ in his hand, and a finger between the fresh-cut leaves at a
poem he would read them.

Just as he had finished the last stanza, amidst a hush of the room that
paid tribute to the beauty of the lines and his perfect rendering of
them, wheels came round from the high road into the lane.

"It is Mr. Gartney come back from Sedgely," said Aunt Etherege, looking
from her window, between the blinds. "Whom on earth has he picked up to
bring with him?"

A thin, angular figure of a woman, destitute of crinoline, wearing big
boots, and a bonnet that ignored the fashion, and carrying in her hand a
black enameled leather bag, was alighting as she spoke, at the gate.

"Mother!" said Faith, leaning forward, and glancing out, also, "it looks
like--it is--Nurse Sampson!"

And she put her work hastily from her lap, and rose to go out at the
side door, to meet and welcome her.

To do this, she had to pass by Mr. Armstrong. How came that rigid look,
that deadly paleness, to his face? What spasm of pain made him clutch
the pamphlet he held with fingers that grew white about the nails?

Faith stopped, startled.

"Mr. Armstrong! Are you not well?" said she. At the same instant of her
pausing, Miss Sampson entered from the hall, behind her. Mr. Armstrong's
eye, lifted toward Faith in an attempt to reply, caught a glimpse of the
sharp, pronounced outlines of the nurse's face. Before Faith could
comprehend, or turn, or cry out, the paleness blanched ghastlier over
his features, and the strong man fell back, fainting.

With quick, professional instinct, Miss Sampson sprang forward,
seizing, as she did so, an ice-water pitcher from the table.

"There, take this!" said she to Faith, "and sprinkle him with it, while
I loosen his neckcloth! Gracious goodness!" she exclaimed, in an altered
tone, as she came nearer to him for this purpose, "do it, some of the
rest of you, and let me get out of his way! It was me!"

And she vanished out of the room.


CHAPTER XXII.

ROGER ARMSTRONG'S STORY.

"Even by means of our sorrows, we belong to the Eternal Plan."
                                                         HUMBOLDT.


"Go in there," said Nurse Sampson to Mr. Gartney, calling him in from
the porch, "and lay that man flat on the floor!"

Which Mr. Gartney did, wondering, vaguely, in the instant required for
his transit to the apartment, whether bandit or lunatic might await his
offices.

All happened in a moment; and in that moment, the minister's fugitive
senses began to return.

"Lie quiet, a minute. Faith, get a glass of wine, or a little brandy."

Faith quickly brought both; and Mr. Armstrong, whom her father now
assisted to the armchair again, took the wine from her hand, with a
smile that thanked her, and depreciated himself.

"I am not ill," he said. "It is all over now. It was the sudden shock. I
did not think I could have been so weak."

Mrs. Gartney had gone to find some hartshorn. Mrs. Etherege, seeing that
the need for it was passing, went out to tell her sister so, and to ask
the strange woman who had originated all the commotion, what it could
possibly mean. Mr. Gartney, at the same instant, caught a glimpse of his
horse, which he had left unfastened at the gate, giving indications of
restlessness, and hastened out to tie him.

Faith and Mr. Armstrong were left alone.

"Did I frighten you, my child?" he asked, gently. "It was a strange
thing to happen! I thought that woman was in her grave. I thought she
died, when--I will tell you all about it some day, soon, Miss Faith. It
was the sad, terrible page of my life."

Faith's eyes were lustrous with sympathy. Under all other thought was a
beating joy--not looked at yet--that he could speak to her so! That he
could snatch this chance moment to tell her, only, of his sacred sorrow!

She moved a half step nearer, and laid her hand, softly, on the chair
arm beside him. She did not touch so much as a fold of his sleeve; but
it seemed, somehow, like a pitying caress.

"I am sorry!" said she. And then the others came in.

Mr. Gartney walked round with his friend to the old house.

Miss Sampson began to recount what she knew of the story. Faith escaped
to her own room at the first sentence. She would rather have it as Mr.
Armstrong's confidence.

Next morning, Faith was dusting, and arranging flowers in the east
parlor, and had just set the "hillside door," as they called it, open,
when Mr. Armstrong passed the window and appeared thereat.

"I came to ask, Miss Faith, if you would walk up over the Ridge. It is a
lovely morning, and I am selfish enough to wish to have you to myself
for a little of it. By and by, I would like to come back, and see Miss
Sampson."

Faith understood. He meant to tell her this that had been heavy upon his
heart through all these years. She would go. Directly, when she had
brought her hat, and spoken with her mother.

Mrs. Etherege and Mrs. Gartney were sitting together in the guest
chamber, above. At noon, after an early dinner, Mrs. Etherege was to
leave.

Mr. Armstrong stood upon the doorstone below, looking outward, waiting.
If he had been inside the room, he would not have heard. The ladies,
sitting by the window, just over his head, were quite unaware and
thoughtless of his possible position.

He caught Faith's clear, sweet accent first, as she announced her
purpose to her mother, adding:

"I shall be back, auntie, long before dinner."

Then she crossed the hall into her own room, made her slight preparation
for the walk, and went down by the kitchen staircase, to give Parthenia
some last word about the early dinner.

"I think," said Mrs. Etherege, in the keenness of her worldly wisdom,
"that this minister of yours might as well have a hint of how matters
stand. It seems to me he is growing to monopolize Faith, rather."

"Oh," replied Mrs. Gartney, "there is nothing of that! You know what
nurse told us, last evening. It isn't quite likely that a man would
faint away at the memory of one woman, if his thoughts were turned, the
least, in that way, upon another. No, indeed! She is his Sunday scholar,
and he treats her always as a very dear young friend. But that is all."

"Maybe. But is it quite safe for her? He is a young man yet,
notwithstanding those few gray hairs."

"Oh, Faith has tacitly belonged to Paul Rushleigh these three years!"

Mr. Armstrong heard it all. He turned the next moment, and met his "dear
young friend" with the same gentle smile and manner that he always wore
toward her, and they walked up the Ridge path, among the trees,
together.

A bowlder of rock, scooped into smooth hollows that made pleasant seats,
was the goal, usually, of the Ridge walk. Here Faith paused, and Mr.
Armstrong made her sit down and rest.

Standing there before her, he began his story.

"One summer--years ago," he said, "I went to the city of New Orleans. I
went to bring thence, with me, a dear friend--her who was to have been
my wife."

The deep voice trembled, and paused. Faith could not look up, her breath
came quickly, and the tears were all but ready.

"She had been there, through the winter and spring, with her father,
who, save myself, was the only near friend she had in all the world.

"The business which took him there detained him until later in the
season than Northerners are accustomed to feel safe in staying. Zion
National Monument, Utah.

THE BOOK OF THE NATIONAL PARKS

The Book of the National Parks
ON THE APPRECIATION OF SCENERY

To the average educated American, scenery is a pleasing hodge-podge
of mountains, valleys, plains, lakes, and rivers. To him, the glacier-hollowed
valley of Yosemite, the stream-scooped abyss of the Grand Canyon,
the volcanic gulf of Crater Lake, the bristling granite core of the
Rockies, and the ancient ice-carved shales of Glacier National Park
all are one--just scenery, magnificent, incomparable, meaningless.

As a people we have been content to wonder, not to know; yet with scenery,
as with all else, to know is to begin fully to enjoy.
Appreciation measures enjoyment.

And this brings me to my proposition, namely, that we shall not really
enjoy our possession of the grandest scenery in the world until we realize
that scenery is the written page of the History of Creation, and until
we learn to read that page.

The national parks of America include areas of the noblest and most
diversified scenic sublimity easily accessible in the world; nevertheless
it is their chiefest glory that they are among the completest
expressions of the earth's history.

The American people is waking rapidly to the magnitude of its scenic
possession; it has yet to learn to appreciate it.

Nevertheless we love scenery. We are a nation of sightseers. The year
before the world war stopped all things, we spent $286,000,000 in
going to Europe.

That summer Switzerland's receipts from the sale of transportation and
board to persons coming from foreign lands to see her scenery was
$100,000,000, and more than half, it has been stated apparently
with authority, came from America.

That same year tourist travel became Canada's fourth largest source of
income, exceeding in gross receipts even her fisheries, and the greater
part came from the United States; it is a matter of record that
seven-tenths of the hotel registrations in the Canadian Rockies
were from south of the border.

Had we then known, as a nation, that there was just as good scenery of
its kind in the United States, and many more kinds, we would have
gone to see that; it is a national trait to buy the best.

Since then, we have discovered this important fact and are crowding to our
national parks.

"Is it true," a woman asked me at the foot of Yosemite Falls, "that this
is the highest unbroken waterfall in the world?"
She was the average tourist, met there by chance. I assured her that such
was the fact. I called attention to the apparent deliberation of
the water's fall, a trick of the senses resulting from failure to realize
height and distance.

"To think they are the highest in the world!"

she mused.

I told her that the soft fingers of water had carved this valley three
thousand feet into the solid granite, and that ice had polished its
walls, and I estimated for her the ages since the Merced River flowed
at the level of the cataract's brink.

"I've seen the tallest building in the world," she replied dreamily,
"and the longest railroad, and the largest lake, and the highest
monument, and the biggest department store, and now I see the highest
waterfall.

Just think of it!"
If one has illusions concerning the average tourist, let him compare the
hundreds who gape at the paint pots and geysers of Yellowstone with the
dozens who exult in the sublimated glory of the colorful canyon. Or let
him listen to the table-talk of a party returned from Crater Lake. Or
let him recall the statistical superlatives which made up his friend's
last letter from the Grand Canyon.

I am not condemning wonder, which, in its place, is a legitimate and
pleasurable emotion. As a condiment to sharpen and accent an abounding
sense of beauty it has real and abiding value.

Love of beauty is practically a universal passion.

It is that which lures millions into the fields, valleys, woods,
and mountains on every holiday, which crowds our ocean lanes and
railroads.

The fact that few of these rejoicing millions
are aware of their own motive,
                                   and that, strangely enough, a few even would be ashamed to make
the admission if they became aware of it, has nothing to do with
the fact.

It's a wise man that knows his own motives. The fact that still fewer,
whether aware or not of the reason of their happiness, are capable of
making the least expression of it, also has nothing to do with the fact.
The tourist woman whom I met at the foot of Yosemite Falls may
have felt secretly suffocated by the filmy grandeur of the incomparable
spectacle, notwithstanding that she was conscious of no higher
emotion than the cheap wonder of a superlative.

The Grand Canyon's rim is the stillest crowded place I know. I've stood
among a hundred people on a precipice and heard the whir of a bird's
wings in the abyss.

Probably the majority of those silent gazers were suffering something akin
to pain at their inability to give vent to the emotions bursting
within them.

I believe that the statement can not be successfully challenged
that, as a people, our enjoyment of scenery is almost wholly
emotional.

Love of beauty spiced by wonder is the equipment for enjoyment of the
average intelligent traveller of to-day. Now add to this a more or less
equal part of the intellectual pleasure of comprehension and you have the
equipment of the average intelligent traveller of to-morrow. To hasten
this to-morrow is one of the several objects of this book.

To see in the carved and colorful depths of the Grand Canyon not
only the stupendous abyss whose terrible beauty grips the soul, but
also to-day's chapter in a thrilling story of creation whose beginning
lay untold centuries back in the ages, whose scene covers three
hundred thousand square miles of our wonderful southwest, whose
actors include the greatest forces of nature, whose tremendous
episodes shame the imagination of Doré, and whose logical end invites
suggestions before which finite minds shrink--this is to come into
the presence of the great spectacle properly equipped for its
enjoyment.

But how many who see the Grand Canyon get more out of it than merely
the beauty that grips the soul?

So it is throughout the world of scenery. The geologic story written on
the cliffs of Crater Lake is more stupendous even than the glory of its
indigo bowl.

The war of titanic forces described in simple language on the rocks of
Glacier National Park is unexcelled in sublimity in the history
of mankind.

The story of Yellowstone's making multiplies many times the thrill
occasioned by its world-famed spectacle.

Even the simplest and smallest rock details often tell thrilling incidents
of prehistoric tunes out of which the enlightened imagination reconstructs
the romances and the tragedies of earth's earlier days.

How eloquent, for example, was the small, water-worn fragment of dull
coal we found on the limestone slope of one of Glacier's mountains!
Impossible companionship! The one the product of forest, the other of
submerged depths. Instantly I glimpsed the distant age when thousands
of feet above the very spot upon which I stood, but then at sea
level, bloomed a Cretaceous forest, whose broken trunks and matted
foliage decayed in bogs where they slowly turned to coal; coal
which, exposed and disintegrated during intervening ages, has long
since--all but a few small fragments like this--washed into the
headwaters of the Saskatchewan to merge eventually in the muds of
Hudson Bay.

And then, still dreaming, my mind leaped millions of years still further
back to lake bottoms where, ten thousand feet below the spot on
which I stood, gathered the pre-Cambrian ooze which later hardened
to this very limestone.

From ooze a score of thousand feet, a hundred million years, to coal!

And both lie here together now in my palm! Filled thus with visions of a
perspective beyond human comprehension, with what multiplied
intensity of interest I now returned to the noble view from Gable
Mountain!

In pleading for a higher understanding of Nature's method and
accomplishment as a precedent to study and observation of our
national parks, I seek enormously to enrich the enjoyment not only
of these supreme examples but of all examples of world making.

The same readings which will prepare you to enjoy to the full the
message of our national parks will invest your neighborhood hills
at home, your creek and river and prairie, your vacation valleys,
the landscape through your car window, even your wayside ditch,
with living interest.

I invite you to a new and fascinating earth, an earth interesting,
vital, personal, beloved, because at last known and understood!

It requires no great study to know and understand the earth well
enough for such purpose as this.

One does not have to dim his eyes with acres of maps, or become a
plodding geologist, or learn to distinguish schists from granites,
or to classify plants by table, or to call wild geese and marmots
by their Latin names.

It is true that geography, geology, physiography, mineralogy, botany
and zoology must each contribute their share toward the condition
of intelligence which will enable you to realize appreciation of
Nature's amazing earth, but the share of each is so small that the
problem will be solved, not by exhaustive study, but by the selection
of essential parts.

Two or three popular books which interpret natural science in perspective
should pleasurably accomplish your purpose. But once begun, I predict
that few will fail to carry certain subjects beyond the mere
essentials, while some will enter for life into a land of new
delights.

Let us, for illustration, consider for a moment the making of America.

The earth, composed of countless aggregations of matter drawn together
from the skies, whirled into a globe, settled into a solid mass
surrounded by an atmosphere carrying water like a sponge, has reached
the stage of development when land and sea have divided the surface
between them, and successions of heat and frost, snow, ice, rain,
and flood, are busy with their ceaseless carving of the land.

Already mountains are wearing down and sea bottoms are building up
with their refuse.

Sediments carried by the rivers are depositing in strata, which
some day will harden into rock.

We are looking now at the close of the era which geologists call Archean,
because it is ancient beyond knowledge. A few of its rocks are known, but
not well enough for many definite conclusions.

All the earth's vast mysterious past is lumped under this title.

The definite history of the earth begins with the close of the dim
Archean era.

It is the lapse from then till now, a few hundred million years at
most out of all infinity, which ever can greatly concern man, for
during this time were laid the only rocks whose reading was assisted
by the presence of fossils.

During this time the continents attained their final shape, the mountains
rose, and valleys, plains, and rivers formed and re-formed many times
before assuming the passing forms which they now show. During this time
also life evolved from its inferred beginnings in the late Archean to the
complicated, finely developed, and in man's case highly mentalized and
spiritualized organization of To-day.

Surely the geologist's field of labor is replete with interest,
inspiration, even romance. But because it has become so saturated with
technicality as to become almost a popular bugaboo, let us attempt no
special study, but rather cull from its voluminous records those
simple facts and perspectives which will reveal to us this greatest
of all story books, our old earth, as the volume of enchantment
that it really is.

With the passing of the Archean, the earth had not yet settled into
the perfectly balanced sphere which Nature destined it to be.

In some places the rock was more compactly squeezed than in others,
and these denser masses eventually were forced violently into neighbor
masses which were not so tightly squeezed. These movements far below
the surface shifted the surface balance and became one of many
complicated and little known causes impelling the crust here to
slowly rise and there to slowly fall.

Thus in places sea bottoms lifted above the surface and became land,
while lands elsewhere settled and became seas. There are areas which
have alternated many times between land and sea; this is why we
find limestones which were formed in the sea overlying shales which
were formed in fresh water, which in turn overlie sandstones which
once were beaches--all these now in plateaus thousands of feet above
the ocean's level.

Sometimes these mysterious internal forces lifted the surface in long
waves. Thus mountain chains and mountain systems were created. Often
their summits, worn down by frosts and rains, disclose the core of rock
which, ages before, then hot and fluid, had underlain the crust
and bent it upward into mountain form.

Now, cold and hard, these masses are disclosed as the granite of to-day's
landscape, or as other igneous rocks of earth's interior which now
cover broad surface areas, mingled with the stratified or water-made
rocks which the surface only produces.

But this has not always been the fate of the under-surface molten
rocks, for sometimes they have burst by volcanic vents clear through
the crust of earth, where, turned instantly to pumice and lava by
release from pressure, they build great surface cones, cover broad plains
and fill basins and valleys.

Thus were created the three great divisions of the rocks which form
the three great divisions of scenery, the sediments, the granites,
and the lavas.

During these changes in the levels of enormous surface areas, the
frosts and water have been industriously working down the elevations
of the land.

Nature forever seeks a level.

The snows of winter, melting at midday, sink into the rocks' minutest
cracks. Expanded by the frosts, the imprisoned water pries open and
chips the surface. The rains of spring and summer wash the chippings and
other débris into rivulets, which carry them into mountain torrents,
which rush them into rivers, which sweep them into oceans, which
deposit them for the upbuilding of the bottoms.

Always the level!

Thousands of square miles of California were built up from ocean's
bottom with sediments chiselled from the mountains of Wyoming,
Colorado, and Utah, and swept seaward through the Grand Canyon.

These mills grind without rest or pause. The atmosphere gathers the
moisture from the sea, the winds roll it in clouds to the land, the
mountains catch and chill the clouds, and the resulting rains hurry
back to the sea in rivers bearing heavy freights of soil.

Spring, summer, autumn, winter, day and night, the mills of Nature
labor unceasingly to produce her level. If ever this earth is really
finished to Nature's liking, it will be as round and polished as
a billiard ball.

[Illustration: _From a photograph by Bailey Willis_
MIDDLE FORK OF THE BELLY RIVER, GLACIER NATIONAL PARK
Very ancient shales and limestone fantastically carved by glaciers.

The illustration shows Glenns Lake, Pyramid Peak, Chaney Glacier,
and Mount Kipp]
Years mean nothing in the computation of the prehistoric past.

Who can conceive a thousand centuries, to say nothing of a million
years?

Yet either is inconsiderable against the total lapse of time even from
the Archean's close till now.

And so geologists have devised an easier method of count, measured
not by units of time, but by what each phase of progress has accomplished.

This measure is set forth in the accompanying table, together with
a conjecture concerning the lapse of time in terms of years.

The most illuminating accomplishment of the table, however, is its
bird's-eye view of the procession of the evolution of life from
the first inference of its existence to its climax of to-day; and,
concurrent with this progress, its suggestion of the growth and
development of scenic America.

It is, in effect, the table of contents of a volume whose thrilling
text and stupendous illustration are engraved immortally in the rocks;
a volume whose ultimate secrets the scholarship of all time perhaps
will never fully decipher, but whose dramatic outlines and many of whose
most thrilling incidents are open to all at the expense of a little
study at home and a little thoughtful seeing in the places where
the facts are pictured in lines so big and graphic that none may
miss their meanings.

Man's colossal egotism is rudely shaken before the Procession of the
Ages.

Aghast, he discovers that the billions of years which have wrought this
earth from star dust were not merely God's laborious preparation of a
habitation fit for so admirable an occupant; that man, on the
contrary, is nothing more or less than the present master tenant
of earth, the highest type of hundreds of millions of years of
succeeding tenants only because he is the latest in evolution.

PROGRESS OF CREATION
Chart of the Divisions of Geologic Time, and an Estimate in Years
based on the assumption that a hundred million years have elapsed
since the close of the Archean Period, together with a condensed
table of the Evolution of Life from its Inferred Beginnings in the
Archean to the Present Time.

Read from the bottom up.

Read the footnote upon the opposite page concerning the Estimate of
Time.

---------+---------------+--------------+-----------------------+----------
ERA | PERIOD | EPOCH | LIFE DEVELOPMENT | ESTIMATED | | | | TIME
---------+---------------+--------------+-----------------------+----------
| | Recent | THE AGE OF MAN |
CENOZOIC | _Quaternary_ | Pleistocene |Animals and plants of | 6 |
| (Ice Age) |the modern type.

First | millions | | |record of man occurs in| of | | |the early
Pleistocene. | years.

Era of +---------------+--------------+-----------------------+ Recent |
| Pliocene | THE AGE OF MAMMALS |
Life | _Tertiary_ | Miocene |Rise and development of|
| | Oligocene |the highest orders of |
| | Eocene |plants and animals.
|
---------+---------------+--------------+-----------------------+----------
| _Cretaceous_ | | THE AGE OF REPTILES |
MESOZOIC | _Jurassic_ | |Shellfish with complex |
| _Triassic_ | |shells.

Enormous land |
| | |reptiles.

Flying | 16 | | |reptiles and the | millions | | |evolution therefrom of
| of | | |birds. First palms. | years.
| | |First hardwood trees. |
| | | First mammals. |

Era of +---------------+--------------+-----------------------+ Intermediate
| | THE AGE OF AMPHIBIANS.|

Life | | | THE COAL AGE |
|_Carboniferous_| Permian |Sharks and sea animals |
| | |with nautilus-like |
| |Pennsylvanian |shells.

"Are you ill, or tired?"

"Oh, no!" answered Faith, quickly, from the surface, as one often does
when thoughts lie deep. "I am quite well. Only--I am sometimes puzzled."

"About what is? Or about what ought to be?"

"About doing. So much depends. I get so tired--feeling how responsible
everything makes me. I wish I were a little child again! Or that
somebody would just take me and tell me where to go, and where to stay,
and what to do, and what not. From minute to minute, as the things come
up."

Roger Armstrong, with his great, chastened soul, yearned over the child
as she spoke; so gladly he would have taken her, at that moment, to his
heart, and bid her lean on him for all that man might give of help--of
love--of leading!

If she had told him, in that moment, all her doubt, as for the instant
of his pause she caught her breath with swelling impulse to do!

"'And they shall all be led of God';" said the minister. "It is only to
be willing to take His way rather than one's own. All this that seems to
depend painfully upon oneself, depends, then, upon Him. The act is
human--the consequences become divine."

Faith was silenced then. There was no appeal to human help from that.
Her impulse throbbed itself away into a lonely passiveness again.

There was a distance between these two that neither dared to pass.

A word was spoken between mother and daughter as they parted for the
night.

"Mother! I have such a thing to think of--to decide!"

It was whispered low, and with cheek hidden on her mother's neck, as the
good-night kiss was taken.

"Decide for your own happiness, Faithie. We have seen and understood for
a long time. If it is to be as we think, nothing could give us a greater
joy for you."

Ah! how much had father and mother seen and understood?

The daughter went her way, to wage her own battle in secret; to balance
and fix her decision between her own heart and God. So we find ourselves
left, at the last, in all the great crises of our life.

Late that night, while Mr. and Mrs. Gartney were felicitating each
other, cheerily, upon the great good that had fallen to the lot of their
cherished child, that child sat by her open window, looking out into the
summer night; the tossing elm boughs whispering weird syllables in her
ears, and the stars looking down upon her soul struggle, so silently,
from so far!

"Mr. Rushleigh's here!" shouted Hendie, precipitating himself, next
morning, into the breakfast room, where, at a rather later hour than
usual, Mrs. Gartney and Faith were washing and wiping the silver and
china, and Mr. Gartney still lingered in his seat, finishing somebody's
long speech, reported in the evening paper of yesterday.

"Mr. Rushleigh's here, on his long-tailed black horse! And he says he'll
give me a ride, but not yet. He wants to see papa. Make haste, papa."

Faith dropped her towel, and as Mr. Gartney rose to go out and meet his
visitor, just whispered, hurriedly, to her mother:

"I'll come down again. I'll see him before he goes." And escaped up the
kitchen staircase to her own room.

Paul Rushleigh came, he told Mr. Gartney, because, although Faith had
not authorized him to appeal to her father to ratify any consent of
hers, he thought it right to let him know what he had already said to
his daughter. He did not wish to hurry Faith. He only wished to stand
openly with Mr. Gartney in the matter, and would wait, then, till she
should be quite ready to give him her own answer.

He explained the prospect his father offered him, and the likelihood of
his making a permanent home at Kinnicutt.

"That is," he added, "if I am to be so happy as to have a home,
anywhere, of my own."

Mr. Gartney was delighted with the young man's unaffected warmth of
heart and noble candor.

"I could not wish better for my daughter, Mr. Rushleigh," he replied.
"And she is a daughter whom I may fairly wish the best for, too."

Mr. Gartney rose. "I will send Faith," said he.

"I do not _ask_ for her," answered Paul, a flush of feeling showing in
his cheek. "I did not come, expecting it--my errand was one I owed to
yourself--but Faith knows quite well how glad I shall be if she chooses
to see me."

As Mr. Gartney crossed the hall from parlor to sitting room, a light
step came over the front staircase.

Faith passed her father, with a downcast look, as he motioned with his
hand toward the room where Paul stood, waiting. The bright color spread
to her temples as she glided in.

She held, but did not wear, the little turquoise ring.

Paul saw it, as he came forward, eagerly.

A thrill of hope, or dread--he scarce knew which--quivered suddenly at
his heart. Was he to take it back, or place it on her finger as a
pledge?

"I have been thinking, Paul," said she, tremulously, and with eyes that
fell again away from his, after the first glance and greeting, "almost
ever since. And I do not think I ought to keep you waiting to know the
little I can tell you. I do not think I understand myself. I cannot
tell, certainly, how I ought--how I do feel. I have liked you very much.
And it was very pleasant to me before all this. I know you deserve to be
made very happy. And if it depends on me, I do not dare to say I will
not try to do it. If you think, yourself, that this is enough--that I
shall do the truest thing so--I will try."

And the timid little fingers laid the ring into his hand, to do with as
he would.

What else could Paul have done?

With the strong arm that should henceforth uphold and guard her, he drew
her close; and with the other hand slipped the simply jeweled round upon
her finger. For all word of answer, he lifted it, so encircled, to his
lips.

Faith shrank and trembled.

Hendie's voice sounded, jubilant, along the upper floor, toward the
staircase.

"I will go, now, if you wish. Perhaps I ought," said Paul. "And yet, I
would so gladly stay. May I come again, by and by?"

Faith uttered a half-audible assent, and as Hendie's step came nearer
down the stairs, and passed the door, straight out upon the grassplot,
toward the gate, and the long-tailed black horse that stood there, she
escaped again to her own chamber.

Hendie had his ride. Meanwhile, his sister, down upon her knees at her
bedside, struggled with the mystery and doubt of her own heart. Why
could she not feel happier? Would it never be otherwise? Was this all
life had for her, in its holiest gift, henceforth? But, come what might,
she would have God, always!

So, without words, only with tears, she prayed, and at last, grew calm.


CHAPTER XXIV.

CONFLICT.

"O Life, O Beyond,
_Art_ thou fair!--_art_ thou sweet?"
                          MRS. BROWNING.


There followed days that almost won Faith back into her outward life of
pleasantness.

Margaret came over with Madam Rushleigh, and felicitated herself and
friend, impetuously. Paul's mother thanked her for making her son happy.
Old Mr. Rushleigh kissed her forehead with a blessing. And Mr. and Mrs.
Gartney looked upon their daughter as with new eyes of love. Hendie rode
the black horse every day, and declared that "everything was just as
jolly as it could be!"

Paul drove her out, and walked with her, and talked of his plans, and
all they would do and have together.

And she let herself be brightened by all this outward cheer and promise,
and this looking forward to a happiness and use that were to come. But
still she shrank and trembled at every loverlike caress, and still she
said, fearfully, every now and then:

"Paul--I don't feel as you do. What if I don't love you as I ought?"

And Paul called her his little oversensitive, conscientious Faithie, and
persuaded himself and her that he had no fear--that he was quite
satisfied.

When Mr. Armstrong came to see her, gravely and tenderly wishing her
joy, and looked searchingly into her face for the pure content that
should be there, she bent her head into her hands, and wept.

She was very weak, you say? She ought to have known her own mind better?
Perhaps. I speak of her as she was. There are mistakes like these in
life; there are hearts that suffer thus, unconscious of their ail.

The minister waited while the momentary burst of emotion subsided, and
something of Faith's wonted manner returned.

"It is very foolish of me," she said, "and you must think me very
strange. But, somehow, tears come easily when one has been feeling a
great deal. And such kind words from you touch me."

"My words and thoughts will always be kind for you, my child. And I know
very well that tears may mean sweeter and deeper things than smiles. I
will not try you with much talking now. You have my affectionate wishes
and my prayers. If there is ever any help that I can give, to you who
have so much loving help about you, count on me as an earnest friend,
always."

The hour was past when Faith, if she could ever, could have asked of him
the help she did most sorely need.

And so, with a gentle hand clasp, he went away.

Mr. Gartney began to be restless about Michigan. He wanted to go and see
this wild estate of his. He would have liked to take his wife, now that
haying would soon be over, and he could spare the time from his farm,
and make it a pleasant summer journey for them both. But he could
neither leave Faith, nor take her, well, it seemed. Hendie might go.
Fathers always think their boys ready for the world when once they are
fairly out of the nursery.

One day, Paul came to Cross Corners with news.

Mr. Rushleigh had affairs to be arranged and looked to, in New
York--matters connected with the mills, which had, within a few weeks,
begun to run; he had been there, once, about them; he could do all quite
well, now, by letter, and an authorized messenger; he could not just now
very well leave Kinnicutt. Besides, he wanted Paul to see and know his
business friends, and to put himself in the way of valuable business
information. Would Faith spare him for a week or two--he bade his son to
ask.

Madam Rushleigh would accompany Paul; and before his return he would go
with his mother to Saratoga, where her daughter Gertrude and Mrs. Philip
Rushleigh were, and where he was to leave her for the remainder of their
stay.

Margaret liked Kinnicutt better than any watering-place; and she and her
father had made a little plan of their own, which, if Faith would go
back with him, they would explain to her.

So Faith went over to Lakeside to tea, and heard the plan.

"We are going to make our first claim upon you, Faith," said the elder
Mr. Rushleigh, as he led his daughter-in-law elect out on the broad
piazza under the Italian awnings, when the slight summer evening repast
was ended. "We want to borrow you, while madam and the yonker are gone.
Your father tells me he wishes to make a Western journey. Now, why not
send him off at this very time? I think your mother intends accompanying
him?"

"It had been talked of," Faith said; "and perhaps her father would be
very glad to go when he could leave her in such good keeping. She would
tell him what Mr. Rushleigh had been so kind as to propose."

It was a suggestion of real rest to Faith--this free companionship with
Margaret again, in the old, girlish fashion--and the very thoughtful
look, that was almost sad, which had become habitual to her face, of
late, brightened into the old, careless pleasure, as she spoke.

Old Mr. Rushleigh saw something in this that began to seem to him more
than mere maidenly shyness.

By and by, Margaret called her brother to sing with her.

"Come, Faithie," said Paul, drawing her gently by the hand. "I can't
sing unless you go, too."

Faith went; more, it seemed, of his will, than her own.

"How does that appear to you?" said Mr. Rushleigh to his wife. "Is it
all right? Does the child care for Paul?"

"Care!" exclaimed the mother, almost surprised into too audible speech.
"How can she help caring? And hasn't it grown up from childhood with
them? What put such a question into your head? I should as soon think of
doubting whether I cared for you."

It was easier for the father to doubt, jealously, for his son, than for
the mother to conceive the possibility of indifference in the woman her
boy had chosen.

"Besides," added Mrs. Rushleigh, "why, else, should she have accepted
him? I _know_ Faith Gartney is not mercenary, or worldly ambitious."

"I am quite sure of that, as well," answered her husband. "It is no
doubt of her motive or her worth--I can't say it is really a doubt of
anything; but, Gertrude, she must not marry the boy unless her whole
heart is in it! A sharp stroke is better than a lifelong pain."

"I'm sure I can't tell what has come over you! She can't ever have
thought of anybody else! And she seems quite one of ourselves."

"Yes; that's just the uncertainty," replied Mr. Rushleigh. "Whether it
isn't as much Margaret, and you and I, as Paul. Whether she fully knows
what she is about. She can't marry the family, you know. We shall die,
and go off, and Heaven knows what; Paul must be the whole world to her,
or nothing. I hope he hasn't hurried her--or let her hurry herself."

"Hurry! She has had years to make up her mind in!"

Mrs. Rushleigh, woman as she was, would not understand.

"We shall go, in three days," said Paul, when he stood in the moonlight
with Faith at the little white gate under the elms, after driving her
home; "and I must have you all the time to myself, until then!"

Faith wondered if it were right that she shouldn't quite care to be "had
all the time to himself until then"? Whether such demonstrativeness and
exclusiveness of affection was ever a little irksome to others as to
her?

Faith thought and questioned, often, what other girls might feel in
positions like her own, and tried to judge herself by them; it
absolutely never occurred to her to think how it might have been if
another than Paul had stood in this relation toward herself.

The young man did not quite have his own way, however. His father went
down to Mishaumok on one of the three days, and left him in charge at
the mills; and there were people to see, and arrangements to make; but
some part of each day he did manage to devote to Faith, and they had
walking and driving together, and every night Paul stayed to tea at
Cross Corners.

"It's my weakness to be drawn into quarrels. It's a thing I have to
guard against....

"What does it all amount to? It is like a fight between navvies in a tunnel
to settle the position of the Pole star.

It doesn't concern us.... Oh!

it doesn't indeed concern us.

It's a scuffle in the darkness, and our business, the business of all
brains, the only permanent good work is to light up the world....

There will be mischief and hatred here and suppression and then
forgetfulness, and then things will go on again, a little better
or a little worse...."

"I'm tired of this place, White, and of all such places. I'm tired of the
shouting and running, the beating and shooting.

I'm sick of all the confusions of life's experience, which tells
only of one need amidst an endless multitude of distresses.

I've seen my fill of wars and disputes and struggles.

I see now how a man may grow weary at last of life and its disorders,
its unreal exacting disorders, its blunders and its remorse. No! I want
to begin upon the realities I have made for myself.

For they are the realities. I want to go now to some quiet
corner where I can polish what I have learnt, sort out my
accumulations, be undisturbed by these transitory symptomatic
things....

"What was that boy saying? They are burning the STAR office.... Well,
let them...."
And as if to emphasize his detachment, his aversion, from the things that
hurried through the night about them, from the red flare in the
sky and the distant shouts and revolver shots and scuffling flights
down side streets, he began to talk again of aristocracy and the
making of greatness and a new great spirit in men.

All the rest of his life, he said, must be given to that. He would
say his thing plainly and honestly and afterwards other men would
say it clearly and beautifully; here it would touch a man and there
it would touch a man; the Invisible King in us all would find himself
and know himself a little in this and a little in that, and at last
a day would come, when fair things and fine things would rule the
world and such squalor as this about them would be as impossible
any more for men as a Stone Age Corroboree....

Late or soon?

Benham sought for some loose large measure of time.

"Before those constellations above us have changed their shapes....

"Does it matter if we work at something that will take a hundred
years or ten thousand years?

It will never come in our lives, White. Not soon enough for that. But after
that everything will be soon--when one comes to death then everything
is at one's fingertips--I can feel that greater world I shall never see
as one feels the dawn coming through the last darkness...."

16

The attack on the Rand Club began while Benham and White were at lunch
in the dining-room at the Sherborough on the day following the
burning of the STAR office.

The Sherborough dining-room was on the first floor, and the Venetian
window beside their table opened on to a verandah above a piazza.

As they talked they became aware of an excitement in the street below,
shouting and running and then a sound of wheels and the tramp
of a body of soldiers marching quickly.

White stood up and looked.
"They're seizing the stuff in the gunshops," he said, sitting down
again. "It's amazing they haven't done it before."
They went on eating and discussing the work of a medical mission
at Mukden that had won Benham's admiration....

A revolver cracked in the street and there was a sound of glass
smashing.

Then more revolver shots.
Who shall attempt to bring into accord the seeming contradictions of a
woman's heart?


CHAPTER XXV.

A GAME AT CHESS.

"Life's burdens fall, its discords cease,
I lapse into the glad release
Of nature's own exceeding peace."
                                    WHITTIER.


"I don't see," said Aunt Faith, "why the child can't come to me,
Henderson, while you and Elizabeth are away. I don't believe in putting
yourself under obligations to people till you're sure they're going to
be something to you. Things don't always turn out according to the
Almanac."

"She goes just as she always has gone to the Rushleighs," replied Mr.
Gartney. "Paul is to be away. It is a visit to Margaret. Still, I shall
be absent at least a fortnight, and it might be well that she should
divide her time, and come to Cross Corners for a few days, if it is only
to see the house opened and ready. Luther can have a bed here, if Mis'
Battis should be afraid."

Mis' Battis was to improve the fortnight's interval for a visit to
Factory Village.

"Well, fix it your own way," said Miss Henderson. "I'm ready for her,
any time. Only, if she's going to peak and pine as she has done ever
since this grand match was settled for her, Glory and I'll have our
hands full, nursing her, by then you get back!"

"Faith is quite well," said Mrs. Gartney. "It is natural for a girl to
be somewhat thoughtful when she decides for herself such an important
relation."

"Symptoms differ, in different cases. _I_ should say she was taking it
pretty hard," said the old lady.

Mr. and Mrs. Gartney left home on Monday.

Faith and Mis' Battis remained in the house a few hours after, setting
all things in that dreary "to rights" before leaving, which is almost,
in its chillness and silence, like burial array. Glory came over to
help; and when all was done--blinds shut, windows and doors fastened,
fire out, ashes removed--stove blackened--Luther drove Mis' Battis and
her box over to Mrs. Pranker's, and Glory took Faith's little bag for
her to the Old House.

This night she was to stay with her aunt. She wanted just this little
pause and quiet before going to the Rushleighs'.

"Tell Aunt Faith I'm coming," said she, as she let herself and Glory out
at the front door, and then, locking it, put the key in her pocket.
"I'll just walk up over the Ridge first, for a little coolness and
quiet, after this busy day."

There was the peace of a rested body and soul upon her face when she
came down again a half hour after, and crossed the lane, and entered,
through the stile, upon the field path to the Old House. Heart and will
had been laid asleep--earthly plan and purpose had been put aside in all
their incompleteness and uncertainty--and only God and Nature had been
permitted to come near.

Mr. Armstrong walked down and met her midway in the field.

"How beautiful mere simpleness and quiet are," said Faith. "The cool
look of trees and grass, and the stillness of this evening time, are
better even than flowers, and bright sunlight, and singing of birds!"

"'He maketh me to lie down in green pastures: He leadeth me beside the
still waters: He restoreth my soul: He leadeth me in the paths of
righteousness for His name's sake.'"

They did not disturb the stillness by more words. They came up
together, in the hush and shadow, to the pleasant doorstone, that
offered its broad invitation to their entering feet, and where Aunt
Faith at this moment stood, watching and awaiting them.

"Go into the blue bedroom, and lay off your things, child," she said,
giving Faith a kiss of welcome, "and then come back and we'll have our
tea."

Faith disappeared through passages and rooms beyond.

Aunt Henderson turned quickly to the minister.

"You're her spiritual adviser, ain't you?" she asked, abruptly.

"I ought to be," answered Mr. Armstrong.

"Why don't you advise her, then?"

"Spiritually, I do and will, in so far as so pure a spirit can need a
help from me. But--I think I know what you mean, Miss Henderson--spirit
and heart are two. I am a man; and she is--what you know."

Miss Henderson's keen eyes fixed themselves, for a minute, piercingly
and unflinchingly, on the minister's face. Then she turned, without a
word, and went into the house to see the tea brought in. She knew, now,
all there was to tell.

Faith's face interpreted itself to Mr. Armstrong. He saw that she
needed, that she would have, rest. Rest, this night, from all that of
late had given her weariness and trouble. So, he did not even talk to
her in the way they mostly talked together; he would not rouse, ever so
distantly, thought, that might, by so many subtle links, bear round upon
her hidden pain. But he brought, after tea, a tiny chessboard, and set
the delicate carved men upon it, and asked her if she knew the game.

"A little," she said. "What everybody always owns to knowing--the
moves."

"Suppose we play."

It was a very pleasant novelty--sitting down with this grave, earnest
friend to a game of skill--and seeing him bring to it all the resource
of power and thought that he bent, at other times, on more important
work.

"Not that, Miss Faith! You don't mean that! You put your queen in
danger."

"My queen is always a great trouble to me," said Faith, smiling, as she
retracted the half-made move. "I think I do better when I give her up in
exchange."

"Excuse me, Miss Faith; but that always seems to me a cowardly sort of
game. It is like giving up a great power in life because one is too weak
to claim and hold it."

"Only I make you lose yours, too."

"Yes, there is a double loss and inefficiency. Does that make a better
game, or one pleasanter to play?"

"There are two people, in there, talking riddles; and they don't even
know it," said Miss Henderson to her handmaid, in the kitchen close by.

Perhaps Mr. Armstrong, as he spoke, did discern a possible deeper
significance in his own words; did misgive himself that he might rouse
thoughts so; at any rate, he made rapid, skillful movements on the
board, that brought the game into new complications, and taxed all
Faith's attention to avert their dangers to herself.

For half an hour, there was no more talking.

Then Faith's queen was put in helpless peril.

"I must give her up," said she. "She is all but gone."

A few moves more, and all Faith's hope depended on one little pawn, that
might be pushed to queen and save her game.

"How one does want the queen power at the last!" said she. "And how much
easier it is to lose it, than to get it back!"

"It is like the one great, leading possibility, that life, in some sort,
offers each of us," said Mr. Armstrong. "Once lost--once missed--we may
struggle on without it--we may push little chances forward to partial
amends; but the game is changed; its soul is gone."

As he spoke he made the move that led to obvious checkmate.

Glory came in to the cupboard, now, and began putting up the tea things
she had brought from washing.

Mr. Armstrong had done just what, at first, he had meant not to do. Had
he bethought himself better, and did he seize the opening to give vague
warning where he might not speak more plainly? Or, had his habit, as a
man of thought, discerning quick meaning in all things, betrayed him
into the instant's forgetfulness?

However it might be, Glory caught glimpse of two strange, pained faces
over the little board and its mystic pieces.

One, pale--downcast--with expression showing a sudden pang; the other,
suffering also, yet tender, self-forgetful, loving--looking on.

"I don't know whichever is worst," she said afterwards, without apparent
suggestion of word or circumstance, to her mistress; "to see the
beautiful times that there are in the world, and not be in 'em--or to
see people that might be in 'em, and ain't!"

They were all out on the front stoop, later. They sat in the cool,
summer dusk, and looked out between the arched lattices where the vines
climbed up, seeing the stars rise, far away, eastwardly, in the blue;
and Mr. Armstrong, talking with Faith, managed to win her back into the
calm he had, for an instant, broken; and to keep her from pursuing the
thought that by and by would surely come back, and which she would
surely want all possible gain of strength to grapple with.

Faith met his intention bravely, seconding it with her own. These
hours, to the last, should still be restful. She would not think,
to-night, of those words that had startled her so--of all they suggested
or might mean--of life's great possibility lost to him, away back in the
sorrowful past, as she also, perhaps was missing it--relinquishing
it--now.

She knew not that his thought had been utterly self-forgetful. She
believed that he had told her, indirectly, of himself, when he had
spoken those dreary syllables--"the game is changed. Its soul is gone!"


CHAPTER XXVI.

LAKESIDE.

"Look! are the southern curtains drawn?
Fetch me a fan, and so begone!
       ·       ·       ·       ·       ·
Rain me sweet odors on the air,
And wheel me up my Indian chair;
And spread some book not overwise
Flat out before my sleepy eyes."
                               O. W. HOLMES.


The Rushleighs' breakfast room at Lakeside was very lovely in a summer's
morning.

Looking off, northwestwardly, across the head of the Pond, the long
windows, opening down to the piazza, let in all the light and joy of the
early day, and that indescribable freshness born from the union of woods
and water.

Faith had come down long before the others, this fair Wednesday morning.

Mr. Rushleigh found her, when he entered, sitting by a window--a book
upon her lap, to be sure--but her eyes away off over the lake, and a
look in them that told of thoughts horizoned yet more distantly.

Last night, he had brought home Paul's first letter.

When he gave it to her, at tea time, with a gay and kindly word, the
color that deepened vividly upon her face, and the quiet way in which
she laid it down beside her plate, were nothing strange, perhaps;
but--was he wrong? the eyes that drooped so quickly as the blushes rose,
and then lifted themselves again so timidly to him as he next addressed
her, were surely brimmed with feeling that was not quite, or wholly
glad.

And now, this wistful, silent, musing, far-off look!

"Good morning, Faithie!"

"Good morning." And the glance came back--the reverie was
broken--Faith's spirit informed her visible presence again, and bade
him true and gentle welcome. "You haven't your morning paper yet? I'll
bring it. Thomas left it in the library, I think. He came back from the
early train, half an hour ago."

"Can't you women tell what's the matter with each other?" said Mr.
Rushleigh to his daughter, who entered by the other door, as Faith went
out into the hall. "What ails Faith, Margaret?"

"Nothing of consequence, I think. She is tired with all that has been
going on, lately. And then she's the shyest little thing!"

"It's a sort of shyness that don't look so happy as it might, it seems
to me. And what has become of Paul's diamonds, I wonder? I went with him
to choose some, last week. I thought I should see them next upon her
finger."

Margaret opened her eyes widely. Of course, this was the first she had
heard of the diamonds. Where could they be, indeed? Was anything wrong?
They had not surely quarreled!

Faith came in with the paper. Thomas brought up breakfast. And
presently, these three, with all their thoughts of and for each other,
that reached into the long years to come, and had their roots in all
that had gone by, were gathered at the table, seemingly with no further
anxiety than to know whether one or another would have toast or
muffins--eggs or raspberries.

Do we not--and most strangely and incomprehensively--live two lives?

"I must write to my mother, to-day," said Margaret, when her father had
driven away to the mills, and they had brought in a few fresh flowers
from the terrace for the vases, and had had a little morning music,
which Margaret always craved, "as an overture," she said, "to the day."

"I must write to my mother; and you, I suppose, will be busy with
answering Paul?"

A little consciousness kept her from looking straight in Faith's face,
as she spoke. Had she done so, she might have seen that a paleness came
over it, and that the lips trembled.

"I don't know," was the answer. "Perhaps not, to-day."

"Not to-day? Won't he be watching every mail? I don't know much about
it, to be sure; but I fancied lovers were such uneasy, exacting
creatures!"

"Paul is very patient," said Faith--not lightly, as Margaret had spoken,
but as one self-reproached, almost, for abusing patience--"and they go
to-morrow to Lake George. He won't look for a letter until he gets to
Saratoga."

She had calculated her time as if it were the minutes of a reprieve.

When Paul Rushleigh, with his mother, reached Saratoga, he found two
letters there, for him. One kind, simple, but reticent, from Faith--a
mere answer to that which she could answer, of his own. The other was
from his father.

"There seems," he wrote to his son, toward the close, "to be a little
cloud upon Faith, somehow. Perhaps it is one you would not wish away. It
may brighten up and roll off, at your return. You, possibly, understand
it better than I. Yet I feel, in my strong anxiety for your true good,
impelled to warn you against letting her deceive herself and you, by
giving you less than, for her own happiness and yours, she ought to be
able to give. Do not marry the child, Paul, if there can be a doubt of
her entire affection for you. You had better go through life alone, than
with a wife's half love. If you have reason to imagine that she feels
bound by anything in the past to what the present cannot heartily
ratify--release her. I counsel you to this, not more in justice to her,
than for the saving of your own peace. She writes you to-day. It may be
that the antidote comes with the hurt. I may be quite mistaken. But I
hurt you, my son, only to save a sorer pain. Faith is true. If she says
she loves you, believe her, and take her, though all the world should
doubt. But if she is fearful--if she hesitates--be fearful, and hesitate
yourself, lest your marriage be no true marriage before Heaven!"

Paul Rushleigh thanked his father, briefly, for his admonition, in
reply. He wrote, also, to Faith--affectionately, but with something, at
last, of her own reserve. He should not probably write again. In a week,
or less, he would be home.

And behind, and beyond all this, that could be put on paper, was the
hope of a life--the sharp doubt of days--waiting the final word!

In a week, he would be home! A week! It might bring much!

Wednesday had come round again.

Dinner was nearly ended at Lakeside. Cool jellies, and creams, and
fruits, were on the table for dessert. Steaming dishes of meats and
vegetables had been gladly sent away, but slightly partaken. The day was
sultry. Even now, at five in the afternoon, the heat was hardly
mitigated from that of midday.

They lingered over their dessert, and spoke, rather languidly, of what
might be done after.

"For me," said Mr. Rushleigh, "I must go down to the mills again, before
night. If either, or both of you, like a drive, I shall be glad to have
you with me."

"Those hot mills!" exclaimed Margaret. "What an excursion to propose!"

"I could find you a very cool corner, even in those hot mills," replied
her father. "My little sanctum, upstairs, that overlooks the river, and
gets its breezes, is the freshest place I have been in, to-day. Will you
go, Faith?"

"Oh, yes! she'll go! I see it in her eyes!" said Margaret. "She is
getting to be as much absorbed in all those frantic looms and
things--that set me into a fever just to think of, whizzing and humming
all day long in this horrible heat--as you are! I believe she expects to
help Paul overseer the factory, one of these days, she is so fierce to
peer into and understand everything about it. Or else, she means
mischief! You had a funny look in your face, Faithie, the other day,
when you stood there by the great rope that hoists the water gate, and
Mr. Blasland was explaining it to us!"

"I was thinking, I remember," said Faith, "what a strange thing it was
to have one's hand on the very motive power of it all. To see those
great looms, and wheels, and cylinders, and spindles, we had been
looking at, and hear nothing but their deafening roar all about us, and
to think that even I, standing there with my hand upon the rope, might
hush it all, and stop the mainspring of it in a minute!"

Ah, Faithie! Did you think, as you said this, how your little hand lay,
otherwise, also, on the mainspring and motive of it all? One of the
three, at least, thought of it, as you spoke.

"Well--your heart's in the spindles, I see!" rejoined Margaret. "So,
don't mind me. I haven't a bit of a plan for your entertainment, here. I
shouldn't, probably, speak to you, if you stayed. It's too hot for
anything but a book, and a fan, and a sofa by an open window!"

Faith laughed; but, before she could reply, a chaise rolled up to the
open front door, and the step and voice of Dr. Wasgatt were heard, as he
inquired for Miss Gartney.

Faith left her seat, with a word of excuse, and met him in the hall.

"I had a patient up this way," said he, "and came round to bring you a
message from Miss Henderson. Nothing to be frightened at, in the least;
only that she isn't quite so well as ordinary, these last hot days, and
thought perhaps you might as lief come over. She said she was expecting
you for a visit there, before your folks get back. No, thank you"--as
Faith motioned to conduct him to the drawing-room--"can't come in. Sorry
I couldn't offer to take you down; but I've got more visits to make, and
they lie round the other way."

"Is Aunt Faith ill?"

"Well--no. Not so but that she'll be spry again in a day or two;
especially if the weather changes. That ankle of hers is troublesome,
and she had something of an ill turn last night, and called me over this
morning. She seems to have taken a sort of fancy that she'd like to have
you there."

"I'll come."

And Faith went back, quickly, as Dr. Wasgatt departed, to make his
errand known, and to ask if Mr. Rushleigh would mind driving her round
to Cross Corners, after going to his mills.

"Wait till to-morrow, Faithie," said Margaret, in the tone of one whom
it fatigues to think of an exertion, even for another. "You'll want your
box with you, you know; and there isn't time for anything to-night."

"I think I ought to go now," answered Faith. "Aunt Henderson never
complains for a slight ailment, and she might be ill again, to-night. I
can take all I shall need before to-morrow in my little morocco bag. I
won't keep you waiting a minute," she added, turning to Mr. Rushleigh.

"I can wait twenty, if you wish," he answered kindly.

But in less than ten, they were driving down toward the river.

Margaret Rushleigh had betaken herself to her own cool chamber, where
the delicate straw matting, and pale green, leaf-patterned chintz of
sofa, chairs, and hangings, gave a feeling of the last degree of summer
lightness and daintiness, and the gentle air breathed in from the
southwest, sifted, on the way, of its sunny heat, by the green draperies
of vine and branch it wandered through.

Lying there, on the cool, springy cushions of her couch--turning the
fresh-cut leaves of the August _Mishaumok_--she forgot the wheels and
the spindles--the hot mills, and the ceaseless whir.

Just at that moment of her utter comfort and content, a young factory
girl dropped, fainting, in the dizzy heat, before her loom.


CHAPTER XXVII.

AT THE MILLS.

"For all day the wheels are droning, turning,--
Their wind comes in our faces,--
Till our hearts turn,--our head with pulses burning,--
And the walls turn in their places."
                                            MRS. BROWNING.


Faith sat silent by Mr. Rushleigh's side, drinking in, also, with a cool
content, the river air that blew upon their faces as they drove along.

"Faithie!" said Paul's father, a little suddenly, at last--"do you know
how true a thing you said a little while ago?"

"How, sir?" asked Faith, not perceiving what he meant.

"When you spoke of having your hand on the mainspring of all this?"

And he raised his right arm, motioning with the slender whip he held,
along the line of factory buildings that lay before them.

A deep, blazing blush burned, at his words, over Faith's cheek and brow.
She sat and suffered it under his eye--uttering not a syllable.

"I knew you did _not_ know. You did not think of it so. Yet it is true,
none the less. Faith! Are you happy? Are you satisfied?"

Still a silence, and tears gathering in the eyes.

"I do not wish to distress you, my dear. It is only a little word I
should like to hear you speak. I must, so far as I can, see that my
children are happy, Faith."

"I suppose," said Faith, tremulously, struggling to speech--"one cannot
expect to be utterly happy in this world."

"One does expect it, forgetting all else, at the moment when is given
what seems to one life's first, great good--the earthly good that comes
but once. I remember my own youth, Faithie. Pure, present content is
seldom overwise."

"Only," said Faith, still tremblingly, "that the responsibility comes
with the good. That feeling of having one's hand upon the mainspring is
a fearful one."

"I am not given," said Mr. Rushleigh, "to quoting Bible at all times;
but you make a line of it come up to me. 'There is no fear in love.
Perfect love casteth out fear.'"

"Be sure of yourself, dear child. Be sure you are content and happy; and
tell me so, if you can; or, tell me otherwise, if you must, without a
reserve or misgiving," he said again, as they drove down the mill
entrance; and their conversation, for the time, came, necessarily, to an
end.

Coming into the mill yard, they were aware of a little commotion about
one of the side doors.

The mill girl who had fainted sat here, surrounded by two or three of
her companions, slowly recovering.

"It is Mary Grover, sir, from up at the Peak," said one of them, in
reply to Mr. Rushleigh's question. "She hasn't been well for some days,
but she's kept on at her work, and the heat, to-day, was too much for
her. She'd ought to be got home, if there was any way. She can't ever
walk."

"I'll take her, myself," said the mill owner, promptly. "Keep her quiet
here a minute or two, while I go in and speak to Blasland."

But first he turned to Faith again. "What shall I do with you, my
child?"

"Dear Mr. Rushleigh," said she, with all her gratitude for his just
spoken kindness to herself and her appreciation of his ready sympathy
for the poor workgirl, in her voice--"don't think of me! It's lovely out
there over the footbridge, and in the fields; and that way, the
distance is nearly nothing to Aunt Faith's. I should like the
walk--really."

"Thank you," said Mr. Rushleigh. "I believe you would. Then I'll take
Mary Grover up to the Peak."

And he shook her hand, and left her standing there, and went up into the
mill.

Two of the girls who had come out with Mary Grover, followed him and
returned to their work. One, sitting with her in the doorway, on one of
the upper steps, and supporting her yet dizzy head upon her shoulder,
remained.

Faith asked if she could do anything, and was answered, no, with thanks.

She turned away, then, and walked over the planking above the race way,
toward the river, where a pretty little footbridge crossed it here, from
the end of the mill building.

Against this end, projected, on this side, a square, tower-like
appendage to the main structure, around which one must pass to reach the
footbridge. A door at the base opened upon a staircase leading up. This
was the entrance to Mr. Rushleigh's "sanctum," above, which
communicated, also, with the second story of the mill.

Here Faith paused. She caught, from around the corner, a sound of the
angry voices of men.

"I tell you, I'll stay here till I see the boss!"

"I tell you, the boss won't see you. He's done with you."

"Let him _be_ done with me, then; and not go spoiling my chance with
other people! I'll see it out with him, somehow, yet."

"Better not threaten. He won't go out of his way to meddle with you;
only it's no use your sending anybody here after a character. He's one
of the sort that speaks the truth and shames the devil."

"I'll let him know he ain't boss of the whole country round! D----d if I
don't!"

Faith turned away from hearing more of this, and from facing the
speakers; and took refuge up the open staircase.

Above--in the quiet little countingroom, shut off by double doors at the
right from the great loom chamber of the mill, and opening at the front
by a wide window upon the river that ran tumbling and flashing below,
spanned by the graceful little bridge that reached the green slope of
the field beyond--it was so cool and pleasant--so still with continuous
and softened sound--that Faith sat down upon the comfortable sofa there,
to rest, to think, to be alone, a little.

She had Paul's letter in her pocket; she had his father's words fresh
upon ear and heart. A strange peace came over her, as she placed herself
here; as if, somehow, a way was soon to be opened and made clear to her.
As if she should come to know herself, and to be brave to act as God
should show her how.

She heard, presently, Mr. Rushleigh's voice in the mill yard, and then
the staircase door closed and locked below. Thinking that he should be
here no more, to-night, he had shut and fastened it.

It was no matter. She would go through the mill, by and by, and look at
the looms; and so out, and over the river, then, to Aunt Faith's.


CHAPTER XXVIII.

LOCKED IN.

"How idle it is to call certain things godsends! as if there were
anything else in the world."--HARE.


It is accounted a part of the machinery of invention when, in a story,
several coincident circumstances, that apart, would have had no
noticeable result, bear down together, with a nice and sure calculation
upon some catastrophe or _dénouement_ that develops itself therefrom.

Last night, a man--an employee in Mr. Rushleigh's factory--had been kept
awake by one of his children, taken suddenly ill. A slight matter--but
it has to do with our story.

Last night, also, Faith--Paul's second letter just received--had lain
sleepless for hours, fighting the old battle over, darkly, of doubt,
pity, half-love, and indecision. She had felt, or had thought she
felt--thus, or so--in the days that were past. Why could she not be sure
of her feeling now?

The new wine in the old bottles--the new cloth in the old
garment--these, in Faith's life, were at variance. What satisfied once,
satisfied no longer. Was she to blame? What ought she to do? There was a
seething--a rending. Poor heart, that was likely to be burst and
torn--wonderingly, helplessly--in the half-comprehended struggle!

So it happened, that, tired with all this, sore with its daily pressure
and recurrence, this moment of strange peace came over her, and soothed
her into rest.

She laid herself back, there, on the broad, soft, old-fashioned sofa,
and with the river breeze upon her brow, and the song of its waters in
her ears, and the deadened hum of the factory rumbling on--she fell
asleep.

How long it had been, she could not tell; she knew not whether it were
evening, or midnight, or near the morning; but she felt cold and
cramped; everything save the busy river was still, and the daylight was
all gone, and stars out bright in the deep, moonless sky, when she
awoke.

Awoke, bewilderedly, and came slowly to the comprehension that she was
here alone. That it was night--that nobody could know it--that she was
locked up here, in the great dreary mill.

She raised herself upon the sofa, and sat in a terrified amaze. She took
out her watch, and tried to see, by the starlight, the time. The slender
black hands upon its golden face were invisible. It ticked--it was
going. She knew, by that, it could not be far beyond midnight, at the
most. She was chilly, in her white dress, from the night air. She went
to the open window, and looked out from it, before she drew it down.
Away, over the fields, and up and down the river, all was dark,
solitary.

Nobody knew it--she was here alone.

She shut the window, softly, afraid of the sounds herself might make.
She opened the double doors from the countingroom, and stood on the
outer threshold, and looked into the mill. The heavy looms were still.
They stood like great, dead creatures, smitten in the midst of busy
motion. There was an awfulness in being here, the only breathing, moving
thing--in darkness--where so lately had been the deafening hum of
rolling wheels, and clanking shafts, and flying shuttles, and busy,
moving human figures. It was as if the world itself were stopped, and
she forgotten on its mighty, silent course.

Should she find her way to the great bell, ring it, and make an alarm?
She thought of this; and then she reasoned with herself that she was
hardly so badly off, as to justify her, quite, in doing that. It would
rouse the village, it would bring Mr. Rushleigh down, perhaps--it would
cause a terrible alarm. And all that she might be spared a few hours
longer of loneliness and discomfort. She was safe. It would soon be
morning.

The mill would be opened early. She would go back to the sofa, and try
to sleep again. Nobody could be anxious about her. The Rushleighs
supposed her to be at Cross Corners. Her aunt would think her detained
at Lakeside. It was really no great matter. She would be brave, and
quiet.

So she shut the double doors again, and found a coat of Paul's, or Mr.
Rushleigh's, in the closet of the countingroom, and lay down upon the
sofa, covering herself with that.

For an hour or more, her heart throbbed, her nerves were excited, she
could not sleep. But at last she grew calmer, her thought wandered from
her actual situation--became indistinct--and slumber held her again,
dreamily.

There was another sleeper, also, in the mill whom Faith knew nothing of.

Michael Garvin, the night watchman--the same whose child had been ill
the night before--when Faith came out into the loom chamber, had left it
but a few minutes, going his silent round within the building, and
recording his faithfulness by the half-hour pin upon the watch clock.
Six times he had done this, already. It was half past ten.

He had gone up, now, by the stairs from the weaving room, into the third
story. These stairs ascended at the front, from within the chamber.

Michael Garvin went on nearly to the end of the room above--stopped, and
looked out at a window. All still, all safe apparently.

He was very tired. What harm in lying down somewhere in a corner, for
five minutes? He need not shut his eyes. He rolled his coat up for a
pillow, and threw it against the wall beneath the window. The next
instant he had stretched his stalwart limbs along the floor, and before
ten minutes of his seventh half hour were spent--long before Faith, who
thought herself all alone in the great building, had lost consciousness
of her strange position--he was fast asleep.

Fast asleep, here, in the third story!

So, since the days of the disciples, men have grown heavy and forgotten
their trust. So they have slumbered upon decks, at sea. So sentinels
have lain down at picket posts, though they knew the purchase of that
hour of rest might be the leaden death!

Faith Gartney dreamed, uneasily.

She thought herself wandering, at night, through the deserted streets of
a great city. She seemed to have come from somewhere afar off, and to
have no place to go to.

Up and down, through avenues sometimes half familiar, sometimes wholly
unknown, she went wearily, without aim, or end, or hope. "Tired! tired!
tired!" she seemed to say to herself. "Nowhere to rest--nobody to take
care of me!"

Then--city, streets, and houses disappeared; the scenery of her dream
rolled away, and opened out, and she was standing on a high, bare cliff,
away up in wintry air; threatening rocky avalanches overhanging
her--chill winds piercing her--and no pathway visible downward. Still
crying out in loneliness and fear. Still with none to comfort or to
help.

Standing on the sheer edge of the precipice--behind her, suddenly, a
crater opened. A hissing breath came up, and the chill air quivered and
scorched about her. Her feet were upon a volcano! A lake of boiling,
molten stone heaved--huge, brazen, bubbling--spreading wider and wider,
like a great earth ulcer, eating in its own brink continually. Up in the
air over her, reared a vast, sulphurous canopy of smoke. The narrowing
ridge beneath her feet burned--trembled. She hovered between two
destructions.

Instantly--in that throbbing, agonizing moment of her dream, just after
which one wakes--she felt a presence--she heard a call--she thought two
arms were stretched out toward her--there seemed a safety and a rest
near by; she was borne by an unseen impulse, along the dizzy ridge that
her feet scarce touched, toward it; she was taken--folded, held; smoke,
fire, the threatening danger of the cliff, were nothing, suddenly, any
more. Whether they menaced still, she thought not; a voice she knew and
trusted was in her ear; a grasp of loving strength sustained her; she
was utterly secure.

So vividly she felt the presence--so warm and sure seemed that love and
strength about her--that waking out of such pause of peace, before her
senses recognized anything that was real without, she stretched her
hands, as if to find it at her side, and her lips breathed a name--the
name of Roger Armstrong.

Then she started to her feet. The kind, protecting presence faded back
into her dream.

The horrible smoke, the scorching smell, were true.

A glare smote sky and trees and water, as she saw them from the window.

There was fire near her!

Could it be among the buildings of the mill?

The long, main structure ran several feet beyond the square projection
within which she stood. Upon the other side, close to the front, quite
away, of course, from all observation hence, joined, at right angles,
another building, communicating and forming one with the first. Here
were the carding rooms. Then beyond, detached, were houses for storage
and other purposes connected with the business.

Was it from one of these the glare and smoke and suffocating burning
smell were pouring?

Or, lay the danger nearer--within these close, contiguous walls?

Vainly she threw up the one window, and leaned forth.

She could not tell.

       And shades on all windows like by millionaires!

Twenty years ago she used to eat from the pot to the hand, and now
she lives in such a palace."

A whiff of steam-heated warmth swept over Mrs. Pelz as the door opened,
and she saw her old friend of the tenements dressed in silk and
diamonds like a being from another world.

"Mrs. Pelz, is it you!" cried Hanneh Breineh, overjoyed at the sight of
her former neighbor. "Come right in. Since when are you back in New
York?"
"We came last week," mumbled Mrs.

Pelz as she was led into a richly carpeted reception-room.

"Make yourself comfortable. Take off your shawl," urged Hanneh Breineh.

But Mrs. Pelz only drew her shawl more tightly around her, a keen sense
of her poverty gripping her as she gazed, abashed by the luxurious wealth
that shone from every corner.

"This shawl covers up my rags," she said, trying to hide her shabby
sweater.

"I'll tell you what; come right into the kitchen," suggested Hanneh
Breineh. "The servant is away for this afternoon, and we can feel more
comfortable there. I can breathe like a free person in my kitchen when
the girl has her day out."

Mrs. Pelz glanced about her in an excited daze.

Never in her life had she seen anything so wonderful as a white tiled
kitchen, with its glistening porcelain sink and the aluminum pots
and pans that shone like silver.

"Where are you staying now?" asked Hanneh Breineh as she pinned an apron
over her silk dress.

"I moved back to Delancey Street, where we used to live," replied
Mrs.

Pelz as she seated herself cautiously in a white enameled chair.

       "_Oi weh!

_ what grand times we had in that old house when we were neighbors!"
sighed Hanneh Breineh, looking at her old friend with misty eyes.

"You still think on Delancey Street?

Haven't you more high-class neighbors up-town here?"
"A good neighbor is not to be found every day," deplored Hanneh
Breineh.
"Up-town here, where each lives in his own house, nobody cares if the
person next door is dying or going crazy from loneliness. It ain't
anything like we used to have it in Delancey Street, when we could
walk into one another's rooms without knocking, and borrow a pinch
of salt or a pot to cook in."

Hanneh Breineh went over to the pantry-shelf.

"We are going to have a bite right here on the kitchen-table like
on Delancey Street.

So long there's no servant to watch us we can eat what we please."
"_Oi!_ how it waters my mouth with appetite, the smell of the herring
and onion!"

chuckled Mrs. Pelz, sniffing the welcome odors with greedy pleasure.

Hanneh Breineh pulled a dish-towel from the rack and threw one end of
it to Mrs. Pelz.

"So long there's no servant around, we can use it together for a napkin.

It's dirty, anyhow.

How it freshens up my heart to see you!"

she rejoiced as she poured out her tea into a saucer. "If you would only
know how I used to beg my daughter to write for me a letter to you; but
these American children, what is to them a mother's feelings?"
"What are you talking!" cried Mrs. Pelz. "The whole world rings with you
and your children. Everybody is envying you. Tell me how began your
luck?"
"You heard how my husband died with consumption," replied Hanneh
Breineh.

"The five-hundred-dollars lodge money gave me the first lift in life, and
I opened a little grocery store.

Then my son Abe married himself to a girl with a thousand dollars.
That started him in business, and now he has the biggest shirt-waist
factory on West Twenty-ninth Street."
"Yes, I heard your son had a factory." Mrs. Pelz hesitated and stammered;
"I'll tell you the truth. What I came to ask you--I thought maybe you
would beg your son Abe if he would give my husband a job."
"Why not?" said Hanneh Breineh. "He keeps more than five hundred hands.

I'll ask him he should take in Mr.

Pelz."
"Long years on you, Hanneh Breineh!

You'll save my life if you could only help my husband get work."

"Of course my son will help him. All my children like to do good. My
daughter Fanny is a milliner on Fifth Avenue, and she takes in the
poorest girls in her shop and even pays them sometimes while they
learn the trade." Hanneh Breineh's face lit up, and her chest filled
with pride as she enumerated the successes of her children.

"And my son Benny he wrote a play on Broadway and he gave away more
than a hundred free tickets for the first night."
"Benny? The one who used to get lost from home all the time? You always
did love that child more than all the rest. And what is Sammy your
baby doing?"

"He ain't a baby no longer. He goes to college and quarterbacks the
football team. They can't get along without him.

"And my son Jake, I nearly forgot him.

He began collecting rent in Delancey Street, and now he is boss of
renting the swellest apartment-houses on Riverside Drive."
"What did I tell you? In America children are like money in the
bank," purred Mrs.

Pelz as she pinched and patted Hanneh Breineh's silk sleeve.
"_Oi weh!_ how it shines from you! You ought to kiss the air and dance
for joy and happiness. It is such a bitter frost outside; a pail of
coal is so dear, and you got it so warm with steam-heat. I had to
pawn my feather-bed to have enough for the rent, and you are rolling
in money."

"Yes, I got it good in some ways, but money ain't everything," sighed
Hanneh Breineh.

"You ain't yet satisfied?"

"But here I got no friends," complained Hanneh Breineh.

"Friends?" queried Mrs. Pelz. "What greater friend is there on earth than
the dollar?"

"_Oi!_ Mrs. Pelz; if you could only look into my heart! I'm so choked up!
You know they say, a cow has a long tongue, but can't talk." Hanneh
Breineh shook her head wistfully, and her eyes filmed with inward brooding.
"My children give me everything from the best.

When I was sick, they got me a nurse by day and one by night. They
bought me the best wine. If I asked for dove's milk, they would buy it
for me; but--but--I can't talk myself out in their language. They
want to make me over for an American lady, and I'm different."

Tears cut their way under her eyelids with a pricking pain as she
went on: "When I was poor, I was free, and could holler and do what
I like in my own house.

Here I got to lie still like a mouse under a broom. Between living up
to my Fifth Avenue daughter and keeping up with the servants I am like
a sinner in the next world that is thrown from one hell to another."

The door-bell rang, and Hanneh Breineh jumped up with a start.

"_Oi weh!_ it must be the servant back already!" she exclaimed as she
tore off her apron.

"_Oi weh!_ let's quickly put the dishes together in a dish-pan.

If she sees I eat on the kitchen table, she will look on me like
the dirt under her feet."

Mrs. Pelz seized her shawl in haste.

"I better run home quick in my rags before your servant sees me."
"I'll speak to Abe about the job," said Hanneh Breineh as she pushed a
bill into the hand of Mrs. Pelz, who edged out as the servant
entered.

* * *

"I'm having fried potato _lotkes_ special for you, Benny," said Hanneh
Breineh as the children gathered about the table for the family dinner
given in honor of Benny's success with his new play. "Do you remember
how you used to lick the fingers from them?"

"O Mother!" reproved Fanny.

"Anyone hearing you would think we were still in the push-cart district."

"Stop your nagging, Sis, and let ma alone," commanded Benny, patting
his mother's arm affectionately. "I'm home only once a month. Let her
feed me what she pleases.

My stomach is bomb-proof."

"Do I hear that the President is coming to your play?" said Abe as he
stuffed a napkin over his diamond-studded shirt-front.

"Why shouldn't he come?" returned Benny.

"The critics say it's the greatest antidote for the race hatred created
by the war.

If you want to know, he is coming to-night; and what's more, our
box is next to the President's."

"_Nu_, Mammeh," sallied Jake, "did you ever dream in Delancey Street
that we should rub sleeves with the President?"

"I always said that Benny had more head than the rest of you," replied the
mother.

As the laughter died away, Jake went on:

"Honor you are getting plenty; but how much _mezummen_ does this play bring
you? Can I invest any of it in real estate for you?"
"I'm getting ten per cent. royalties of the gross receipts," replied the
youthful playwright.

"How much is that?" queried Hanneh Breineh.

"Enough to buy up all your fish markets in Delancey Street," laughed Abe
in good-natured raillery at his mother.

Her son's jest cut like a knife-thrust in her heart. She felt her heart
ache with the pain that she was shut out from their successes. Each
added triumph only widened the gulf.

And when she tried to bridge this gulf by asking questions, they
only thrust her back upon herself.

"Your fame has even helped me get my hat trade solid with the Four
Hundred," put in Fanny.

"You bet I let Mrs. Van Suyden know that our box is next to the
President's. She said she would drop in to meet you. Of course she let
on to me that she hadn't seen the play yet, though my designer said she
saw her there on the opening night."
"Oh, Gosh! the toadies!" sneered Benny. "Nothing so sickens you with
success as the way people who once shoved you off the sidewalk
come crawling to you on their stomachs begging you to dine with
them."
"Say, that leading man of yours he's some class," cried Fanny.

"That's the man I'm looking for.

Will you invite him to supper after the theater?"

The playwright turned to his mother.
  
"Say, Ma," he said laughingly,
  "how would you like a real actor for a son-in-law?"

"She should worry," mocked Sam. "She'll be discussing with him the
future of the Greek drama.

Too bad it doesn't happen to be Warfield, or mother could give him tips
on the 'Auctioneer.'"
Jake turned to his mother with a covert grin.

"I guess you'd have no objection if Fanny got next to Benny's leading
man. He makes at least fifteen hundred a week. That wouldn't be such a
bad addition to the family, would it?"

Again the bantering tone stabbed Hanneh Breineh. Everything in her
began to tremble and break loose.

"Why do you ask me?" she cried, throwing her napkin into her plate.
"Do I count for a person in this house? If I'll say something, will you
even listen to me? What is to me the grandest man that my daughter
could pick out? Another enemy in my house! Another person to
shame himself from me!"

She swept in her children in one glance of despairing anguish as she
rose from the table. "What worth is an old mother to American children?
The President is coming to-night to the theater, and none of you asked
me to go." Unable to check the rising tears, she fled toward the kitchen
and banged the door.

They all looked at one another guiltily.

"Say, Sis," Benny called out sharply, "what sort of frame-up
is this?

Haven't you told mother that she was to go with us to-night?"
"Yes--I----" Fanny bit her lips as she fumbled evasively for words. "I
asked her if she wouldn't mind my taking her some other time."
"Now you have made a mess of it!" fumed Benny. "Mother'll be too hurt to
go now."
"Well, I don't care," snapped Fanny. "I can't appear with mother
in a box at the theater.

Can I introduce her to Mrs. Van Suyden? And suppose your leading man
should ask to meet me?"
"Take your time, Sis. He hasn't asked yet," scoffed Benny.

"The more reason I shouldn't spoil my chances. You know
mother.

She'll spill the beans that we come from Delancey Street the minute we
introduce her anywhere. Must I always have the black shadow of my past
trailing after me?"

"But have you no feelings for mother?" admonished Abe.

"I've tried harder than all of you to do my duty.

I've _lived_ with her." She turned angrily upon them.

"I've borne the shame of mother while you bought her off with a present
and a treat here and there.

God knows how hard I tried to civilize her so as not to have to
blush with shame when I take her anywhere.

I dressed her in the most stylish Paris models, but Delancey Street
sticks out from every inch of her. Whenever she opens her mouth, I'm
done for. You fellows had your chance to rise in the world because
a man is free to go up as high as he can reach up to; but I, with all my
style and pep, can't get a man my equal because a girl is always judged
by her mother."
They were silenced by her vehemence, and unconsciously turned to Benny.

"I guess we all tried to do our best for mother," said Benny, thoughtfully.
"But wherever there is growth, there is pain and heartbreak.

The trouble with us is that the Ghetto of the Middle Ages and the
children of the twentieth century have to live under one roof,
and----"
A sound of crashing dishes came from the kitchen, and the voice of
Hanneh Breineh resounded through the dining-room as she wreaked her
pent-up fury on the helpless servant.

"Oh, my nerves! I can't stand it any more! There will be no girl again
for another week," cried Fanny.

"Oh, let up on the old lady," protested Abe. "Since she can't take it out
on us any more, what harm is it if she cusses the servants?"

"If you fellows had to chase around employment agencies, you wouldn't see
anything funny about it. Why can't we move into a hotel that will do
away with the need of servants altogether?"

"I got it better," said Jake, consulting a note-book from his pocket.

"I have on my list an apartment on Riverside Drive where there's only
a small kitchenette; but we can do away with the cooking, for there
is a dining service in the building."

The new Riverside apartment to which Hanneh Breineh was removed by her
socially ambitious children was for the habitually active mother an
empty desert of enforced idleness.

Deprived of her kitchen, Hanneh Breineh felt robbed of the last reason
for her existence.

Cooking and marketing and puttering busily with pots and pans gave
her an excuse for living and struggling and bearing up with her
children. The lonely idleness of Riverside Drive stunned all her
senses and arrested all her thoughts.

It gave her that choked sense of being cut off from air, from life,
from everything warm and human. The cold indifference, the each-for-himself
look in the eyes of the people about her were like stinging slaps in
the face. Even the children had nothing real or human in them. They were
starched and stiff miniatures of their elders.

But the most unendurable part of the stifling life on Riverside
Drive was being forced to eat in the public dining-room. No matter
how hard she tried to learn polite table manners, she always found people
staring at her, and her daughter rebuking her for eating with the
wrong fork or guzzling the soup or staining the cloth.

In a fit of rebellion Hanneh Breineh resolved never to go down to the
public dining-room again, but to make use of the gas-stove in the
kitchenette to cook her own meals.

That very day she rode down to Delancey Street and purchased a new
market-basket. For some time she walked among the haggling push-cart
venders, relaxing and swimming in the warm waves of her old familiar
past.

A fish-peddler held up a large carp in his black, hairy hand and waved
it dramatically:

"Women! Women! Fourteen cents a pound!"
He ceased his raucous shouting as he saw Hanneh Breineh in her rich
attire approach his cart.

"How much?" she asked pointing to the fattest carp.

           "Fifteen cents,
  lady," said the peddler, smirking as he raised his price.

"Swindler! Didn't I hear you call fourteen cents?" shrieked Hanneh Breineh,
exultingly, the spirit of the penny chase surging in her blood.
Diplomatically, Hanneh Breineh turned as if to go, and the fishman
seized her basket in frantic fear.

"I should live; I'm losing money on the fish, lady," whined the
peddler.

"I'll let it down to thirteen cents for you only."
"Two pounds for a quarter, and not a penny more," said Hanneh Breineh,
thrilling again with the rare sport of bargaining, which had been
her chief joy in the good old days of poverty.

"_Nu_, I want to make the first sale for good luck."

The peddler threw the fish on the scale.

As he wrapped up the fish, Hanneh Breineh saw the driven look of worry
in his haggard eyes, and when he counted out for her the change from her
dollar, she waved it aside.

"Keep it for your luck," she said, and hurried off to strike a new
bargain at a push-cart of onions.

Hanneh Breineh returned triumphantly with her purchases. The basket under
her arm gave forth the old, homelike odors of herring and garlic,
while the scaly tail of a four-pound carp protruded from its
newspaper wrapping.

A gilded placard on the door of the apartment-house proclaimed that all
merchandise must be delivered through the trade entrance in the
rear; but Hanneh Breineh with her basket strode proudly through the
marble-paneled hall and rang nonchalantly for the elevator.

The uniformed hall-man, erect, expressionless, frigid with dignity, stepped
forward:

"Just a minute, Madam, I'll call a boy to take up your basket for you."

Hanneh Breineh, glaring at him, jerked the basket savagely from his
hands.

"Mind your own business," she retorted. "I'll take it up myself. Do
you think you're a Russian policeman to boss me in my own house?"

Angry lines appeared on the countenance of the representative of social
decorum.

"It is against the rules, Madam," he said stiffly.

"You should sink into the earth with all your rules and brass
buttons.

Ain't this America?

Ain't this a free country?

Can't I take up in my own house what I buy with my own money?"
cried Hanneh Breineh, reveling in the opportunity to shower forth
the volley of invectives that had been suppressed in her for the
weeks of deadly dignity of Riverside Drive.

In the midst of this uproar Fanny came in with Mrs.

Van Suyden. Hanneh Breineh rushed over to her, crying:

"This bossy policeman won't let me take up my basket in the elevator."

The daughter, unnerved with shame and confusion, took the basket
in her white-gloved hand and ordered the hall-boy to take it around
to the regular delivery entrance.

Hanneh Breineh was so hurt by her daughter's apparent defense of the
hallman's rules that she utterly ignored Mrs. Van Suyden's greeting and
walked up the seven flights of stairs out of sheer spite.

"You see the tragedy of my life?" broke out Fanny, turning to Mrs. Van
Suyden.

"You poor child!

You go right up to your dear, old lady mother, and I'll come some
other time."
Instantly Fanny regretted her words. Mrs. Van Suyden's pity only roused
her wrath the more against her mother.

Breathless from climbing the stairs, Hanneh Breineh entered the
apartment just as Fanny tore the faultless millinery creation from
her head and threw it on the floor in a rage.

"Mother, you are the ruination of my life!

You have driven away Mrs.

Van Suyden, as you have driven away all my best friends. What do you think
we got this apartment for but to get rid of your fish smells and
your brawls with the servants?

       And here you come with a basket on your arm as if you just landed
from steerage!

And this afternoon, of all times, when Benny is bringing his leading
man to tea. When will you ever stop disgracing us?"
"When I'm dead," said Hanneh Breineh, grimly. "When the earth will cover
me up, then you'll be free to go your American way.

I'm not going to make myself over for a lady on Riverside Drive. I hate
you and all your swell friends. I'll not let myself be choked up here
by you or by that hall-boss-policeman that is higher in your eyes
than your own mother."

"So that's your thanks for all we've done for you?"

cried the daughter.

"All you've done for me?"

shouted Hanneh Breineh.

"What have you done for me? You hold me like a dog on a chain. It
stands in the Talmud; some children give their mothers dry
           bread and water and go to heaven for it, and some give their mother
roast duck and go to Gehenna because it's not given with love."

"You want me to love you yet?" raged the daughter. "You knocked
every bit of love out of me when I was yet a kid. All the memories of
           childhood I have is your everlasting
                                                           cursing and yelling that we were gluttons."

The bell rang sharply,
  and Hanneh Breineh flung open
  the door.

                         "Your groceries, ma'am," said the boy.

Hanneh Breineh seized the basket from him, and with a vicious fling sent
it rolling across the room, strewing its contents over the Persian
rugs and inlaid floor.

Then seizing her hat and coat, she stormed out of the apartment and
down the stairs.

Mr. and Mrs. Pelz sat crouched and shivering over their meager supper
when the door opened, and Hanneh Breineh in fur coat and plumed hat
charged into the room.

"I come to cry out to you my bitter heart," she sobbed. "Woe is me!
It is so black for my eyes!"
"What is the matter with you, Hanneh Breineh?"

cried Mrs. Pelz in bewildered alarm.

"I am turned out of my own house by the brass-buttoned policeman
that bosses the elevator.

_Oi-i-i-i! Weh-h-h-h!_ what have I from my life?
The whole world rings with my son's play.

Even the President came to see it, and I, his mother, have not seen
it yet. My heart is dying in me like in a prison," she went on wailing.
"I am starved out for a piece of real eating. In that swell restaurant
is nothing but napkins and forks and lettuce-leaves.

There are a dozen plates to every bite of food. And it looks so
fancy on the plate, but it's nothing but straw in the mouth.

I'm starving, but I can't swallow down their American eating."
"Hanneh Breineh," said Mrs. Pelz, "you are sinning before God.

Look on your fur coat; it alone would feed a whole family for a year. I
never had yet a piece of fur trimming on a coat, and you are in fur from
the neck to the feet.

I never had yet a piece of feather on a hat, and your hat is all feathers."

"What are you envying me?" protested Hanneh Breineh. "What have I
from all my fine furs and feathers when my children are strangers
to me?

All the fur coats in the world can't warm up the loneliness inside my
heart.
All the grandest feathers can't hide the bitter shame in my face that my
children shame themselves from me."
Hanneh Breineh suddenly loomed over them like some ancient, heroic
figure of the Bible condemning unrighteousness.

"Why should my children shame themselves from me? From where did they
get the stuff to work themselves up in the world? Did they get it
from the air? How did they get all their smartness to rise over the
people around them? Why don't the children of born American mothers
write my Benny's plays? It is I, who never had a chance to be a person,
who gave him the fire in his head.

If I would have had a chance to go to school and learn the language, what
couldn't I have been? It is I and my mother and my mother's mother and
my father and father's father who had such a black life in Poland;
it is our choked thoughts and feelings that are flaming up in my
children and making them great in America.

And yet they shame themselves from me!"
For a moment Mr. and Mrs.

Pelz were hypnotized by the sweep of her words. Then Hanneh Breineh
sank into a chair in utter exhaustion.

She began to weep bitterly, her body shaking with sobs.
"Woe is me! For what did I suffer and hope on my children? A bitter
old age--my end. I'm so lonely!"
All the dramatic fire seemed to have left her. The spell was
broken.
They saw the Hanneh Breineh of old, ever discontented, ever complaining
even in the midst of riches and plenty.
"Hanneh Breineh," said Mrs. Pelz, "the only trouble with you is
that you got it too good. People will tear the eyes out of your
head because you're complaining yet. If I only had your fur coat!
If I only had your diamonds! I have nothing. You have everything.
You are living on the fat of the land. You go right back home and
thank God that you don't have my bitter lot."
"You got to let me stay here with you," insisted Hanneh Breineh.
"I'll not go back to my children except when they bury me. When
they will see my dead face, they will understand how they killed
me."
Mrs. Pelz glanced nervously at her husband. They barely had enough
covering for their one bed; how could they possibly lodge a
visitor?
"I don't want to take up your bed," said Hanneh Breineh. "I don't
care if I have to sleep on the floor or on the chairs, but I'll
stay here for the night."
Seeing that she was bent on staying, Mr. Pelz prepared to sleep by
putting a few chairs next to the trunk, and Hanneh Breineh was
invited to share the rickety bed with Mrs. Pelz.
The mattress was full of lumps and hollows. Hanneh Breineh lay
cramped and miserable, unable to stretch out her limbs. For years
she had been accustomed to hair mattresses and ample woolen blankets,
so that though she covered herself with her fur coat, she was too
cold to sleep. But worse than the cold were the creeping things on
the wall."If you had kept
back your knowledge of this, you would have sealed up a painful doubt
for your own tormenting. That man, James Regan, came to me this morning.
There is good in the fellow, after all. He told me, just as you have,
and as Hardy did, the words he spoke in passion. He was afraid, he said,
they might be brought up against him. And so he came to 'own up,' and
account for his time; and to beg me to believe that he never had any
definite thought of harm. I told him I did believe it; and then the poor
fellow, rough as he is, turned pale, and burst into tears. Last night
gave him a lesson, I think, that will go far to take the hardness out of
him. Blasland says, 'he worked like five men and a horse,' at the fire."

Faith's face glowed as she listened, at the nobleness of these two; of
the generous, Christian gentleman--of the coarse workman, who wore his
nature, like his garb--the worse part of an everyday.

Fire and loss are not all calamity, when such as this comes of them.

Her own recital was soon finished.

Mr. Rushleigh listened, giving his whole sympathy to the danger she had
faced, his fresh and fervent acknowledgment and admiring praise to the
prompt daring she had shown, as if these things, and naught else, had
been in either mind.

At these thanks--at this praise--Faith shrank.

"Oh, Mr. Rushleigh!" she interrupted, with a low, pained, humbled
entreaty--"don't speak so! Only forgive me--if you can!"

Her hands lifted themselves with a slight, imploring gesture toward him.
He laid his own upon them, gently, soothingly.

"I will not have you trouble or reproach yourself, Faith," he answered,
meeting her meaning, frankly, now. "There are things beyond our control.
All we can do is to be simply true. There is something, I know, which
you think lies between us to be spoken of. Do not speak at all, if it be
hard for you. I will tell the boy that it was a mistake--that it cannot
be."

But the father's lip was a little unsteady, to his own feeling, as he
said the words.

"Oh, Mr. Rushleigh!" cried Faith. "If everything could only be put back
as it was, in the old days before all this!"

"But that is what we can't do. Nothing goes back precisely to what it
was before."

"No," said Aunt Faith, from her sofa. "And never did, since the days of
Humpty Dumpty. You might be glad to, but you can't do it. Things must
just be made the best of, as they are. And they're never just alike, two
minutes together. They're altering, and working, and going on, all the
time. And that's a comfort, too, when you come to think of it."

"There is always comfort, somehow, when there has been no willful wrong.
And there has been none here, I am sure."

Faith, with the half smile yet upon her face, called there by her aunt's
quaint speaking, bent her head, and burst into tears.

"I came to reassure and to thank you, Faith--not to let you distress
yourself so," said Mr. Rushleigh. "Margaret sent all kind messages; but
I would not bring her. I thought it would be too much for you, so soon.
Another day, she will come. We shall always claim old friendship, my
child, and remember our new debt; though the old days themselves cannot
quite be brought back again as they were. There may be better days,
though, even, by and by."

"Let Margaret know, before she comes, please," whispered Faith. "I don't
think I could tell her."

"You shall not have a moment of trial that I can spare you. But--Paul
will be content with nothing, as a final word, that does not come from
you."

"I will see him when he comes. I wish it. Oh, sir! I am so sorry."

"And so am I, Faith. We must all be sorry. But we are _only_ sorry. And
that is all that need be said."

The conversation, after this, could not be prolonged. Mr. Rushleigh took
his leave, kindly, as he had made his greeting.

"Oh, Aunt Faith! What a terrible thing I have done!"

"What a terrible thing you came near doing, you mean, child! Be thankful
to the Lord--He's delivered you from it! And look well to the rest of
your life, after all this. Out of fire and misery you must have been
saved for something!"

Then Aunt Faith called Glory, and told her to bring an egg, beat up in
milk--"to a good froth, mind; and sugared and nut-megged, and a
teaspoonful of brandy in it."

This she made Faith swallow, and then bade her put her feet up on the
sofa, and lean back, and shut her eyes, and not speak another word till
she'd had a nap.

All which, strangely enough, Faith--wearied, troubled, yet
relieved--obeyed.

For the next two days, what with waiting on the invalids--for Faith was
far from well--and with answering the incessant calls at the door of
curious people flocking to inquire, Glory McWhirk was kept busy and
tired. But not with a thankless duty, as in the days gone by, that she
remembered; it was heart work now, and brought heart love as its reward.
It was one of her "real good times."

Mr. Armstrong talked and read with them, and gave hand help and ministry
also, just when it could be given most effectually.

It was a beautiful lull of peace between the conflict that was past, and
the final pang that was to come. Faith accepted it with a thankfulness.
Such joy as this was all life had for her, henceforth. There was no
restlessness, no selfishness in the love that had so suddenly asserted
itself, and borne down all her doubts. She thought not of it, as love,
any more. She never dreamed of being other to Mr. Armstrong than she
was. Only, that other life had become impossible to her. Here, if she
might not elsewhere, she had gone back to the things that were. She
could be quite content and happy, so. It was enough to rest in such a
friendship. If only she had once seen Paul, and if he could but bear it!

And Roger Armstrong, of intent, was just what he had always been--the
kind and earnest friend--the ready helper--no more. He knew Faith
Gartney had a trouble to bear; he had read her perplexity--her
indecision; he had feared, unselfishly, for the mistake she was making.
Miss Henderson had told him, now, in few, plain words, how things were
ending; he strove, in all pleasant and thoughtful ways, to soothe and
beguile her from her harassment. He dreamed not how the light had come
to her that had revealed to her the insufficiency of that other love. He
laid his own love back, from his own sight.

So, calmly, and with what peace they might, these hours went on.

"I want to see that Sampson woman," said Aunt Faith, suddenly, to her
niece, on the third afternoon of their being together. "Do you think she
would come over here if I should send for her?"

Faith flashed a surprised look of inquiry to Miss Henderson's face.

"Why, aunt?" she asked.

"Never mind why, child. I can't tell you now. Of course it's something,
or I shouldn't want her. Something I should like to know, and that I
suppose she could tell me. Do you think she'd come?"

"Why, yes, auntie. I don't doubt it. I might write her a note."

"I wish you would. Mr. Armstrong says he'll drive over. And I'd like to
have you do it right off. Now, don't ask me another word about it, till
she's been here."

Faith wrote the note, and Mr. Armstrong went away.

Miss Henderson seemed to grow tired, to-day, after her dinner, and at
four o'clock she said to Glory, abruptly:

"I'll go to bed. Help me into the other room."

Faith offered to go too, and assist her. But her aunt said, no, she
should do quite well with Glory. "And if the Sampson woman comes, send
her in to me."

Faith was astonished, and a little frightened.

What could it be that Miss Henderson wanted with the nurse? Was it
professionally that she wished to see her? She knew the peculiar whim,
or principle, Miss Sampson always acted on, of never taking cases of
common illness. She could not have sent for her in the hope of keeping
her merely to wait upon her wants as an invalid, and relieve Glory? Was
her aunt aware of symptoms in herself, foretokening other or more
serious illness?

Faith could only wonder, and wait.

Glory came back, presently, into the southeast room, to say to Faith
that her aunt was comfortable, and thought she should get a nap. I
caught the boat about a week later, after a few pleasant days with
Kidder and Blake, who had turned up at Wood Island, after a very
successful hunt on the mainland.

A word in regard to the Kadiak bear. Dr. Merriam has proved that he is
distinct from other bear.

That he ever reached 2,000 pounds is doubtful in my mind, but, by
comparing measurements of skins, we can be sure he comes up to
1,200, or a little over.

Whether the Kadiak bear is bigger than the big brown bear of the mainland
is doubtful. At present the growth of these bears is badly
interfered with by the natives, and they rarely reach the old bear
age, when these brutes become massive in their bony structure, and
accumulate a vast amount of fat, just before denning up.

_W. Lord Smith_.

The Mountain Sheep and its Range

The mountain sheep is, in my estimation, the finest of all our
American big game.

Many men have killed it and sheep heads are trophies almost as common
as moose heads, and yet among those who have hunted it most and know it
best, but little is really understood as to the life of the mountain
sheep, and many erroneous ideas prevail with regard to it.

It is generally supposed to be an animal found only among the tops of the
loftiest and most rugged mountains, and never to be seen on the lower
ground, and there are still people interested in big game who
now and then ask one confidentially whether there really is anything
in the story that the sheep throw themselves down from great heights,
and, striking on their horns, rebound to their feet without injury.

Each one of us individually knows but little about the mountain sheep,
yet each who has hunted them has observed something of their ways, and
each can contribute some share to an accumulation of facts which some
time may be of assistance to the naturalist who shall write the
life history of this noble species.

But unless that naturalist has already been in the field and has
there gathered much material, he is likely to be hard put to it
when the time comes for his story to be written, since then there
may be no mountain sheep to observe or to write of.

The sheep is not likely to be so happy in its biographer as was the
buffalo, for Dr. Allen's monograph on the American bison is a classic
among North American natural history works.

The mountain sheep is an inhabitant of western America, and the books
tell us that it inhabits the Rocky Mountains from southern California
to Alaska.

This is sufficiently vague, and I shall endeavor a little further
on to indicate a few places where this species may still be found,
though even so I am unable to assign their ranges to the various
forms that have been described.

But there might be something more in
me, yet; and you might have brought it out, maybe. You _were_ bringing
it out. You, and the responsibilities my father put upon me. But it's
too late, now. It can't be helped."

"Not too late, Paul, for that noble part of you to grow. It was that I
came so near really loving at the last. But--Paul! a woman don't want to
lead her husband. She wants to be led. I have thought," she added,
timidly, "so much of that verse in the Epistle--'the head of the woman
is the man, and the head of the man is Christ, and the head of Christ is
God.'"

"You came _near_ loving me!" cried Paul, catching at this sentence,
only, out of all that should, by and by, nevertheless, come out in
letters of light upon his thought and memory. "Oh, Faith! you may, yet!
It isn't all quite over?"

Then Faith Gartney knew she must say it all. All--though the hot crimson
flushed up painfully, and the breath came quick, and she trembled from
head to foot, there, where she stood. But the truth, mighty, and holy in
its might, came up from heart to lip, and the crimson paled, and the
breath grew calm, and she stood firm with her pure resolve, even in her
maidenly shame, before him.

There are instants, when all thought of the moment itself, and the look
and the word of it, are overborne and lost.

"No, Paul. I will tell you truly. With my little, childish heart, I
loved you. With the love of a dear friend, I hold you still, and shall
hold you, always. But, Paul!--no one else knows it, and I never knew it
till I stood face to face with death--with my _soul_ I have come to love
another!"

Deep and low these last words were--given up from the very innermost,
and spoken with bowed head and streaming eyes.

Paul Rushleigh took her hand. A manly reverence in him recognized the
pure courage that unveiled her woman's heart, and showed him all.

"Faith!" he said, "you have never deceived me. You are always noble.
Forgive me that I have made you struggle to love me!"

With these words, he went.

Faith flung herself upon the sofa, and hid her face in its cushion,
hearing, through her sobs, the tread of his horse as he passed down the
road.

This chapter of her life story was closed.


CHAPTER XXXI.

NURSE SAMPSON'S WAY OF LOOKING AT IT.

"I can believe, it shall you grieve,
  And somewhat you distrain;
But afterward, your paines hard,
  Within a day or twain,
Shall soon aslake; and ye shall take
  Comfort to you again."
                 OLD ENGLISH BALLAD.


Glory looked in, once, at the southeast room, and saw Faith lying, still
with hidden face; and went away softly, shutting the door behind her as
she went.

When Mr. Armstrong and Miss Sampson came, she met them at the front
entrance, and led the nurse directly to her mistress, as she had been
told.

Mr. Armstrong betook himself to his own room. Perhaps the hollow Paul
Rushleigh's horse had pawed at the gatepost, and the closed door of the
keeping room, revealed something to his discernment that kept him from
seeking Faith just then.

There was a half hour of quiet in the old house. A quiet that ever
brooded very much.

Then Nurse Sampson came out, with a look on her face that made Faith
gaze upon her with an awed feeling of expectation. She feared, suddenly,
to ask a question.

It was not a long-drawn look of sympathy. It was not surprised, nor
shocked, nor excited. It was a look of business. As if she knew of work
before her to do. As if Nurse Sampson were in her own proper element,
once more.

Faith knew that something--she could not guess what--something terrible,
she feared--had happened, or was going to happen, to her aunt.

It was in the softening twilight that Miss Henderson sent for her to
come in.

Aunt Faith leaned against her pillows, looking bright and comfortable,
even cheerful; but there was a strange gentleness in look and word and
touch, as she greeted the young girl who came to her bedside with a face
that wore at once its own subduedness of fresh-past grief, and a
wondering, loving apprehension of something to be disclosed concerning
the kind friend who lay there, invested so with such new grace of
tenderness.

Was there a twilight, other than that of day, softening, also, around
her?

"Little Faith!" said Aunt Henderson. Her very voice had taken an
unwonted tone.

"Auntie! It is surely something very grave! Will you not tell me?"

"Yes, child. I mean to tell you. It may be grave. Most things are, if we
had the wisdom to see it. But it isn't very dreadful. It's what I've had
warning enough of, and had mostly made up my mind to. But I wasn't quite
sure. Now, I am. I suppose I've got to bear some pain, and go through a
risk that will be greater, at my years, than it would have been if I'd
been younger. And I may die. That's all."

The words, of old habit, were abrupt. The eye and voice were tender with
unspoken love.

Faith turned to Miss Sampson, who sat by.

"And then, again, she mayn't," said the nurse. "I shall stay and see her
through. There'll have to be an operation. At least, I think so. We'll
have the doctor over, to-morrow. And now, if there's one thing more
important than another, it's to keep her cheerful. So, if you've got
anything bright and lively to say, speak out! If not, _keep_ out! She'll
do well enough, I dare say."

Poor Faith! And, without this new trouble, there was so much that she,
herself, was needing comfort for!

"You're a wise woman, Nurse Sampson. But you don't know everything,"
said Aunt Faith. "The best thing to take people out of their own
worries, is to go to work and find out how other folks' worries are
getting on. He's been here, hasn't he, child?"

It was not so hard for Aunt Faith, who had borne secretly, so long, the
suspicion of what was coming, and had lived on, calmly, nevertheless, in
her daily round, to turn thus from the announcement of her own state and
possible danger, to thought and inquiry for the affairs of another, as
it was for that other, newly apprised, and but half apprised, even, of
what threatened, to leave the subject there, and answer. They were
being meticulously careful with them. Never was there less mob violence
in a riot. They walked by the captured cars almost deferentially, like
rough men honoured by a real lady's company. And when White and Benham
reached the Power House the marvel grew. The rioters were already in
possession and going freely over the whole place, and they had injured
nothing. They had stopped the engines, but they had not even
disabled them.

Here too manifestly a majority of the people were, like White and Benham,
merely lookers-on.

"But this is the most civilized rioting," said Benham.

"It isn't rioting; it's drifting. Just as things drifted in Moscow.

Because nobody has the rudder....

"What maddens me," he said, "is the democracy of the whole
thing. White!
I HATE this modern democracy. Democracy and inequality! Was there ever
an absurder combination?

What is the good of a social order in which the men at the top are
commoner, meaner stuff than the men underneath, the same stuff, just
spoilt, spoilt by prosperity and opportunity and the conceit that comes
with advantage? This trouble wants so little, just a touch of
aristocracy, just a little cultivated magnanimity, just an inkling of
responsibility, and the place might rise instantly out of all this squalor
and evil temper.... What does all this struggle here amount to? On
one side unintelligent greed, unintelligent resentment on the other;
suspicion everywhere....

"And you know, White, at bottom THEY ALL WANT TO BE DECENT!

"If only they had light enough in their brains to show them how.
It's such a plain job they have here too, a new city, the simplest
industries, freedom from war, everything to make a good life for
men, prosperity, glorious sunshine, a kind of happiness in the air.
And mismanagement, fear, indulgence, jealousy, prejudice, stupidity,
poison it all. A squabble about working on a Saturday afternoon,
a squabble embittered by this universal shadow of miner's phthisis
that the masters were too incapable and too mean to prevent.
"Oh, God!" cried Benham, "when will men be princes and take hold
of life? When will the kingship in us wake up and come to its own?...
Look at this place! Look at this place!... The easy, accessible
happiness!"But it's very hard," said Faith, smiling, despite all her saddening
thoughts, at the characteristic harangue, "always to know wrong from
right. People may make mistakes, if they mean ever so well."

"Yes, awful mistakes! There's that poor, unfortunate woman in the Bible.
I never thought the Lord meant any reflection by what he said--on her.
She'd had six husbands. And he knew she hadn't got what she bargained
for, after all. Most likely she never had, in the whole six. And if
things had got into such a snarl as that eighteen hundred years ago, how
many people, do you think, by this time, are right enough in themselves
to be right for anybody? I've thought it all over, many a time. I've had
reasons of my own, and I've seen plenty of reasons as I've gone about
the world. And my conclusion is, that matrimony's come to be more of a
discipline, nowadays, than anything else!"

It was strange cheer; and it came at a strange moment; with the very
birth of a new anxiety. But so our moments and their influences are
mingled. Faith was roused, strengthened, confirmed in her own thought of
right, beguiled out of herself, by the words of these two odd,
plain-dealing women, as she would not have been if a score of
half-comprehending friends had soothed her indirectly with inanities,
and delicate half-handling of that which Aunt Faith and Nurse Sampson
went straight to the heart of, and brought out, uncompromisingly, into
the light. So much we can endure from a true earnestness and simplicity,
rough and homely though it be, which would be impertinent and
intolerable if it came but with surface sympathy.

She had a word that night from Robert Armstrong, when he came, late in
the evening, from a conversation with Aunt Faith, and found her at the
open door upon the stoop. It was only a hand grasp, and a fervent "God
bless you, child! You have been brave and true!" and he passed on. But a
balm and a quiet fell deep into her heart, and a tone, that was a joy,
lingered in her ear, and comforted her as no other earthly comfort
could. But this was not all earthly; it lifted her toward heaven. It
bore her toward the eternal solace there.

Aunt Faith would have no scenes. She told the others, in turn, very much
as she had told Faith, that a suffering and an uncertainty lay before
her; and then, by her next word and gesture, demanded that the life
about her should go right on, taking as slightly as might be its
coloring from this that brooded over her. Nobody had a chance to make a
wail. There was something for each to do.

Miss Henderson, by Nurse Sampson's advice, remained mostly in her bed.
In fact, she had kept back the announcement of this ailment of hers,
just so long as she could resist its obvious encroachment. The twisted
ankle had been, for long, a convenient explanation of more than its own
actual disability.

But it was not a sick room--one felt that--this little limited bound in
which her life was now visibly encircled. All the cheer of the house was
brought into it. If people were sorry and fearful, it was elsewhere.
Neither Aunt Faith nor the nurse would let anybody into "their
hospital," as Miss Sampson said, "unless they came with a bright look
for a pass." Every evening, the great Bible was opened there, and Mr.
Armstrong read with them, and uttered for them words that lifted each
heart, with its secret need and thankfulness, to heaven. All together,
trustfully, and tranquilly, they waited.

Dr. Wasgatt had been called in. Quite surprised he was, at this new
development. He "had thought there was something a little peculiar in
her symptoms." But he was one of those Æsculapian worthies who, having
lived a scientifically uneventful life, plodding quietly along in his
profession among people who had mostly been ill after very ordinary
fashions, and who required only the administering of stereotyped
remedies, according to the old stereotyped order and rule, had quite
forgotten to think of the possibility of any unusual complications. If
anybody were taken ill of a colic, and sent for him and told him so, for
a colic he prescribed, according to outward indications. The subtle
signs that to a keener or more practiced discernment, might have
betokened more, he never thought of looking for. What then? All cannot
be geniuses; most men just learn a trade. It is only a Columbus who, by
the drift along the shore of the fact or continent he stands on,
predicates another, far over, out of sight.

Surgeons were to come out from Mishaumok to consult. Mr. and Mrs.
Gartney would be home, now, in a day or two, and Aunt Faith preferred to
wait till then. Mis' Battis opened the Cross Corners house, and Faith
went over, daily, to direct the ordering of things there.

"Faith!" said Miss Henderson, on the Wednesday evening when they were to
look confidently for the return of their travelers next day, "come here,
child! I have something to say to you."

Walpole, by Lord Braybrooke 336 Portraits of Ulrich of Hutten 336
Change of Names 337 Queries answered, No. 6., by Bolton Corney 337
Beaver Hats 338 Replies to Minor Queries:--Anecdote of the Civil
Wars--Mousetrap Dante--Cromwell's Estates--Genealogy of European
Sovereigns-- Shipster--Kentish Ballad--Bess of Hardwick--Trophee--Emerald--
Ancient Motto: Barnacles--Tureen--Hudibrastic Couplet--Dr.

Hugh Todd's MSS. 338
MISCELLANIES:-- Burnet--Translation from Vinny Bourne--Prince Madoc--Mistake
in Gibbon--Jew's Harp--Havior, &c. 341
MISCELLANEOUS:-- Notes on Books, Sales, Catalogues, &c. 342 Notices
to Correspondents 343 Advertisements 343
* * * * *

EARLY STATISTICS.--CHART, KENT.

Perhaps some one of your numerous readers will be good enough to inform
me whether any _general statistical returns_, compiled from our early
parish registers, have ever been published. An examination of the register
of Chart next Sutton Valence, in Kent, which disclosed some very curious
facts, has led me to make this inquiry. They seem to point to the inevitable
conclusion that the disturbed state of England during the period
of the Great Rebellion retarded the increase of population to an extent
almost incredible--so as to suggest a doubt whether some special cause
might not have operated in the parish in question which was not felt
elsewhere. But, as I am quite unable to discover the existence of any
such cause, I shall be glad to learn whether a similar result appears
generally in other registers of the period above referred to.

The register-book of Chart commences with the year 1558, and is
continued regularly from that time.

During the remainder of the sixteenth, and for about the first thirty-five
years of the seventeenth century, the baptisms registered increase
steadily in number: from that period there is a very marked decrease.

For the twenty years commencing with 1600 and ending with 1619, the
number 260; for the twenty years 1620 to 1639, the number is 246;
and for the twenty years 1640 to 1659, the number is _only_ 120.

No doubt this diminution must be attributed partly to the spread of
Nonconformity; but I believe that during the Protectorate, the
registration of _births_ was substituted for that of _baptisms_,
and therefore the state of religious feeling which then prevailed
bears less directly on the question.

And even after the Restoration the register exhibits but a small increase
in the number of baptisms. For the various periods of twenty years
from that event up to 1760, the numbers range from 152 to 195. And
pursuing the inquiry, I find that the number of marriages, for any
given time, varies consistently with that of baptisms. If any of your
reader can clear up the difficulty, I shall feel much obliged for
any information which may tend to do so.

Are the following extracts from the register above referred to of
sufficient interest to merit your acceptance?

"1648

.
I can't help thinking that what I've done has been
a leading. And if it has, it's right. Now, put this back, and tell Miss
Sampson she may bring my gruel."


CHAPTER XXXII.

GLORY McWHIRK'S INSPIRATION.

"No bird am I to sing in June,
And dare not ask an equal boon.
Good nests and berries red are Nature's
To give away to better creatures,--
And yet my days go on, go on."
                         MRS. BROWNING.


Mr. and Mrs. Gartney arrived on Thursday.

Two weeks and three days they had been absent; and in that time how the
busy sprites of change and circumstance had been at work! As if the
scattered straws of events, that, stretched out in slender windrows,
might have reached across a field of years, had been raked together, and
rolled over--crowded close, and heaped, portentous, into these eighteen
days!

Letters had told them something; of the burned mill, and Faith's fearful
danger and escape; of Aunt Henderson's continued illness, and its
present serious aspect; and with this last intelligence, which met them
in New York but two days since, Mrs. Gartney found her daughter's
agitated note of pained avowal, that she "had come, through all this, to
know herself better, and to feel sure that this marriage ought not to
be"; that, in short, all was at length over between her and Paul
Rushleigh.

Now I fail to share with my advisers their poor opinion of the taste,
enterprise, and intelligence of the wide-awake American, but, for the
sake of my message, I yield in some part to their warnings. Therefore I
have so presented my material that the miscalled, and, I verily
believe, badly slandered "average reader," may have his "popular"
book by omitting the note on the Appreciation of Scenery, and the
several notes explanatory of scenery which are interpolated between
groups of chapters.

If it is true, as I have been told, that the "average reader" would
omit these anyway, because it is his habit to omit prefaces and notes
of every kind, then nothing has been lost.

It came at length--the long evening talk, after Hendie was in bed, and
Mr. Gartney had been over to the old house, and seen his aunt, and had
come back, to find wife and daughter sitting in the dim light beside the
open door, drawn close in love and confidence, and so glad and thankful
to have each other back once more!

First--Aunt Faith; and what was to be done--what might be hoped--what
must be feared--for her. Then, the terrible story of the fire; and all
about it, that could only be got at by the hundred bits of question and
answer, and the turning over and over, and repetition, whereby we do the
best--the feeble best--we can, to satisfy great askings and deep
sympathies that never can be anyhow made palpable in words.

And, last of all--just with the good-night kiss--Faith and her mother
had had it all before, in the first minutes they were left alone
together--Mr. Gartney said to his daughter:

"You are quite certain, now, Faith?"

"Quite certain, father"; Faith answered, low, with downcast eyes, as she
stood before him.

Her father laid his hand upon her head.

"You are a good girl; and I don't blame you; yet I thought you would
have been safe and happy, so."

"I am safe and happy here at home," said Faith.

"Home is in no hurry to spare you, my child."

And Faith felt taken back to daughterhood once more.

Margaret Rushleigh had been to see her, before this. It was a painful
visit, with the mingling of old love and new restraint; and the effort,
on either side, to show that things, except in the one particular, were
still unchanged.

Faith felt how true it was that "nothing could go back, precisely, to
what it was before."

There was another visit, a day or two after the reassembling of the
family at Cross Corners. This was to say farewell. New plans had been
made. It would take some time to restore the mills to working order, and
Mr. Rushleigh had not quite resolved whether to sell them out as they
were, or to retain the property. Mrs. Rushleigh wished Margaret to join
her at Newport, whither the Saratoga party was to go within the coming
week. Then there was talk of another trip to Europe. Margaret had never
been abroad. It was very likely they would all go out in October.

Paul's name was never mentioned.

Faith realized, painfully, how her little hand had been upon the motive
power of much that was all ended, now.

Two eminent medical men had been summoned from Mishaumok, and had held
consultation with Dr. Wasgatt upon Miss Henderson's case. It had been
decided to postpone the surgical operation for two or three weeks.
Meanwhile, she was simply to be kept comfortable and cheerful,
strengthened with fresh air, and nourishing food, and some slight
tonics.

Faith was at the old house, constantly. Her aunt craved her presence,
and drew her more and more to herself. The strong love, kept down by a
stiff, unbending manner, so, for years--resisting almost its own
growth--would no longer be denied or concealed. Faith Gartney had
nestled herself into the very core of this true, upright heart,
unpersuadable by anything but clear judgment and inflexible conscience.

"I had a beautiful dream last night, Miss Faith," said Glory, one
morning, when Faith came over and found the busy handmaiden with her
churn upon the doorstone, "about Miss Henderson. I thought she was all
well, and strong, and she looked so young, and bright, and pleasant! And
she told me to make a May Day. And we had it out here in the field. And
everybody had a crown; and everybody was queen. And the little children
danced round the old apple tree, and climbed up, and rode horseback in
the branches. And Miss Henderson was out there, dressed in white, and
looking on. It don't seem so--just to say it; but I couldn't tell you
how beautiful it was!"

"Dreams are strange things," said Faith, thoughtfully. "It seems as if
they were sent to us, sometimes--as if we really had a sort of life in
them."

"Don't they?" cried Glory, eagerly. "Why, Miss Faith, I've dreamed on,
and on, sometimes, a whole story out! And, after all, we're asleep
almost as much as we're awake. Why isn't it just as real?"

"I had a dream that night of the fire, Glory. I never shall forget it. I
went to sleep there, on the sofa. And it seemed as if I were on the top
of a high, steep cliff, with no way to get down. And all at once, there
was fire behind me--a burning mountain! And it came nearer, and nearer,
till it scorched my very feet; and there was no way down. When he was
informed that I was present at his first meeting a few nights before
in Jersey City, he came over to me and in a most friendly way said:
"What did you really think of my speech?"

For a moment I was embarrassed, and yet the frankness of the man was
compelling and so I said: "Doctor, do you really desire an honest
opinion of that speech?

I really want to serve you but I can do so only by speaking frankly."
He replied: "That is what I most desire."

"Well," I said, "your speech was most disappointing."

I stopped suddenly, feeling that I had done enough damage to the
Professor's feelings. But he urged: "Please tell me what your criticism
is.

What I most need is honesty and frankness. You cannot hurt my feelings
by truthfully expressing your opinion.

Don't forget that I am an amateur at this game and need advice and
guidance."

Encouraged by this suggestion, I proceeded to tell him what I considered
the principal defects of his opening speech at Jersey City.

I told him that there was a lack of definiteness in it which gave
rise to the impression that he was trying to evade a discussion of
the moral issues of the campaign, among them, of major importance,
being the regulation of Public Utilities and the passage of an
Employers' Liability Act.

Briefly sketching for him our legislative situation, I gave him the facts
with reference to those large measures of public interest; how, for
many years, in face of constant agitation, the Old Guard had
prevented the enactment of these measures into law, and how,
therefore, his failure to discuss these matters in his first speech
had caused a grave feeling of unrest in the progressive ranks of
both parties in New Jersey.

[Illustration:

The White House Washington
Cornish, N.

H., July 3, 1915
My dear Tumulty:

I am heartily obliged to you for your telegrams.

It is characteristic of you to keep my mind free by such messages.
I am really having a most refreshing and rewarding time and am very
thankful to get it. I hope that you are not having depressing weather in
Washington and that you are finding it possible to make satisfactory
arrangements for the family, so that we can have the pleasure of
having you with us at the White House when I get back.

With warmest messages from us all, Affectionately yours,
(signed) Woodrow Wilson 
Hon.

Joseph P. Tumulty Washington, D.C.

This letter reveals the warm personal relations between the President and
his secretary.]

He listened with keen attention and then modestly remarked: "I value
very highly this tip and you may rest assured I shall cover these
matters in my next speech.

I meant that speech to be general."
She went straight to the tin baker before
the fire, and lifted the cover, to see if her biscuits were ready for
tea. Then she seated herself upon a little bench that stood against the
chimney-side, and leaned her head against the bricks, and looked down
into the glowing coals.

"It was put into my head to do it!" she said, breathlessly, to herself.
"I hope it wasn't ridiculous!"

So she sat, and gazed on, into the coals. _They_ were out there in the
sunset, with the new moon and the bright star above them in the saffron
depths.

They stood alone, except for each other, in this still, radiant beauty
of all things.

Miss Henderson's window was around a projection of the rambling,
irregular structure, which made the angle wherein the pleasant old
doorstone lay.

Sitting on the mossy turf, I mused over bygone years in the sloping
shadows of the evening, when slowly there came out from the folding
darkness of foliage an apparition of beauty in the perfect form of
a woman, and stood on a white slab of stone at the water's brink.

It seemed that the heart of the earth must heave in joy under her bare
white feet. Methought the vague veilings of her body should melt in ecstasy
into air as the golden mist of dawn melts from off the snowy peak of the
eastern hill. She bowed herself above the shining mirror of the lake
and saw the reflection of her face. She started up in awe and stood
still; then smiled, and with a careless sweep of her left arm
unloosed her hair and let it trail on the earth at her feet.

His deep, earnest eyes, lit with
a new, strange radiance, smote upon hers, and held them spellbound with
their glance.

"I, too, dreamed that night," said he, "of an unknown peril to you. You
beckoned me. I sprang from out that dream, and rushed into the
night--until I found you!"

Their two souls met, in that brief recital, and knew that they had met
before. That, through the dreamland, there had been that call and
answer.

Faith neither spoke, nor stirred, nor trembled. This supreme moment of
her life held her unmoved in its own mightiness.

Roger Armstrong held out both his hands.

"Faith! In the sight of God, I believe you belong to me!"

--Marye, the daughter of John Smith, Esq. was baptized on the thirteenth
daye of Januarie, 1660, by John Case, Vicar. The first that hath been
baptized at the font since it was re-erected by the appoynm't of
the said Mr.

Smith, being full sixteene yeers paste.

As God's gift, to the heart that
had been earthly desolate so long.

There was no dread, no shrinking, in that moment. A perfect love cast
out all fear.