13th (Lord's day).  So that Griffin was fain to carry it to Westminster to
go by express, and my other letters of import to my father and elsewhere
could not go at all.  To bed between one and two and slept till 8, and lay
talking till 9 with great pleasure with my wife.  So up and put my clothes
in order against tomorrow's journey, and then at noon at dinner, and all
the afternoon almost playing and discoursing with my wife with great
content, and then to my office there to put papers in order against my
going.  And by and by comes my uncle Wight to bid us to dinner to-morrow
to a haunch of venison I sent them yesterday, given me by Mr. Povy, but I
cannot go, but my wife will.  Then into the garden to read my weekly vows,
and then home, where at supper saying to my wife, in ordinary fondness,
"Well! shall you and I never travel together again?" she took me up and
offered and desired to go along with me.  I thinking by that means to have
her safe from harm's way at home here, was willing enough to feign, and
after some difficulties made did send about for a horse and other things,
and so I think she will go.  So, in a hurry getting myself and her things
ready, to bed.

14th.  Up betimes, and my wife's mind and mine holding for her going, so
she to get her ready, and I abroad to do the like for myself, and so home,
and after setting every thing at my office and at home in order, by coach
to Bishop's Gate, it being a very promising fair day.  There at the
Dolphin we met my uncle Thomas and his son-in-law, which seems a very
sober man, and Mr. Moore.  So Mr. Moore and my wife set out before, and my
uncle and I staid for his son Thomas, who, by a sudden resolution, is
preparing to go with us, which makes me fear something of mischief which
they design to do us.  He staying a great while, the old man and I before,
and about eight miles off, his son comes after us, and about six miles
further we overtake Mr. Moore and my wife, which makes me mightily
consider what a great deal of ground is lost in a little time, when it is
to be got up again by another, that is to go his own ground and the
other's too; and so after a little bayte (I paying all the reckonings the
whole journey) at Ware, to Buntingford, where my wife, by drinking some
cold beer, being hot herself, presently after 'lighting, begins to be
sick, and became so pale, and I alone with her in a great chamber there,
that I thought she would have died, and so in great horror, and having a
great tryall of my true love and passion for her, called the mayds and
mistresse of the house, and so with some strong water, and after a little
vomit, she came to be pretty well again; and so to bed, and I having put
her to bed with great content, I called in my company, and supped in the
chamber by her, and being very merry in talk, supped and then parted, and
I to bed and lay very well.  This day my cozen Thomas dropped his hanger,
and it was lost.

15th.  Up pretty betimes and rode as far as Godmanehester, Mr. Moore
having two falls, once in water and another in dirt, and there 'light and
eat and drunk, being all of us very weary, but especially my uncle and
wife.  Thence to Brampton to my father's, and there found all well, but
not sensible how they ought to treat my uncle and his son, at least till
the Court be over, which vexed me, but on my counsel they carried it fair
to them; and so my father, cozen Thomas, and I up to Hinchingbroke, where
I find my Lord and his company gone to Boughton, which vexed me; but there
I find my Lady and the young ladies, and there I alone with my Lady two
hours, she carrying me through every part of the house and gardens, which
are, and will be, mighty noble indeed.  Here I saw Mrs. Betty Pickering,
who is a very well-bred and comely lady, but very fat. Thence, without so
much as drinking, home with my father and cozen, who staid for me, and to
a good supper; after I had had an hour's talk with my father abroad in the
fields, wherein he begun to talk very highly of my promises to him of
giving him the profits of Sturtlow, as if it were nothing that I give him
out of my purse, and that he would have me to give this also from myself
to my brothers and sister; I mean Brampton and all, I think: I confess I
was angry to hear him talk in that manner, and took him up roundly in it,
and advised him if he could not live upon L50 per ann., which was another
part of his discourse, that he would think to come and live at Tom's
again, where L50 per ann. will be a good addition to Tom's trade, and I
think that must be done when all is done.  But my father spoke nothing
more of it all the time I was in the country, though at the time he seemed
to like it well enough.  I also spoke with Piggott too this evening before
I went in to supper, and doubt that I shall meet with some knots in my
business to-morrow before I can do it at the Court, but I shall do my
best.  After supper my uncle and his son to Stankes's to bed, which
troubles me, all our father's beds being lent to Hinchingbroke, and so my
wife and I to bed, she very weary.

16th.  Up betimes, and with my wife to Hinchingbroke to see my Lady, she
being to go to my Lord this morning, and there I left her, and so back to
the Court, and heard Sir R. Bernard's charges to the Courts Baron and
Leete, which took up till noon, and were worth hearing, and after putting
my business into some way, went home to my father's to dinner, and after
dinner to the Court, where Sir Robert and his son came again by and by,
and then to our business, and my father and I having given bond to him for
the L21 Piggott owed him, my uncle Thomas did quietly admit himself and
surrender to us the lands first mortgaged for our whole debt, and Sir
Robert added to it what makes it up L209, to be paid in six months.  But
when I came to give him an account of more lands to be surrendered to us,
wherein Piggott's wife was concerned, and she there to give her consent,
Sir Robert would not hear of it, but began to talk very high that we were
very cruel, and we had caution enough for our money, and he could not in
conscience let the woman do it, and reproached my uncle, both he and his
son, with taking use upon use for this money.  To all which I did give him
such answers and spoke so well, and kept him so to it, that all the Court
was silent to hear us, and by report since do confess they did never hear
the like in the place.  But he by a wile had got our bond, and I was
content to have as much as I could though I could not get all, and so took
Piggott's surrender of them without his wife, and by Sir Robert's own
consent did tell the Court that if the money were not paid in the time,
and the security prove not sufficient, I would conclude myself wronged by
Sir Robert, which he granted I should do.  This kept us till night, but am
heartily glad it ended so well on my uncle's part, he doing that and
Prior's little house very willingly.  So the Court broke up, and my father
and Mr. Shepley and I to Gorrum's to drink, and then I left them, and to
the Bull, where my uncle was to .hear what he and the people said of our
business, and here nothing but what liked me very well.  So by and by home
and to supper, and with my mind in pretty good quiett, to bed.

17th.  Up, and my father being gone to bed ill last night and continuing
so this morning, I was forced to come to a new consideration, whether it
was fit for to let my uncle and his son go to Wisbeach about my uncle
Day's estate alone or no, and concluded it unfit; and so resolved to go
with them myself, leaving my wife there, I begun a journey with them, and
with much ado, through the fens, along dikes, where sometimes we were
ready to have our horses sink to the belly, we got by night, with great
deal of stir and hard riding, to Parson's Drove, a heathen place, where I
found my uncle and aunt Perkins, and their daughters, poor wretches! in a
sad, poor thatched cottage, like a poor barn, or stable, peeling of hemp,
in which I did give myself good content to see their manner of preparing
of hemp; and in a poor condition of habitt took them to our miserable inn,
and there, after long stay, and hearing of Frank, their son, the miller,
play, upon his treble, as he calls it, with which he earns part of his
living, and singing of a country bawdy song, we sat down to supper; the
whole crew, and Frank's wife and child, a sad company, of which I was
ashamed, supped with us.  And after supper I, talking with my aunt about
her report concerning my uncle Day's will and surrender, I found her in
such different reports from what she writes and says to the people, and
short of what I expected, that I fear little will be done of good in it.
By and by newes is brought to us that one of our horses is stole out of
the stable, which proves my uncle's, at which I am inwardly glad--I mean,
that it was not mine; and at this we were at a great loss; and they
doubting a person that lay at next door, a Londoner, some lawyer's clerk,
we caused him to be secured in his bed, and other care to be taken to
seize the horse; and so about twelve at night or more, to bed in a sad,
cold, nasty chamber, only the mayde was indifferent handsome, and so I had
a kiss or two of her, and I to bed, and a little after I was asleep they
waked me to tell me that the horse was found, which was good newes, and so
to sleep till the morning, but was bit cruelly, and nobody else of our
company, which I wonder at, by the gnatts.

18th.  Up, and got our people together as soon as we could; and after
eating a dish of cold cream, which was my supper last night too, we took
leave of our beggarly company, though they seem good people, too; and over
most sad Fenns, all the way observing the sad life which the people of the
place which if they be born there, they do call the Breedlings' of the
place, do live, sometimes rowing from one spot to another, and then
wadeing, to Wisbeach, a pretty town, and a fine church and library, where
sundry very old abbey manuscripts; and a fine house, built on the church
ground by Secretary Thurlow, and a fine gallery built for him in the
church, but now all in the Bishop of Ely's hands.  After visiting the
church, &c., we went out of the towne, by the help of a stranger, to find
out one Blinkhorne, a miller, of whom we might inquire something of old
Day's disposal of his estate, and in whose hands it now is; and by great
chance we met him, and brought him to our inn to dinner; and instead of
being informed in his estate by this fellow, we find that he is the next
heir to the estate, which was matter, of great sport to my cozen Thomas
and me, to see such a fellow prevent us in our hopes, he being Day's
brother's, daughter's son, whereas we are but his sister's sons and
grandsons; so that, after all, we were fain to propose our matter to him,
and to get him to give us leave to look after the business, and so he to
have one-third part, and we two to have the other two-third parts, of what
should be recovered of the estate, which he consented to; and after some
discourse and paying the reckoning, we mounted again, and rode, being very
merry at our defeat, to Chatteris, my uncle very weary, and after supper,
and my telling of three stories, to their good liking, of spirits, we all
three in a chamber went to bed.

19th.  Up pretty betimes, and after eating something, we set out and I
(being willing thereto) went by a mistake with them to St. Ives, and
there, it being known that it was their nearer way to London, I took leave
of them there, they going straight to London and I to Brampton, where I
find my father ill in bed still, and Madam Norbery (whom and her fair
daughter and sister I was ashamed to kiss, but did, my lip being sore with
riding in the wind and bit with the gnatts), lately come to town, come to
see my father and mother, and they after a little stay being gone, I told
my father my success.  And after dinner my wife and I took horse, and rode
with marvellous, and the first and only hour of, pleasure, that ever I had
in this estate since I had to do with it, to Brampton woods; and through
the wood rode, and gathered nuts in my way, and then at Graffam to an old
woman's house to drink, where my wife used to go; and being in all
circumstances highly pleased, and in my wife's riding and good company at
this time, I rode, and she showed me the river behind my father's house,
which is very pleasant, and so saw her home, and I straight to Huntingdon,
and there met Mr. Shepley and to the Crown (having sent home my horse by
Stankes), and there a barber came and trimmed me, and thence walked to
Hinchingbroke, where my Lord and ladies all are just alighted.  And so I
in among them, and my Lord glad to see me, and the whole company.  Here I
staid and supped with them, and after a good stay talking, but yet
observing my Lord not to be so mightily ingulphed in his pleasure in the
country as I expected and hoped, I took leave of them, and after a walk in
the courtyard in the dark with Mr. Howe, who tells me that my Lord do not
enjoy himself and please himself as he used to do, but will hasten up to
London, and that he is resolved to go to Chelsey again, which we are
heartily grieved for and studious how to prevent if it be possible, I took
horse, there being one appointed for me, and a groom to attend me, and so
home, where my wife: staid up and sister for me, and so to bed, troubled
for what I hear of my Lord.

20th (Lord's day).  Up, and finding my father somewhat better, walked to
Huntingdon church, where in my Lord's pew, with the young ladies, by my
Lord's own showing me the place, I stayed the sermon, and so to
Hinchingbroke, walking with Mr. Shepley and Dr. King, whom they account a
witty man here, as well as a good physician, and there my Lord took me
with the rest of the company, and singly demanded my opinion in the walks
in his garden, about the bringing of the crooked wall on the mount to a
shape; and so to dinner, there being Collonel Williams and much other
company, and a noble dinner.  But having before got my Lord's warrant for
travelling to-day, there being a proclamation read yesterday against it at
Huntingdon, at which I am very glad, I took leave, leaving them at dinner,
and walked alone to my father's, and there, after a word or two to my
father and mother, my wife and I mounted, and, with my father's boy, upon
a horse I borrowed of Captain Ferrers, we rode to Bigglesworth by the help
of a couple of countrymen, that led us through the very long and dangerous
waters, because of the ditches on each side, though it begun to be very
dark, and there we had a good breast of mutton roasted for us, and supped,
and to bed.

21st.  Up very betimes by break of day, and got my wife up, whom the
thought of this day's long journey do discourage; and after eating
something, and changing of a piece of gold to pay the reckoning, we
mounted, and through Baldwicke, where a fayre is kept to-day, and a great
one for cheese and other such commodities, and so to Hatfield, it being
most curious weather from the time we set out to our getting home, and
here we dined, and my wife being very weary, and believing that it would
be hard to get her home to-night, and a great charge to keep her longer
abroad, I took the opportunity of an empty coach that was to go to London,
and left her to come in it to London, for half-a-crown, and so I and the
boy home as fast as we could drive, and it was even night before we got
home.  So that I account it very good fortune that we took this course,
being myself very weary, much more would my wife have been.  At home found
all very well and my house in good order.  To see Sir W. Pen, who is
pretty well, and Sir J. Minnes, who is a little lame on one foot, and the
rest gone to Chatham, viz.: Sir G. Carteret and Sir W. Batten, who has in
my absence inveighed against my contract the other day for Warren's masts,
in which he is a knave, and I shall find matter of tryumph, but it vexes
me a little.  So home, and by and by comes my wife by coach well home, and
having got a good fowl ready for supper against her coming, we eat
heartily, and so with great content and ease to our own bed, there nothing
appearing so to our content as to be at our own home, after being abroad
awhile.

22nd.  I up, well refreshed after my journey, and to my office and there
set some things in order, and then Sir W. Pen and I met and held an
office, and at noon to dinner, and so by water with my wife to
Westminster, she to see her father and mother, and we met again at my
Lord's lodgings, and thence by water home again, where at the door we met
Sir W. Pen and his daughter coming to visit us, and after their visit I to
my office, and after some discourse to my great satisfaction with Sir W.
Warren about our bargain of masts, I wrote my letters by the post, and so
home to supper and to bed.  This day my wife showed me bills printed,
wherein her father, with Sir John Collidon and Sir Edward Ford, have got a
patent for curing of smoky chimneys.

     [The Patent numbered 138 is printed in the appendix to Wheatley's
     "Samuel Pepys and the World he lived in" (p. 241).  It is drawn in
     favour of John Colladon, Doctor in Physicke, and of Alexander
     Marchant, of St. Michall, and describes "a way to prevent and cure
     the smoakeing of Chimneys, either by stopping the tunnell towards
     the top, and altering the former course of the smoake, or by setting
     tunnells with checke within the chimneyes."  Sir Edward Ford's name
     does not appear in the patent.]

I wish they may do good thereof, but fear it will prove but a poor
project.  This day the King and Queen are to come to Oxford.  I hear my
Lady Castlemaine is for certain gone to Oxford to meet him, having lain
within here at home this week or two, supposed to have miscarried; but for
certain is as great in favour as heretofore;

     [According to Collins, Henry Fitzroy, Lady Castlemaine's second son
     by Charles II., was born on September 20th, 1663.  He was the first
     Duke of Grafton.--B.]

at least Mrs. Sarah at my Lord's, who hears all from their own family, do
say so.  Every day brings newes of the Turke's advance into Germany, to
the awakeing of all the Christian Princes thereabouts, and possessing
himself of Hungary.  My present care is fitting my wife's closett and my
house, and making her a velvet coate, and me a new black cloth suit, and
coate and cloake, and evening my reckoning as well as I can against
Michaelmas Day, hoping for all that to have my balance as great or greater
than ever I had yet.

23rd.  Up betimes and to my office, where setting down my journall while I
was in the country to this day, and at noon by water to my Lord Crew's,
and there dined with him and Sir Thomas, thinking to have them inquire
something about my Lord's lodgings at Chelsey, or any thing of that sort,
but they did not, nor seem to take the least notice of it, which is their
discretion, though it might be better for my Lord and them too if they
did, that so we might advise together for the best, which cannot be while
we seem ignorant one to another, and it is not fit for me to begin the
discourse.  Thence walked to several places about business and to
Westminster Hall, thinking to meet Mrs. Lane, which is my great vanity
upon me at present, but I must correct it.  She was not in the way.  So by
water home and to my office, whither by and by came my brother John, who
is to go to Cambridge to-morrow, and I did give him a most severe
reprimand for his bad account he gives me of his studies.  This I did with
great passion and sharp words, which I was sorry to be forced to say, but
that I think it for his good, forswearing doing anything for him, and that
which I have yet, and now do give him, is against my heart, and will also
be hereafter, till I do see him give me a better account of his studies.
I was sorry to see him give me no answer, but, for aught I see, to hear me
without great resentment, and such as I should have had: in his condition.
But I have done my duty, let him do his, for I am resolved to be as good
as my word.  After two hours walking in the garden, till after it was
dark, I ended with him and to my office, and there set some papers in
order, and so to supper, and my poor wife, who is mighty busy at home;
fitting her closet.  So to bed.

24th.  Up betimes, and after taking leave of my brother, John, who went
from me to my father's this day, I went forth by water to Sir Philip
Warwick's, where I was with him a pretty while; and in discourse he tells
me, and made it; appear to me, that the King cannot be in debt to the Navy
at this time L5,000; and it is my opinion that Sir G. Carteret do owe the
King money, and yet the whole Navy debt paid.  Thence I parted, being
doubtful of myself that I have not, spoke with the gravity and weight that
I ought to do in so great a business.  But I rather hope it is my
doubtfulness of myself, and the haste which he was in, some very great
personages waiting for him without, while he was with me, that made him
willing to be gone.  To the office by water, where we sat doing little,
now Mr. Coventry is not here, but only vex myself to see what a sort of
coxcombs we are when he is not here to undertake such a business as we do.
In the afternoon telling my wife that I go to Deptford, I went, by water
to Westminster Hall, and there finding Mrs. Lane, took her over to
Lambeth, where we were lately, and there, did what I would with her, but
only the main thing, which she; would not consent to, for which God be
praised .  .  .  .  .  But, trust in the Lord, I shall never do so again
while I live.  After being tired with her company I landed her at White;
Hall, and so home and at my office writing letters till 12 at night
almost, and then home to supper and bed, and there found my poor wife hard
at work, which grieved my heart to see that I should abuse so good a
wretch, and that is just with God to make her bad with me for my wrongin
of her, but I do resolve never to do the like again.  So to bed.

25th.  Lay pretty long in bed, and so to my office all the morning till by
and by called out by Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten, with them by water
to Deptford, where it of a sudden did lighten, thunder, and rain so as we
could do nothing but stay in Davis's house, and by and by Sir J. Minnes
and I home again by water, and I home to dinner, and after dinner to the
office, and there till night all alone, even of my clerks being there,
doing of business, and so home and to bed.

26th.  Up and to my office, and there we sat till noon, and then I to the
Exchange, but did little there, but meeting Mr. Rawlinson he would needs
have me home to dinner, and Mr. Deane of Woolwich being with me I took him
with me, and there we dined very well at his own dinner, only no
invitation, but here I sat with little pleasure, considering my wife at
home alone, and so I made what haste home I could, and was forced to sit
down again at dinner with her, being unwilling to neglect her by being
known to dine abroad.  My doing so being only to keep Deane from dining at
home with me, being doubtful what I have to eat.  So to the office, and
there till late at night, and so home to supper and bed, being mightily
pleased to find my wife so mindful of her house.

27th (Lord's day).  Lay chatting with my wife a good while, then up and
got me ready and to church, without my man William, whom I have not seen
to-day, nor care, but would be glad to have him put himself far enough out
of my favour that he may not wonder to have me put him away.  So home to
dinner, being a little troubled to see Pembleton out again, but I do not
discern in my wife the least memory of him.  Dined, and so to my office a
little, and then to church again, where a drowsy sermon, and so home to
spend the evening with my poor wife, consulting about her closett,
clothes, and other things.  At night to supper, though with little
comfort, I finding myself both head and breast in great pain, and what
troubles me most my right ear is almost deaf.  It is a cold, which God
Almighty in justice did give me while I sat lewdly sporting with Mrs. Lane
the other day with the broken window in my neck.  I went to bed with a
posset, being very melancholy in consideration of the loss of my hearing.

28th.  Up, though with pain in my head, stomach, and ear, and that deaf so
as in my way by coach to White Hall with Sir J. Minnes I called at Mr.
Holliard's, who did give me some pills, and tells me I shall have my
hearing again and be well.  So to White Hall, where Sir J. Minnes and I
did spend an hour in the Gallery, looking upon the pictures, in which he
hath some judgment.  And by and by the Commissioners for Tangier met: and
there my Lord Teviott, together with Captain Cuttance, Captain Evans, and
Jonas Moore, sent to that purpose, did bring us a brave draught of the
Mole to be built there; and report that it is likely to be the most
considerable place the King of England hath in the world; and so I am apt
to think it will.  After discourse of this, and of supplying the garrison
with some more horse, we rose; and Sir J. Minnes and I home again, finding
the street about our house full, Sir R. Ford beginning his shrievalty
to-day and, what with his and our houses being new painted, the street
begins to look a great deal better than it did, and more gracefull.  Home
and eat one bit of meat, and then by water with him and Sir W. Batten to a
sale of old provisions at Deptford, which we did at Captain Boddily's
house, to the value of L600 or L700, but I am not satisfied with the
method used in this thing.  Then home again by water, and after a little
at my office, and visit Sir W. Pen, who is not very well again, with his
late pain, home to supper, being hungry, and my ear and cold not so bad I
think as it was.  So to bed, taking one of my pills.  Newes that the King
comes to town for certain on Thursday next from his progresse.

29th.  Took two pills more in the morning and they worked all day, and I
kept the house.  About noon dined, and then to carry several heavy things
with my wife up and down stairs, in order to our going to lie above, and
Will to come down to the Wardrobe, and that put me into a violent sweat,
so I had a fire made, and then, being dry again, she and I to put up some
paper pictures in the red chamber, where we go to lie very pretty, and the
map of Paris.  Then in the evening, towards night, it fell to thunder,
lighten, and rain so violently that my house was all afloat, and I in all
the rain up to the gutters, and there dabbled in the rain and wet half an
hour, enough to have killed a man.  That done downstairs to dry myself
again, and by and by come Mr. Sympson to set up my wife's chimney-piece in
her closett, which pleases me, and so that being done, I to supper and to
bed, shifting myself from top to toe, and doubtful of my doing myself
hurt.

30th.  Rose very well, and my hearing pretty well again, and so to my
office, by and by Mr. Holliard come, and at my house he searched my ear,
and I hope all will be well, though I do not yet hear so well as I used to
do with my right ear.  So to my office till noon, and then home to dinner,
and in the afternoon by water to White Hall, to the Tangier Committee;
where my Lord Tiviott about his accounts; which grieves me to see that his
accounts being to be examined by us, there are none of the great men at
the Board that in compliment will except against any thing in his
accounts, and so none of the little persons dare do it: so the King is
abused.  Thence home again by water with Sir W. Rider, and so to my
office, and there I sat late making up my month's accounts, and, blessed
be God, do find myself L760 creditor, notwithstanding that for clothes for
myself and wife, and layings out on her closett, I have spent this month
L47.  So home, where I found our new cooke-mayde Elizabeth, whom my wife
never saw at all, nor I but once at a distance before, but recommended
well by Mr. Creed, and I hope will prove well.  So to supper, prayers, and
bed.  This evening Mr. Coventry is come to St. James's, but I did not go
see him, and tomorrow the King, Queen, Duke and his Lady, and the whole
Court comes to towne from their progresse.  Myself and family well, only
my father sicke in the country.  All the common talke for newes is the
Turke's advance in Hungary, &c.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                 OCTOBER
                                  1663

October 1st.  Up and betimes to my office, and then to sit, where Sir G.
Carteret, Sir W. Batten, Sir W. Pen, Sir J. Minnes, Mr. Coventry and
myself, a fuller board than by the King's progresse and the late pays and
my absence has been a great while.  Sat late, and then home to dinner.
After dinner I by water to Deptford about a little business, and so back
again, buying a couple of good eeles by the way, and after writing by the
post, home to see the painter at work, late, in my wife's closet, and so
to supper and to bed, having been very merry with the painter, late, while
he was doing his work.  This day the King and Court returned from their
progress.

2nd.  Up betimes and by water to St. James's, and there visited Mr.
Coventry as a compliment after his new coming to town, but had no great
talk with him, he being full of business.  So back by foot through London,
doing several errands, and at the 'Change met with Mr. Cutler, and he and
I to a coffee-house, and there discoursed, and he do assure me that there
is great likelyhood of a war with Holland, but I hope we shall be in good
condition before it comes to break out.  I like his company, and will make
much of his acquaintance.  So home to dinner with my wife, who is over
head and eares in getting her house up, and so to the office, and with Mr.
Lewes, late, upon some of the old victuallers' accounts, and so home to
supper and to bed, up to our red chamber, where we purpose always to lie.
This day I received a letter from Mr. Barlow, with a Terella,

     [Professor Silvanus P. Thompson, F.R.S., has kindly supplied me with
     the following interesting note on the terrella (or terella): The
     name given by Dr. William Gilbert, author of the famous treatise,
     "De Magnete" (Lond.  1600), to a spherical loadstone, on account of
     its acting as a model, magnetically, of the earth; compass-needles
     pointing to its poles, as mariners' compasses do to the poles of
     the earth.  The term was adopted by other writers who followed
     Gilbert, as the following passage from Wm.  Barlowe's "Magneticall
     Advertisements" (Lond.  1616) shows: "Wherefore the round Loadstone
     is significantly termed by Doct. Gilbert Terrella, that is, a
     little, or rather a very little Earth: For it representeth in an
     exceeding small model (as it were) the admirable properties
     magneticall of the huge Globe of the earth" (op. cit, p. 55).
     Gilbert set great store by his invention of the terrella, since it
     led him to propound the true theory of the mariners' compass.  In
     his portrait of himself which he had painted for the University of
     Oxford he was represented as holding in his hand a globe inscribed
     terella.  In the Galileo Museum in Florence there is a terrella
     twenty-seven inches in diameter, of loadstone from Elba, constructed
     for Cosmo de' Medici.  A smaller one contrived by Sir Christopher
     Wren was long preserved in the museum of the Royal Society (Grew's
     "Rarities belonging to the Royal Society," p.  364).  Evelyn was
     shown "a pretty terrella described with all ye circles and skewing
     all y magnetic deviations" (Diary, July 3rd, 1655).]

which I had hoped he had sent me, but to my trouble I find it is to
present from him to my Lord Sandwich, but I will make a little use of it
first, and then give it him.

3rd.  Up, being well pleased with my new lodging and the convenience of
having our mayds and none else about us, Will lying below.  So to the
office, and there we sat full of business all the morning.  At noon I home
to dinner, and then abroad to buy a bell to hang by our chamber door to
call the mayds.  Then to the office, and met Mr. Blackburne, who came to
know the reason of his kinsman (my Will) his being observed by his friends
of late to droop much.  I told him my great displeasure against him and
the reasons of it, to his great trouble yet satisfaction, for my care over
him, and how every thing I said was for the good of the fellow, and he
will take time to examine the fellow about all, and to desire my pleasure
concerning him, which I told him was either that he should became a better
servant or that we would not have him under my roof to be a trouble.  He
tells me in a few days he will come to me again and we shall agree what to
do therein.  I home and told my wife all, and am troubled to see that my
servants and others should be the greatest trouble I have in the world,
more than for myself.  We then to set up our bell with a smith very well,
and then I late at the office.  So home to supper and to bed.

4th (Lord's day).  Up and to church, my house being miserably overflooded
with rayne last night, which makes me almost mad.  At home to dinner with
my wife, and so to talk, and to church again, and so home, and all the
evening most pleasantly passed the time in good discourse of our fortune
and family till supper, and so to bed, in some pain below, through cold
got.

5th.  Up with pain, and with Sir J. Minnes by coach to the Temple, and
then I to my brother's, and up and down on business, and so to the New
Exchange, and there met Creed, and he and I walked two or three hours,
talking of many businesses, especially about Tangier, and my Lord Tiviot's
bringing in of high accounts, and yet if they were higher are like to pass
without exception, and then of my Lord Sandwich sending a messenger to
know whether the King intends to come to Newmarket, as is talked, that he
may be ready to entertain him at Hinchingbroke.  Thence home and dined,
and my wife all day putting up her hangings in her closett, which she do
very prettily herself with her own hand, to my great content.  So I to the
office till night, about several businesses, and then went and sat an hour
or two with Sir W. Pen, talking very largely of Sir J. Minnes's simplicity
and unsteadiness, and of Sir W. Batten's suspicious dealings, wherein I
was open, and he sufficiently, so that I do not care for his telling of
tales, for he said as much, but whether that were so or no I said nothing
but what is my certain knowledge and belief concerning him.  Thence home
to bed in great pain.

6th.  Slept pretty well, and my wife waked to ring the bell to call up our
mayds to the washing about 4 o'clock, and I was and she angry that our
bell did not wake them sooner, but I will get a bigger bell.  So we to
sleep again till 8 o'clock, and then I up in some ease to the office,
where we had a full board, where we examined Cocke's second account, when
Mr. Turner had drawn a bill directly to be paid the balance thereof, as
Mr. Cocke demanded, and Sir J. Minnes did boldly assert the truth of it,
and that he had examined it, when there is no such thing, but many
vouchers, upon examination, missing, and we saw reason to strike off
several of his demands, and to bring down his 5 per cent. commission to 3
per cent.  So we shall save the King some money, which both the
Comptroller and his clerke had absolutely given away.  There was also two
occasions more of difference at the table; the one being to make out a
bill to Captain Smith for his salary abroad as commander-in-chief in the
Streights.  Sir J. Minnes did demand an increase of salary for his being
Vice-Admiral in the Downes, he having received but 40s. without an
increase, when Sir J. Lawson, in the same voyage, had L3, and others have
also had increase, only he, because he was an officer of the board, was
worse used than any body else, and particularly told Sir W. Batten that he
was the opposer formerly of his having an increase, which I did wonder to
hear him so boldly lay it to him.  So we hushed up the dispute, and
offered, if he would, to examine precedents, and report them, if there was
any thing to his advantage to be found, to the Duke.  The next was, Mr.
Chr. Pett and Deane were summoned to give an account of some knees

     ["Naturally grown timber or bars of iron bent to a right angle or to
     fit the surfaces and to secure bodies firmly together as hanging
     knees secure the deck beams to the sides."--Smyth's Sailor's Word-
     Book.  There are several kinds of knees.]

which Pett reported bad, that were to be served in by Sir W. Warren, we
having contracted that none should be served but such as were to be
approved of by our officers.  So that if they were bad they were to be
blamed for receiving them.  Thence we fell to talk of Warren's other
goods, which Pett had said were generally bad, and falling to this
contract again, I did say it was the most cautious and as good a contract
as had been made here, and the only [one] that had been in such terms. Sir
J. Minnes told me angrily that Winter's timber, bought for 33s. per load,
was as good and in the same terms.  I told him that it was not so, but
that he and Sir W. Batten were both abused, and I would prove it was as
dear a bargain as had been made this half year, which occasioned high
words between them and me, but I am able to prove it and will.  That also
was so ended, and so to other business.  At noon Lewellin coming to me I
took him and Deane, and there met my uncle Thomas, and we dined together,
but was vexed that, it being washing-day, we had no meat dressed, but sent
to the Cook's, and my people had so little witt to send in our meat from
abroad in that Cook's dishes, which were marked with the name of the Cook
upon them, by which, if they observed anything, they might know it was not
my own dinner.  After dinner we broke up, and I by coach, setting down
Luellin in Cheapside.  So to White Hall, where at the Committee of
Tangier, but, Lord! how I was troubled to see my Lord Tiviott's accounts
of L10,000 paid in that manner, and wish 1000 times I had not been there.
Thence rose with Sir G. Carteret and to his lodgings, and there discoursed
of our frays at the table to-day, and particularly of that of the
contract, and the contract of masts the other day, declaring my fair
dealing, and so needing not any man's good report of it, or word for it,
and that I would make it so appear to him, if he desired it, which he did,
and I will do it.  Thence home by water in great pain, and at my office a
while, and thence a little to Sir W. Pen, and so home to bed, and finding
myself beginning to be troubled with wind as I used to be, and in pain in
making water, I took a couple of pills that I had by me of Mr. Hollyard's.

7th.  They wrought in the morning, and I did keep my bed, and my pain
continued on me mightily that I kept within all day in great pain, and
could break no wind nor have any stool after my physic had done working.
So in the evening I took coach and to Mr. Holliard's, but he was not at
home, and so home again, and whether the coach did me good or no I know
not .  .  .  .  So to bed and lay in good ease all night, and .  .  .  .
pretty well to the morning .  .  .  .  .

     [Pepys's prescription for the colic:

     "Balsom of Sulphur, 3 or 4 drops in a spoonfull of Syrrup of Colts
     foote, not eating or drinking two hours before or after.

     "The making of this Balsom:

     "2/3ds of fine Oyle, and 1/3d of fine Brimstone, sett 13 or 14
     houres upon yt fire, simpring till a thicke Stufte lyes at ye
     Bottome, and ye Balsom at ye topp.  Take this off &c.

     "Sir Rob. Parkhurst for ye Collique."--M. B.]

8th.  So, keeping myself warm, to the office, and at noon home to dinner,
my pain coming again by breaking no wind nor having any stool.  So to Mr.
Holliard, and by his direction, he assuring me that it is nothing of the
stone, but only my constitution being costive, and that, and cold from
without, breeding and keeping the wind, I took some powder that he did
give me in white wine, and sat late up, till past eleven at night, with my
wife in my chamber till it had done working, which was so weakly that I
could hardly tell whether it did work or no.  My mayds being at this time
in great dirt towards getting of all my house clean, and weary and having
a great deal of work to do therein to-morrow and next day, were gone to
bed before my wife and I, who also do lie in our room more like beasts
than Christians, but that is only in order to having of the house shortly
in a cleaner, or rather very clean condition.  Some ease I had so long as
this did keep my body loose, and I slept well.

9th.  And did keep my bed most of this morning, my body I find being still
bound and little wind, and so my pain returned again, though not so bad,
but keeping my body with warm clothes very hot I made shift to endure it,
and at noon sent word to Mr. Hollyard of my condition, that I could
neither have a natural stool nor break wind, and by that means still in
pain and frequent offering to make water.  So he sent me two bottles of
drink and some syrup, one bottle to take now and the other to-morrow
morning.  So in the evening, after Commissioner Pett, who came to visit
me, and was going to Chatham, but methinks do talk to me in quite another
manner, doubtfully and shyly, and like a stranger, to what he did
heretofore.  After I saw he was gone I did drink one of them, but it was a
most loathsome draught, and did keep myself warm after it, and had that
afternoon still a stool or two, but in no plenty, nor any wind almost
carried away, and so to bed.  In no great pain, but do not think myself
likely to be well till I have a freedom of stool and wind.  Most of this
day and afternoon my wife and I did spend together in setting things now
up and in order in her closet, which indeed is, and will be, when I can
get her some more things to put in it, a very pleasant place, and is at
present very pretty, and such as she, I hope, will find great content in.
So to bed.

10th.  Up, and not in any good ease yet, but had pain in making water, and
some course.  I see I must take besides keeping myself warm to make myself
break wind and go freely to stool before I can be well, neither of which I
can do yet, though I have drank the other bottle of Mr. Hollyard's against
my stomach this morning.  I did, however, make shift to go to the office,
where we sat, and there Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten did advise me to
take some juniper water, and Sir W. Batten sent to his Lady for some for
me, strong water made of juniper.  Whether that or anything else of my
draught this morning did it I cannot tell, but I had a couple of stools
forced after it .  .  .  .  but whether I shall grow better upon it I
cannot tell.  Dined at home at noon, my wife and house in the dirtiest
pickle that ever she and it was in almost, but in order, I hope, this
night to be very clean.  To the office all the afternoon upon victualling
business, and late at it, so after I wrote by the post to my father, I
home.  This evening Mr. Hollyard sends me an electuary to take (a walnut
quantity of it) going to bed, which I did. 'Tis true I slept well, and
rose in a little ease in the morning.

11th (Lord's day).  And was mightily pleased to see my house clean and in
good condition, but something coming into my wife's head, and mine, to be
done more about bringing the green bed into our chamber, which is
handsomer than the red one, though not of the colour of our hangings, my
wife forebore to make herself clean to-day, but continued in a sluttish
condition till to-morrow.  I after the old passe, all the day within
doors, .  .  .  .  the effect of my electuary last night, and the greatest
of my pain I find to come by my straining .  .  .  .  For all this I eat
with a very good stomach, and as much as I use to do, and so I did this
noon, and staid at home discoursing and doing things in my chamber,
altering chairs in my chamber, and set them above in the red room, they
being Turkey work, and so put their green covers upon those that were
above, not so handsome.  At night fell to reading in the Church History of
Fuller's, and particularly Cranmer's letter to Queen Elizabeth, which
pleases me mightily for his zeal, obedience, and boldness in a cause of
religion.  After supper to bed as I use to be, in pain .  .  .  .  .

12th.  Up (though slept well) and made some water in the morning [as] I
used to do, and a little pain returned to me, and some fears, but being
forced to go to the Duke at St. James's, I took coach and in my way called
upon Mr. Hollyard and had his advice to take a glyster.  At St. James's we
attended the Duke all of us.  And there, after my discourse, Mr. Coventry
of his own accord begun to tell the Duke how he found that discourse
abroad did run to his prejudice about the fees that he took, and how he
sold places and other things; wherein he desired to appeal to his
Highness, whether he did any thing more than what his predecessors did,
and appealed to us all.  So Sir G. Carteret did answer that some fees were
heretofore taken, but what he knows not; only that selling of places never
was nor ought to be countenanced.  So Mr. Coventry very hotly answered to
Sir G. Carteret, and appealed to himself whether he was not one of the
first that put him upon looking after this taking of fees, and that he
told him that Mr. Smith should say that he made L5000 the first year, and
he believed he made L7000.  This Sir G. Carteret denied, and said, that if
he did say so he told a lie, for he could not, nor did know, that ever he
did make that profit of his place; but that he believes he might say L2500
the first year.  Mr. Coventry instanced in another thing, particularly
wherein Sir G. Carteret did advise with him about the selling of the
Auditor's place of the stores, when in the beginning there was an
intention of creating such an office.  This he confessed, but with some
lessening of the tale Mr. Coventry told, it being only for a respect to my
Lord Fitz-Harding.  In fine, Mr. Coventry did put into the Duke's hand a
list of above 250 places that he did give without receiving one farthing,
so much as his ordinary fees for them, upon his life and oath; and that
since the Duke's establishment of fees he had never received one token
more of any man; and that in his whole life he never conditioned or
discoursed of any consideration from any commanders since he came to the
Navy.  And afterwards, my Lord Barkeley merrily discoursing that he wished
his profit greater than it was, and that he did believe that he had got
L50,000 since he came in, Mr. Coventry did openly declare that his
Lordship, or any of us, should have not only all he had got, but all that
he had in the world (and yet he did not come a beggar into the Navy, nor
would yet be thought to speak in any contempt of his Royall Highness's
bounty), and should have a year to consider of it too, for L25,000.  The
Duke's answer was, that he wished we all had made more profit than he had
of our places, and that we had all of us got as much as one man below
stayres in the Court, which he presently named, and it was Sir George
Lane!  This being ended, and the list left in the Duke's hand, we parted,
and I with Sir G. Carteret, Sir J. Minnes, and Sir W. Batten by coach to
the Exchange, and there a while, and so home, and whether it be the
jogging, or by having my mind more employed (which I believe is a great
matter) I know not, but .  .  .  . I begin to be suddenly well, at least
better than I was.  So home and to dinner, and thence by coach to the Old
Exchange, and there cheapened some laces for my wife, and then to
Mr.-----the great laceman in Cheapside, and bought one cost me L4. more by
20s.  than I intended, but when I came to see them I was resolved to buy
one worth wearing with credit, and so to the New Exchange, and there put
it to making, and so to my Lord's lodgings and left my wife, and so I to
the Committee of Tangier, and then late home with my wife again by coach,
beginning to be very well, and yet when I came home .  .  .  .  the little
straining which I thought was no strain at all at the present did by and
by bring me some pain for a good while.  Anon, about 8 o'clock, my wife
did give me a clyster which Mr. Hollyard directed, viz., a pint of strong
ale, 4 oz. of sugar, and 2 oz. of butter.  It lay while I lay upon the bed
above an hour, if not two, and then thinking it quite lost I rose, and by
and by it began with my walking to work, and gave me three or four most
excellent stools and carried away wind, put me in excellent ease, and
taking my usual walnut quantity of electuary at my going into bed I had
about two stools in the night .  .  .  .  .

13th.  And so rose in the morning in perfect good ease .  .  .  .
continued all the morning well, and in the afternoon had a natural easily
and dry stoole, the first I have had these five days or six, for which God
be praised, and so am likely to continue well, observing for the time to
come when any of this pain comes again

(1) To begin to keep myself as warm as I can.

(2) Strain as little as ever I can backwards, remembering that my pain
will come by and by, though in the very straining I do not feel it.

(3) Either by physic forward or by clyster backward or both ways to get an
easy and plentiful going to stool and breaking of wind.

(4) To begin to suspect my health immediately when I begin to become
costive and bound, and by all means to keep my body loose, and that to
obtain presently after I find myself going the contrary.

This morning at the office, and at noon with Creed to the Exchange, where
much business, but, Lord!  how my heart, though I know not reason for it,
began to doubt myself, after I saw Stint, Field's one-eyed solicitor,
though I know not any thing that they are doing, or that they endeavour
any thing further against us in the business till the terme.  Home, and
Creed with me to dinner, and after dinner John Cole, my old friend, came
to see and speak with me about a friend.  I find him ingenious, but more
and more discern his city pedantry; but however, I will endeavour to have
his company now and then, for that he knows much of the temper of the
City, and is able to acquaint therein as much as most young men, being of
large acquaintance, and himself, I think, somewhat unsatisfied with the
present state of things at Court and in the Church.  Then to the office,
and there busy till late, and so home to my wife, with some ease and
pleasure that I hope to be able to follow my business again, which by
God's leave I am resolved to return to with more and more eagerness. I
find at Court, that either the King is doubtfull of some disturbance, or
else would seem so (and I have reason to hope it is no worse), by his
commanding all commanders of castles, &c., to repair to their charges; and
mustering the Guards the other day himself, where he found reason to
dislike their condition to my Lord Gerard, finding so many absent men, or
dead pays.

     [This is probably an allusion to the practice of not reporting the
     deaths of soldiers, that the officers might continue to draw their
     pay.--B.]

My Lady Castlemaine, I hear, is in as great favour as ever, and the King
supped with her the very first night he came from Bath: and last night and
the night before supped with her; when there being a chine of beef to
roast, and the tide rising into their kitchen that it could not be roasted
there, and the cook telling her of it, she answered, "Zounds! she must set
the house on fire but it should be roasted!" So it was carried to Mrs.
Sarah's husband's, and there it was roasted.  So home to supper and to
bed, being mightily pleased with all my house and my red chamber, where my
wife and I intend constantly to lie, and the having of our dressing room
and mayds close by us without any interfering or trouble.

14th.  Up and to my office, where all the morning, and part of it Sir J.
Minnes spent, as he do every thing else, like a fool, reading the Anatomy
of the body to me, but so sillily as to the making of me understand any
thing that I was weary of him, and so I toward the 'Change and met with
Mr. Grant, and he and I to the Coffee-house, where I understand by him
that Sir W. Petty and his vessel are coming, and the King intends to go to
Portsmouth to meet it.  Thence home and after dinner my wife and I, by Mr.
Rawlinson's conduct, to the Jewish Synagogue: where the men and boys in
their vayles, and the women behind a lattice out of sight; and some things
stand up, which I believe is their Law, in a press to which all coming in
do bow; and at the putting on their vayles do say something, to which
others that hear him do cry Amen, and the party do kiss his vayle.  Their
service all in a singing way, and in Hebrew.  And anon their Laws that
they take out of the press are carried by several men, four or five
several burthens in all, and they do relieve one another; and whether it
is that every one desires to have the carrying of it, I cannot tell, thus
they carried it round about the room while such a service is singing.  And
in the end they had a prayer for the King, which they pronounced his name
in Portugall; but the prayer, like the rest, in Hebrew.  But, Lord! to see
the disorder, laughing, sporting, and no attention, but confusion in all
their service, more like brutes than people knowing the true God, would
make a man forswear ever seeing them more and indeed I never did see so
much, or could have imagined there had been any religion in the whole
world so absurdly performed as this.  Away thence with my mind strongly
disturbed with them, by coach and set down my wife in Westminster Hall,
and I to White Hall, and there the Tangier Committee met, but the Duke and
the Africa Committee meeting in our room, Sir G. Carteret; Sir W. Compton,
Mr. Coventry, Sir W. Rider, Cuttance and myself met in another room, with
chairs set in form but no table, and there we had very fine discourses of
the business of the fitness to keep Sally, and also of the terms of our
King's paying the Portugees that deserted their house at Tangier, which
did much please me, and so to fetch my wife, and so to the New Exchange
about her things, and called at Thomas Pepys the turner's and bought
something there, an so home to supper and to bed, after I had been a good
while with Sir W. Pen, railing and speaking freely our minds against Sir
W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes, but no more than the folly of one and the
knavery of the other do deserve.

15th.  Up, I bless God being now in pretty good condition, but cannot come
to make natural stools yet .  .  .  .  .  So up and to the office, where
we sat all the morning, and at noon dined at home, my head full of
business, and after stepping abroad to buy a thing or two, compasses and
snuffers for my wife, I returned to my office and there mighty busy till
it was late, and so home well contented with the business that I had done
this afternoon, and so to supper and to bed.

16th.  Up and to my office, where all the morning doing business, and at
noon home to dinner, and then up to remove my chest and clothes up stairs
to my new wardrobe, that I may have all my things above where I lie, and
so by coach abroad with my wife, leaving her at my Lord's till I went to
the Tangier Committee, where very good discourse concerning the Articles
of peace to be continued with Guyland, and thence took up my wife, and
with her to her tailor's, and then to the Exchange and to several places,
and so home and to my office, where doing some business, and then home to
supper and to bed.

17th.  Up and to my office, and there we sat a very full board all the
morning upon some accounts of Mr. Gauden's.  Here happened something
concerning my Will which Sir W. Batten would fain charge upon him, and I
heard him mutter something against him of complaint for his often
receiving people's money to Sir G. Carteret, which displeased me much, but
I will be even with him.  Thence to the Dolphin Tavern, and there Mr.
Gauden did give us a great dinner.  Here we had some discourse of the
Queen's being very sick, if not dead, the Duke and Duchess of York being
sent for betimes this morning to come to White Hall to her.  So to my
office and there late doing business, and so home to supper, my house
being got mighty clean to my great content from top to toe, and so to bed,
myself beginning to be in good condition of health also, but only my
laying out so much money upon clothes for myself and wife and her closet
troubles me.

18th (Lord's day).  Up, and troubled at a distaste my wife took at a small
thing that Jane did, and to see that she should be so vexed that I took
part with Jane, wherein I had reason; but by and by well again, and so my
wife in her best gown and new poynt that I bought her the other day, to
church with me, where she has not been these many weeks, and her mayde
Jane with her.  I was troubled to see Pembleton there, but I thought it
prudence to take notice myself first of it and show my wife him, and so by
little and little considering that it mattered not much his being there I
grew less concerned and so mattered it not much, and the less when, anon,
my wife showed me his wife, a pretty little woman, and well dressed, with
a good jewel at her breast.  The parson, Mr. Mills, I perceive, did not
know whether to pray for the Queen or no, and so said nothing about her;
which makes me fear she is dead.  But enquiring of Sir J. Minnes, he told
me that he heard she was better last night.  So home to dinner, and Tom
came and dined with me, and so, anon, to church again, and there a simple
coxcomb preached worse than the Scot, and no Pembleton nor his wife there,
which pleased me not a little, and then home and spent most of the evening
at Sir W. Pen's in complaisance, seeing him though he deserves no respect
from me.  This evening came my uncle Wight to speak with me about my uncle
Thomas's business, and Mr. Moore came, 4 or 5 days out of the country and
not come to see me before, though I desired by two or three messengers
that he would come to me as soon as he came to town.  Which do trouble me
to think he should so soon forget my kindness to him, which I am afraid he
do.  After walking a good while in the garden with these, I went up again
to Sir W. Pen, and took my wife home, and after supper to prayers, and
read very seriously my vowes, which I am fearful of forgetting by my late
great expenses, but I hope in God I do not, and so to bed.

19th.  Waked with a very high wind, and said to my wife, "I pray God I
hear not of the death of any great person, this wind is so high!" fearing
that the Queen might be dead.  So up; and going by coach with Sir W.
Batten and Sir J. Minnes to St. James's, they tell me that Sir W. Compton,
who it is true had been a little sickly for a week or fortnight, but was
very well upon Friday at night last at the Tangier Committee with us, was
dead--died yesterday: at which I was most exceedingly surprised, he being,
and so all the world saying that he was, one of the worthyest men and best
officers of State now in England; and so in my conscience he was: of the
best temper, valour, abilities of mind, integrity, birth, fine person, and
diligence of any one man he hath left behind him in the three kingdoms;
and yet not forty years old, or if so, that is all.

     [Sir William Compton (1625-1663) was knighted at Oxford, December
     12th, 1643.  He was called by Cromwell "the sober young man and the
     godly cavalier."  After the Restoration he was M.P. for Cambridge
     (1661), and appointed Master of the Ordnance.  He died in Drury
     Lane, suddenly, as stated in the text, and was buried at Compton
     Wynyates, Warwickshire.]

I find the sober men of the Court troubled for him; and yet not so as to
hinder or lessen their mirth, talking, laughing, and eating, drinking, and
doing every thing else, just as if there was no such thing, which is as
good an instance for me hereafter to judge of death, both as to the
unavoidableness, suddenness, and little effect of it upon the spirits of
others, let a man be never so high, or rich, or good; but that all die
alike, no more matter being made of the death of one than another, and
that even to die well, the praise of it is not considerable in the world,
compared to the many in the world that know not nor make anything of it,
nor perhaps to them (unless to one that like this poor gentleman, who is
one of a thousand, there nobody speaking ill of him) that will speak ill
of a man.  Coming to St. James's, I hear that the Queen did sleep five
hours pretty well to-night, and that she waked and gargled her mouth, and
to sleep again; but that her pulse beats fast, beating twenty to the
King's or my Lady Suffolk's eleven; but not so strong as it was.  It seems
she was so ill as to be shaved and pidgeons put to her feet, and to have
the extreme unction given her by the priests, who were so long about it
that the doctors were angry.  The King, they all say; is most fondly
disconsolate for her, and weeps by her, which makes her weep;

     ["The queen was given over by her physicians, .  .  .  , and the
     good nature of the king was much affected with the situation in
     which he saw!  a princess whom, though he did not love her, yet he
     greatly esteemed.  She loved him tenderly, and thinking that it was
     the last time she should ever speak to him, she told him 'That the
     concern he showed for her death was enough to make her quit life
     with regret; but that not possessing charms sufficient to merit his
     tenderness, she had at least the consolation in dying to give place
     to a consort who might be more worthy, of it and to whom heaven,
     perhaps, might grant a blessing that had been refused to her.'  At
     these words she bathed his hands with some tears which he thought
     would be her last; he mingled his own with hers, and without
     supposing she would take him at his word, he conjured her to live
     for his sake."--Grammont Memoirs, chap.  vii.]

which one this day told me he reckons a good sign, for that it carries
away some rheume from the head.  This morning Captain Allen tells me how
the famous Ned Mullins, by a slight fall, broke his leg at the ancle,
which festered; and he had his leg cut off on Saturday, but so ill done,
notwithstanding all the great chyrurgeons about the town at the doing of
it, that they fear he will not live with it, which is very strange,
besides the torment he was put to with it.  After being a little with the
Duke, and being invited to dinner to my Lord Barkeley's, and so, not
knowing how to spend our time till noon, Sir W. Batten and I took coach,
and to the Coffee-house in Cornhill;

     [This may be the Coffee House in Exchange Alley, which had for a
     sign, Morat the Great, or The Great Turk, where coffee was sold in
     berry, in powder, and pounded in a mortar.  There is a token of the
     house, see "Boyne's Tokens," ed.  Williamson, vol.  i., p.  592.]

where much talk about the Turk's proceedings, and that the plague is got
to Amsterdam, brought by a ship from Argier; and it is also carried to
Hambrough.  The Duke says the King purposes to forbid any of their ships
coming into the river.  The Duke also told us of several Christian
commanders (French) gone over to the Turks to serve them; and upon inquiry
I find that the King of France do by this aspire to the Empire, and so to
get the Crown of Spayne also upon the death of the King, which is very
probable, it seems.  Back to St. James's, and there dined with my Lord
Barkeley and his lady, where Sir G. Carteret, Sir W. Batten, and myself,
with two gentlemen more; my Lady, and one of the ladies of honour to the
Duchesse (no handsome woman, but a most excellent hand).  A fine French
dinner, and so we after dinner broke up and to Creed's new lodgings in
Axe-yard, which I like very well and so with him to White Hall and walked
up and down in the galleries with good discourse, and anon Mr. Coventry
and Povy, sad for the loss of one of our number we sat down as a Committee
for Tangier and did some business and so broke up, and I down with Mr.
Coventry and in his chamber discoursing of business of the office and Sir
J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten's carriage, when he most ingeniously tells me
how they have carried themselves to him in forbearing to speak the other
day to the Duke what they know they have so largely at other times said to
him, and I told him what I am put to about the bargain for masts.  I
perceive he thinks of it all and will remember it.  Thence took up my wife
at Mrs. Harper's where she and Jane were, and so called at the New
Exchange for some things for her, and then at Tom's went up and saw his
house now it is finished, and indeed it is very handsome, but he not
within and so home and to my office; and then to supper and to bed.

20th.  Up and to the office, where we sat; and at noon Sir G. Carteret,
Sir J. Minnes, and I to dinner to my Lord Mayor's, being invited, where
was the Farmers of the Customes, my Lord Chancellor's three sons, and
other great and much company, and a very great noble dinner, as this
Mayor--[Sir John Robinson.]--is good for nothing else.  No extraordinary
discourse of any thing, every man being intent upon his dinner, and myself
willing to have drunk some wine to have warmed my belly, but I did for my
oath's sake willingly refrain it, but am so well pleased and satisfied
afterwards thereby, for it do keep me always in so good a frame of mind
that I hope I shall not ever leave this practice.  Thence home, and took
my wife by coach to White Hall, and she set down at my Lord's lodgings, I
to a Committee of Tangier, and thence with her homeward, calling at
several places by the way.  Among others at Paul's Churchyard, and while I
was in Kirton's shop, a fellow came to offer kindness or force to my wife
in the coach, but she refusing, he went away, after the coachman had
struck him, and he the coachman.  So I being called, went thither, and the
fellow coming out again of a shop, I did give him a good cuff or two on
the chops, and seeing him not oppose me, I did give him another; at last
found him drunk, of which I was glad, and so left him, and home, and so to
my office awhile, and so home to supper and to bed. This evening, at my
Lord's lodgings, Mrs. Sarah talking with my wife and I how the Queen do,
and how the King tends her being so ill.  She tells us that the Queen's
sickness is the spotted fever; that she was as full of the spots as a
leopard which is very strange that it should be no more known; but perhaps
it is not so.  And that the King do seem to take it much to heart, for
that he hath wept before her; but, for all that; that he hath not missed
one night since she was sick, of supping with my Lady Castlemaine; which I
believe is true, for she [Sarah] says that her husband hath dressed the
suppers every night; and I confess I saw him myself coming through the
street dressing of a great supper to-night, which Sarah says is also for
the King and her; which is a very strange thing.

21st.  Up, and by and by comes my brother Tom to me, though late (which do
vex me to the blood that I could never get him to come time enough to me,
though I have spoke a hundred times; but he is very sluggish, and too
negligent ever to do well at his trade I doubt), and having lately
considered with my wife very much of the inconvenience of my going in no
better plight, we did resolve of putting me into a better garb, and, among
other things, to have a good velvet cloake; that is, of cloth lined with
velvet and other things modish, and a perruque, and so I sent him and her
out to buy me velvet, and I to the Exchange, and so to Trinity House, and
there dined with Sir W. Batten, having some business to speak with him,
and Sir W. Rider.  Thence, having my belly full, away on foot to my
brother's, all along Thames Streete, and my belly being full of small
beer, I did all alone, for health's sake, drink half a pint of Rhenish
wine at the Still-yard, mixed with beer.  From my brother's with my wife
to the Exchange, to buy things for her and myself, I being in a humour of
laying out money, but not prodigally, but only in clothes, which I every
day see that I suffer for want of, I so home, and after a little at my
office, home to supper and to bed.  Memorandum: This morning one Mr.
Commander, a scrivener, came to me from Mr. Moore with a deed of which.
Mr. Moore had told me, that my Lord had made use of my name, and that I
was desired by my Lord to sign it.  Remembering this very well, though
understanding little of the particulars, I read it over, and found it
concern Sir Robt. Bernard and Duckinford, their interest in the manor of
Brampton.  So I did sign it, declaring to Mr. Commander that I am only
concerned in having my name at my Lord Sandwich's desire used therein, and
so I sealed it up after I had signed and sealed the deed, and desired him
to give it so sealed to Mr. Moore.  I did also call at the Wardrobe this
afternoon to have told Mr. Moore of it, but he was not within, but knowing
Mr. Commander to have the esteem of a good and honest man with my Lord
Crew, I did not doubt to intrust him with the deed after I had signed it.
This evening after I came home I begun to enter my wife in arithmetique,
in order to her studying of the globes, and she takes it very well, and, I
hope, with great pleasure, I shall bring her to understand many fine
things.

22nd.  Up to the office, where we sat till noon and then I home to dinner,
and after dinner with my wife to her study and there read some more
arithmetique, which she takes with great ease and pleasure.  This morning,
hearing that the Queen grows worse again, I sent to stop the making of my
velvet cloake, till I see whether she lives or dies.  So a little abroad
about several businesses, and then home and to my office till night, and
then home to supper, teach my wife, and so to bed.

23rd.  Up, and this morning comes Mr. Clerke, and tells me that the
Injunction against Trice is dismissed again, which troubles me much.  So I
am to look after it in the afternoon.  There comes also by appointment my
uncle Thomas, to receive the first payment of his daughter's money. But
showing of me the original of the deed by which his daughter gives her
right to her legacy to him, and the copy of it attested by the Scrivener,
for me to keep by me, I did find some difference, and thereupon did look
more into it, and at last did find the whole thing a forgery; yet he
maintained it again and again, upon oath, that it had been signed and
sealed by my cozen Mary ever since before her marriage. So I told him to
his teeth he did like a knave, and so he did, and went with him to the
Scrivener at Bedlam, and there found how it came to pass, viz., that he
had lost, or pretends to have lost, the true original, and that so he was
forced to take this course; but a knave, at least a man that values not
what he swears to, I perceive he is.  But however I am now better able to
see myself fully secured before I part with the money, for I find that his
son Charles has right to this legacy till the first L100 of his daughter's
portion be paid, he being bond for it.  So I put him upon getting both his
sons to be bound for my security, and so left him and so home, and then
abroad to my brother's, but found him abroad at the young couple that was
married yesterday, and he one of the Br[ide's] men, a kinswoman
(Brumfield) of the Joyces married to an upholster. Thence walked to the
King's Head at Charing Cross and there dined, and hear that the Queen
slept pretty well last night, but her fever continues upon her still.  It
seems she hath never a Portuguese doctor here. Thence by appointment to
the Six Clerks' office to meet Mr. Clerke, which I did and there waited
all the afternoon for Wilkinson my attorney, but he came not, and so vexed
and weary we parted, and I endeavoured but in vain to have found Dr.
Williams, of whom I shall have use in Trice's business, but I could not
find him.  So weary walked home; in my way bought a large kitchen knife
and half dozen oyster knives.  Thence to Mr. Holliard, who tells me that
Mullins is dead of his leg cut off the other day, but most basely done.
He tells me that there is no doubt but that all my slyme do come away in
my water, and therefore no fear of the stone; but that my water being so
slymy is a good sign.  He would have me now and then to take a clyster,
the same I did the other day, though I feel no pain, only to keep me
loose, and instead of butter, which he would have to be salt butter, he
would have me sometimes use two or three ounces of honey, at other times
two or three ounces of Linseed oil. Thence to Mr. Rawlinson's and saw some
of my new bottles made, with my crest upon them, filled with wine, about
five or six dozen.  So home and to my office a little, and thence home to
prepare myself against T. Trice, and also to draw a bond fit for my uncle
and his sons to enter into before I pay them the money.  That done to bed.

24th.  Up and to my office, where busy all the morning about Mr. Gauden's
account, and at noon to dinner with him at the Dolphin, where mighty merry
by pleasant stories of Mr. Coventry's and Sir J. Minnes's, which I have
put down some of in my book of tales.  Just as I was going out my uncle
Thomas came to the with a draught of a bond for him and his sons to sign
to me about the payment of the L20 legacy, which I agreed to, but he would
fain have had from me the copy of the deed, which he had forged and did
bring me yesterday, but I would not give him it.  Says [he] I perceive
then you will keep it to defame me with, and desired me not to speak of
it, for he did it innocently.  Now I confess I do not find any great hurt
in the thing, but only to keep from me a sight of the true original deed,
wherein perhaps there was something else that may touch this business of
the legacy which he would keep from me, or it may be, it is really lost as
he says it is.  But then he need not have used such a slight, but confess
it without danger.  Thence by coach with Mr. Coventry to the Temple, and
thence I to the Six Clerks' office, and discoursed with my Attorney and
Solicitor, and he and I to Mr. Turner, who puts me in great fear that I
shall not get retayned again against Tom Trice; which troubles me.
Thence, it being night, homewards, and called at Wotton's and tried some
shoes, but he had none to fit me.  He tells me that by the Duke of York's
persuasion Harris is come again to Sir W. Davenant upon his terms that he
demanded, which will make him very high and proud.  Thence to another
shop, and there bought me a pair of shoes, and so walked home and to my
office, and dispatch letters by the post, and so home to supper and to
bed, where to my trouble I find my wife begin to talk of her being alone
all day, which is nothing but her lack of something to do, for while she
was busy she never, or seldom, complained .  .  .  .  . The Queen is in a
good way of recovery; and Sir Francis Pridgeon hath got great honour by
it, it being all imputed to his cordiall, which in her dispaire did give
her rest and brought her to some hopes of recovery.  It seems that, after
the much talk of troubles and a plot, something is found in the North that
a party was to rise, and some persons that were to command it are found,
as I find in a letter that Mr. Coventry read to-day about it from those
parts.

     [This refers to a rising in the West Riding of Yorkshire, which took
     place on October 12th, and was known as the Farneley Wood Plot.  The
     rising was easily put down, and several prisoners were taken.  A
     special commission of oyer and terminer was sent down to York to try
     the prisoners in January, 1663-64, when twenty-one were convicted
     and executed.  (See Whitaker's "Loidis and Elmete," 1816.)]

25th (Lord's day).  Up, and my wife and I to church, where it is strange
to see how the use and seeing Pembleton come with his wife thither to
church, I begin now to make too great matter of it, which before was so
terrible to me.  Dined at home, my wife and I alone, a good dinner, and so
in the afternoon to church again, where the Scot preached, and I slept
most of the afternoon.  So home, and my wife and I together all the
evening discoursing, and then after reading my vowes to myself, and my
wife with her mayds (who are mighty busy to get it dispatched because of
their mistress's promise, that when it is done they shall have leave all
to go see their friends at Westminster, whither my wife will carry them)
preparing for their washing to-morrow, we hastened to supper and to bed.

26th.  Waked about one o'clock in the morning .  .  .  .  My wife being
waked rung her bell, and the mayds rose and went to washing, we to sleep
again till 7 o'clock, and then up, and I abroad to look out Dr. Williams,
but being gone out I went to Westminster, and there seeing my Lord
Sandwich's footman knew he was come to town, and so I went in and saw him,
and received a kind salute from him, but hear that my father is very ill
still.  Thence to Westminster Hall with Creed, and spent the morning
walking there, where, it being Terme time, I met several persons, and
talked with them, among others Dr. Pierce, who tells me that the Queen is
in a way to be pretty well again, but that her delirium in her head
continues still; that she talks idle, not by fits, but always, which in
some lasts a week after so high a fever, in some more, and in some for
ever; that this morning she talked mightily that she was brought to bed,
and that she wondered that she should be delivered without pain and
without spueing or being sicke, and that she was troubled that her boy was
but an ugly boy.  But the King being by, said, "No, it is a very pretty
boy."--"Nay," says she, "if it be like you it is a fine boy indeed, and I
would be very well pleased with it."  The other day she talked mightily of
Sir H. Wood's lady's great belly, and said if she should miscarry he would
never get another, and that she never saw such a man as this Sir H. Wood
in her life, and seeing of Dr. Pridgeon, she said, "Nay, Doctor, you need
not scratch your head, there is hair little enough already in the place."
But methinks it was not handsome for the weaknesses of Princes to be
talked of thus.  Thence Creed and I to the King's Head ordinary, where
much and very good company, among others one very talking man, but a
scholler, that would needs put in his discourse and philosophy upon every
occasion, and though he did well enough, yet his readiness to speak spoilt
all.  Here they say that the Turkes go on apace, and that my Lord
Castlehaven is going to raise 10,000 men here for to go against him; that
the King of France do offer to assist the Empire upon condition that he
may be their Generalissimo, and the Dolphin chosen King of the Romans: and
it is said that the King of France do occasion this difference among the
Christian Princes of the Empire, which gives the Turke such advantages.
They say also that the King of Spayne is making all imaginable force
against Portugall again.  Thence Creed and I to one or two periwigg shops
about the Temple, having been very much displeased with one that we saw, a
head of greasy and old woman's haire, at Jervas's in the morning; and
there I think I shall fit myself of one very handsomely made.  Thence by
coach, my mind being troubled for not meeting with Dr. Williams, to St.
Catharine's to look at a Dutch ship or two for some good handsome maps,
but met none, and so back to Cornhill to Moxon's, but it being dark we
staid not to see any, then to coach again, and presently spying Sir W.
Batten; I 'light and took him in and to the Globe in Fleete Streete, by
appointment, where by and by he and I with our solicitor to Sir F. Turner
about Field's business, and back to the Globe, and thither I sent for Dr.
Williams, and he is willing to swear in my behalf against T. Trice, viz.,
that at T. Trice's desire we have met to treat about our business.  Thence
(I drinking no wine) after an hour's stay Sir W. Batten and another, and
he drinking, we home by coach, and so to my office and set down my
Journall, and then home to supper and to bed, my washing being in a good
condition over.  I did give Dr. Williams 20s. tonight, but it was after he
had answered me well to what I had to ask him about this business, and it
was only what I had long ago in my petty bag book allotted for him besides
the bill of near L4 which I paid him a good while since by my brother Tom
for physique for my wife, without any consideration to this business that
he is to do for me, as God shall save me.  Among the rest, talking of the
Emperor at table to-day one young gentleman, a pretty man, and it seems a
Parliament man, did say that he was a sot;

     [Leopold I, the Holy Roman Emperor, was born June 9th, 1640.  He
     became King of Hungary in 1655, and King of Bohemia in 1658, in
     which year he received the imperial crown.  The Princes of the
     German Empire watched for some time the progress of his struggle
     with the Turks with indifference, but in 1663 they were induced to
     grant aid to Leopold after he had made a personal appeal to them in
     the diet at Ratisbon.]

for he minded nothing of the Government, but was led by the Jesuites.
Several at table took him up, some for saying that he was a sot in being
led by the Jesuites, [who] are the best counsel he can take.  Another
commander, a Scott[ish] Collonell, who I believe had several under him,
that he was a man that had thus long kept out the Turke till now, and did
many other great things, and lastly Mr. Progers, one of our courtiers, who
told him that it was not a thing to be said of any Soveraigne Prince, be
his weaknesses what they will, to be called a sot, which methinks was very
prettily said.

27th.  Up, and my uncle Thomas and his scrivener bringing me a bond and
affidavit to my mind, I paid him his L20 for his daughter's legacy, and L5
more for a Quarter's annuity, in the manner expressed in each acquittance,
to which I must be referred on any future occasion, and to the bond and
affidavit.  Thence to the office and there sat till noon, and then home to
dinner, and after dinner (it being a foul house to-day among my maids,
making up their clothes) abroad with my Will with me by coach to Dr,
Williams, and with him to the Six Clerks's office, and there, by advice of
his acquaintance, I find that my case, through my neglect and the neglect
of my lawyers, is come to be very bad, so as that it will be very hard to
get my bill retayned again.  However, I got him to sign and swear an
affidavit that there was treaties between T. Trice and me with as much
advantage as I could for me, but I will say that for him he was most exact
as ever I saw man in my life, word by word what it was that he swore to,
and though, God forgive me, I could have been almost naturally willing to
have let him ignorantly have sworn to something that was not of itself
very certain, either or no, yet out of his own conscience and care he
altered the words himself so as to make them very safe for him to swear.
This I carrying to my clerk Wilkinson, and telling him how I heard matters
to stand, he, like a conceited fellow, made nothing of it but advised me
to offer Trice's clerks the cost of the dismission, viz., 46s. 8d., which
I did, but they would not take it without his client.  Immediately
thereupon we parted, and met T. Trice coming into the room, and he came to
me and served me with a subpoena for these very costs, so I paid it him,
but Lord! to see his resolution, and indeed discretion, in the wording of
his receipt, he would have it most express to my greatest disadvantage
that could be, yet so as I could not deny to give it him.  That being
paid, my clerke, and then his began to ask why we could not think, being
friends, of referring it, or stating it, first ourselves, and then put it
to some good lawyer to judge in it.  From one word to more we were
resolved to try, and to that end to step to the Pope's Head Taverne, and
there he and his Clerke and Attorney and I and my Clerke, and sent for Mr.
Smallwood, and by and by comes Mr. Clerke, my Solicitor, and after I had
privately discoursed with my men and seen how doubtfully they talked, and
what future certain charge and trouble it would be, with a doubtful
victory, I resolved to condescend very low, and after some talke all
together Trice and I retired, and he came to L150 the lowest, and I bid
him L80.  So broke off and then went to our company, and they putting us
to a second private discourse, at last I was contented to give him L100,
he to spend 40s. of it among this good company that was with us.  So we
went to our company, both seeming well pleased that we were come to an
end, and indeed I am in the respects above said, though it be a great sum
for us to part with. I am to pay him by giving him leave to buy about L40
worth of Piggott's land and to strike off so much of Piggott's debt, and
the other to give him bond to pay him in 12 months after without interest,
only giving him a power to buy more land of Piggott and paying him that
way as he did for the other, which I am well enough contented with, or at
least to take the land at that price and give him the money.  This last I
did not tell him, but I shall order it so.  Having agreed upon to-morrow
come se'nnight for the spending of the 40s. at Mr. Rawlinson's, we parted,
and I set T. Trice down in Paul's Churchyard and I by coach home and to my
office, and there set down this day's passages, and so home to supper and
to bed. Mr. Coventry tells me to-day that the Queen had a very good night
last night; but yet it is strange that still she raves and talks of little
more than of her having of children, and fancys now that she hath three
children, and that the girle is very like the King.  And this morning
about five o'clock waked (the physician feeling her pulse, thinking to be
better able to judge, she being still and asleep, waked her) and the first
word she said was, "How do the children?"

28th.  Up and at my office all the morning, and at noon Mr. Creed came to
me and dined with me, and after dinner Murford came to me and he and I
discoursed wholly upon his breach of contract with us.  After that Mr.
Creed and I abroad, I doing several errands, and with him at last to the
great coffee-house, and there after some common discourse we parted and I
home, paying what I owed at the Mitre in my way, and at home Sympson the
joyner coming he set up my press for my cloaks and other small things, and
so to my office a little, and to supper, and to bed.  This morning Mr.
Blackburne came to me, and telling me what complaints Will made of the
usage he had from my wife and other discouragements, and, I seeing him,
instead of advising, rather favouring his kinsman, I told him freely my
mind, but friendlily, and so we have concluded to have him have a lodging
elsewhere, and that I will spare him L15 of his salary, and if I do not
need to keep another L20.

29th.  Up, it being my Lord Mayor's day, Sir Anthony Bateman.  This
morning was brought home my new velvet cloake, that is, lined with velvet,
a good cloth the outside, the first that ever I had in my life, and I pray
God it may not be too soon now that I begin to wear it.  I had it this day
brought, thinking to have worn it to dinner, but I thought it would be
better to go without it because of the crowde, and so I did not wear it.
We met a little at the office, and then home again and got me ready to go
forth, my wife being gone forth by my consent before to see her father and
mother, and taken her cooke mayde and little girle to Westminster with her
for them to see their friends.  This morning in dressing myself and
wanting a band,

     [The band succeeded the ruff as the ordinary civil costume.  The
     lawyers, who now retain bands, and the clergy, who have only lately
     left them off, formerly wore ruffs.]

I found all my bands that were newly made clean so ill smoothed that I
crumpled them, and flung them all on the ground, and was angry with Jane,
which made the poor girle mighty sad, so that I were troubled for it
afterwards.  At noon I went forth, and by coach to Guild Hall (by the way
calling at Mr. Rawlinson's), and there was admitted, and meeting with Mr.
Proby (Sir R. Ford's son), and Lieutenant-Colonel Baron, a City commander,
we went up and down to see the tables; where under every salt there was a
bill of fare, and at the end of the table the persons proper for the
table.  Many were the tables, but none in the Hall but the Mayor's and the
Lords of the Privy Council that had napkins

     [As the practice of eating with forks gradually was introduced from
     Italy into England, napkins were not so generally used, but
     considered more as an ornament than a necessary.

                    "The laudable use of forks,
          Brought into custom here, as they are in Italy,
          To the sparing of napkins."

                         Ben Jonson, The Devil is an Ass, act v., sc.  3.

     The guests probably brought their own knife and fork with them in a
     case.--M.B.]

or knives, which was very strange.  We went into the Buttry, and there
stayed and talked, and then into the Hall again: and there wine was
offered and they drunk, I only drinking some hypocras, which do not break
my vowe, it being, to the best of my present judgement, only a mixed
compound drink, and not any wine.

     [A drink, composed usually of red wine, but sometimes of white, with
     the addition of sugar and spices.  Sir Walter Scott ("Quarterly
     Review," vol.  xxxiii.) says, after quoting this passage of Pepys,
     "Assuredly his pieces of bacchanalian casuistry can only be matched
     by that of Fielding's chaplain of Newgate, who preferred punch to
     wine, because the former was a liquor nowhere spoken against in
     Scripture."]

If I am mistaken, God forgive me!  but I hope and do think I am not.  By
and by met with Creed; and we, with the others, went within the several
Courts, and there saw the tables prepared for the Ladies and Judges and
Bishopps: all great sign of a great dinner to come.  By and by about one
o'clock, before the Lord Mayor came, come into the Hall, from the room
where they were first led into, the Lord Chancellor (Archbishopp before
him), with the Lords of the Council, and other Bishopps, and they to
dinner.  Anon comes the Lord Mayor, who went up to the lords, and then to
the other tables to bid wellcome; and so all to dinner.  I sat near Proby,
Baron, and Creed at the Merchant Strangers' table; where ten good dishes
to a messe, with plenty of wine of all sorts, of which I drunk none; but
it was very unpleasing that we had no napkins nor change of trenchers, and
drunk out of earthen pitchers and wooden dishes.--[The City plate was
probably melted during the Civil War.-M.B.]--It happened that after the
lords had half dined, came the French Embassador, up to the lords' table,
where he was to have sat; but finding the table set, he would not sit down
nor dine with the Lord Mayor, who was not yet come, nor have a table to
himself, which was offered; but in a discontent went away again.  After I
had dined, I and Creed rose and went up and down the house, and up to the
lady's room, and there stayed gazing upon them.  But though there were
many and fine, both young and old, yet I could not discern one handsome
face there; which was very strange, nor did I find the lady that young
Dawes married so pretty as I took her for, I having here an opportunity of
looking much upon her very near.  I expected musique, but there was none
but only trumpets and drums, which displeased me.  The dinner, it seems,
is made by the Mayor and two Sheriffs for the time being, the Lord Mayor
paying one half, and they the other.  And the whole, Proby says, is
reckoned to come to about 7 or L800 at most.  Being wearied with looking
upon a company of ugly women, Creed and I went away, and took coach and
through Cheapside, and there saw the pageants, which were very silly, and
thence to the Temple, where meeting Greatorex, he and we to Hercules
Pillars, there to show me the manner of his going about of draining of
fenns, which I desired much to know, but it did not appear very
satisfactory to me, as he discoursed it, and I doubt he will faile in it.
Thence I by coach home, and there found my wife come home, and by and by
came my brother Tom, with whom I was very angry for not sending me a bill
with my things, so as that I think never to have more work done by him if
ever he serves me so again, and so I told him.  The consideration of
laying out L32 12s. this very month in his very work troubles me also, and
one thing more, that is to say, that Will having been at home all the day,
I doubt is the occasion that Jane has spoken to her mistress tonight that
she sees she cannot please us and will look out to provide herself
elsewhere, which do trouble both of us, and we wonder also at her, but yet
when the rogue is gone I do not fear but the wench will do well.  To the
office a little, to set down my Journall, and so home late to supper and
to bed.  The Queen mends apace, they say; but yet talks idle still.

30th.  Lay long in bed with my wife, and then up and a while at my office,
and so to the Change, and so [home] again, and there I found my wife in a
great passion with her mayds.  I upstairs to set some things in order in
our chamber and wardrobe, and so to dinner upon a good dish of stewed
beef, then up again about my business.  Then by coach with my wife to the
New Exchange, and there bought and paid for several things, and then back,
calling at my periwigg-makers, and there showed my wife the periwigg made
for me, and she likes it very well, and so to my brother's, and to buy a
pair of boddice for her, and so home, and to my office late, and then home
to my wife, purposing to go on to a new lesson in arithmetique with her.
So to supper and to bed.  The Queen mends apace, but her head still light.
My mind very heavy thinking of my great layings out lately, and what they
must still be for clothes, but I hope it is in order to getting of
something the more by it, for I perceive how I have hitherto suffered for
lack of going as becomes my place.  After a little discourse with my wife
upon arithmetique, to bed.

31st.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and at noon
home to dinner, where Creed came and dined with me, and after dinner he
and I upstairs, and I showed him my velvet cloake and other things of
clothes, that I have lately bought, which he likes very well, and I took
his opinion as to some things of clothes, which I purpose to wear, being
resolved to go a little handsomer than I have hitherto.  Thence to the
office; where busy till night, and then to prepare my monthly account,
about which I staid till 10 or 11 o'clock at night, and to my great sorrow
find myself L43 worse than I was the last month, which was then L760, and
now it is but L717.  But it hath chiefly arisen from my layings-out in
clothes for myself and wife; viz., for her about L12, and for myself L55,
or thereabouts; having made myself a velvet cloake, two new cloth suits,
black, plain both; a new shagg

     [Shag was a stuff similar to plush.  In 1703 a youth who was missing
     is described in an advertisement as wearing "red shag breeches,
     striped with black stripes." (Planche's "Cyclopxdia of Costume ").]

gowne, trimmed with gold buttons and twist, with a new hat, and, silk tops
for my legs, and many other things, being resolved henceforward to go like
myself.  And also two perriwiggs, one whereof costs me L3, and the other
40s.--I have worn neither yet, but will begin next week, God willing.  So
that I hope I shall not need now to lay out more money a great while, I
having laid out in clothes for myself and wife, and for her closett and
other things without, these two months, this and the last, besides
household expenses of victuals, &c., above L110.  But I hope I shall with
more comfort labour to get more, and with better successe than when, for
want of clothes, I was forced to sneake like a beggar.  Having done this I
went home, and after supper to bed, my mind being eased in knowing my
condition, though troubled to think that I have been forced to spend so
much.

Thus I end this month worth L717, or thereabouts, with a good deal of good
goods more than I had, and a great deal of new and good clothes.  My
greatest trouble and my wife's is our family, mighty out of order by this
fellow Will's corrupting the mayds by his idle talke and carriage, which
we are going to remove by hastening him out of the house, which his uncle
Blackburne is upon doing, and I am to give him L20 per annum toward his
maintenance.  The Queene continues lightheaded, but in hopes to recover.
The plague is much in Amsterdam, and we in fears of it here, which God
defend.

     [Defend is used in the sense of forbid.  It is a Gallicism from the
     French "defendre."]

The Turke goes on mightily in the Emperor's dominions, and the Princes
cannot agree among themselves how to go against him.  Myself in pretty
good health now, after being ill this month for a week together, but
cannot yet come to .  .  .  .  well, being so costive, but for this month
almost I have not had a good natural stool, but to this hour am forced to
take physic every night, which brings me neither but one stool, and that
in the morning as soon as I am up, all the rest of the day very costive.
My father has been very ill in the country, but I hope better again now. I
am lately come to a conclusion with Tom Trice to pay him L100, which is a
great deale of money, but I hope it will save a great deale more.  But
thus everything lessens, which I have and am like to have, and therefore I
must look about me to get something more than just my salary, or else I
may resolve to live well and die a beggar.

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     And so to sleep till the morning, but was bit cruelly
     And there, did what I would with her
     Content as to be at our own home, after being abroad awhile
     Found guilty, and likely will be hanged (for stealing spoons)
     Half a pint of Rhenish wine at the Still-yard, mixed with beer
     His readiness to speak spoilt all
     No more matter being made of the death of one than another
     Out of an itch to look upon the sluts there
     Plague is much in Amsterdam, and we in fears of it here
     Pride himself too much in it
     Reckon nothing money but when it is in the bank
     Resolve to live well and die a beggar
     Scholler, that would needs put in his discourse (every occasion)
     She was so ill as to be shaved and pidgeons put to her feet
     The plague is got to Amsterdam, brought by a ship from Argier
     We having no luck in maids now-a-days
     Who is over head and eares in getting her house up


                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A.  F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                           NOVEMBER & DECEMBER
                                  1663

November 1st (Lord's day).  This morning my brother's man brought me a new
black baize waistecoate, faced with silke, which I put on from this day,
laying by half-shirts for this winter.  He brought me also my new gowne of
purple shagg, trimmed with gold, very handsome; he also brought me as a
gift from my brother, a velvet hat, very fine to ride in, and the fashion,
which pleases me very well, to which end, I believe, he sent it me, for he
knows I had lately been angry with him.  Up and to church with my wife,
and at noon dined at home alone, a good calves head boiled and dumplings,
an excellent dinner methought it was.  Then to church again, whither Sir
W. Pen came, the first time he has been at church these several months, he
having been sicke all the while.  Home and to my office, where I taught my
wife some part of subtraction, and then fell myself to set some papers of
my last night's accounts in order, and so to supper home, and after supper
another bout at arithmetique with my wife, and then to my office again and
made an end of my papers, and so home to prayers, and then to read my
vowes, and to bed.

2d.  Up, and by coach to White Hall, and there in the long Matted Gallery
I find Sir G. Carteret, Sir J. Minnes, and Sir W. Batten--and by and by
comes the King to walk there with three or four with him; and soon as he
saw us, says he, "Here is the Navy Office," and there walked twenty turns
the length of the gallery, talking, methought, but ordinary talke.  By and
by came the Duke, and he walked, and at last they went into the Duke's
lodgings.  The King staid so long that we could not discourse with the
Duke, and so we parted.  I heard the Duke say that he was going to wear a
perriwigg; and they say the King also will.  I never till this day
observed that the King is mighty gray.  Thence, meeting with Creed, walked
with him to Westminster Hall, and thence by coach took up Mrs. Hunt, and
carried her towards my house, and we light at the 'Change, and sent her to
my house, Creed and I to the Coffeehouse, and then to the 'Change, and so
home, and carried a barrel of oysters with us, and so to dinner, and after
a good dinner left Mrs. Hunt and my wife making marmalett of quinces, and
Creed and I to the perriwigg makers, but it being dark concluded of
nothing, and so Creed went away, and I with Sir W. Pen, who spied me in
the street, in his coach home.  There found them busy still, and I up to
my vyall.  Anon, the comfiture being well done, my wife and I took Mrs.
Hunt at almost 9 at night by coach and carried Mrs. Hunt home, and did
give her a box of sugar and a haunch of venison given me by my Lady the
other day.  We did not 'light, but saw her within doors, and straight
home, where after supper there happening some discourse where my wife
thought she had taken Jane in a lie, she told me of it mighty
triumphantly, but I, not seeing reason to conclude it a lie, was vexed,
and my wife and I to very high words, wherein I up to my chamber, and she
by and by followed me up, and to very bad words from her to me, calling me
perfidious and man of no conscience, whatever I pretend to, and I know not
what, which troubled me mightily, and though I would allow something to
her passion, yet I see again and again that she spoke but somewhat of what
she had in her heart.  But I tempered myself very well, so as that though
we went to bed with discontent she yielded to me and began to be fond, so
that being willing myself to peace, we did before we sleep become very
good friends, it being past 12 o'clock, and so with good hearts and joy to
rest.

3rd.  Up and to the office, where busy all the morning, and at noon to the
Coffee-house, and there heard a long and most passionate discourse between
two doctors of physique, of which one was Dr. Allen, whom I knew at
Cambridge, and a couple of apothecarys; these maintaining chymistry
against them Galenicall physique; and the truth is, one of the apothecarys
whom they charged most, did speak very prettily, that is, his language and
sense good, though perhaps he might not be so knowing a physician as to
offer to contest with them.  At last they came to some cooler terms, and
broke up.  I home, and there Mr. Moore coming by my appointment dined with
me, and after dinner came Mr. Goldsborough, and we discoursed about the
business of his mother, but could come to no agreement in it but parted
dissatisfied.  By and by comes Chapman, the periwigg-maker, and upon my
liking it, without more ado I went up, and there he cut off my haire,
which went a little to my heart at present to part with it; but, it being
over, and my periwigg on, I paid him L3 for it; and away went he with my
owne haire to make up another of, and I by and by, after I had caused all
my mayds to look upon it; and they conclude it do become me; though Jane
was mightily troubled for my parting of my own haire, and so was Besse, I
went abroad to the Coffeehouse, and coming back went to Sir W. Pen and
there sat with him and Captain Cocke till late at night, Cocke talking of
some of the Roman history very well, he having a good memory.  Sir W. Pen
observed mightily, and discoursed much upon my cutting off my haire, as he
do of every thing that concerns me, but it is over, and so I perceive
after a day or two it will be no great matter.

4th.  Up and to my office, shewing myself to Sir W. Batten, and Sir J.
Minnes, and no great matter made of my periwigg, as I was afeard there
would be.  Among other things there came to me Shales of Portsmouth, by my
order, and I began to discourse with him about the arrears of stores
belonging to the Victualling Office there, and by his discourse I am in
some hopes that if I can get a grant from the King of such a part of all I
discover I may chance to find a way to get something by the by, which do
greatly please me the very thoughts of.  Home to dinner, and very pleasant
with my wife, who is this day also herself making of marmalett of quince,
which she now do very well herself.  I left her at it and by coach I to
the New Exchange and several places to buy and bring home things, among
others a case I bought of the trunk maker's for my periwigg, and so home
and to my office late, and among other things wrote a letter to Will's
uncle to hasten his removal from me, and so home to supper and to bed.
This morning Captain Cocke did give me a good account of the Guinny trade.
The Queene is in a great way to recovery.  This noon came John Angier to
me in a pickle, I was sad to see him, desiring my good word for him to go
a trooper to Tangier, but I did schoole him and sent him away with good
advice, but no present encouragement. Presently after I had a letter from
his poor father at Cambridge, who is broke, it seems, and desires me to
get him a protection, or a place of employment; but, poor man, I doubt I
can helpe him, but will endeavour it.

5th.  Lay long in bed, then up, called by Captain Cocke about business of
a contract of his for some Tarre, and so to the office, and then to Sir W.
Pen and there talked, and he being gone came Sir W. Warren and discoursed
about our business with Field, and at noon by agreement to the Miter to
dinner upon T. Trice's 40s., to be spent upon our late agreement.  Here
was a very poor dinner and great company.  All our lawyers on both sides,
and several friends of his and some of mine brought by him, viz., Mr.
Moore, uncle Wight, Dr. Williams, and my cozen Angier, that lives here in
town, who t Captain John Shales after dinner carried me aside and showed
me a letter from his poor brother at Cambridge to me of the same contents
with that yesterday to me desiring help from me.  Here I was among a sorry
company without any content or pleasure, and at the last the reckoning
coming to above 40s. by 15s., he would have me pay the 10s. and he would
pay the 5s., which was so poor that I was ashamed of it, and did it only
to save contending with him. There, after agreeing a day for him and I to
meet and seal our agreement, I parted and home, and at the office by
agreement came Mr. Shales, and there he and I discourse till late the
business of his helping me in the discovery of some arrears of provisions
and stores due to the stores at Portsmouth, out of which I may chance to
get some money, and save the King some too, and therefore I shall
endeavour to do the fellow some right in other things here to his
advantage between Mr. Gauden and him. He gone my wife and I to her
arithmetique, in which she pleases me well, and so to the office, there
set down my Journall, and so home to supper and to bed.  A little troubled
to see how my family is out of order by Will's being there, and also to
hear that Jane do not please my wife as I expected and would have wished.

6th.  This morning waking, my wife was mighty-earnest with me to persuade
me that she should prove with child since last night, which, if it be, let
it come, and welcome.  Up to my office, whither Commissioner Pett came,
newly come out of the country, and he and I walked together in the garden
talking of business a great while, and I perceive that by our
countenancing of him he do begin to pluck up his head, and will do good
things I hope in the yard.  Thence, he being gone, to my office and there
dispatched many people, and at noon to the 'Change to the coffee-house,
and among other things heard Sir John Cutler say, that of his owne
experience in time of thunder, so many barrels of beer as have a piece of
iron laid upon them will not be soured, and the others will.  Thence to
the 'Change, and there discoursed with many people, and I hope to settle
again to my business and revive my report of following of business, which
by my being taken off for a while by sickness and, laying out of money has
slackened for a little while.  Home, and there found Mrs. Hunt, who dined
very merry, good woman; with us.  After dinner came in Captain Grove, and
he and I alone to talk of many things, and among many others of the
Fishery, in which he gives the such hopes that being at this time full of
projects how to get a little honestly, of which some of them I trust in
God will take, I resolved this afternoon to go and consult my Lord
Sandwich about it, and so, being to carry home Mrs. Hunt, I took her and
my wife by coach and set them at Axe Yard, and I to my Lord's and thither
sent for Creed and discoursed with him about it, and he and I to White
Hall, where Sir G. Carteret and my Lord met me very fortunately, and
wondered first to see me in my perruque, and I am glad it is over, and
then, Sir G. Carteret being gone, I took my Lord aside, who do give me the
best advice he can, and telling me how there are some projectors, by name
Sir Edward Ford, who would have the making of farthings,

     [Sir Edward Ford, son of Sir William Ford of Harting, born at Up
     Park in 1605.  "After the Restoration he invented a mode of coining
     farthings.  Each piece was to differ minutely from another to
     prevent forgery.  He failed in procuring a patent for these in
     England, but obtained one for Ireland.  He died in Ireland before he
     could carry his design into execution, on September 3rd, 1670"
     ("Dictionary of National Biography ").]

and out of that give so much to the King for the maintenance of the
Fishery; but my Lord do not like that, but would have it go as they
offered the last year, and so upon my desire he promises me when it is
seasonable to bring me into the commission with others, if any of them
take, and I perceive he and Mr. Coventry are resolved to follow it hard.
Thence, after walking a good while in the Long gallery, home to my Lord's
lodging, my Lord telling me how my father did desire him to speak to me
about my giving of my sister something, which do vex me to see that he
should trouble my Lord in it, but however it is a good occasion for me to
tell my Lord my condition, and so I was glad of it.  After that we begun
to talk of the Court, and he tells me how Mr. Edward Montagu begins to
show respect to him again after his endeavouring to bespatter him all was,
possible; but he is resolved never to admit him into his friendship again.
He tells me how he and Sir H. Bennet, the Duke of Buckingham and his
Duchesse, was of a committee with somebody else for the getting of Mrs.
Stewart for the King; but that she proves a cunning slut, and is advised
at Somerset House by the Queene-Mother, and by her mother, and so all the
plot is spoiled and the whole committee broke.  Mr. Montagu and the Duke
of Buckingham fallen a-pieces, the Duchesse going to a nunnery; and so
Montagu begins to enter friendship with my Lord, and to attend the
Chancellor whom he had deserted.  My Lord tells me that Mr. Montagu, among
other things, did endeavour to represent him to the Chancellor's sons as
one that did desert their father in the business of my Lord of Bristoll;
which is most false, being the only man that hath several times dined with
him when no soul hath come to him, and went with him that very day home
when the Earl impeached him in the Parliament House, and hath refused ever
to pay a visit to my Lord of Bristoll, not so much as in return to a visit
of his.  So that the Chancellor and my Lord are well known and trusted one
by another.  But yet my Lord blames the Chancellor for desiring to have it
put off to the next Session of Parliament, contrary to my Lord Treasurer's
advice, to whom he swore he would not do it: and, perhaps, my Lord
Chancellor, for aught I see by my Lord's discourse, may suffer by it when
the Parliament comes to sit.  My Lord tells me that he observes the Duke
of York do follow and understand business very well, and is mightily
improved thereby.  Here Mr. Pagett coming in I left my Lord and him, and
thence I called my wife and her maid Jane and by coach home and to my
office, where late writing some things against tomorrow, and so home to
supper and to bed.  This morning Mr. Blackburne came to me to let me know
that he had got a lodging very commodious for his kinsman, and so he is
ready at my pleasure to go when I would bid him, and so I told him that I
would in a day or two send to speak with him and he and I would talk and
advise Will what to do, of which I am very glad.

7th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and Sir W. Pen
and I had a word or two, where by opposing him in not being willing to
excuse a mulct put upon the purser of the James, absent from duty, he
says, by his business and order, he was mighty angry, and went out of the
office like an asse discontented: At which I am never a whit sorry; I
would not have [him] think that I dare not oppose him, where I see reason
and cause for it.  Home to dinner, and then by coach abroad about several
businesses to several places, among others to Westminster Hall, where,
seeing Howlett's daughter going out of the other end of the Hall, I
followed her if I would to have offered talk to her and dallied with her a
little, but I could not overtake her.  Then calling at Unthank's for
something of my wife's not done, a pretty little gentlewoman, a lodger
there, came out to tell me that it was not yet done, which though it vexed
me yet I took opportunity of taking her by the hand with the boot, and so
found matter to talk a little the longer to her, but I was ready to laugh
at myself to see how my anger would not operate, my disappointment coming
to me by such a messenger.  Thence to Doctors' Commons and there consulted
Dr. Turner about some differences we have with the officers of the East
India ships about goods brought by them without paying freight, which we
demand of them.  So home to my office, and there late writing letters, and
so home to supper and to bed, having got a scurvy cold by lying cold in my
head the last night.  This day Captain Taylor brought me a piece of plate,
a little small state dish, he expecting that I should get him some
allowance for demorage

     ["'Demurrage' is the compensation due to a shipowner from a
     freighter for unduly decaying his vessel in port beyond the time
     specified in the charter-party or bill of lading.  It is in fact an
     extended freight.  A ship, unjustly detained as a prize is entitled
     to 'demurrage.'"--Smyth's Sailor's Word-Book, 1867.]

of his ship "William," kept long at Tangier, which I shall and may justly
do.

8th (Lord's day).  Up, and it being late, to church without my wife, and
there I saw Pembleton come into the church and bring his wife with him, a
good comely plain woman, and by and by my wife came after me all alone,
which I was a little vexed at.  I found that my coming in a perriwigg did
not prove so strange to the world as I was afear'd it would, for I thought
that all the church would presently have cast their eyes all upon me, but
I found no such thing.  Here an ordinary lazy sermon of Mr. Mill's, and
then home to dinner, and there Tom came and dined with us; and after
dinner to talk about a new black cloth suit that I have a making, and so
at church time to church again, where the Scott preached, and I slept most
of the time.  Thence home, and I spent most of the evening upon Fuller's
"Church History" and Barckly's "Argeny," and so after supper to prayers
and to bed, a little fearing my pain coming back again, myself continuing
as costive as ever, and my physic ended, but I had sent a porter to-day
for more and it was brought me before I went to bed, and so with pretty
good content to bed.

9th.  Up and found myself very well, and so by coach to White Hall and
there met all my fellow officers, and so to the Duke, where, when we came
into his closett, he told us that Mr. Pepys was so altered with his new
perriwigg that he did not know him.  So to our discourse, and among and
above other things we were taken up in talking upon Sir J. Lawson's coming
home, he being come to Portsmouth; and Captain Berkely is come to towne
with a letter from the Duana of Algier to the King, wherein they do demand
again the searching of our ships and taking out of strangers, and their
goods; and that what English ships are taken without the Duke's pass they
will detain (though it be flat contrary to the words of the peace) as
prizes, till they do hear from our King, which they advise him may be
speedy.  And this they did the very next day after they had received with
great joy the Grand Seignor's confirmation of the Peace from
Constantinople by Captain Berkely; so that there is no command nor
certainty to be had of these people.  The King is resolved to send his
will by a fleete of ships; and it is thought best and speediest to send
these very ships that are now come home, five sail of good ships, back
again after cleaning, victualling, and paying them.  But it is a pleasant
thing to think how their Basha, Shavan Aga, did tear his hair to see the
soldiers order things thus; for (just like his late predecessor) when they
see the evil of war with England, then for certain they complain to the
Grand Seignor of him, and cut his head off:  this he is sure of, and knows
as certain.  Thence to Westminster Hall, where I met with Mr. Pierce,
chyrurgeon; and among other things he asked me seriously whether I knew
anything of my Lord's being out of favour with the King; and told me, that
for certain the King do take mighty notice of my Lord's living obscurely
in a corner not like himself, and becoming the honour that he is come to.
I was sorry to hear, and the truth is, from my Lord's discourse among his
people (which I am told) of the uncertainty of princes' favours, and his
melancholy keeping from Court, I am doubtful of some such thing;  but I
seemed wholly strange to him in it, but will make my use of it.  He told
me also how loose the Court is, nobody looking after business, but every
man his lust and gain; and how the King is now become besotted upon Mrs.
Stewart, that he gets into corners, and will be with her half an houre
together kissing her to the observation of all the world; and she now
stays by herself and expects it, as my Lady Castlemaine did use to do; to
whom the King, he says, is still kind, so as now and then he goes to have
a chat with her as he believes;  but with no such fondness as he used to
do.  But yet it is thought that this new wench is so subtle, that she lets
him not do any thing than is safe to her, but yet his doting is so great
that, Pierce tells me, it is verily thought if the Queene had died, he
would have married her.  The Duke of Monmouth is to have part of the
Cockpitt new built for lodgings for him, and they say to be made Captain
of the Guards in the room of my Lord Gerard.  Having thus talked with him,
there comes into the Hall Creed and Ned Pickering, and after a turne or
two with them, it being noon, I walked with them two to the King's Head
ordinary, and there we dined; little discourse but what was common, only
that the Duke of Yorke is a very, desperate huntsman, but I was ashamed of
Pickering, who could not forbear having up my Lord Sandwich now and then
in the most paltry matters abominable.  Thence I took leave of them, and
so having taken up something at my wife's tailor's, I home by coach and
there to my office, whither Shales came and I had much discourse with him
about the business of the victualling, and thence in the evening to the
Coffee-house, and there sat till by and by, by appointment Will brought me
word that his uncle Blackburne was ready to speak with me.  So I went down
to him, and he and I to a taverne hard by, and there I begun to speak to
Will friendlily, advising him how to carry himself now he is going from
under my roof, without any reflections upon the occasion from whence his
removal arose.  This his uncle seconded, and after laying down to him his
duty to me, and what I expect of him, in a discourse of about a quarter of
an houre or more, we agreed upon his going this week, towards the latter
(end) of the week, and so dismissed him, and Mr. Blackburne and I fell to
talk of many things, wherein I did speak so freely to him in many things
agreeing with his sense that he was very open to me: first, in that of
religion, he makes it great matter of prudence for the King and Council to
suffer liberty of conscience; and imputes the losse of Hungary to the
Turke from the Emperor's denying them this liberty of their religion.  He
says that many pious ministers of the word of God, some thousands of them,
do now beg their bread: and told me how highly the present clergy carry
themselves every where, so as that they are hated and laughed at by
everybody; among other things, for their excommunications, which they send
upon the least occasions almost that can be.  And I am convinced in my
judgement, not only from his discourse, but my thoughts in general, that
the present clergy will never heartily go down with the generality of the
commons of England; they have been so used to liberty and freedom, and
they are so acquainted with the pride and debauchery of the present
clergy.  He did give me many stories of the affronts which the clergy
receive in all places of England from the gentry and ordinary persons of
the parish.  He do tell me what the City thinks of General Monk, as of a
most perfidious man that hath betrayed every body, and the King also; who,
as he thinks, and his party, and so I have heard other good friends of the
King say, it might have been better for the King to have had his hands a
little bound for the present, than be forced to bring such a crew of poor
people about him, and be liable to satisfy the demands of every one of
them.  He told me that to his knowledge (being present at every meeting at
the Treaty at the Isle of Wight), that the old King did confess himself
overruled and convinced in his judgement against the Bishopps, and would
have suffered and did agree to exclude the service out of the churches,
nay his own chappell; and that he did always say, that this he did not by
force, for that he would never abate one inch by any vyolence; but what he
did was out of his reason and judgement.  He tells me that the King by
name, with all his dignities, is prayed for by them that they call
Fanatiques, as heartily and powerfully as in any of the other churches
that are thought better: and that, let the King think what he will, it is
them that must helpe him in the day of warr.  For as they are the most, so
generally they are the most substantial sort of people, and the soberest;
and did desire me to observe it to my Lord Sandwich, among other things,
that of all the old army now you cannot see a man begging about the
street; but what?  You shall have this captain turned a shoemaker; the
lieutenant, a baker; this a brewer; that a haberdasher; this common
soldier, a porter; and every man in his apron and frock, &c., as if they
never had done anything else: whereas the others go with their belts and
swords, swearing and cursing, and stealing; running into people's houses,
by force oftentimes, to carry away something; and this is the difference
between the temper of one and the other; and concludes (and I think with
some reason,) that the spirits of the old parliament soldiers are so
quiett and contented with God's providences, that the King is safer from
any evil meant him by them one thousand times more than from his own
discontented Cavalier.  And then to the publique management of business:
it is done, as he observes, so loosely and so carelessly, that the kingdom
can never be happy with it, every man looking after himself, and his owne
lust and luxury; among other things he instanced in the business of money,
he do believe that half of what money the Parliament gives the King is not
so much as gathered.  And to the purpose he told me how the Bellamys (who
had some of the Northern counties assigned them for their debt for the
petty warrant victualling) have often complained to him that they cannot
get it collected, for that nobody minds, or, if they do, they won't pay it
in. Whereas (which is a very remarkable thing,) he hath been told by some
of the Treasurers at Warr here of late, to whom the most of the L120,000
monthly was paid, that for most months the payments were gathered so duly,
that they seldom had so much or more than 40s., or the like, short in the
whole collection; whereas now the very Commissioners for Assessments and
other publique payments are such persons, and those that they choose in
the country so like themselves, that from top to bottom there is not a man
carefull of any thing, or if he be, he is not solvent; that what between
the beggar and the knave, the King is abused the best part of all his
revenue.  From thence we began to talk of the Navy, and particularly of
Sir W. Pen, of whose rise to be a general I had a mind to be informed.  He
told me he was always a conceited man, and one that would put the best
side outward, but that it was his pretence of sanctity that brought him
into play.  Lawson, and Portman, and the Fifth-monarchy men, among whom he
was a great brother, importuned that he might be general; and it was
pleasant to see how Blackburne himself did act it, how when the
Commissioners of the Admiralty would enquire of the captains and admirals
of such and such men, how they would with a sigh and casting up the eyes
say, "Such a man fears the Lord," or, "I hope such a man hath the Spirit
of God," and such things as that.  But he tells me that there was a cruel
articling against Pen after one fight, for cowardice, in putting himself
within a coyle of cables, of which he had much ado to acquit himself: and
by great friends did it, not without remains of guilt, but that his
brethren had a mind to pass it by, and Sir H. Vane did advise him to
search his heart, and see whether this fault or a greater sin was not the
occasion of this so great tryall.  And he tells me, that what Pen gives
out about Cromwell's sending and entreating him to go to Jamaica, is very
false; he knows the contrary: besides, the Protector never was a man that
needed to send for any man, specially such a one as he, twice.  He tells
me that the business of Jamaica did miscarry absolutely by his pride, and
that when he was in the Tower he would cry like a child.  This he says of
his own personal knowledge, and lastly tells me that just upon the turne,
when Monk was come from the North to the City, and did begin to think of
bringing in the King, Pen was then turned Quaker.  This he is most certain
of.  He tells me that Lawson was never counted any thing but only a
seaman, and a stout man, but a false man, and that now he appears the
greatest hypocrite in the world.  And Pen the same.  He tells me that it
is much talked of, that the King intends to legitimate the Duke of
Monmouth; and that he has not, nor his friends of his persuasion, have any
hopes of getting their consciences at liberty but by God Almighty's
turning of the King's heart, which they expect, and are resolved to live
and die in quiett hopes of it; but never to repine, or act any thing more
than by prayers towards it.  And that not only himself but all of them
have, and are willing at any time to take the oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy.  Thus far, and upon many more things, we had discoursed when
some persons in a room hard by began to sing in three parts very finely
and to play upon a flagilette so pleasantly that my discourse afterwards
was but troublesome, and I could not attend it, and so, anon, considering
of a sudden the time of night, we found it 11 o'clock, which I thought it
had not been by two hours, but we were close in talk, and so we rose, he
having drunk some wine and I some beer and sugar, and so by a fair
moonshine home and to bed, my wife troubled with tooth ache.  Mr.
Blackburne observed further to me, some certain notice that he had of the
present plot so much talked of; that he was told by Mr. Rushworth,  how
one Captain Oates, a great discoverer, did employ several to bring and
seduce others into a plot, and that one of his agents met with one that
would not listen to him, nor conceal what he had offered him, but so
detected the trapan.  This, he says, is most true.  He also, among other
instances how the King is served, did much insist upon the cowardice and
corruption of the King's guards and militia, which to be sure will fail
the King, as they have done already, when there will be occasion for them.

10th.  Up and to the office, where we sat till noon, and then to the
Exchange, where spoke with several and had my head casting about how to
get a penny and I hope I shall, and then hone, and there Mr. Moore by
appointment dined with me, and after dinner all the afternoon till night
drawing a bond and release against to-morrow for T. Trice, and I to come
to a conclusion in which I proceed with great fear and jealousy, knowing
him to be a rogue and one that I fear has at this time got too great a
hank--[hold]--over me by the neglect of my lawyers.  But among other
things I am come to an end with Mr. Moore for a L32, a good while lying in
my hand of my Lord Privy Seal's which he for the odd L7 do give me a bond
to secure me against, and so I got L25 clear.  Then, he being gone, to the
office and there late setting down yesterday's remarkable discourses, and
so home and to supper, late, and to bed.  The Queene, I hear, is now very
well again, and that she hath bespoke herself a new gowne.

11th.  Up and to my office all the morning, and at noon to the
Coffee-house, where with Dr. Allen some good discourse about physique and
chymistry.  And among other things, I telling him what Dribble the German
Doctor do offer of an instrument to sink ships; he tells me that which is
more strange, that something made of gold, which they call in chymistry
Aurum fulminans, a grain, I think he said, of it put into a silver spoon
and fired, will give a blow like a musquett, and strike a hole through the
spoon downward, without the least force upward; and this he can make a
cheaper experiment of, he says, with iron prepared.  Thence to the
'Change, and being put off a meeting with T. Trice, he not coming, I home
to dinner, and after dinner by coach with my wife to my periwigg maker's
for my second periwigg, but it is not done, and so, calling at a place or
two, home, and there to my office, and there taught my wife a new lesson
in arithmetique and so sent her home, and I to several businesses; and so
home to supper and to bed, being mightily troubled with a cold in my
stomach and head, with a great pain by coughing.

12th.  Lay long in bed, indeed too long, divers people and the officers
staying for me.  My cozen Thomas Pepys the executor being below, and I
went to him and stated reckonings about our debt, for his payments of
money to my uncle Thomas heretofore by the Captain's orders.  I did not
pay him but will soon do it if I can.  To the office and there all the
morning, where Sir W. Pen, like a coxcomb, was so ready to cross me in a
motion I made unawares for the entering a man at Chatham into the works,
wherein I was vexed to see his spleene, but glad to understand it, and
that it was in no greater a matter, I being not at all concerned here. To
the 'Change and did several businesses there and so home with Mr. Moore to
dinner, my wife having dined, with Mr. Hollyard with her to-day, he being
come to advise her about her hollow sore place.  After dinner Mr. Moore
and I discoursing of my Lord's negligence in attendance at Court, and the
discourse the world makes of it, with the too great reason that I believe
there is for it; I resolved and took coach to his lodgings, thinking to
speak with my Lord about it without more ado. Here I met Mr. Howe, and he
and I largely about it, and he very soberly acquainted me how things are
with my Lord, that my Lord do not do anything like himself, but follows
his folly, and spends his time either at cards at Court with the ladies,
when he is there at all, or else at Chelsy with the slut to his great
disgrace, and indeed I do see and believe that my Lord do apprehend that
he do grow less too at Court. Anon my Lord do come in, and I begun to fall
in discourse with him, but my heart did misgive me that my Lord would not
take it well, and then found him not in a humour to talk, and so after a
few ordinary words, my Lord not talking in the manner as he uses to do; I
took leave, and spent some time with W. Howe again, and told him how I
could not do what I had so great a mind and resolution to do, but that I
thought it would be as well to do it in writing, which he approves of, and
so I took leave of him, and by coach home, my mind being full of it, and
in pain concerning it.  So to my office busy very late, the nights running
on faster than one thinks, and so to supper and to bed.

13th.  Up and to my office, busy all the morning with Commissioner Pett;
at noon I to the Exchange, and meeting Shales, he and I to the
Coffee-house and there talked of our victualling matters, which I fear
will come to little.  However I will go on and carry it as far as I can.
So home to dinner where I expected Commissioner Pett, and had a good
dinner, but he came not.  After dinner came my perriwigg-maker, and brings
me a second periwigg, made of my own haire, which comes to 21s. 6d. more
than the worth of my own haire, so that they both come to L4 1s. 6d.,
which he sayth will serve me two years, but I fear it.  He being gone, I
to my office, and put on my new shagg purple gowne, with gold buttons and
loop lace, I being a little fearful of taking cold and of pain coming upon
me. Here I staid making an end of a troublesome letter, but to my
advantage, against Sir W. Batten, giving Sir G. Carteret an account of our
late great contract with Sir W. Warren for masts, wherein I am sure I did
the King L600 service.  That done home to my wife to take a clyster, which
I did, and it wrought very well and brought a great deal of wind, which I
perceive is all that do trouble me.  After that, about 9 or 10 o'clock, to
supper in my wife's chamber, and then about 12 to bed.

14th.  Up and to the office, where we sat, and after we had almost done,
Sir W. Batten desired to have the room cleared, and there he did acquaint
the board how he was obliged to answer to something lately said which did
reflect upon the Comptroller and him, and to that purpose told how the
bargain for Winter's timber did not prove so bad as I had reported to the
board it would.  After he had done I cleared the matter that I did not
mention the business as a thing designed by me against them, but was led
to it by Sir J. Minnes, and that I said nothing but what I was told by
Mayers the surveyor as much as by Deane upon whom they laid all the fault,
which I must confess did and do still trouble me, for they report him to
be a fellow not fit to be employed, when in my conscience he deserves
better than any officer in the yard.  I thought it not convenient to
vindicate him much now, but time will serve when I will do it, and I am
bound to do it.  I offered to proceed to examine and prove what I said if
they please, but Mr. Coventry most discreetly advised not, it being to no
purpose, and that he did believe that what I said did not by my manner of
speaking it proceed from any design of reproaching them, and so it ended.
But my great trouble is for poor Deane.  At noon home and dined with my
wife, and after dinner Will told me if I pleased he was ready to remove
his things, and so before my wife I did give him good counsel, and that
his going should not abate my kindnesse for him, if he carried himself
well, and so bid "God bless him," and left him to remove his things, the
poor lad weeping, but I am apt to think matters will be the better both
for him and us.  So to the office and there late busy. In the evening Mr.
Moore came to tell me that he had no opportunity of speaking his mind to
my Lord yesterday, and so I am resolved to write to him very suddenly.  So
after my business done I home, I having staid till 12 o'clock at night
almost, making an end of a letter to Sir G. Carteret about the late
contract for masts, wherein I have done myself right, and no wrong to Sir
W. Batten.  This night I think is the first that I have lain without ever
a man in my house besides myself, since I came to keep any.  Will being
this night gone to his lodging, and by the way I hear to-day that my boy
Waynman has behaved himself so with Mr. Davis that they have got him put
into a Barbadoes ship to be sent away, and though he sends to me to get a
release for him I will not out of love to the boy, for I doubt to keep him
here were to bring him to the gallows.

15th (Lord's day).  Lay very long in bed with my wife and then up and to
my office there to copy fair my letter to Sir G. Carteret, which I did,
and by and by most opportunely a footman of his came to me about other
business, and so I sent it him by his own servant.  I wish good luck with
it.  At noon home to dinner, my wife not being up, she lying to expect Mr.
Holyard the surgeon.  So I dined by myself, and in the afternoon to my
office again, and there drew up a letter to my Lord, stating to him what
the world talks concerning him, and leaving it to him and myself to be
thought of by him as he pleases, but I have done but my duty in it. I wait
Mr. Moore's coming for his advice about sending it.  So home to supper to
my wife, myself finding myself by cold got last night beginning to have
some pain, which grieves me much in my mind to see to what a weakness I am
come.  This day being our Queene's birthday, the guns of the Tower went
all off; and in the evening the Lord Mayor sent from church to church to
order the constables to cause bonfires to be made in every streete, which
methinks is a poor thing to be forced to be commanded.  After a good
supper with my wife, and hearing of the mayds read in the Bible, we to
prayers, and to bed.

16th.  Up, and being ready then abroad by coach to White Hall, and there
with the Duke, where Mr. Coventry did a second time go to vindicate
himself against reports and prove by many testimonies that he brought,
that he did nothing but what had been done by the Lord Admiral's
secretaries heretofore, though he do not approve of it, nor since he had
any rule from the Duke hath he exceeded what he is there directed to take,
and the thing I think is very clear that they always did take and that now
he do take less than ever they did heretofore.  Thence away, and Sir G.
Carteret did call me to him and discourse with me about my letter
yesterday, and did seem to take it unkindly that I should doubt of his
satisfaction in the bargain of masts, and did promise me that hereafter
whatever he do hear to my prejudice he would tell me before he would
believe it, and that this was only Sir W. Batten's report in this
business, which he says he did ever approve of, in which I know he lies.
Thence to my Lord's lodgings thinking to find Mr. Moore, in order to the
sending away my letter of reproof to my Lord, but I do not find him, but
contrary do find my Lord come to Court, which I am glad to hear and should
be more glad to hear that he do follow his business that I may not have
occasion to venture upon his good nature by such a provocation as my
letter will be to him.  So by coach home, to the Exchange, where I talked
about several businesses with several people, and so home to dinner with
my wife, and then in the afternoon to my office, and there late, and in
the evening Mr. Hollyard came, and he and I about our great work to look
upon my wife's malady, which he did, and it seems her great conflux of
humours, heretofore that did use to swell there, did in breaking leave a
hollow which has since gone in further and further; till now it is near
three inches deep, but as God will have it do not run into the bodyward,
but keeps to the outside of the skin, and so he must be forced to cut it
open all along, and which my heart I doubt will not serve for me to see
done, and yet she will not have any body else to see it done, no, not her
own mayds, and so I must do it, poor wretch, for her.  To-morrow night he
is to do it.  He being gone, I to my office again a little while, and so
home to supper and to bed.

17th.  Up, and while I am dressing myself, Mr. Deane of Woolwich came to
me, and I did tell him what had happened to him last Saturday in the
office, but did encourage him to make no matter of it, for that I did not
fear but he would in a little time be master of his enemies as much as
they think to master him, and so he did tell me many instances of the
abominable dealings of Mr. Pett of Woolwich towards him.  So we broke up,
and I to the office, where we sat all the forenoon doing several
businesses, and at noon I to the 'Change where Mr. Moore came to me, and
by and by Tom Trice and my uncle Wight, and so we out to a taverne (the
New Exchange taverne over against the 'Change where I never was before,
and I found my old playfellow Ben Stanley master of it), and thence to a
scrivener to draw up a bond, and to another tavern (the King's Head) we
went, and calling on my cozen Angier at the India House there we eat a bit
of pork from a cookes together, and after dinner did seal the bond, and I
did take up the old bond of my uncle's to my aunt, and here T. Trice
before them do own all matters in difference between us is clear as to
this business, and that he will in six days give me it under the hand of
his attorney that there is no judgment against the bond that may give me
any future trouble, and also a copy of their letters of his Administration
to Godfrey, as much of it as concerns me to have.  All this being done
towards night we broke up, and so I home and with Mr. Moore to my office,
and there I read to him the letter I have wrote to send to my Lord to give
him an account how the world, both city and court, do talk of him and his
living as he do there in such a poor and bad house so much to his
disgrace.  Which Mr. Moore do conclude so well drawn: that he would not
have me by any means to neglect sending it, assuring me in the best of his
judgment that it cannot but endear me to my Lord instead of what I fear of
getting his offence, and did offer to take the same words and send them as
from, him with his hand to him, which I am not unwilling should come (if
they are at all fit to go) from any body but myself, and so, he being
gone, I did take a copy of it to keep by me in shorthand, and sealed them
up to send to-morrow by my Will. So home, Mr. Hollyard being come to my
wife, and there she being in bed, he and I alone to look again upon her
.  .  .  . and there he do find that, though it would not be much pain,
yet she is so fearful,  and the thing will be somewhat painful in the
tending, which I shall not be able to look after, but must require a nurse
and people about her; so that upon second thoughts he believes that a
fomentation will do as well, and though it will be troublesome yet no
pain, and what her mayd will be able to do without knowing directly what
it is for, but only that it may be for the piles.  For though it be
nothing but what is fiery honest, yet my wife is loth to give occasion of
discourse concerning it.  By this my mind and my wife's is much eased, for
I confess I should have been troubled to have had my wife cut before my
face, I could not have borne to have seen it.  I had great discourse with
him about my disease.  He tells me again that I must eat in a morning some
loosening gruel, and at night roasted apples, that I must drink now and
then ale with my wine, and eat bread and butter and honey, and rye bread
if I can endure it, it being loosening.  I must also take once a week a
clyster of his last prescription, only honey now and then instead of
butter, which things I am now resolved to apply myself to.  He being gone
I to my office again to a little business, and then home to supper and to
bed, being in, a little pain by drinking of cold small beer to-day and
being in a cold room at the Taverne I believe.

18th.  Up, and after being ready, and done a little business at the
office, I and Mr. Hater by water to Redriffe, and so walked to Deptford,
where I have not been a very great, while, and there paid off the Milford
in very good order, and all respect showed me in the office as much as
there used to be to any of the rest or the whole board.  That done at noon
I took Captain Terne, and there coming in by chance Captain Berkeley, him
also to dinner with me to the Globe.  Captain Berkeley, who was lately
come from Algier, did give us a good account of the place, and how the
Basha there do live like a prisoner, being at the mercy of the soldiers
and officers, so that there is nothing but a great confusion there.  After
dinner came Sir W. Batten, and I left him to pay off another ship, and I
walked home again reading of a little book of new poems of Cowley's, given
me by his brother.  Abraham do lie, it seems, very sicke, still, but like
to recover.  At my office till late, and then came Mr. Hollyard so full of
discourse and Latin that I think he hath got a cupp, but I do not know;
but full of talke he is in defence of Calvin and Luther.  He begun this
night the fomentation to my wife, and I hope it will do well with her.  He
gone, I to the office again a little, and so to bed.  This morning I sent
Will with my great letter of reproof to my Lord Sandwich, who did give it
into his owne hand.  I pray God give a blessing to it, but confess I am
afeard what the consequence may be to me of good or bad, which is
according to the ingenuity that he do receive it with.  However, I am
satisfied that it will do him good, and that he needs it:

     MY LORD,

     I do verily hope that neither the manner nor matter of this advice
     will be condemned by your Lordship, when for my defence in the first
     I shall alledge my double attempt, since your return from
     Hinchinbroke, of doing it personally, in both of which your
     Lordship's occasions, no doubtfulnesse of mine, prevented me, and
     that being now fearful of a sudden summons to Portsmouth, for the
     discharge of some ships there, I judge it very unbecoming the duty
     which every bit of bread I eat tells me I owe to your Lordship to
     expose the safety of your honour to the uncertainty of my return.
     For the matter, my Lord, it is such as could I in any measure think
     safe to conceal from, or likely to be discovered to you by any other
     hand, I should not have dared so far to owne what from my heart I
     believe is false, as to make myself but the relater of other's
     discourse; but, sir, your Lordship's honour being such as I ought to
     value it to be, and finding both in city and court that discourses
     pass to your prejudice, too generally for mine or any man's
     controllings but your Lordship's, I shall, my Lord, without the
     least greatening or lessening the matter, do my duty in laying it
     shortly before you.

     People of all conditions, my Lord, raise matter of wonder from your
     Lordship's so little appearance at Court: some concluding thence
     their disfavour thereby, to which purpose I have had questions asked
     me, and endeavouring to put off such insinuations by asserting the
     contrary, they have replied, that your Lordship's living so beneath
     your quality, out of the way, and declining of Court attendance,
     hath been more than once discoursed about the King.  Others, my
     Lord, when the chief ministers of State, and those most active of
     the Council have been reckoned up, wherein your Lordship never used
     to want an eminent place, have said, touching your Lordship, that
     now your turn was served, and the King had given you a good estate,
     you left him to stand or fall as he would, and, particularly in that
     of the Navy, have enlarged upon your letting fall all service there.

     Another sort, and those the most, insist upon the bad report of the
     house wherein your Lordship, now observed in perfect health again,
     continues to sojourne, and by name have charged one of the daughters
     for a common courtizan, alledging both places and persons where and
     with whom she hath been too well known, and how much her wantonnesse
     occasions, though unjustly, scandal to your Lordship, and that as
     well to gratifying of some enemies as to the wounding of more
     friends I am not able to tell.

     Lastly, my Lord, I find a general coldness in all persons towards
     your Lordship, such as, from my first dependance on you, I never yet
     knew, wherein I shall not offer to interpose any thoughts or advice
     of mine, well knowing your Lordship needs not any.  But with a most
     faithful assurance that no person nor papers under Heaven is privy
     to what I here write, besides myself and this, which I shall be
     careful to have put into your owne hands, I rest confident of your
     Lordship's just construction of my dutifull intents herein, and in
     all humility take leave, may it please your Lordship,

     Your Lordship's most obedient Servant, S. P.

The foregoing letter was sealed up, and enclosed in this that follows

     MY LORD,

     If this finds your Lordship either not alone, or not at leisure, I
     beg the suspending your opening of the enclosed till you shall have
     both, the matter very well bearing such a delay, and in all humility
     remain, may it please your Lordship,

     Your Lordship's most obedient Servant, S. P.

     November 17, 1663.

     My servant hath my directions to put this into your Lordship's owne
     hand, but not to stay for any answer.

19th.  Up, and to the office, where (Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten being
gone this morning to Portsmouth) the rest of us met, and rode at noon.  So
I to the 'Change, where little business, and so home to dinner, and being
at dinner Mr. Creed in and dined with us, and after dinner Mr. Gentleman,
my Jane's father, to see us and her.  And after a little stay with them, I
was sent for by Sir G. Carteret by agreement, and so left them, and to him
and with him by coach to my Lord Treasurer, to discourse with him about
Mr. Gauden's having of money, and to offer to him whether it would not be
necessary, Mr. Gauden's credit being so low as it is, to take security of
him if he demands any great sum, such as L20,000, which now ought to be
paid him upon his next year's declaration.  Which is a sad thing, that
being reduced to this by us, we should be the first to doubt his credit;
but so it is.  However, it will be managed with great tenderness to him.
My Lord Treasurer we found in his bed-chamber, being laid up of the goute.
I find him a very ready man, and certainly a brave servant to the King: he
spoke so quick and sensibly of the King's charge. Nothing displeased me in
him but his long nails, which he lets grow upon a pretty thick white short
hand, that it troubled me to see them.  Thence with Sir G. Carteret by
coach, and he set me down at the New Exchange. In our way he told me there
is no such thing likely yet as a Dutch war, neither they nor we being in
condition for it, though it will come certainly to that in some time, our
interests lying the same way, that is to say, in trade.  But not yet.
Thence to the Temple, and there visited my cozen Roger Pepys and his
brother Dr. John, a couple, methinks, of very ordinary men, and thence to
speak [with] Mr. Moore, and met him by the way, who tells me, to my great
content, that he believes my letter to my Lord Sandwich hath wrought well
upon him, and that he will look after himself and his business upon it,
for he begins already to do so.  But I dare not conclude anything till I
see him, which shall be to-morrow morning, that I may be out of my pain to
know how he takes it of me.  He and I to the Coffee-house, and there drank
and talked a little, and so I home, and after a little at my office home
to supper and to bed, not knowing how to avoid hopes from Mr. Moore's
words to-night, and yet I am fearful of the worst.

20th.  Up, and as soon as I could to my Lord Sandwich's lodgings, but he
was gone out before, and so I am defeated of my expectation of being eased
one way or other in the business of my Lord.  But I went up to Mr. Howe,
who I saw this day the first time in a periwigg, which becomes him very
well, and discoursed with him.  He tells me that my Lord is of a sudden
much changed, and he do believe that he do take my letter well. However,
we do both bless God that it hath so good an effect upon him. Thence I
home again, calling at the Wardrobe, where I found my Lord, but so busy
with Mr. Townsend making up accounts there that I was unwilling to trouble
him, and so went away.  By and by to the Exchange, and there met by
agreement Mr. Howe, and took him with a barrel of oysters home to dinner,
where we were very merry, and indeed I observe him to be a very hopeful
young man, but only a little conceited.  After dinner I took him and my
wife, and setting her in Covent Garden at her mother's, he and I to my
Lord's, and thence I with Mr. Moore to White Hall, there the King and
Council being close, and I thinking it an improper place to meet my Lord
first upon the business; I took coach, and calling my wife went home,
setting Mr. Moore down by the way, and having been late at the office
alone looking over some plates of the Northern seas, the White seas, and
Archangell river, I went home, and, after supper, to bed.  My wife tells
me that she and her brother have had a great falling out to-night, he
taking upon him to challenge great obligation upon her, and taxing her for
not being so as she ought to be to her friends, and that she can do more
with me than she pretends, and I know not what, but God be thanked she
cannot.  A great talke there is today of a crush between some of the
Fanatiques up in arms, and the King's men in the North; but whether true I
know not yet.

21st.  At the office all the morning and at noon I receive a letter from
Mr. Creed, with a token, viz., a very noble parti-coloured Indian gowne
for my wife.  The letter is oddly writ, over-prizing his present, and
little owning any past service of mine, but that this was his genuine
respects, and I know not what: I confess I had expectations of a better
account from him of my service about his accounts, and so give his boy
12d., and sent it back again, and after having been at the pay of a ship
this afternoon at the Treasury, I went by coach to Ludgate, and, by
pricing several there, I guess this gowne may be worth about L12 or L15.
But, however, I expect at least L50 of him.  So in the evening I wrote him
a letter telling him clearly my mind, a copy of which I keep and of his
letter and so I resolve to have no more such correspondence as I used to
have but will have satisfaction of him as I do expect.  So to write my
letters, and after all done I went home to supper and to bed, my mind
being pretty well at ease from my letter to Creed, and more for my receipt
this afternoon of L17 at the Treasury, for the L17 paid a year since to
the carver for his work at my house, which I did intend to have paid
myself, but, finding others to do it, I thought it not amisse to get it
too, but I am afeard that we may hear of it to our greater prejudices
hereafter.

22nd (Lord's day).  Up pretty early, and having last night bespoke a
coach, which failed me this morning, I walked as far as the Temple, and
there took coach, and to my Lord's lodgings, whom I found ready to go to
chappell; but I coming, he begun, with a very serious countenance, to tell
me that he had received my late letter, wherein first he took notice of my
care of him and his honour, and did give me thanks for that part of it
where I say that from my heart I believe the contrary of what I do there
relate to be the discourse of others; but since I intended it not a
reproach, but matter of information, and for him to make a judgment of it
for his practice, it was necessary for me to tell him the persons of whom
I have gathered the several particulars which I there insist on.  I would
have made excuses in it; but, seeing him so earnest in it, I found myself
forced to it, and so did tell him Mr. Pierce; the chyrurgeon, in that of
his Lordship's living being discoursed of at Court; a mayd servant that-I
kept, that lived at Chelsy school; and also Mr. Pickering, about the
report touching the young woman; and also Mr. Hunt, in Axe Yard, near whom
she lodged.  I told him the whole city do discourse concerning his neglect
of business; and so I many times asserting my dutifull intention in all
this, and he owning his accepting of it as such.  That that troubled me
most in particular is, that he did there assert the civility of the people
of the house, and the young gentlewoman, for whose reproach he was sorry.
His saying that he was resolved how to live, and that though he was taking
a house, meaning to live in another manner, yet it was not to please any
people, or to stop report, but to please himself, though this I do believe
he might say that he might not seem to me to be so much wrought upon by
what I have writ; and lastly, and most of all, when I spoke of the
tenderness that I have used in declaring this to him, there being nobody
privy to it, he told me that I must give him leave to except one.  I told
him that possibly somebody might know of some thoughts of mine, I having
borrowed some intelligence in this matter from them, but nobody could say
they knew of the thing itself what I writ. This, I confess, however, do
trouble me, for that he seemed to speak it as a quick retort, and it must
sure be Will. Howe, who did not see anything of what I writ, though I told
him indeed that I would write; but in this, I think, there is no great
hurt.  I find him, though he cannot but owne his opinion of my good
intentions, and so, he did again and again profess it, that he is troubled
in his mind at it; and I confess, I think I may have done myself an injury
for his good, which, were it to do again, and that I believed he would
take it no better, I think I should sit quietly without taking any notice
of it, for I doubt there is no medium between his taking it very well or
very ill.  I could not forbear weeping before him at the latter end,
which, since, I am ashamed of, though I cannot see what he can take it to
proceed from but my tenderness and good will to him.  After this discourse
was ended, he began to talk very, cheerfully of other things, and I walked
with him to White Hall, and we discoursed of the pictures in the gallery,
which, it may be, he might do out of policy, that the boy might not see
any, strangeness in him; but I rather think that his mind was somewhat
eased, and hope that he will be to me as he was before.  But, however, I
doubt not when he sees that I follow my business, and become an honour to
him, and not to be like to need him, or to be a burden to him, and rather
able to serve him than to need him, and if he do continue to follow
business, and so come to his right witts again, I do not doubt but he will
then consider my faithfulnesse to him, and esteem me as he ought.  At
chappell I had room in the Privy Seale pew with other gentlemen, and there
heard Dr. Killigrew, preach, but my mind was so, I know not whether
troubled, or only full of thoughts of what had passed between my Lord and
me that I could not mind it, nor can at this hour remember three words.
The anthem was good after sermon, being the fifty-first psalme, made for
five voices by one of Captain Cooke's boys, a pretty boy.  And they say
there are four or five of them that can do as much.  And here I first
perceived that the King is a little musicall, and kept good time with his
hand all along the anthem.  Up into the gallery after sermon and there I
met Creed.  We saluted one another and spoke but not one word of what had
passed yesterday between us, but told me he was forced to such a place to
dinner and so we parted.  Here I met Mr. Povy, who tells me how Tangier
had like to have been betrayed, and that one of the King's officers is
come, to whom 8,000 pieces of eight were offered for his part.  Hence I to
the King's Head ordinary, and there dined, good and much company, and a
good dinner: most of their discourse was about hunting, in a dialect I
understand very little.  Thence by coach to our own church, and there my
mind being yet unsettled I could mind nothing, and after sermon home and
there told my wife what had passed, and thence to my office, where doing
business only to keep my mind employed till late; and so home to supper,
to prayers, and to bed.

23rd: Up and to Alderman Backwell's, where Sir W. Rider, by appointment,
met us to consult about the insuring of our hempe ship from Archangell, in
which we are all much concerned, by my Lord Treasurer's command.  That
being put in a way I went to Mr. Beacham, one of our jury, to confer with
him about our business with Field at our trial to-morrow, and thence to
St. Paul's Churchyarde, and there bespoke "Rushworth's Collections," and
"Scobell's Acts of the Long Parliament,"' &c., which I will make the King
pay for as to the office; and so I do not break my vow at all.  Back to
the Coffee-house, and then to the 'Change, where Sir W. Rider and I did
bid 15 per cent., and nobody will take it under 20 per cent., and the
lowest was 15 per cent.  premium, and 15 more to be abated in case of
losse, which we did not think fit without order to give, and so we parted,
and I home to a speedy, though too good a dinner to eat alone, viz., a
good goose and a rare piece of roast beef.  Thence to the Temple, but
being there too soon and meeting Mr. Moore I took him up and to my Lord
Treasurer's, and thence to Sir Ph. Warwick's, where I found him and did
desire his advice, who left me to do what I thought fit in this business
of the insurance, and so back again to the Temple all the way telling Mr.
Moore what had passed between my Lord and me yesterday, and indeed my
fears do grow that my Lord will not reform as I hoped he would nor have
the ingenuity to take my advice as he ought kindly.  But however I am
satisfied that the one person whom he said he would take leave to except
is not Mr. Moore, and so W. Howe I am sure could tell him nothing of my
letter that ever he saw it.  Here Mr. Moore and I parted, and I up to the
Speaker's chamber, and there met Mr. Coventry by appointment to discourse
about Field's business, and thence we parting I homewards and called at
the Coffeehouse, and there by great accident hear that a letter is come
that our ship is safe come to Newcastle.  With this news I went like an
asse presently to Alderman Backewell and, told him of it, and he and I
went to the African House in Broad Street to have spoke with Sir W. Rider
to tell him of it, but missed him.  Now what an opportunity had I to have
concealed this and seemed to have made an insurance and got L100 with the
least trouble and danger in the whole world.  This troubles me to think I
should be so oversoon.  So back again with Alderman Backewell talking of
the new money, which he says will never be counterfeited, he believes; but
it is deadly inconvenient for telling, it is so thick, and the edges are
made to turn up.  I found him as full of business, and, to speak the
truth, he is a very painfull man, and ever was, and now-a-days is well
paid for it.  So home and to my office, doing business late in order to
the getting a little money, and so home to supper and to bed.

24th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and at noon to
the 'Change, where everybody joyed me in our hemp ship's coming safe, and
it seems one man, Middleburgh, did give 20 per cent. in gold last night,
three or four minutes before the newes came of her being safe.  Thence
with Mr. Deane home and dined, and after dinner and a good deal of
discourse of the business of Woolwich Yard, we opened his draught of a
ship which he has made for me, and indeed it is a most excellent one and
that that I hope will be of good use to me as soon as I get a little time,
and much indebted I am to the poor man.  Toward night I by coach to
Whitehall to the Tangier committee, and there spoke with my Lord and he
seems mighty kind to me, but I will try him to-morrow by a visit to see
whether he holds it or no.  Then home by coach again and to my office,
where late with Captain Miners about the East India business.  So home to
supper and to bed, being troubled to find myself so bound as I am,
notwithstanding all the physic that I take.  This day our tryall was with
Field, and I hear that they have given him L29 damage more, which is a
strange thing, but yet not so much as formerly, nor as I was afeard of.

25th.  Up and to Sir G. Carteret's house, and with him by coach to
Whitehall.  He uses me mighty well to my great joy, and in our discourse
took occasion to tell me that as I did desire of him the other day so he
desires of me the same favour that we may tell one another at any time any
thing that passes among us at the office or elsewhere wherein we are
either dissatisfied one with another, and that I should find him in all
things as kind and ready to serve me as my own brother.  This methinks-was
very sudden and extraordinary and do please me mightily, and I am resolved
by no means ever to lose him again if I can.  He told me that he did still
observe my care for the King's service in my office.  He set me down in
Fleet Street and thence I by another coach to my Lord Sandwich's, and
there I did present him Mr. Barlow's "Terella," with which he was very
much pleased, and he did show me great kindnesse, and by other discourse I
have reason to think that he is not at all, as I feared he would be,
discontented against me more than the trouble of the thing will work upon
him.  I left him in good humour, and I to White Hall, to the Duke of York
and Mr. Coventry, and there advised about insuring the hempe ship at 12
per cent., notwithstanding her being come to Newcastle, and I do hope that
in all my three places which are now my hopes and supports I may not now
fear any thing, but with care, which through the Lord's blessing I will
never more neglect, I don't doubt but to keep myself up with them all.
For in the Duke, and Mr. Coventry, my Lord Sandwich and Sir G. Carteret I
place my greatest hopes, and it pleased me yesterday that Mr. Coventry in
the coach (he carrying me to the Exchange at noon from the office) did,
speaking of Sir W. Batten, say that though there was a difference between
them, yet he would embrace any good motion of Sir W. Batten to the King's
advantage as well as of Mr. Pepys' or any friend he had.   And when I
talked that I would go about doing something of the Controller's work when
I had time, and that I thought the Controller would not take it ill, he
wittily replied that there was nothing in the world so hateful as a dog in
the manger.  Back by coach to the Exchange, there spoke with Sir W. Rider
about insuring, and spoke with several other persons about business, and
shall become pretty well known quickly.  Thence home to dinner with my
poor wife, and with great joy to my office, and there all the afternoon
about business, and among others Mr. Bland came to me and had good
discourse, and he has chose me a referee for him in a business, and anon
in the evening comes Sir W. Warren, and he and I had admirable discourse.
He advised me in things I desired about, bummary,--[bottomry]--and other
ways of putting out money as in parts of ships, how dangerous they are,
and lastly fell to talk of the Dutch management of the Navy, and I think
will helpe me to some accounts of things of the Dutch Admiralty, which I
am mighty desirous to know.  He seemed to have been mighty privy with my
Lord Albemarle in things before this great turn, and to the King's
dallying with him and others for some years before, but I doubt all was
not very true. However, his discourse is very useful in general, though he
would seem a little more than ordinary in this.  Late at night home to
supper and to bed, my mind in good ease all but my health, of which I am
not a little doubtful.

26th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and at noon I
to the 'Change, and there met with Mr. Cutler the merchant, who would
needs have me home to his house by the Dutch Church, and there in an old
but good house, with his wife and mother, a couple of plain old women, I
dined a good plain dinner, and his discourse after dinner with me upon
matters of the navy victualling very good and worth my hearing, and so
home to my office in the afternoon with my mind full of business, and
there at it late, and so home to supper to my poor wife, and to bed,
myself being in a little pain.  .  .  .  . by a stroke .  .  .  .  in
pulling up my breeches yesterday over eagerly, but I will lay nothing to
it till I see whether it will cease of itself or no.  The plague, it
seems, grows more and more at Amsterdam; and we are going upon making of
all ships coming from thence and Hambrough, or any other infected places,
to perform their Quarantine (for thirty days as Sir Rd. Browne expressed
it in the order of the Council, contrary to the import of the word, though
in the general acceptation it signifies now the thing, not the time spent
in doing it) in Holehaven, a thing never done by us before.

27th.  Up and to my office, where busy with great delight all the morning,
and at noon to the 'Change, and so home to dinner with my poor wife, and
with great content to my office again, and there hard at work upon stating
the account of the freights due to the King from the East India Company
till late at night, and so home to supper and to bed.  My wife mightily
pleased with my late discourse of getting a trip over to Calais, or some
other port of France, the next summer, in one of the yachts, and I believe
I shall do it, and it makes good sport that my mayde Jane dares not go,
and Besse is wild to go, and is mad for joy, but yet will be willing to
stay if Jane hath a mind, which is the best temper in this and all other
things that ever I knew in my life.

28th.  Up and at the office sat all the morning, and at noon by Mr.
Coventry's coach to the 'Change, and after a little while there where I
met with Mr. Pierce, the chyrurgeon, who tells me for good newes that my
Lord Sandwich is resolved to go no more to Chelsy, and told me he believed
that I had been giving my Lord some counsel, which I neither denied nor
affirmed, but seemed glad with him that he went thither no more, and so I
home to dinner, and thence abroad to Paul's Church Yard, and there looked
upon the second part of Hudibras, which I buy not, but borrow to read, to
see if it be as good as the first, which the world cry so mightily up,
though it hath not a good liking in me, though I had tried by twice or
three times reading to bring myself to think it witty. Back again home and
to my office, and there late doing business and so home to supper and to
bed.  I have been told two or three times, but to-day for certain I am
told how in Holland publickly they have pictured our King with reproach.
One way is with his pockets turned the wrong side outward, hanging out
empty; another with two courtiers picking of his pockets; and a third,
leading of two ladies, while others abuse him; which amounts to great
contempt.

29th (Lord's day).  This morning I put on my best black cloth suit,
trimmed with scarlett ribbon, very neat, with my cloake lined with
velvett, and a new beaver, which altogether is very noble, with my black
silk knit canons I bought a month ago.  I to church alone, my wife not
going, and there I found my Lady Batten in a velvet gown, which vexed me
that she should be in it before my wife, or that I am able to put her into
one, but what cannot be, cannot be.  However, when I came home I told my
wife of it, and to see my weaknesse, I could on the sudden have found my
heart to have offered her one, but second thoughts put it by, and indeed
it would undo me to think of doing as Sir W. Batten and his Lady do, who
has a good estate besides his office.  A good dinner we had of boeuf a la
mode, but not roasted so well as my wife used to do it. So after dinner I
to the French Church, but that being too far begun I came back to St.
Dunstan's by six and heard a good sermon, and so home and to my office
all, the evening making up my accounts of this month, and blessed be God I
have got up my crumb again to L770, the most that ever I had yet, and good
clothes a great many besides, which is a great mercy of God to me.  So
home to supper and to bed.

30th.  Was called up by a messenger from Sir W. Pen to go with him by
coach to White Hall.  So I got up and went with him, and by the way he
began to observe to me some unkind dealing of mine to him a weeke or two
since at the table, like a coxcomb, when I answered him pretty freely that
I would not think myself to owe any man the service to do this or that
because they would have it so (it was about taking of a mulct upon a
purser for not keeping guard at Chatham when I was there), so he talked
and I talked and let fall the discourse without giving or receiving any
great satisfaction, and so to other discourse, but I shall know him still
for a false knave.  At White Hall we met the Duke in the Matted Gallery,
and there he discoursed with us; and by and by my Lord Sandwich came and
stood by, and talked; but it being St. Andrew's, and a collar-day, he went
to the Chappell, and we parted.  From him and Sir W. Pen and I back again
and 'light at the 'Change, and to the Coffee-house, where I heard the best
story of a cheate intended by a Master of a ship, who had borrowed twice
his money upon the bottomary, and as much more insured upon his ship and
goods as they were worth, and then would have cast her away upon the coast
of France, and there left her, refusing any pilott which was offered him;
and so the Governor of the place took her and sent her over hither to find
an owner, and so the ship is come safe, and goods and all; they all worth
L500, and he had one way or other taken L3000. The cause is to be tried
to-morrow at Guildhall, where I intend to be. Thence home to dinner, and
then with my wife to her arithmetique.  In the evening came W. Howe to see
me, who tells me that my Lord hath been angry three or four days with him,
would not speak to him; at last did, and charged him with having spoken to
me about what he had observed concerning his Lordship, which W. Howe
denying stoutly, he was well at ease; and continues very quiett, and is
removing from Chelsy as fast as he can, but, methinks, both by my Lord's
looks upon me to-day, or it may be it is only my doubtfulness, and by W.
Howe's discourse, my Lord is not very well pleased, nor, it may be, will
be a good while, which vexes me; but I hope all will over in time, or else
I am but ill rewarded for my good service.  Anon he and I to the Temple
and there parted, and I to my cozen Roger Pepys, whom I met going to his
chamber; he was in haste, and to go out of town tomorrow.  He tells me of
a letter from my father which he will keep to read to me at his coming to
town again.  I perceive it is about my father's jealousys concerning my
wife's doing ill offices with me against him only from the differences
they had when she was there, which he very unwisely continues to have and
troubles himself and friends about to speak to me in, as my Lord Sandwich,
Mr. Moore, and my cozen Roger, which vexes me, but I must impute it to his
age and care for my mother and Pall and so let it go.  After little
discourse with him I took coach and home, calling upon my bookseller's for
two books, Rushworth's and Scobell's Collections.  I shall make the King
pay for them.  The first I spent some time at the office to read and it is
an excellent book.  So home and spent the evening with my wife in
arithmetique, and so to supper and to bed.  I end this month with my mind
in good condition for any thing else, but my unhappy adventuring to
disoblige my Lord by doing him service in representing to him the
discourse of the world concerning him and his affairs.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                 DECEMBER
                                   1663

December 1st.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning.  At
noon I home to dinner with my poor wife, with whom now-a-days I enjoy
great pleasure in her company and learning of Arithmetique.  After dinner
I to Guild Hall to hear a tryall at King's Bench, before Lord Chief
Justice Hide, about the insurance of a ship, the same I mention in my
yesterday's journall, where everything was proved how money was so taken
up upon bottomary and insurance, and the ship left by the master and
seamen upon rocks, where, when the sea fell at the ebb, she must perish.
The master was offered helpe, and he did give the pilotts 20 sols to drink
to bid them go about their business, saying that the rocks were old, but
his ship was new, and that she was repaired for L6 and less all the damage
that she received, and is now brought by one, sent for on purpose by the
insurers, into the Thames, with her cargo, vessels of tallow daubed over
with butter, instead of all butter, the whole not worth above L500, ship
and all, and they had took up, as appeared, above L2,400.  He had given
his men money to content them; and yet, for all this, he did bring some of
them to swear that it was very stormy weather, and [they] did all they
could to save her, and that she was seven feete deep water in hold, and
were fain to cut her main and foremast, that the master was the last man
that went out, and they were fain to force [him] out when she was ready to
sink; and her rudder broke off, and she was drawn into the harbour after
they were gone, as wrecke all broken, and goods lost: that she could not
be carried out again without new building, and many other things so
contrary as is not imaginable more.  There was all the great counsel in
the kingdom in the cause; but after one witnesse or two for the plaintiff,
it was cried down as a most notorious cheate; and so the jury, without
going out, found it for the plaintiff.  But it was pleasant to see what
mad sort of testimonys the seamen did give, and could not be got to speak
in order: and then their terms such as the judge could not understand; and
to hear how sillily the Counsel and judge would speak as to the terms
necessary in the matter, would make one laugh: and above all, a Frenchman
that was forced to speak in French, and took an English oathe he did not
understand, and had an interpreter sworn to tell us what he said, which
was the best testimony of all.  So home well satisfied with this
afternoon's work, purposing to spend an afternoon or two every term so,
and so to my office a while and then home to supper, arithmetique with my
wife, and to bed.  I heard other causes, and saw the course of pleading by
being at this trial, and heard and learnt two things: one is that every
man has a right of passage in, but not a title to, any highway.  The next,
that the judge would not suffer Mr. Crow, who hath fined for Alderman, to
be called so, but only Mister, and did eight or nine times fret at it, and
stop every man that called him so.

2nd.  My wife troubled all last night with the toothache and this morning.
I up and to my office, where busy, and so home to dinner with my wife, who
is better of her tooth than she was, and in the afternoon by agreement
called on by Mr. Bland, and with him to the Ship a neighbour tavern and
there met his antagonist Mr. Custos and his referee Mr. Clarke a merchant
also, and begun the dispute about the freight of a ship hired by Mr. Bland
to carry provisions to Tangier, and the freight is now demanded, whereas
he says that the goods were some spoiled, some not delivered, and upon the
whole demands L1300 of the other, and their minds are both so high, their
demands so distant, and their words so many and hot against one another
that I fear we shall bring it to nothing.  But however I am glad to see
myself so capable of understanding the business as I find I do, and shall
endeavour to do Mr. Bland all the just service I can therein.  Here we
were in a bad room, which vexed me most, but we. meet at another house
next.  So at noon I home and to my office till 9 o'clock, and so home to
my wife to keep her company, arithmetique, then to supper, and to bed, she
being well of her tooth again.

3rd.  Up and to the office, where all the forenoon, and then (by Mr.
Coventry's coach) to the 'Change, and so home to dinner, very pleasant
with my poor wife.  Somebody from Portsmouth, I know not who, has this day
sent me a Runlett of Tent.  So to my office all the afternoon, where much
business till late at night, and so home to my wife, and then to supper
and to bed.  This day Sir G. Carteret did tell us at the table, that the
Navy (excepting what is due to the Yards upon the quarter now going on,
and what few bills he hath not heard of) is quite out of debt; which is
extraordinary good newes, and upon the 'Change to hear how our creditt
goes as good as any merchant's upon the 'Change is a joyfull thing to
consider, which God continue!  I am sure the King will have the benefit of
it, as well as we some peace and creditt.

4th.  Up pretty betimes, that is about 7 o'clock, it being now dark then,
and so got me ready, with my clothes, breeches and warm stockings, and by
water with Henry Russell, cold and wet and windy to Woolwich, to a hempe
ship there, and staid looking upon it and giving direction as to the
getting it ashore, and so back again very cold, and at home without going
on shore anywhere about 12 o'clock, being fearful of taking cold, and so
dined at home and shifted myself, and so all the afternoon at my office
till night, and then home to keep my poor wife company, and so to supper
and to bed.

5th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and then with
the whole board, viz., Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Batten, and myself along with
Captain Allen home to dinner, where he lives hard by in Mark Lane, where
we had a very good plain dinner and good welcome, in a pretty little house
but so smoky that it was troublesome to us all till they put out the fire,
and made one of charcoale.  I was much pleased with this dinner for the
many excellent stories told by Mr. Coventry, which I have put down in my
book of tales and so shall not mention them here.  We staid till night,
and then Mr. Coventry away, and by and by I home to my office till 9 or 10
at night, and so home to supper and to bed after some talke and
Arithmetique with my poor wife, with whom now-a-days I live with great
content, out of all trouble of mind by jealousy (for which God forgive
me), or any other distraction more than my fear of my Lord Sandwich's
displeasure.

6th (Lord's day).  Lay long in bed, and then up and to church alone, which
is the greatest trouble that I have by not having a man or, boy to wait on
me, and so home to dinner, my wife, it being a cold day, and it begun to
snow (the first snow we have seen this year) kept her bed till after
dinner, and I below by myself looking over my arithmetique books and
timber rule.  So my wife rose anon, and she and I all the afternoon at
arithmetique, and she is come to do Addition, Subtraction, and
Multiplicacion very well, and so I purpose not to trouble her yet with
Division, but to begin with the Globes to her now.  At night came Captain
Grove to discourse with me about Field's business and of other matters,
and so, he being gone, I to my office, and spent an houre or two reading
Rushworth, and so to supper home, and to prayers and bed, finding myself
by cold to have some pain begin with me, which God defend should increase.

7th.  Up betimes, and, it being a frosty morning, walked on foot to White
Hall, but not without some fear of my pain coming.  At White Hall I hear
and find that there was the last night the greatest tide that ever was
remembered in England to have been in this river: all White Hall having
been drowned, of which there was great discourse.  Anon we all met, and up
with the Duke and did our business, and by and by my Lord of Sandwich came
in, but whether it be my doubt or no I cannot tell, but I do not find that
he made any sign of kindnesse or respect to me, which troubles me more
than any thing in the world.  After done there Sir W. Batten and Captain
Allen and I by coach to the Temple, where I 'light, they going home, and
indeed it being my trouble of mind to try whether I could meet with my
Lord Sandwich and try him to see how he will receive me.  I took coach and
back again to Whitehall, but there could not find him.  But here I met Dr.
Clerke, and did tell him my story of my health; how my pain comes to me
now-a-days.  He did write something for me which I shall take when there
is occasion.  I then fell to other discourse of Dr. Knapp, who tells me he
is the King's physician, and is become a solicitor for places for people,
and I am mightily troubled with him.  He tells me he is the most impudent
fellow in the world, that gives himself out to be the King's physician,
but it is not so, but is cast out of the Court. From thence I may learn
what impudence there is in the world, and how a man may be deceived in
persons: Anon the King and Duke and Duchesse came to dinner in the
Vane-roome, where I never saw them before; but it seems since the tables
are done, he dines there all together.  The Queene is pretty well, and
goes out of her chamber to her little chappell in the house.  The King of
France, they say, is hiring of sixty sail of ships of the Dutch, but it is
not said for what design.  By and by, not hoping to see my Lord, I went to
the King's Head ordinary, where a good dinner but no discourse almost, and
after dinner by coach, home, and found my wife this cold day not yet out
of bed, and after a little good talk with her to my office, and there
spent my time till late.  Sir W. Warren two or three hours with me talking
of trade, and other very good discourse, which did please me very, well,
and so, after reading in Rushworth, home to supper and to bed.

8th.  Lay long in bed, and then up and to the office, where we sat all the
morning, and among other things my Lord Barkely called in question his
clerk Mr. Davy for something which Sir W. Batten and I did tell him
yesterday, but I endeavoured to make the least of it, and so all was put
up.  At noon to the 'Change, and among other businesses did discourse with
Captain Taylor, and I think I shall safely get L20 by his ship's freight
at present, besides what it may be I may get hereafter.  So home to
dinner, and thence by coach to White Hall, where a great while walked with
my Lord Tiviott, whom I find a most carefull, thoughtfull, and cunning
man, as I also ever took him to be.  He is this day bringing in an account
where he makes the King debtor to him L10,000 already on the garrison of
Tangier account; but yet demands not ready money to pay it, but offers
such ways of paying it out of the sale of old decayed provisions as will
enrich him finely.  Anon came my Lord Sandwich, and then we fell to our
business at the Committee about my Lord Tiviott's accounts, wherein I took
occasion to speak now and then, so as my Lord Sandwich did well seem to
like of it, and after we were up did bid me good night in a tone that,
methinks, he is not so displeased with me as I did doubt he is; however, I
will take a course to know whether he be or no.  The Committee done, I
took coach and home to my office, and there late, and so to supper at
home, and to bed, being doubtful of my pain through the very cold weather
which we have, but I will take all the care I can to prevent it.

9th.  Lay very long in bed for fear of my pain, and then rose and went to
stool (after my wife's way, who by all means would have me sit long and
upright) very well, and being ready to the office.  From thence I was
called by and by to my wife, she not being well.  So to her, and found her
in great pain. . . . . .  So by and by to my office again, and then abroad
to look out a cradle to burn charcoal in at my office, and I found one to
my mind in Newgate Market, and so meeting Hoby's man in the street, I
spoke to him to serve it in to the office for the King.  So home to
dinner, and after talk with my wife, she in bed and pain all day, I to my
office most of the evening, and then home to my wife.  This day Mrs.
Russell did give my wife a very fine St. George, in alabaster, which will
set out my wife's closett mightily.  This evening at the office, after I
had wrote my day's passages, there came to me my cozen Angier of
Cambridge, poor man, making his moan, and obtained of me that I would send
his son to sea as a Reformado, which I will take care to do.  But to see
how apt every man is to forget friendship in time of adversity.  How glad
was I when he was gone, for fear he should ask me to be bond for him, or
to borrow money of me.

10th.  Up, pretty well, the weather being become pretty warm again, and to
the office, where we sat all the morning, and I confess having received so
lately a token from Mrs. Russell, I did find myself concerned for our not
buying some tallow of her (which she bought on purpose yesterday most
unadvisedly to her great losse upon confidence of putting it off to us).
So hard it is for a man not to be warped against his duty and master's
interest that receives any bribe or present, though not as a bribe, from
any body else.  But she must be contented, and I to do her a good turn
when I can without wrong to the King's service.  Then home to dinner (and
did drink a glass of wine and beer, the more for joy that this is the
shortest day in the year,--[Old Style]--which is a pleasant consideration)
with my wife.  She in bed but pretty well, and having a messenger from my
brother, that he is not well nor stirs out of doors, I went forth to see
him, and found him below, he has not been well, but is not ill.  I found
him taking order for the distribution of Mrs. Ramsey's coals, a thing my
father for many years did, and now he after him, which I was glad to see,
as also to hear that Mr. Wheatly begins to look after him.  I hope it is
about his daughter.  Thence to St. Paul's Church Yard, to my bookseller's,
and having gained this day in the office by my stationer's bill to the
King about 40s. or L3, I did here sit two or three hours calling for
twenty books to lay this money out upon, and found myself at a great losse
where to choose, and do see how my nature would gladly return to laying
out money in this trade.  I could not tell whether to lay out my money for
books of pleasure, as plays, which my nature was most earnest in; but at
last, after seeing Chaucer, Dugdale's History of Paul's, Stows London,
Gesner, History of Trent, besides Shakespeare, Jonson, and Beaumont's
plays, I at last chose Dr. Fuller's Worthys, the Cabbala or Collections of
Letters of State, and a little book, Delices de Hollande, with another
little book or two, all of good use or serious pleasure: and Hudibras,
both parts, the book now in greatest fashion for drollery, though I
cannot, I confess, see enough where the wit lies.  My mind being thus
settled, I went by linke home, and so to my office, and to read in
Rushworth; and so home to supper and to bed.  Calling at Wotton's, my
shoemaker's, today, he tells me that Sir H. Wright is dying; and that
Harris is come to the Duke's house again; and of a rare play to be acted
this week of Sir William Davenant's: the story of Henry the Eighth with
all his wives.

11th.  Up and abroad toward the Wardrobe, and going out Mr. Clerke met me
to tell me that Field has a writ against me in this last business of L30
10s., and that he believes he will get an execution against me this
morning, and though he told me it could not be well before noon, and that
he would stop it at the Sheriff's, yet it is hard to believe with what
fear I did walk and how I did doubt at every man I saw and do start at the
hearing of one man cough behind my neck.  I to, the Wardrobe and there
missed Mr. Moore.  So to Mr. Holden's and evened all reckonings there for
hats, and then walked to Paul's Churchyard and after a little at my
bookseller's and bought at a shop Cardinall Mazarin's Will in French.  I
to the Coffeehouse and there among others had good discourse with an Iron
Merchant, who tells me the great evil of discouraging our natural
manufacture of England in that commodity by suffering the Swede to bring
in three times more than ever they did and our owne Ironworks be lost, as
almost half of them, he says, are already.  Then I went and sat by Mr.
Harrington, and some East country merchants, and talking of the country
about Quinsborough, and thereabouts, he told us himself that for fish,
none there, the poorest body, will buy a dead fish, but must be alive,
unless it be in winter; and then they told us the manner of putting their
nets into the water.  Through holes made in the thick ice, they will
spread a net of half a mile long; and he hath known a hundred and thirty
and a hundred and seventy barrels of fish taken at one draught.  And then
the people come with sledges upon the ice, with snow at the bottome, and
lay the fish in and cover them with snow, and so carry them to market.
And he hath seen when the said fish have been frozen in the sledge, so as
that he hath taken a fish and broke a-pieces, so hard it hath been; and
yet the same fishes taken out of the snow, and brought into a hot room,
will be alive and leap up and down.  Swallows are often brought up in
their nets out of the mudd from under water, hanging together to some
twigg or other, dead in ropes, and brought to the fire will come to life.
Fowl killed in December.  (Alderman Barker said) he did buy, and putting
into the box under his sledge, did forget to take them out to eate till
Aprill next, and they then were found there, and were through the frost as
sweet and fresh and eat as well as at first killed.  Young beares are
there; their flesh sold in market as ordinarily as beef here, and is
excellent sweet meat.  They tell us that beares there do never hurt any
body, but fly away from you, unless you pursue and set upon them; but
wolves do much mischief.  Mr. Harrington told us how they do to get so
much honey as they send abroad.  They make hollow a great fir-tree,
leaving only a small slitt down straight in one place, and this they close
up again, only leave a little hole, and there the bees go in and fill the
bodys of those trees as full of wax and honey as they can hold; and the
inhabitants at times go and open the slit, and take what they please
without killing the bees, and so let them live there still and make more.
Fir trees are always planted close together, because of keeping one
another from the violence of the windes; and when a fell is made, they
leave here and there a grown tree to preserve the young ones coming up.
The great entertainment and sport of the Duke of Corland, and the princes
thereabouts, is hunting; which is not with dogs as we, but he appoints
such a day, and summons all the country-people as to a campagnia; and by
several companies gives every one their circuit, and they agree upon a
place where the toyle is to be set; and so making fires every company as
they go, they drive all the wild beasts, whether bears, wolves, foxes,
swine, and stags, and roes, into the toyle; and there the great men have
their stands in such and such places, and shoot at what they have a mind
to, and that is their hunting.  They are not very populous there, by
reason that people marry women seldom till they are towards or above
thirty; and men thirty or forty years old, or more oftentimes.  Against a
publique hunting the Duke sends that no wolves be killed by the people;
and whatever harm they do, the Duke makes it good to the person that
suffers it: as Mr. Harrington instanced in a house where he lodged, where
a wolfe broke into a hog-stye, and bit three or four great pieces off the
back of the hog, before the house could come to helpe it (it calling, and
that did give notice to the people of the house); and the man of the house
told him that there were three or four wolves thereabouts that did them
great hurt; but it was no matter, for the Duke was to make it good to him,
otherwise he would kill them.  Hence home and upstairs, my wife keeping
her bed, and had a very good dinner, and after dinner to my office, and
there till late busy.  Among other things Captain Taylor came to me about
his bill for freight, and besides that I found him contented that I have
the L30 I got, he do offer me to give me L6 to take the getting of the
bill paid upon me, which I am ready to do, but I am loath to have it said
that I ever did it.  However, I will do him the service to get it paid if
I can and stand to his courtesy what he will give me.  Late to supper
home, and to my great joy I have by my wife's good advice almost brought
myself by going often and leisurely to the stool that I am come almost to
have my natural course of stool as well as ever, which I pray God continue
to me.

12th.  Up and to the office where all the morning, and among other things
got Sir G. Carteret to put his letters to Captain Taylor's bill by which I
am in hopes to get L5, which joys my heart.  We had this morning a great
dispute between Mr. Gauden, Victualler of the Navy, and Sir J. Lawson, and
the rest of the Commanders going against Argier, about their fish and
keeping of Lent; which Mr. Gauden so much insists upon to have it
observed, as being the only thing that makes up the loss of his dear
bargain all the rest of the year.  At noon went home and there I found
that one Abrahall, who strikes in for the serving of the King with Ship
chandlery ware, has sent my wife a Japan gowne, which pleases her very
well and me also, it coming very opportune, but I know not how to carry
myself to him, I being already obliged so far to Mrs. Russell, so that I
am in both their pays.  To the Exchange, where I had sent Luellin word I
would come to him, and thence brought him home to dinner with me.  He
tells me that W. Symon's wife is dead, for which I am sorry, she being a
good woman, and tells me an odde story of her saying before her death,
being in good sense, that there stood her uncle Scobell.  Then he began to
tell me that Mr. Deering had been with him to desire him to speak to me
that if I would get him off with these goods upon his hands, he would give
me 50 pieces, and further that if I would stand his friend to helpe him to
the benefit of his patent as the King's merchant, he could spare me L200
per annum out of his profits.  I was glad to hear both of these, but
answered him no further than that as I would not by any thing be bribed to
be unjust in my dealings,

     [Edward Dering was granted, August, 1660, "the office of King's
     merchant in the East, for buying and providing necessaries for
     apparelling the Navy" ("Calendar," Domestic, 1660-61, p.  212).
     There is evidence among the State Papers of some dissatisfaction
     with the timber, &c., which he supplied to the Navy, and at this
     time he appears to have had some stores left on his hands.]

so I was not so squeamish as not to take people's acknowledgment where I
had the good fortune by my pains to do them good and just offices, and so
I would not come to be at any agreement with him, but I would labour to do
him this service and to expect his consideration thereof afterwards as he
thought fit.  So I expect to hear more of it.  I did make very much of
Luellin in hopes to have some good by this business, and in the evening
received some money from Mr. Moore, and so went and settled accounts in my
books between him and me, and I do hope at Christmas not only to find
myself as rich or more than ever I was yet, but also my accounts in less
compass, fewer reckonings either of debts or moneys due to me, than ever I
have been for some years, and indeed do so, the goodness of God bringing
me from better to a better expectation and hopes of doing well. This day I
heard my Lord Barkeley tell Sir G. Carteret that he hath letters from
France that the King hath unduked twelve Dukes, only to show his power and
to crush his nobility, who he said he did see had heretofore laboured to
cross him.  And this my Lord Barkeley did mightily magnify, as a sign of a
brave and vigorous mind, that what he saw fit to be done he dares do.  At
night, after business done at my office, home to supper and to bed.  I
have forgot to set down a very remarkable passage that, Lewellen being
gone, and I going into the office, and it begun to be dark, I found nobody
there, my clerks being at the burial of a child of W. Griffin's, and so I
spent a little time till they came, walking in the garden, and in the mean
time, while I was walking Mrs. Pen's pretty maid came by my side, and went
into the office, but finding nobody there I went in to her, being glad of
the occasion.  She told me as she was going out again that there was
nobody there, and that she came for a sheet of paper.  So I told her I
would supply her, and left her in the office and went into my office and
opened my garden door, thinking to have got her in, and there to have
caressed her, and seeming looking for paper, I told her this way was as
near a way for her, but she told me she had left the door open and so did
not come to me.  So I carried her some paper and kissed her, leading her
by the hand to the garden door and there let her go.  But, Lord! to see
how much I was put out of order by this surprisal, and how much I could
have subjected my mind to have treated and been found with this wench, and
how afterwards I was troubled to think what if she should tell this and
whether I had spoke or done any thing that might be unfit for her to tell.
But I think there was nothing more passed than just what I here write.

13th (Lord's day).  Up and made me ready for Church, but my wife and I had
a difference about her old folly that she would fasten lies upon her
mayds, and now upon Jane, which I did not see enough to confirm me in it,
and so would not consent to her.  To church, where after sermon home, and
to my office, before dinner, reading my vowes, and so home to dinner,
where Tom came to me and he and I dined together, my wife not rising all
day, and after dinner I made even accounts with him, and spent all the
afternoon in my chamber talking of many things with him, and about
Wheately's daughter for a wife for him, and then about the Joyces and
their father Fenner, how they are sometimes all honey one with another and
then all turd, and a strange rude life there is among them.  In the
evening, he gone, I to my office to read Rushworth upon the charge and
answer of the Duke of Buckingham, which is very fine, and then to do a
little business against to-morrow, and so home to supper to my wife, and
then to bed.

14th.  Up by candlelight, which I do not use to do, though it be very
late, that is to say almost 8 o'clock, and out by coach to White Hall,
where we all met and to the Duke, where I heard a large discourse between
one that goes over an agent from the King to Legorne and thereabouts, to
remove the inconveniences his ships are put to by denial of pratique;
which is a thing that is now-a-days made use of only as a cheat, for a man
may buy a bill of health for a piece of eight, and my enemy may agree with
the Intendent of the Sante for ten pieces of eight or so; that he shall
not give me a bill of health, and so spoil me in my design, whatever it
be.  This the King will not endure, and so resolves either to have it
removed, or to keep all ships from coming in, or going out there, so long
as his ships are stayed for want hereof.  Then, my Lord Sandwich being
there, we all went into the Duke's closet and did our business. But among
other things, Lord! what an account did Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten
make of the pulling down and burning of the head of the Charles, where
Cromwell was placed with people under his horse, and Peter, as the Duke
called him, is praying to him; and Sir J. Minnes would needs infer the
temper of the people from their joy at the doing of this and their
building a gibbet for the hanging of his head up, when God knows, it is
even the flinging away of L100 out of the King's purse, to the building of
another, which it seems must be a Neptune.  Thence I through White Hall
only to see what was doing, but meeting none that I knew I went through
the garden to my Lord Sandwich's lodging, where I found my Lord got before
me (which I did not intend or expect) and was there trying some musique,
which he intends for an anthem of three parts, I know not whether for the
King's chapel or no, but he seems mighty intent upon it.  But it did
trouble me to hear him swear before God and other oathes, as he did now
and then without any occasion, which methinks did so ill become him, and I
hope will be a caution for me, it being so ill a thing in him.  The
musique being done, without showing me any good or ill countenance, he did
give me his hat and so adieu, and went down to his coach without saying
anything to me.  He being gone I and Mr. Howe talked a good while.  He
tells me that my Lord, it is true, for a while after my letter, was
displeased, and did shew many slightings of me when he had occasion of
mentioning me to his Lordship, but that now my Lord is in good temper and
he do believe will shew me as much respect as ever, and would have me not
to refrain to come to him.  This news I confess did much trouble me, but
when I did hear how he is come to himself, and hath wholly left Chelsy,
and the slut, and that I see he do follow his business, and becomes in
better repute than before, I am rejoiced to see it, though it do cost me
some disfavour for a time, for if not his good nature and ingenuity, yet I
believe his memory will not bear it always in his mind.  But it is my
comfort that this is the thing that after so many years good service that
has made him my enemy.  Thence to the King's Head ordinary, and there
dined among a company of fine gentlemen; some of them discoursed of the
King of France's greatness, and how he is come to make the Princes of the
Blood to take place of all foreign Embassadors, which it seems is granted
by them of Venice and other States, and expected from my Lord.  Hollis,
our King's Embassador there; and that either upon that score or something
else he hath not had his entry yet in Paris, but hath received several
affronts, and among others his harnesse cut, and his gentlemen of his
horse killed, which will breed bad blood if true.  They say also that the
King of France hath hired threescore ships of Holland, and forty of the
Swede, but nobody knows what to do; but some great designs he hath on foot
against the next year.  Thence by coach home and to my office, where I
spent all the evening till night with Captain Taylor discoursing about
keeping of masts, and when he was gone, with Sir W. Warren, who did give
me excellent discourse about the same thing, which I have committed to
paper, and then fell to other talk of his being at Chatham lately and
there discoursing of his masts.  Commissioner Pett did let fall several
scurvy words concerning my pretending to know masts as well as any body,
which I know proceeds ever since I told him I could measure a piece of
timber as well as anybody employed by the King.  But, however, I shall
remember him for a black sheep again a good while, with all his fair words
to me, and perhaps may let him know that my ignorance does the King as
much good as all his knowledge, which would do more it is true if it were
well used.  Then we fell to talk of Sir J. Minnes's and Sir W. Batten's
burning of Oliver's head, while he was there; which was done with so much
insulting and folly as I never heard of, and had the Trayned Band of
Rochester to come to the solemnity, which when all comes to all,
Commissioner Pett says it never was made for him; but it troubles me the
King should suffer L100 losse in his purse, to make a new one after it was
forgot whose it was, or any words spoke of it.  He being gone I mightily
pleased with his discourse, by which I always learn something, I to read a
little in Rushworth, and so home to supper to my wife, it having been
washing day, and so to bed, my mind I confess a little troubled for my
Lord Sandwich's displeasure.  But God will give me patience to bear since
it rises from so good an occasion.

15th.  Before I was up, my brother's man came to tell me that my cozen,
Edward Pepys, was dead, died at Mrs. Turner's, for which my wife and I are
very sorry, and the more for that his wife was the only handsome woman of
our name.  So up and to the office, where the greatest business was Sir J.
Minnes and Sir W. Batten against me for Sir W. Warren's contract for
masts, to which I may go to my memorandum book to see what past, but came
off with conquest, and my Lord Barkely and Mr. Coventry well convinced
that we are well used.  So home to dinner, and thither came to me Mr.
Mount and Mr. Luellin, I think almost foxed, and there dined with me and
very merry as I could be, my mind being troubled to see things so ordered
at the Board, though with no disparagement to me at all.  At dinner comes
a messenger from the Counter with an execution against me for the L30
10s., given the last verdict to Field.  The man's name is Thomas, of the
Poultry Counter.  I sent Griffin with him to the Dolphin, where Sir W.
Batten was at dinner, and he being satisfied that I should pay the money,
I did cause the money to be paid him, and Griffin to tell it out to him in
the office.  He offered to go along with me to Sir R. Ford, but I thought
it not necessary, but let him go with it, he also telling me that there is
never any receipt for it given, but I have good witness of the payment of
it.  They being gone, Luellin having again told me by myself that Deering
is content to give me L50 if I can sell his deals for him to the King, not
that I did ever offer to take it, or bid Luellin bargain for me with him,
but did tacitly seem to be willing to do him what service I could in it,
and expect his thanks, what he thought good.  Thence to White Hall by
coach, by the way overtaking Mr. Moore, and took him into the coach to me,
and there he could tell me nothing of my Lord, how he stands as to his
thoughts or respect to me, but concludes that though at present he may be
angry yet he will come to be pleased again with me no doubt, and says that
he do mind his business well, and keeps at Court.  So to White Hall, and
there by order found some of the Commissioners of Tangier met, and my Lord
Sandwich among the rest, to whom I bowed, but he shewed me very little if
any countenance at all, which troubles me mightily.  Having soon done
there, I took up Mr. Moore again and set him down at Pauls, by the way he
proposed to me of a way of profit which perhaps may shortly be made by
money by fines upon houses at the Wardrobe, but how I did not understand
but left it to another discourse.  So homeward, calling upon Mr. Fen, by
Sir G. Carteret's desire, and did there shew him the bill of Captain
Taylor's whereby I hope to get something justly.  Home and to my office,
and there very late with Sir W. Warren upon very serious discourse,
telling him how matters passed to-day, and in the close he and I did fall
to talk very openly of the business of this office, and (if I was not a
little too open to tell him my interest, which is my fault) he did give me
most admirable advice, and such as do speak him a most able and worthy
man, and understanding seven times more than ever I thought to be in him.
He did particularly run over every one of the officers and commanders, and
shewed me how I had reason to mistrust every one of them, either for their
falsenesse or their over-great power, being too high to fasten a real
friendship in, and did give me a common but a most excellent saying to
observe in all my life.  He did give it in rhyme, but the sense was this,
that a man should treat every friend in his discourse and opening his mind
to him as of one that may hereafter be his foe.  He did also advise me how
I should take occasion to make known to the world my case, and the pains
that I take in my business, and above all to be sure to get a thorough
knowledge in my employment, and to that add all the interest at Court that
I can, which I hope I shall do.  He staid talking with me till almost 12
at night, and so good night, being sorry to part with him, and more sorry
that he should have as far as Wapping to walk to-night. So I to my
Journall and so home, to supper and to bed.

16th.  Up, and with my head and heart full of my business, I to my office,
and there all the morning, where among other things to my great content
Captain Taylor brought me L40, the greater part of which I shall gain to
myself after much care and pains out of his bill of freight, as I have at
large set down in my book of Memorandums.  At noon to the 'Change and
there met with Mr. Wood by design, and got out of him to my advantage a
condition which I shall make good use of against Sir W. Batten (vide my
book of Memorandums touching the contract of masts of Sir W. Warren about
which I have had so much trouble).  So home to dinner and then to the Star
Tavern hard by to our arbitration of Mr. Bland's business, and at it a
great while, but I found no order like to be kept in our inquiry, and Mr.
Clerke, the other arbitrator, one so far from being fit (though able as to
his trade of a merchant) to inquire and to take pains in searching out the
truth on both sides, that we parted without doing anything, nor do I
believe we shall at all ever attain to anything in it.  Then home and till
12 at night making up my accounts with great account of this day's receipt
of Captain Taylor's money and some money reimbursed me which I have laid
out on Field's business.  So home with my mind in pretty good quiet, and
to Supper and to bed.

17th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning.  At noon home
to my poor wife and dined, and then by coach abroad to Mrs. Turner's where
I have not been for many a day, and there I found her and her sister Dike
very sad for the death of their brother.  After a little common expression
of sorrow, Mrs. Turner told me that the trouble she would put me to was,
to consult about getting an achievement prepared, scutcheons were done
already, to set over the door.  So I did go out to Mr. Smith's, where my
brother tells me the scutcheons are made, but he not being within, I went
to the Temple, and there spent my time in a Bookseller's shop, reading in
a book of some Embassages into Moscovia, &c., where was very good reading,
and then to Mrs. Turner's, and thither came Smith to me, with whom I did
agree for L4 to make a handsome one, ell square within the frame.  After
he was gone I sat an houre talking of the suddennesse of his death within
7 days, and how by little and little death came upon him, neither he nor
they thinking it would come to that. He died after a day's raveing,
through lightness in his head for want of sleep.  His lady did not know of
his sickness, nor do they hear yet how she takes it.  Hence home, taking
some books by the way in Paul's Churchyard by coach to my office, where
late doing business, and so home to supper and to bed.

18th.  Up, and after being ready and done several businesses with people,
I took water (taking a dram of the bottle at the waterside) with a gaily,
the first that ever I had yet, and down to Woolwich, calling at Ham
Creeke, where I met Mr. Deane, and had a great deal of talke with him
about business, and so to the Ropeyarde and Docke, discoursing several
things, and so back again and did the like at Deptford, and I find that it
is absolutely necessary for me to do thus once a weeke at least all the
yeare round, which will do me great good, and so home with great ease and
content, especially out of the content which I met with in a book I bought
yesterday, being a discourse of the state of Rome under the present Pope,
Alexander the 7th, it being a very excellent piece.  After eating
something at home, then to my office, where till night about business to
dispatch.  Among other people came Mr. Primate, the leather seller, in
Fleete Streete, to see me, he says, coming this way; and he tells me that
he is upon a proposal to the King, whereby, by a law already in being, he
will supply the King, without wrong to any man, or charge to the people in
general, so much as it is now, above L200,000 per annum, and God knows
what, and that the King do like the proposal, and hath directed that the
Duke of Monmouth, with their consent, be made privy, and go along with him
and his fellow proposer in the business, God knows what it is; for I
neither can guess nor believe there is any such thing in his head.  At
night made an end of the discourse I read this morning, and so home to
supper and to bed.

19th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and I laboured
hard at Deering's business of his deals more than I would if I did not
think to get something, though I do really believe that I did what is to
the King's advantage in it, and yet, God knows, the expectation of profit
will have its force and make a man the more earnest.  Dined at home, and
then with Mr. Bland to another meeting upon his arbitration, and seeing we
were likely to do no good I even put them upon it, and they chose Sir W.
Rider alone to end the matter, and so I am rid of it.  Thence by coach to
my shoemaker's and paid all there, and gave something to the boys' box
against Christmas.  To Mrs. Turner's, whom I find busy with Sir W. Turner,
about advising upon going down to Norfolke with the corps, and I find him
in talke a sober, considering man.  So home to my office late, and then
home to supper and to bed.  My head full of business, but pretty good
content.

20th (Lord's day).  Up and alone to church, where a common sermon of Mr.
Mills, and so home to dinner in our parler, my wife being clean, and the
first time we have dined here a great while together, and in the afternoon
went to church with me also, and there begun to take her place above Mrs.
Pen, which heretofore out of a humour she was wont to give her as an
affront to my Lady Batten.  After a dull sermon of the Scotchman, home,
and there I found my brother Tom and my two cozens Scotts, he and she, the
first time they were ever here.  And by and by in comes my uncle.  Wight
and Mr. Norbury, and they sat with us a while drinking, of wine, of which
I did give them plenty.  But the two would not stay supper, but the other
two did.  And we were as merry as I could be with people that I do wish
well to, but know not what discourse either to give them or find from
them.  We showed them our house from top to bottom, and had a good Turkey
roasted for our supper, and store of wine, and after supper sent them home
on foot, and so we to prayers and to bed.

21st.  Up betimes, my wife having a mind to have gone abroad with me, but
I had not because of troubling me, and so left her, though against my
will, to go and see her father and mother by herself, and I straight to my
Lord Sandwich's, and there I had a pretty kind salute from my Lord, and
went on to the Duke's, where my fellow officers by and by came, and so in
with him to his closet, and did our business, and so broke up, and I with
Sir W. Batten by coach to Salisbury Court, and there spoke with Clerk our
Solicitor about Field's business, and so parted, and I to Mrs. Turner's,
and there saw the achievement pretty well set up, and it is well done.
Thence I on foot to Charing Crosse to the ordinary, and there, dined,
meeting Mr. Gauden and Creed.  Here variety of talk but to no great
purpose.  After dinner won a wager of a payre of gloves of a crowne of Mr.
Gauden upon some words in his contract for victualling. There parted in
the street with them, and I to my Lord's, but he not being within, took
coach, and, being directed by sight of bills upon the walls, I did go to
Shoe Lane to see a cocke-fighting at a new pit there, a sport I was never
at in my life; but, Lord! to see the strange variety of people, from
Parliament-man (by name Wildes, that was Deputy Governor of the Tower when
Robinson was Lord Mayor) to the poorest 'prentices, bakers, brewers,
butchers, draymen, and what not; and all these fellows one with another in
swearing, cursing, and betting.  I soon had enough of it, and yet I would
not but have seen it once, it being strange to observe the nature of these
poor creatures, how they will fight till they drop down dead upon the
table, and strike after they are ready to give up the ghost, not offering
to run away when they are weary or wounded past doing further, whereas
where a dunghill brood comes he will, after a sharp stroke that pricks
him, run off the stage, and then they wring off his neck without more ado,
whereas the other they preserve, though their eyes be both out, for breed
only of a true cock of the game.  Sometimes a cock that has had ten to one
against him will by chance give an unlucky blow, will strike the other
starke dead in a moment, that he never stirs more; but the common rule is,
that though a cock neither runs nor dies, yet if any man will bet L10 to a
crowne, and nobody take the bet, the game is given over, and not sooner.
One thing more it is strange to see how people of this poor rank, that
look as if they had not bread to put in their mouths, shall bet three or
four pounds at one bet, and lose it, and yet bet as much the next battle
(so they call every match of two cocks), so that one of them will lose L10
or L20 at a meeting.  Thence, having enough of it, by coach to my Lord
Sandwich's, where I find him within with Captain Cooke and his boys, Dr.
Childe, Mr. Madge, and Mallard, playing and singing over my Lord's anthem
which he hath made to sing in the King's Chappell: my Lord saluted me
kindly and took me into the withdrawing-room, to hear it at a distance,
and indeed it sounds very finely, and is a good thing, I believe, to be
made by him, and they all commend it.  And after that was done Captain
Cooke and his two boys did sing some Italian songs, which I must in a word
say I think was fully the best musique that I ever yet heard in all my
life, and it was to me a very great pleasure to hear them.  After all
musique ended, my Lord going to White Hall, I went along with him, and
made a desire for to have his coach to go along with my cozen Edward
Pepys's hearse through the City on Wednesday next, which he granted me
presently, though he cannot yet come to speak to me in the familiar stile
that he did use to do, nor can I expect it.  But I was the willinger of
this occasion to see whether he would deny me or no, which he would I
believe had he been at open defyance against me.  Being not a little
pleased with all this, though I yet see my Lord is not right yet, I
thanked his Lordship and parted with him in White Hall.  I back to my
Lord's, and there took up W. Howe in a coach, and carried him as far as
the Half Moone, and there set him down. By the way, talking of my Lord,
who is come another and a better man than he was lately, and God be
praised for it, and he says that I shall find my Lord as he used to be to
me, of which I have good hopes, but I shall beware of him, I mean W. Howe,
how I trust him, for I perceive he is not so discreet as I took him for,
for he has told Captain Ferrers (as Mr. Moore tells me) of my letter to my
Lord, which troubles me, for fear my Lord should think that I might have
told him.  So called with my coach at my wife's brother's lodging, but she
was gone newly in a coach homewards, and so I drove hard and overtook her
at Temple Bar, and there paid off mine, and went home with her in her
coach.  She tells me how there is a sad house among her friends.  Her
brother's wife proves very unquiet, and so her mother is, gone back to be
with her husband and leave the young couple to themselves, and great
trouble, and I fear great want, will be among them, I pray keep me from
being troubled with them.  At home to put on my gowne and to my office,
and there set down this day's Journall, and by and by comes Mrs. Owen,
Captain Allen's daughter, and causes me to stay while the papers relating
to her husband's place, bought of his father, be copied out because of her
going by this morning's tide home to Chatham.  Which vexes me, but there
is no help for it.  I home to supper while a young [man] that she brought
with her did copy out the things, and then I to the office again and
dispatched her, and so home to bed.

22nd.  Up and there comes my she cozen Angier, of Cambridge, to me to
speak about her son.  But though I love them, and have reason so to do,
yet, Lord!  to consider how cold I am to speak to her, for fear of giving
her too much hopes of expecting either money or anything else from me
besides my care of her son.  I let her go without drinking, though that
was against my will, being forced to hasten to the office, where we sat
all the morning, and at noon I to Sir R. Ford's, where Sir R. Browne (a
dull but it seems upon action a hot man), and he and I met upon setting a
price upon the freight of a barge sent to France to the Duchess of
Orleans.  And here by discourse I find them greatly crying out against the
choice of Sir J. Cutler to be Treasurer for Paul's upon condition that he
give L1500 towards it, and it seems he did give it upon condition that he
might be Treasurer for the work, which they say will be worth three times
as much money, and talk as if his being chosen to the office will make
people backward to give, but I think him as likely a man as either of
them, or better.  The business being done we parted, Sir R. Ford never
inviting me to dine with him at all, and I was not sorry for it.  Home and
dined.  I had a letter from W. Howe that my Lord hath ordered his coach
and six horses for me to-morrow, which pleases me mightily to think that
my Lord should do so much, hoping thereby that his anger is a little over.
After dinner abroad with my wife by coach to Westminster, and set her at
Mrs. Hunt's while I about my business, having in our way met with Captain
Ferrers luckily to speak to him about my coach, who was going in all haste
thither, and I perceive the King and Duke and all the Court was going to
the Duke's playhouse to see "Henry VIII."  acted, which is said to be an
admirable play.  But, Lord! to see how near I was to have broken my oathe,
or run the hazard of 20s. losse, so much my nature was hot to have gone
thither; but I did not go, but having spoke with W. Howe and known how my
Lord did do this kindly as I would have it, I did go to Westminster Hall,
and there met Hawley, and walked a great while with him.  Among other
discourse encouraging him to pursue his love to Mrs. Lane, while God knows
I had a roguish meaning in it.  Thence calling my wife home by coach,
calling at several places, and to my office, where late, and so home to
supper and to bed.  This day I hear for certain that my Lady Castlemaine
is turned Papist, which the Queene for all do not much like, thinking that
she do it not for conscience sake.  I heard to-day of a great fray lately
between Sir H. Finch's coachman, who struck with his whip a coachman of
the King's to the losse of one of his eyes; at which the people of the
Exchange seeming to laugh and make sport with some words of contempt to
him, my Lord Chamberlin did come from the King to shut up the 'Change, and
by the help of a justice, did it; but upon petition to the King it was
opened again.

23rd.  Up betimes and my wife; and being in as mourning a dress as we
could, at present, without cost, put ourselves into, we by Sir W. Pen's
coach to Mrs. Turner's, at Salisbury Court, where I find my Lord's coach
and six horses.  We staid till almost eleven o'clock, and much company
came, and anon, the corps being put into the hearse, and the scutcheons
set upon it, we all took coach, and I and my wife and Auditor Beale in my
Lord Sandwich's coach, and went next to Mrs. Turner's mourning coach, and
so through all the City and Shoreditch, I believe about twenty coaches,
and four or five with six and four horses.  Being come thither, I made up
to the mourners, and bidding them a good journey, I took leave and back
again, and setting my wife into a hackney out of Bishopsgate Street, I
sent her home, and I to the 'Change and Auditor Beale about his business.
Did much business at the 'Change, and so home to dinner, and then to my
office, and there late doing business also to my great content to see God
bless me in my place and opening honest ways, I hope to get a little money
to lay up and yet to live handsomely.  So to supper and to bed.  My wife
having strange fits of the toothache, some times on this, and by and by on
that side of her tooth, which is not common.

24th.  Up betimes; and though it was a most foggy morning, and cold, yet
with a gally down to Eriffe, several times being at a loss whither we
went.  There I mustered two ships of the King's, lent by him to the Guiny
Company, which are manned better than ours at far less wages.  Thence on
board two of the King's, one of them the "Leopard," Captain Beech, who I
find an able and serious man.  He received me civilly, and his wife was
there, a very well bred and knowing woman, born at Antwerp, but speaks as
good English as myself, and an ingenious woman.  Here was also Sir G.
Carteret's son, who I find a pretty, but very talking man, but good
humour.  Thence back again, entertaining myself upon my sliding rule with
great content, and called at Woolwich, where Mr. Chr. Pett having an
opportunity of being alone did tell me his mind about several things he
thought I was offended with him in, and told me of my kindness to his
assistant.  I did give him such an answer as I thought was fit and left
him well satisfied, he offering to do me all the service, either by
draughts or modells that I should desire.  Thence straight home, being
very cold, but yet well, I thank God, and at home found my wife making
mince pies, and by and by comes in Captain Ferrers to see us, and, among
other talke, tells us of the goodness of the new play of "Henry VIII.,"
which makes me think [it] long till my time is out; but I hope before I go
I shall set myself such a stint as I may not forget myself as I have
hitherto done till I was forced for these months last past wholly to
forbid myself the seeing of one.  He gone I to my office and there late
writing and reading, and so home to bed.

25th (Christmas day).  Lay long talking pleasantly with my wife, but among
other things she begun, I know not whether by design or chance, to enquire
what she should do if I should by any accident die, to which I did give
her some slight answer; but shall make good use of it to bring myself to
some settlement for her sake, by making a will as soon as I can.  Up and
to church, where Mr. Mills made an ordinary sermon, and so home and dined
with great pleasure with my wife, and all the afternoon first looking out
at window and seeing the boys playing at many several sports in our back
yard by Sir W. Pen's, which reminded me of my own former times, and then I
began to read to my wife upon the globes with great pleasure and to good
purpose, for it will be pleasant to her and to me to have her understand
these things.  In the evening at the office, where I staid late reading
Rushworth, which is a most excellent collection of the beginning of the
late quarrels in this kingdom, and so home to supper and to bed, with good
content of mind.

26th.  Up and walked forth first to the Minerys to Brown's, and there with
great pleasure saw and bespoke several instruments, and so to Cornhill to
Mr. Cades, and there went up into his warehouse to look for a map or two,
and there finding great plenty of good pictures, God forgive me! how my
mind run upon them, and bought a little one for my wife's closett
presently, and concluded presently of buying L10 worth, upon condition he
would give me the buying of them.  Now it is true I did still within me
resolve to make the King one way or other pay for them, though I saved it
to him another way, yet I find myself too forward to fix upon the expense,
and came away with a resolution of buying them, but do hope that I shall
not upon second thoughts do it without a way made out before I buy them to
myself how to do [it] without charge to my main stock.  Thence to the
Coffee-house, and sat long in good discourse with some gentlemen
concerning the Roman Empire.  So home and found Mr. Hollyard there, and he
stayed and dined with us, we having a pheasant to dinner.  He gone, I all
the afternoon with my wife to cards, and, God forgive me! to see how the
very discourse of plays, which I shall be at liberty to see after New
Year's Day next, do set my mind upon them, but I must be forced to stint
myself very strictly before I begin, or else I fear I shall spoil all.  In
the evening came my aunt Wight's kinswoman to see how my wife do, with a
compliment from my aunt, which I take kindly as it is unusual for her to
do it, but I do perceive my uncle is very kind to me of late.  So to my
office writing letters, and then to read and make an end of Rushworth,
which I did, and do say that it is a book the most worth reading for a man
of my condition or any man that hopes to come to any publique condition in
the world that I do know.  So home to supper and to bed.

27th.  Up and to church alone and so home to dinner with my wife very
pleasant and pleased with one another's company, and in our general
enjoyment one of another, better we think than most other couples do.  So
after dinner to the French church, but came too late, and so back to our
owne church, where I slept all the sermon the Scott preaching, and so
home, and in the evening Sir J. Minnes and I met at Sir W. Pen's about
ordering some business of the Navy, and so I home to supper, discourse,
prayers, and bed.

28th.  Up and by coach to my Lord's lodgings, but he was gone abroad, so I
lost my pains, but, however, walking through White Hall I heard the King
was gone to play at Tennis, so I down to the new Tennis Court; and saw him
and Sir Arthur Slingsby play against my Lord of Suffolke and my Lord
Chesterfield.  The King beat three, and lost two sets, they all, and he
particularly playing well, I thought.  Thence went and spoke with the Duke
of Albemarle about his wound at Newhall, but I find him a heavy dull man,
methinks, by his answers to me.  Thence to the King's Head ordinary and
there dined, and found Creed there, but we met and dined and parted
without any thing more than "How do you?"  After dinner straight on foot
to Mr. Hollyard's, and there paid him L3 in full for his physic and work
to my wife .  .  .  .  but whether it is cured for ever or no I cannot
tell, but he says it will never come to anything, though it may be it may
ooze now and then a little.  So home and found my wife gone out with Will
(whom she sent for as she do now a days upon occasion) to have a tooth
drawn, she having it seems been in great pain all day, and at night came
home with it drawn, and pretty well.  This evening I had a stove brought
me to the office to try, but it being an old one it smokes as much as if
there was nothing but a hearth as I had before, but it may be great new
ones do not, and therefore I must enquire further.  So at night home to
supper and to bed.  The Duchesse of York is fallen sicke of the meazles.

29th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning sitting, at noon to the
'change, and there I found and brought home Mr. Pierse the surgeon to
dinner.  Where I found also Mr. Luellin and Mount, and merry at dinner,
but their discourse so free .  .  .  .  that I was weary of them.  But
after dinner Luellin took me up to my chamber to give me L50 for the
service I did him, though not so great as he expected and I intended. But
I told him that I would not sell my liberty to any man.  If he would give
me any thing by another's hand I would endeavour to deserve it, but I will
never give him himself thanks for it, not acknowledging the receiving of
any, which he told me was reasonable.  I did also tell him that neither
this nor any thing should make me to do any thing that should not be for
the King's service besides.  So we parted and left them three at home with
my wife going to cards, and I to my office and there staid late.  Sir W.
Pen came like a cunning rogue to sit and talk with me about office
business and freely about the Comptroller's business of the office, to
which I did give him free answers and let him make the best of them.  But
I know him to be a knave, and do say nothing that I fear to have said
again.  Anon came Sir W. Warren, and after talking of his business of the
masts and helping me to understand some foul dealing in the business of
Woods we fell to other talk, and particularly to speak of some means how
to part this great familiarity between Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes,
and it is easy to do by any good friend of Sir J. Minnes to whom it will
be a good service, and he thinks that Sir J. Denham will be a proper man
for it, and so do I. So after other discourse we parted, and I home and to
bed.

30th.  Up betimes and by coach to my Lord Sandwich, who I met going out,
and he did aske me how his cozen, my wife; did, the first time he hath
done so since his being offended, and, in my conscience, he would be glad
to be free with me again, but he knows not how to begin.  So he went out,
and I through the garden to Mr. Coventry, where I saw Mr. Ch. Pett
bringing him a modell, and indeed it is a pretty one, for a New Year's
gift; but I think the work not better done than mine.  With him by coach
to London, with good and friendly discourse of business and against Sir W.
Batten and his foul dealings.  So leaving him at the Guiny House I to the
Coffee House, whither came Mr. Grant and Sir W. Petty, with whom I talked,
and so did many, almost all the house there, about his new vessel, wherein
he did give me such satisfaction in every point that I am almost confident
she will prove an admirable invention.  So home to dinner, and after being
upon the 'Change awhile I dined with my wife, who took physique to-day,
and so to my office, and there all the afternoon till late at night about
office business, and so to supper and to bed.

31st.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and among other
things Sir W. Warren came about some contract, and there did at the open
table, Sir W. Batten not being there; openly defy him, and insisted how
Sir W. Batten did endeavour to oppose him in everything that he offered.
Sir W. Pen took him up for it, like a counterfeit rogue, though I know he
was as much pleased to hear him talk so as any man there.  But upon his
speaking no more was said but to the business.  At noon we broke up and I
to the 'Change awhile, and so home again to dinner, my head aching
mightily with being overcharged with business.  We had to dinner, my wife
and I, a fine turkey and a mince pie, and dined in state, poor wretch, she
and I, and have thus kept our Christmas together all alone almost, having
not once been out, but to-morrow my vowes are all out as to plays and
wine, but I hope I shall not be long before I come to new ones, so much
good, and God's blessing, I find to have attended them. Thence to the
office and did several businesses and answered several people, but my head
aching and it being my great night of accounts, I went forth, took coach,
and to my brother's, but he was not within, and so I back again and sat an
hour or two at the Coffee [house], hearing some simple discourse about
Quakers being charmed by a string about their wrists, and so home, and
after a little while at my office, I home and supped, and so had a good
fire in my chamber and there sat till 4 o'clock in the morning making up
my accounts and writing this last Journall of the year.  And first I bless
God I do, after a large expense, even this month, by reason of Christmas,
and some payments to my father, and other things extraordinary, find that
I am worth in money, besides all my household stuff, or any thing of
Brampton, above L800, whereof in my Lord Sandwich's hand, L700, and the
rest in my hand.  So that there is not above L5 of all my estate in money
at this minute out of my hands and my Lord's.  For which the good God be
pleased to give me a thankful heart and a mind careful to preserve this
and increase it.  I do live at my lodgings in the Navy Office, my family
being, besides my wife and I, Jane Gentleman, Besse, our excellent,
good-natured cookmayde, and Susan, a little girle, having neither man nor
boy, nor like to have again a good while, living now in most perfect
content and quiett, and very frugally also; my health pretty good, but
only that I have been much troubled with a costiveness which I am
labouring to get away, and have hopes of doing it.  At the office I am
well, though envied to the devil by Sir William Batten, who hates me to
death, but cannot hurt me.  The rest either love me, or at least do not
show otherwise, though I know Sir W. Pen to be a false knave touching me,
though he seems fair.  My father and mother well in the country; and at
this time the young ladies of Hinchingbroke with them, their house having
the small-pox in it.  The Queene after a long and sore sicknesse is become
well again; and the King minds his mistresse a little too much, if it
pleased God!  but I hope all things will go well, and in the Navy
particularly, wherein I shall do my duty whatever comes of it.  The great
talke is the designs of the King of France, whether against the Pope or
King of Spayne nobody knows; but a great and a most promising Prince he
is, and all the Princes of Europe have their eye upon him.  My wife's
brother come to great unhappiness by the ill-disposition, my wife says, of
his wife, and her poverty, which she now professes, after all her
husband's pretence of a great fortune, but I see none of them, at least
they come not to trouble me.  At present I am concerned for my cozen
Angier, of Cambridge, lately broke in his trade, and this day am sending
his son John, a very rogue, to sea.  My brother Tom I know not what to
think of, for I cannot hear whether he minds his business or not; and my
brother John at Cambridge, with as little hopes of doing good there, for
when he was here he did give me great cause of dissatisfaction with his
manner of life.  Pall with my father, and God knows what she do there, or
what will become of her, for I have not anything yet to spare her, and she
grows now old, and must be disposed of one way or other.  The Duchesse of
York, at this time, sicke of the meazles, but is growing well again.  The
Turke very far entered into Germany, and all that part of the world at a
losse what to expect from his proceedings.  Myself, blessed be God!  in a
good way, and design and resolution of sticking to my business to get a
little money with doing the best service I can to the King also; which God
continue!  So ends the old year.

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Again that she spoke but somewhat of what she had in her heart
     Better we think than most other couples do
     Compliment from my aunt, which I take kindly as it is unusual
     Did go to Shoe Lane to see a cocke-fighting at a new pit there
     Dined at home alone, a good calves head boiled and dumplings
     Every man looking after himself, and his owne lust and luxury
     Excommunications, which they send upon the least occasions
     Expectation of profit will have its force
     King was gone to play at Tennis
     Opening his mind to him as of one that may hereafter be his foe
     Pen was then turned Quaker
     Persuade me that she should prove with child since last night
     Pride and debauchery of the present clergy
     Quakers being charmed by a string about their wrists
     Taught my wife some part of subtraction
     To bed with discontent she yielded to me and began to be fond

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS FOR PEPY'S DIARY 1963 COMPLETE:

     A woman sober, and no high-flyer, as he calls it
     Academy was dissolved by order of the Pope
     After oysters, at first course, a hash of rabbits, a lamb
     After some pleasant talk, my wife, Ashwell, and I to bed
     After awhile I caressed her and parted seeming friends
     Again that she spoke but somewhat of what she had in her heart
     And there, did what I would with her
     And so to sleep till the morning, but was bit cruelly
     And so to bed and there entertained her with great content
     And so to bed, my father lying with me in Ashwell's bed
     Apprehend about one hundred Quakers
     At last we pretty good friends
     Before I sent my boy out with them, I beat him for a lie
     Being cleansed of lice this day by my wife
     Better we think than most other couples do
     Book itself, and both it and them not worth a turd
     But a woful rude rabble there was, and such noises
     Compliment from my aunt, which I take kindly as it is unusual
     Conceited, but that's no matter to me
     Content as to be at our own home, after being abroad awhile
     Dare not oppose it alone for making an enemy and do no good
     Did so watch to see my wife put on drawers, which (she did)
     Did go to Shoe Lane to see a cocke-fighting at a new pit there
     Did find none of them within, which I was glad of
     Dined at home alone, a good calves head boiled and dumplings
     Dinner was great, and most neatly dressed
     Dog attending us, which made us all merry again
     Dr. Calamy is this day sent to Newgate for preaching
     Duodecimal arithmetique
     Eat a mouthful of pye at home to stay my stomach
     Employed by the fencers to play prizes at
     Enquiring into the selling of places do trouble a great many
     Every man looking after himself, and his owne lust and luxury
     Every small thing is enough now-a-days to bring a difference
     Excommunications, which they send upon the least occasions
     Expectation of profit will have its force
     Familiarity with her other servants is it that spoils them all
     Fear it may do him no good, but me hurt
     Fearful that I might not go far enough with my hat off
     Feverish, and hath sent for Mr. Pierce to let him blood
     Found guilty, and likely will be hanged (for stealing spoons)
     Found him a fool, as he ever was, or worse
     Galileo's air thermometer, made before 1597
     Give her a Lobster and do so touse her and feel her all over
     God knows that I do not find honesty enough in my own mind
     Goes with his guards with him publiquely, and his trumpets
     Goes down the wind in honour as well as every thing else
     Great plot which was lately discovered in Ireland
     Had a good supper of an oxe's cheek
     Half a pint of Rhenish wine at the Still-yard, mixed with beer
     Hanged with a silken halter
     He is too wise to be made a friend of
     He hoped he should live to see her "ugly and willing"
     He having made good promises, though I fear his performance
     His readiness to speak spoilt all
     How highly the Presbyters do talk in the coffeehouses still
     I calling her beggar, and she me pricklouse, which vexed me
     I and she never were so heartily angry in our lives as to-day
     I do not find other people so willing to do business as myself
     I slept most of the sermon
     I was very angry, and resolve to beat him to-morrow
     Ill humour to be so against that which all the world cries up
     In some churches there was hardly ten people in the whole church
     Insurrection of the Catholiques there
     It must be the old ones that must do any good
     Jealous, though God knows I have no great reason
     John has got a wife, and for that he intends to part with him
     Justice of proceeding not to condemn a man unheard
     Keep at interest, which is a good, quiett, and easy profit
     King was gone to play at Tennis
     Lady Castlemaine hath all the King's Christmas presents
     Lay long in bed talking and pleasing myself with my wife
     Lay very long with my wife in bed talking with great pleasure
     Lay chiding, and then pleased with my wife in bed
     Liability of a husband to pay for goods supplied his wife
     Many thousands in a little time go out of England
     Matters in Ireland are full of discontent
     Money, which sweetens all things
     Most flat dead sermon, both for matter and manner of delivery
     Much discourse, but little to be learned
     My maid Susan ill, or would be thought so
     My wife has got too great head to be brought down soon
     My wife and her maid Ashwell had between them spilled the pot.  .  .
.
     No more matter being made of the death of one than another
     No sense nor grammar, yet in as good words that ever I saw
     Nor will yield that the Papists have any ground given them
     Nor would become obliged too much to any
     Nothing in the world done with true integrity
     Nothing of any truth and sincerity, but mere envy and design
     Nothing is to be got without offending God and the King
     Once a week or so I know a gentleman must go .  .  .  .
     Opening his mind to him as of one that may hereafter be his foe
     Out of an itch to look upon the sluts there
     Pain of the stone, and makes bloody water with great pain
     Parliament do agree to throw down Popery
     Pen was then turned Quaker
     Persuade me that she should prove with child since last night
     Plague is much in Amsterdam, and we in fears of it here
     Pride and debauchery of the present clergy
     Pride himself too much in it
     Quakers being charmed by a string about their wrists
     Rabbit not half roasted, which made me angry with my wife
     Railed bitterly ever and anon against John Calvin
     Reading my Latin grammar, which I perceive I have great need
     Reckon nothing money but when it is in the bank
     Resolve to live well and die a beggar
     Sad for want of my wife, whom I love with all my heart
     Saw his people go up and down louseing themselves
     Scholler, that would needs put in his discourse (every occasion)
     Scholler, but, it may be, thinks himself to be too much so
     See how time and example may alter a man
     See whether my wife did wear drawers to-day as she used to do
     Sent me last night, as a bribe, a barrel of sturgeon
     Servant of the King's pleasures too, as well as business
     She was so ill as to be shaved and pidgeons put to her feet
     She is conceited that she do well already
     She used the word devil, which vexed me
     She begins not at all to take pleasure in me or study to please
     So home, and mighty friends with my wife again
     So much is it against my nature to owe anything to any body
     So home to supper and bed with my father
     So home, and after supper did wash my feet, and so to bed
     So neat and kind one to another
     Softly up to see whether any of the beds were out of order or no
     Sorry for doing it now, because of obliging me to do the like
     Sporting in my fancy with the Queen
     Statute against selling of offices
     Talk very highly of liberty of conscience
     Taught my wife some part of subtraction
     That I might say I saw no money in the paper
     That he is not able to live almost with her
     The plague is got to Amsterdam, brought by a ship from Argier
     The goldsmith, he being one of the jury to-morrow
     The house was full of citizens, and so the less pleasant
     Thence by coach, with a mad coachman, that drove like mad
     There is no passing but by coach in the streets, and hardly that
     There is no man almost in the City cares a turd for him
     Therefore ought not to expect more justice from her
     These young Lords are not fit to do any service abroad
     They were so false spelt that I was ashamed of them
     They say now a common mistress to the King
     Things being dear and little attendance to be had we went away
     Though it be but little, yet I do get ground every month
     Through the Fleete Ally to see a couple of pretty [strumpets]
     To bed with discontent she yielded to me and began to be fond
     Towzing her and doing what I would, but the last thing of all
     Upon a small temptation I could be false to her
     Vexed at my wife's neglect in leaving of her scarf
     Waked this morning between four and five by my blackbird
     We having no luck in maids now-a-days
     Who is over head and eares in getting her house up
     Whose voice I am not to be reconciled
     Wife and the dancing-master alone above, not dancing but talking
     Wine, new and old, with labells pasted upon each bottle
     With much ado in an hour getting a coach home
     Would not make my coming troublesome to any
     Yet it was her fault not to see that I did take them


                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.

                                1664 N.S.

January 1st, 1663-64.

Went to bed between 4 and 5 in the morning with my mind in good temper of
satisfaction and slept till about 8, that many people came to speak with
me.  Among others one came with the best New Year's gift that ever I had,
namely from Mr. Deering, with a bill of exchange drawn upon himself for
the payment of L50 to Mr. Luellin.  It being for my use with a letter of
compliment.  I am not resolved what or how to do in this business, but I
conclude it is an extraordinary good new year's gift, though I do not take
the whole, or if I do then give some of it to Luellin.  By and by comes
Captain Allen and his son Jowles and his wife, who continues pretty still.
They would have had me set my hand to a certificate for his loyalty, and I
know not what his ability for any employment.  But I did not think it fit,
but did give them a pleasing denial, and after sitting with me an hour
they went away.  Several others came to me about business, and then being
to dine at my uncle Wight's I went to the Coffee-house, sending my wife by
Will, and there staid talking an hour with Coll. Middleton, and others,
and among other things about a very rich widow, young and handsome, of one
Sir Nicholas Gold's, a merchant, lately fallen, and of great courtiers
that already look after her: her husband not dead a week yet.  She is
reckoned worth L80,000.  Thence to my uncle Wight's, where Dr. of-----,
among others, dined, and his wife, a seeming proud conceited woman, I know
not what to make of her, but the Dr's. discourse did please me very well
about the disease of the stone, above all things extolling Turpentine,
which he told me how it may be taken in pills with great ease.  There was
brought to table a hot pie made of a swan I sent them yesterday, given me
by Mr. Howe, but we did not eat any of it.  But my wife and I rose from
table, pretending business, and went to the Duke's house, the first play I
have been at these six months, according to my last vowe, and here saw the
so much cried-up play of "Henry the Eighth;" which, though I went with
resolution to like it, is so simple a thing made up of a great many
patches, that, besides the shows and processions in it, there is nothing
in the world good or well done.  Thence mightily dissatisfied back at
night to my uncle Wight's, and supped with them, but against my stomach
out of the offence the sight of my aunt's hands gives me, and ending
supper with a mighty laugh, the greatest I have had these many months, at
my uncle's being out in his grace after meat, we rose and broke up, and my
wife and I home and to bed, being sleepy since last night.

2nd.  Up and to the office, and there sitting all the morning, and at noon
to the 'Change, in my going met with Luellin and told him how I had
received a letter and bill for L50 from Mr. Deering, and delivered it to
him, which he told me he would receive for me.  To which I consented,
though professed not to desire it if he do not consider himself
sufficiently able by the service I have done, and that it is rather my
desire to have nothing till he be further sensible of my service.  From
the 'Change I brought him home and dined with us, and after dinner I took
my wife out, for I do find that I am not able to conquer myself as to
going to plays till I come to some new vowe concerning it, and that I am
now come, that is to say, that I will not see above one in a month at any
of the publique theatres till the sum of 50s. be spent, and then none
before New Year's Day next, unless that I do become worth L1000 sooner
than then, and then am free to come to some other terms, and so leaving
him in Lombard Street I took her to the King's house, and there met Mr.
Nicholson, my old colleague, and saw "The Usurper," which is no good play,
though better than what I saw yesterday.  However, we rose unsatisfied,
and took coach and home, and I to the office late writing letters, and so
to supper and to bed.

3rd (Lord's day).  Lay long in bed, and then rose and with a fire in my
chamber staid within all day, looking over and settling my accounts in
good order, by examining all my books, and the kitchen books, and I find
that though the proper profit of my last year was but L305, yet I did by
other gain make it up L444., which in every part of it was unforeseen of
me, and therefore it was a strange oversight for lack of examining my
expenses that I should spend L690 this year, but for the time to come I
have so distinctly settled all my accounts in writing and the particulars
of all my several layings out, that I do hope I shall hereafter make a
better judgment of my spendings than ever.  I dined with my wife in her
chamber, she in bed, and then down again and till 11 at night, and broke
up and to bed with great content, but could not make an end of writing
over my vows as I purposed, but I am agreed in every thing how to order
myself for the year to come, which I trust in God will be much for my
good.  So up to prayers and to bed.  This evening Sir W. Pen came to
invite me against next Wednesday, being Twelfth day, to his usual feast,
his wedding day.

4th.  Up betimes, and my wife being ready, and her mayd Besse and the
girl, I carried them by coach and set them all down in Covent Garden and
there left them, and I to my Lord Sandwich's lodgings, but he not being
up, I to the Duke's chamber, and there by and by to his closett, where
since his lady was ill, a little red bed of velvet is brought for him to
lie alone, which is a very pretty one.  After doing business here, I to my
Lord's again, and there spoke with him, and he seems now almost friends
again as he used to be.  Here meeting Mr. Pierce, the chyrurgeon, he told
me among other Court newes, how the Queene is very well again, and the
King lay with her on Saturday night last; and that she speaks now very
pretty English, and makes her sense out now and then with pretty phrazes:
as among others this is mightily cried up; that, meaning to say that she
did not like such a horse so well as the rest, he being too prancing and
full of tricks, she said he did make too much vanity. Thence to the Tennis
Court, after I had spent a little time in Westminster Hall, thinking to
have met with Mrs. Lane, but I could not and am glad of it, and there saw
the King play at Tennis and others: but to see how the King's play was
extolled without any cause at all, was a loathsome sight, though
sometimes, indeed, he did play very well and deserved to be commended; but
such open flattery is beastly.  Afterwards to St. James's Parke, being
unwilling to go to spend money at the ordinary, and there spent an hour or
two, it being a pleasant day, seeing people play at Pell Mell; where it
pleased me mightily to hear a gallant, lately come from France, swear at
one of his companions for suffering his man (a spruce blade) to be so
saucy as to strike a ball while his master was playing on the Mall.

     [When Egerton was Bishop of Durham, he often played at bowls with
     his guests on the public days.  On an occasion of this sort, a
     visitor happening to cross the lawn, one of the chaplains exclaimed,
     "You must not shake the green, for the bishop is going to bowl."-B.]

Thence took coach at White Hall and took up my wife, who is mighty sad to
think of her father, who is going into Germany against the Turkes; but
what will become of her brother I know not.  He is so idle, and out of all
capacity, I think, to earn his bread.  Home and at my office till is at
night making my solemn vowes for the next year, which I trust in the Lord
I shall keep, but I fear I have a little too severely bound myself in some
things and in too many, for I fear I may forget some.  But however, I know
the worst, and shall by the blessing of God observe to perform or pay my
forfeits punctually.  So home and to bed with my mind at rest.

5th.  Up and to our office, where we sat all the morning, where my head
being willing to take in all business whatever, I am afraid I shall over
clogg myself with it.  But however, it is my desire to do my duty and
shall the willinger bear it.  At noon home and to the 'Change, where I met
with Luellin, who went off with me and parted to meet again at the
Coffeehouse, but missed.  So home and found him there, and Mr. Barrow came
to speak with me, so they both dined with me alone, my wife not being
ready, and after dinner I up in my chamber with Barrow to discourse about
matters of the yard with him, and his design of leaving the place, which I
am sorry for, and will prevent if I can.  He being gone then Luellin did
give me the L50 from Mr. Deering, which he do give me for my pains in his
business and what I may hereafter take for him, though there is not the
least word or deed I have yet been guilty of in his behalf but what I am
sure has been to the King's advantage and the profit of the service, nor
ever will.  And for this money I never did condition with him or expected
a farthing at the time when I did do him the service, nor have given any
receipt for it, it being brought me by Luellin, nor do purpose to give him
any thanks for it, but will wherein I can faithfully endeavour to see him
have the privilege of his Patent as the King's merchant.  I did give
Luellin two pieces in gold for a pair of gloves for his kindness herein.
Then he being gone, I to my office, where busy till late at night, that
through my room being over confounded in business I could stay there no
longer, but went home, and after a little supper to bed.

6th (Twelfth day).  Up and to my office, where very busy all the morning,
being indeed over loaded with it through my own desire of doing all I can.
At noon to the 'Change, but did little, and so home to dinner with my poor
wife, and after dinner read a lecture to her in Geography, which she takes
very prettily and with great pleasure to her and me to teach her, and so
to the office again, where as busy as ever in my life, one thing after
another, and answering people's business, particularly drawing up things
about Mr. Wood's masts, which I expect to have a quarrel about with Sir W.
Batten before it be ended, but I care not. At night home to my wife, to
supper, discourse, prayers, and to bed. This morning I began a practice
which I find by the ease I do it with that I shall continue, it saving me
money and time; that is, to trimme myself with a razer: which pleases me
mightily.

7th.  Up, putting on my best clothes and to the office, where all the
morning we sat busy, among other things upon Mr. Wood's performance of his
contract for masts, wherein I was mightily concerned, but I think was
found all along in the right, and shall have my desire in it to the King's
advantage.  At noon, all of us to dinner to Sir W. Pen's, where a very
handsome dinner, Sir J. Lawson among others, and his lady and his
daughter, a very pretty lady and of good deportment, with looking upon
whom I was greatly pleased, the rest of the company of the women were all
of our own house, of no satisfaction or pleasure at all.  My wife was not
there, being not well enough, nor had any great mind.  But to see how Sir
W. Pen imitates me in everything, even in his having his chimney piece in
his dining room the same with that in my wife's closett, and in every
thing else I perceive wherein he can.  But to see again how he was out in
one compliment: he lets alone drinking any of the ladies' healths that
were there, my Lady Batten and Lawson, till he had begun with my Lady
Carteret, who was absent, and that was well enough, and then Mr.
Coventry's mistresse, at which he was ashamed, and would not have had him
have drunk it, at least before the ladies present, but his policy, as he
thought, was such that he would do it.  After dinner by coach with Sir G.
Carteret and Sir J. Minnes by appointment to Auditor Beale's in Salisbury
Court, and there we did with great content look over some old ledgers to
see in what manner they were kept, and indeed it was in an extraordinary
good method, and such as (at least out of design to keep them employed) I
do persuade Sir J. Minnes to go upon, which will at least do as much good
it may be to keep them for want of something to do from envying those that
do something.  Thence calling to see whether Mrs. Turner was returned,
which she is, and I spoke one word only to her, and away again by coach
home and to my office, where late, and then home to supper and bed.

8th.  Up and all the morning at my office and with Sir J. Minnes,
directing him and Mr. Turner about keeping of their books according to
yesterday's work, wherein I shall make them work enough.  At noon to the
'Change, and there long, and from thence by appointment took Luellin,
Mount, and W. Symons, and Mr. Pierce, the chirurgeon, home to dinner with
me and were merry.  But, Lord! to hear how W. Symons do commend and look
sadly and then talk bawdily and merrily, though his wife was dead but the
other day, would make a dogg laugh.  After dinner I did go in further part
of kindness to Luellin for his kindness about Deering's L50 which he
procured me the other day of him.  We spent all the afternoon together and
then they to cards with my wife, who this day put on her Indian blue gowne
which is very pretty, where I left them for an hour, and to my office, and
then to them again, and by and by they went away at night, and so I again
to my office to perfect a letter to Mr. Coventry about Department
Treasurers, wherein I please myself and hope to give him content and do
the King service therein.  So having done, I home and to teach my wife a
new lesson in the globes, and to supper, and to bed.  We had great
pleasure this afternoon; among other things, to talk of our old passages
together in Cromwell's time; and how W. Symons did make me laugh and
wonder to-day when he told me how he had made shift to keep in, in good
esteem and employment, through eight governments in one year (the dear
1659, which were indeed, and he did name them all), and then failed
unhappy in the ninth, viz. that of the King's coming in.  He made good to
me the story which Luellin did tell me the other day, of his wife upon her
death-bed; how she dreamt of her uncle Scobell, and did foretell, from
some discourse she had with him, that she should die four days thence, and
not sooner, and did all along say so, and did so.  Upon the 'Change a
great talke there was of one Mr. Tryan, an old man, a merchant in
Lyme-Streete, robbed last night (his man and mayde being gone out after he
was a-bed), and gagged and robbed of L1050 in money and about L4000 in
jewells, which he had in his house as security for money.  It is believed
by many circumstances that his man is guilty of confederacy, by their
ready going to his secret till in his desk, wherein the key of his
cash-chest lay.

9th.  Up (my underlip being mightily swelled, I know not how but by
overrubbing it, it itching) and to the office, where we sat all the
morning, and at noon I home to dinner, and by discourse with my wife
thought upon inviting my Lord Sandwich to a dinner shortly.  It will cost
me at least ten or twelve pounds; but, however, some arguments of prudence
I have, which however I shall think again upon before I proceed to that
expence.  After dinner by coach I carried my wife and Jane to Westminster,
leaving her at Mr. Hunt's, and I to Westminster Hall, and there visited
Mrs. Lane, and by appointment went out and met her at the Trumpet, Mrs.
Hare's, but the room being damp we went to the Bell tavern, and there I
had her company, but could not do as I used to do (yet nothing but what
was honest) .  .  .  .  .  So I to talk about her having Hawley, she told
me flatly no, she could not love him.  I took occasion to enquire of
Howlett's daughter, with whom I have a mind to meet a little to see what
mettle the young wench is made of, being very pretty, but she tells me she
is already betrothed to Mrs. Michell's son, and she in discourse tells me
more, that Mrs. Michell herself had a daughter before marriage, which is
now near thirty years old, a thing I could not have believed.  Thence
leading her to the Hall, I took coach and called my wife and her mayd, and
so to the New Exchange, where we bought several things of our pretty Mrs.
Dorothy Stacy, a pretty woman, and has the modestest look that ever I saw
in my life and manner of speech.  Thence called at Tom's and saw him
pretty well again, but has not been currant. So homeward, and called at
Ludgate, at Ashwell's uncle's, but she was not within, to have spoke to
her to have come to dress my wife at the time my Lord dines here.  So
straight home, calling for Walsingham's Manuals at my bookseller's to read
but not to buy, recommended for a pretty book by Sir W. Warren, whose
warrant however I do not much take till I do read it.  So home to supper
and to bed, my wife not being very well since she came home, being
troubled with a fainting fit, which she never yet had before since she was
my wife.

10th (Lord's day).  Lay in bed with my wife till 10 or 11 o'clock, having
been very sleepy all night.  So up, and my brother Tom being come to see
me, we to dinner, he telling me how Mrs. Turner found herself discontented
with her late bad journey, and not well taken by them in the country, they
not desiring her coming down, nor the burials of Mr. Edward Pepys's corps
there.  After dinner I to the office, where all the afternoon, and at
night my wife and I to my uncle Wight's, and there eat some of their swan
pie, which was good, and I invited them to my house to eat a roasted swan
on Tuesday next, which after I was come home did make a quarrels between
my wife and I, because she had appointed a wish to-morrow.  But, however,
we were friends again quickly.  So to bed. All our discourse to-night was
Mr. Tryan's late being robbed; and that Collonell Turner (a mad, swearing,
confident fellow, well known by all, and by me), one much indebted to this
man for his very livelihood, was the man that either did or plotted it;
and the money and things are found in his hand, and he and his wife now in
Newgate for it; of which we are all glad, so very a known rogue he was.

11th.  Waked this morning by 4 o'clock by my wife to call the mayds to
their wash, and what through my sleeping so long last night and vexation
for the lazy sluts lying so long again and their great wash, neither my
wife nor I could sleep one winke after that time till day, and then I rose
and by coach (taking Captain Grove with me and three bottles of Tent,
which I sent to Mrs. Lane by my promise on Saturday night last) to White
Hall, and there with the rest of our company to the Duke and did our
business, and thence to the Tennis Court till noon, and there saw several
great matches played, and so by invitation to St. James's; where, at Mr.
Coventry's chamber, I dined with my Lord Barkeley, Sir G. Carteret, Sir
Edward Turner, Sir Ellis Layton, and one Mr. Seymour, a fine gentleman;
were admirable good discourse of all sorts, pleasant and serious.  Thence
after dinner to White Hall, where the Duke being busy at the Guinny
business, the Duke of Albemarle, Sir W. Rider, Povy, Sir J. Lawson and I
to the Duke of Albemarle's lodgings, and there did some business, and so
to the Court again, and I to the Duke of York's lodgings, where the Guinny
company are choosing their assistants for the next year by ballotting.
Thence by coach with Sir J. Robinson, Lieutenant of the Tower, he set me
down at Cornhill, but, Lord!  the simple discourse that all the way we
had, he magnifying his great undertakings and cares that have been upon
him for these last two years, and how he commanded the city to the content
of all parties, when the loggerhead knows nothing almost that is sense.
Thence to the Coffee-house, whither comes Sir W. Petty and Captain Grant,
and we fell in talke (besides a young gentleman, I suppose a merchant, his
name Mr. Hill, that has travelled and I perceive is a master in most sorts
of musique and other things) of musique; the universal character; art of
memory; Granger's counterfeiting of hands and other most excellent
discourses to my great content, having not been in so good company a great
while, and had I time I should covet the acquaintance of that Mr. Hill.
This morning I stood by the King arguing with a pretty Quaker woman, that
delivered to him a desire of hers in writing.  The King showed her Sir J.
Minnes, as a man the fittest for her quaking religion, saying that his
beard was the stiffest thing about him, and again merrily said, looking
upon the length of her paper, that if all she desired was of that length
she might lose her desires; she modestly saying nothing till he begun
seriously to discourse with her, arguing the truth of his spirit against
hers; she replying still with these words, "O King!" and thou'd him all
along.  The general talke of the towne still is of Collonell Turner, about
the robbery; who, it is thought, will be hanged.  I heard the Duke of York
tell to-night, how letters are come that fifteen are condemned for the
late plot by the judges at York; and, among others, Captain Oates, against
whom it was proved that he drew his sword at his going out, and flinging
away the scabbard, said that he would either return victor or be hanged.
So home, where I found the house full of the washing and my wife mighty
angry about Will's being here to-day talking with her mayds, which she
overheard, idling of their time, and he telling what a good mayd my old
Jane was, and that she would never have her like again.  At which I was
angry, and after directing her to beat at least the little girl, I went to
the office and there reproved Will, who told me that he went thither by my
wife's order, she having commanded him to come thither on Monday morning.
Now God forgive me! how apt I am to be jealous of her as to this fellow,
and that she must needs take this time, when she knows I must be gone out
to the Duke, though methinks had she that mind she would never think it
discretion to tell me this story of him, to let me know that he was there,
much less to make me offended with him, to forbid him coming again.  But
this cursed humour I cannot cool in myself by all the reason I have, which
God forgive me for, and convince me of the folly of it, and the disquiet
it brings me.  So home, where, God be thanked, when I came to speak to my
wife my trouble of mind soon vanished, and to bed.  The house foul with
the washing and quite out of order against to-morrow's dinner.

12th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and at noon to
the 'Change awhile, and so home, getting things against dinner ready, and
anon comes my uncle Wight and my aunt, with their cozens Mary and Robert,
and by chance my uncle Thomas Pepys.  We had a good dinner, the chief dish
a swan roasted, and that excellent meate.  At, dinner and all day very
merry.  After dinner to cards, where till evening, then to the office a
little, and to cards again with them, and lost half-a-crowne. They being
gone, my wife did tell me how my uncle did this day accost her alone, and
spoke of his hoping she was with child, and kissing her earnestly told her
he should be very glad of it, and from all circumstances methinks he do
seem to have some intention of good to us, which I shall endeavour to
continue more than ever I did yet.  So to my office till late, and then
home to bed, after being at prayers, which is the first time after my late
vowe to say prayers in my family twice in every week.

13th.  Up and to my office a little, and then abroad to many several
places about business, among others to the geometrical instrument makers,
and through Bedlam (calling by the way at an old bookseller's and there
fell into looking over Spanish books and pitched upon some, till I thought
of my oathe when I was going to agree for them, and so with much ado got
myself out of the shop glad at my heart and so away) to the African House
to look upon their book of contracts for several commodities for my
information in the prices we give in the Navy.  So to the Coffee [house]
where extraordinary good discourse of Dr. Whistler's' upon my question
concerning the keeping of masts, he arguing against keeping them dry, by
showing the nature of corruption in bodies and the several ways thereof.
So to the 'Change, and thence with Sir W. Rider to the Trinity House to
dinner, and then home and to my office till night, and then with Mr. Bland
to Sir T. Viner's about pieces of eight for Sir J. Lawson, and so back to
my office, and there late upon business, and so home to supper and to bed.

14th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning, and at noon all of us,
viz., Sir G. Carteret and Sir W. Batten at one end, and Mr. Coventry, Sir
J. Minnes and I (in the middle at the other end, being taught how to sit
there all three by my sitting so much the backwarder) at the other end, to
Sir G. Carteret's, and there dined well.  Here I saw Mr. Scott, the
bastard that married his youngest daughter.  Much pleasant talk at table,
and then up and to the office, where we sat long upon our design of
dividing the Controller's work into some of the rest of our hands for the
better doing of it, but he would not yield to it, though the simple man
knows in his heart that he do not do one part of it.  So he taking upon
him to do it all we rose, I vexed at the heart to see the King's service
run after this manner, but it cannot be helped.  Thence to the Old James
to the reference about Mr. Bland's business.  Sir W. Rider being now added
to us, and I believe we shall soon come to some determination in it.  So
home and to my office, did business, and then up to Sir W. Pen and did
express my trouble about this day's business, he not being there, and
plainly told him what I thought of it, and though I know him a false
fellow yet I adventured, as I have done often, to tell him clearly my
opinion of Sir W. Batten and his design in this business, which is very
bad.  Hence home, and after a lecture to my wife in her globes, to prayers
and to bed.

15th.  Up and to my office, where all the morning, and among other things
Mr. Turner with me, and I did tell him my mind about the Controller his
master and all the office, and my mind touching himself too, as he did
carry himself either well or ill to me and my clerks, which I doubt not
but it will operate well.  Thence to the 'Change, and there met my uncle
Wight, who was very kind to me, and would have had me home with him, and
so kind that I begin to wonder and think something of it of good to me.
Thence home to dinner, and after dinner with Mr. Hater by water, and
walked thither and back again from Deptford, where I did do something
checking the iron business, but my chief business was my discourse with
Mr. Hater about what had passed last night and to-day about the office
business, and my resolution to do him all the good I can therein.  So
home, and my wife tells me that my uncle Wight hath been with her, and
played at cards with her, and is mighty inquisitive to know whether she is
with child or no, which makes me wonder what his meaning is, and after all
my thoughts, I cannot think, unless it be in order to the making his will,
that he might know how to do by me, and I would to God my wife had told
him that she was.

16th.  Up, and having paid some money in the morning to my uncle Thomas on
his yearly annuity, to the office, where we sat all the morning.  At noon
I to the 'Change about some pieces of eight for Sir J. Lawson. There I
hear that Collonell Turner is found guilty of felony at the Sessions in
Mr. Tryan's business, which will save his life.  So home and met there J.
Hasper come to see his kinswoman our Jane.  I made much of him and made
him dine with us, he talking after the old simple manner that he used to
do.  He being gone, I by water to Westminster Hall, and there did see Mrs.
Lane.  .  .  .  .  So by coach home and to my office, where Browne of the
Minerys brought me an Instrument made of a Spyral line very pretty for all
questions in Arithmetique almost, but it must be some use that must make
me perfect in it.  So home to supper and to bed, with my mind 'un peu
troubled pour ce que fait' to-day, but I hope it will be 'la dernier de
toute ma vie.'

17th (Lord's day).  Up, and I and my wife to church, where Pembleton
appeared, which, God forgive me, did vex me, but I made nothing of it. So
home to dinner, and betimes my wife and I to the French church and there
heard a good sermon, the first time my wife and I were there ever
together.  We sat by three sisters, all pretty women.  It was pleasant to
hear the reader give notice to them, that the children to be catechized
next Sunday were them of Hounsditch and Blanche Chapiton.  Thence home,
and there found Ashwell come to see my wife (we having called at her
lodging the other, day to speak with her about dressing my wife when my
Lord Sandwich dines here), and is as merry as ever, and speaks as
disconcerned for any difference between us on her going away as ever. She
being gone, my wife and I to see Sir W. Pen and there supped with him much
against my stomach, for the dishes were so deadly foule that I could not
endure to look upon them.  So after supper home to prayers and to bed.

18th.  Up, being troubled to find my wife so ready to have me go out of
doors.  God forgive me for my jealousy! but I cannot forbear, though God
knows I have no reason to do so, or to expect her being so true to me as I
would have her.  I abroad to White Hall, where the Court all in mourning
for the Duchesse of Savoy.  We did our business with the Duke, and so I to
W. Howe at my Lord's lodgings, not seeing my Lord, he being abroad, and
there I advised with W. Howe about my having my Lord to dinner at my
house, who likes it well, though it troubles me that I should come to need
the advice of such a boy, but for the present it is necessary.  Here I
found Mr. Mallard, and had from him a common tune set by my desire to the
Lyra Vyall, which goes most admirably.  Thence home by coach to the
'Change, after having been at the Coffee-house, where I hear Turner is
found guilty of felony and burglary; and strange stories of his confidence
at the barr, but yet great indiscretion in his argueing.  All desirous of
his being hanged.  So home and found that Will had been with my wife.
But, Lord! why should I think any evil of that; and yet I cannot forbear
it.  But upon enquiry, though I found no reason of doubtfulness, yet I
could not bring my nature to any quiet or content in my wife all day and
night, nor though I went with her to divert myself at my uncle Wight's,
and there we played at cards till 12 at night and went home in a great
shower of rain, it having not rained a great while before.  Here was one
Mr. Benson, a Dutchman, played and supped with us, that pretends to sing
well, and I expected great matters but found nothing to be pleased with at
all.  So home and to bed, yet troubled in my mind.

19th.  Up, without any kindness to my wife, and so to the office, where we
sat all the morning, and at noon I to the 'Change, and thence to Mr.
Cutler's with Sir W. Rider to dinner, and after dinner with him to the Old
James upon our reference of Mr. Bland's, and, having sat there upon the
business half an hour, broke up, and I home and there found Madame Turner
and her sister Dike come to see us, and staid chatting till night, and so
away, and I to my office till very late, and my eyes began to fail me, and
be in pain which I never felt to now-a-days, which I impute to sitting up
late writing and reading by candle-light.  So home to supper and to bed.

20th.  Up and by coach to my Lord Sandwich's, and after long staying till
his coming down (he not sending for me up, but it may be he did not know I
was there), he came down, and I walked with him to the Tennis Court, and
there left him, seeing the King play.  At his lodgings this morning there
came to him Mr. W. Montague's fine lady, which occasioned my Lord's
calling me to her about some business for a friend of hers preferred to be
a midshipman at sea.  My Lord recommended the whole matter to me. She is a
fine confident lady, I think, but not so pretty as I once thought her.  My
Lord did also seal a lease for the house he is now taking in Lincoln's Inn
Fields, which stands him in 250 per annum rent. Thence by water to my
brother's, whom I find not well in bed, sicke, they think, of a
consumption, and I fear he is not well, but do not complain, nor desire to
take anything.  From him I visited Mr. Honiwood, who is lame, and to thank
him for his visit to me the other day, but we were both abroad.  So to Mr.
Commander's in Warwicke Lane, to speak to him about drawing up my will,
which he will meet me about in a day or two.  So to the 'Change and walked
home, thence with Sir Richard Ford, who told me that Turner is to be
hanged to-morrow, and with what impudence he hath carried out his trial;
but that last night, when he brought him newes of his death, he began to
be sober and shed some tears, and he hopes will die a penitent; he having
already confessed all the thing, but says it was partly done for a joke,
and partly to get an occasion of obliging the old man by his care in
getting him his things again, he having some hopes of being the better by
him in his estate at his death.  Home to dinner, and after dinner my wife
and I by water, which we have not done together many a day, that is not
since last summer, but the weather is now very warm, and left her at Axe
Yard, and I to White Hall, and meeting Mr. Pierce walked with him an hour
in the Matted Gallery; among other things he tells me that my Lady
Castlemaine is not at all set by by the King, but that he do doat upon
Mrs. Stewart only; and that to the leaving of all business in the world,
and to the open slighting of the Queene; that he values not who sees him
or stands by him while he dallies with her openly; and then privately in
her chamber below, where the very sentrys observe his going in and out;
and that so commonly, that the Duke or any of the nobles, when they would
ask where the King is, they will ordinarily say, "Is the King above, or
below?"  meaning with Mrs. Stewart: that the King do not openly disown my
Lady Castlemaine, but that she comes to Court; but that my Lord
FitzHarding and the Hambletons,

     [The three brothers, George Hamilton, James Hamilton, and the Count
     Antoine Hamilton, author of the "Memoires de Grammont."]

and sometimes my Lord Sandwich, they say, have their snaps at her.  But he
says my Lord Sandwich will lead her from her lodgings in the darkest and
obscurest manner, and leave her at the entrance into the Queene's
lodgings, that he might be the least observed; that the Duke of Monmouth
the King do still doat on beyond measure, insomuch that the King only, the
Duke of York, and Prince Rupert, and the Duke of Monmouth, do now wear
deep mourning, that is, long cloaks, for the Duchesse of Savoy; so that he
mourns as a Prince of the Blood, while the Duke of York do no more, and
all the nobles of the land not so much; which gives great offence, and he
says the Duke of York do consider.  But that the Duke of York do give
himself up to business, and is like to prove a noble Prince; and so indeed
I do from my heart think he will.  He says that it is believed, as well as
hoped, that care is taken to lay up a hidden treasure of money by the King
against a bad day, pray God it be so!  but I should be more glad that the
King himself would look after business, which it seems he do not in the
least.  By and by came by Mr. Coventry, and so we broke off; and he and I
took a turn or two and so parted, and then my Lord Sandwich came upon me,
to speak with whom my business of coming again to-night to this ende of
the town chiefly was, in order to the seeing in what manner he received
me, in order to my inviting him to dinner to my house, but as well in the
morning as now, though I did wait upon him home and there offered occasion
of talk with him, yet he treated me, though with respect, yet as a
stranger, without any of the intimacy or friendship which he used to do,
and which I fear he will never, through his consciousness of his faults,
ever do again.  Which I must confess do trouble me above anything in the
world almost, though I neither do need at present nor fear to need to be
so troubled, nay, and more, though I do not think that he would deny me
any friendship now if I did need it, but only that he has not the face to
be free with me, but do look upon me as a remembrancer of his former
vanity, and an espy upon his present practices, for I perceive that
Pickering to-day is great with him again, and that he has done a great
courtesy for Mr. Pierce, the chirurgeon, to a good value, though both
these and none but these did I mention by name to my Lord in the business
which has caused all this difference between my Lord and me.  However, I
am resolved to forbear my laying out my money upon a dinner till I see him
in a better posture, and by grave and humble, though high deportment, to
make him think I do not want him, and that will make him the readier to
admit me to his friendship again, I believe the soonest of anything but
downright impudence, and thrusting myself, as others do, upon him, which
yet I cannot do, not [nor] will not endeavour.  So home, calling with my
wife to see my brother again, who was up, and walks up and down the house
pretty well, but I do think he is in a consumption.  Home, troubled in
mind for these passages with my Lord, but am resolved to better my case in
my business to make my stand upon my owne legs the better and to lay up as
well as to get money, and among other ways I will have a good fleece out
of Creed's coat ere it be long, or I will have a fall.  So to my office
and did some business, and then home to supper and to bed, after I had by
candlelight shaved myself and cut off all my beard clear, which will make
my worke a great deal the less in shaving.

21st.  Up, and after sending my wife to my aunt Wight's to get a place to
see Turner hanged, I to the office, where we sat all the morning, and at
noon going to the 'Change; and seeing people flock in the City, I
enquired, and found that Turner was not yet hanged.  And so I went among
them to Leadenhall Street, at the end of Lyme Street, near where the
robbery was done; and to St. Mary Axe, where he lived.  And there I got
for a shilling to stand upon the wheel of a cart, in great pain, above an
houre before the execution was done; he delaying the time by long
discourses and prayers one after another, in hopes of a reprieve; but none
came, and at last was flung off the ladder in his cloake.  A comely-looked
man he was, and kept his countenance to the end: I was sorry to see him.
It was believed there were at least 12 or 14,000 people in the street.  So
I home all in a sweat, and dined by myself, and after dinner to the Old
James, and there found Sir W. Rider and Mr. Cutler at dinner, and made a
second dinner with them, and anon came Mr. Bland and Custos, and Clerke,
and so we fell to the business of reference, and upon a letter from Mr.
Povy to Sir W. Rider and I telling us that the King is concerned in it, we
took occasion to fling off the business from off our shoulders and would
have nothing to do with it, unless we had power from the King or
Commissioners of Tangier, and I think it will be best for us to continue
of that mind, and to have no hand, it being likely to go against the King.
Thence to the Coffee-house, and heard the full of Turner's discourse on
the cart, which was chiefly to clear himself of all things laid to his
charge but this fault, for which he now suffers, which he confesses.  He
deplored the condition of his family, but his chief design was to lengthen
time, believing still a reprieve would come, though the sheriff advised
him to expect no such thing, for the King was resolved to grant none.
After that I had good discourse with a pretty young merchant with mighty
content.  So to my office and did a little business, and then to my aunt
Wight's to fetch my wife home, where Dr. Burnett did tell me how poorly
the sheriffs did endeavour to get one jewell returned by Turner, after he
was convicted, as a due to them, and not to give it to Mr. Tryan, the true
owner, but ruled against them, to their great dishonour.  Though they
plead it might be another jewell for ought they know and not Tryan's.
After supper home, and my wife tells me mighty stories of my uncle's fond
and kind discourses to her to-day, which makes me confident that he has
thoughts of kindness for us, he repeating his desire for her to be with
child, for it cannot enter into my head that he should have any unworthy
thoughts concerning her.  After doing some business at my office, I home
to supper, prayers, and to bed.

22nd.  Up, and it being a brave morning, with a gaily to Woolwich, and
there both at the Ropeyarde and the other yarde did much business, and
thence to Greenwich to see Mr. Pett and others value the carved work of
the "Henrietta" (God knows in an ill manner for the King), and so to
Deptford, and there viewed Sir W. Petty's vessel; which hath an odd
appearance, but not such as people do make of it, for I am of the opinion
that he would never have discoursed so much of it, if it were not better
than other vessels, and so I believe that he was abused the other day, as
he is now, by tongues that I am sure speak before they know anything good
or bad of her.  I am sorry to find his ingenuity discouraged so.  So home,
reading all the way a good book, and so home to dinner, and after dinner a
lesson on the globes to my wife, and so to my office till 10 or 11 o'clock
at night, and so home to supper and to bed.

23rd.  Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning.  At noon home
to dinner, where Mr. Hawly came to see us and dined with us, and after we
had dined came Mr. Mallard, and after he had eat something, I brought down
my vyall which he played on, the first maister that ever touched her yet,
and she proves very well and will be, I think, an admirable instrument.
He played some very fine things of his owne, but I was afeard to enter too
far in their commendation for fear he should offer to copy them for me
out, and so I be forced to give or lend him something. So to the office in
the evening, whither Mr. Commander came to me, and we discoursed about my
will, which I am resolved to perfect the next week by the grace of God.
He being gone, I to write letters and other business late, and so home to
supper and to bed.

24th (Lord's day).  Lay long in bed, and then up, and being desirous to
perform my vowes that I lately made, among others, to be performed this
month, I did go to my office, and there fell on entering, out of a
bye-book, part of my second journall-book, which hath lain these two years
and more unentered.  Upon this work till dinner, and after dinner to it
again till night, and then home to supper, and after supper to read a
lecture to my wife upon the globes, and so to prayers and to bed.  This
evening also I drew up a rough draught of my last will to my mind.

25th.  Up and by coach to Whitehall to my Lord's lodgings, and seeing that
knowing that I was in the house, my Lord did not nevertheless send for me
up, I did go to the Duke's lodgings, and there staid while he was making
ready, in which time my Lord Sandwich came, and so all into his closet and
did our common business, and so broke up, and I homeward by coach with Sir
W. Batten, and staid at Warwicke Lane and there called upon Mr. Commander
and did give him my last will and testament to write over in form, and so
to the 'Change, where I did several businesses.  So home to dinner, and
after I had dined Luellin came and we set him something to eat, and I left
him there with my wife, and to the office upon a particular meeting of the
East India Company, where I think I did the King good service against the
Company in the business of their sending our ships home empty from the
Indies contrary to their contract, and yet, God forgive me!  I found that
I could be willing to receive a bribe if it were offered me to conceal my
arguments that I found against them, in consideration that none of my
fellow officers, whose duty it is more than mine, had ever studied the
case, or at this hour do understand it, and myself alone must do it.  That
being done Mr. Povy and Bland came to speak with me about their business
of the reference, wherein I shall have some more trouble, but cannot help
it, besides I hope to make some good use of Mr. Povy to my advantage.  So
home after business done at my office, to supper, and then to the globes
with my wife, and so to bed. Troubled a little in mind that my Lord
Sandwich should continue this strangeness to me that methinks he shows me
now a days more than while the thing was fresh.

26th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning.  At noon to the
'Change, after being at the Coffee-house, where I sat by Tom Killigrew,
who told us of a fire last night in my Lady Castlemaine's lodging, where
she bid L40 for one to adventure the fetching of a cabinet out, which at
last was got to be done; and the fire at last quenched without doing much
wrong.  To 'Change and there did much business, so home to dinner, and
then to the office all the afternoon.  And so at night my aunt Wight and
Mrs. Buggin came to sit with my wife, and I in to them all the evening, my
uncle coming afterward, and after him Mr. Benson the Dutchman, a frank,
merry man.  We were very merry and played at cards till late and so broke
up and to bed in good hopes that this my friendship with my uncle and aunt
will end well.

27th.  Up and to the office, and at noon to the Coffeehouse, where I sat
with Sir G. Ascue

     [Sir George Ayscue or Askew.  After his return from his imprisonment
     he declined to go to sea again, although he was twice afterwards
     formally appointed.  He sat on the court-martial on the loss of the
     "Defiance" in 1668.]

and Sir William Petty, who in discourse is, methinks, one of the most
rational men that ever I heard speak with a tongue, having all his notions
the most distinct and clear, and, among other things (saying, that in all
his life these three books were the most esteemed and generally cried up
for wit in the world "Religio Medici," "Osborne's Advice to a Son,"

     [Francis Osborne, an English writer of considerable abilities and
     popularity, was the author of "Advice to a Son," in two parts,
     Oxford, 1656-8, 8vo.  He died in 1659.  He is the same person
     mentioned as "My Father Osborne," October 19th, 1661.--B.]

and "Hudibras "), did say that in these--in the two first principally--the
wit lies, and confirming some pretty sayings, which are generally like
paradoxes, by some argument smartly and pleasantly urged, which takes with
people who do not trouble themselves to examine the force of an argument,
which pleases them in the delivery, upon a subject which they like;
whereas, as by many particular instances of mine, and others, out of
Osborne, he did really find fault and weaken the strength of many of
Osborne's arguments, so as that in downright disputation they would not
bear weight; at least, so far, but that they might be weakened, and better
found in their rooms to confirm what is there said.  He shewed finely
whence it happens that good writers are not admired by the present age;
because there are but few in any age that do mind anything that is
abstruse and curious; and so longer before any body do put the true
praise, and set it on foot in the world, the generality of mankind
pleasing themselves in the easy delights of the world, as eating,
drinking, dancing, hunting, fencing, which we see the meanest men do the
best, those that profess it.  A gentleman never dances so well as the
dancing master, and an ordinary fiddler makes better musique for a
shilling than a gentleman will do after spending forty, and so in all the
delights of the world almost.  Thence to the 'Change, and after doing much
business, home, taking Commissioner Pett with me, and all alone dined
together.  He told me many stories of the yard, but I do know him so well,
and had his character given me this morning by Hempson, as well as my own
too of him before, that I shall know how to value any thing he says either
of friendship or other business.  He was mighty serious with me in
discourse about the consequence of Sir W. Petty's boat, as the most
dangerous thing in the world, if it should be practised by endangering our
losse of the command of the seas and our trade, while the Turkes and
others shall get the use of them, which, without doubt, by bearing more
sayle will go faster than any other ships, and, not being of burden, our
merchants cannot have the use of them and so will be at the mercy of their
enemies.  So that I perceive he is afeard that the honour of his trade
will down, though (which is a truth) he pretends this consideration to
hinder the growth of this invention.  He being gone my wife and I took
coach and to Covent Garden, to buy a maske at the French House, Madame
Charett's, for my wife; in the way observing the streete full of coaches
at the new play, "The Indian Queene;" which for show, they say, exceeds
"Henry the Eighth."  Thence back to Mrs. Turner's and sat a while with
them talking of plays and I know not what, and so called to see Tom, but
not at home, though they say he is in a deep consumption, and Mrs. Turner
and Dike and they say he will not live two months to an end.  So home and
to the office, and then to supper and to bed.

28th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning sitting, and at noon
upon several things to the 'Change, and thence to Sir G. Carteret's to
dinner of my own accord, and after dinner with Mr. Wayth down to Deptford
doing several businesses, and by land back again, it being very cold, the
boat meeting me after my staying a while for him at an alehouse by
Redriffe stairs.  So home, and took Will coming out of my doors, at which
I was a little moved, and told my wife of her keeping him from the office
(though God knows my base jealous head was the cause of it), which she
seemed troubled at, and that it was only to discourse with her about
finding a place for her brother.  So I to my office late, Mr. Commander
coming to read over my will in order to the engrossing it, and so he being
gone I to other business, among others chiefly upon preparing matters
against Creed for my profit, and so home to supper and bed, being mightily
troubled with my left eye all this evening from some dirt that is got into
it.

29th.  Up, and after shaving myself (wherein twice now, one after another,
I have cut myself much, but I think it is from the bluntness of the razor)
there came Mr. Deane to me and staid with me a while talking about masts,
wherein he prepared me in several things against Mr. Wood, and also about
Sir W. Petty's boat, which he says must needs prove a folly, though I do
not think so unless it be that the King will not have it encouraged.  At
noon, by appointment, comes Mr. Hartlibb and his wife, and a little before
them Messrs. Langley and Bostocke (old acquaintances of mine at
Westminster, clerks), and after shewing them my house and drinking they
set out by water, my wife and I with them down to Wapping on board the
"Crowne," a merchantman, Captain Floyd, a civil person. Here was
Vice-Admiral Goodson, whom the more I know the more I value for a serious
man and staunch.  Here was Whistler the flagmaker, which vexed me, but it
mattered not.  Here was other sorry company and the discourse poor, so
that we had no pleasure there at all, but only to see and bless God to
find the difference that is now between our condition and that heretofore,
when we were not only much below Hartlibb in all respects, but even these
two fellows above named, of whom I am now quite ashamed that ever my
education should lead me to such low company, but it is God's goodness
only, for which let him be praised.  After dinner I. broke up and with my
wife home, and thence to the Fleece in Cornhill, by appointment, to meet
my Lord Marlborough, a serious and worthy gentleman, who, after doing our
business, about the company, he and they began to talk of the state of the
Dutch in India, which is like to be in a little time without any controll;
for we are lost there, and the Portuguese as bad.  Thence to the
Coffee-house, where good discourse, specially of Lt.-Coll. Baron touching
the manners of the Turkes' Government, among whom he lived long.  So to my
uncle Wight's, where late playing at cards, and so home.

30th.  Up, and a sorry sermon of a young fellow I knew at Cambridge; but
the day kept solemnly for the King's murder, and all day within doors
making up my Brampton papers, and in the evening Mr. Commander came and we
made perfect and signed and sealed my last will and testament, which is so
to my mind, and I hope to the liking of God Almighty, that I take great
joy in myself that it is done, and by that means my mind in a good
condition of quiett.  At night to supper and to bed.  This evening, being
in a humour of making all things even and clear in the world, I tore some
old papers; among others, a romance which (under the title of "Love a
Cheate ") I begun ten years ago at Cambridge; and at this time reading it
over to-night I liked it very well, and wondered a little at myself at my
vein at that time when I wrote it, doubting that I cannot do so well now
if I would try.

31st (Lord's day).  Up, and in my chamber all day long (but a little at
dinner) settling all my Brampton accounts to this day in very good order,
I having obliged myself by oathe to do that and some other things within
this month, and did also perfectly prepare a state of my estate and
annexed it to my last will and testament, which now is perfect, and,
lastly, I did make up my monthly accounts, and find that I have gained
above L50 this month clear, and so am worth L858 clear, which is the
greatest sum I ever yet was master of, and also read over my usual vowes,
as I do every Lord's day, but with greater seriousness than ordinary, and
I do hope that every day I shall see more and more the pleasure of looking
after my business and laying up of money, and blessed be God for what I
have already been enabled by his grace to do.  So to supper and to bed
with my mind in mighty great ease and content, but my head very full of
thoughts and business to dispatch this next month also, and among others
to provide for answering to the Exchequer for my uncle's being
Generall-Receiver in the year 1647, which I am at present wholly unable to
do, but I must find time to look over all his papers.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                               FEBRUARY
                               1663-1664

February 1st.  Up (my maids rising early this morning to washing), and
being ready I found Mr. Strutt the purser below with 12 bottles of sacke,
and tells me (which from Sir W. Batten I had heard before) how young Jack
Davis has railed against Sir W. Batten for his endeavouring to turn him
out of his place, at which for the fellow's sake, because it will likely
prove his ruin, I am sorry, though I do believe he is a very arch rogue. I
took Strutt by coach with me to White Hall, where I set him down, and I to
my Lord's, but found him gone out betimes to the Wardrobe, which I am glad
to see that he so attends his business, though it troubles me that my
counsel to my prejudice must be the cause of it.  They tell me that he
goes into the country next week, and that the young ladies come up this
week before the old lady.  Here I hear how two men last night, justling
for the wall about the New Exchange, did kill one another, each thrusting
the other through; one of them of the King's Chappell, one Cave, and the
other a retayner of my Lord Generall Middleton's.  Thence to White Hall;
where, in the Duke's chamber, the King came and stayed an hour or two
laughing at Sir W. Petty, who was there about his boat; and at Gresham
College in general; at which poor Petty was, I perceive, at some loss; but
did argue discreetly, and bear the unreasonable follies of the King's
objections and other bystanders with great discretion; and offered to take
oddes against the King's best boates; but the King would not lay, but
cried him down with words only.  Gresham College he mightily laughed at,
for spending time only in weighing of ayre, and doing nothing else since
they sat.  Thence to Westminster Hall, and there met with diverse people,
it being terme time.  Among others I spoke with Mrs. Lane, of whom I
doubted to hear something of the effects of our last meeting about a
fortnight or three weeks ago, but to my content did not. Here I met with
Mr. Pierce, who tells me of several passages at Court, among others how
the King, coming the other day to his Theatre to see "The Indian Queene"
(which he commends for a very fine thing), my Lady Castlemaine was in the
next box before he came; and leaning over other ladies awhile to whisper
to the King, she rose out of the box and went into the King's, and set
herself on the King's right hand, between the King and the Duke of York;
which, he swears, put the King himself, as well as every body else, out of
countenance; and believes that she did it only to show the world that she
is not out of favour yet, as was believed.  Thence with Alderman Maynell
by his coach to the 'Change, and there with several people busy, and so
home to dinner, and took my wife out immediately to the King's Theatre, it
being a new month, and once a month I may go, and there saw "The Indian
Queene" acted; which indeed is a most pleasant show, and beyond my
expectation; the play good, but spoiled with the ryme, which breaks the
sense.  But above my expectation most, the eldest Marshall did do her part
most excellently well as I ever heard woman in my life; but her voice not
so sweet as Ianthe's; but, however, we came home mightily contented.  Here
we met Mr. Pickering and his mistress, Mrs. Doll Wilde; he tells me that
the business runs high between the Chancellor and my Lord Bristoll against
the Parliament; and that my Lord Lauderdale and Cooper open high against
the Chancellor; which I am sorry for.  In my way home I 'light and to the
Coffee-house, where I heard Lt. Coll. Baron tell very good stories of his
travels over the high hills in Asia above the clouds, how clear the heaven
is above them, how thicke like a mist the way is through the cloud that
wets like a sponge one's clothes, the ground above the clouds all dry and
parched, nothing in the world growing, it being only a dry earth, yet not
so hot above as below the clouds.  The stars at night most delicate bright
and a fine clear blue sky, but cannot see the earth at any time through
the clouds, but the clouds look like a world below you.  Thence home and
to supper, being hungry, and so to the office, did business, specially
about Creed, for whom I am now pretty well fitted, and so home to bed.
This day in Westminster Hall W. Bowyer told me that his father is dead
lately, and died by being drowned in the river, coming over in the night;
but he says he had not been drinking.  He was taken with his stick in his
hand and cloake over his shoulder, as ruddy as before he died.  His horse
was taken overnight in the water, hampered in the bridle, but they were so
silly as not to look for his master till the next morning, that he was
found drowned.

2nd.  Up and to the office, where, though Candlemas day, Mr. Coventry and
Sir W. Pen and I all the morning, the others being at a survey at
Deptford.  At noon by coach to the 'Change with Mr. Coventry, thence to
the Coffee-house with Captain Coeke, who discoursed well of the good
effects in some kind of a Dutch warr and conquest (which I did not
consider before, but the contrary) that is, that the trade of the world is
too little for us two, therefore one must down: 2ndly, that though our
merchants will not be the better husbands by all this, yet our wool will
bear a better price by vaunting of our cloths, and by that our tenants
will be better able to pay rents, and our lands will be more worth, and
all our owne manufactures, which now the Dutch outvie us in; that he
thinks the Dutch are not in so good a condition as heretofore because of
want of men always, and now from the warrs against the Turke more than
ever.  Then to the 'Change again, and thence off to the Sun Taverne with
Sir W. Warren, and with him discoursed long, and had good advice, and
hints from him, and among other things he did give me a payre of gloves
for my wife wrapt up in paper, which I would not open, feeling it hard;
but did tell him that my wife should thank him, and so went on in
discourse.  When I came home, Lord! in what pain I was to get my wife out
of the room without bidding her go, that I might see what these gloves
were; and, by and by, she being gone, it proves a payre of white gloves
for her and forty pieces in good gold, which did so cheer my heart, that I
could eat no victuals almost for dinner for joy to think how God do bless
us every day more and more, and more yet I hope he will upon the increase
of my duty and endeavours.  I was at great losse what to do, whether tell
my wife of it or no, which I could hardly forbear, but yet I did and will
think of it first before I do, for fear of making her think me to be in a
better condition, or in a better way of getting money, than yet I am.
After dinner to the office, where doing infinite of business till past to
at night to the comfort of my mind, and so home with joy to supper and to
bed.  This evening Mr. Hempson came and told me how Sir W, Batten his
master will not hear of continuing him in his employment as Clerk of the
Survey at Chatham, from whence of a sudden he has removed him without any
new or extraordinary cause, and I believe (as he himself do in part write,
and J. Norman do confess) for nothing but for that he was twice with me
the other day and did not wait upon him.  So much he fears me and all that
have to do with me.  Of this more in the Mem. Book of my office upon this
day, there I shall find it.

3rd.  Up, and after a long discourse with my cozen Thomas Pepys, the
executor, I with my wife by coach to Holborn, where I 'light, and she to
her father's, I to the Temple and several places, and so to the 'Change,
where much business, and then home to dinner alone; and so to the Mitre
Taverne by appointment (and there met by chance with W. Howe come to buy
wine for my Lord against his going down to Hinchingbroke, and I private
with him a great while discoursing of my Lord's strangeness to me; but he
answers that I have no reason to think any such thing, but that my Lord is
only in general a more reserved man than he was before) to meet Sir W.
Rider and Mr. Clerke, and there after much ado made an end, giving Mr.
Custos L202 against Mr. Bland, which I endeavoured to bring down but could
not, and think it is well enough ended for Mr. Bland for all that. Thence
by coach to fetch my wife from her brother's, and found her gone home.
Called at Sir Robert Bernard's about surrendering my estate in reversion
to the use of my life, which will be done, and at Roger Pepys, who was
gone to bed in pain of a boyle that he could not sit or stand. So home,
where my wife is full of sad stories of her good-natured father and
roguish brother, who is going for Holland and his wife, to be a soldier.
And so after a little at the office to bed.  This night late coming in my
coach, coming up Ludgate Hill, I saw two gallants and their footmen taking
a pretty wench, which I have much eyed, lately set up shop upon the hill,
a seller of riband and gloves.  They seek to drag her by some force, but
the wench went, and I believe had her turn served, but, God forgive me!
what thoughts and wishes I had of being in their place. In Covent Garden
to-night, going to fetch home my wife, I stopped at the great
Coffee-house' there, where I never was before; where Dryden the poet (I
knew at Cambridge), and all the wits of the town, and Harris the player,
and Mr. Hoole of our College.  And had I had time then, or could at ether
times, it will be good coming thither, for there, I perceive, is very
witty and pleasant discourse.  But I could not tarry, and as it was late,
they were all ready to go away.

4th.  Up and to the office, where after a while sitting, I left the board
upon pretence of serious business, and by coach to Paul's School, where I
heard some good speeches of the boys that were to be elected this year.
Thence by and by with Mr. Pullen and Barnes (a great Non-Conformist) with
several others of my old acquaintance to the Nag's Head Taverne, and there
did give them a bottle of sacke, and away again and I to the School, and
up to hear the upper form examined; and there was kept by very many of the
Mercers, Clutterbucke, a Barker, Harrington, and others; and with great
respect used by them all, and had a noble dinner.  Here they tell me, that
in Dr. Colett's will he says that he would have a Master found for the
School that hath good skill in Latin, and (if it could be) one that had
some knowledge of the Greeke; so little was Greeke known here at that
time.  Dr. Wilkins and one Mr. Smallwood, Posers. After great pleasure
there, and specially to Mr. Crumlum, so often to tell of my being a
benefactor to the School, I to my bookseller's and there spent an hour
looking over Theatrum Urbium and Flandria illustrata, with excellent cuts,
with great content.  So homeward, and called at my little milliner's,
where I chatted with her, her husband out of the way, and a mad merry slut
she is.  So home to the office, and by and by comes my wife home from the
burial of Captain Grove's wife at Wapping (she telling me a story how her
mayd Jane going into the boat did fall down and show her arse in the
boat), and alone comes my uncle Wight and Mr. Maes with the state of their
case, which he told me very discreetly, and I believe is a very hard one,
and so after drinking a bottle of ale or two they gone, and I a little
more to the office, and so home to prayers and to bed.  This evening I
made an end of my letter to Creed about his pieces of eight, and sent it
away to him.  I pray God give good end to it to bring me some money, and
that duly as from him.

5th.  Up, and down by water, a brave morning, to Woolwich, and there spent
an houre or two to good purpose, and so walked to Greenwich and thence to
Deptford, where I found (with Sir W. Batten upon a survey) Sir J. Minnes,
Sir W. Pen, and my Lady Batten come down and going to dinner. I dined with
them, and so after dinner by water home, all the way going and coming
reading "Faber Fortunae," which I can never read too often. At home a
while with my wife, and so to my office, where till 8 o'clock, and then
home to look over some Brampton papers, and my uncle's accounts as
Generall-Receiver of the County for 1647 of our monthly assessment, which,
contrary to my expectation, I found in such good order and so, thoroughly
that I did not expect, nor could have thought, and that being done, having
seen discharges for every farthing of money he received, I went to bed
late with great quiett.

6th.  Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and so at noon
to the 'Change, where I met Mr. Coventry, the first time I ever saw him
there, and after a little talke with him and other merchants, I up and
down about several businesses, and so home, whither came one Father
Fogourdy, an Irish priest, of my wife's and her mother's acquaintance in
France, a sober, discreet person, but one that I would not have converse
with my wife for fear of meddling with her religion, but I like the man
well.  Thence with my wife abroad, and left her at Tom's, while I abroad
about several businesses and so back to her, myself being vexed to find at
my first coming Tom abroad, and all his books, papers, and bills loose
upon the open table in the parlour, and he abroad, which I ranted at him
for when he came in.  Then by coach home, calling at my cozen Scott's, who
(she) lies dying, they say, upon a miscarriage.  My wife could not be
admitted to see her, nor anybody.  At home to the office late writing
letters, and then home to supper and to bed.  Father Fogourdy confirms to
me the newes that for certain there is peace between the Pope and King of
France.

7th (Lord's day).  Up and to church, and thence home, my wife being ill
.  .  .  kept her bed all day, and I up and dined by her bedside, and then
all the afternoon till late at night writing some letters of business to
my father stating of matters to him in general of great import, and other
letters to ease my mind in the week days that I have not time to think of,
and so up to my wife, and with great mirth read Sir W. Davenant's two
speeches in dispraise of London and Paris, by way of reproach one to
another, and so to prayers and to bed.

8th.  Up, and by coach called upon Mr. Phillips, and after a little talk
with him away to my Lord Sandwich's, but he being gone abroad, I staid a
little and talked with Mr. Howe, and so to Westminster in term time, and
there met Mr. Pierce, who told me largely how the King still do doat upon
his women, even beyond all shame; and that the good Queen will of herself
stop before she goes sometimes into her dressing-room, till she knows
whether the King be there, for fear he should be, as she hath sometimes
taken him, with Mrs. Stewart; and that some of the best parts of the
Queen's joynture are, contrary to faith, and against the opinion of my
Lord Treasurer and his Council, bestowed or rented, I know not how, to my
Lord Fitz-Harding and Mrs. Stewart, and others of that crew that the King
do doat infinitely upon the Duke of Monmouth, apparently as one that he
intends to have succeed him.  God knows what will be the end of it! After
he was gone I went and talked with Mrs. Lane about persuading her to
Hawly, and think she will come on, which I wish were done, and so to Mr.
Howlett and his wife, and talked about the same, and they are mightily for
it, and I bid them promote it, for I think it will be for both their goods
and my content.  But I was much pleased to look upon their pretty
daughter, which is grown a pretty mayd, and will make a fine modest woman.
Thence to the 'Change by coach, and after some business done, home to
dinner, and thence to Guildhall, thinking to have heard some pleading, but
there were no Courts, and so to Cade's, the stationer, and there did look
upon some pictures which he promised to give me the buying of, but I found
he would have played the Jacke with me, but at last he did proffer me what
I expected, and I have laid aside L10 or L12 worth, and will think of it,
but I am loth to lay out so much money upon them.  So home a little vexed
in my mind to think how to-day I was forced to compliment W. Howe and
admit myself to an equality with Mr. Moore, which is come to challenge in
his discourse with me, but I will admit it no more, but let me stand or
fall, I will show myself as strange to them as my Lord do himself to me.
After at the office till 9 o'clock, I home in fear of some pain by taking
cold, and so to supper and to bed.

9th.  Up and to the office, where sat all the morning.  At noon by coach
with Mr. Coventry to the 'Change, where busy with several people.  Great
talke of the Dutch proclaiming themselves in India, Lords of the Southern
Seas, and deny traffick there to all ships but their owne, upon pain of
confiscation; which makes our merchants mad.  Great doubt of two ships of
ours, the "Greyhound" and another, very rich, coming from the Streights,
for fear of the Turkes.  Matters are made up between the Pope and the King
of France; so that now all the doubt is, what the French will do with
their armies.  Thence home, and there found Captain Grove in mourning for
his wife, and Hawly, and they dined with me.  After dinner, and Grove
gone, Hawly and I talked of his mistress, Mrs. Lane, and I seriously
advising him and inquiring his condition, and do believe that I shall
bring them together.  By and by comes Mr. Moore, with whom much good
discourse of my Lord, and among other things told me that my Lord is
mightily altered, that is, grown very high and stately, and do not admit
of any to come into his chamber to him, as heretofore, and that I must not
think much of his strangeness to me, for it was the same he do to every
body, and that he would not have me be solicitous in the matter, but keep
off and give him now and then a visit and no more, for he says he himself
do not go to him now a days but when he sends for him, nor then do not
stay for him if he be not there at the hour appointed, for, says he, I do
find that I can stand upon my own legs and I will not by any over
submission make myself cheap to any body and contemptible, which was the
doctrine of the world that I lacked most, and shall follow it.  I
discoursed with him about my money that my Lord hath, and the L1000 that I
stand bound with him in, to my cozen Thomas Pepys, in both which I will
get myself at liberty as soon as I can; for I do not like his being angry
and in debt both together to me; and besides, I do not perceive he looks
after paying his debts, but runs farther and farther in.  He being gone,
my wife and I did walk an houre or two above in our chamber, seriously
talking of businesses.  I told her my Lord owed me L700, and shewed her
the bond, and how I intended to carry myself to my Lord.  She and I did
cast about how to get Captain Grove for my sister, in which we are mighty
earnest at present, and I think it would be a good match, and will
endeavour it.  So to my office a while, then home to supper and to bed.

10th.  Up, and by coach to my Lord Sandwich, to his new house, a fine
house, but deadly dear, in Lincoln's Inne Fields, where I found and spoke
a little to him.  He is high and strange still, but did ask me how my wife
did, and at parting remembered him to his cozen, which I thought was
pretty well, being willing to flatter myself that in time he will be well
again.  Thence home straight and busy all the forenoon, and at noon with
Mr. Bland to Mr. Povy's, but he being at dinner and full of company we
retreated and went into Fleet Street to a friend of his, and after a long
stay, he telling me the long and most perplexed story of Coronell and
Bushell's business of sugars, wherein Parke and Green and Mr. Bland and 40
more have been so concerned about the King of Portugal's duties, wherein
every party has laboured to cheat another, a most pleasant and profitable
story to hear, and in the close made me understand Mr. Maes' business
better than I did before.  By and by dinner came, and after dinner and
good discourse that and such as I was willing for improvement sake to
hear, I went away too to White Hall to a Committee of Tangier, where I
took occasion to demand of Creed whether he had received my letter, and he
told me yes, and that he would answer it, which makes me much wonder what
he means to do with me, but I will be even with him before I have done,
let him make as light of it as he will.  Thence to the Temple, where my
cozen Roger Pepys did show me a letter my Father wrote to him last Terme
to shew me, proposing such things about Sturtlow and a portion for Pall,
and I know not what, that vexes me to see him plotting how to put me to
trouble and charge, and not thinking to pay our debts and legacys, but I
will write him a letter will persuade him to be wiser.  So home, and
finding my wife abroad (after her coming home from being with my aunt
Wight to-day to buy Lent provisions) gone with Will to my brother's, I
followed them by coach, but found them not, for they were newly gone home
from thence, which troubled me.  I to Sir Robert Bernard's chamber, and
there did surrender my reversion in Brampton lands to the use of my will,
which I was glad to have done, my will being now good in all parts.
Thence homewards, calling a little at the Coffee-house, where a little
merry discourse, and so home, where I found my wife, who says she went to
her father's to be satisfied about her brother, who I found at my house
with her.  He is going this next tide with his wife into Holland to seek
his fortune.  He had taken his leave of us this morning.  I did give my
wife 10s. to give him, and a coat that I had by me, a close-bodied
light-coloured cloth coat, with a gold edgeing in each seam, that was the
lace of my wife's best pettycoat that she had when I married her.  I staid
not there, but to my office, where Stanes the glazier was with me till to
at night making up his contract, and, poor man, I made him almost mad
through a mistake of mine, but did afterwards reconcile all, for I would
not have the man that labours to serve the King so cheap above others
suffer too much.  He gone I did a little business more, and so home to
supper and to bed, being now pretty well again, the weather being warm.
My pain do leave me without coming to any great excesse, but my cold that
I had got I suppose was not very great, it being only the leaving of my
wastecoat unbuttoned one morning.

11th.  Up, after much pleasant discourse with my wife, and to the office,
where we sat all the morning, and did much business, and some much to my
content by prevailing against Sir W. Batten for the King's profit.  At
noon home to dinner, my wife and I hand to fist to a very fine pig.  This
noon Mr. Falconer came and visited my wife, and brought her a present, a
silver state-cup and cover, value about L3 or L4, for the courtesy I did
him the other day.  He did not stay dinner with me.  I am almost sorry for
this present, because I would have reserved him for a place to go in
summer a-visiting at Woolwich with my wife.

12th.  Up, and ready, did find below Mr. Creed's boy with a letter from
his master for me.  So I fell to reading it, and it is by way of stating
the case between S. Pepys and J. Creed most excellently writ, both showing
his stoutness and yet willingness to peace, reproaching me yet flattering
me again, and in a word in as good a manner as I think the world could
have wrote, and indeed put me to a greater stand than ever I thought I
could have been in this matter.  All the morning thinking how to behave
myself in the business, and at noon to the Coffee-house; thence by his
appointment met him upon the 'Change, and with him back to the
Coffee-house, where with great seriousness and strangeness on both sides
he said his part and I mine, he sometimes owning my favour and assistance,
yet endeavouring to lessen it, as that the success of his business was not
wholly or very much to be imputed to that assistance: I to alledge the
contrary, and plainly to tell him that from the beginning I never had it
in my mind to do him all that kindnesse for nothing, but he gaining 5 or
L600, I did expect a share of it, at least a real and not a complimentary
acknowledgment of it.  In fine I said nothing all the while that I need
fear he can do me more hurt with them than before I spoke them.  The most
I told him was after we were come to a peace, which he asked me whether he
should answer the Board's letter or no.  I told him he might forbear it a
while and no more.  Then he asked how the letter could be signed by them
without their much enquiry.  I told him it was as I worded it and nothing
at all else of any moment, whether my words be ever hereafter spoken of
again or no.  So that I have the same neither better nor worse force over
him that I had before, if he should not do his part.  And the peace
between us was this: Says he after all, well, says he, I know you will
expect, since there must be some condescension, that it do become me to
begin it, and therefore, says he, I do propose (just like the interstice
between the death of the old and the coming in of the present king, all
the time is swallowed up as if it had never been) so our breach of
friendship may be as if it had never been, that I should lay aside all
misapprehensions of him or his first letter, and that he would reckon
himself obliged to show the same ingenuous acknowledgment of my love and
service to him as at the beginning he ought to have done, before by my
first letter I did (as he well observed) put him out of a capacity of
doing it, without seeming to do it servilely, and so it rests, and I shall
expect how he will deal with me.  After that I began to be free, and both
of us to discourse of other things, and he went home with me and dined
with me and my wife and very pleasant, having a good dinner and the
opening of my lampry (cutting a notch on one side), which proved very
good.  After dinner he and I to Deptford, walking all the way, where we
met Sir W. Petty and I took him back, and I got him to go with me to his
vessel and discourse it over to me, which he did very well, and then
walked back together to the waterside at Redriffe, with good discourse all
the way.  So Creed and I by boat to my house, and thence to coach with my
wife and called at Alderman Backewell's and there changed Mr. Falconer's
state-cup, that he did give us the other day, for a fair tankard.  The cup
weighed with the fashion L5 16s., and another little cup that Joyce Norton
did give us 17s., both L6 13s.; for which we had the tankard, which came
to L6 10s., at 5s. 7d.  per oz., and 3s. in money, and with great content
away thence to my brother's, Creed going away there, and my brother
bringing me the old silk standard that I lodged there long ago, and then
back again home, and thence, hearing that my uncle Wight had been at my
house, I went to him to the Miter, and there with him and Maes, Norbury,
and Mr. Rawlinson till late eating some pot venison (where the Crowne
earthen pot pleased me mightily), and then homewards and met Mr. Barrow,
so back with him to the Miter and sat talking about his business of his
discontent in the yard, wherein sometimes he was very foolish and pettish,
till 12 at night, and so went away, and I home and up to my wife a-bed,
with my mind ill at ease whether I should think that I had by this made
myself a bad end by missing the certainty of L100 which I proposed to
myself so much, or a good one by easing myself of the uncertain good
effect but the certain trouble and reflection which must have fallen on me
if we had proceeded to a public dispute, ended besides embarking myself
against my Lord, who (which I had forgot) had given him his hand for the
value of the pieces of eight at his rates which were all false, which by
the way I shall take heed to the giving of my Lord notice of it hereafter
whenever he goes out again.

13th.  Up, and after I had told my wife in the morning in bed the passages
yesterday with Creed my head and heart was mightily lighter than they were
before, and so up and to the office, and thence, after sitting, at 11
o'clock with Mr. Coventry to the African House, and there with Sir W.
Ryder by agreement we looked over part of my Lord Peterborough's accounts,
these being by Creed and Vernaty.  Anon down to dinner to a table which
Mr. Coventry keeps here, out of his L300 per annum as one of the
Assistants to the Royall Company, a very pretty dinner, and good company,
and excellent discourse, and so up again to our work for an hour till the
Company came to having a meeting of their own, and so we broke up and
Creed and I took coach and to Reeves, the perspective glass maker, and
there did indeed see very excellent microscopes, which did discover a
louse or mite or sand most perfectly and largely.  Being sated with that
we went away (yet with a good will were it not for my obligation to have
bought one) and walked to the New Exchange, and after a turn or two and
talked I took coach and home, and so to my office, after I had been with
my wife and saw her day's work in ripping the silke standard, which we
brought home last night, and it will serve to line a bed, or for twenty
uses, to our great content.  And there wrote fair my angry letter to my
father upon that that he wrote to my cozen Roger Pepys, which I hope will
make him the more carefull to trust to my advice for the time to come
without so many needless complaints and jealousys, which are troublesome
to me because without reason.

14th (Lord's day).  Up and to church alone, where a lazy sermon of Mr.
Mills, upon a text to introduce catechizing in his parish, which I
perceive he intends to begin.  So home and very pleasant with my wife at
dinner.  All the afternoon at my office alone doing business, and then in
the evening after a walk with my wife in the garden, she and I to my uncle
Wight's to supper, where Mr. Norbury, but my uncle out of tune, and after
supper he seemed displeased mightily at my aunt's desiring [to] put off a
copper kettle, which it seems with great study he had provided to boil
meat in, and now she is put in the head that it is not wholesome, which
vexed him, but we were very merry about it, and by and by home, and after
prayers to bed.

15th.  Up, and carrying my wife to my Lord's lodgings left her, and I to
White Hall, to the Duke; where he first put on a periwigg to-day; but
methought his hair cut short in order thereto did look very prettily of
itself, before he put on his periwigg.

     [Charles II. followed his brother in the use of the periwig in the
     following April.]

Thence to his closet and there did our business, and thence Mr. Coventry
and I down to his chamber and spent a little time, and so parted, and I
took my wife homeward, I stopping at the Coffee-house, and thence a while
to the 'Change, where great newes of the arrivall of two rich ships, the
Greyhound and another, which they were mightily afeard of, and great
insurance given, and so home to dinner, and after an houre with my wife at
her globes, I to the office, where very busy till 11 at night, and so home
to supper and to bed.  This afternoon Sir Thomas Chamberlin came to the
office to me, and showed me several letters from the East Indys, showing
the height that the Dutch are come to there, showing scorn to all the
English, even in our only Factory there of Surat, beating several men, and
hanging the English Standard St. George under the Dutch flagg in scorn;
saying, that whatever their masters do or say at home, they will do what
they list, and will be masters of all the world there; and have so
proclaimed themselves Soveraigne of all the South Seas; which certainly
our King cannot endure, if the Parliament will give him money. But I doubt
and yet do hope they will not yet, till we are more ready for it.

16th.  Up and to the office, where very busy all the morning, and most
with Mr. Wood, I vexing him about his masts.  At noon to the 'Change a
little and thence brought Mr. Barrow to dinner with me, where I had a
haunch of venison roasted, given me yesterday, and so had a pretty dinner,
full of discourse of his business, wherein the poor man is mightily
troubled, and I pity him in it, but hope to get him some ease. He being
gone I to the office, where very busy till night, that my uncle Wight and
Mr. Maes came to me, and after discourse about Maes' business to supper
very merry, but my mind upon my business, and so they being gone I to my
Vyall a little, which I have not done some months, I think, before, and
then a little to my office, at 11 at night, and so home and to bed.

17th.  Up, and with my wife, setting her down by her father's in Long
Acre, in so ill looked a place, among all the whore houses, that I was
troubled at it, to see her go thither.  Thence I to White Hall and there
walked up and down talking with Mr. Pierce, who tells me of the King's
giving of my Lord Fitz-Harding two leases which belong indeed to the
Queene, worth L20,000 to him; and how people do talk of it, and other
things of that nature which I am sorry to hear.  He and I walked round the
Park with great pleasure, and back again, and finding no time to speak
with my Lord of Albemarle, I walked to the 'Change and there met my wife
at our pretty Doll's, and so took her home, and Creed also whom I met
there, and sent her hose, while Creed and I staid on the 'Change, and by
and by home and dined, where I found an excellent mastiffe, his name
Towser, sent me by a chyrurgeon.  After dinner I took my wife again by
coach (leaving Creed by the way going to Gresham College, of which he is
now become one of the virtuosos) and to White Hall, where I delivered a
paper about Tangier to my Lord Duke of Albemarle in the council chamber,
and so to Mrs. Hunt's to call my wife, and so by coach straight home, and
at my office till 3 o'clock in the morning, having spent much time this
evening in discourse with Mr. Cutler, who tells me how the Dutch deal with
us abroad and do not value us any where, and how he and Sir W. Rider have
found reason to lay aside Captain Cocke in their company, he having played
some indiscreet and unfair tricks with them, and has lost himself every
where by his imposing upon all the world with the conceit he has of his
own wit, and so has, he tells me, Sir R. Ford also, both of whom are very
witty men.  He being gone Sir W. Rider came and staid with me till about
12 at night, having found ourselves work till that time, about
understanding the measuring of Mr. Wood's masts, which though I did so
well before as to be thought to deal very hardly against Wood, yet I am
ashamed I understand it no better, and do hope yet, whatever be thought of
me, to save the King some more money, and out of an impatience to breake
up with my head full of confused confounded notions, but nothing brought
to a clear comprehension, I was resolved to sit up and did till now it is
ready to strike 4 o'clock, all alone, cold, and my candle not enough left
to light me to my owne house, and so, with my business however brought to
some good understanding, and set it down pretty clear, I went home to bed
with my mind at good quiet, and the girl sitting up for me (the rest all
a-bed).  I eat and drank a little, and to bed, weary, sleepy, cold, and my
head akeing.

18th.  Called up to the office and much against my will I rose, my head
aching mightily, and to the office, where I did argue to good purpose for
the King, which I have been fitting myself for the last night against Mr.
Wood about his masts, but brought it to no issue.  Very full of business
till noon, and then with Mr. Coventry to the African House, and there fell
to my Lord Peterborough's accounts, and by and by to dinner, where
excellent discourse, Sir G. Carteret and others of the African Company
with us, and then up to the accounts again, which were by and by done, and
then I straight home, my head in great pain, and drowsy, so after doing a
little business at the office I wrote to my father about sending him the
mastiff was given me yesterday.  I home and by daylight to bed about 6
o'clock and fell to sleep, wakened about 12 when my wife came to bed, and
then to sleep again and so till morning, and then:

19th.  Up in good order in my head again and shaved myself, and then to
the office, whither Mr. Cutler came, and walked and talked with me a great
while; and then to the 'Change together; and it being early, did tell me
several excellent examples of men raised upon the 'Change by their great
diligence and saving; as also his owne fortune, and how credit grew upon
him; that when he was not really worth L1100, he had credit for L100,000
of Sir W. Rider how he rose; and others.  By and by joyned with us Sir
John Bankes; who told us several passages of the East India Company; and
how in his very case, when there was due to him and Alderman Mico L64,000
from the Dutch for injury done to them in the East Indys, Oliver presently
after the peace, they delaying to pay them the money, sent them word, that
if they did not pay them by such a day, he would grant letters of mark to
those merchants against them; by which they were so fearful of him, they
did presently pay the money every farthing.  By and by, the 'Change
filling, I did many businesses, and about 2 o'clock went off with my uncle
Wight to his house, thence by appointment we took our wives (they by coach
with Mr. Mawes) and we on foot to Mr. Jaggard, a salter, in Thames Street,
for whom I did a courtesy among the poor victuallers, his wife, whom long
ago I had seen, being daughter to old Day, my uncle Wight's master, is a
very plain woman, but pretty children they have.  They live methought at
first in but a plain way, but afterward I saw their dinner, all fish,
brought in very neatly, but the company being but bad I had no great
pleasure in it. After dinner I to the office, where we should have met
upon business extraordinary, but business not coming we broke up, and I
thither again and took my wife; and taking a coach, went to visit my Ladys
Jemimah and Paulina Montagu, and Mrs. Elizabeth Dickering, whom we find at
their father's new house

     [The Earl of Sandwich had just moved to a house in Lincoln's Inn
     Fields.  Elizabeth Dickering, who afterwards married John Creed, was
     niece to Lord Sandwich.]

in Lincolne's Inn Fields; but the house all in dirt.  They received us
well enough; but I did not endeavour to carry myself over familiarly with
them; and so after a little stay, there coming in presently after us my
Lady Aberguenny and other ladies, we back again by coach, and visited, my
wife did, my she cozen Scott, who is very ill still, and thence to
Jaggard's again, where a very good supper and great store of plate; and
above all after supper Mrs. Jaggard did at my entreaty play on the Vyall,
but so well as I did not think any woman in England could and but few
Maisters, I must confess it did mightily surprise me, though I knew
heretofore that she could play, but little thought so well.  After her I
set Maes to singing, but he did it so like a coxcomb that I was sick of
him.  About 11 at night I carried my aunt home by coach, and then home
myself, having set my wife down at home by the way.  My aunt tells me they
are counted very rich people, worth at least 10 or L12,000, and their
country house all the yeare long and all things liveable, which mightily
surprises me to think for how poore a man I took him when I did him the
courtesy at our office.  So after prayers to bed, pleased at nothing all
the day but Mrs. Jaggard playing on the Vyall, and that was enough to make
me bear with all the rest that did not content me.

20th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and at noon to
the 'Change with Mr. Coventry and thence home to dinner, after dinner by a
gaily down to Woolwich, where with Mr. Falconer, and then at the other
yard doing some business to my content, and so walked to Greenwich, it
being a very fine evening and brought right home with me by water, and so
to my office, where late doing business, and then home to supper and to
bed.

21st. (Lord's day).  Up, and having many businesses at the office to-day I
spent all the morning there drawing up a letter to Mr. Coventry about
preserving of masts, being collections of my own, and at noon home to
dinner, whither my brother Tom comes, and after dinner I took him up and
read my letter lately of discontent to my father, and he is seemingly
pleased at it, and cries out of my sister's ill nature and lazy life
there.  He being gone I to my office again, and there made an end of my
morning's work, and then, after reading my vows of course, home and back
again with Mr. Maes and walked with him talking of his business in the
garden, and he being gone my wife and I walked a turn or two also, and
then my uncle Wight fetching of us, she and I to his house to supper, and
by the way calling on Sir G. Carteret to desire his consent to my bringing
Maes to him, which he agreed to.  So I to my uncle's, but staid a great
while vexed both of us for Maes not coming in, and soon he came, and I
with him from supper to Sir G. Carteret, and there did largely discourse
of the business, and I believe he may expect as much favour as he can do
him, though I fear that will not be much.  So back, and after sitting
there a good while, we home, and going my wife told me how my uncle when
he had her alone did tell her that he did love her as well as ever he did,
though he did not find it convenient to show it publicly for reasons on
both sides, seeming to mean as well to prevent my jealousy as his wife's,
but I am apt to think that he do mean us well, and to give us something if
he should die without children.  So home to prayers and to bed.  My wife
called up the people to washing by four o'clock in the morning; and our
little girl Susan is a most admirable Slut and pleases us mightily, doing
more service than both the others and deserves wages better.

22nd.  Up and shaved myself, and then my wife and I by coach out, and I
set her down by her father's, being vexed in my mind and angry with her
for the ill-favoured place, among or near the whore houses, that she is
forced to come to him.  So left her there, and I to Sir Th. Warwick's but
did not speak with him.  Thence to take a turn in St. James's Park, and
meeting with Anth. Joyce walked with him a turn in the Pell Mell and so
parted, he St. James's ward and I out to Whitehall ward, and so to a
picture-sellers by the Half Moone in the street over against the Exchange,
and there looked over the maps of several cities and did buy two books of
cities stitched together cost me 9s. 6d., and when I came home thought of
my vowe, and paid 5s. into my poor box for it, hoping in God that I shall
forfeit no more in that kind.  Thence, meeting Mr. Moore, and to the
Exchange and there found my wife at pretty Doll's, and thence by coach set
her at my uncle Wight's, to go with my aunt to market once more against
Lent, and I to the Coffee-house, and thence to the 'Change, my chief
business being to enquire about the manner of other countries keeping of
their masts wet or dry, and got good advice about it, and so home, and
alone ate a bad, cold dinner, my people being at their washing all day,
and so to the office and all the afternoon upon my letter to Mr. Coventry
about keeping of masts, and ended it very well at night and wrote it fair
over.  This evening came Mr. Alsopp the King's brewer, with whom I spent
an houre talking and bewailing the posture of things at present; the King
led away by half-a-dozen men, that none of his serious servants and
friends can come at him.  These are Lauderdale, Buckingham, Hamilton,
Fitz-Harding (to whom he hath, it seems, given L2,000 per annum in the
best part of the King's estate); and that that the old Duke of Buckingham
could never get of the King.  Progers is another, and Sir H. Bennett.  He
loves not the Queen at all, but is rather sullen to her; and she, by all
reports, incapable of children. He is so fond of the Duke of Monmouth,
that every body admires it; and he says the Duke hath said, that he would
be the death of any man that says the King was not married to his mother:
though Alsopp says, it is well known that she was a common whore before
the King lay with her.  But it seems, he says, that the King is mighty
kind to these his bastard children; and at this day will go at midnight to
my Lady Castlemaine's nurses, and take the child and dance it in his arms:
that he is not likely to have his tables up again in his house,--[The
tables at which the king dined in public.-B.]--for the crew that are about
him will not have him come to common view again, but keep him obscurely
among themselves.  He hath this night, it seems, ordered that the Hall
(which there is a ball to be in to-night before the King) be guarded, as
the Queen-Mother's is, by his Horse Guards; whereas heretofore they were
by the Lord Chamberlain or Steward, and their people.  But it is feared
they will reduce all to the soldiery, and all other places taken away; and
what is worst of all, that he will alter the present militia, and bring
all to a flying army.  That my Lord Lauderdale, being Middleton's enemy,
and one that scorns the Chancellor even to open affronts before the King,
hath got the whole power of Scotland into his hand; whereas the other day
he was in a fair way to have had his whole estate, and honour, and life,
voted away from him.  That the King hath done himself all imaginable wrong
in the business of my Lord Antrim, in Ireland; who, though he was the head
of rebels, yet he by his letter owns to have acted by his father's and
mother's, and his commissions; but it seems the truth is, he hath obliged
himself, upon the clearing of his estate, to settle it upon a daughter of
the Queene-Mother's (by my Lord Germin, I suppose,) in marriage, be it to
whom the Queene pleases; which is a sad story.  It seems a daughter of the
Duke of Lenox's was, by force, going to be married the other day at
Somerset House, to Harry Germin; but she got away and run to the King, and
he says he will protect her. She is, it seems, very near akin to the King:
Such mad doings there are every day among them!  The rape upon a woman at
Turnstile the other day, her husband being bound in his shirt, they both
being in bed together, it being night, by two Frenchmen, who did not only
lye with her but abused her with a linke, is hushed up for L300, being the
Queen Mother's servants.  There was a French book in verse, the other day,
translated and presented to the Duke of Monmouth in such a high stile,
that the Duke of York, he tells me, was mightily offended at it.  The Duke
of Monmouth's mother's brother hath a place at Court; and being a Welchman
(I think he told me) will talk very broad of the King's being married to
his sister.  The King did the other day, at the Council, commit my Lord
Digby's' chaplin, and steward, and another servant, who went upon the
process begun there against their lord, to swear that they saw him at
church, end receive the Sacrament as a Protestant, (which, the judges
said, was sufficient to prove him such in the eye of the law); the King, I
say, did commit them all to the Gate-house, notwithstanding their pleading
their dependance upon him, and the faith they owed him as their lord,
whose bread they eat.  And that the King should say, that he would soon
see whether he was King, or Digby.  That the Queene-Mother hath outrun
herself in her expences, and is now come to pay very ill, or run in debt;
the money being spent that she received for leases.  He believes there is
not any money laid up in bank, as I told him some did hope; but he says,
from the best informers he can assure me there is no such thing, nor any
body that should look after such a thing; and that there is not now above
L80,000 of the Dunkirke money left in stock.  That Oliver in the year when
he spent L1,400,000 in the Navy, did spend in the whole expence of the
kingdom L2,600,000.  That all the Court are mad for a Dutch war; but both
he and I did concur, that it was a thing rather to be dreaded than hoped
for; unless by the French King's falling upon Flanders, they and the Dutch
should be divided.  That our Embassador had, it is true, an audience; but
in the most dishonourable way that could be; for the Princes of the Blood
(though invited by our Embassador, which was the greatest absurdity that
ever Embassador committed these 400 years) were not there; and so were not
said to give place to our King's Embassador.  And that our King did openly
say, the other day in the Privy Chamber, that he would not be hectored out
of his right and preeminencys by the King of France, as great as he was.
That the Pope is glad to yield to a peace with the French (as the
newes-book says), upon the basest terms that ever was.  That the talke
which these people about our King, that I named before, have, is to tell
him how neither privilege of Parliament nor City is any thing; but his
will is all, and ought to be so: and their discourse, it seems, when they
are alone, is so base and sordid, that it makes the eares of the very
gentlemen of the back-stairs (I think he called them) to tingle to hear it
spoke in the King's hearing; and that must be very bad indeed.  That my
Lord Digby did send to Lisbon a couple of priests, to search out what they
could against the Chancellor concerning the match, as to the point of his
knowing before-hand that the Queene was not capable of bearing children;
and that something was given her to make her so.  But as private as they
were, when they came thither they were clapped up prisoners.  That my Lord
Digby endeavours what he can to bring the business into the House of
Commons, hoping there to master the Chancellor, there being many enemies
of his there; but I hope the contrary.  That whereas the late King did
mortgage 'Clarendon' to somebody for L20,000, and this to have given it to
the Duke of Albemarle, and he sold it to my Lord Chancellor, whose title
of Earldome is fetched from thence; the King hath this day sent his order
to the Privy Seale for the payment of this L20,000 to my Lord Chancellor,
to clear the mortgage!  Ireland in a very distracted condition about the
hard usage which the Protestants meet with, and the too good which the
Catholiques.  And from altogether, God knows my heart, I expect nothing
but ruine can follow, unless things are better ordered in a little time.
He being gone my wife came and told me how kind my uncle Wight had been to
her to-day, and that though she says that all his kindness comes from
respect to her she discovers nothing but great civility from him, yet but
what she says he otherwise will tell me, but to-day he told her plainly
that had she a child it should be his heir, and that should I or she want
he would be a good friend to us, and did give my wife instructions to
consent to all his wife says at any time, she being a pettish woman, which
argues a design I think he has of keeping us in with his wife in order to
our good sure, and he declaring her jealous of him that so he dares not
come to see my wife as otherwise he would do and will endeavour to do.  It
looks strange putting all together, but yet I am in hopes he means well.
My aunt also is mighty open to my wife and tells her mighty plain how her
husband did intend to double her portion to her at his death as a
jointure.  That he will give presently L100 to her niece Mary and a good
legacy at his death, and it seems did as much to the other sister, which
vexed [me] to think that he should bestow so much upon his wife's friends
daily as he do, but it cannot be helped for the time past, and I will
endeavour to remedy it for the time to come.  After all this discourse
with my wife at my office alone, she home to see how the wash goes on and
I to make an end of my work, and so home to supper and to bed.

23rd.  Up, it being Shrove Tuesday, and at the office sat all the morning,
at noon to the 'Change and there met with Sir W. Rider, and of a sudden
knowing what I had at home, brought him and Mr. Cutler and Mr. Cooke,
clerk to Mr. Secretary Morrice, a sober and pleasant man, and one that I
knew heretofore, when he was my Lord 's secretary at Dunkirke.  I made
much of them and had a pretty dinner for a sudden.  We talked very
pleasantly, and they many good discourses of their travels abroad.  After
dinner they gone, I to my office, where doing many businesses very late,
but to my good content to see how I grow in estimation every day more and
more, and have things given more oftener than I used to have formerly, as
to have a case of very pretty knives with agate shafts by Mrs. Russell. So
home and to bed.  This day, by the blessing of God, I have lived
thirty-one years in the world; and, by the grace of God, I find myself not
only in good health in every thing, and particularly as to the stone, but
only pain upon taking cold, and also in a fair way of coming to a better
esteem and estate in the world, than ever I expected.  But I pray God give
me a heart to fear a fall, and to prepare for it!

24th (Ash-Wednesday).  Up and by water, it being a very fine morning, to
White Hall, and there to speak with Sir Ph. Warwicke, but he was gone out
to chappell, so I spent much of the morning walking in the Park, and going
to the Queene's chappell, where I staid and saw their masse, till a man
came and bid me go out or kneel down: so I did go out.  And thence to
Somerset House; and there into the chappell, where Monsieur d'Espagne used
to preach.  But now it is made very fine, and was ten times more crouded
than the Queene's chappell at St. James's; which I wonder at. Thence down
to the garden of Somerset House, and up and down the new building, which
in every respect will be mighty magnificent and costly. I staid a great
while talking with a man in the garden that was sawing of a piece of
marble, and did give him 6d. to drink.  He told me much of the nature and
labour of the worke, how he could not saw above 4 inches of the stone in a
day, and of a greater not above one or two, and after it is sawed, then it
is rubbed with coarse and then with finer and finer sand till they come to
putty, and so polish it as smooth as glass.  Their saws have no teeth, but
it is the sand only which the saw rubs up and down that do the thing.
Thence by water to the Coffee-house, and there sat with Alderman Barker
talking of hempe and the trade, and thence to the 'Change a little, and so
home and dined with my wife, and then to the office till the evening, and
then walked a while merrily with my wife in the garden, and so she gone, I
to work again till late, and so home to supper and to bed.

25th.  Up and to the office, where we sat, and thence with Mr. Coventry by
coach to the glasshouse and there dined, and both before and after did my
Lord Peterborough's accounts.  Thence home to the office, and there did
business till called by Creed, and with him by coach (setting my wife at
my brother's) to my Lord's, and saw the young ladies, and talked a little
with them, and thence to White Hall, a while talking but doing no
business, but resolved of going to meet my Lord tomorrow, having got a
horse of Mr. Coventry to-day.  So home, taking up my wife, and after doing
something at my office home, God forgive me, disturbed in my mind out of
my jealousy of my wife tomorrow when I am out of town, which is a hell to
my mind, and yet without all reason.  God forgive me for it, and mend
me.  So home, and getting my things ready for me, weary to bed.

26th.  Up, and after dressing myself handsomely for riding, I out, and by
water to Westminster, to Mr. Creed's chamber, and after drinking some
chocolate, and playing on the vyall, Mr. Mallard being there, upon Creed's
new vyall, which proves, methinks, much worse than mine, and, looking upon
his new contrivance of a desk and shelves for books, we set out from an
inne hard by, whither Mr. Coventry's horse was carried, and round about
the bush through bad ways to Highgate.  Good discourse in the way had
between us, and it being all day a most admirable pleasant day, we, upon
consultation, had stopped at the Cocke, a mile on this side Barnett, being
unwilling to put ourselves to the charge or doubtful acceptance of any
provision against my Lord's coming by, and there got something and dined,
setting a boy to look towards Barnett Hill, against their coming; and
after two or three false alarms, they come, and we met the coach very
gracefully, and I had a kind receipt from both Lord and Lady as I could
wish, and some kind discourse, and then rode by the coach a good way, and
so fell to discoursing with several of the people, there being a dozen
attending the coach, and another for the mayds and parson. Among others
talking with W. Howe, he told me how my Lord in his hearing the other day
did largely tell my Lord Peterborough and Povy (who went with them down to
Hinchinbrooke) how and when he discarded Creed, and took me to him, and
that since the Duke of York has several times thanked him for me, which
did not a little please me, and anon I desiring Mr. Howe to tell me upon
[what] occasion this discourse happened, he desired me to say nothing of
it now, for he would not have my Lord to take notice of our being
together, but he would tell me another time, which put me into some
trouble to think what he meant by it.  But when we came to my Lord's
house, I went in; and whether it was my Lord's neglect, or general
indifference, I know not, but he made me no kind of compliment there; and,
methinks, the young ladies look somewhat highly upon me.  So I went away
without bidding adieu to anybody, being desirous not to be thought too
servile.  But I do hope and believe that my Lord do yet value me as high
as ever, though he dare not admit me to the freedom he once did, and that
my Lady is still the same woman.  So rode home and there found my uncle
Wight.  'Tis an odd thing as my wife tells me his caressing her and coming
on purpose to give her visits, but I do not trouble myself for him at all,
but hope the best and very good effects of it.  He being gone I eat
something and my wife.  I told all this day's passages, and she to give me
very good and rational advice how to behave myself to my Lord and his
family, by slighting every body but my Lord and Lady, and not to seem to
have the least society or fellowship with them, which I am resolved to do,
knowing that it is my high carriage that must do me good there, and to
appear in good clothes and garbe.  To the office, and being weary, early
home to bed.

27th.  Up, but weary, and to the office, where we sat all the morning.
Before I went to the office there came Bagwell's wife to me to speak for
her husband.  I liked the woman very well and stroked her under the chin,
but could not find in my heart to offer anything uncivil to her, she
being, I believe, a very modest woman.  At noon with Mr. Coventry to the
African house, and to my Lord Peterborough's business again, and then to
dinner, where, before dinner, we had the best oysters I have seen this
year, and I think as good in all respects as ever I eat in my life.  I eat
a great many.  Great, good company at dinner, among others Sir Martin
Noell, who told us the dispute between him, as farmer of the Additional
Duty, and the East India Company, whether callicos be linnen or no; which
he says it is, having been ever esteemed so: they say it is made of cotton
woole, and grows upon trees, not like flax or hempe.  But it was carried
against the Company, though they stand out against the verdict. Thence
home and to the office, where late, and so home to supper and to bed, and
had a very pleasing and condescending answer from my poor father to-day in
answer to my angry discontentful letter to him the other day, which
pleases me mightily.

28th (Lord's day).  Up and walked to Paul's; and by chance it was an
extraordinary day for the Readers of the Inns of Court and all the
Students to come to church, it being an old ceremony not used these
twenty-five years, upon the first Sunday in Lent.  Abundance there was of
Students, more than there was room to seat but upon forms, and the Church
mighty full.  One Hawkins preached, an Oxford man.  A good sermon upon
these words: "But the wisdom from above is first pure, then peaceable."
Both before and after sermon I was most impatiently troubled at the Quire,
the worst that ever I heard.  But what was extraordinary, the Bishop of
London, who sat there in a pew, made a purpose for him by the pulpitt, do
give the last blessing to the congregation; which was, he being a comely
old man, a very decent thing, methought.  The Lieutenant of the Tower, Sir
J. Robinson, would needs have me by coach home with him, and sending word
home to my house I did go and dine with him, his ordinary table being very
good, and his lady a very high-carriaged but comely big woman; I was
mightily pleased with her.  His officers of his regiment dined with him.
No discourse at table to any purpose, only after dinner my Lady would
needs see a boy which was represented to her to be an innocent country boy
brought up to towne a day or two ago, and left here to the wide world, and
he losing his way fell into the Tower, which my Lady believes, and takes
pity on him, and will keep him; but though a little boy and but young, yet
he tells his tale so readily and answers all questions so wittily, that
for certain he is an arch rogue, and bred in this towne; but my Lady will
not believe it, but ordered victuals to be given him, and I think will
keep him as a footboy for their eldest son.  After dinner to chappell in
the Tower with the Lieutenant, with the keyes carried before us, and the
Warders and Gentleman-porter going before us.  And I sat with the
Lieutenant in his pew, in great state, but slept all the sermon.  None, it
seems, of the prisoners in the Tower that are there now, though they may,
will come to prayers there.  Church being done, I back to Sir John's house
and there left him and home, and by and by to Sir W. Pen, and staid a
while talking with him about Sir J. Minnes his folly in his office, of
which I am sicke and weary to speak of it, and how the King is abused in
it, though Pen, I know, offers the discourse only like a rogue to get it
out of me, but I am very free to tell my mind to him, in that case being
not unwilling he should tell him again if he will or any body else.
Thence home, and walked in the garden by brave moonshine with my wife
above two hours, till past 8 o'clock, then to supper, and after prayers to
bed.

29th.  Up and by coach with Sir W. Pen to Charing Cross, and there I
'light, and to Sir Phillip Warwick to visit him and discourse with him
about navy business, which I did at large and he most largely with me, not
only about the navy but about the general Revenue of England, above two
hours, I think, many staying all the while without, but he seemed to take
pains to let me either understand the affairs of the Revenue or else to be
a witness of his pains and care in stating it.  He showed me indeed many
excellent collections of the State of the Revenue in former Kings and the
late times, and the present.  He showed me how the very Assessments
between 1643 and 1659, which were taxes (besides Excise, Customes,
Sequestrations, Decimations, King and Queene's and Church Lands, or any
thing else but just the Assessments), come to above fifteen millions.  He
showed me a discourse of his concerning the Revenues of this and foreign
States.  How that of Spayne was great, but divided with his kingdoms, and
so came to little.  How that of France did, and do much exceed ours before
for quantity; and that it is at the will of the Prince to tax what he will
upon his people; which is not here.  That the Hollanders have the best
manner of tax, which is only upon the expence of provisions, by an excise;
and do conclude that no other tax is proper for England but a pound-rate,
or excise upon the expence of provisions.  He showed me every particular
sort of payment away of money, since the King's coming in, to this day;
and told me, from one to one, how little he hath received of profit from
most of them; and I believe him truly. That the L1,200,000 which the
Parliament with so much ado did first vote to give the King, and since
hath been reexamined by several committees of the present Parliament, is
yet above L300,000 short of making up really to the King the L1,200,000,
as by particulars he showed me.

     [A committee was appointed in September, 1660, to consider the
     subject of the King's revenue, and they "reported to the Commons that
     the average revenue of Charles I., from 1637 to 1641 inclusive, had
     been L895,819, and the average expenditure about L1,110,000.  At
     that time prices were lower and the country less burthened with navy
     and garrisons, among which latter Dunkirk alone now cost more than
     L100,000 a year.  It appeared, therefore, that the least sum to
     which the King could be expected to 'conform his expense' was
     L1,200,000."  Burnet writes, "It was believed that if two millions
     had been asked he could have carried it.  But he (Clarendon) had no
     mind to put the King out of the necessity of having recourse to his
     Parliament."--Lister's Life of Clarendon, vol. ii., pp.  22, 23.]

And in my Lord Treasurer's excellent letter to the King upon this subject,
he tells the King how it was the spending more than the revenue that did
give the first occasion of his father's ruine, and did since to the
rebels; who, he says, just like Henry the Eighth, had great and sudden
increase of wealth, but yet, by overspending, both died poor; and further
tells the King how much of this L1,200,000 depends upon the life of the
Prince, and so must be renewed by Parliament again to his successor; which
is seldom done without parting with some of the prerogatives of the
Crowne; or if denied and he persists to take it of the people, it gives
occasion to a civill war, which may, as it did in the late business of
tonnage and poundage, prove fatal to the Crowne. He showed me how many
ways the Lord Treasurer did take before he moved the King to farme the
Customes in the manner he do, and the reasons that moved him to do it.  He
showed the a very excellent argument to prove, that our importing lesse
than we export, do not impoverish the kingdom, according to the received
opinion: which, though it be a paradox, and that I do not remember the
argument, yet methought there was a great deale in what he said.  And upon
the whole I find him a most exact and methodicall man, and of great
industry: and very glad that he thought fit to show me all this; though I
cannot easily guess the reason why he should do it to me, unless from the
plainness that he sees I use to him in telling him how much the King may
suffer for our want of understanding the case of our Treasury.  Thence to
White Hall (where my Lord Sandwich was, and gave me a good countenance, I
thought), and before the Duke did our usual business, and so I about
several businesses in the house, and then out to the Mewes with Sir W.
Pen.  But in my way first did meet with W. Howe, who did of himself advise
me to appear more free with my Lord and to come to him, for my own
strangeness he tells me he thinks do make my Lord the worse.  At the Mewes
Sir W. Pen and Mr. Baxter did shew me several good horses, but Pen, which
Sir W. Pen did give the Duke of York, was given away by the Duke the other
day to a Frenchman, which Baxter is cruelly vexed at, saying that he was
the best horse that he expects a great while to have to do with.  Thence I
to the 'Change, and thence to a Coffee-house with Sir W. Warren, and did
talk much about his and Wood's business, and thence homewards, and in my
way did stay to look upon a fire in an Inneyard in Lumbard Streete.  But,
Lord! how the mercers and merchants who had warehouses there did carry
away their cloths and silks. But at last it was quenched, and I home to
dinner, and after dinner carried my wife and set her and her two mayds in
Fleete Streete to buy things, and I to White Hall to little purpose, and
so to Westminster Hall, and there talked with Mrs. Lane and Howlett, but
the match with Hawly I perceive will not take, and so I am resolved wholly
to avoid occasion of further ill with her.  Thence by water to Salsbury
Court, and found my wife, by agreement, at Mrs. Turner's, and after a
little stay and chat set her and young Armiger down in Cheapside, and so
my wife and I home.  Got home before our mayds, who by and by came with a
great cry and fright that they had like to have been killed by a coach;
but, Lord! to see how Jane did tell the story like a foole and a
dissembling fanatique, like her grandmother, but so like a changeling,
would make a man laugh to death almost, and yet be vexed to hear her.  By
and by to the office to make up my monthly accounts, which I make up
to-night, and to my great content find myself worth eight hundred and
ninety and odd pounds, the greatest sum I ever yet knew, and so with a
heart at great case to bed.

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     A mad merry slut she is
     A real and not a complimentary acknowledgment
     At least 12 or 14,000 people in the street (to see the hanging)
     Bearing more sayle will go faster than any other ships (multihull)
     But the wench went, and I believe had her turn served
     Chatted with her, her husband out of the way
     Could not saw above 4 inches of the stone in a day
     Do look upon me as a remembrancer of his former vanity
     Fear of making her think me to be in a better condition
     Few in any age that do mind anything that is abstruse
     God forgive me! what thoughts and wishes I had
     Good writers are not admired by the present
     Hear something of the effects of our last meeting (pregnancy?)
     I do not like his being angry and in debt both together to me
     I will not by any over submission make myself cheap
     Ireland in a very distracted condition
     Jane going into the boat did fall down and show her arse
     King is mighty kind to these his bastard children
     King still do doat upon his women, even beyond all shame
     Mankind pleasing themselves in the easy delights of the world
     Play good, but spoiled with the ryme, which breaks the sense
     Pleased to look upon their pretty daughter
     Pray God give me a heart to fear a fall, and to prepare for it!
     Pretty sayings, which are generally like paradoxes
     Ryme, which breaks the sense
     Sent my wife to get a place to see Turner hanged
     Sheriffs did endeavour to get one jewell
     So home to prayers and to bed
     Such open flattery is beastly
     Talked with Mrs. Lane about persuading her to Hawly
     Their saws have no teeth, but it is the sand only
     There did see Mrs. Lane.  .  .  .  .
     Travels over the high hills in Asia above the clouds
     Wherein every party has laboured to cheat another
     Willing to receive a bribe if it were offered me
     Would make a dogg laugh


                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                 MARCH
                               1663-1664

March 1st.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and at
noon to the 'Change, and after much business and meeting my uncle Wight,
who told me how Mr. Maes had like to have been trapanned yesterday, but
was forced to run for it; so with Creed and Mr. Hunt home to dinner, and
after a good and pleasant dinner, Mr. Hunt parted, and I took Mr. Creed
and my wife and down to Deptford, it being most pleasant weather, and
there till night discoursing with the officers there about several things,
and so walked home by moonshine, it being mighty pleasant, and so home,
and I to my office, where late about getting myself a thorough
understanding in the business of masts, and so home to bed, my left eye
being mightily troubled with rheum.

2nd.  Up, my eye mightily out of order with the rheum that is fallen down
into it, however, I by coach endeavoured to have waited on my Lord
Sandwich, but meeting him in Chancery Lane going towards the City I
stopped and so fairly walked home again, calling at St. Paul's
Churchyarde, and there looked upon a pretty burlesque poem, called
"Scarronides, or Virgile Travesty;" extraordinary good.  At home to the
office till dinner, and after dinner my wife cut my hair short, which is
growne pretty long again, and then to the office, and there till 9 at
night doing business.  This afternoon we had a good present of tongues and
bacon from Mr. Shales, of Portsmouth.  So at night home to supper, and,
being troubled with my eye, to bed.  This morning Mr. Burgby, one of the
writing clerks belonging to the Council, was with me about business, a
knowing man, he complains how most of the Lords of the Council do look
after themselves and their own ends, and none the publique, unless Sir
Edward Nicholas.  Sir G. Carteret is diligent, but all for his own ends
and profit.  My Lord Privy Scale, a destroyer of every body's business,
and do no good at all to the publique.  The Archbishop of Canterbury
speaks very little, nor do much, being now come to the highest pitch that
he can expect.  He tells me, he believes that things will go very high
against the Chancellor by Digby, and that bad things will be proved. Talks
much of his neglecting the King; and making the King to trot every day to
him, when he is well enough to go to visit his cozen Chief-Justice Hide,
but not to the Council or King.  He commends my Lord of Ormond mightily in
Ireland; but cries out cruelly of Sir G. Lane for his corruption; and that
he hath done my Lord great dishonour by selling of places here, which are
now all taken away, and the poor wretches ready to starve.  That nobody
almost understands or judges of business better than the King, if he would
not be guilty of his father's fault to be doubtfull of himself, and easily
be removed from his own opinion.  That my Lord Lauderdale is never from
the King's care nor council, and that he is a most cunning fellow.  Upon
the whole, that he finds things go very bad every where; and even in the
Council nobody minds the publique.

3rd.  Up pretty early and so to the office, where we sat all the morning
making a very great contract with Sir W. Warren for provisions for the
yeare coming, and so home to dinner, and there was W. Howe come to dine
with me, and before dinner he and I walked in the garden, and we did
discourse together, he assuring me of what he told me the other day of my
Lord's speaking so highly in my commendation to my Lord Peterborough and
Povy, which speaks my Lord having yet a good opinion of me, and also how
well my Lord and Lady both are pleased with their children's being at my
father's, and when the bigger ladies were there a little while ago, at
which I am very glad.  After dinner he went away, I having discoursed with
him about his own proceedings in his studies, and I observe him to be very
considerate and to mind his book in order to preferring himself by my
Lord's favour to something, and I hope to the outing of Creed in his
Secretaryship.  For he tells me that he is confident my Lord do not love
him nor will trust him in any secret matter, he is so cunning and crafty
in all he do.  So my wife and I out of doors thinking to have gone to have
seen a play, but when we came to take coach, they tell us there are none
this week, being the first of Lent.  But, Lord! to see how impatient I
found myself within to see a play, I being at liberty once a month to see
one, and I think it is the best method I could have taken. But to my
office, did very much business with several people till night, and so
home, being unwilling to stay late because of my eye which is not yet well
of the rheum that is fallen down into it, but to supper and to bed.

4th.  Up, my eye being pretty well, and then by coach to my Lord Sandwich,
with whom I spoke, walking a good while with him in his garden, which and
the house is very fine, talking of my Lord Peterborough's accounts,
wherein he is concerned both for the foolery as also inconvenience which
may happen upon my Lord Peterborough's ill-stating of his matters, so as
to have his gaine discovered unnecessarily.  We did talk long and freely
that I hope the worst is past and all will be well. There were several
people by trying a new-fashion gun

     [Many attempts to produce a satisfactory revolver were made in
     former centuries, but it was not till the present one that Colt's
     revolver was invented.  On February 18th, 1661, Edward, Marquis of
     Worcester, obtained Letters Patent for "an invencon to make certeyne
     guns or pistolls which in the tenth parte of one minute of an houre
     may, with a flaske contrived to that purpose, be re-charged the
     fourth part of one turne of the barrell which remaines still fixt,
     fastening it as forceably and effectually as a dozen thrids of any
     scrue, which in the ordinary and usual way require as many turnes."
     On March 3rd, 1664, Abraham Hill obtained Letters Patent for a "gun
     or pistoll for small shott, carrying seaven or eight charges of the
     same in the stocke of the gun."]

brought my Lord this morning, to shoot off often, one after another,
without trouble or danger, very pretty.  Thence to the Temple, and there
taking White's boat down to Woolwich, taking Mr. Shish at Deptford in my
way, with whom I had some good discourse of the Navy business.  At
Woolwich discoursed with him and Mr. Pett about iron worke and other
businesses, and then walked home, and at Greenwich did observe the
foundation laying of a very great house for the King, which will cost a
great deale of money.

     [Building by John Webb; now a part of Greenwich Hospital.  Evelyn
     wrote in his Diary, October 19th, 1661: "I went to London to visite
     my Lord of Bristoll, having been with Sir John Denham (his Mates
     surveyor) to consult with him about the placing of his palace at
     Greenwich, which I would have had built between the river and the
     Queene's house, so as a large cutt should have let in ye Thames like
     a bay; but Sir John was for setting it in piles at the very brink of
     the water, which I did not assent to and so came away, knowing Sir
     John to be a better poet than architect, tho' he had Mr. Webb (Inigo
     Jones's man) to assist him."]

So home to dinner, and my uncle Wight coming in he along with my wife and
I by coach, and setting him down by the way going to Mr. Maes we two to my
Lord Sandwich's to visit my Lady, with whom I left my wife discoursing,
and I to White Hall, and there being met by the Duke of Yorke, he called
me to him and discoursed a pretty while with me about the new ship's
dispatch building at Woolwich, and talking of the charge did say that he
finds always the best the most cheape, instancing in French guns, which in
France you may buy for 4 pistoles, as good to look to as others of 16, but
not the service.  I never had so much discourse with the Duke before, and
till now did ever fear to meet him.  He found me and Mr. Prin together
talking of the Chest money, which we are to blame not to look after.
Thence to my Lord's, and took up my wife, whom my Lady hath received with
her old good nature and kindnesse, and so homewards, and she home, I
'lighting by the way, and upon the 'Change met my uncle Wight and told him
my discourse this afternoon with Sir G. Carteret in Maes' business, but
much to his discomfort, and after a dish of coffee home, and at my office
a good while with Sir W. Warren talking with great pleasure of many
businesses, and then home to supper, my wife and I had a good fowle to
supper, and then I to the office again and so home, my mind in great ease
to think of our coming to so good a respect with my Lord again, and my
Lady, and that my Lady do so much cry up my father's usage of her
children, and the goodness of the ayre there, found in the young ladies'
faces at their return thence, as she says, as also my being put into the
commission of the Fishery,

     [There had been recently established, under the Great Seal of
     England, a Corporation for the Royal Fishing, of which the Duke of
     York was Governor, Lord Craven Deputy-Governor, and the Lord Mayor
     and Chamberlain of London, for the time being, Treasurers, in which
     body was vested the sole power of licensing lotteries ("The Newes,"
     October 6th, 1664).  The original charter (dated April 8th, 1664),
     incorporating James, Duke of York, and thirty-six assistants as
     Governor and Company of the Royal Fishing of Great Britain and
     Ireland, is among the State Papers.  The duke was to be Governor
     till February 26th, 1665]

for which I must give my Lord thanks, and so home to bed, having a great
cold in my head and throat tonight from my late cutting my hair so close
to my head, but I hope it will be soon gone again.

5th.  Up and to the office, where, though I had a great cold, I was forced
to speak much upon a publique meeting of the East India Company, at our
office; where our own company was full, and there was also my Lord George
Barkeley, in behalfe of the company of merchants (I suppose he is on that
company), who, hearing my name, took notice of me, and condoled my cozen
Edward Pepys's death, not knowing whose son I was, nor did demand it of
me.  We broke up without coming to any conclusion, for want of my Lord
Marlborough.  We broke up and I to the 'Change, where with several people
and my uncle Wight to drink a dish of coffee, and so home to dinner, and
then to the office all the afternoon, my eye and my throat being very bad,
and my cold increasing so as I could not speak almost at all at night.  So
at night home to supper, that is a posset, and to bed.

6th (Lord's day).  Up, and my cold continuing in great extremity I could
not go out to church, but sat all day (a little time at dinner excepted)
in my closet at the office till night drawing up a second letter to Mr.
Coventry about the measure of masts to my great satisfaction, and so in
the evening home, and my uncle and aunt Wight came to us and supped with
us, where pretty merry, but that my cold put me out of humour.  At night
with my cold, and my eye also sore still, to bed.

7th.  Up betimes, and the Duke being gone abroad to-day, as we heard by a
messenger, I spent the morning at my office writing fair my yesterday's
work till almost 2 o'clock (only Sir G. Carteret coming I went down a
little way by water towards Deptford, but having more mind to have my
business done I pretended business at the 'Change, and so went into
another boat), and then, eating a bit, my wife and I by coach to the
Duke's house, where we saw "The Unfortunate Lovers;" but I know not
whether I am grown more curious than I was or no, but I was not much
pleased with it, though I know not where to lay the fault, unless it was
that the house was very empty, by reason of a new play at the other house.
Yet here was my Lady Castlemayne in a box, and it was pleasant to hear an
ordinary lady hard by us, that it seems did not know her before, say,
being told who she was, that "she was well enough."  Thence home, and I
ended and sent away my letter to Mr. Coventry (having first read it and
had the opinion of Sir W. Warren in the case), and so home to supper and
to bed, my cold being pretty well gone, but my eye remaining still snare
and rhumey, which I wonder at, my right eye ayling nothing.

8th.  Up with some little discontent with my wife upon her saying that she
had got and used some puppy-dog water, being put upon it by a desire of my
aunt Wight to get some for her, who hath a mind, unknown to her husband,
to get some for her ugly face.  I to the office, where we sat all the
morning, doing not much business through the multitude of counsellors, one
hindering another.  It was Mr. Coventry's own saying to me in his coach
going to the 'Change, but I wonder that he did give me no thanks for my
letter last night, but I believe he did only forget it. Thence home,
whither Luellin came and dined with me, but we made no long stay at
dinner; for "Heraclius"  being acted, which my wife and I have a mighty
mind to see, we do resolve, though not exactly agreeing with the letter of
my vowe, yet altogether with the sense, to see another this month, by
going hither instead of that at Court, there having been none conveniently
since I made my vowe for us to see there, nor like to be this Lent, and
besides we did walk home on purpose to make this going as cheap as that
would have been, to have seen one at Court, and my conscience knows that
it is only the saving of money and the time also that I intend by my
oaths, and this has cost no more of either, so that my conscience before
God do after good consultation and resolution of paying my forfeit, did my
conscience accuse me of breaking my vowe, I do not find myself in the
least apprehensive that I have done any violence to my oaths.  The play
hath one very good passage well managed in it, about two persons
pretending, and yet denying themselves, to be son to the tyrant Phocas,
and yet heire of Mauritius to the crowne.  The garments like Romans very
well.  The little girle is come to act very prettily, and spoke the
epilogue most admirably.  But at the beginning, at the drawing up of the
curtaine, there was the finest scene of the Emperor and his people about
him, standing in their fixed and different pastures in their Roman
habitts, above all that ever I yet saw at any of the theatres.  Walked
home, calling to see my brother Tom, who is in bed, and I doubt very ill
of a consumption.  To the office awhile, and so home to supper and to bed.

9th.  Up pretty betimes to my office, where all day long, but a little at
home at dinner, at my office finishing all things about Mr. Wood's
contract for masts, wherein I am sure I shall save the King L400 before I
have done.  At night home to supper and to bed.

10th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning doing business, and at
noon to the 'Change and there very busy, and so home to dinner with my
wife, to a good hog's harslet,

     [Harslet or haslet, the entrails of an animal, especially of a hog,
     as the heart, liver, &c.]

a piece of meat I love, but have not eat of I think these seven years, and
after dinner abroad by coach set her at Mrs. Hunt's and I to White Hall,
and at the Privy Seale I enquired, and found the Bill come for the
Corporation of the Royall Fishery; whereof the Duke of Yorke is made
present Governor, and several other very great persons, to the number of
thirty-two, made his assistants for their lives: whereof, by my Lord
Sandwich's favour, I am one; and take it not only as a matter of honour,
but that, that may come to be of profit to me, and so with great content
went and called my wife, and so home and to the office, where busy late,
and so home to supper and to bed.

11th.  Up and by coach to my Lord Sandwich's, who not being up I staid
talking with Mr. Moore till my Lord was ready and come down, and went
directly out without calling for me or seeing any body.  I know not
whether he knew I was there, but I am apt to think not, because if he
would have given me that slighting yet he would not have done it to others
that were there.  So I went back again doing nothing but discoursing with
Mr. Moore, who I find by discourse to be grown rich, and indeed not to use
me at all with the respect he used to do, but as his equal.  He made me
known to their Chaplin, who is a worthy, able man. Thence home, and by and
by to the Coffee-house, and thence to the 'Change, and so home to dinner,
and after a little chat with my wife to the office, where all the
afternoon till very late at the office busy, and so home to supper and to
bed, hoping in God that my diligence, as it is really very useful for the
King, so it will end in profit to myself. In the meantime I have good
content in mind to see myself improve every day in knowledge and being
known.

12th.  Lay long pleasantly entertaining myself with my wife, and then up
and to the office, where busy till noon, vexed to see how Sir J. Minnes
deserves rather to be pitied for his dotage and folly than employed at a
great salary to ruin the King's business.  At noon to the 'Change, and
thence home to dinner, and then down to Deptford, where busy a while, and
then walking home it fell hard a raining.  So at Halfway house put in, and
there meeting Mr. Stacy with some company of pretty women, I took him
aside to a room by ourselves, and there talked with him about the several
sorts of tarrs, and so by and by parted, and I walked home and there late
at the office, and so home to supper and to bed.

13th (Lord's day).  Lay long in bed talking with my wife, and then up in
great doubt whether I should not go see Mr. Coventry or no, who hath not
been well these two or three days, but it being foul weather I staid
within, and so to my office, and there all the morning reading some Common
Law, to which I will allot a little time now and then, for I much want it.
At noon home to dinner, and then after some discourse with my wife, to the
office again, and by and by Sir W. Pen came to me after sermon and walked
with me in the garden and then one comes to tell me that Anthony and Will
Joyce were come to see me, so I in to them and made mighty much of them,
and very pleasant we were, and most of their business I find to be to
advise about getting some woman to attend my brother Tom, whom they say is
very ill and seems much to want one.  To which I agreed, and desired them
to get their wives to enquire out one. By and by they bid me good night,
but immediately as they were gone out of doors comes Mrs. Turner's boy
with a note to me to tell me that my brother Tom was so ill as they feared
he would not long live, and that it would be fit I should come and see
him.  So I sent for them back, and they came, and Will Joyce desiring to
speak with me alone I took him up, and there he did plainly tell me to my
great astonishment that my brother is deadly ill, and that their chief
business of coming was to tell me so, and what is worst that his disease
is the pox, which he hath heretofore got, and hath not been cured, but is
come to this, and that this is certain, though a secret told his father
Fenner by the Doctor which he helped my brother to.  This troubled me
mightily, but however I thought fit to go see him for speech of people's
sake, and so walked along with them, and in our way called on my uncle
Fenner (where I have not been these 12 months and more) and advised with
him, and then to my brother, who lies in bed talking idle.  He could only
say that he knew me, and then fell to other discourse, and his face like a
dying man, which Mrs. Turner, who was here, and others conclude he is.
The company being gone, I took the mayde, which seems a very grave and
serious woman, and in W. Joyce's company' did inquire how things are with
her master.  She told me many things very discreetly, and said she had all
his papers and books, and key of his cutting house, and showed me a bag
which I and Wm. Joyce told, coming to L5 14s. 0d., which we left with her
again, after giving her good counsel, and the boys, and seeing a nurse
there of Mrs. Holden's choosing, I left them, and so walked home greatly
troubled to think of my brother's condition, and the trouble that would
arise to me by his death or continuing sick.  So at home, my mind
troubled, to bed.

14th.  Up, and walked to my brother's, where I find he hath continued
talking idly all night, and now knows me not; which troubles me mightily.
So I walked down and discoursed a great while alone with the mayde, who
tells me many passages of her master's practices, and how she concludes
that he has run behind hand a great while and owes money, and has been
dunned by several people, among others by one Cave, both husband and wife,
but whether it was for--[See April 6th]--money or something worse she
knows not, but there is one Cranburne, I think she called him, in Fleete
Lane with whom he hath many times been mighty private, but what their
dealings have been she knows not, but believes these were naught, and then
his sitting up two Saturday nights one after another when all were abed
doing something to himself, which she now suspects what it was, but did
not before, but tells me that he hath been a very bad husband as to
spending his time, and hath often told him of it, so that upon the whole I
do find he is, whether he lives or dies, a ruined man, and what trouble
will befall me by it I know not.  Thence to White Hall; and in the Duke's
chamber, while he was dressing, two persons of quality that were there did
tell his Royal Highness how the other night, in Holborne, about midnight,
being at cards, a link-boy come by and run into the house, and told the
people the house was a-falling.  Upon this the whole family was frighted,
concluding that the boy had said that the house was a-fire: so they deft
their cards above, and one would have got out of the balcone, but it was
not open; the other went up to fetch down his children, that were in bed;
so all got clear out of the house.  And no sooner so, but the house fell
down indeed, from top to bottom.  It seems my Lord Southampton's
canaille--[sewer]--did come too near their foundation, and so weakened the
house, and down it came; which, in every respect, is a most extraordinary
passage.  By and by into his closet and did our business with him.  But I
did not speed as I expected in a business about the manner of buying hemp
for this year, which troubled me, but it proceeds only from my pride, that
I must needs expect every thing to be ordered just as I apprehend, though
it was not I think from my errour, but their not being willing to hear and
consider all that I had to propose.  Being broke up I followed my Lord
Sandwich and thanked him for his putting me into the Fishery, which I
perceive he expected, and cried "Oh!" says he, "in the Fishery you mean.
I told you I would remember you in it," but offered no other discourse.
But demanding whether he had any commands for me, methought he cried "No!"
as if he had no more mind to discourse with me, which still troubles me
and hath done all the day, though I think I am a fool for it, in not
pursuing my resolution of going handsome in clothes and looking high, for
that must do it when all is done with my Lord.  Thence by coach with Sir
W. Batten to the city, and his son Castle, who talks mighty highly against
Captain Tayler, calling him knave, and I find that the old Boating father
is led and talks just as the son do, or the son as the father would have
him. 'Light and to Mr. Moxon's, and there saw our office globes in doing,
which will be very handsome but cost money.  So to the Coffee-house, and
there very fine discourse with Mr. Hill the merchant, a pretty, gentile,
young, and sober man.  So to the 'Change, and thence home, where my wife
and I fell out about my not being willing to have her have her gowne
laced, but would lay out the same money and more on a plain new one.  At
this she flounced away in a manner I never saw her, nor which I could ever
endure.  So I away to the office, though she had dressed herself to go see
my Lady Sandwich.  She by and by in a rage follows me, and coming to me
tells me in spitefull manner like a vixen and with a look full of rancour
that she would go buy a new one and lace it and make me pay for it, and
then let me burn it if I would after she had done it, and so went away in
a fury.  This vexed me cruelly, but being very busy I had, not hand to
give myself up to consult what to do in it, but anon, I suppose after she
saw that I did not follow her, she came again to the office, where I made
her stay, being busy with another, half an houre, and her stomach coming
down we were presently friends, and so after my business being over at the
office we out and by coach to my Lady Sandwich's, with whom I left my
wife, and I to White Hall, where I met Mr. Delsety, and after an hour's
discourse with him met with nobody to do other business with, but back
again to my Lady, and after half an hour's discourse with her to my
brother's, who I find in the same or worse condition.  The doctors give
him over and so do all that see him. He talks no sense two, words together
now; and I confess it made me weepe to see that he should not be able,
when I asked him, to say who I was. I went to Mrs. Turner's, and by her
discourse with my brother's Doctor, Mr. Powell, I find that she is full
now of the disease which my brother is troubled with, and talks of it
mightily, which I am sorry for, there being other company,  but methinks
it should be for her honour to forbear talking of it, the shame of this
very thing I confess troubles me as much as anything.  Back to my
brother's and took my wife, and carried her to my uncle Fenner's and there
had much private discourse with him.  He tells me of the Doctor's thoughts
of my brother's little hopes of recovery, and from that to tell me his
thoughts long of my brother's bad husbandry, and from that to say that he
believes he owes a great deal of money, as to my cozen Scott I know not
how much, and Dr. Thos. Pepys L30, but that the Doctor confesses that he
is paid L20 of it, and what with that and what he owes my father and me I
doubt he is in a very sad condition, that if he lives he will not be able
to show his head, which will be a very great shame to me.  After this I
went in to my aunt and my wife and Anthony Joyce and his wife, who were by
chance there, and drank and so home, my mind and head troubled, but I hope
it will [be] over in a little time one way or other.  After doing a little
at my office of business I home to supper and to bed.  From notice that my
uncle Fenner did give my father the last week of my brother's condition,
my mother is coming up to towne, which also do trouble me.  The business
between my Lords Chancellor and Bristoll, they say, is hushed up; and the
latter gone or going, by the King's licence, to France.

15th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and at noon
comes Madam Turner and her daughter The., her chief errand to tell me that
she had got Dr. Wiverly, her Doctor, to search my brother's mouth, where
Mr. Powell says there is an ulcer, from thence he concludes that he hath
had the pox.  But the Doctor swears that there is not, nor ever was any,
and my brother being very sensible, which I was glad to hear, he did talk
with him about it, and he did wholly disclaim that ever he had the
disease, or that ever he said to Powell that he had it.  All which did put
me into great comfort as to the reproach which was spread against him.  So
I sent for a barrel of oysters, and they dined, and we were very merry, I
being willing to be so upon this news.  After dinner we took coach and to
my brother's, where contrary to my expectation he continues as bad or
worse, talking idle, and now not at all knowing any of us as before.  Here
we staid a great while, I going up and down the house looking after
things.  In the evening Dr. Wiverley came again, and I sent for Mr. Powell
(the Doctor and I having first by ourselves searched my brother again at
his privities, where he was as clear as ever he was born, and in the
Doctor's opinion had been ever so), and we three alone discoursed the
business, where the coxcomb did give us his simple reasons for what he had
said, which the Doctor fully confuted, and left the fellow only saying
that he should cease to report any such thing, and that what he had said
was the best of his judgment from my brother's words and a ulcer, as he
supposed, in his mouth.  I threatened him that I would have satisfaction
if I heard any more such discourse, and so good night to them two, giving
the Doctor a piece for his fee, but the other nothing.  I to my brother
again, where Madam Turner and her company, and Mrs. Croxton, my wife, and
Mrs. Holding.  About 8 o'clock my brother began to fetch his spittle with
more pain, and to speak as much but not so distinctly, till at last the
phlegm getting the mastery of him, and he beginning as we thought to
rattle, I had no mind to see him die, as we thought he presently would,
and so withdrew and led Mrs. Turner home, but before I came back, which
was in half a quarter of an hour, my brother was dead.  I went up and
found the nurse holding his eyes shut, and he poor wretch lying with his
chops fallen, a most sad sight, and that which put me into a present very
great transport of grief and cries, and indeed it was a most sad sight to
see the poor wretch lie now still and dead, and pale like a stone.  I
staid till he was almost cold, while Mrs. Croxton, Holden, and the rest
did strip and lay him out, they observing his corpse, as they told me
afterwards, to be as clear as any they ever saw, and so this was the end
of my poor brother, continuing talking idle and his lips working even to
his last that his phlegm hindered his breathing, and at last his breath
broke out bringing a flood of phlegm and stuff out with it, and so he
died.  This evening he talked among other talk a great deal of French very
plain and good, as, among others: 'quand un homme boit quand il n'a poynt
d'inclination a boire il ne luy fait jamais de bien.'  I once begun to
tell him something of his condition, and asked him whither he thought he
should go.  He in distracted manner answered me--"Why, whither should I
go? there are but two ways: If I go, to the bad way I must give God thanks
for it, and if I go the other way I must give God the more thanks for it;
and I hope I have not been so undutifull and unthankfull in my life but I
hope I shall go that way."  This was all the sense, good or bad, that I
could get of him this day.  I left my wife to see him laid out, and I by
coach home carrying my brother's papers, all I could find, with me, and
having wrote a letter to, my father telling him what hath been said I
returned by coach, it being very late, and dark, to my brother's, but all
being gone, the corpse laid out, and my wife at Mrs. Turner's, I thither,
and there after an hour's talk, we up to bed, my wife and I in the little
blue chamber, and I lay close to my wife, being full of disorder and grief
for my brother that I could not sleep nor wake with satisfaction, at last
I slept till 5 or 6 o'clock.

16th.  And then I rose and up, leaving my wife in bed, and to my
brother's, where I set them on cleaning the house, and my wife coming anon
to look after things, I up and down to my cozen Stradwicke's and uncle
Fenner's about discoursing for the funeral, which I am resolved to put off
till Friday next.  Thence home and trimmed myself, and then to the
'Change, and told my uncle Wight of my brother's death, and so by coach to
my cozen Turner's and there dined very well, but my wife .  .  . .  in
great pain we were forced to rise in some disorder, and in Mrs. Turner's
coach carried her home and put her to bed.  Then back again with my cozen
Norton to Mrs. Turner's, and there staid a while talking with Dr. Pepys,
the puppy, whom I had no patience to hear.  So I left them and to my
brother's to look after things, and saw the coffin brought; and by and by
Mrs. Holden came and saw him nailed up.  Then came W. Joyce to me half
drunk, and much ado I had to tell him the story of my brother's being
found clear of what was said, but he would interrupt me by some idle
discourse or other, of his crying what a good man, and a good speaker my
brother was, and God knows what.  At last weary of him I got him away, and
I to Mrs. Turner's, and there, though my heart is still heavy to think of
my poor brother, yet I could give way to my fancy to hear Mrs. The. play
upon the Harpsicon, though the musique did not please me neither.  Thence
to my brother's and found them with my mayd Elizabeth taking an inventory
of the goods of the house, which I was well pleased at, and am much
beholden to Mr. Honeywood's man in doing of it.  His name is Herbert, one
that says he knew me when he lived with Sir Samuel Morland, but I have
forgot him.  So I left them at it, and by coach home and to my office,
there to do a little business, but God knows my heart and head is so full
of my brother's death, and the consequences of it, that I can do very
little or understand it.  So home to supper, and after looking over some
business in my chamber I to bed to my wife, who continues in bed in some
pain still.  This day I have a great barrel of oysters given me by Mr.
Barrow, as big as 16 of others, and I took it in the coach with me to Mrs.
Turner's, and give them to her.  This day the Parliament met again, after
a long prorogation, but what they have done I have not been in the way to
hear.

17th.  Up and to my brother's, where all the morning doing business
against to-morrow, and so to my cozen Stradwicke's about the same
business, and to the 'Change, and thence home to dinner, where my wife in
bed sick still, but not so bad as yesterday.  I dined by her, and so to
the office, where we sat this afternoon, having changed this day our
sittings from morning to afternoons, because of the Parliament which
returned yesterday; but was adjourned till Monday next; upon pretence that
many of the members were said to be upon the road; and also the King had
other affairs, and so desired them to adjourn till then.  But the truth
is, the King is offended at my Lord of Bristol, as they say, whom he hath
found to have been all this while (pretending a desire of leave to go into
France, and to have all the difference between him and the Chancellor made
up,) endeavouring to make factions in both Houses to the Chancellor.  So
the King did this to keep the Houses from meeting; and in the meanwhile
sent a guard and a herald last night to have taken him at Wimbleton, where
he was in the morning, but could not find him: at which the King was and
is still mightily concerned, and runs up and down to and from the
Chancellor's like a boy: and it seems would make Digby's articles against
the Chancellor to be treasonable reflections against his Majesty.  So that
the King is very high, as they say; and God knows what will follow upon
it!  After office I to my brother's again, and thence to Madam Turner's,
in both places preparing things against to-morrow; and this night I have
altered my resolution of burying him in the church yarde among my young
brothers and sisters, and bury him in the church, in the middle isle, as
near as I can to my mother's pew.  This costs me 20s. more.  This being
all, home by coach, bringing my brother's silver tankard for safety along
with me, and so to supper, after writing to my father, and so to bed.

18th.  Up betimes, and walked to my brother's, where a great while putting
things in order against anon; then to Madam Turner's and eat a breakfast
there, and so to Wotton, my shoemaker, and there got a pair of shoes
blacked on the soles against anon for me; so to my brother's and to
church, and with the grave-maker chose a place for my brother to lie in,
just under my mother's pew.  But to see how a man's tombes are at the
mercy of such a fellow, that for sixpence he would, (as his owne words
were,) "I will justle them together but I will make room for him;"
speaking of the fulness of the middle isle, where he was to lie; and that
he would, for my father's sake, do my brother that is dead all the
civility he can; which was to disturb other corps that are not quite
rotten, to make room for him; and methought his manner of speaking it was
very remarkable; as of a thing that now was in his power to do a man a
courtesy or not.  At noon my wife, though in pain, comes, but I being
forced to go home, she went back with me, where I dressed myself, and so
did Besse; and so to my brother's again: whither, though invited, as the
custom is, at one or two o'clock, they came not till four or five.  But at
last one after another they come, many more than I bid: and my reckoning
that I bid was one hundred and twenty; but I believe there was nearer one
hundred and fifty.  Their service was six biscuits apiece, and what they
pleased of burnt claret.  My cosen Joyce Norton kept the wine and cakes
above; and did give out to them that served, who had white gloves given
them.  But above all, I am beholden to Mrs. Holden, who was most kind, and
did take mighty pains not only in getting the house and every thing else
ready, but this day in going up and down to see, the house filled and
served, in order to mine, and their great content, I think; the men
sitting by themselves in some rooms, and women by themselves in others,
very close, but yet room enough.  Anon to church, walking out into the
streete to the Conduit, and so across the streete, and had a very good
company along with the corps.  And being come to the grave as above, Dr.
Pierson, the minister of the parish, did read the service for buriall: and
so I saw my poor brother laid into the grave; and so all broke up; and I
and my wife and Madam Turner and her family to my brother's, and by and by
fell to a barrell of oysters, cake, and cheese, of Mr. Honiwood's, with
him, in his chamber and below, being too merry for so late a sad work.
But, Lord! to see how the world makes nothing of the memory of a man, an
houre after he is dead!  And, indeed, I must blame myself; for though at
the sight of him dead and dying, I had real grief for a while, while he
was in my sight, yet presently after, and ever since, I have had very
little grief indeed for him.  By and by, it beginning to be late, I put
things in some order in the house, and so took my wife and Besse (who hath
done me very good service in cleaning and getting ready every thing and
serving the wine and things to-day, and is indeed a most excellent
good-natured and faithful wench, and I love her mightily), by coach home,
and so after being at the office to set down the day's work home to supper
and to bed.

19th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning, and at noon my wife
and I alone, having a good hen, with eggs, to dinner, with great content.
Then by coach to my brother's, where I spent the afternoon in paying some
of the charges of the buriall, and in looking over his papers, among which
I find several letters of my brother John's to him speaking very foale
words of me and my deportment to him here, and very crafty designs about
Sturtlow land and God knows what, which I am very glad to know, and shall
make him repent them.  Anon my father and my brother John came to towne by
coach.  I sat till night with him, giving him an account of things.  He,
poor man, very sad and sickly.  I in great pain by a simple compressing of
my cods to-day by putting one leg over another as I have formerly done,
which made me hasten home, and after a little at the office in great
disorder home to bed.

20th (Lord's day).  Kept my bed all the morning, having laid a poultice to
my cods last night to take down the tumour there which I got yesterday,
which it did do, being applied pretty warm, and soon after the beginning
of the swelling, and the pain was gone also.  We lay talking all the
while, among other things of religion, wherein I am sorry so often to hear
my wife talk of her being and resolving to die a Catholique,

     [Mrs. Pepys's leaning towards Roman Catholicism was a constant
     trouble to her husband; but, in spite of his fears, she died a
     Protestant (Dr. Milles's certificate.)]

and indeed a small matter, I believe, would absolutely turn her, which I
am sorry for.  Up at noon to dinner, and then to my chamber with a fire
till late at night looking over my brother Thomas's papers, sorting of
them, among which I find many base letters of my brother John's to him
against me, and carrying on plots against me to promote Tom's having of
his Banbury' Mistress, in base slighting terms, and in worse of my sister
Pall, such as I shall take a convenient time to make my father know, and
him also to his sorrow.  So after supper to bed, our people rising to wash
to-morrow.

21st.  Up, and it snowing this morning a little, which from the mildness
of the winter and the weather beginning to be hot and the summer to come
on apace, is a little strange to us.  I did not go abroad for fear of my
tumour, for fear it shall rise again, but staid within, and by and by my,
father came, poor man, to me, and my brother John.  After much talke and
taking them up to my chamber, I did there after some discourse bring in
any business of anger--with John, and did before my father read all his
roguish letters, which troubled my father mightily, especially to hear me
say what I did, against my allowing any thing for the time to come to him
out of my owne purse, and other words very severe, while he, like a simple
rogue, made very silly and churlish answers to me, not like a man of any
goodness or witt, at which I was as much disturbed as the other, and will
be as good as my word in making him to his cost know that I will remember
his carriage to me in this particular the longest day I live. It troubled
me to see my poor father so troubled, whose good nature did make him, poor
wretch, to yield, I believe, to comply with my brother Tom and him in part
of their designs, but without any ill intent to me, or doubt of me or my
good intentions to him or them, though it do trouble me a little that he
should in any manner do it.  They dined with me, and after dinner abroad
with my wife to buy some things for her, and I to the office, where we sat
till night, and then, after doing some business at my closet, I home and
to supper and to bed.  This day the Houses of Parliament met; and the King
met them, with the Queene with him.  And he made a speech to them:

     [March 16th, 1663-64.  This day both Houses met, and on the gist the
     king opened the session with a speech from the throne, in which
     occurs this Passage: "I pray, Mr. Speaker, and you, gentlemen of the
     House of Commons, give that Triennial Bill once a reading in your
     house, and then, in God's name, do what you think fit for me and
     yourselves and the whole kingdom.  I need not tell you how much I
     love parliaments.  Never king was so much beholden to parliaments as
     I have been, nor do I think the crown can ever be happy without
     frequent parliaments" (Cobbett's "Parliamentary History," vol. iv.,
     cc. 290, 291).]

among other things, discoursing largely of the plots abroad against him
and the peace of the kingdom; and, among other things, that the
dissatisfied party had great hopes upon the effect of the Act for a
Triennial Parliament granted by his father, which he desired them to
peruse, and, I think, repeal.  So the Houses did retire to their own
House, and did order the Act to be read to-morrow before them; and I
suppose it will be repealed, though I believe much against the will of a
good many that sit there.

22nd.  Up, and spent the whole morning and afternoon at my office, only in
the evening, my wife being at my aunt Wight's, I went thither, calling at
my own house, going out found the parlour curtains drawn, and inquiring
the reason of it, they told me that their mistress had got Mrs. Buggin's
fine little dog and our little bitch, which is proud at this time, and I
am apt to think that she was helping him to line her, for going afterwards
to my uncle Wight's, and supping there with her, where very merry with Mr.
Woolly's drollery, and going home I found the little dog so little that of
himself he could not reach our bitch, which I am sorry for, for it is the
finest dog that ever I saw in my life, as if he were painted the colours
are so finely mixed and shaded.  God forgive me, it went against me to
have my wife and servants look upon them while they endeavoured to do
something .  .  .  .

23rd.  Up, and going out saw Mrs. Buggin's dog, which proves as I thought
last night so pretty that I took him and the bitch into my closet below,
and by holding down the bitch helped him to line her, which he did very
stoutly, so as I hope it will take, for it is the prettiest dog that ever
I saw.  So to the office, where very busy all the morning, and so to the
'Change, and off hence with Sir W. Rider to the Trinity House, and there
dined very well: and good discourse among the old men of Islands now and
then rising and falling again in the Sea, and that there is many dangers
of grounds and rocks that come just up to the edge almost of the sea, that
is never discovered and ships perish without the world's knowing the
reason of it.  Among other things, they observed, that there are but two
seamen in the Parliament house, viz., Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen, and
not above twenty or thirty merchants; which is a strange thing in an
island, and no wonder that things of trade go no better nor are better
understood.  Thence home, and all the afternoon at the office, only for an
hour in the evening my Lady Jemimah, Paulina, and Madam Pickering come to
see us, but my wife would not be seen, being unready.  Very merry with
them; they mightily talking of their thrifty living for a fortnight before
their mother came to town, and other such simple talk, and of their merry
life at Brampton, at my father's, this winter.  So they being gone, to the
office again till late, and so home and to supper and to bed.

24th.  Called up by my father, poor man, coming to advise with me about
Tom's house and other matters, and he being gone I down by water to
Greenwich, it being very-foggy, and I walked very finely to Woolwich, and
there did very much business at both yards, and thence walked back,
Captain Grove with me talking, and so to Deptford and did the like-there,
and then walked to Redriffe (calling and eating a bit of collops and eggs
at Half-way house), and so home to the office, where we sat late, and home
weary to supper and to bed.

25th (Lady-day).  Up and by water to White Hall, and there to chappell;
where it was most infinite full to hear Dr. Critton.  Being not knowne,
some great persons in the pew I pretended to, and went in, did question my
coming in.  I told them my pretence; so they turned to the orders of the
chappell, which hung behind upon the wall, and read it; and were
satisfied; but they did not demand whether I was in waiting or no; and so
I was in some fear lest he that was in waiting might come and betray me.
The Doctor preached upon the thirty-first of Jeremy, and the twenty-first
and twenty-second verses, about a woman compassing a man; meaning the
Virgin conceiving and bearing our Saviour.  It was the worst sermon I ever
heard him make, I must confess; and yet it was good, and in two places
very bitter, advising the King to do as the Emperor Severus did, to hang
up a Presbyter John (a short coat and a long gowne interchangeably) in all
the Courts of England.  But the story of Severus was pretty, that he
hanged up forty senators before the Senate house, and then made a speech
presently to the Senate in praise of his owne lenity; and then decreed
that never any senator after that time should suffer in the same manner
without consent of the Senate: which he compared to the proceeding of the
Long Parliament against my Lord Strafford.  He said the greatest part of
the lay magistrates in England were Puritans, and would not do justice;
and the Bishopps, their powers were so taken away and lessened, that they
could not exercise the power they ought.  He told the King and the ladies
plainly, speaking of death and of the skulls and bones of dead men and
women,

     [The preacher appears to have had the grave scene in "Hamlet" in
     his mind, as he gives the same illustration of Alexander as Hamlet
     does.]

how there is no difference; that nobody could tell that of the great
Marius or Alexander from a pyoneer; nor, for all the pains the ladies take
with their faces, he that should look in a charnels-house could not
distinguish which was Cleopatra's, or fair Rosamond's, or Jane Shoare's.
Thence by water home.  After dinner to the office, thence with my wife to
see my father and discourse how he finds Tom's matters, which he do very
ill, and that he finds him to have been so negligent, that he used to
trust his servants with cutting out of clothes, never hardly cutting out
anything himself; and, by the abstract of his accounts, we find him to owe
above L290, and to be coming to him under L200.  Thence home with my wife,
it being very dirty on foot, and bought some fowl in Gracious. Streets and
some oysters against our feast to-morrow.  So home, and after at the
office a while, home to supper and to bed.

26th.  Up very betimes and to my office, and there read over some papers
against a meeting by and by at this office of Mr. Povy, Sir W. Rider,
Creed, and Vernaty, and Mr. Gauden about my Lord Peterborough's accounts
for Tangier, wherein we proceeded a good way; but, Lord! to see how
ridiculous Mr. Povy is in all he says or do; like a man not more fit for
to be in such employments as he is, and particularly that of Treasurer
(paying many and very great sums without the least written order) as he is
to be King of England, and seems but this day, after much discourse of
mine, to be sensible of that part of his folly, besides a great deal more
in other things.  This morning in discourse Sir W. Rider [said], that he
hath kept a journals of his life for almost these forty years, even to
this day and still do, which pleases me mightily.  That being done Sir J.
Minnes and I sat all the morning, and then I to the 'Change, and there got
away by pretence of business with my uncle Wight to put off Creed, whom I
had invited to dinner, and so home, and there found Madam Turner, her
daughter The., Joyce Norton, my father and Mr. Honywood, and by and by
come my uncle Wight and aunt.  This being my solemn feast for my cutting
of the stone, it being now, blessed be God! this day six years since the
time; and I bless God I do in all respects find myself free from that
disease or any signs of it, more than that upon the least cold I continue
to have pain in making water, by gathering of wind and growing costive,
till which be removed I am at no ease, but without that I am very well.
One evil more I have, which is that upon the least squeeze almost my cods
begin to swell and come to great pain, which is very strange and
troublesome to me, though upon the speedy applying of a poultice it goes
down again, and in two days I am well again.  Dinner not being presently
ready I spent some time myself and shewed them a map of Tangier left this
morning at my house by Creed, cut by our order, the Commissioners, and
drawn by Jonas Moore, which is very pleasant, and I purpose to have it
finely set out and hung up.  Mrs. Hunt coming to see my wife by chance
dined here with us.  After dinner Sir W. Batten sent to speak with me, and
told me that he had proffered our bill today in the House, and that it was
read without any dissenters, and he fears not but will pass very well,
which I shall be glad of.  He told me also how Sir [Richard] Temple hath
spoke very discontentfull words in the House about the Tryennial Bill; but
it hath been read the second time to-day, and committed; and, he believes,
will go on without more ado, though there are many in the House are
displeased at it, though they dare not say much.  But above all
expectation, Mr. Prin is the man against it, comparing it to the idoll
whose head was of gold, and his body and legs and feet of different metal.
So this Bill had several degrees of calling of Parliaments, in case the
King, and then the Council, and then the Lord Chancellor, and then the
Sheriffes, should fail to do it.  He tells me also, how, upon occasion of
some 'prentices being put in the pillory to-day for beating of their
masters, or some such like thing, in Cheapside, a company of 'prentices
came and rescued them, and pulled down the pillory; and they being set up
again, did the like again.  So that the Lord Mayor and Major Generall
Browne was fain to come and stay there, to keep the peace; and drums, all
up and down the city, was beat to raise the trained bands, for to quiett
the towne, and by and by, going out with my uncle and aunt Wight by coach
with my wife through Cheapside (the rest of the company after much content
and mirth being broke up), we saw a trained band stand in Cheapside upon
their guard.  We went, much against my uncle's will, as far almost as Hyde
Park, he and my aunt falling out all the way about it, which vexed me, but
by this I understand my uncle more than ever I did, for he was mighty soon
angry, and wished a pox take her, which I was sorry to hear.  The weather
I confess turning on a sudden to rain did make it very unpleasant, but yet
there was no occasion in the world for his being so angry, but she bore
herself very discreetly, and I must confess she proves to me much another
woman than I thought her, but all was peace again presently, and so it
raining very fast, we met many brave coaches coming from the Parke and so
we turned and set them down at home, and so we home ourselves, and ended
the day with great content to think how it hath pleased the Lord in six
years time to raise me from a condition of constant and dangerous and most
painfull sicknesse and low condition and poverty to a state of constant
health almost, great honour and plenty, for which the Lord God of heaven
make me truly thankfull.  My wife found her gowne come home laced, which
is indeed very handsome, but will cost me a great deal of money, more than
ever I intended, but it is but for once.  So to the office and did
business, and then home and to bed.

27th (Lord's day).  Lay long in bed wrangling with my wife about the
charge she puts me to at this time for clothes more than I intended, and
very angry we were, but quickly friends again.  And so rising and ready I
to my office, and there fell upon business, and then to dinner, and then
to my office again to my business, and by and by in the afternoon walked
forth towards my father's, but it being church time, walked to St.
James's, to try if I could see the belle Butler, but could not; only saw
her sister, who indeed is pretty, with a fine Roman nose.  Thence walked
through the ducking-pond fields; but they are so altered since my father
used to carry us to Islington, to the old man's, at the King's Head, to
eat cakes and ale (his name was Pitts) that I did not know which was the
ducking-pond nor where I was.  So through F[l]ee[t] lane to my father's,
and there met Mr. Moore, and discoursed with him and my father about who
should administer for my brother Tom, and I find we shall have trouble in
it, but I will clear my hands of it, and what vexed me, my father seemed
troubled that I should seem to rely so wholly upon the advice of Mr.
Moore, and take nobody else, but I satisfied him, and so home; and in
Cheapside, both coming and going, it was full of apprentices, who have
been here all this day, and have done violence, I think, to the master of
the boys that were put in the pillory yesterday. But, Lord! to see how the
train-bands are raised upon this: the drums beating every where as if an
enemy were upon them; so much is this city subject to be put into a
disarray upon very small occasions.  But it was pleasant to hear the boys,
and particularly one little one, that I demanded the business.  He told me
that that had never been done in the city since it was a city, two
prentices put in the pillory, and that it ought not to be so. So I walked
home, and then it being fine moonshine with my wife an houre in the
garden, talking of her clothes against Easter and about her mayds, Jane
being to be gone, and the great dispute whether Besse, whom we both love,
should be raised to be chamber-mayde or no.  We have both a mind to it,
but know not whether we should venture the making her proud and so make a
bad chamber-mayde of a very good natured and sufficient cook-mayde.  So to
my office a little, and then to supper, prayers and to bed.

28th.  This is the first morning that I have begun, and I hope shall
continue to rise betimes in the morning, and so up and to my office, and
thence about 7 o'clock to T. Trice, and advised with him about our
administering to my brother Tom, and I went to my father and told him what
to do; which was to administer and to let my cozen Scott have a letter of
Atturny to follow the business here in his absence for him, who by that
means will have the power of paying himself (which we cannot however
hinder) and do us a kindness we think too.  But, Lord! what a shame,
methinks, to me, that, in this condition, and at this age, I should know
no better the laws of my owne country!  Thence to Westminster Hall, and
spent till noon, it being Parliament time, and at noon walked with Creed
into St. James's Parke, talking of many things, particularly of the poor
parts and great unfitness for business of Mr. Povy, and yet what a show he
makes in the world.  Mr. Coventry not being come to his chamber, I walked
through the house with him for an hour in St. James's fields' talking of
the same subject, and then parted, and back and with great impatience,
sometimes reading, sometimes walking, sometimes thinking that Mr.
Coventry, though he invited us to dinner with him, was gone with the rest
of the office without a dinner.  At last, at past 4 o'clock I heard that
the Parliament was not up yet, and so walked to Westminster Hall, and
there found it so, and meeting with Sir J. Minnes, and being very hungry,
went over with him to the Leg, and before we had cut a bit, the House
rises, however we eat a bit and away to St. James's and there eat a second
part of our dinner with Mr. Coventry and his brother Harry, Sir W. Batten
and Sir W. Pen.  The great matter today in the House hath been, that Mr.
Vaughan, the great speaker, is this day come to towne, and hath declared
himself in a speech of an houre and a half, with great reason and
eloquence, against the repealing of the Bill for Triennial Parliaments;
but with no successe: but the House have carried it that there shall be
such Parliaments, but without any coercive power upon the King, if he will
bring this Act.  But, Lord! to see how the best things are not done
without some design; for I perceive all these gentlemen that I was with
to-day were against it (though there was reason enough on their side); yet
purely, I could perceive, because it was the King's mind to have it; and
should he demand any thing else, I believe they would give it him.  But
this the discontented Presbyters, and the faction of the House will be
highly displeased with; but it was carried clearly against them in the
House.  We had excellent good table-talke, some of which I have entered in
my book of stories.  So with them by coach home, and there find (bye my
wife), that Father Fogourdy hath been with her to-day, and she is mightily
for our going to hear a famous Reule preach at the French Embassador's
house: I pray God he do not tempt her in any matters of religion, which
troubles me; and also, she had messages from her mother to-day, who sent
for her old morning-gown, which was almost past wearing; and I used to
call it her kingdom, from the ease and content she used to have in the
wearing of it.  I am glad I do not hear of her begging any thing of more
value, but I do not like that these messages should now come all upon
Monday morning, when my wife expects of course I should be abroad at the
Duke's.  To the office, where Mr. Norman came and showed me a design of
his for the storekeeper's books, for the keeping of them regular in order
to a balance, which I am mightily satisfied to see, and shall love the
fellow the better, as he is in all things sober, so particularly for his
endeavour to do something in this thing so much wanted.  So late home to
supper and to bed, weary-with walking so long to no purpose in the Park
to-day.

29th.  Was called up this morning by a messenger from Sir G. Carteret to
come to him to Sir W. Batten's, and so I rose and thither to him, and with
him and Sir J. Minnes to, Sir G. Carteret's to examine his accounts, and
there we sat at it all the morning.  About noon Sir W. Batten came from
the House of Parliament and told us our Bill for our office was read the
second time to-day, with great applause, and is committed.  By and by to
dinner, where good cheere, and Sir G. Carteret in his humour a very good
man, and the most kind father and pleased father in his children that ever
I saw.  Here is now hung up a picture of my Lady Carteret, drawn by Lilly,
a very fine picture, but yet not so good as I have seen of his doing.
After dinner to the business again without any intermission till almost
night, and then home, and took coach to my father to see and discourse
with him, and so home again and to my office, where late, and then home to
bed.

30th.  Up very betimes to my office, and thence at 7 o'clock to Sir G.
Carteret, and there with Sir J. Minnes made an end of his accounts, but
staid not dinner, my Lady having made us drink our morning draft there of
several wines, but I drank: nothing but some of her coffee, which was
poorly made, with a little sugar in it.  Thence to the 'Change a great
while, and had good discourse with Captain Cocke at the Coffee-house about
a Dutch warr, and it seems the King's design is by getting underhand the
merchants to bring in their complaints to the Parliament, to make them in
honour begin a warr, which he cannot in honour declare first, for fear
they should not second him with money.  Thence homewards, staying a pretty
while with my little she milliner at the end of Birchin Lane, talking and
buying gloves of her, and then home to dinner, and in the afternoon had a
meeting upon the Chest business, but I fear unless I have time to look
after it nothing will be done,, and that I fear I shall not.  In the
evening comes Sir W. Batten, who tells us that the Committee have approved
of our bill with very few amendments in words, not in matter.  So to my
office, where late with Sir W. Warren, and so home to supper and to bed.

31st.  Up betimes, and to my office, where by and by comes Povy, Sir W.
Rider, Mr. Bland, Creed, and Vernatty, about my Lord Peterborough's
accounts, which we now went through, but with great difficulty, and many
high words between Mr. Povy and I; for I could not endure to see so many
things extraordinary put in, against truthe and reason.  He was very
angry, but I endeavoured all I could to profess my satisfaction in my
Lord's part of the accounts, but not in those foolish idle things, they
say I said, that others had put in.  Anon we rose and parted, both of us
angry, but I contented, because I knew all of them must know I was in the
right.  Then with Creed to Deptford, where I did a great deal of business
enquiring into the business of canvas and other things with great content,
and so walked back again, good discourse between Creed and I by the way,
but most upon the folly of Povy, and at home found Luellin, and so we to
dinner, and thence I to the office, where we sat all the afternoon late,
and being up and my head mightily crowded with business, I took my wife by
coach to see my father.  I left her at his house and went to him to an
alehouse hard by, where my cozen Scott was, and my father's new tenant,
Langford, a tailor, to whom I have promised my custom, and he seems a very
modest, carefull young man.  Thence my wife coming with the coach to the
alley end I home, and after supper to the making up my monthly accounts,
and to my great content find myself worth above L900, the greatest sum I
ever yet had.  Having done my accounts, late to bed.  My head of late
mighty full of business, and with good content to myself in it, though
sometimes it troubles me that nobody else but I should bend themselves to
serve the King with that diligence, whereby much of my pains proves
ineffectual.

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Doubtfull of himself, and easily be removed from his own opinion
     Drink a dish of coffee
     Ill from my late cutting my hair so close to my head
     Nothing of the memory of a man, an houre after he is dead!
     She had got and used some puppy-dog water
     Subject to be put into a disarray upon very small occasions
     Very angry we were, but quickly friends again
     Went against me to have my wife and servants look upon them


                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                             APRIL & MAY
                                 1664

April 1st.  Up and to my office, where busy till noon, and then to the
'Change, where I found all the merchants concerned with the presenting
their complaints to the Committee of Parliament appointed to receive them
this afternoon against the Dutch.  So home to dinner, and thence by coach,
setting my wife down at the New Exchange, I to White Hall; and coming too
soon for the Tangier Committee walked to Mr. Blagrave for a song.  I left
long ago there, and here I spoke with his kinswoman, he not being within,
but did not hear her sing, being not enough acquainted with her, but would
be glad to have her, to come and be at my house a week now and then.  Back
to White Hall, and in the Gallery met the Duke of Yorke (I also saw the
Queene going to the Parke, and her Mayds of Honour: she herself looks ill,
and methinks Mrs. Stewart is grown fatter, and not so fair as she was);
and he called me to him, and discoursed a good while with me; and after he
was gone, twice or thrice staid and called me again to him, the whole
length of the house: and at last talked of the Dutch; and I perceive do
much wish that the Parliament will find reason to fall out with them.  He
gone, I by and by found that the Committee of Tangier met at the Duke of
Albemarle's, and so I have lost my labour.  So with Creed to the 'Change,
and there took up my wife and left him, and we two home, and I to walk in
the garden with W. Howe, whom we took up, he having been to see us, he
tells me how Creed has been questioned before the Council about a letter
that has been met with, wherein he is mentioned by some fanatiques as a
serviceable friend to them, but he says he acquitted himself well in it,
but, however, something sticks against him, he says, with my Lord, at
which I am not very sorry, for I believe he is a false fellow.  I walked
with him to Paul's, he telling me how my Lord is little at home, minds his
carding and little else, takes little notice of any body; but that he do
not think he is displeased, as I fear, with me, but is strange to all,
which makes me the less troubled.  So walked back home, and late at the
office.  So home and to bed.  This day Mrs. Turner did lend me, as a
rarity, a manuscript of one Mr. Wells, writ long ago, teaching the method
of building a ship, which pleases me mightily.  I was at it to-night, but
durst not stay long at it, I being come to have a great pain and water in
my eyes after candle-light.

2nd.  Up and to my office, and afterwards sat, where great contest with
Sir W. Batten and Mr. Wood, and that doating fool Sir J. Minnes, that says
whatever Sir W. Batten says, though never minding whether to the King's
profit or not.  At noon to the Coffee-house, where excellent discourse
with Sir W. Petty, who proposed it as a thing that is truly questionable,
whether there really be any difference between waking and dreaming, that
it is hard not only to tell how we know when we do a thing really or in a
dream, but also to know what the difference [is] between one and the
other.  Thence to the 'Change, but having at this discourse long
afterwards with Sir Thomas Chamberlin, who tells me what I heard from
others, that the complaints of most Companies were yesterday presented to
the Committee of Parliament against the Dutch, excepting that of the East
India, which he tells me was because they would not be said to be the
first and only cause of a warr with Holland, and that it is very probable,
as well as most necessary, that we fall out with that people.  I went to
the 'Change, and there found most people gone, and so home to dinner, and
thence to Sir W. Warren's, and with him past the whole afternoon, first
looking over two ships' of Captain Taylor's and Phin. Pett's now in
building, and am resolved to learn something of the art, for I find it is
not hard and very usefull, and thence to Woolwich, and after seeing Mr.
Falconer, who is very ill, I to the yard, and there heard Mr. Pett tell me
several things of Sir W. Batten's ill managements, and so with Sir W.
Warren walked to Greenwich, having good discourse, and thence by water, it
being now moonshine and 9 or 10 o'clock at night, and landed at Wapping,
and by him and his man safely brought to my door, and so he home, having
spent the day with him very well.  So home and eat something, and then to
my office a while, and so home to prayers and to bed.

3rd (Lord's day).  Being weary last night lay long, and called up by W.
Joyce.  So I rose, and his business was to ask advice of me, he being
summonsed to the House of Lords to-morrow, for endeavouring to arrest my
Lady Peters

     [Elizabeth, daughter of John Savage, second Earl Rivers, and first
     wife to William, fourth Lord Petre, who was, in 1678, impeached by
     the Commons of high treason, and died under confinement in the
     Tower, January 5th, 1683, s. p.--B.]

for a debt.  I did give him advice, and will assist him.  He staid all the
morning, but would not dine with me.  So to my office and did business.
At noon home to dinner, and being set with my wife in the kitchen my
father comes and sat down there and dined with us.  After dinner gives me
an account of what he had done in his business of his house and goods,
which is almost finished, and he the next week expects to be going down to
Brampton again, which I am glad of because I fear the children of my Lord
that are there for fear of any discontent.  He being gone I to my office,
and there very busy setting papers in order till late at night, only in
the afternoon my wife sent for me home, to see her new laced gowne, that
is her gown that is new laced; and indeed it becomes her very nobly, and
is well made.  I am much pleased with it.  At night to supper, prayers,
and to bed.

4th.  Up, and walked to my Lord Sandwich's; and there spoke with him about
W. Joyce, who told me he would do what was fit in so tender a point.  I
can yet discern a coldness in him to admit me to any discourse with him.
Thence to Westminster, to the Painted Chamber, and there met the two
Joyces.  Will in a very melancholy taking.  After a little discourse I to
the Lords' House before they sat; and stood within it a good while, while
the Duke of York came to me and spoke to me a good while about the new
ship' at Woolwich.  Afterwards I spoke with my Lord Barkeley and my Lord
Peterborough about it.  And so staid without a good while, and saw my Lady
Peters, an impudent jade, soliciting all the Lords on her behalf.  And at
last W. Joyce was called in; and by the consequences, and what my Lord
Peterborough told me, I find that he did speak all he said to his
disadvantage, and so was committed to the Black Rod: which is very hard,
he doing what he did by the advice of my Lord Peters' own steward.  But
the Sergeant of the Black Rod did direct one of his messengers to take him
in custody, and so he was peaceably conducted to the Swan with two Necks,
in Tuttle Street, to a handsome dining-room; and there was most civilly
used, my uncle Fenner, and his brother Anthony, and some other friends
being with him.  But who would have thought that the fellow that I should
have sworn could have spoken before all the world should in this be so
daunted, as not to know what he said, and now to cry like a child.  I
protest, it is very strange to observe. I left them providing for his stay
there to-night and getting a petition against tomorrow, and so away to
Westminster Hall, and meeting Mr. Coventry, he took me to his chamber,
with Sir William Hickeman, a member of their House, and a very civill
gentleman.  Here we dined very plentifully, and thence to White Hall to
the Duke's, where we all met, and after some discourse of the condition of
the Fleete, in order to a Dutch warr, for that, I perceive, the Duke hath
a mind it should come to, we away to the office, where we sat, and I took
care to rise betimes, and so by water to Halfway House, talking all the
way good discourse with Mr. Wayth, and there found my wife, who was gone
with her mayd Besse to have a walk.  But, Lord!  how my jealous mind did
make me suspect that she might have some appointment to meet somebody.
But I found the poor souls coming away thence, so I took them back, and
eat and drank, and then home, and after at the office a while, I home to
supper and to bed.  It was a sad sight, me thought, to-day to see my Lord
Peters coming out of the House fall out with his lady (from whom he is
parted) about this business; saying that she disgraced him.  But she hath
been a handsome woman, and is, it seems, not only a lewd woman, but very
high-spirited.

5th.  Up very betimes, and walked to my cozen Anthony Joyce's, and thence
with him to his brother Will, in Tuttle Street, where I find him pretty
cheery over [what] he was yesterday (like a coxcomb), his wife being come
to him, and having had his boy with him last night.  Here I staid an hour
or two and wrote over a fresh petition, that which was drawn by their
solicitor not pleasing me, and thence to the Painted chamber, and by and
by away by coach to my Lord Peterborough's, and there delivered the
petition into his hand, which he promised most readily to deliver to the
House today.  Thence back, and there spoke to several Lords, and so did
his solicitor (one that W. Joyce hath promised L5 to if he be released).
Lord Peterborough presented a petition to the House from W. Joyce: and a
great dispute, we hear, there was in the House for and against it.  At
last it was carried that he should be bayled till the House meets again
after Easter, he giving bond for his appearance.  This was not so good as
we hoped, but as good as we could well expect.  Anon comes the King and
passed the Bill for repealing the Triennial Act, and another about Writs
of Errour.  I crowded in and heard the King's speech to them; but he
speaks the worst that ever I heard man in my life worse than if he read it
all, and he had it in writing in his hand.  Thence, after the House was
up, and I inquired what the order of the House was, I to W. Joyce,' with
his brother, and told them all.  Here was Kate come, and is a comely fat
woman.  I would not stay dinner, thinking to go home to dinner, and did go
by water as far as the bridge, but thinking that they would take it kindly
my being there, to be bayled for him if there was need, I returned, but
finding them gone out to look after it, only Will and his wife and sister
left and some friends that came to visit him, I to Westminster Hall, and
by and by by agreement to Mrs. Lane's lodging, whither I sent for a
lobster, and with Mr. Swayne and his wife eat it, and argued before them
mightily for Hawly, but all would not do, although I made her angry by
calling her old, and making her know what herself is. Her body was out of
temper for any dalliance, and so after staying there 3 or 4 hours, but yet
taking care to have my oath safe of not staying a quarter of an hour
together with her, I went to W. Joyce, where I find the order come, and
bayle (his father and brother) given; and he paying his fees, which come
to above L2, besides L5 he is to give one man, and his charges of eating
and drinking here, and 10s. a-day as many days as he stands under bayle:
which, I hope, will teach him hereafter to hold his tongue better than he
used to do.  Thence with Anth. Joyce's wife alone home talking of Will's
folly, and having set her down, home myself, where I find my wife dressed
as if she had been abroad, but I think she was not, but she answering me
some way that I did not like I pulled her by the nose, indeed to offend
her, though afterwards to appease her I denied it, but only it was done in
haste.  The poor wretch took it mighty ill, and I believe besides wringing
her nose she did feel pain, and so cried a great while, but by and by I
made her friends, and so after supper to my office a while, and then home
to bed.  This day great numbers of merchants came to a Grand Committee of
the House to bring in their claims against the Dutch.  I pray God guide
the issue to our good!

6th.  Up and to my office, whither by and by came John Noble, my father's
old servant, to speake with me.  I smelling the business, took him home;
and there, all alone, he told me how he had been serviceable to my brother
Tom, in the business of his getting his servant, an ugly jade, Margaret,
with child.  She was brought to bed in St. Sepulchre's parish of two
children; one is dead, the other is alive; her name Elizabeth, and goes by
the name of Taylor, daughter to John Taylor.  It seems Tom did a great
while trust one Crawly with the business, who daily got money of him; and
at last, finding himself abused, he broke the matter to J. Noble, upon a
vowe of secresy.  Tom's first plott was to go on the other side the water
and give a beggar woman something to take the child.  They did once go,
but did nothing, J. Noble saying that seven years hence the mother might
come to demand the child and force him to produce it, or to be suspected
of murder.  Then I think it was that they consulted, and got one Cave, a
poor pensioner in St. Bride's parish to take it, giving him L5, he thereby
promising to keepe it for ever without more charge to them.  The parish
hereupon indite the man Cave for bringing this child upon the parish, and
by Sir Richard Browne he is sent to the Counter. Cave thence writes to Tom
to get him out.  Tom answers him in a letter of his owne hand, which J.
Noble shewed me, but not signed by him, wherein he speaks of freeing him
and getting security for him, but nothing as to the business of the child,
or anything like it: so that forasmuch as I could guess, there is nothing
therein to my brother's prejudice as to the main point, and therefore I
did not labour to tear or take away the paper.  Cave being released,
demands L5 more to secure my brother for ever against the child; and he
was forced to give it him and took bond of Cave in L100, made at a
scrivener's, one Hudson, I think, in the Old Bayly, to secure John Taylor,
and his assigns, &c.  (in consideration of L10 paid him), from all
trouble, or charge of meat, drink, clothes, and breeding of Elizabeth
Taylor; and it seems, in the doing of it, J. Noble was looked upon as the
assignee of this John Taylor.  Noble says that he furnished Tom with this
money, and is also bound by another bond to pay him 20s. more this next
Easter Monday; but nothing for either sum appears under Tom's hand.  I
told him how I am like to lose a great sum by his death, and would not pay
any more myself, but I would speake to my father about it against the
afternoon.  So away he went, and I all the morning in my office busy, and
at noon home to dinner mightily oppressed with wind, and after dinner took
coach and to Paternoster Row, and there bought a pretty silke for a
petticoate for my wife, and thence set her down at the New Exchange, and I
leaving the coat at Unthanke's, went to White Hall, but the Councell
meeting at Worcester House I went thither, and there delivered to the Duke
of Albemarle a paper touching some Tangier business, and thence to the
'Change for my wife, and walked to my father's, who was packing up some
things for the country.  I took him up and told him this business of Tom,
at which the poor wretch was much troubled, and desired me that I would
speak with J. Noble, and do what I could and thought fit in it without
concerning him in it.  So I went to Noble, and saw the bond that Cave did
give and also Tom's letter that I mentioned above, and upon the whole I
think some shame may come, but that it will be hard from any thing I see
there to prove the child to be his. Thence to my father and told what I
had done, and how I had quieted Noble by telling him that, though we are
resolved to part with no more money out of our own purses, yet if he can
make it appear a true debt that it may be justifiable for us to pay it, we
will do our part to get it paid, and said that I would have it paid before
my own debt.  So my father and I both a little satisfied, though vexed to
think what a rogue my brother was in all respects.  I took my wife by
coach home, and to my office, where late with Sir W. Warren, and so home
to supper and to bed.  I heard to-day that the Dutch have begun with us by
granting letters of marke against us; but I believe it not.

7th.  Up and to my office, where busy, and by and by comes Sir W. Warren
and old Mr. Bond in order to the resolving me some questions about masts
and their proportions, but he could say little to me to my satisfaction,
and so I held him not long but parted.  So to my office busy till noon and
then to the 'Change, where high talke of the Dutch's protest against our
Royall Company in Guinny, and their granting letters of marke against us
there, and every body expects a warr, but I hope it will not yet be so,
nor that this is true.  Thence to dinner, where my wife got me a pleasant
French fricassee of veal for dinner, and thence to the office, where vexed
to see how Sir W. Batten ordered things this afternoon (vide my office
book, for about this time I have begun, my notions and informations
encreasing now greatly every day, to enter all occurrences extraordinary
in my office in a book by themselves), and so in the evening after long
discourse and eased my mind by discourse with Sir W. Warren, I to my
business late, and so home to supper and to bed.

8th.  Up betimes and to the office, and anon, it begunn to be fair after a
great shower this morning, Sir W. Batten and I by water (calling his son
Castle by the way, between whom and I no notice at all of his letter the
other day to me) to Deptford, and after a turn in the yard, I went with
him to the Almes'-house to see the new building which he, with some
ambition, is building of there, during his being Master of Trinity House;
and a good worke it is, but to see how simply he answered somebody
concerning setting up the arms of the corporation upon the door, that and
any thing else he did not deny it, but said he would leave that to the
master that comes after him.  There I left him and to the King's yard
again, and there made good inquiry into the business of the poop lanterns,
wherein I found occasion to correct myself mightily for what I have done
in the contract with the platerer, and am resolved, though I know not how,
to make them to alter it, though they signed it last night, and so I took
Stanes

     [Among the State Papers is a petition of Thomas Staine to the Navy
     Commissioners "for employment as plateworker in one or two
     dockyards.  Has incurred ill-will by discovering abuses in the great
     rates given by the king for several things in the said trade.  Begs
     the appointment, whereby it will be seen who does the work best and
     cheapest, otherwise he and all others will be discouraged from
     discovering abuses in future, with order thereon for a share of the
     work to be given to him"  ("Calendar," Domestic, 1663-64, p. 395)]

home with me by boat and discoursed it, and he will come to reason when I
can make him to understand it.  No sooner landed but it fell a mighty
storm of rain and hail, so I put into a cane shop and bought one to walk
with, cost me 4s. 6d., all of one joint.  So home to dinner, and had an
excellent Good Friday dinner of peas porridge and apple pye.  So to the
office all the afternoon preparing a new book for my contracts, and this
afternoon come home the office globes done to my great content.  In the
evening a little to visit Sir W. Pen, who hath a feeling this day or two
of his old pain.  Then to walk in the garden with my wife, and so to my
office a while, and then home to the only Lenten supper I have had of
wiggs--[Buns or teacakes.]--and ale, and so to bed.  This morning betimes
came to my office to me boatswain Smith of Woolwich, telling me a notable
piece of knavery of the officers of the yard and Mr. Gold in behalf of a
contract made for some old ropes by Mr. Wood, and I believe I shall find
Sir W. Batten of the plot (vide my office daybook).

     [These note-books referred to in the Diary are not known to exist
     now.]

9th.  The last night, whether it was from cold I got to-day upon the water
I know not, or whether it was from my mind being over concerned with
Stanes's business of the platery of the navy, for my minds was mighty
troubled with the business all night long, I did wake about one o'clock in
the morning, a thing I most rarely do, and pissed a little with great
pain, continued sleepy, but in a high fever all night, fiery hot, and in
some pain.  Towards morning I slept a little and waking found myself
better, but .  .  .  . with some pain, and rose I confess with my clothes
sweating, and it was somewhat cold too, which I believe might do me more
hurt, for I continued cold and apt to shake all the morning, but that some
trouble with Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten kept me warm.  At noon home
to dinner upon tripes, and so though not well abroad with my wife by coach
to her Tailor's and the New Exchange, and thence to my father's and spoke
one word with him, and thence home, where I found myself sick in my
stomach and vomited, which I do not use to do. Then I drank a glass or two
of Hypocras, and to the office to dispatch some business, necessary, and
so home and to bed, and by the help of Mithrydate slept very well.

10th (Lord's day).  Lay long in bed, and then up and my wife dressed
herself, it being Easter day, but I not being so well as to go out, she,
though much against her will, staid at home with me; for she had put on
her new best gowns, which indeed is very fine now with the lace; and this
morning her taylor brought home her other new laced silks gowns with a
smaller lace, and new petticoats, I bought the other day both very pretty.
We spent the day in pleasant talks and company one with another, reading
in Dr. Fuller's book what he says of the family of the Cliffords and
Kingsmills, and at night being myself better than I was by taking a
glyster, which did carry away a great deal of wind, I after supper at
night went to bed and slept well.

11th.  Lay long talking with my wife, then up and to my chamber preparing
papers against my father comes to lie here for discourse about country
business.  Dined well with my wife at home, being myself not yet thorough
well, making water with some pain, but better than I was, and all my fear
of an ague gone away.  In the afternoon my father came to see us, and he
gone I up to my morning's work again, and so in the evening a little to
the office and to see Sir W. Batten, who is ill again, and so home to
supper and to bed.

12th.  Up, and after my wife had dressed herself very fine in her new
laced gown, and very handsome indeed, W. Howe also coming to see us, I
carried her by coach to my uncle Wight's and set her down there, and W.
Howe and I to the Coffee-house, where we sat talking about getting of him
some place under my Lord of advantage if he should go to sea, and I would
be glad to get him secretary and to out Creed if I can, for he is a crafty
and false rogue.  Thence a little to the 'Change, and thence took him to
my uncle Wight's, where dined my father, poor melancholy man, that used to
be as full of life as anybody, and also my aunt's brother, Mr. Sutton, a
merchant in Flanders, a very sober, fine man, and Mr. Cole and his lady;
but, Lord! how I used to adore that man's talke, and now methinks he is
but an ordinary man, his son a pretty boy indeed, but his nose unhappily
awry.  Other good company and an indifferent, and but indifferent dinner
for so much company, and after dinner got a coach, very dear, it being
Easter time and very foul weather, to my Lord's, and there visited my
Lady, and leaving my wife there I and W. Howe to Mr. Pagett's, and there
heard some musique not very good, but only one Dr. Walgrave, an Englishman
bred at Rome, who plays the best upon the lute that I ever heard man.
Here I also met Mr. Hill

     [Thomas Hill, a man whose taste for music caused him to be a very
     acceptable companion to Pepys.  In January, 1664-65, he became
     assistant to the secretary of the Prize Office.]

the little merchant, and after all was done we sung.  I did well enough a
Psalm or two of Lawes; he I perceive has good skill and sings well, and a
friend of his sings a good base.  Thence late walked with them two as far
as my Lord's, thinking to take up my wife and carry them home, but there
being no coach to be got away they went, and I staid a great while, it
being very late, about 10 o'clock, before a coach could be got.  I found
my Lord and ladies and my wife at supper.  My Lord seems very kind.  But I
am apt to think still the worst, and that it is only in show, my wife and
Lady being there.  So home, and find my father come to lie at our house;
and so supped, and saw him, poor man, to bed, my heart never being fuller
of love to him, nor admiration of his prudence and pains heretofore in the
world than now, to see how Tom hath carried himself in his trade; and how
the poor man hath his thoughts going to provide for his younger children
and my mother.  But I hope they shall never want. So myself and wife to
bed.

13th.  Though late, past 12, before we went to bed, yet I heard my poor
father up, and so I rang up my people, and I rose and got something to eat
and drink for him, and so abroad, it being a mighty foul day, by coach,
setting my father down in Fleet Streete and I to St. James's, where I
found Mr. Coventry (the Duke being now come thither for the summer) with a
goldsmith, sorting out his old plate to change for new; but, Lord! what a
deale he hath!  I staid and had two or three hours discourse with him,
talking about the disorders of our office, and I largely to tell him how
things are carried by Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes to my great grief.
He seems much concerned also, and for all the King's matters that are done
after the same rate every where else, and even the Duke's household
matters too, generally with corruption, but most indeed with neglect and
indifferency.  I spoke very loud and clear to him my thoughts of Sir J.
Minnes and the other, and trust him with the using of them.  Then to talk
of our business with the Dutch; he tells me fully that he believes it will
not come to a warr; for first, he showed me a letter from Sir George
Downing, his own hand, where he assures him that the Dutch themselves do
not desire, but above all things fear it, and that they neither have given
letters of marke against our shipps in Guinny, nor do De Ruyter

     [Michael De Ruyter, the Dutch admiral, was born 1607.  He served
     under Tromp in the war against England in 1653, and was Lieutenant
     Admiral General of Holland in 1665.  He died April 26th, 1676, of
     wounds received in a battle with the French off Syracuse.  Among the
     State Papers is a news letter (dated July 14th, 1664) containing
     information as to the views of the Dutch respecting a war with
     England.  "They are preparing many ships, and raising 6,000 men, and
     have no doubt of conquering by sea."  "A wise man says the States
     know how to master England by sending moneys into Scotland for them
     to rebel, and also to the discontented in England, so as to place
     the King in the same straits as his father was, and bring him to
     agree with Holland" ("Calendar," 1663-64, p. 642).]

stay at home with his fleet with an eye to any such thing, but for want of
a wind, and is now come out and is going to the Streights.  He tells me
also that the most he expects is that upon the merchants' complaints, the
Parliament will represent them to the King, desiring his securing of his
subjects against them, and though perhaps they may not directly see fit,
yet even this will be enough to let the Dutch know that the Parliament do
not oppose the King, and by that means take away their hopes, which was
that the King of England could not get money or do anything towards a warr
with them, and so thought themselves free from making any restitution,
which by this they will be deceived in.  He tells me also that the Dutch
states are in no good condition themselves, differing one with another,
and that for certain none but the states of Holland and Zealand will
contribute towards a warr, the others reckoning themselves, being inland,
not concerned in the profits of warr or peace. But it is pretty to see
what he says, that those here that are forward for a warr at Court, they
are reported in the world to be only designers of getting money into the
King's hands, they that elsewhere are for it have a design to trouble the
kingdom and to give the Fanatiques an opportunity of doing hurt, and
lastly those that are against it (as he himself for one is very cold
therein) are said to be bribed by the Dutch. After all this discourse he
carried me in his coach, it raining still, to, Charing Cross, and there
put me into another, and I calling my father and brother carried them to
my house to dinner, my wife keeping bed all day .  .  .  .  .  All the
afternoon at the office with W. Boddam looking over his particulars about
the Chest of Chatham, which shows enough what a knave Commissioner Pett
hath been all along, and how Sir W. Batten hath gone on in getting good
allowance to himself and others out of the poors' money.  Time will show
all.  So in the evening to see Sir W. Pen, and then home to my father to
keep him company, he being to go out of town, and up late with him and my
brother John till past 12 at night to make up papers of Tom's accounts fit
to leave with my cozen Scott.  At last we did make an end of them, and so
after supper all to bed.

14th.  Up betimes, and after my father's eating something, I walked out
with him as far as Milk Streete, he turning down to Cripplegate to take
coach; and at the end of the streete I took leave, being much afeard I
shall not see him here any more, he do decay so much every day, and so I
walked on, there being never a coach to be had till I came to Charing
Cross, and there Col. Froud took me up and carried me to St. James's,
where with Mr. Coventry and Povy, &c., about my Lord Peterborough's
accounts, but, Lord!  to see still what a puppy that Povy is with all his
show is very strange.  Thence to Whitehall and W. C[oventry] and I and Sir
W. Rider resolved upon a day to meet and make an end of all the business.
Thence walked with Creed to the Coffee-house in Covent Garden, where no
company, but he told me many fine experiments at Gresham College; and some
demonstration that the heat and cold of the weather do rarify and condense
the very body of glasse, as in a bolt head' with cold water in it put into
hot water, shall first by rarifying the glasse make the water sink, and
then when the heat comes to the water makes that rise again, and then put
into cold water makes the water by condensing the glass to rise, and then
when the cold comes to the water makes it sink, which is very pretty and
true, he saw it tried.  Thence by coach home, and dined above with my wife
by her bedside, she keeping her bed .  .  . .  .  So to the office, where
a great conflict with Wood and Castle about their New England masts?  So
in the evening my mind a little vexed, but yet without reason, for I shall
prevail, I hope, for the King's profit, and so home to supper and to bed.

15th.  Up and all the morning with Captain Taylor at my house talking
about things of the Navy, and among other things I showed him my letters
to Mr. Coventry, wherein he acknowledges that nobody to this day did ever
understand so much as I have done, and I believe him, for I perceive he
did very much listen to every article as things new to him, and is
contented to abide by my opinion therein in his great contest with us
about his and Mr. Wood's masts.  At noon to the 'Change, where I met with
Mr. Hill, the little merchant, with whom, I perceive, I shall contract a
musical acquaintance; but I will make it as little troublesome as I can.
Home and dined, and then with my wife by coach to the Duke's house, and
there saw "The German Princess" acted, by the woman herself; but never was
any thing so well done in earnest, worse performed in jest upon the stage;
and indeed the whole play, abating the drollery of him that acts her
husband, is very simple, unless here and there a witty sprinkle or two. We
met and sat by Dr. Clerke.  Thence homewards, calling at Madam Turner's,
and thence set my wife down at my aunt Wight's and I to my office till
late, and then at to at night fetched her home, and so again to my office
a little, and then to supper and to bed.

16th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning upon the dispute of Mr.
Wood's masts, and at noon with Mr. Coventry to the African House; and
after a good and pleasant dinner, up with him, Sir W. Rider, the simple
Povy, of all the most ridiculous foole that ever I knew to attend to
business, and Creed and Vernatty, about my Lord Peterborough's accounts;
but the more we look into them, the more we see of them that makes
dispute, which made us break off, and so I home, and there found my wife
and Besse gone over the water to Half-way house, and after them, thinking
to have gone to Woolwich, but it was too late, so eat a cake and home, and
thence by coach to have spoke with Tom Trice about a letter I met with
this afternoon from my cozen Scott, wherein he seems to deny proceeding as
my father's attorney in administering for him in my brother Tom's estate,
but I find him gone out of town, and so returned vexed home and to the
office, where late writing a letter to him, and so home and to bed.

17th (Lord's day).  Up, and I put on my best cloth black suit and my
velvet cloake, and with my wife in her best laced suit to church, where we
have not been these nine or ten weeks.  The truth is, my jealousy hath
hindered it, for fear she should see Pembleton.  He was here to-day, but I
think sat so as he could not see her, which did please me, God help me!
mightily, though I know well enough that in reason this is nothing but my
ridiculous folly.  Home to dinner, and in the afternoon, after long
consulting whether to go to Woolwich or no to see Mr. Falconer, but indeed
to prevent my wife going to church, I did however go to church with her,
where a young simple fellow did preach: I slept soundly all the sermon,
and thence to Sir W. Pen's, my wife and I, there she talking with him and
his daughter, and thence with my wife walked to my uncle Wight's and there
supped, where very merry, but I vexed to see what charges the vanity of my
aunt puts her husband to among her friends and nothing at all among ours.
Home and to bed.  Our parson, Mr. Mills, his owne mistake in reading of
the service was very remarkable, that instead of saying, "We beseech thee
to preserve to our use the kindly fruits of the earth," he cries,
"Preserve to our use our gracious Queen Katherine."

18th.  Up and by coach to Westminster, and there solicited W. Joyce's
business again; and did speake to the Duke of Yorke about it, who did
understand it very well.  I afterwards did without the House fall in
company with my Lady Peters, and endeavoured to mollify her; but she told
me she would not, to redeem her from hell, do any thing to release him;
but would be revenged while she lived, if she lived the age of Methusalem.
I made many friends, and so did others.  At last it was ordered by the
Lords that it should be referred to the Committee of Privileges to
consider.  So I, after discoursing with the Joyces, away by coach to the
'Change; and there, among other things, do hear that a Jew hath put in a
policy of four per cent. to any man, to insure him against a Dutch warr
for four months; I could find in my heart to take him at this offer, but
however will advise first, and to that end took coach to St. James's, but
Mr. Coventry was gone forth, and I thence to Westminster Hall, where Mrs.
Lane was gone forth, and so I missed of my intent to be with her this
afternoon, and therefore meeting Mr. Blagrave, went home with him, and
there he and his kinswoman sang, but I was not pleased with it, they
singing methought very ill, or else I am grown worse to please than
heretofore.  Thence to the Hall again, and after meeting with several
persons, and talking there, I to Mrs. Hunt's (where I knew my wife and my
aunt Wight were about business), and they being gone to walk in the parke
I went after them with Mrs. Hunt, who staid at home for me, and finding
them did by coach, which I had agreed to wait for me, go with them all and
Mrs. Hunt and a kinswoman of theirs, Mrs. Steward, to Hide Parke, where I
have not been since last year; where I saw the King with his periwigg, but
not altered at all; and my Lady Castlemayne in a coach by herself, in
yellow satin and a pinner on; and many brave persons.  And myself being in
a hackney and full of people, was ashamed to be seen by the world, many of
them knowing me.  Thence in the evening home, setting my aunt at home, and
thence we sent for a joynt of meat to supper, and thence to the office at
11 o'clock at night, and so home to bed.

19th.  Up and to St. James's, where long with Mr. Coventry, Povy, &c., in
their Tangier accounts, but such the folly of that coxcomb Povy that we
could do little in it, and so parted for the time, and I to walk with
Creed and Vernaty in the Physique Garden in St. James's Parke; where I
first saw orange-trees, and other fine trees.  So to Westminster Hall, and
thence by water to the Temple, and so walked to the 'Change, and there
find the 'Change full of news from Guinny, some say the Dutch have sunk
our ships and taken our fort, and others say we have done the same to
them.  But I find by our merchants that something is done, but is yet a
secret among them.  So home to dinner, and then to the office, and at
night with Captain Tayler consulting how to get a little money by letting
him the Elias to fetch masts from New England.  So home to supper and to
bed.

20th.  Up and by coach to Westminster, and there solicited W. Joyce's
business all the morning, and meeting in the Hall with Mr. Coventry, he
told me how the Committee for Trade have received now all the complaints
of the merchants against the Dutch, and were resolved to report very
highly the wrongs they have done us (when, God knows! it is only our owne
negligence and laziness that hath done us the wrong) and this to be made
to the House to-morrow.  I went also out of the Hall with Mrs. Lane to the
Swan at Mrs. Herbert's in the Palace Yard to try a couple of bands, and
did (though I had a mind to be playing the fool with her) purposely stay
but a little while, and kept the door open, and called the master and
mistress of the house one after another to drink and talk with me, and
showed them both my old and new bands.  So that as I did nothing so they
are able to bear witness that I had no opportunity there to do anything.
Thence by coach with Sir W. Pen home, calling at the Temple for Lawes's
Psalms, which I did not so much (by being against my oath) buy as only lay
down money till others be bound better for me, and by that time I hope to
get money of the Treasurer of the Navy by bills, which, according to my
oath, shall make me able to do it.  At home dined, and all the afternoon
at a Committee of the Chest, and at night comes my aunt and uncle Wight
and Nan Ferrers and supped merrily with me, my uncle coming in an hour
after them almost foxed.  Great pleasure by discourse with them, and so,
they gone, late to bed.

21st.  Up pretty betimes and to my office, and thither came by and by Mr.
Vernaty and staid two hours with me, but Mr. Gauden did not come, and so
he went away to meet again anon.  Then comes Mr. Creed, and, after some
discourse, he and I and my wife by coach to Westminster (leaving her at
Unthanke's, her tailor's) Hall, and there at the Lords' House heard that
it is ordered, that, upon submission upon the knee both to the House and
my Lady Peters, W. Joyce shall be released.  I forthwith made him submit,
and aske pardon upon his knees; which he did before several Lords.  But my
Lady would not hear it; but swore she would post the Lords, that the world
might know what pitifull Lords the King hath; and that revenge was sweeter
to her than milk; and that she would never be satisfied unless he stood in
a pillory, and demand pardon there.  But I perceive the Lords are ashamed
of her, and so I away calling with my wife at a place or two to inquire
after a couple of mayds recommended to us, but we found both of them bad.
So set my wife at my uncle Wight's and I home, and presently to the
'Change, where I did some business, and thence to my uncle's and there
dined very well, and so to the office, we sat all the afternoon, but no
sooner sat but news comes my Lady Sandwich was come to see us, so I went
out, and running up (her friend however before me) I perceive by my dear
Lady blushing that in my dining-room she was doing something upon the
pott, which I also was ashamed of, and so fell to some discourse, but
without pleasure through very pity to my Lady.  She tells me, and I find
true since, that the House this day have voted that the King be desired to
demand right for the wrong done us by the Dutch, and that they will stand
by him with their lives fortunes: which is a very high vote, and more than
I expected.  What the issue will be, God knows! My Lady, my wife not being
at home, did not stay, but, poor, good woman, went away, I being mightily
taken with her dear visitt, and so to the office, where all the afternoon
till late, and so to my office, and then to supper and to bed, thinking to
rise betimes tomorrow.

22nd.  Having directed it last night, I was called up this morning before
four o'clock.  It was full light enough to dress myself, and so by water
against tide, it being a little coole, to Greenwich; and thence, only that
it was somewhat foggy till the sun got to some height, walked with great
pleasure to Woolwich, in my way staying several times to listen to the
nightingales.  I did much business both at the Ropeyarde and the other,
and on floate I discovered a plain cheat which in time I shall publish of
Mr. Ackworth's.  Thence, having visited Mr. Falconer also, who lies still
sick, but hopes to be better, I walked to Greenwich, Mr. Deane with me.
Much good discourse, and I think him a very just man, only a little
conceited, but yet very able in his way, and so he by water also with me
also to towne.  I home, and immediately dressing myself, by coach with my
wife to my Lord Sandwich's, but they having dined we would not 'light but
went to Mrs. Turner's, and there got something to eat, and thence after
reading part of a good play, Mrs. The., my wife and I, in their coach to
Hide Parke, where great plenty of gallants, and pleasant it was, only for
the dust.  Here I saw Mrs. Bendy, my Lady Spillman's faire daughter that
was, who continues yet very handsome.  Many others I saw with great
content, and so back again to Mrs. Turner's, and then took a coach and
home.  I did also carry them into St. James's Park and shewed them the
garden.  To my office awhile while supper was making ready, and so home to
supper and to bed.

23rd (Coronation day).  Up, and after doing something at my office, and,
it being a holiday, no sitting likely to be, I down by water to Sir W.
Warren's, who hath been ill, and there talked long with him good
discourse, especially about Sir W. Batten's knavery and his son Castle's
ill language of me behind my back, saying that I favour my fellow
traytours, but I shall be even with him.  So home and to the 'Change,
where I met with Mr. Coventry, who himself is now full of talke of a Dutch
warr; for it seems the Lords have concurred in the Commons' vote about it;
and so the next week it will be presented to the King, insomuch that he do
desire we would look about to see what stores we lack, and buy what we
can.  Home to dinner, where I and my wife much troubled about my money
that is in my Lord Sandwich's hand, for fear of his going to sea and be
killed; but I will get what of it out I can.  All the afternoon, not being
well, at my office, and there doing much business, my thoughts still
running upon a warr and my money.  At night home to supper and to bed.

24th (Lord's day).  Up, and all the morning in my chamber setting some of
my private papers in order, for I perceive that now publique business
takes up so much of my time that I must get time a-Sundays or a-nights to
look after my owne matters.  Dined and spent all the afternoon talking
with my wife, at night a little to the office, and so home to supper and
to bed.

25th.  Up, and with Sir W. Pen by coach to St. James's and there up to the
Duke, and after he was ready to his closet, where most of our talke about
a Dutch warr, and discoursing of things indeed now for it.  The Duke,
which gives me great good hopes, do talk of setting up a good discipline
in the fleete.  In the Duke's chamber there is a bird, given him by Mr.
Pierce, the surgeon, comes from the East Indys, black the greatest part,
with the finest collar of white about the neck; but talks many things and
neyes like the horse, and other things, the best almost that ever I heard
bird in my life.  Thence down with Mr. Coventry and Sir W. Rider, who was
there (going along with us from the East Indya house to-day) to discourse
of my Lord Peterborough's accounts, and then walked over the Parke, and in
Mr. Cutler's coach with him and Rider as far as the Strand, and thence I
walked to my Lord Sandwich's, where by agreement I met my wife, and there
dined with the young ladies; my Lady, being not well, kept her chamber.
Much simple discourse at table among the young ladies.  After dinner
walked in the garden, talking, with Mr. Moore about my Lord's business.
He told me my Lord runs in debt every day more and more, and takes little
care how to come out of it.  He counted to me how my Lord pays use now for
above L9000, which is a sad thing, especially considering the probability
of his going to sea, in great danger of his life, and his children, many
of them, to provide for.  Thence, the young ladies going out to visit, I
took my wife by coach out through the city, discoursing how to spend the
afternoon; and conquered, with much ado, a desire of going to a play; but
took her out at White Chapel, and to Bednal Green; so to Hackney, where I
have not been many a year, since a little child I boarded there.  Thence
to Kingsland, by my nurse's house, Goody Lawrence, where my brother Tom
and I was kept when young.  Then to Newington Green, and saw the outside
of Mrs. Herbert's house, where she lived, and my Aunt Ellen with her; but,
Lord!  how in every point I find myself to over-value things when a child.
Thence to Islington, and so to St. John's to the Red Bull, and there: saw
the latter part of a rude prize fought, but with good pleasure enough; and
thence back to Islington, and at the King's Head, where Pitts lived, we
'light and eat and drunk for remembrance of the old house sake, and so
through Kingsland again, and so to Bishopsgate, and so home with great
pleasure.  The country mighty pleasant, and we with great content home,
and after supper to bed, only a little troubled at the young ladies
leaving my wife so to-day, and from some passages fearing my Lady might be
offended.  But I hope the best.

26th.  Up, and to my Lord Sandwich's, and coming a little too early, I
went and saw W. Joyce, and by and by comes in Anthony, they both owning a
great deal of kindness received from me in their late business, and indeed
I did what I could, and yet less I could not do.  It has cost the poor man
above L40; besides, he is likely to lose his debt.  Thence to my Lord's,
and by and by he comes down, and with him (Creed with us) I rode in his
coach to St. James's, talking about W. Joyce's business mighty merry, and
my Lady Peters, he says, is a drunken jade, he himself having seen her
drunk in the lobby of their House.  I went up with him to the Duke, where
methought the Duke did not shew him any so great fondness as he was wont;
and methought my Lord was not pleased that I should see the Duke made no
more of him, not that I know any thing of any unkindnesse, but I think
verily he is not as he was with him in his esteem.  By and by the Duke
went out and we with him through the Parke, and there I left him going
into White Hall, and Creed and I walked round the Parke, a pleasant walk,
observing the birds, which is very pleasant; and so walked to the New
Exchange, and there had a most delicate dish of curds and creame, and
discourse with the good woman of the house, a discreet well-bred woman,
and a place with great delight I shall make it now and then to go thither.
Thence up, and after a turn or two in the 'Change, home to the Old
Exchange by coach, where great newes and true, I saw by written letters,
of strange fires seen at Amsterdam in the ayre, and not only there, but in
other places thereabout.  The talke of a Dutch warr is not so hot, but yet
I fear it will come to it at last.  So home and to the office, where we
sat late.  My wife gone this afternoon to the buriall of my she-cozen
Scott, a good woman; and it is a sad consideration how the Pepys's decay,
and nobody almost that I know in a present way of encreasing them.  At
night late at my office, and so home to my wife to supper and to bed.

27th.  Up, and all the morning very busy with multitude of clients, till
my head began to be overloaded.  Towards noon I took coach and to the
Parliament house door, and there staid the rising of the House, and with
Sir G. Carteret and Mr. Coventry discoursed of some tarr that I have been
endeavouring to buy, for the market begins apace to rise upon us, and I
would be glad first to serve the King well, and next if I could I find
myself now begin to cast how to get a penny myself.  Home by coach with
Alderman Backewell in his coach, whose opinion is that the Dutch will not
give over the business without putting us to some trouble to set out a
fleete; and then, if they see we go on well, will seek to salve up the
matter.  Upon the 'Change busy.  Thence home to dinner, and thence to the
office till my head was ready to burst with business, and so with my wife
by coach, I sent her to my Lady Sandwich and myself to my cozen Roger
Pepys's chamber, and there he did advise me about our Exchequer business,
and also about my brother John, he is put by my father upon interceding
for him, but I will not yet seem the least to pardon him nor can I in my
heart.  However, he and I did talk how to get him a mandamus for a
fellowship, which I will endeavour.  Thence to my Lady's, and in my way
met Mr. Sanchy, of Cambridge, whom I have not met a great while.  He seems
a simple fellow, and tells me their master, Dr. Rainbow, is newly made
Bishop of Carlisle.  To my Lady's, and she not being well did not see her,
but straight home with my wife, and late to my office, concluding in the
business of Wood's masts, which I have now done and I believe taken more
pains in it than ever any Principall officer in this world ever did in any
thing to no profit to this day.  So, weary, sleepy, and hungry, home and
to bed.  This day the Houses attended the King, and delivered their votes
to him: upon the business of the Dutch; and he thanks them, and promises
an answer in writing.

28th.  Up and close at my office all the morning.  To the 'Change busy at
noon, and so home to dinner, and then in the afternoon at the office till
night, and so late home quite tired with business, and without joy in
myself otherwise than that I am by God's grace enabled to go through it
and one day, hope to have benefit by it.  So home to supper and to bed.

29th.  Up betimes, and with Sir W. Rider and Cutler to White Hall.  Rider
and I to St. James's, and there with Mr. Coventry did proceed strictly
upon some fooleries of Mr. Povy's in my Lord Peterborough's accounts,
which will touch him home, and I am glad of it, for he is the most
troublesome impertinent man that ever I met with.  Thence to the 'Change,
and there, after some business, home to dinner, where Luellin and Mount
came to me and dined, and after dinner my wife and I by coach to see my
Lady Sandwich, where we find all the children and my Lord removed, and the
house so melancholy that I thought my Lady had been dead, knowing that she
was not well; but it seems she hath the meazles, and I fear the small pox,
poor lady.  It grieves me mightily; for it will be a sad houre to the
family should she miscarry.  Thence straight home and to the office, and
in the evening comes Mr. Hill the merchant and another with him that sings
well, and we sung some things, and good musique it seemed to me, only my
mind too full of business to have much pleasure in it. But I will have
more of it.  They gone, and I having paid Mr. Moxon for the work he has
done for the office upon the King's globes, I to my office, where very
late busy upon Captain Tayler's bills for his masts, which I think will
never off my hand.  Home to supper and to bed.

30th.  Up and all the morning at the office.  At noon to the 'Change,
where, after business done, Sir W. Rider and Cutler took me to the Old
James and there did give me a good dish of mackerell, the first I have
seen this year, very good, and good discourse.  After dinner we fell to
business about their contract for tarr, in which and in another business
of Sir W. Rider's, canvas, wherein I got him to contract with me, I held
them to some terms against their wills, to the King's advantage, which I
believe they will take notice of to my credit.  Thence home, and by water
by a gally down to Woolwich, and there a good while with Mr. Pett upon the
new ship discoursing and learning of him.  Thence with Mr. Deane to see
Mr: Falconer, and there find him in a way to be well.  So to the water
(after much discourse with great content with Mr. Deane) and home late,
and so to the office, wrote to, my father among other things my continued
displeasure against my brother John, so that I will give him nothing more
out of my own purse, which will trouble the poor man, but however it is
fit that I should take notice of my brother's ill carriage to me.  Then
home and till 12 at night about my month's accounts, wherein I have just
kept within compass, this having been a spending month. So my people being
all abed I put myself to bed very sleepy.  All the newes now is what will
become of the Dutch business, whether warr or peace.  We all seem to
desire it, as thinking ourselves to have advantages at present over them;
for my part I dread it.  The Parliament promises to assist the King with
lives and fortunes, and he receives it with thanks and promises to demand
satisfaction of the Dutch.  My poor Lady Sandwich is fallen sick three
days since of the meazles.  My Lord Digby's business is hushed up, and
nothing made of it; he is gone, and the discourse quite ended.  Never more
quiet in my family all the days of my life than now, there being only my
wife and I and Besse and the little girl Susan, the best wenches to our
content that we can ever expect.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                  MAY
                                  1664

May 1st (Lord's day).  Lay long in bed.  Went not to church, but staid at
home to examine my last night's accounts, which I find right, and that I
am L908 creditor in the world, the same I was last month.  Dined, and
after dinner down by water with my wife and Besse with great pleasure as
low as Greenwich and so back, playing as it were leisurely upon the water
to Deptford, where I landed and sent my wife up higher to land below
Half-way house.  I to the King's yard and there spoke about several
businesses with the officers, and so with Mr. Wayth consulting about
canvas, to Half-way house where my wife was, and after eating there we
broke and walked home before quite dark.  So to supper, prayers, and to
bed.

2nd.  Lay pretty long in bed.  So up and by water to St. James's, and
there attended the Duke with Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes, and having
done our work with him walked to Westminster Hall, and after walking there
and talking of business met Mr. Rawlinson and by coach to the 'Change,
where I did some business, and home to dinner, and presently by coach to
the King's Play-house to see "The Labyrinth," but, coming too soon, walked
to my Lord's to hear how my Lady do, who is pretty well; at least past all
fear.  There by Captain Ferrers meeting with an opportunity of my Lord's
coach, to carry us to the Parke anon, we directed it to come to the
play-house door; and so we walked, my wife and I and Madamoiselle.  I paid
for her going in, and there saw "The Labyrinth," the poorest play,
methinks, that ever I saw, there being nothing in it but the odd accidents
that fell out, by a lady's being bred up in man's apparel, and a man in a
woman's.  Here was Mrs. Stewart, who is indeed very pretty, but not like
my Lady Castlemayne, for all that. Thence in the coach to the Parke, where
no pleasure; there being much dust, little company, and one of our horses
almost spoiled by falling down, and getting his leg over the pole; but all
mended presently, and after riding up and down, home.  Set Madamoiselle at
home; and we home, and to my office, whither comes Mr. Bland, and pays me
the debt he acknowledged he owed me for my service in his business of the
Tangier Merchant, twenty pieces of new gold, a pleasant sight.  It cheered
my heart; and he being gone, I home to supper, and shewed them my wife;
and she, poor wretch, would fain have kept them to look on, without any
other design but a simple love to them; but I thought it not convenient,
and so took them into my own hand.  So, after supper, to bed.

3rd.  Up, and being ready, went by agreement to Mr. Bland's and there
drank my morning draft in good chocollatte, and slabbering my band sent
home for another, and so he and I by water to White Hall, and walked to
St. James's, where met Creed and Vernatty, and by and by Sir W. Rider, and
so to Mr. Coventry's chamber, and there upon my Lord Peterborough's
accounts, where I endeavoured to shew the folly and punish it as much as I
could of Mr. Povy; for, of all the men in the world, I never knew any man
of his degree so great a coxcomb in such imployments.  I see I have lost
him forever, but I value it not; for he is a coxcomb, and, I doubt, not
over honest, by some things which I see; and yet, for all his folly, he
hath the good lucke, now and then, to speak his follies in as good words,
and with as good a show, as if it were reason, and to the purpose, which
is really one of the wonders of my life.  Thence walked to Westminster
Hall; and there, in the Lords' House, did in a great crowd, from ten
o'clock till almost three, hear the cause of Mr. Roberts, my Lord Privy
Seal's son, against Win, who by false ways did get the father of Mr.
Roberts's wife (Mr. Bodvill) to give him the estate and disinherit his
daughter.  The cause was managed for my Lord Privy Seal by Finch the
Solicitor [General]; but I do really think that he is truly a man of as
great eloquence as ever I heard, or ever hope to hear in all my life.
Thence, after long staying to speak with my Lord Sandwich, at last he
coming out to me and speaking with me about business of my Lord
Peterborough, I by coach home to the office, where all the afternoon, only
stept home to eat one bit and to the office again, having eaten nothing
before to-day.  My wife abroad with my aunt Wight and Norbury. I in the
evening to my uncle Wight's, and not finding them come home, they being
gone to the Parke and the Mulberry garden, I went to the 'Change, and
there meeting with Mr. Hempson, whom Sir W. Batten has lately turned out
of his place, merely because of his coming to me when he came to town
before he went to him, and there he told me many rogueries of Sir W.
Batten, how he knows and is able to prove that Captain Cox of Chatham did
give him L10 in gold to get him to certify for him at the King's coming
in, and that Tom Newborne did make [the] poor men give him L3 to get Sir
W. Batten to cause them to be entered in the yard, and that Sir W. Batten
had oftentimes said: "by God, Tom, you shall get something and I will have
some on't."  His present clerk that is come in Norman's' room has given
him something for his place; that they live high and (as Sir Francis
Clerk's lady told his wife) do lack money as well as other people, and
have bribes of a piece of sattin and cabinetts and other things from
people that deal with him, and that hardly any body goes to see or hath
anything done by Sir W. Batten but it comes with a bribe, and that this is
publickly true that his wife was a whore, and that he had libells flung
within his doors for a cuckold as soon as he was married; that he received
L100 in money and in other things to the value of L50 more of Hempson, and
that he intends to give him back but L50; that he hath abused the Chest
and hath now some L1000 by him of it. I met also upon the 'Change with Mr.
Cutler, and he told me how for certain Lawson hath proclaimed warr again
with Argier, though they had at his first coming given back the ships
which they had taken, and all their men; though they refused afterwards to
make him restitution for the goods which they had taken out of them.
Thence to my uncle Wight's, and he not being at home I went with Mr.
Norbury near hand to the Fleece, a mum house in Leadenhall, and there
drunk mum and by and by broke up, it being about 11 o'clock at night, and
so leaving them also at home, went home myself and to bed.

4th.  Up, and my new Taylor, Langford, comes and takes measure of me for a
new black cloth suit and cloake, and I think he will prove a very carefull
fellow and will please me well.  Thence to attend my Lord Peterborough in
bed and give him an account of yesterday's proceeding with Povy.  I
perceive I labour in a business will bring me little pleasure; but no
matter, I shall do the King some service.  To my Lord's lodgings, where
during my Lady's sickness he is, there spoke with him about the same
business.  Back and by water to my cozen Scott's.  There condoled with him
the loss of my cozen, his wife, and talked about his matters, as atturney
to my father, in his administering to my brother Tom.  He tells me we are
like to receive some shame about the business of his bastarde with Jack
Noble; but no matter, so it cost us no money. Thence to the Coffee-house
and to the 'Change a while.  News uncertain how the Dutch proceed.  Some
say for, some against a war.  The plague increases at Amsterdam.  So home
to dinner, and after dinner to my office, where very late, till my eyes
(which begin to fail me nowadays by candlelight) begin to trouble me.
Only in the afternoon comes Mr. Peter Honiwood to see me and gives me
20s., his and his friends' pence for my brother John, which, God forgive
my pride, methinks I think myself too high to take of him; but it is an
ungratefull pitch of pride in me, which God forgive.  Home at night to
supper and to bed.

5th.  Up betimes to my office, busy, and so abroad to change some plate
for my father to send to-day by the carrier to Brampton, but I observe and
do fear it may be to my wrong that I change spoons of my uncle Robert's
into new and set a P upon them that thereby I cannot claim them hereafter,
as it was my brother Tom's practice.  However, the matter of this is not
great, and so I did it.  So to the 'Change, and meeting Sir W. Warren,
with him to a taverne, and there talked, as we used to do, of the evils
the King suffers in our ordering of business in the Navy, as Sir W. Batten
now forces us by his knavery.  So home to dinner, and to the office, where
all the afternoon, and thence betimes home, my eyes beginning every day to
grow less and less able to bear with long reading or writing, though it be
by daylight; which I never observed till now. So home to my wife, and
after supper to bed.

6th.  This morning up and to my office, where Sympson my joyner came to
work upon altering my closet, which I alter by setting the door in another
place, and several other things to my great content.  Busy at it all day,
only in the afternoon home, and there, my books at the office being out of
order, wrote letters and other businesses.  So at night with my head full
of the business of my closet home to bed, and strange it is to think how
building do fill my mind and put out all other things out of my thoughts.

7th.  Betimes at my office with the joyners, and giving order for other
things about it.  By and by we sat all the morning.  At noon to dinner,
and after dinner comes Deane of Woolwich, and I spent, as I had appointed,
all the afternoon with him about instructions which he gives me to
understand the building of a ship, and I think I shall soon understand it.
In the evening a little to my office to see how the work goes forward
there, and then home and spent the evening also with Mr. Deane, and had a
good supper, and then to bed, he lying at my house.

8th (Lord's day).  This day my new tailor, Mr. Langford, brought me home a
new black cloth suit and cloake lined with silk moyre, and he being gone,
who pleases me very well with his work and I hope will use me pretty well,
then Deane and I to my chamber, and there we repeated my yesterday's
lesson about ships all the morning, and I hope I shall soon understand it.
At noon to dinner, and strange how in discourse he cries up chymistry from
some talk he has had with an acquaintance of his, a chymist, when, poor
man, he understands not one word of it.  But I discern very well that it
is only his good nature, but in this of building ships he hath taken great
pains, more than most builders I believe have.   After dinner he went
away, and my wife and I to church, and after church to Sir W. Pen, and
there sat and talked with him, and the perfidious rogue seems, as he do
always, mightily civil to us, though I know he hates and envies us.  So
home to supper, prayers, and to bed.

9th.  Up and to my office all the morning, and there saw several things
done in my work to my great content, and at noon home to dinner, and after
dinner in Sir W. Pen's coach he set my wife and I down at the New
Exchange, and after buying some things we walked to my Lady Sandwich's,
who, good lady, is now, thanks be to God!  so well as to sit up, and sent
to us, if we were not afeard, to come up to her.  So we did; but she was
mightily against my wife's coming so near her; though, poor wretch! she is
as well as ever she was, as to the meazles, and nothing can I see upon her
face.  There we sat talking with her above three hours, till six o'clock,
of several things with great pleasure and so away, and home by coach,
buying several things for my wife in our way, and so after looking what
had been done in my office to-day, with good content home to supper and to
bed.  But, strange, how I cannot get any thing to take place in my mind
while my work lasts at my office.  This day my wife and I in our way to
Paternoster Row to buy things called upon Mr. Hollyard to advise upon her
drying up her issue in her leg, which inclines of itself to dry up, and he
admits of it that it should be dried up.

10th.  Up and at my office looking after my workmen all the morning, and
after the office was done did the same at night, and so home to supper and
to bed.

11th.  Up and all day, both forenoon and afternoon, at my office to see it
finished by the joyners and washed and every thing in order, and indeed
now my closet is very convenient and pleasant for me.  My uncle Wight came
to me to my office this afternoon to speak with me about Mr. Maes's
business again, and from me went to my house to see my wife, and strange
to think that my wife should by and by send for me after he was gone to
tell me that he should begin discourse of her want of children and his
also, and how he thought it would be best for him and her to have one
between them, and he would give her L500 either in money or jewells
beforehand, and make the child his heir.  He commended her body, and
discoursed that for all he knew the thing was lawful.  She says she did
give him a very warm answer, such as he did not excuse himself by saying
that he said this in jest, but told her that since he saw what her mind
was he would say no more to her of it, and desired her to make no words of
it.  It seemed he did say all this in a kind of counterfeit laugh, but by
all words that passed, which I cannot now so well set down, it is plain to
me that he was in good earnest, and that I fear all his kindness is but
only his lust to her.  What to think of it of a sudden I know not, but I
think not to take notice yet of it to him till I have thought better of
it.  So with my mind and head a little troubled I received a letter from
Mr. Coventry about a mast for the Duke's yacht, which with other business
makes me resolve to go betimes to Woolwich to-morrow.  So to supper and to
bed.

12th.  Up by 4 o'clock and by water to Woolwich, where did some business
and walked to Greenwich, good discourse with Mr. Deane best part of the
way; there met by appointment Commissioner Pett, and with him to Deptford,
where did also some business, and so home to my office, and at noon Mrs.
Hunt and her cozens child and mayd came and dined with me.  My wife sick
.  .  .  in bed.  I was troubled with it, but, however, could not help it,
but attended them till after dinner, and then to the office and there sat
all the afternoon, and by a letter to me this afternoon from Mr. Coventry
I saw the first appearance of a warr with Holland.  So home; and betimes
to bed because of rising to-morrow.

13th.  Up before three o'clock, and a little after upon the water, it
being very light as at noon, and a bright sunrising; but by and by a
rainbow appeared, the first that ever in a morning I saw, and then it fell
a-raining a little, but held up again, and I to Woolwich, where before all
the men came to work I with Mr. Deane spent two hours upon the new ship,
informing myself in the names and natures of many parts of her to my great
content, and so back again, without doing any thing else, and after
shifting myself away to Westminster, looking after Mr. Maes's business and
others.  In the Painted Chamber I heard a fine conference between some of
the two Houses upon the Bill for Conventicles.  The Lords would be freed
from having their houses searched by any but the Lord Lieutenant of the
County; and upon being found guilty, to be tried only by their peers; and
thirdly, would have it added, that whereas the Bill says, "That that,
among other things, shall be a conventicle wherein any such meeting is
found doing any thing contrary to the Liturgy of the Church of England,"
they would have it added, "or practice."  The Commons to the Lords said,
that they knew not what might hereafter be found out which might be called
the practice of the Church of England; for there are many things may be
said to be the practice of the Church, which were never established by any
law, either common, statute, or canon; as singing of psalms, binding up
prayers at the end of the Bible, and praying extempore before and after
sermon: and though these are things indifferent, yet things for aught they
at present know may be started, which may be said to be the practice of
the Church which would not be fit to allow.  For the Lords' priviledges,
Mr. Walter told them how tender their predecessors had been of the
priviledges of the Lords; but, however, where the peace of the kingdom
stands in competition with them, they apprehend those priviledges must
give place.  He told them that he thought, if they should owne all to be
the priviledges of the Lords which might be demanded, they should be led
like the man (who granted leave to his neighbour to pull off his horse's
tail, meaning that he could not do it at once) that hair by hair had his
horse's tail pulled off indeed: so the Commons, by granting one thing
after another, might be so served by the Lords.  Mr. Vaughan, whom I could
not to my grief perfectly hear, did say, if that they should be obliged in
this manner to, exempt the Lords from every thing, it would in time come
to pass that whatever (be [it] never so great) should be voted by the
Commons as a thing penall for a commoner, the contrary should be thought a
priviledge to the Lords: that also in this business, the work of a
conventicle being but the work of an hour, the cause of a search would be
over before a Lord Lieutenant, who may be many miles off, can be sent for;
and that all this dispute is but about L100; for it is said in the Act,
that it shall be banishment or payment of L100.  I thereupon heard the
Duke of Lenox say, that there might be Lords who could not always be ready
to lose L100, or some such thing: They broke up without coming to any end
in it.  There was also in the Commons' House a great quarrel about Mr.
Prin, and it was believed that he should have been sent to the Towre, for
adding something to a Bill (after it was ordered to be engrossed) of his
own head--a Bill for measures for wine and other things of that sort, and
a Bill of his owne bringing in; but it appeared he could not mean any hurt
in it.  But, however, the King was fain to write in his behalf, and all
was passed over.  But it is worth my remembrance, that I saw old Ryly the
Herald, and his son; and spoke to his son, who told me in very bad words
concerning Mr. Prin, that the King had given him an office of keeping the
Records; but that he never comes thither, nor had been there these six
months: so that I perceive they expect to get his imployment from him.
Thus every body is liable to be envied and supplanted.  At noon over to
the Leg, where Sir G. Ascue, Sir Robt. Parkhurst and Sir W. Pen dined. A
good dinner and merry.  Thence to White Hall walking up and down a great
while, but the Council not meeting soon enough I went homeward, calling
upon my cozen Roger Pepys, with whom I talked and heard so much from him
of his desire that I would see my brother's debts paid, and things still
of that nature tending to my parting with what I get with pain to serve
others' expenses that I was cruelly vexed.  Thence to Sir R. Bernard, and
there heard something of Pigott's delay of paying our money, that that
also vexed me mightily.  So home and there met with a letter from my cozen
Scott, which tells me that he is resolved to meddle no more with our
business, of administering for my father, which altogether makes me almost
distracted to think of the trouble that I am like to meet with by other
folks' business more than ever I hope to have by my owne.  So with great
trouble of mind to bed.

14th.  Up, full of pain, I believe by cold got yesterday.  So to the
office, where we sat, and after office home to dinner, being in
extraordinary pain.  After dinner my pain increasing I was forced to go to
bed, and by and by my pain rose to be as great for an hour or two as ever
I remember it was in any fit of the stone, both in the lower part of my
belly and in my back also.  No wind could I break.  I took a glyster, but
it brought away but a little, and my height of pain followed it.  At last
after two hours lying thus in most extraordinary anguish, crying and
roaring, I know not what, whether it was my great sweating that may do it,
but upon getting by chance, among my other tumblings, upon my knees, in
bed, my pain began to grow less and less, till in an hour after I was in
very little pain, but could break no wind, nor make any water, and so
continued, and slept well all night.

15th (Lord's day).  Rose, and as I had intended without reference to this
pain, took physique, and it wrought well with me, my wife lying from me
to-night, the first time she did in the same house ever since we were
married, I think (unless while my father was in town, that he lay with
me).  She took physique also to-day, and both of our physiques wrought
well, so we passed our time to-day, our physique having done working, with
some pleasure talking, but I was not well, for I could make no water yet,
but a drop or two with great pain, nor break any wind.  In the evening
came Mr. Vernatty to see me and discourse about my Lord Peterborough's
business, and also my uncle Wight and Norbury, but I took no notice nor
showed any different countenance to my uncle Wight, or he to me, for all
that he carried himself so basely to my wife the last week, but will take
time to make my use of it.  So, being exceeding hot, to bed, and slept
well.

16th.  Forced to rise because of going to the Duke to St. James's, where
we did our usual business, and thence by invitation to Mr. Pierces the
chyrurgeon, where I saw his wife, whom I had not seen in many months
before.  She holds her complexion still, but in everything else, even in
this her new house and the best rooms in it, and her closet which her
husband with some vainglory took me to show me, she continues the eeriest
slattern that ever I knew in my life.  By and by we to see an experiment
of killing a dogg by letting opium into his hind leg.  He and Dr. Clerke
did fail mightily in hitting the vein, and in effect did not do the
business after many trials; but with the little they got in, the dogg did
presently fall asleep, and so lay till we cut him up, and a little dogg
also, which they put it down his throate; he also staggered first, and
then fell asleep, and so continued.  Whether he recovered or no, after I
was gone, I know not, but it is a strange and sudden effect.  Thence
walked to Westminster Hall, where the King was expected to come to
prorogue the House, but it seems, afterwards I hear, he did not come. I
promised to go again to Mr. Pierce's, but my pain grew so great, besides a
bruise I got to-day in my right testicle, which now vexes me as much as
the other, that I was mighty melancholy, and so by coach home and there
took another glyster, but find little good by it, but by sitting still my
pain of my bruise went away, and so after supper to bed, my wife and I
having talked and concluded upon sending my father an offer of having Pall
come to us to be with us for her preferment, if by any means I can get her
a husband here, which, though it be some trouble to us, yet it will be
better than to have her stay there till nobody will have her and then be
flung upon my hands.

17th.  Slept well all night and lay long, then rose and wrote my letter to
my father about Pall, as we had resolved last night.  So to dinner and
then to the office, finding myself better than I was, and making a little
water, but not yet breaking any great store of wind, which I wonder at,
for I cannot be well till I do do it.  After office home and to supper and
with good ease to bed, and endeavoured to tie my hands that I might not
lay them out of bed, by which I believe I have got cold, but I could not
endure it.

18th.  Up and within all the morning, being willing to keep as much as I
could within doors, but receiving a very wakening letter from Mr. Coventry
about fitting of ships, which speaks something like to be done, I went
forth to the office, there to take order in things, and after dinner to
White Hall to a Committee of Tangier, but did little.  So home again and
to Sir W. Pen, who, among other things of haste in this new order for
ships, is ordered to be gone presently to Portsmouth to look after the
work there.  I staid to discourse with him, and so home to supper, where
upon a fine couple of pigeons, a good supper; and here I met a pretty
cabinet sent me by Mr. Shales, which I give my wife, the first of that
sort of goods I ever had yet, and very conveniently it comes for her
closett.  I staid up late finding out the private boxes, but could not do
some of them, and so to bed, afraid that I have been too bold to-day in
venturing in the cold.  This day I begun to drink butter-milke and whey,
and I hope to find great good by it.

19th.  Up, and it being very rayny weather, which makes it cooler than it
was, by coach to Charing Cross with Sir W. Pen, who is going to Portsmouth
this day, and left him going to St. James's to take leave of the Duke, and
I to White Hall to a Committee of Tangier; where God forgive how our
Report of my Lord Peterborough's accounts was read over and agreed to by
the Lords, without one of them understanding it!  And had it been what it
would, it had gone: and, besides, not one thing touching the King's profit
in it minded or hit upon.  Thence by coach home again, and all the morning
at the office, sat, and all the afternoon till 9 at night, being fallen
again to business, and I hope my health will give me leave to follow it.
So home to supper and to bed, finding myself pretty well.  A pretty good
stool, which I impute to my whey to-day, and broke wind also.

20th.  Up and to my office, whither by and by comes Mr. Cholmely, and
staying till the rest of the company come he told me how Mr. Edward
Montagu is turned out of the Court, not [to] return again.  His fault, I
perceive, was his pride, and most of all his affecting to seem great with
the Queene and it seems indeed had more of her eare than any body else,
and would be with her talking alone two or three hours together; insomuch
that the Lords about the King, when he would be jesting with them about
their wives, would tell the King that he must have a care of his wife too,
for she hath now the gallant: and they say the King himself did once ask
Montagu how his mistress (meaning the Queene) did.  He grew so proud, and
despised every body, besides suffering nobody, he or she, to get or do any
thing about the Queene, that they all laboured to do him a good turn.
They also say that he did give some affront to the Duke of Monmouth, which
the King himself did speak to him of.  But strange it is that this man
should, from the greatest negligence in the world, come to be the miracle
of attendance, so as to take all offices from everybody, either men or
women, about the Queene.  Insomuch that he was observed as a miracle, but
that which is the worst, that which in a wise manner performed [would]
turn to his greatest advantage, was by being so observed employed to his
greatest wrong, the world concluding that there must be something more
than ordinary to cause him to do this.  So he is gone, nobody pitying but
laughing at him; and he pretends only that he is gone to his father, that
is sick in the country.  By and by comes Povy, Creed, and Vernatty, and so
to their accounts, wherein more trouble and vexation with Povy.  That
being done, I sent them going and myself fell to business till dinner.  So
home to dinner very pleasant.  In the afternoon to my office, where busy
again, and by and by came a letter from my father so full of trouble for
discontents there between my mother and servants, and such troubles to my
father from hence from Cave that hath my brother's bastard that I know not
what in the world to do, but with great trouble, it growing night, spent
some time walking, and putting care as much as I could out of my head,
with my wife in the garden, and so home to supper and to bed.

21st.  Up, called by Mr. Cholmely, and walked with him in the garden till
others came to another Committee of Tangier, as we did meet as we did use
to do, to see more of Povy's folly, and so broke up, and at the office sat
all the morning, Mr. Coventry with us, and very hot we are getting out
some ships.  At noon to the 'Change, and there did some business, and
thence home to dinner, and so abroad with my wife by coach to the New
Exchange, and there laid out almost 40s. upon her, and so called to see my
Lady Sandwich, whom we found in her dining-room, which joyed us mightily;
but she looks very thin, poor woman, being mightily broke. She told us
that Mr. Montagu is to return to Court, as she hears, which I wonder at,
and do hardly believe.  So home and to my office, where late, and so home
to supper and to bed.

22nd (Lord's day).  Up and by water to White Hall to my Lord's lodgings,
and with him walked to White Hall without any great discourse, nor do I
find that he do mind business at all.  Here the Duke of Yorke called me to
him, to ask me whether I did intend to go with him to Chatham or no. I
told him if he commanded, but I did believe there would be business here
for me, and so he told me then it would be better to stay, which I suppose
he will take better than if I had been forward to go.  Thence, after
staying and seeing the throng of people to attend the King to Chappell
(but, Lord! what a company of sad, idle people they are) I walked to St.
James's with Colonell Remes, where staid a good while and then walked to
White Hall with Mr. Coventry, talking about business. So meeting Creed,
took him with me home and to dinner, a good dinner, and thence by water to
Woolwich, where mighty kindly received by Mrs. Falconer and her husband,
who is now pretty well again, this being the first time I ever carried my
wife thither.  I walked to the Docke, where I met Mrs. Ackworth alone at
home, and God forgive me! what thoughts I had, but I had not the courage
to stay, but went to Mr. Pett's and walked up and down the yard with him
and Deane talking about the dispatch of the ships now in haste, and by and
by Creed and my wife and a friend of Mr. Falconer's came with the boat and
called me, and so by water to Deptford, where I landed, and after talking
with others walked to Half-way house with Mr. Wayth talking about the
business of his supplying us with canvas, and he told me in discourse
several instances of Sir W. Batten's cheats.  So to Half-way house,
whither my wife and them were gone before, and after drinking there we
walked, and by water home, sending Creed and the other with the boat home.
Then wrote a letter to Mr. Coventry, and so a good supper of pease, the
first I eat this year, and so to bed.

23rd.  Up and to the office, where Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Batten, and
myself met and did business, we being in a mighty hurry.  The King is gone
down with the Duke and a great crew this morning by break of day to
Chatham.  Towards noon I and my wife by water to Woolwich, leaving my wife
at Mr. Falconer's, and Mr. Hater and I with some officers of the yard on
board to see several ships how ready they are.  Then to Mr. Falconer's to
a good dinner, having myself carried them a vessel of sturgeon and a
Lamprey pie, and then to the Yarde again, and among other things did at
Mr. Ackworth's obtain a demonstration of his being a knave; but I did not
discover it, till it be a little more seasonable.  So back to the Ropeyard
and took my wife and Mr. Hater back, it raining mighty hard of a sudden,
but we with the tilt

     [Tilt (A.S. teld) represents a tent or awning.  It was used for a
     cloth covering for a cart or waggon, or for a canopy or awning over
     a portion of a boat.]

kept ourselves dry.  So to Deptford, did some business there; but, Lord!
to see how in both places the King's business, if ever it should come to a
warr, is likely to be done, there not being a man that looks or speaks
like a man that will take pains, or use any forecast to serve the King, at
which I am heartily troubled.  So home, it raining terribly, but we still
dry, and at the office late discoursing with Sir J. Minnes and Sir W.
Batten, who like a couple of sots receive all I say but to little purpose.
So late home to supper and to bed.

24th.  Up and to the office, where Sir J. Minnes and I sat all the
morning, and after dinner thither again, and all the afternoon hard at the
office till night, and so tired home to supper and to bed.  This day I
heard that my uncle Fenner is dead, which makes me a little sad, to see
with what speed a great many of my friends are gone, and more, I fear, for
my father's sake, are going.

25th.  Took physique betimes and to sleep, then up, it working all the
morning.  At noon dined, and in the afternoon in my chamber spending two
or three hours to look over some unpleasant letters and things of trouble
to answer my father in, about Tom's business and others, that vexed me,
but I did go through it and by that means eased my mind very much.  This
afternoon also came Tom and Charles Pepys by my sending for, and received
of me L40 in part towards their L70 legacy of my uncle's.  Spent the
evening talking with my wife, and so to bed.

26th.  Up to the office, where we sat, and I had some high words with Sir
W. Batten about canvas, wherein I opposed him and all his experience,
about seams in the middle, and the profit of having many breadths and
narrow, which I opposed to good purpose, to the rejecting of the whole
business.  At noon home to dinner, and thence took my wife by coach, and
she to my Lady Sandwich to see her.  I to Tom Trice, to discourse about my
father's giving over his administration to my brother, and thence to Sir
R. Bernard, and there received L19 in money, and took up my father's bond
of L21, that is L40, in part of Piggot's L209 due to us, which L40 he pays
for 7 roods of meadow in Portholme.  Thence to my wife, and carried her to
the Old Bayly, and there we were led to the Quest House, by the church,
where all the kindred were by themselves at the buriall of my uncle
Fenner; but, Lord! what a pitiful rout of people there was of them, but
very good service and great company the whole was.  And so anon to church,
and a good sermon, and so home, having for ease put my L19 into W. Joyce's
hand, where I left it.  So to supper and to bed, being in a little pain
from some cold got last night lying without anything upon my feet.

27th.  Up, not without some pain by cold, which makes me mighty
melancholy, to think of the ill state of my health.  To the office, where
busy till my brains ready to drop with variety of business, and vexed for
all that to see the service like to suffer by other people's neglect.
Vexed also at a letter from my father with two troublesome ones enclosed
from Cave and Noble, so that I know not what to do therein.  At home to
dinner at noon.  But to comfort my heart, Captain Taylor this day brought
me L20 he promised me for my assistance to him about his masts.  After
dinner to the office again, and thence with Mr. Wayth to St. Catherine's
to see some variety of canvas's, which indeed was worth my seeing, but
only I was in some pain, and so took not the delight I should otherwise
have done.  So home to the office, and there busy till late at night, and
so home to supper and to bed.  This morning my taylor brought me a very
tall mayde to be my cook-mayde; she asked L5, but my wife offered her but
L3 10s.--whether she will take it or no I know not till to-morrow, but I
am afeard she will be over high for us, she having last been a chamber
mayde, and holds up her head, as my little girle Su observed.

28th.  Up pretty well as to pain and wind, and to the office, where we sat
close and did much business.  At noon I to the 'Change, and thence to Mr.
Cutler's, where I heard Sir W. Rider was, where I found them at dinner and
dined with them, he having yesterday and to-day a fit of a pain like the
gout, the first time he ever had it.  A good dinner.  Good discourse, Sir
W. Rider especially much fearing the issue of a Dutch warr, wherein I very
highly commend him.  Thence home, and at the office a while, and then with
Mr. Deane to a second lesson upon my Shipwrightry, wherein I go on with
great pleasure.  He being gone I to the office late, and so home to supper
and to bed.  But, Lord! to see how my very going to the 'Change, and being
without my gowne, presently brought me wind and pain, till I came home and
was well again; but I am come to such a pass that I shall not know what to
do with myself, but I am apt to think that it is only my legs that I take
cold in from my having so long worn a gowne constantly.

29th (Whitsunday.  King's Birth and Restauration day).  Up, and having
received a letter last night desiring it from Mr. Coventry, I walked to
St. James's, and there he and I did long discourse together of the
business of the office, and the warr with the Dutch; and he seemed to
argue mightily with the little reason that there is for all this.  For
first, as to the wrong we pretend they have done us: that of the East
Indys, for their not delivering of Poleron, it is not yet known whether
they have failed or no; that of their hindering the Leopard cannot amount
to above L3,000 if true; that of the Guinny Company, all they had done us
did not amount to above L200 or L300 he told me truly; and that now, from
what Holmes, without any commission, hath done in taking an island and two
forts, hath set us much in debt to them; and he believes that Holmes will
have been so puffed up with this, that he by this time hath been enforced
with more strength than he had then, hath, I say, done a great deale more
wrong to them.  He do, as to the effect of the warr, tell me clearly that
it is not any skill of the Dutch that can hinder our trade if we will, we
having so many advantages over them, of winds, good ports, and men; but it
is our pride, and the laziness of the merchant.  He seems to think that
there may be some negotiation which may hinder a warr this year, but that
he speaks doubtfully as unwilling I perceive to be thought to discourse
any such thing.  The main thing he desired to speake with me about was, to
know whether I do understand my Lord Sandwich's intentions as to going to
sea with this fleete; saying, that the Duke, if he desires it, is most
willing to it; but thinking that twelve ships is not a fleete fit for my
Lord to be troubled to go out with, he is not willing to offer it to him
till he hath some intimations of his mind to go, or not.  He spoke this
with very great respect as to my Lord, though methinks it is strange they
should not understand one another better at this time than to need
another's mediation.  Thence walked over the Parke to White Hall, Mr. Povy
with me, and was taken in a very great showre in the middle of the Parke
that we were very wet.  So up into, the house and with him to the King's
closett, whither by and by the King came, my Lord Sandwich carrying the
sword.  A Bishopp preached, but he speaking too low for me to hear behind
the King's closett, I went forth and walked and discoursed with Colonell
Reames, who seems a very willing man to be informed in his business of
canvas, which he is undertaking to strike in with us to serve the Navy.
By and by my Lord Sandwich came forth, and called me to him: and we fell
into discourse a great while about his business, wherein he seems to be
very open with me, and to receive my opinion as he used to do; and I hope
I shall become necessary to him again.  He desired me to think of the
fitness, or not, for him to offer himself to go to sea; and to give him my
thoughts in a day or two.  Thence after sermon among the ladies on the
Queene's side; where I saw Mrs. Stewart, very fine and pretty, but far
beneath my Lady Castlemayne.  Thence with Mr. Povy home to dinner; where
extraordinary cheer.  And after dinner up and down to see his house.  And
in a word, methinks, for his perspective upon his wall in his garden, and
the springs rising up with the perspective in the little closett; his room
floored above with woods of several colours, like but above the best
cabinet-work I ever saw; his grotto and vault, with his bottles of wine,
and a well therein to keep them cool; his furniture of all sorts; his bath
at the top of his house, good pictures, and his manner of eating and
drinking; do surpass all that ever I did see of one man in all my life.
Thence walked home and found my uncle Wight and Mr. Rawlinson, who supped
with me.  They being gone, I to bed, being in some pain from my being so
much abroad to-day, which is a most strange thing that in such warm
weather the least ayre should get cold and wind in me.  I confess it makes
me mighty sad and out of all content in the world.

30th.  Lay long, the bells ringing, it being holiday, and then up and all
the day long in my study at home studying of shipmaking with great content
till the evening, and then came Mr. Howe and sat and then supped with me.
He is a little conceited, but will make a discreet man.  He being gone, a
little to my office, and then home to bed, being in much pain from
yesterday's being abroad, which is a consideration of mighty sorrow to me.

31st.  Up, and called upon Mr. Hollyard, with whom I advised and shall
fall upon some course of doing something for my disease of the wind, which
grows upon me every day more and more.  Thence to my Lord Sandwich's, and
while he was dressing I below discoursed with Captain Cooke, and I think
if I do find it fit to keep a boy at all I had as good be supplied from
him with one as any body.  By and by up to my Lord, and to discourse about
his going to sea, and the message I had from Mr. Coventry to him.  He
wonders, as he well may, that this course should be taken, and he every
day with the Duke, who, nevertheless, seems most friendly to him, who hath
not yet spoke one word to my Lord of his desire to have him go to sea.  My
Lord do tell me clearly that were it not that he, as all other men that
were of the Parliament side, are obnoxious to reproach, and so is forced
to bear what otherwise he would not, he would never suffer every thing to
be done in the Navy, and he never be consulted; and it seems, in the
naming of all these commanders for this fleete, he hath never been asked
one question.  But we concluded it wholly inconsistent with his honour not
to go with this fleete, nor with the reputation which the world hath of
his interest at Court; and so he did give me commission to tell Mr.
Coventry that he is most willing to receive any commands from the Duke in
this fleete, were it less than it is, and that particularly in this
service.  With this message I parted, and by coach to the office, where I
found Mr. Coventry, and told him this.  Methinks, I confess, he did not
seem so pleased with it as I expected, or at least could have wished, and
asked me whether I had told my Lord that the Duke do not expect his going,
which I told him I had. But now whether he means really that the Duke, as
he told me the other day, do think the Fleete too small for him to take or
that he would not have him go, I swear I cannot tell.  But methinks other
ways might have been used to put him by without going in this manner about
it, and so I hope it is out of kindness indeed.  Dined at home, and so to
the office, where a great while alone in my office, nobody near, with
Bagwell's wife of Deptford, but the woman seems so modest that I durst not
offer any courtship to her, though I had it in my mind when I brought her
in to me. But I am resolved to do her husband a courtesy, for I think he
is a man that deserves very well.  So abroad with my wife by coach to St.
James's, to one Lady Poultny's, where I found my Lord, I doubt, at some
vain pleasure or other.  I did give him a short account of what I had done
with Mr. Coventry, and so left him, and to my wife again in the coach, and
with her to the Parke, but the Queene being gone by the Parke to
Kensington, we staid not but straight home and to supper (the first time I
have done so this summer), and so to my office doing business, and then to
my monthly accounts, where to my great comfort I find myself better than I
was still the last month, and now come to L930.  I was told to-day, that
upon Sunday night last, being the King's birth-day, the King was at my
Lady Castlemayne's lodgings (over the hither-gates at Lambert's lodgings)
dancing with fiddlers all night almost; and all the world coming by taking
notice of it, which I am sorry to hear.  The discourse of the town is only
whether a warr with Holland or no, and we are preparing for it all we can,
which is but little.  Myself subject more than ordinary to pain by winde,
which makes me very sad, together with the trouble which at present lies
upon me in my father's behalf, rising from the death of my brother, which
are many and great.  Would to God they were over!

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Bath at the top of his house
     Fear all his kindness is but only his lust to her
     Fetch masts from New England
     Find myself to over-value things when a child
     Generally with corruption, but most indeed with neglect
     I slept soundly all the sermon
     In a hackney and full of people, was ashamed to be seen
     In my dining-room she was doing something upon the pott
     Methought very ill, or else I am grown worse to please
     Mrs. Lane was gone forth, and so I missed of my intent
     Saw "The German Princess" acted, by the woman herself
     Slabbering my band sent home for another
     That hair by hair had his horse's tail pulled off indeed


                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                              JUNE & JULY
                                 1664

June 1st.  Up, having lain long, going to bed very late after the ending
of my accounts.  Being up Mr. Hollyard came to me, and to my great sorrow,
after his great assuring me that I could not possibly have the stone
again, he tells me that he do verily fear that I have it again, and has
brought me something to dissolve it, which do make me very much troubled,
and pray to God to ease me.  He gone, I down by water to Woolwich and
Deptford to look after the dispatch of the ships, all the way reading Mr.
Spencer's Book of Prodigys, which is most ingeniously writ, both for
matter and style.  Home at noon, and my little girl got me my dinner, and
I presently out by water and landed at Somerset stairs, and thence through
Covent Garden, where I met with Mr. Southwell (Sir W. Pen's friend), who
tells me the very sad newes of my Lord Tiviott's and nineteen more
commission officers being killed at Tangier by the Moores, by an ambush of
the enemy upon them, while they were surveying their lines; which is very
sad, and, he says, afflicts the King much.  Thence to W. Joyce's, where by
appointment I met my wife (but neither of them at home), and she and I to
the King's house, and saw "The Silent Woman;" but methought not so well
done or so good a play as I formerly thought it to be, or else I am
nowadays out of humour.  Before the play was done, it fell such a storm of
hayle, that we in the middle of the pit were fain to rise;

     [The stage was covered in by a tiled roof, but the pit was open to
     the sky.  "The pit lay open to the weather for sake of light, but
     was subsequently covered in with a glazed cupola, which, however,
     only imperfectly protected the audience, so that in stormy weather
     the house was thrown into disorder, and the people in the pit were
     fain to rise" (Cunningham's "Story of Nell Gwyn," ed. 1893, p. 33).]

and all the house in a disorder, and so my wife and I out and got into a
little alehouse, and staid there an hour after the play was done before we
could get a coach, which at last we did (and by chance took up Joyce
Norton and Mrs. Bowles.  and set them at home), and so home ourselves, and
I, after a little to my office, so home to supper and to bed.

2nd.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and then to the
'Change, where after some stay by coach with Sir J. Minnes and Mr.
Coventry to St. James's, and there dined with Mr. Coventry very finely,
and so over the Parke to White Hall to a Committee of Tangier about
providing provisions, money, and men for Tangier.  At it all the
afternoon, but it is strange to see how poorly and brokenly things are
done of the greatest consequence, and how soon the memory of this great
man is gone, or, at least, out of mind by the thoughts of who goes next,
which is not yet knowne.  My Lord of Oxford, Muskerry, and several others
are discoursed of.  It seems my Lord Tiviott's design was to go a mile and
half out of the towne, to cut down a wood in which the enemy did use to
lie in ambush.  He had sent several spyes; but all brought word that the
way was clear, and so might be for any body's discovery of an enemy before
you are upon them.  There they were all snapt, he and all his officers,
and about 200 men, as they say; there being left now in the garrison but
four captains.  This happened the 3d of May last, being not before that
day twelvemonth of his entering into his government there: but at his
going out in the morning he said to some of his officers, "Gentlemen, let
us look to ourselves, for it was this day three years that so many brave
Englishmen were knocked on the head by the Moores, when Fines made his
sally out."  Here till almost night, and then home with Sir J. Minnes by
coach, and so to my office a while, and home to supper and bed, being now
in constant pain in my back, but whether it be only wind or what it is the
Lord knows, but I fear the worst.

3rd.  Up, still in a constant pain in my back, which much afflicts me with
fear of the consequence of it.  All the morning at the office, we sat at
the office extraordinary upon the business of our stores, but, Lord!  what
a pitiful account the Surveyor makes of it grieves my heart. This morning
before I came out I made a bargain with Captain Taylor for a ship for the
Commissioners for Tangier, wherein I hope to get L40 or L50. To the
'Change, and thence home and dined, and then by coach to White Hall,
sending my wife to Mrs. Hunt's.  At the Committee for Tangier all the
afternoon, where a sad consideration to see things of so great weight
managed in so confused a manner as it is, so as I would not have the
buying of an acre of land bought by the Duke of York and Mr. Coventry, for
ought I see, being the only two that do anything like men; Prince Rupert
do nothing but swear and laugh a little, with an oathe or two, and that's
all he do.  Thence called my wife and home, and I late at my office, and
so home to supper and to bed, pleased at my hopes of gains by to-day's
work, but very sad to think of the state of my health.

4th.  Up and to St. James's by coach, after a good deal of talk before I
went forth with J. Noble, who tells me that he will secure us against
Cave, that though he knows, and can prove it, yet nobody else can prove
it, to be Tom's child; that the bond was made by one Hudson, a scrivener,
next to the Fountaine taverne, in the Old Bayly; that the children were
born, and christened, and entered in the parish-book of St. Sepulchre's,
by the name of Anne and Elizabeth Taylor and he will give us security
against Cave if we pay him the money.  And then up to the Duke, and was
with him giving him an account how matters go, and of the necessity there
is of a power to presse seamen, without which we cannot really raise men
for this fleete of twelve sayle, besides that it will assert the King's
power of pressing, which at present is somewhat doubted, and will make the
Dutch believe that we are in earnest.  Thence by water to the office,
where we sat till almost two o'clock.  This morning Captain Ferrer came to
the office to tell me that my Lord hath given him a promise of Young's
place in the Wardrobe, and hearing that I pretend a promise to it he comes
to ask my consent, which I denied him, and told him my Lord may do what he
pleases with his promise to me, but my father's condition is not so as
that I should let it go if my Lord will stand to his word, and so I sent
him going, myself being troubled a little at it.  After office I with Mr.
Coventry by water to St. James's and dined with him, and had excellent
discourse from him.  So to the Committee for Tangier all afternoon, where
still the same confused doings, and my Lord Fitz-Harding now added to the
Committee; which will signify much.  It grieves me to see how brokenly
things are ordered.  So by coach home, and at my office late, and so to
supper and to bed, my body by plenty of breaking of wind being just now
pretty well again, having had a constant akeing in my back these 5 or 6
days.  Mr. Coventry discoursing this noon about Sir W. Batten (what a sad
fellow he is!) told me how the King told him the other day how Sir W.
Batten, being in the ship with him and Prince Rupert when they expected to
fight with Warwick, did walk up and down sweating with a napkin under his
throat to dry up his sweat; and that Prince Rupert being a most jealous
man, and particularly of Batten, do walk up and down swearing bloodily to
the King, that Batten had a mind to betray them to-day, and that the
napkin was a signal; "but, by God," says he, "if things go ill, the first
thing I will do is to shoot him."  He discoursed largely and bravely to me
concerning the different sort of valours, the active and passive valour.
For the latter, he brought as an instance General Blake; who, in the
defending of Taunton and Lime for the Parliament, did through his stubborn
sort of valour defend it the most 'opiniastrement' that ever any man did
any thing; and yet never was the man that ever made any attaque by land or
sea, but rather avoyded it on all, even fair occasions.  On the other
side, Prince Rupert, the boldest attaquer in the world for personal
courage; and yet, in the defending of Bristol, no man ever did anything
worse, he wanting the patience and seasoned head to consult and advise for
defence, and to bear with the evils of a siege.  The like he says is said
of my Lord Tiviott, who was the boldest adventurer of his person in the
world, and from a mean man in few years was come to this greatness of
command and repute only by the death of all his officers, he many times
having the luck of being the only survivor of them all, by venturing upon
services for the King of France that nobody else would; and yet no man
upon a defence, he being all fury and no judgment in a fight.  He tells me
above all of the Duke of Yorke, that he is more himself and more of
judgement is at hand in him in the middle of a desperate service, than at
other times, as appeared in the business of Dunkirke, wherein no man ever
did braver things, or was in hotter service in the close of that day,
being surrounded with enemies; and then, contrary to the advice of all
about him, his counsel carried himself and the rest through them safe, by
advising that he might make his passage with but a dozen with him; "For,"
says he, "the enemy cannot move after me so fast with a great body, and
with a small one we shall be enough to deal with them;" and though he is a
man naturally martiall to the highest degree, yet a man that never in his
life talks one word of himself or service of his owne, but only that he
saw such or such a thing, and lays it down for a maxime that a Hector can
have no courage.  He told me also, as a great instance of some men, that
the Prince of Condo's excellence is, that there not being a more furious
man in the world, danger in fight never disturbs him more than just to
make him civill, and to command in words of great obligation to his
officers and men; but without any the least disturbance in his judgment or
spirit.

5th (Lord's day).  About one in the morning I was knocked up by my mayds
to come to my wife who is very ill.  I rose, and from some cold she got
to-day, or from something else, she is taken with great gripings, a
looseness, and vomiting.  I lay a while by her upon the bed, she being in
great pain, poor wretch, but that being a little over I to bed again, and
lay, and then up and to my office all the morning, setting matters to
rights in some accounts and papers, and then to dinner, whither Mr.
Shepley, late come to town, came to me, and after dinner and some pleasant
discourse he went his way, being to go out of town to Huntington again
to-morrow.  So all the afternoon with my wife discoursing and talking, and
in the evening to my office doing business, and then home to supper and to
bed.

6th.  Up and found my wife very ill again, which troubles me, but I was
forced to go forth.  So by water with Mr. Gauden and others to see a ship
hired by me for the Commissioners of Tangier, and to give order therein.
So back to the office, and by coach with Mr. Gauden to White Hall, and
there to my Lord Sandwich, and here I met Mr. Townsend very opportunely
and Captain Ferrer, and after some discourse we did accommodate the
business of the Wardrobe place, that he shall have the reversion if he
will take it out by giving a covenant that if Mr. Young' dyes before my
father my father shall have the benefit of it for his life.  So home, and
thence by water to Deptford, and there found our Trinity Brethren come
from their election to church, where Dr. Britton made, methought, an
indifferent sermon touching the decency that we ought to observe in God's
house, the church, but yet to see how ridiculously some men will carry
themselves.  Sir W. Batten did at open table anon in the name of the whole
Society desire him to print his sermon, as if the Doctor could think that
they were fit judges of a good sermon.  Then by barge with Sir W. Batten
to Trinity House.  It seems they have with much ado carried it for Sir G.
Carteret against Captain Harrison, poor man, who by succession ought to
have been it, and most hands were for him, but only they were forced to
fright the younger Brethren by requiring them to set their hands (which is
an ill course) and then Sir G. Carteret carryed it.  Here was at dinner my
Lord Sandwich, Mr. Coventry, my Lord Craven, and others. A great dinner,
and good company.  Mr. Prin also, who would not drink any health, no, not
the King's, but sat down with his hat on all the while;

     [William Prynne had published in 1628 a small book against the
     drinking of healths, entitled, "Healthes, Sicknesse; or a
     compendious and briefe Discourse, prouing, the Drinking and Pledging
     of Healthes to be sinfull and utterly unlawfull unto Christians
     .  .  . wherein all those ordinary objections, excuses or pretences,
     which are made to justifie, extenuate, or excuse the drinking or
     pledging of Healthes are likewise cleared and answered."  The
     pamphlet was dedicated to Charles I. as "more interessed in the
     theame and subject of this compendious discourse then any other that
     I know," and "because your Majestie of all other persons within your
     owne dominions, are most dishonoured, prejudiced, and abused by
     these Healthes."]

but nobody took notice of it to him at all; but in discourse with the
Doctor he did declare himself that he ever was, and has expressed himself
in all his books for mixt communion against the Presbyterian examination.
Thence after dinner by water, my Lord Sandwich and all us Tangier men,
where at the Committee busy till night with great confusion, and then by
coach home, with this content, however, that I find myself every day
become more and more known, and shall one day hope to have benefit by it.
I found my wife a little better.  A little to my office, then home to
supper and to bed.

7th.  Up and to the office (having by my going by water without any thing
upon my legs yesterday got some pain upon me again), where all the
morning.  At noon a little to the 'Change, and thence home to dinner, my
wife being ill still in bed.  Thence to the office, where busy all the
afternoon till 9 at night, and so home to my wife, to supper, and to bed.

8th.  All day before dinner with Creed, talking of many things, among
others, of my Lord's going so often to Chelsy, and he, without my speaking
much, do tell me that his daughters do perceive all, and do hate the
place, and the young woman there, Mrs. Betty Becke; for my Lord, who sent
them thither only for a disguise for his going thither, will come under
pretence to see them, and pack them out of doors to the Parke, and stay
behind with her; but now the young ladies are gone to their mother to
Kensington.  To dinner, and after dinner till 10 at night in my study
writing of my old broken office notes in shorthand all in one book, till
my eyes did ake ready to drop out.  So home to supper and to bed.

9th.  Up and at my office all the morning.  At noon dined at home, Mr.
Hunt and his kinswoman (wife in the country), after dinner I to the
office, where we sat all the afternoon.  Then at night by coach to attend
the Duke of Albemarle about the Tangier ship.  Coming back my wife spied
me going home by coach from Mr. Hunt's, with whom she hath gained much in
discourse to-day concerning W. Howe's discourse of me to him.  That he was
the man that got me to be secretary to my Lord; and all that I have
thereby, and that for all this I never did give him 6d. in my life. Which
makes me wonder that this rogue dare talk after this manner, and I think
all the world is grown false.  But I hope I shall make good use of it.  So
home to supper and to bed, my eyes aching mightily since last night.

10th.  Up and by water to White Hall, and there to a Committee of Tangier,
and had occasion to see how my Lord Ashworth--[Lord Ashworth is probably a
miswriting for Lord Ashley (afterwards Earl of Shaftesbury).]--deports
himself, which is very fine indeed, and it joys my heart to see that there
is any body looks so near into the King's business as I perceive he do in
this business of my Lord Peterborough's accounts. Thence into the Parke,
and met and walked with Captain Sylas Taylor, my old acquaintance while I
was of the Exchequer, and Dr. Whore, talking of musique, and particularly
of Mr. Berckenshaw's way, which Taylor magnifies mightily, and perhaps but
what it deserves, but not so easily to be understood as he and others make
of it.  Thence home by water, and after dinner abroad to buy several
things, as a map, and powder, and other small things, and so home to my
office, and in the evening with Captain Taylor by water to our Tangier
ship, and so home, well pleased, having received L26 profit to-day of my
bargain for this ship, which comforts me mightily, though I confess my
heart, what with my being out of order as to my health, and the fear I
have of the money my Lord oweth me and I stand indebted to him in, is much
cast down of late.  In the evening home to supper and to bed.

11th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, where some
discourse arose from Sir G. Carteret and Mr. Coventry, which gives me
occasion to think that something like a war is expected now indeed, though
upon the 'Change afterwards I hear too that an Embassador is landed from
Holland, and one from their East India Company, to treat with ours about
the wrongs we pretend to.  Mr. Creed dined with me, and thence after
dinner by coach with my wife only to take the ayre, it being very warm and
pleasant, to Bowe and Old Ford; and thence to Hackney.  There 'light, and
played at shuffle-board, eat cream and good churies; and so with good
refreshment home.  Then to my office vexed with Captain Taylor about the
delay of carrying down the ship hired by me for Tangier, and late about
that and other things at the office.  So home to supper and to bed.

12th (Lord's day).  All the morning in my chamber consulting my lesson of
ship building, and at noon Mr. Creed by appointment came and dined with
us, and sat talking all the afternoon till, about church time, my wife and
I began our great dispute about going to Griffin's child's christening,
where I was to have been godfather, but Sir J. Minnes refusing, he wanted
an equal for me and my Lady Batten, and so sought for other.  Then the
question was whether my wife should go, and she having dressed herself on
purpose, was very angry, and began to talk openly of my keeping her within
doors before Creed, which vexed me to the guts, but I had the discretion
to keep myself without passion, and so resolved at last not to go, but to
go down by water, which we did by H. Russell--[a waterman]--to the
Half-way house, and there eat and drank, and upon a very small occasion
had a difference again broke out, where without any the least cause she
had the cunning to cry a great while, and talk and blubber, which made me
mighty angry in mind, but said nothing to provoke her because Creed was
there, but walked home, being troubled in my mind also about the knavery
and neglect of Captain Fudge and Taylor, who were to have had their ship
for Tangier ready by Thursday last, and now the men by a mistake are come
on board, and not any master or man or boy of the ship's company on board
with them when we came by her side this afternoon, and also received a
letter from Mr. Coventry this day in complaint of it.  We came home, and
after supper Creed went home, and I to bed.  My wife made great means to
be friends, coming to my bedside and doing all things to please me, and at
last I could not hold out, but seemed pleased, and so parted, and I with
much ado to sleep, but was easily wakened by extraordinary great rain, and
my mind troubled the more to think what the soldiers would do on board
tonight in all this weather.

13th.  So up at 5 o'clock, and with Captain Taylor on board her at
Deptford, and found all out of order, only the soldiers civil, and Sir
Arthur Bassett a civil person.  I rated at Captain Taylor, whom, contrary
to my expectation, I found a lying and a very stupid blundering fellow,
good for nothing, and yet we talk of him in the Navy as if he had been an
excellent officer, but I find him a lying knave, and of no judgment or
dispatch at all.  After finding the condition of the ship, no master, not
above four men, and many ship's provisions, sayls, and other things
wanting, I went back and called upon Fudge, whom I found like a lying
rogue unready to go on board, but I did so jeer him that I made him get
every thing ready, and left Taylor and H. Russell to quicken him, and so
away and I by water on to White Hall, where I met his Royal Highnesse at a
Tangier Committee about this very thing, and did there satisfy him how
things are, at which all was pacified without any trouble, and I hope may
end well, but I confess I am at a real trouble for fear the rogue should
not do his work, and I come to shame and losse of the money I did hope
justly to have got by it.  Thence walked with Mr. Coventry to St. James's,
and there spent by his desire the whole morning reading of some old Navy
books given him of old Sir John Cooke's by the Archbishop of Canterbury
that now is; wherein the order that was observed in the Navy then, above
what it is now, is very observable, and fine things we did observe in our
reading.  Anon to dinner, after dinner to discourse of the business of the
Dutch warr, wherein he tells me the Dutch do in every particular, which
are but few and small things that we can demand of them, whatever cry we
unjustly make, do seem to offer at an accommodation, for they do owne that
it is not for their profit to have warr with England.  We did also talk of
a History of the Navy of England, how fit it were to be writ; and he did
say that it hath been in his mind to propose to me the writing of the
History of the late Dutch warr, which I am glad to hear, it being a thing
I much desire, and sorts mightily with my genius; and, if well done, may
recommend me much.  So he says he will get me an order for making of
searches to all records, &c., in order thereto, and I shall take great
delight in doing of it.  Thence by water down to the Tower, and thither
sent for Mr. Creed to my house, where he promised to be, and he and I down
to the ship, and find all things in pretty good order, and I hope will end
to my mind.  Thence having a gaily down to Greenwich, and there saw the
King's works, which are great, a-doing there, and so to the Cherry Garden,
and so carried some cherries home, and after supper to bed, my wife lying
with me, which from my not being thoroughly well, nor she, we have not
done above once these two or three weeks.

14th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and had great
conflict about the flags again, and am vexed methought to see my Lord
Berkely not satisfied with what I said, but however I stop the King's
being abused by the flag makers for the present.  I do not know how it may
end, but I will do my best to preserve it.  So home to dinner, and after
dinner by coach to Kensington.  In the way overtaking Mr. Laxton, the
apothecary, with his wife and daughters, very fine young lasses, in a
coach; and so both of us to my Lady Sandwich, who hath lain this fortnight
here at Deane Hodges's.  Much company came hither to-day, my Lady
Carteret, &c., Sir William Wheeler and his lady, and, above all, Mr.
Becke, of Chelsy, and wife and daughter, my Lord's mistress, and one that
hath not one good feature in her face, and yet is a fine lady, of a fine
taille, and very well carriaged, and mighty discreet.  I took all the
occasion I could to discourse with the young ladies in her company to give
occasion to her to talk, which now and then she did, and that mighty
finely, and is, I perceive, a woman of such an ayre, as I wonder the less
at my Lord's favour to her, and I dare warrant him she hath brains enough
to entangle him.  Two or three houres we were in her company, going into
Sir H. Finche's garden, and seeing the fountayne, and singing there with
the ladies, and a mighty fine cool place it is, with a great laver of
water in the middle and the bravest place for musique I ever heard. After
much mirthe, discoursing to the ladies in defence of the city against the
country or court, and giving them occasion to invite themselves to-morrow
to me to dinner, to my venison pasty, I got their mother's leave, and so
good night, very well pleased with my day's work, and, above all, that I
have seen my Lord's mistresse.  So home to supper, and a little at my
office, and to bed.

15th.  Up and by appointment with Captain Witham (the Captain that brought
the newes of the disaster at Tangier, where my Lord Tiviott was slain) and
Mr. Tooker to Beares Quay, and there saw and more afterward at the several
grannarys several parcels of oates, and strange it is to hear how it will
heat itself if laid up green and not often turned.  We came not to any
agreement, but did cheapen several parcels, and thence away, promising to
send again to them.  So to the Victualling office, and then home.  And in
our garden I got Captain Witham to tell me the whole story of my Lord
Tiviott's misfortune; for he was upon the guard with his horse neare the
towne, when at a distance he saw the enemy appear upon a hill, a mile and
a half off, and made up to them, and with much ado escaped himself; but
what became of my Lord he neither knows nor thinks that any body but the
enemy can tell.  Our losse was about four hundred.  But he tells me that
the greater wonder is that my Lord Tiviott met no sooner with such a
disaster; for every day he did commit himself to more probable danger than
this, for now he had the assurance of all his scouts that there was no
enemy thereabouts; whereas he used every day to go out with two or three
with him, to make his discoveries, in greater danger, and yet the man that
could not endure to have anybody else to go a step out of order to
endanger himself.  He concludes him to be the man of the hardest fate to
lose so much honour at one blow that ever was.  His relation being done he
parted; and so I home to look after things for dinner.  And anon at noon
comes Mr. Creed by chance, and by and by the three young ladies:--[Lord
Sandwich's daughters.]--and very merry we were with our pasty, very well
baked; and a good dish of roasted chickens; pease, lobsters, strawberries.
And after dinner to cards: and about five o'clock, by water down to
Greenwich; and up to the top of the hill, and there played upon the ground
at cards.  And so to the Cherry Garden, and then by water singing finely
to the Bridge, and there landed; and so took boat again, and to Somersett
House.  And by this time, the tide being against us, it was past ten of
the clock; and such a troublesome passage, in regard of my Lady Paulina's
fearfullness, that in all my life I never did see any poor wretch in that
condition.  Being come hither, there waited for them their coach; but it
being so late, I doubted what to do how to get them home.  After half an
hour's stay in the street, I sent my wife home by coach with Mr. Creed's
boy; and myself and Creed in the coach home with them.  But, Lord! the
fear that my Lady Paulina was in every step of the way; and indeed at this
time of the night it was no safe thing to go that road; so that I was even
afeard myself, though I appeared otherwise.--We came safe, however, to
their house, where all were abed; we knocked them up, my Lady and all the
family being in bed.  So put them into doors; and leaving them with the
mayds, bade them good night, and then into the towne, Creed and I, it
being about twelve o'clock and past; and to several houses, inns, but
could get no lodging, all being in bed.  At the last house, at last, we
found some people drinking and roaring; and there got in, and after
drinking, got an ill bed, where

16th.  I lay in my drawers and stockings and wastecoate till five of the
clock, and so up; and being well pleased with our frolique, walked to
Knightsbridge, and there eat a messe of creame, and so to St. James's, and
there walked a little, and so I to White Hall, and took coach, and found
my wife well got home last night, and now in bed.  So I to the office,
where all the morning, and at noon to the 'Change, so home and to my
office, where Mr. Ackworth came to me (though he knows himself and I know
him to be a very knave), yet he came to me to discover the knavery of
other people like the most honest man in the world.  However, good use I
shall make of his discourse, for in this he is much in the right.  He
being gone I to the 'Change, Mr. Creed with me, after we had been by water
to see a vessell we have hired to carry more soldiers to Tangier, and also
visited a rope ground, wherein I learnt several useful things. The talk
upon the 'Change is, that De Ruyter is dead, with fifty men of his own
ship, of the plague, at Cales: that the Holland Embassador here do
endeavour to sweeten us with fair words; and things likely to be
peaceable.  Home after I had spoke with my cozen Richard Pepys upon the
'Change, about supplying us with bewpers from Norwich, which I should be
glad of, if cheap.  So home to supper and bed.

17th.  Up, and to my office, where I dispatched much business, and then
down by water to Woolwich to make a discovery of a cheate providing for us
in the working of some of our own ground Tows into new cordage, to be sold
to us for Riga cordage.  Thence to Mr. Falconer's, where I met Sir W.
Batten and Lady, and Captain Tinker, and there dined with them, and so to
the Dockyarde and to Deptford by water, and there very long informing
myself in the business of flags and bewpers and other things, and so home
late, being weary, and full of good information to-day, but I perceive the
corruptions of the Navy are of so many kinds that it is endless to look
after them, especially while such a one as Sir W. Batten discourages every
man that is honest.  So home to my office, there very late, and then to
supper and to bed mightily troubled in my mind to hear how Sir W. Batten
and Sir J. Minnes do labour all they can to abuse or enable others to
abuse the King.

18th.  From morning till 11 at night (only a little at dinner at home) at
my office very busy, setting many businesses in order to my great trouble,
but great content in the end.  So home to supper and to bed. Strange to
see how pert Sir W. Pen is to-day newly come from Portsmouth with his head
full of great reports of his service and the state of the ships there.
When that is over he will be just as another man again or worse.  But I
wonder whence Mr. Coventry should take all this care for him, to send for
him up only to look after his Irish business with my Lord Ormond and to
get the Duke's leave for him to come with so much officiousness, when I am
sure he knows him as well as I do as to his little service he do.

19th (Lord's day).  Up, and all the morning and afternoon (only at dinner
at home) at my office doing many businesses for want of time on the week
days.  In the afternoon the greatest shower of rain of a sudden and the
greatest and most continued thunder that ever I heard I think in my life.
In the evening home to my wife, and there talked seriously of several of
our family concernments, and among others of bringing Pall out of the
country to us here to try to put her off, which I am very desirous, and my
wife also of.  So to supper, prayers, which I have of late too much
omitted.  So to bed.

20th.  It having been a very cold night last night I had got some cold,
and so in pain by wind, and a sure precursor of pain is sudden letting off
farts, and when that stops, then my passages stop and my pain begins. Up
and did several businesses, and so with my wife by water to White Hall,
she to her father's, I to the Duke, where we did our usual business.  And
among other discourse of the Dutch, he was merrily saying how they print
that Prince Rupert, Duke of Albemarle, and my Lord Sandwich, are to be
Generalls; and soon after is to follow them "Vieux Pen;" and so the Duke
called him in mirth Old Pen.  They have, it seems, lately wrote to the
King, to assure him that their setting-out ships were only to defend their
fishing-trade, and to stay near home, not to annoy the King's subjects;
and to desire that he would do the like with his ships: which the King
laughs at, but yet is troubled they should think him such a child, to
suffer them to bring home their fish and East India Company's ships, and
then they will not care a fart for us.  Thence to Westminster Hall, it
being term time, meeting Mr. Dickering, he tells me how my Lady last week
went to see Mrs. Becke, the mother; and by and by the daughter came in,
but that my Lady do say herself, as he says, that she knew not for what
reason, for she never knew they had a daughter, which I do not believe.
She was troubled, and her heart did rise as soon as she appeared, and
seems the most ugly woman that ever she saw.  This if true were strange,
but I believe it is not.  Thence to my Lord's lodgings; and were merry
with the young ladies, who make a great story of their appearing before
their mother the morning after we carried them, the last week, home so
late; and that their mother took it very well, at least without any anger.
Here I heard how the rich widow, my Lady Gold, is married to one Neale,
after he had received a box on the eare by her brother (who was there a
sentinel, in behalf of some courtier) at the door; but made him draw, and
wounded him.  She called Neale up to her, and sent for a priest, married
presently, and went to bed.  The brother sent to the Court, and had a
serjeant sent for Neale; but Neale sent for him up to be seen in bed, and
she owned him for her husband: and so all is past.  It seems Sir H. Bennet
did look after her.  My Lady very pleasant.  After dinner came in Sir
Thomas Crew and Mr. Sidney, lately come from France, who is growne a
little, and a pretty youth he is; but not so improved as they did give him
out to be, but like a child still. But yet I can perceive he hath good
parts and good inclinations.  Thence with Creed, who dined here, to
Westminster to find out Mr. Hawly, and did, but he did not accept of my
offer of his being steward to my Lord at sea.  Thence alone to several
places about my law businesses, and with good success; at last I to Mr.
Townsend at the Wardrobe, and received kind words from him to be true to
me against Captain Ferrers his endeavours to get the place from my father
as my Lord hath promised him. Here met Will. Howe, and he went forth with
me; and by water back to White Hall to wait on my Lord, who is come back
from Hinchinbroke; where he has been about 4 or 5 days.  But I was never
more vexed to see how an over-officious visitt is received, for he
received me with as little concernment as in the middle of his discontent,
and a fool I am to be of so servile a humour, and vexed with that
consideration I took coach home, and could not get it off my mind all
night.  To supper and to bed, my wife finding fault with Besse for her
calling upon Jane that lived with us, and there heard Mrs. Harper and her
talk ill of us and not told us of it.  With which I was also vexed, and
told her soundly of it till she cried, poor wench, and I hope without
dissimulation, and yet I cannot tell; however, I was glad to see in what
manner she received it, and so to sleep.

21st.  Being weary yesterday with walking I sleep long, and at last up and
to the office, where all the morning.  At home to dinner, Mr. Deane with
me.  After dinner I to White Hall (setting down my wife by the way) to a
Committee of Tangier, where the Duke of Yorke, I perceive, do attend the
business very well, much better than any man there or most of them, and my
[mind] eased of some trouble I lay under for fear of his thinking ill of
me from the bad successe in the setting forth of these crew men to
Tangier.  Thence with Mr. Creed, and walked in the Parke, and so to the
New Exchange, meeting Mr. Moore, and he with us.  I shewed him no friendly
look, but he took no notice to me of the Wardrobe business, which vexes
me.  I perceive by him my Lord's business of his family and estate goes
very ill, and runs in debt mightily.  I would to God I were clear of it,
both as to my owne money and the bond of L1000, which I stand debtor for
him in, to my cozen Thomas Pepys.  Thence by coach home and to my office a
little, and so to supper and to bed.

22nd.  Up and I found Mr. Creed below, who staid with me a while, and then
I to business all the morning.  At noon to the 'Change and Coffee-house,
where great talke of the Dutch preparing of sixty sayle of ships. The
plague grows mightily among them, both at sea and land.  From the 'Change
to dinner to Trinity House with Sir W. Rider and Cutler, where a very good
dinner.  Here Sir G. Ascue dined also, who I perceive desires to make
himself known among the seamen.  Thence home, there coming to me my Lord
Peterborough's Sollicitor with a letter from him to desire present
dispatch in his business of freight, and promises me L50, which is good
newes, and I hope to do his business readily for him.  This much rejoiced
me.  All the afternoon at his business, and late at night comes the
Sollicitor again, and I with him at 9 o'clock to Mr. Povy's, and there
acquainted him with the business.  The money he won't pay without warrant,
but that will be got done in a few days.  So home by coach and to bed.

23rd.  Up, and to the office, and there we sat all the morning.  So to the
'Change, and then home to dinner and to my office, where till 10 at night
very busy, and so home to supper and to bed.  My cozen, Thomas Pepys, was
with me yesterday and I took occasion to speak to him about the bond I
stand bound for my Lord Sandwich to him in L1000.  I did very plainly,
obliging him to secrecy, tell him how the matter stands, yet with all duty
to my Lord my resolution to be bound for whatever he desires me for him,
yet that I would be glad he had any other security. I perceive by Mr.
Moore today that he hath been with my Lord, and my Lord how he takes it I
know not, but he is looking after other security and I am mighty glad of
it.  W. Howe was with me this afternoon, to desire some things to be got
ready for my Lord against his going down to his ship, which will be soon;
for it seems the King and both the Queenes intend to visit him.  The Lord
knows how my Lord will get out of this charge; for Mr. Moore tells me
to-day that he is L10,000 in debt and this will, with many other things
that daily will grow upon him (while he minds his pleasure as he do), set
him further backward.  But it was pretty this afternoon to hear W. Howe
mince the matter, and say that he do believe that my Lord is in debt L2000
or L3000, and then corrected himself and said, No, not so, but I am afraid
he is in debt L1000.  I pray God gets me well rid of his Lordship as to
his debt, and I care not.

24th.  Up and out with Captain Witham in several places again to look for
oats for Tangier, and among other places to the City granarys, where it
seems every company have their granary and obliged to keep such a quantity
of corne always there or at a time of scarcity to issue so much at so much
a bushell: and a fine thing it is to see their stores of all sorts, for
piles for the bridge, and for pipes, a thing I never saw before.

     [From the commencement of the reign of Henry VIII., or perhaps
     earlier, it was the custom of the City of London to provide against
     scarcity, by requiring each of the chartered Companies to keep in
     store a certain quantity of corn, which was to be renewed from time
     to time, and when required for that purpose, produced in the market
     for sale, at such times and prices, and in such quantities, as the
     Lord Mayor or Common Council should direct.  See the report of a
     case in the Court of Chancery, "Attorney-General v. Haberdashers'
     Company" (Mylne and Keens "Reports," vol. i., p. 420).--B.]

Thence to the office, and there busy all the morning.  At noon to my uncle
Wight's, and there dined, my wife being there all the morning. After
dinner to White Hall; and there met with Mr. Pierce, and he showed me the
Queene's bed-chamber, and her closett, where she had nothing but some
pretty pious pictures, and books of devotion; and her holy water at her
head as she sleeps, with her clock by her bed-side, wherein a lamp burns
that tells her the time of the night at any time.  Thence with him to the
Parke, and there met the Queene coming from Chappell, with her Mayds of
Honour, all in silver-lace gowns again: which is new to me, and that which
I did not think would have been brought up again.  Thence he carried me to
the King's closett: where such variety of pictures, and other things of
value and rarity, that I was properly confounded and enjoyed no pleasure
in the sight of them; which is the only time in my life that ever I was so
at a loss for pleasure, in the greatest plenty of objects to give it me.
Thence home, calling in many places and doing abundance of errands to my
great content, and at night weary home, where Mr. Creed waited for me, and
he and I walked in the garden, where he told me he is now in a hurry
fitting himself for sea, and that it remains that he deals as an ingenuous
man with me in the business I wot of, which he will do before he goes.
But I perceive he will have me do many good turns for him first, both as
to his bills coming to him in this office, and also in his absence at the
Committee of Tangier, which I promise, and as he acquits himself to me I
will willingly do.  I would I knew the worst of it, what it is he intends,
that so I may either quit my hands of him or continue my kindness still to
him.

25th.  We staid late, and he lay with me all night and rose very merry
talking, and excellent company he is, that is the truth of it, and a most
cunning man.  He being gone I to the office, where we sat all the morning.
At noon to dinner, and then to my office busy, and by and by home with Mr.
Deane to a lesson upon raising a Bend of Timbers,

     [This seems to refer to knee timber, of which there was not a
     sufficient supply.  A proposal was made to produce this bent wood
     artificially: "June 22, 1664.  Sir William Petty intimated that it
     seemed by the scarcity and greater rate of knee timber that nature
     did not furnish crooked wood enough for building: wherefore he
     thought it would be fit to raise by art, so much of it in
     proportion, as to reduce it to an equal rate with strait timber"
     (Birch's "History of the Royal Society,")]

and he being gone I to the office, and there came Captain Taylor, and he
and I home, and I have done all very well with him as to the business of
the last trouble, so that come what will come my name will be clear of any
false dealing with him.  So to my office again late, and then to bed.

26th (Lord's day).  Up, and Sir J. Minnes set me down at my Lord
Sandwich's, where I waited till his coming down, when he came, too, could
find little to say to me but only a general question or two, and so
good-bye.  Here his little daughter, my Lady Katharine was brought, who is
lately come from my father's at Brampton, to have her cheek looked after,
which is and hath long been sore.  But my Lord will rather have it be as
it is, with a scarr in her face, than endanger it being worse by
tampering.  He being gone, I went home, a little troubled to see he minds
me no more, and with Creed called at several churches, which, God knows,
are supplied with very young men, and the churches very empty; so home and
at our owne church looked in, and there heard one preach whom Sir W. Pen
brought, which he desired us yesterday to hear, that had been his chaplin
in Ireland, a very silly fellow.  So home and to dinner, and after dinner
a frolique took us, we would go this afternoon to the Hope; so my wife
dressed herself, and, with good victuals and drink, we took boat presently
and the tide with us got down, but it was night, and the tide spent by the
time we got to Gravesend; so there we stopped, but went not on shore, only
Creed, to get some cherries,

     [Pliny tells us that cherries were introduced into Britain by the
     Romans, and Lydgate alludes to them as sold in the London streets.
     Richard Haines, fruiterer to Henry VI IL, imported a number of
     cherry trees from Flanders, and planted them at Tenham, in Kent.
     Hence the fame of the Kentish cherries.]

and send a letter to the Hope, where the Fleete lies.  And so, it being
rainy, and thundering mightily, and lightning, we returned.  By and by the
evening turned mighty clear and moonshine; we got with great pleasure
home, about twelve o'clock, which did much please us, Creed telling pretty
stories in the boat.  He lay with me all night.

27th.  Up, and he and I walked to Paul's Church yard, and there saw Sir
Harry Spillman's book, and I bespoke it and others, and thence we took
coach, and he to my Lord's and I to St. James's, where we did our usual
business, and thence I home and dined, and then by water to Woolwich, and
there spent the afternoon till night under pretence of buying Captain
Blackman's house and grounds, and viewing the ground took notice of
Clothiers' cordage with which he, I believe, thinks to cheat the King.
That being done I by water home, it being night first, and there I find
our new mayd Jane come, a cook mayd.  So to bed.

28th.  Up, and this day put on a half shirt first this summer, it being
very hot; and yet so ill-tempered I am grown, that I am afeard I shall
catch cold, while all the world is ready to melt away.  To the office all
the morning, at noon to dinner at home, then to my office till the
evening, then out about several businesses and then by appointment to the
'Change, and thence with my uncle Wight to the Mum house, and there
drinking, he do complain of his wife most cruel as the most troublesome
woman in the world, and how she will have her will, saying she brought him
a portion and God knows what.  By which, with many instances more, I
perceive they do live a sad life together.  Thence to the Mitre and there
comes Dr. Burnett to us and Mr. Maes, but the meeting was chiefly to bring
the Doctor and me together, and there I began to have his advice about my
disease, and then invited him to my house: and I am resolved to put myself
into his hands.  Here very late, but I drank nothing, nor will, though he
do advise me to take care of cold drinks.  So home and to bed.

29th.  Up, and Mr. Shepley came to me, who is lately come to town; among
other things I hear by him how the children are sent for away from my
father's, but he says without any great discontent.  I am troubled there
should be this occasion of difference, and yet I am glad they are gone,
lest it should have come to worse.  He tells me how my brave dogg I did
give him, going out betimes one morning to Huntington, was set upon by
five other doggs, and worried to pieces, of which I am a little, and he
the most sorry I ever saw man for such a thing.  Forth with him and walked
a good way talking, then parted and I to the Temple, and to my cozen Roger
Pepys, and thence by water to Westminster to see Dean Honiwood, whom I had
not visited a great while.  He is a good-natured, but a very weak man, yet
a Dean, and a man in great esteem.  Thence walked to my Lord Sandwich's,
and there dined, my Lord there.  He was pleasant enough at table with me,
but yet without any discourse of business, or any regard to me when dinner
was over, but fell to cards, and my Lady and I sat two hours alone,
talking of the condition of her family's being greatly in debt, and many
children now coming up to provide for.  I did give her my sense very plain
of it, which she took well and carried further than myself, to the
bemoaning their condition, and remembering how finely things were ordered
about six years ago, when I lived there and my Lord at sea every year.
Thence home, doing several errands by the way.  So to my office, and there
till late at night, Mr. Comander coming to me for me to sign and seal the
new draft of my will, which I did do, I having altered something upon the
death of my brother Tom.  So home to supper and to bed.

30th.  Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning.  At noon home
to dinner, Mr. Wayth with me, and by and by comes in Mr. Falconer and his
wife and dined with us, the first time she was ever here.  We had a pretty
good dinner, very merry in discourse, sat after dinner an hour or two,
then down by water to Deptford and Woolwich about getting of some business
done which I was bound to by my oath this month, and though in some things
I have not come to the height of my vow of doing all my business in paying
all my petty debts and receipt of all my petty monies due to me, yet I
bless God I am not conscious of any neglect in me that they are not done,
having not minded my pleasure at all, and so being resolved to take no
manner of pleasure till it be done, I doubt not God will forgive me for
not forfeiting the L10 promised.  Walked back from Woolwich to Greenwich
all alone, save a man that had a cudgell in his hand, and, though he told
me he laboured in the King's yarde, and many other good arguments that he
is an honest man, yet, God forgive me!  I did doubt he might knock me on
the head behind with his club.  But I got safe home.  Then to the making
up my month's accounts, and find myself still a gainer and rose to L951,
for which God be blessed.  I end the month with my mind full of business
and some sorrow that I have not exactly performed all my vowes, though my
not doing is not my fault, and shall be made good out of my first leisure.
Great doubts yet whether the Dutch wary go on or no.  The Fleet ready in
the Hope, of twelve sayle. The King and Queenes go on board, they say, on
Saturday next.  Young children of my Lord Sandwich gone with their mayds
from my mother's, which troubles me, it being, I hear from Mr. Shepley,
with great discontent, saying, that though they buy good meate, yet can
never have it before it stinks, which I am ashamed of.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                 JULY
                                 1664

July 1st.  Up and within all the morning, first bringing down my Tryangle
to my chamber below, having a new frame made proper for it to stand on. By
and by comes Dr. Burnett, who assures me that I have an ulcer either in
the kidneys or bladder, for my water, which he saw yesterday, he is sure
the sediment is not slime gathered by heat, but is a direct pusse. He did
write me down some direction what to do for it, but not with the
satisfaction I expected.

                       Dr. Burnett's advice to mee.

                 The Originall is fyled among my letters.

     Take of ye Rootes of Marsh-Mallows foure ounces, of Cumfry, of
     Liquorish, of each two ounces, of ye Mowers of St. John's Wort two
     Handsfull, of ye Leaves of Plantan, of Alehoofe, of each three
     handfulls, of Selfeheale, of Red Roses, of each one Handfull, of
     Cynament, of Nutmegg, of each halfe an ounce.  Beate them well, then
     powre upon them one Quart of old Rhenish wine, and about Six houres
     after strayne it and clarify it with ye white of an Egge, and with a
     sufficient quantity of sugar, boyle it to ye consistence of a Syrrup
     and reserve it for use.

     Dissolve one spoonefull of this Syrrup in every draught of Ale or
     beere you drink.

     Morning and evening swallow ye quantity of an hazle-nutt of Cyprus
     Terebintine.

     If you are bound or have a fit of ye Stone eate an ounce of Cassia
     new drawne, from ye poynt of a knife.

     Old Canary or Malaga wine you may drinke to three or 4 glasses, but
     noe new wine, and what wine you drinke, lett it bee at meales.-[From
     a slip of paper inserted in the Diary at this place.]

I did give him a piece, with good hopes, however, that his advice will be
of use to me, though it is strange that Mr. Hollyard should never say one
word of this ulcer in all his life to me.  He being gone, I to the
'Change, and thence home to dinner, and so to my office, busy till the
evening, and then by agreement came Mr. Hill and Andrews and one
Cheswicke, a maister who plays very well upon the Spinette, and we sat
singing Psalms till 9 at night, and so broke up with great pleasure, and
very good company it is, and I hope I shall now and then have their
company.  They being gone, I to my office till towards twelve o'clock, and
then home and to bed.  Upon the 'Change, this day, I saw how uncertain the
temper of the people is, that, from our discharging of about 200 that lay
idle, having nothing to do, upon some of our ships, which were ordered to
be fitted for service, and their works are now done, the towne do talk
that the King discharges all his men, 200 yesterday and 800 to-day, and
that now he hath got L100,000 in his hand, he values not a Dutch warr.
But I undeceived a great many, telling them how it is.

2nd.  Up and to the office, where all the morning.  At noon to the
'Change, and there, which is strange, I could meet with nobody that I
could invite home to my venison pasty, but only Mr. Alsopp and Mr. Lanyon,
whom I invited last night, and a friend they brought along with them.  So
home and with our venison pasty we had other good meat and good discourse.
After dinner sat close to discourse about our business of the victualling
of the garrison of Tangier, taking their prices of all provisions, and I
do hope to order it so that they and I also may get something by it, which
do much please me, for I hope I may get nobly and honestly with profit to
the King.  They being gone came Sir W. Warren, and he and I discoursed
long about the business of masts, and then in the evening to my office,
where late writing letters, and then home to look over some Brampton
papers, which I am under an oathe to dispatch before I spend one half
houre in any pleasure or go to bed before 12 o'clock, to which, by the
grace of God, I will be true.  Then to bed.  When I came home I found that
to-morrow being Sunday I should gain nothing by doing it to-night, and
to-morrow I can do it very well and better than to-night.  I went to bed
before my time, but with a resolution of doing the thing to better purpose
to-morrow.

3rd (Lord's day).  Up and ready, and all the morning in my chamber looking
over and settling some Brampton businesses.  At noon to dinner, where the
remains of yesterday's venison and a couple of brave green geese, which we
are fain to eat alone, because they will not keepe, which troubled us.
After dinner I close to my business, and before the evening did end it
with great content, and my mind eased by it.  Then up and spent the
evening walking with my wife talking, and it thundering and lightning all
the evening, and this yeare have had the most of thunder and lightning
they say of any in man's memory, and so it is, it seems, in France and
everywhere else.  So to prayers and to bed.

4th.  Up, and many people with me about business, and then out to several
places, and so at noon to my Lord Crew's, and there dined and very much
made of there by him.  He offered me the selling of some land of his in
Cambridgeshire, a purchase of about L1000, and if I can compass it I will.
After dinner I walked homeward, still doing business by the way, and at
home find my wife this day of her owne accord to have lain out 25s. upon a
pair of pendantes for her eares, which did vex me and brought both me and
her to very high and very foule words from her to me, such as trouble me
to think she should have in her mouth, and reflecting upon our old
differences, which I hate to have remembered.  I vowed to breake them, or
that she should go and get what she could for them again.  I went with
that resolution out of doors; the poor wretch afterwards in a little while
did send out to change them for her money again.  I followed Besse her
messenger at the 'Change, and there did consult and sent her back; I would
not have them changed, being satisfied that she yielded. So went home, and
friends again as to that business; but the words I could not get out of my
mind, and so went to bed at night discontented, and she came to bed to me,
but all would not make me friends, but sleep and rise in the morning
angry.  This day the King and the Queene went to visit my Lord Sandwich
and the fleete, going forth in the Hope.

     ["Their Majesties were treated at Tilbury Hope by the Earl of
     Sandwich, returning the same day, abundantly satisfied both with the
     dutiful respects of that honourable person and with the excellent
     condition of all matters committed to his charge" ("The Newes," July
     7th, 1664).--B.]

5th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning.  At noon to the 'Change
a little, then with W. Howe home and dined.  So after dinner to my office,
and there busy till late at night, having had among other things much
discourse with young Gregory about the Chest business, wherein Sir W.
Batten is so great a knave, and also with Alsop and Lanyon about the
Tangier victualling, wherein I hope to get something for myself.  Late
home to supper and to bed, being full of thoughts of a sudden resolution
this day taken upon the 'Change of going down to-morrow to the Hope.

6th.  Up very betimes, and my wife also, and got us ready; and about eight
o'clock, having got some bottles of wine and beer and neat's tongues, we
went to our barge at the Towre, where Mr. Pierce and his wife, and a
kinswoman and his sister, and Mrs. Clerke and her sister and cozen were to
expect us; and so set out for the Hope, all the way down playing at cards
and other sports, spending our time pretty merry.  Come to the Hope about
one and there showed them all the ships, and had a collacion of anchovies,
gammon, &c., and after an houre's stay or more, embarked again for home;
and so to cards and other sports till we came to Greenwich, and there Mrs.
Clerke and my wife and I on shore to an alehouse, for them to do their
business, and so to the barge again, having shown them the King's pleasure
boat; and so home to the Bridge, bringing night home with us; and it
rained hard, but we got them on foot to the Beare, and there put them into
a boat, and I back to my wife in the barge, and so to the Tower Wharf and
home, being very well pleased today with the company, especially Mrs.
Pierce, who continues her complexion as well as ever, and hath, at this
day, I think, the best complexion that ever I saw on any woman, young or
old, or child either, all days of my life.  Also Mrs. Clerke's kinswoman
sings very prettily, but is very confident in it; Mrs. Clerke herself
witty, but spoils all in being so conceited and making so great a flutter
with a few fine clothes and some bad tawdry things worne with them.  But
the charge of the barge lies heavy upon me, which troubles me, but it is
but once, and I may make Pierce do me some courtesy as great.  Being come
home, I weary to bed with sitting.  The reason of Dr. Clerke's not being
here was the King's being sicke last night and let blood, and so he durst
not come away to-day.

7th.  Up, and this day begun, the first day this year, to put off my
linnen waistcoat, but it happening to be a cool day I was afraid of taking
cold, which troubles me, and is the greatest pain I have in the world to
think of my bad temper of my health.  At the office all the morning.
Dined at home, to my office to prepare some things against a Committee of
Tangier this afternoon.  So to White Hall, and there found the Duke and
twenty more reading their commission (of which I am, and was also sent to,
to come) for the Royall Fishery, which is very large, and a very serious
charter it is; but the company generally so ill fitted for so serious a
worke that I do much fear it will come to little.  That being done, and
not being able to do any thing for lacke of an oathe for the Governor and
Assistants to take, we rose.  Then our Committee for the Tangier
victualling met and did a little, and so up, and I and Mr. Coventry walked
in the garden half an hour, talking of the business of our masts, and
thence away and with Creed walked half an hour or more in the Park, and
thence to the New Exchange to drink some creame, but missed it and so
parted, and I home, calling by the way for my new bookes, viz., Sir H.
Spillman's "Whole Glossary," "Scapula's Lexicon," and Shakespeare's plays,
which I have got money out of my stationer's bills to pay for.  So home
and to my office a while, and then home and to bed, finding myself pretty
well for all my waistecoate being put off to-day. The king is pretty well
to-day, though let blood the night before yesterday.

8th.  Up and called out by my Lord Peterborough's gentleman to Mr. Povy's
to discourse about getting of his money, wherein I am concerned in hopes
of the L50 my Lord hath promised me, but I dare not reckon myself sure of
it till I have it in my main,--[hand.]--for these Lords are hard to be
trusted.  Though I well deserve it.  I staid at Povy's for his coming in,
and there looked over his stables and every thing, but notwithstanding all
the times I have been there I do yet find many fine things to look on.
Thence to White Hall a little, to hear how the King do, he not having been
well these three days.  I find that he is pretty well again. So to Paul's
Churchyarde about my books, and to the binder's and directed the doing of
my Chaucer,

     [This was Speght's edition of 1602, which is still in the Pepysian
     Library.  The book is bound in calf, with brass clasps and bosses.
     It is not lettered.]

though they were not full neate enough for me, but pretty well it is; and
thence to the clasp-maker's to have it clasped and bossed.  So to the
'Change and home to dinner, and so to my office till 5 o'clock, and then
came Mr. Hill and Andrews, and we sung an houre or two.  Then broke up and
Mr. Alsop and his company came and consulted about our Tangier victualling
and brought it to a good head.  So they parted, and I to supper and to
bed.

9th.  Up, and at the office all the morning.  In the afternoon by coach
with Sir J. Minnes to White Hall, and there to a Committee for Fishing;
but the first thing was swearing to be true to the Company, and we were
all sworne; but a great dispute we had, which, methought, is very ominous
to the Company; some, that we should swear to be true to the best of our
power, and others to the best of our understanding; and carried in the
last, though in that we are the least able to serve the Company, because
we would not be obliged to attend the business when we can, but when we
list.  This consideration did displease me, but it was voted and so went.
We did nothing else, but broke up till a Committee of Guinny was set and
ended, and then met again for Tangier, and there I did my business about
my Lord Peterborough's order and my own for my expenses for the garrison
lately.  So home, by the way calling for my Chaucer and other books, and
that is well done to my mind, which pleased me well.  So to my office till
late writing letters, and so home to my wife to supper and bed, where we
have not lain together because of the heat of the weather a good while,
but now against her going into the country.

10th (Lord's day).  Up and by water, towards noon, to Somersett House, and
walked to my Lord Sandwich's, and there dined with my Lady and the
children.  And after some ordinary discourse with my Lady, after dinner
took our leaves and my wife hers, in order to her going to the country
to-morrow.  But my Lord took not occasion to speak one word of my father
or mother about the children at all, which I wonder at, and begin I will
not.  Here my Lady showed us my Lady Castlemayne's picture, finely done;
given my Lord; and a most beautiful picture it is.  Thence with my Lady
Jemimah and Mr. Sidney to St. Gyles's Church, and there heard a long,
poore sermon.  Thence set them down and in their coach to Kate Joyce's
christening, where much company, good service of sweetmeates; and after an
houre's stay, left them, and in my Lord's coach--his noble, rich
coach--home, and there my wife fell to putting things in order against her
going to-morrow, and I to read, and so to bed, where I not well, and so
had no pleasure at all with my poor wife.

11th.  But betimes up this morning, and, getting ready, we by coach to
Holborne, where, at nine o'clock, they set out, and I and my man Will on
horseback, by my wife, to Barnett; a very pleasant day; and there dined
with her company, which was very good; a pretty gentlewoman with her, that
goes but to Huntington, and a neighbour to us in towne.  Here we staid two
hours and then parted for all together, and my poor wife I shall soon want
I am sure.  Thence I and Will to see the Wells, half a mile off,

     [The mineral springs at Barnet Common, nearly a mile to the west of
     High Barnet.  The discovery of the wells was announced in the
     "Perfect Diurnall" of June 5th, 1652, and Fuller, writing in 1662,
     says that there are hopes that the waters may "save as many lives as
     were lost in the fatal battle at Barnet" ("Worthies," Herts).  A
     pamphlet on "The Barnet Well Water" was published by the Rev. W. M.
     Trinder, M.D., as late as the year 1800, but in 1840 the old well-
     house was pulled down.]

and there I drank three glasses, and went and walked and came back and
drunk two more; the woman would have had me drink three more; but I could
not, my belly being full, but this wrought very well, and so we rode home,
round by Kingsland, Hackney, and Mile End till we were quite weary, and my
water working at least 7 or 8 times upon the road, which pleased me well,
and so home weary, and not being very well, I betimes to bed, and there
fell into a most mighty sweat in the night, about eleven o'clock, and
there, knowing what money I have in the house and hearing a noyse, I begun
to sweat worse and worse, till I melted almost to water. I rung, and could
not in half an houre make either of the wenches hear me, and this made me
fear the more, lest they might be gaga; and then I begun to think that
there was some design in a stone being flung at the window over our
stayres this evening, by which the thiefes meant to try what looking there
would be after them and know our company.  These thoughts and fears I had,
and do hence apprehend the fears of all rich men that are covetous and
have much money by them.  At last Jane rose, and then I understand it was
only the dogg wants a lodging and so made a noyse.  So to bed, but hardly
slept, at last did, and so till morning,

12th.  And so rose, called up by my Lord Peterborough's gentleman about
getting his Lord's money to-day of Mr. Povy, wherein I took such order,
that it was paid, and I had my L50 brought me, which comforts my heart. We
sat at the office all the morning, then at home.  Dined alone; sad for
want of company and not being very well, and know not how to eat alone.
After dinner down with Sir G. Carteret, Sir J. Minnes, and Sir W. Batten
to view, and did like a place by Deptford yard to lay masts in.  By and by
comes Mr. Coventry, and after a little stay he and I down to Blackwall, he
having a mind to see the yarde, which we did, and fine storehouses there
are and good docks, but of no great profit to him that oweth them for
ought we see.

     [For "owneth."  This sense is very common in Shakespeare.  In the
     original edition of the authorized version of the Bible we read: "So
     shall the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man that oweth this girdle"
     (Acts xxi.  I i) Nares's Glossary.]

So home by water with him, having good discourse by the way, and so I to
the office a while, and late home to supper and to bed.

13th.  Up and to my office, at noon (after having at an alehouse hard by
discoursed with one Mr. Tyler, a neighbour, and one Captain Sanders about
the discovery of some pursers that have sold their provisions) I to my
Lord Sandwich, thinking to have dined there, but they not dining at home,
I with Captain Ferrers to Mr. Barwell the King's Squire Sadler, where
about this time twelvemonths I dined before at a good venison pasty.  The
like we had now, and very good company, Mr. Tresham and others.  Thence to
White Hall to the Fishery, and there did little.  So by water home, and
there met Lanyon, &c., about Tangier matters, and so late to my office,
and thence home and to bed.  Mr. Moore was with me late to desire me to
come to my Lord Sandwich tomorrow morning, which I shall, but I wonder
what my business is.

14th.  My mind being doubtful what the business should be, I rose a little
after four o'clock, and abroad.  Walked to my Lord's, and nobody up, but
the porter rose out of bed to me so I back again to Fleete Streete, and
there bought a little book of law; and thence, hearing a psalm sung, I
went into St. Dunstan's, and there heard prayers read, which, it seems, is
done there every morning at six o'clock; a thing I never did do at a
chappell, but the College Chappell, in all my life. Thence to my Lord's
again, and my Lord being up, was sent for up, and he and I alone.  He did
begin with a most solemn profession of the same confidence in and love for
me that he ever had, and then told me what a misfortune was fallen upon me
and him: in me, by a displeasure which my Lord Chancellor did show to him
last night against me, in the highest and most passionate manner that ever
any man did speak, even to the not hearing of any thing to be said to him:
but he told me, that he did say all that could be said for a man as to my
faithfullnesse and duty to his Lordship, and did me the greatest right
imaginable.  And what should the business be, but that I should be forward
to have the trees in Clarendon Park marked and cut down, which he, it
seems, hath bought of my Lord Albemarle; when, God knows!  I am the most
innocent man in the world in it, and did nothing of myself, nor knew of
his concernment therein, but barely obeyed my Lord Treasurer's warrant for
the doing thereof.  And said that I did most ungentlemanlike with him, and
had justified the rogues in cutting down a tree of his; and that I had
sent the veriest Fanatique [Deane] that is in England to mark them, on
purpose to nose--[provoke]--him.  All which, I did assure my Lord, was
most properly false, and nothing like it true; and told my Lord the whole
passage.  My Lord do seem most nearly affected; he is partly, I believe,
for me, and partly for himself.  So he advised me to wait presently upon
my Lord, and clear myself in the most perfect manner I could, with all
submission and assurance that I am his creature both in this and all other
things; and that I do owne that all I have, is derived through my Lord
Sandwich from his Lordship.  So, full of horror, I went, and found him
busy in tryals of law in his great room; and it being Sitting-day, durst
not stay, but went to my Lord and told him so: whereupon he directed me to
take him after dinner; and so away I home, leaving my Lord mightily
concerned for me.  I to the office, and there sat busy all the morning.
At noon to the 'Change, and from the 'Change over with Alsopp and the
others to the Pope's Head tavern, and there staid a quarter of an hour,
and concluded upon this, that in case I got them no more than 3s. per week
per man I should have of them but L150 per ann., but to have it without
any adventure or charge, but if I got them 3s. 2d., then they would give
me L300 in the like manner.  So I directed them to draw up their tender in
a line or two against the afternoon, and to meet me at White Hall.  So I
left them, and I to my Lord Chancellor's; and there coming out after
dinner I accosted him, telling him that I was the unhappy Pepys that had
fallen into his high displeasure, and come to desire him to give me leave
to make myself better understood to his Lordship, assuring him of my duty
and service.  He answered me very pleasingly, that he was confident upon
the score of my Lord Sandwich's character of me, but that he had reason to
think what he did, and desired me to call upon him some evening: I named
to-night, and he accepted of it.  So with my heart light I to White Hall,
and there after understanding by a stratagem, and yet appearing wholly
desirous not to understand Mr. Gauden's price when he desired to show it
me, I went down and ordered matters in our tender so well that at the
meeting by and by I was ready with Mr. Gauden's and his, both directed him
a letter to me to give the board their two tenders, but there being none
but the Generall Monk and Mr. Coventry and Povy and I, I did not think fit
to expose them to view now, but put it off till Saturday, and so with good
content rose.  Thence I to the Half Moone, against the 'Change, to
acquaint Lanyon and his friends of our proceedings, and thence to my Lord
Chancellor's, and there heard several tryals, wherein I perceive my Lord
is a most able and ready man.  After all done, he himself called, "Come,
Mr. Pepys, you and I will take a turn in the garden."  So he was led down
stairs, having the goute, and there walked with me, I think, above an
houre, talking most friendly, yet cunningly.  I told him clearly how
things were; how ignorant I was of his Lordship's concernment in it; how I
did not do nor say one word singly, but what was done was the act of the
whole Board.  He told me by name that he was more angry with Sir G.
Carteret than with me, and also with the whole body of the Board.  But
thinking who it was of the Board that knew him least, he did place his
fear upon me; but he finds that he is indebted to none of his friends
there.  I think I did thoroughly appease him, till he thanked me for my
desire and pains to satisfy him; and upon my desiring to be directed who I
should of his servants advise with about this business, he told me nobody,
but would be glad to hear from me himself.  He told me he would not direct
me in any thing, that it might not be said that the Lord Chancellor did
labour to abuse the King; or (as I offered) direct the suspending the
Report of the Purveyors but I see what he means, and I will make it my
worke to do him service in it.  But, Lord! to see how he is incensed
against poor Deane, as a fanatique rogue, and I know not what: and what he
did was done in spite to his Lordship, among all his friends and tenants.
He did plainly say that he would not direct me in any thing, for he would
not put himself into the power of any man to say that he did so and so;
but plainly told me as if he would be glad I did something.  Lord! to see
how we poor wretches dare not do the King good service for fear of the
greatness of these men.  He named Sir G. Carteret, and Sir J. Minnes, and
the rest; and that he was as angry with them all as me.  But it was
pleasant to think that, while he was talking to me, comes into the garden
Sir G. Carteret; and my Lord avoided speaking with him, and made him and
many others stay expecting him, while I walked up and down above an houre,
I think; and would have me walk with my hat on.  And yet, after all this,
there has been so little ground for this his jealousy of me, that I am
sometimes afeard that he do this only in policy to bring me to his side by
scaring me; or else, which is worse, to try how faithfull I would be to
the King; but I rather think the former of the two.  I parted with great
assurance how I acknowledged all I had to come from his Lordship; which he
did not seem to refuse, but with great kindness and respect parted.  So I
by coach home, calling at my Lord's, but he not within.  At my office
late, and so home to eat something, being almost starved for want of
eating my dinner to-day, and so to bed, my head being full of great and
many businesses of import to me.

15th.  Up, and to my Lord Sandwich's; where he sent for me up, and I did
give my Lord an account of what had passed with my Lord Chancellor
yesterday; with which he was well pleased, and advised me by all means to
study in the best manner I could to serve him in this business.  After
this discourse ended, he begun to tell me that he had now pitched upon his
day of going to sea upon Monday next, and that he would now give me an
account how matters are with him.  He told me that his work now in the
world is only to keep up his interest at Court, having little hopes to get
more considerably, he saying that he hath now about L8,000 per annum. It
is true, he says, he oweth about L10,000; but he hath been at great
charges in getting things to this pass in his estate; besides his building
and good goods that he hath bought.  He says he hath now evened his
reckonings at the Wardrobe till Michaelmas last, and hopes to finish it to
Ladyday before he goes.  He says now there is due, too, L7,000 to him
there, if he knew how to get it paid, besides L2000 that Mr. Montagu do
owe him.  As to his interest, he says that he hath had all the injury done
him that ever man could have by another bosom friend that knows all his
secrets, by Mr. Montagu; but he says that the worst of it all is past, and
he gone out and hated, his very person by the King, and he believes the
more upon the score of his carriage to him; nay, that the Duke of Yorke
did say a little while since in his closett, that he did hate him because
of his ungratefull carriage to my Lord of Sandwich.  He says that he is as
great with the Chancellor, or greater, than ever in his life.  That with
the King he is the like; and told me an instance, that whereas he formerly
was of the private council to the King before he was last sicke, and that
by the sickness an interruption was made in his attendance upon him; the
King did not constantly call him, as he used to do, to his private
council, only in businesses of the sea and the like; but of late the King
did send a message to him by Sir Harry Bennet, to excuse the King to my
Lord that he had not of late sent for him as he used to do to his private
council, for it was not out of any distaste, but to avoid giving offence
to some others whom he did not name; but my Lord supposes it might be
Prince Rupert, or it may be only that the King would rather pass it by an
excuse, than be thought unkind: but that now he did desire him to attend
him constantly, which of late he hath done, and the King never more kind
to him in his life than now.  The Duke of Yorke, as much as is possible;
and in the business of late, when I was to speak to my Lord about his
going to sea, he says that he finds the Duke did it with the greatest
ingenuity and love in the world; "and whereas," says my Lord, "here is a
wise man hard by that thinks himself so, and would be thought so, and it
may be is in a degree so (naming by and by my Lord Crew), would have had
me condition with him that neither Prince Rupert nor any body should come
over his head, and I know not what."  The Duke himself hath caused in his
commission, that he be made Admirall of this and what other ships or
fleets shall hereafter be put out after these; which is very noble.  He
tells me in these cases, and that of Mr. Montagu's, and all others, he
finds that bearing of them patiently is his best way, without noise or
trouble, and things wear out of themselves and come fair again.  But, says
he, take it from me, never to trust too much to any man in the world, for
you put yourself into his power; and the best seeming friend and real
friend as to the present may have or take occasion to fall out with you,
and then out comes all.  Then he told me of Sir Harry Bennet, though they
were always kind, yet now it is become to an acquaintance and familiarity
above ordinary, that for these months he hath done no business but with my
Lord's advice in his chamber, and promises all faithfull love to him and
service upon all occasions.  My Lord says, that he hath the advantage of
being able by his experience to helpe and advise him; and he believes that
that chiefly do invite Sir Harry to this manner of treating him.  "Now,"
says my Lord, "the only and the greatest embarras that I have in the world
is, how to behave myself to Sir H. Bennet and my Lord Chancellor, in case
that there do lie any thing under the embers about my Lord Bristoll, which
nobody can tell; for then," says he, "I must appear for one or other, and
I will lose all I have in the world rather than desert my Lord Chancellor:
so that," says he, "I know not for my life what to do in that case."  For
Sir H. Bennet's love is come to the height, and his confidence, that he
hath given my Lord a character, and will oblige my Lord to correspond with
him.  "This," says he, "is the whole condition of my estate and interest;
which I tell you, because I know not whether I shall see you again or no."
Then as to the voyage, he thinks it will be of charge to him, and no
profit; but that he must not now look after nor think to encrease, but
study to make good what he hath, that what is due to him from the Wardrobe
or elsewhere may be paid, which otherwise would fail, and all a man hath
be but small content to him.  So we seemed to take leave one of another;
my Lord of me, desiring me that I would write to him and give him
information upon all occasions in matters that concern him; which, put
together with what he preambled with yesterday, makes me think that my
Lord do truly esteem me still, and desires to preserve my service to him;
which I do bless God for.  In the middle of our discourse my Lady Crew
came in to bring my Lord word that he hath another son, my Lady being
brought to bed just now, I did not think her time had been so nigh, but
she's well brought to bed, for which God be praised!  and send my Lord to
study the laying up of something the more!  Then with Creed to St.
James's, and missing Mr. Coventry, to White Hall; where, staying for him
in one of the galleries, there comes out of the chayre-room Mrs. Stewart,
in a most lovely form, with her hair all about her eares, having her
picture taking there.  There was the King and twenty more, I think,
standing by all the while, and a lovely creature she in this dress seemed
to be.  Thence to the 'Change by coach, and so home to dinner and then to
my office.  In the evening Mr. Hill, Andrews and I to my chamber to sing,
which we did very pleasantly, and then to my office again, where very late
and so home, with my mind I bless God in good state of ease and body of
health, only my head at this juncture very full of business, how to get
something.  Among others what this rogue Creed will do before he goes to
sea, for I would fain be rid of him and see what he means to do, for I
will then declare myself his firm friend or enemy.

16th.  Up in the morning, my head mightily confounded with the great deale
of business I have upon me to do.  But to the office, and there dispatched
Mr. Creed's business pretty well about his bill; but then there comes W.
Howe for my Lord's bill of Imprest for L500 to carry with him this voyage,
and so I was at a loss how to carry myself in it, Creed being there, but
there being no help I delivered it to them both, and let them contend,
when I perceive they did both endeavour to have it, but W. Howe took it,
and the other had the discretion to suffer it.  But I think I cleared
myself to Creed that it past not from any practice of mine.  At noon rose
and did some necessary business at the 'Change.  Thence to Trinity House
to a dinner which Sir G. Carteret makes there as Maister this year.
Thence to White Hall to the Tangier Committee, and there, above my
expectation, got the business of our contract for the victualling carried
for my people, viz., Alsopp, Lanyon, and Yeabsly; and by their promise I
do thereby get L300 per annum to myself, which do overjoy me; and the
matter is left to me to draw up.  Mr. Lewes was in the gallery and is
mightily amazed at it, and I believe Mr. Gauden will make some stir about
it, for he wrote to Mr. Coventry to-day about it to argue why he should
for the King's convenience have it, but Mr. Coventry most justly did argue
freely for them that served cheapest.  Thence walked a while with Mr.
Coventry in the gallery, and first find that he is mighty cold in his
present opinion of Mr. Peter Pett for his flagging and doing things so
lazily there, and he did also surprise me with a question why Deane did
not bring in their report of the timber of Clarendon.  What he means
thereby I know not, but at present put him off; nor do I know how to steer
myself: but I must think of it, and advise with my Lord Sandwich.  Thence
with Creed by coach to my Lord Sandwich's, and there I got Mr. Moore to
give me my Lord's hand for my receipt of L109 more of my money of Sir G.
Carteret, so that then his debt to me will be under L500, I think.  This
do ease my mind also.  Thence carried him and W. Howe into London, and set
them down at Sir G. Carteret's to receive some money, and I home and there
busy very late, and so home to supper and to bed, with my mind in pretty
good ease, my business being in a pretty good condition every where.

17th (Lord's day).  All the morning at my office doing business there, it
raining hard.  So dined at home alone.  After dinner walked to my Lord's,
and there found him and much other guests at table at dinner, and it seems
they have christened his young son to-day-called him James.  I got a piece
of cake.  I got my Lord to signe and seale my business about my selling of
Brampton land, which though not so full as I would, yet is as full as I
can at present.  Walked home again, and there fell to read, and by and by
comes my uncle Wight, Dr. Burnett, and another gentleman, and talked and
drank, and the Doctor showed me the manner of eating, turpentine, which
pleases me well, for it is with great ease.  So they being gone, I to
supper and to bed.

18th.  Up, and walked to my Lord's, and there took my leave of him, he
seeming very friendly to me in as serious a manner as ever in his life,
and I believe he is very confident of me.  He sets out this morning for
Deale.  Thence to St. James's to the Duke, and there did our usual
business.  He discourses very freely of a warr with Holland, to begin
about winter, so that I believe we shall come to it.  Before we went up to
the Duke, Sir G. Carteret and I did talk together in the Parke about my
Lord Chancellor's business of the timber; he telling me freely that my
Lord Chancellor was never so angry with him in all his life, as he was for
this business, in great passion; and that when he saw me there, he knew
what it was about.  And plots now with me how we may serve my Lord, which
I am mightily glad of; and I hope together we may do it.  Thence to
Westminster to my barber's, to have my Periwigg he lately made me cleansed
of its nits, which vexed me cruelly that he should put such a thing into
my hands.  Here meeting his mayd Jane, that has lived with them so long, I
talked with her, and sending her of an errand to Dr. Clerk's, did meet
her, and took her into a little alehouse in Brewers Yard, and there did
sport with her, without any knowledge of her though, and a very pretty
innocent girl she is.  Thence to my Lord Chancellor's, but he being busy I
went away to the 'Change, and so home to dinner.  By and by comes Creed,
and I out with him to Fleet Street, and he to Mr. Povy's, I to my Lord
Chancellor's, and missing him again walked to Povy's, and there saw his
new perspective in his closet.  Povy, to my great surprise and wonder, did
here attacque me in his own and Mr. Bland's behalf that I should do for
them both for the new contractors for the victualling of the garrison.
Which I am ashamed that he should ask of me, nor did I believe that he was
a man that did seek benefit in such poor things.  Besides that he
professed that he did not believe that I would have any hand myself in the
contract, and yet here declares that he himself would have profit by it,
and himself did move me that Sir W. Rider might join, and Ford with
Gauden.  I told him I had no interest in them, but I fear they must do
something to him, for he told me that those of the Mole did promise to
consider him.  Thence home and Creed with me, and there he took occasion
to owne his obligations to me, and did lay down twenty pieces in gold upon
my shelf in my closett, which I did not refuse, but wish and expected
should have been more.  But, however, this is better than nothing, and now
I am out of expectation, and shall henceforward know how to deal with him.
After discourse of settling his matters here, we went out by coach, and he
'light at the Temple, and there took final leave of me, in order to his
following my Lord to-morrow.  I to my Lord Chancellor, and discoursed his
business with him.  I perceive, and he says plainly, that he will not have
any man to have it in his power to say that my Lord Chancellor did
contrive the wronging the King of his timber; but yet I perceive, he would
be glad to have service done him therein; and told me Sir G. Carteret hath
told him that he and I would look after his business to see it done in the
best manner for him.  Of this I was glad, and so away.  Thence home, and
late with my Tangier men about drawing up their agreement with us, wherein
I find much trouble, and after doing as much as we could to-night, broke
up and I to bed.

19th.  Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning.  At noon dined
alone at home.  After dinner Sir W. Batten and I down by water to
Woolwich, where coming to the ropeyarde we are told that Mr. Falconer, who
hath been ill of a relapse these two days, is just now dead.  We went up
to his widow, who is sicke in bed also.  The poor woman in great sorrow,
and entreats our friendship, which we shall, I think, in every thing do
for her.  I am sure I will.  Thence to the Docke, and there in Sheldon's
garden eat some fruit; so to Deptford a little, and thence home, it
raining mightily, and being cold I doubted my health after it. At the
office till 9 o'clock about Sir W. Warren's contract for masts, and then
at home with Lanyon and Yeabsly till 12 and past about their contract for
Tangier, wherein they and I differed, for I would have it drawn to the
King's advantage, as much as might be, which they did not like, but parted
good friends; however, when they were gone, I wished that I had forborne
any disagreement till I had had their promise to me in writing.  They
being gone, I to bed.

20th.  Up, and a while to my office, and then home with Mr. Deane till
dinner, discoursing upon the business of my Lord Chancellor's timber in
Clarendon Parke, and how to make a report therein without offending him;
which at last I drew up, and hope it will please him.  But I would to God
neither I nor he ever had had any thing to have done with it!  Dined
together with a good pig, and then out by coach to White Hall, to the
Committee for Fishing; but nothing done, it being a great day to-day there
upon drawing at the Lottery of Sir Arthur Slingsby.  I got in and stood by
the two Queenes and the Duchesse of Yorke, and just behind my Lady
Castlemayne, whom I do heartily adore; and good sport it was to see how
most that did give their ten pounds did go away with a pair of globes only
for their lot, and one gentlewoman, one Mrs. Fish, with the only blanke.
And one I staid to see drew a suit of hangings valued at L430, and they
say are well worth the money, or near it.  One other suit there is better
than that; but very many lots of three and fourscore pounds.  I observed
the King and Queenes did get but as poor lots as any else.  But the wisest
man I met with was Mr. Cholmley, who insured as many as would, from
drawing of the one blank for 12d.; in which case there was the whole
number of persons to one, which I think was three or four hundred.  And so
he insured about 200 for 200 shillings, so that he could not have lost if
one of them had drawn it, for there was enough to pay the L10; but it
happened another drew it, and so he got all the money he took.  I left the
lottery, and went to a play, only a piece of it, which was the Duke's
house, "Worse and Worse;" just the same manner of play, and writ, I
believe, by the same man as "The Adventures of Five Hours;" very pleasant
it was, and I begin to admire Harris more than ever.  Thence to
Westminster to see Creed, and he and I took a walk in the Parke.  He is
ill, and not able yet to set out after my Lord, but will do to-morrow. So
home, and late at my office, and so home to bed.  This evening being
moonshine I played a little late upon my flageolette in the garden.  But
being at Westminster Hall I met with great news that Mrs. Lane is married
to one Martin, one that serves Captain Marsh.  She is gone abroad with him
to-day, very fine.  I must have a bout with her very shortly to see how
she finds marriage.

21st.  Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning, among other
things making a contract with Sir W. Warren for almost 1000 Gottenburg
masts, the biggest that ever was made in the Navy, and wholly of my
compassing and a good one I hope it is for the King.  Dined at Sir W.
Batten's, where I have not eat these many months.  Sir G. Carteret, Mr.
Coventry, Sir J. Minnes, and myself there only, and my Lady.  A good
venison pasty, and very merry, and pleasant I made myself with my Lady,
and she as much to me.  This morning to the office comes Nicholas Osborne,
Mr. Gauden's clerke, to desire of me what piece of plate I would choose to
have a L100, or thereabouts, bestowed upon me in, he having order to lay
out so much; and, out of his freedom with me, do of himself come to make
this question.  I a great while urged my unwillingnesse to take any, not
knowing how I could serve Mr. Gauden, but left it wholly to himself; so at
noon I find brought home in fine leather cases, a pair of the noblest
flaggons that ever I saw all the days of my life; whether I shall keepe
them or no I cannot tell; for it is to oblige me to him in the business of
the Tangier victualling, wherein I doubt I shall not; but glad I am to see
that I shall be sure to get something on one side or other, have it which
will: so, with a merry heart, I looked upon them, and locked them up.
After dinner to [give] my Lord Chancellor a good account of his business,
and he is very well pleased therewith, and carries himself with great
discretion to me, without seeming over glad or beholding to me; and yet I
know that he do think himself very well served by me.  Thence to
Westminster and to Mrs. Lane's lodgings, to give her joy, and there
suffered me to deal with her as I hoped to do, and by and by her husband
comes, a sorry, simple fellow, and his letter to her which she proudly
showed me a simple, nonsensical thing.  A man of no discourse, and I fear
married her to make a prize of, which he is mistaken in, and a sad wife I
believe she will prove to him, for she urged me to appoint a time as soon
as he is gone out of town to give her a meeting next week.  So by water
with a couple of cozens of Mrs. Lane's, and set them down at Queenhive,
and I through Bridge home, and there late at business, and so home to
supper and to bed.

22nd.  Up and to my office, where busy all the morning.  At noon to the
'Change, and so home to dinner, and then down by water to Deptford, where
coming too soon, I spent an houre in looking round the yarde, and putting
Mr. Shish

     [Jonas Shish, master-shipwright at Deptford.  There are several
     papers of his among the State Papers.  "I was at the funeral of old
     Mr. Shish, Master Shipwright of His Majesty's Yard here, an honest
     and remarkable man, and his death a public loss, for his excellent
     success in building ships (though altogether illiterate) and for
     bringing up so many of his children to be able artists.  I held up
     the pall with three knights who did him that honour, and he was
     worthy of it.  It was the custom of this good man to rise in the
     night and pray, kneeling in his own coffin, which he had lying by
     him for many years.  He was born that famous year, the Gunpowder-
     plot, 1605" (Evelyn's "Diary," May 13th, 1680).]

to measure a piece or two of timber, which he did most cruelly wrong, and
to the King's losse 12 or 13s. in a piece of 28 feet in contents.  Thence
to the Clerke of the Cheques, from whose house Mr. Falconer was buried
to-day; Sir J. Minnes and I the only principal officers that were there.
We walked to church with him, and then I left them without staying the
sermon and straight home by water, and there find, as I expected, Mr.
Hill, and Andrews, and one slovenly and ugly fellow, Seignor Pedro, who
sings Italian songs to the theorbo most neatly, and they spent the whole
evening in singing the best piece of musique counted of all hands in the
world, made by Seignor Charissimi, the famous master in Rome.  Fine it
was, indeed, and too fine for me to judge of. They have spoke to Pedro to
meet us every weeke, and I fear it will grow a trouble to me if we once
come to bid judges to meet us, especially idle Masters, which do a little
displease me to consider. They gone comes Mr. Lanyon, who tells me Mr.
Alsopp is now become dangerously ill, and fears his recovery, covery,
which shakes my expectation of L630 per annum by the business; and,
therefore, bless God for what Mr. Gauden hath sent me, which, from some
discourse to-day with Mr. Osborne, swearing that he knows not any thing of
this business of the victualling; but, the contrary, that it is not that
moves Mr. Gauden to send it me, for he hath had order for it any time
these two months. Whether this be true or no, I know not; but I shall
hence with the more confidence keepe it.  To supper and to the office a
little, and to walk in the garden, the moon shining bright, and fine warm
fair weather, and so home to bed.

23rd.  Up, and all the morning at the office.  At noon to the 'Change,
where I took occasion to break the business of my Lord Chancellor's timber
to Mr. Coventry in the best manner I could.  He professed to me, that,
till, Sir G. Carteret did speake of it at the table, after our officers
were gone to survey it, he did not know that my Lord Chancellor had any
thing to do with it; but now he says that he had been told by the Duke
that Sir G. Carteret had spoke to him about it, and that he had told the
Duke that, were he in my Lord Chancellor's case, if he were his father, he
would rather fling away the gains of two or L3,000, than have it said that
the timber, which should have been the King's, if it had continued the
Duke of Albemarle's, was concealed by us in favour of my Lord Chancellor;
for, says he, he is a great man, and all such as he, and he himself
particularly, have a great many enemies that would be glad of such an
advantage against him.  When I told him it was strange that Sir J. Minnes
and Sir G. Carteret, that knew my Lord Chancellor's concernment therein,
should not at first inform us, he answered me that for Sir J. Minnes, he
is looked upon to be an old good companion, but by nobody at the other end
of the towne as any man of business, and that my Lord Chancellor, he dares
say, never did tell him of it, only Sir G. Carteret, he do believe, must
needs know it, for he and Sir J. Shaw are the greatest confidants he hath
in the world.  So for himself, he said, he would not mince the matter, but
was resolved to do what was fit, and stand upon his owne legs therein, and
that he would speak to the Duke, that he and Sir G. Carteret might be
appointed to attend my Lord Chancellor in it.  All this disturbs me
mightily.  I know not what to say to it, nor how to carry myself therein;
for a compliance will discommend me to Mr. Coventry, and a discompliance
to my Lord Chancellor.  But I think to let it alone, or at least meddle in
it as little more as I can. From thence walked toward Westminster, and
being in an idle and wanton humour, walked through Fleet Alley, and there
stood a most pretty wench at one of the doors, so I took a turn or two,
but what by sense of honour and conscience I would not go in, but much
against my will took coach and away, and away to Westminster Hall, and
there 'light of Mrs. Lane, and plotted with her to go over the water.  So
met at White's stairs in Chanel Row, and over to the old house at Lambeth
Marsh, and there eat and drank, and had my pleasure of her twice, she
being the strangest woman in talk of love to her husband sometimes, and
sometimes again she do not care for him, and yet willing enough to allow
me a liberty of doing what I would with her.  So spending 5s. or 6s.  upon
her, I could do what I would, and after an hour's stay and more back again
and set her ashore there again, and I forward to Fleet Street, and called
at Fleet Alley, not knowing how to command myself, and went in and there
saw what formerly I have been acquainted with, the wickedness of these
houses, and the forcing a man to present expense.  The woman indeed is a
most lovely woman, but I had no courage to meddle with her for fear of her
not being wholesome, and so counterfeiting that I had not money enough, it
was pretty to see how cunning she was, would not suffer me to have to do
in any manner with her after she saw I had no money, but told me then I
would not come again, but she now was sure I would come again, but I hope
in God I shall not, for though she be one of the prettiest women I ever
saw, yet I fear her abusing me.  So desiring God to forgive me for this
vanity, I went home, taking some books from my bookseller, and taking his
lad home with me, to whom I paid L10 for books I have laid up money for,
and laid out within these three weeks, and shall do no more a great while
I hope.  So to my office writing letters, and then home and to bed, weary
of the pleasure I have had to-day, and ashamed to think of it.

24th (Lord's day).  Up, in some pain all day from yesterday's passages,
having taken cold, I suppose.  So staid within all day reading of two or
three good plays.  At night to my office a little, and so home, after
supper to bed.

25th.  Up, and with Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten by coach to St.
James's, but there the Duke being gone out we to my Lord Berkeley's
chamber, Mr. Coventry being there, and among other things there met with a
printed copy of the King's commission for the repair of Paul's, which is
very large, and large power for collecting money, and recovering of all
people that had bought or sold formerly any thing belonging to the Church.
And here I find my Lord Mayor of the City set in order before the
Archbishopp or any nobleman, though all the greatest officers of state are
there.  But yet I do not hear by my Lord Berkeley, who is one of them,
that any thing is like to come of it.  Thence back again homewards, and
Sir W. Batten and I to the Coffee-house, but no newes, only the plague is
very hot still, and encreases among the Dutch.  Home to dinner, and after
dinner walked forth, and do what I could I could not keep myself from
going through Fleet Lane, but had the sense of safety and honour not to go
in, and the rather being a holiday I feared I might meet with some people
that might know me.  Thence to Charing Cross, and there called at
Unthanke's to see what I owed, but found nothing, and here being a couple
of pretty ladies, lodgers in the kitchen, I staid a little there.  Thence
to my barber Gervas, who this day buries his child, which it seems was
born without a passage behind, so that it never voided any thing in the
week or fortnight that it has been born.  Thence to Mr. Reeves, it coming
just now in my head to buy a microscope, but he was not within, so I
walked all round that end of the town among the loathsome people and
houses, but, God be thanked!  had no desire to visit any of them.  So
home, where I met Mr. Lanyon, who tells me Mr. Alsop is past hopes, which
will mightily disappoint me in my hopes there, and yet it may be not.  I
shall think whether it will be safe for me to venture myself or no, and
come in as an adventurer.  He gone, Mr. Cole (my old Jack Cole) comes to
see and speak with me, and his errand in short to tell me that he is
giving over his trade; he can do no good in it, and will turn what he has
into money and go to sea, his father being dead and leaving him little, if
any thing.  This I was sorry to hear, he being a man of good parts, but, I
fear, debauched.  I promised him all the friendship I can do him, which
will end in little, though I truly mean it, and so I made him stay with me
till 11 at night, talking of old school stories, and very pleasing ones,
and truly I find that we did spend our time and thoughts then otherwise
than I think boys do now, and I think as well as methinks that the best
are now.  He supped with me, and so away, and I to bed.  And strange to
see how we are all divided that were bred so long at school together, and
what various fortunes we have run, some good, some bad.

26th.  All the morning at the office, at noon to Anthony Joyce's, to our
gossip's dinner.  I had sent a dozen and a half of bottles of wine
thither, and paid my double share besides, which is 18s.  Very merry we
were, and when the women were merry and rose from table, I above with
them, ne'er a man but I, I began discourse of my not getting of children,
and prayed them to give me their opinions and advice, and they freely and
merrily did give me these ten, among them (1) Do not hug my wife too hard
nor too much; (2) eat no late suppers; (3) drink juyce of sage; (4) tent
and toast; (5) wear cool holland drawers; (6) keep stomach warm and back
cool; (7) upon query whether it was best to do at night or morn, they
answered me neither one nor other, but when we had most mind to it; (8)
wife not to go too straight laced; (9) myself to drink mum and sugar; (10)
Mrs. Ward did give me, to change my place.  The 3rd, 4th, 6th, 7th, and
10th they all did seriously declare, and lay much stress upon them as
rules fit to be observed indeed, and especially the last, to lie with our
heads where our heels do, or at least to make the bed high at feet and low
at head.  Very merry all, as much as I could be in such sorry company.
Great discourse of the fray yesterday in Moorefields, how the butchers at
first did beat the weavers (between whom there hath been ever an old
competition for mastery), but at last the weavers rallied and beat them.
At first the butchers knocked down all for weavers that had green or blue
aprons, till they were fain to pull them off and put them in their
breeches.  At last the butchers were fain to pull off their sleeves, that
they might not be known, and were soundly beaten out of the field, and
some deeply wounded and bruised; till at last the weavers went out
tryumphing, calling L100 for a butcher.  I to Mr. Reeves to see a
microscope, he having been with me to-day morning, and there chose one
which I will have.  Thence back and took up young Mrs. Harman, a pretty
bred and pretty humoured woman whom I could love well, though not
handsome, yet for her person and carriage, and black.  By the way met her
husband going for her, and set them both down at home, and so home to my
office a while, and so to supper and bed.

27th.  Up, and after some discourse with Mr. Duke, who is to be Secretary
to the Fishery, and is now Secretary to the Committee for Trade, who I
find a very ingenious man, I went to Mr. Povy's, and there heard a little
of his empty discourse, and fain he would have Mr. Gauden been the
victualler for Tangier, which none but a fool would say to me when he
knows he hath made it his request to me to get him something of these men
that now do it.  Thence to St. James's, but Mr. Coventry being ill and in
bed I did not stay, but to White Hall a little, walked up and down, and so
home to fit papers against this afternoon, and after dinner to the 'Change
a little, and then to White Hall, where anon the Duke of Yorke came, and a
Committee we had of Tangier, where I read over my rough draught of the
contract for Tangier victualling, and acquainted them with the death of
Mr. Alsopp, which Mr. Lanyon had told me this morning, which is a sad
consideration to see how uncertain a thing our lives are, and how little
to be presumed of in our greatest undertakings.  The words of the contract
approved of, and I home and there came Mr. Lanyon to me and brought my
neighbour, Mr. Andrews, to me, whom he proposes for his partner in the
room of Mr. Alsopp, and I like well enough of it.  We read over the
contract together, and discoursed it well over and so parted, and I am
glad to see it once over in this condition again, for Mr. Lanyon and I had
some discourse to-day about my share in it, and I hope if it goes on to
have my first hopes of L300 per ann.  They gone, I to supper and to bed.
This afternoon came my great store of Coles in, being to Chaldron, so that
I may see how long they will last me.

28th.  At the office all the morning, dined, after 'Change, at home, and
then abroad, and seeing "The Bondman"  upon the posts, I consulted my
oaths and find I may go safely this time without breaking it; I went
thither, notwithstanding my great desire to have gone to Fleet Alley, God
forgive me, again.  There I saw it acted.  It is true, for want of
practice, they had many of them forgot their parts a little; but Betterton
and my poor Ianthe outdo all the world.  There is nothing more taking in
the world with me than that play.  Thence to Westminster to my barber's,
and strange to think how when I find that Jervas himself did intend to
bring home my periwigg, and not Jane his maid, I did desire not to have it
at all, for I had a mind to have her bring it home.  I also went to Mr.
Blagrave's about speaking to him for his kinswoman to come live with my
wife, but they are not come to town, and so I home by coach and to my
office, and then to supper and to bed.  My present posture is thus: my
wife in the country and my mayde Besse with her and all quiett there.  I
am endeavouring to find a woman for her to my mind, and above all one that
understands musique, especially singing.  I am the willinger to keepe one
because I am in good hopes to get 2 or L300 per annum extraordinary by the
business of the victualling of Tangier, and yet Mr. Alsopp, my chief
hopes, is dead since my looking after it, and now Mr. Lanyon, I fear, is,
falling sicke too.  I am pretty well in health, only subject to wind upon
any cold, and then immediate and great pains.  All our discourse is of a
Dutch warr and I find it is likely to come to it, for they are very high
and desire not to compliment us at all, as far as I hear, but to send a
good fleete to Guinny to oppose us there.  My Lord Sandwich newly gone to
sea, and I, I think, fallen into his very good opinion again, at least he
did before his going, and by his letter since, show me all manner of
respect and confidence.  I am over-joyed in hopes that upon this month's
account I shall find myself worth L1000, besides the rich present of two
silver and gilt flaggons which Mr. Gauden did give me the other day.  I do
now live very prettily at home, being most seriously, quietly, and neatly
served by my two mayds Jane and the girle Su, with both of whom I am
mightily well pleased.  My greatest trouble is the settling of Brampton
Estate, that I may know what to expect, and how to be able to leave it
when I die, so as to be just to my promise to my uncle Thomas and his son.
The next thing is this cursed trouble my brother Tom is likely to put us
to by his death, forcing us to law with his creditors, among others Dr.
Tom Pepys, and that with some shame as trouble, and the last how to know
in what manner as to saving or spending my father lives, lest they should
run me in debt as one of my uncle's executors, and I never the wiser nor
better for it.  But in all this I hope shortly to be at leisure to
consider and inform myself well.

29th.  At the office all the morning dispatching of business, at noon to
the 'Change after dinner, and thence to Tom Trice about Dr. Pepys's
business, and thence it raining turned into Fleet Alley, and there was
with Cocke an hour or so.  The jade, whether I would not give her money or
not enough; she would not offer to invite to do anything, but on the
contrary saying she had no time, which I was glad of, for I had no mind to
meddle with her, but had my end to see what a cunning jade she was, to see
her impudent tricks and ways of getting money and raising the reckoning by
still calling for things, that it come to 6 or 7 shillings presently.  So
away home, glad I escaped without any inconvenience, and there came Mr.
Hill, Andrews and Seignor Pedro, and great store of musique we had, but I
begin to be weary of having a master with us, for it spoils, methinks, the
ingenuity of our practice.  After they were gone comes Mr. Bland to me,
sat till 11 at night with me, talking of the garrison of Tangier and
serving them with pieces of eight.  A mind he hath to be employed there,
but dares not desire any courtesy of me, and yet would fain engage me to
be for him, for I perceive they do all find that I am the busy man to see
the King have right done him by inquiring out other bidders.  Being quite
tired with him, I got him gone, and so to bed.

30th.  All the morning at the office; at noon to the 'Change, where great
talke of a rich present brought by an East India ship from some of the
Princes of India, worth to the King L70,000 in two precious stones. After
dinner to the office, and there all the afternoon making an end of several
things against the end of the month, that I may clear all my reckonings
tomorrow; also this afternoon, with great content, I finished the
contracts for victualling of Tangier with Mr. Lanyon and the rest, and to
my comfort got him and Andrews to sign to the giving me L300 per annum, by
which, at least, I hope to be a L100 or two the better.  Wrote many
letters by the post to ease my mind of business and to clear my paper of
minutes, as I did lately oblige myself to clear every thing against the
end of the month.  So at night with my mind quiet and contented to bed.
This day I sent a side of venison and six bottles of wine to Kate Joyce.

31st (Lord's day).  Up, and to church, where I have not been these many
weeks.  So home, and thither, inviting him yesterday, comes Mr. Hill, at
which I was a little troubled, but made up all very well, carrying him
with me to Sir J. Minnes, where I was invited and all our families to a
venison pasty.  Here good cheer and good discourse.  After dinner Mr. Hill
and I to my house, and there to musique all the afternoon.  He being gone,
in the evening I to my accounts, and to my great joy and with great thanks
to Almighty God, I do find myself most clearly worth L1014, the first time
that ever I was worth L1000 before, which is the height of all that ever I
have for a long time pretended to.  But by the blessing of God upon my
care I hope to lay up something more in a little time, if this business of
the victualling of Tangier goes on as I hope it will. So with praise to
God for this state of fortune that I am brought to as to wealth, and my
condition being as I have at large set it down two days ago in this book,
I home to supper and to bed, desiring God to give me the grace to make
good use of what I have and continue my care and diligence to gain more.

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     All divided that were bred so long at school together
     Began discourse of my not getting of children
     Came to bed to me, but all would not make me friends
     Feared I might meet with some people that might know me
     Had no mind to meddle with her
     Her impudent tricks and ways of getting money
     How little to be presumed of in our greatest undertakings
     Mind to have her bring it home
     My wife made great means to be friends, coming to my bedside
     Never to trust too much to any man in the world
     Not well, and so had no pleasure at all with my poor wife
     Not when we can, but when we list
     Now against her going into the country (lay together)
     Periwigg he lately made me cleansed of its nits
     Presse seamen, without which we cannot really raise men
     Shakespeare's plays
     She had the cunning to cry a great while, and talk and blubber
     There eat and drank, and had my pleasure of her twice
     These Lords are hard to be trusted
     Things wear out of themselves and come fair again
     To my Lord Sandwich, thinking to have dined there
     Upon a very small occasion had a difference again broke out
     Very high and very foule words from her to me
     What wine you drinke, lett it bee at meales


                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                           AUGUST & SEPTEMBER
                                 1664

August 1st.  Up, my mind very light from my last night's accounts, and so
up and with Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Batten, and Sir W. Pen to St. James's,
where among other things having prepared with some industry every man a
part this morning and no sooner (for fear they should either consider of
it or discourse of it one to another) Mr. Coventry did move the Duke and
obtain it that one of the clerkes of the Clerke of the Acts should have an
addition of L30 a year, as Mr. Turner hath, which I am glad of, that I may
give T. Hater L20 and keep L10 towards a boy's keeping.  Thence Mr.
Coventry and I to the Attorney's chamber at the Temple, but not being
there we parted, and I home, and there with great joy told T. Hater what I
had done, with which the poor wretch was very glad, though his modesty
would not suffer him to say much.  So to the Coffee-house, and there all
the house full of the victory Generall Soushe

     [General Soushe was Louis Ratuit, Comte de Souches.  The battle was
     fought at Lewenz (or Leva), in Hungary.--B.]

(who is a Frenchman, a soldier of fortune, commanding part of the German
army) hath had against the Turke; killing 4,000 men, and taking most
extraordinary spoil.  Thence taking up Harman and his wife, carried them
to Anthony Joyce's, where we had my venison in a pasty well done; but,
Lord! to see how much they made of, it, as if they had never eat any
before, and very merry we were, but Will most troublesomely so, and I find
he and his wife have a most wretched life one with another, but we took no
notice, but were very merry as I could be in such company.  But Mrs.
Harman is a very pretty-humoured wretch, whom I could love with all my
heart, being so good and innocent company.  Thence to Westminster to Mr.
Blagrave's, and there, after singing a thing or two over, I spoke to him
about a woman for my wife, and he offered me his kinswoman, which I was
glad of, but she is not at present well, but however I hope to have her.
Thence to my Lord Chancellor's, and thence with Mr. Coventry, who
appointed to meet me there, and with him to the Attorney General, and
there with Sir Ph. Warwicke consulted of a new commission to be had
through the Broad Seale to enable us to make this contract for Tangier
victualling.  So home, and there talked long with Will about the young
woman of his family which he spoke of for to live with my wife, but though
she hath very many good qualitys, yet being a neighbour's child and young
and not very staid, I dare not venture of having her, because of her being
able to spread any report of our family upon any discontent among the
heart of our neighbours.  So that my dependance is upon Mr. Blagrave, and
so home to supper and to bed.  Last night, at 12 o'clock, I was waked
with knocking at Sir W. Pen's door; and what was it but people's running
up and down to bring him word that his brother,

     [George Penn, the elder brother of Sir W. Penn, was a wealthy
     merchant at San Lucar, the port of Seville.  He was seized as a
     heretic by the Holy Office, and cast into a dungeon eight feet
     square and dark as the grave.  There he remained three years, every
     month being scourged to make him confess his crimes.  At last, after
     being twice put to the rack, he offered to confess whatever they
     would suggest.  His property, L12,000, was then confiscated, his
     wife, a Catholic, taken from him, and he was banished from Spain for
     ever.--M. B.]

who hath been a good while, it seems, sicke, is dead.

2nd.  At the office all the morning.  At noon dined, and then to, the
'Change, and there walked two hours or more with Sir W. Warren, who after
much discourse in general of Sir W. Batten's dealings, he fell to talk how
every body must live by their places, and that he was willing, if I
desired it, that I should go shares with him in anything that he deals in.
He told me again and again, too, that he confesses himself my debtor too
for my service and friendship to him in his present great contract of
masts, and that between this and Christmas he shall be in stocke and will
pay it me.  This I like well, but do not desire to become a merchant, and,
therefore, put it off, but desired time to think of it.  Thence to the
King's play-house, and there saw "Bartholomew Fayre," which do still
please me; and is, as it is acted, the best comedy in the world, I
believe.  I chanced to sit by Tom Killigrew, who tells me that he is
setting up a Nursery; that is, is going to build a house in Moorefields,
wherein he will have common plays acted.  But four operas it shall have in
the year, to act six weeks at a time; where we shall have the best scenes
and machines, the best musique, and every thing as magnificent as is in
Christendome; and to that end hath sent for voices and painters and other
persons from Italy.  Thence homeward called upon my Lord Marlborough, and
so home and to my office, and then to Sir W. Pen, and with him and our
fellow officers and servants of the house and none else to Church to lay
his brother in the ground, wherein nothing handsome at all, but that he
lays him under the Communion table in the chancel, about nine at night?
So home and to bed.

3rd.  Up betimes and set some joyners on work to new lay my floor in our
wardrobe, which I intend to make a room for musique.  Thence abroad to
Westminster, among other things to Mr. Blagrave's, and there had his
consent for his kinswoman to come to be with my wife for her woman, at
which I am well pleased and hope she may do well.  Thence to White Hall to
meet with Sir G. Carteret about hiring some ground to make our mast docke
at Deptford, but being Council morning failed, but met with Mr. Coventry,
and he and I discoursed of the likeliness of a Dutch warr, which I think
is very likely now, for the Dutch do prepare a fleet to oppose us at
Guinny, and he do think we shall, though neither of us have a mind to it,
fall into it of a sudden, and yet the plague do increase among them, and
is got into their fleet, and Opdam's own ship, which makes it strange they
should be so high.  Thence to the 'Change, and thence home to dinner, and
down by water to Woolwich to the rope yard, and there visited Mrs.
Falconer, who tells me odd stories of how Sir W. Pen was rewarded by her
husband with a gold watch (but seems not certain of what Sir W. Batten
told me, of his daughter having a life given her in L80 per ann.) for his
helping him to his place, and yet cost him L150 to Mr. Coventry besides.
He did much advise it seems Mr. Falconer not to marry again, expressing
that he would have him make his daughter his heire, or words to that
purpose, and that that makes him, she thinks, so cold in giving her any
satisfaction, and that W. Boddam hath publickly said, since he came down
thither to be clerke of the ropeyard, that it hath this week cost him
L100, and would be glad that it would cost him but half as much more for
the place, and that he was better before than now, and that if he had been
to have bought it, he would not have given so much for it.  Now I am sure
that Mr. Coventry hath again and again said that he would take nothing,
but would give all his part in it freely to him, that so the widow might
have something.  What the meaning of this is I know not, but that Sir W.
Pen do get something by it.  Thence to the Dockeyard, and there saw the
new ship in great forwardness.  So home and to supper, and then to the
office, where late, Mr. Bland and I talking about Tangier business, and so
home to bed.

4th.  Up betimes and to the office, fitting myself against a great dispute
about the East India Company, which spent afterwards with us all the
morning.  At noon dined with Sir W. Pen, a piece of beef only, and I
counterfeited a friendship and mirth which I cannot have with him, yet out
with him by his coach, and he did carry me to a play and pay for me at the
King's house, which is "The Rivall Ladys," a very innocent and most pretty
witty play.  I was much pleased with it, and it being given me, I look
upon it as no breach to my oathe.  Here we hear that Clun, one of their
best actors, was, the last night, going out of towne (after he had acted
the Alchymist, wherein was one of his best parts that he acts) to his
country-house, set upon and murdered; one of the rogues taken, an Irish
fellow.  It seems most cruelly butchered and bound.  The house will have a
great miss of him.  Thence visited my Lady Sandwich, who tells me my Lord
FitzHarding is to be made a Marquis.  Thence home to my office late, and
so to supper and to bed.

5th.  Up very betimes and set my plaisterer to work about whiting and
colouring my musique roome, which having with great pleasure seen done,
about ten o'clock I dressed myself, and so mounted upon a very pretty
mare, sent me by Sir W. Warren, according to his promise yesterday.  And
so through the City, not a little proud, God knows, to be seen upon so
pretty a beast, and to my cozen W. Joyce's, who presently mounted too, and
he and I out of towne toward Highgate; in the way, at Kentish-towne,
showing me the place and manner of Clun's being killed and laid in a
ditch, and yet was not killed by any wounds, having only one in his arm,
but bled to death through his struggling.  He told me, also, the manner of
it, of his going home so late [from] drinking with his whore, and manner
of having it found out.  Thence forward to Barnett, and there drank, and
so by night to Stevenage, it raining a little, but not much, and there to
my great trouble, find that my wife was not come, nor any Stamford coach
gone down this week, so that she cannot come.  So vexed and weary, and not
thoroughly out of pain neither in my old parts, I after supper to bed, and
after a little sleep, W. Joyce comes in his shirt into my chamber, with a
note and a messenger from my wife, that she was come by Yorke coach to
Bigglesworth, and would be with us to-morrow morning.  So, mightily
pleased at her discreete action in this business, I with peace to sleep
again till next morning.  So up, and

6th.  Here lay Deane Honiwood last night.  I met and talked with him this
morning, and a simple priest he is, though a good, well-meaning man. W.
Joyce and I to a game at bowles on the green there till eight o'clock, and
then comes my wife in the coach, and a coach full of women, only one man
riding by, gone down last night to meet a sister of his coming to town.
So very joyful drank there, not 'lighting, and we mounted and away with
them to Welling, and there 'light, and dined very well and merry and glad
to see my poor-wife.  Here very merry as being weary I could be, and after
dinner, out again, and to London.  In our way all the way the mightiest
merry, at a couple of young gentlemen, come down to meet the same
gentlewoman, that ever I was in my life, and so W. Joyce too, to see how
one of them was horsed upon a hard-trotting sorrell horse, and both of
them soundly weary and galled.  But it is not to be set down how merry we
were all the way.  We 'light in Holborne, and by another coach my wife and
mayde home, and I by horseback, and found all things well and most mighty
neate and clean.  So, after welcoming my wife a little, to the office, and
so home to supper, and then weary and not very well to bed.

7th (Lord's day).  Lay long caressing my wife and talking, she telling me
sad stories of the ill, improvident, disquiett, and sluttish manner that
my father and mother and Pall live in the country, which troubles me
mightily, and I must seek to remedy it.  So up and ready, and my wife
also, and then down and I showed my wife, to her great admiration and joy,
Mr. Gauden's present of plate, the two flaggons, which indeed are so noble
that I hardly can think that they are yet mine.  So blessing God for it,
we down to dinner mighty pleasant, and so up after dinner for a while, and
I then to White Hall, walked thither, having at home met with a letter of
Captain Cooke's, with which he had sent a boy for me to see, whom he did
intend to recommend to me.  I therefore went and there met and spoke with
him.  He gives me great hopes of the boy, which pleases me, and at
Chappell I there met Mr. Blagrave, who gives a report of the boy, and he
showed me him, and I spoke to him, and the boy seems a good willing boy to
come to me, and I hope will do well.  I am to speak to Mr. Townsend to
hasten his clothes for him, and then he is to come.  So I walked homeward
and met with Mr. Spong, and he with me as far as the Old Exchange talking
of many ingenuous things, musique, and at last of glasses, and I find him
still the same ingenuous man that ever he was, and do among other fine
things tell me that by his microscope of his owne making he do discover
that the wings of a moth is made just as the feathers of the wing of a
bird, and that most plainly and certainly. While we were talking came by
several poor creatures carried by, by constables, for being at a
conventicle.  They go like lambs, without any resistance.  I would to God
they would either conform, or be more wise, and not be catched!  Thence
parted with him, mightily pleased with his company, and away homeward,
calling at Dan Rawlinson, and supped there with my uncle Wight, and then
home and eat again for form sake with her, and then to prayers and to bed.

8th.  Up and abroad with Sir W. Batten, by coach to St. James's, where by
the way he did tell me how Sir J. Minnes would many times arrogate to
himself the doing of that that all the Board have equal share in, and more
that to himself which he hath had nothing to do in, and particularly the
late paper given in by him to the Duke, the translation of a Dutch print
concerning the quarrel between us and them, which he did give as his own
when it was Sir Richard Ford's wholly.  Also he told me how Sir W. Pen (it
falling in our discourse touching Mrs. Falconer) was at first very great
for Mr. Coventry to  bring him in guests, and that at high rates for
places, and very open was he to me therein.  After business done with the
Duke, I home to the Coffee-house, and so home to dinner, and after dinner
to hang up my fine pictures in my dining  room, which makes it very
pretty, and so my wife and I abroad to the King's play-house, she giving
me her time of the last month, she having not seen any then; so my vowe is
not broke at all, it costing me no more money than it would have done upon
her, had she gone both her times that were due to her.  Here we saw
"Flora's Figarys."  I never saw it before, and by the most ingenuous
performance of the young jade Flora, it seemed as pretty a pleasant play
as ever I saw in my life.  So home to supper, and then to my office late,
Mr. Andrews and I to talk about our victualling commission, and then he
being gone I to set down my four days past journalls and expenses, and so
home to bed.

9th.  Up, and to my office, and there we sat all the morning, at noon
home, and there by appointment Mr. Blagrave came and dined with me, and
brought a friend of his of the Chappell with him.  Very merry at dinner,
and then up to my chamber and there we sung a Psalm or two of Lawes's,
then he and I a little talke by ourselves of his kinswoman that is to come
to live with my wife, who is to come about ten days hence, and I hope will
do well.  They gone I to my office, and there my head being a little
troubled with the little wine I drank, though mixed with beer, but it may
be a little more than I used to do, and yet I cannot say so, I went home
and spent the afternoon with my wife talking, and then in the evening a
little to my office, and so home to supper and to bed.  This day comes the
newes that the Emperour hath beat the Turke;

     [This was the battle of St. Gothard, in which the Turks were
     defeated with great slaughter by the imperial forces under
     Montecuculli, assisted by the confederates from the Rhine, and by
     forty troops of French cavalry under Coligni.  St. Gothard is in
     Hungary, on the river Raab, near the frontier of Styria; it is about
     one hundred and twenty miles south of Vienna, and thirty east of
     Gratz.  The battle took place on the 9th Moharrem, A.H. 1075, or
     23rd July, A.D. 1664 (old style), which is that used by Pepys.--B.]

killed the Grand Vizier and several great Bassas, with an army of 80,000
men killed and routed; with some considerable loss of his own side, having
lost three generals, and the French forces all cut off almost. Which is
thought as good a service to the Emperour as beating the Turke almost, for
had they conquered they would have been as troublesome to him.

     [The fact is, the Germans were beaten by the Turks, and the French
     won the battle for them.--B.]

10th.  Up, and, being ready, abroad to do several small businesses, among
others to find out one to engrave my tables upon my new sliding rule with
silver plates, it being so small that Browne that made it cannot get one
to do it.  So I find out Cocker, the famous writing-master, and get him to
do it, and I set an hour by him to see him design it all; and strange it
is to see him with his natural eyes to cut so small at his first designing
it, and read it all over, without any missing, when for my life I could
not, with my best skill, read one word or letter of it; but it is use.
But he says that the best light for his life to do a very small thing by
(contrary to Chaucer's words to the Sun, "that he should lend his light to
them that small seals grave"), it should be by an artificial light of a
candle, set to advantage, as he could do it.  I find the fellow, by his
discourse, very ingenuous; and among other things, a great admirer and
well read in all our English poets, and undertakes to judge of them all,
and that not impertinently.  Well pleased with his company and better with
his judgement upon my Rule, I left him and home, whither Mr. Deane by
agreement came to me and dined with me, and by chance Gunner Batters's
wife.  After dinner Deane and I [had] great discourse again about my Lord
Chancellor's timber, out of which I wish I may get well. Thence I to
Cocker's again, and sat by him with good discourse again for an hour or
two, and then left him, and by agreement with Captain Silas Taylor (my old
acquaintance at the Exchequer) to the Post Officer to hear some instrument
musique of Mr. Berchenshaw's before my Lord Brunkard and Sir Robert
Murray.  I must confess, whether it be that I hear it but seldom, or that
really voice is better, but so it is that I found no pleasure at all in
it, and methought two voyces were worth twenty of it. So home to my office
a while, and then to supper and to bed.

11th.  Up, and through pain, to my great grief forced to wear my gowne to
keep my legs warm.  At the office all the morning, and there a high
dispute against Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen about the breadth of canvas
again, they being for the making of it narrower, I and Mr. Coventry and
Sir J. Minnes for the keeping it broader.  So home to dinner, and by and
by comes Mr. Creed, lately come from the Downes, and dined with me. I show
him a good countenance, but love him not for his base ingratitude to me.
However, abroad, carried my wife to buy things at the New Exchange, and so
to my Lady Sandwich's, and there merry, talking with her a great while,
and so home, whither comes Cocker with my rule, which he hath engraved to
admiration, for goodness and smallness of work: it cost me 14s. the doing,
and mightily pleased I am with it.  By and by, he gone, comes Mr. Moore
and staid talking with me a great while about my Lord's businesses, which
I fear will be in a bad condition for his family if my Lord should
miscarry at sea.  He gone, I late to my office, and cannot forbear
admiring and consulting my new rule, and so home to supper and to bed.
This day, for a wager before the King, my Lords of Castlehaven and Arran
(a son of my Lord of Ormond's), they two alone did run down and kill a
stoute bucke in St. James's parke.

12th.  Up, and all the morning busy at the office with Sir W. Warren about
a great contract for New England masts, where I was very hard with him,
even to the making him angry, but I thought it fit to do it as well as
just for my owne [and] the King's behalf.  At noon to the 'Change a
little, and so to dinner and then out by coach, setting my wife and mayde
down, going to Stevens the silversmith to change some old silver lace and
to go buy new silke lace for a petticoat; I to White Hall and did much
business at a Tangier Committee; where, among other things, speaking about
propriety of the houses there, and how we ought to let the Portugeses I
have right done them, as many of them as continue, or did sell the houses
while they were in possession, and something further in their favour, the
Duke in an anger I never observed in him before, did cry, says he, "All
the world rides us, and I think we shall never ride anybody."  Thence
home, and, though late, yet Pedro being there, he sang a song and parted.
I did give him 5s., but find it burdensome and so will break up the
meeting.  At night is brought home our poor Fancy, which to my great grief
continues lame still, so that I wish she had not been brought ever home
again, for it troubles me to see her.

13th.  Up, and before I went to the office comes my Taylor with a coate I
have made to wear within doors, purposely to come no lower than my knees,
for by my wearing a gowne within doors comes all my tenderness about my
legs.  There comes also Mr. Reeve, with a microscope and scotoscope.

     [An optical instrument used to enable objects to be seen in the
     dark.  The name is derived from the Greek.]

For the first I did give him L5 10s., a great price, but a most curious
bauble it is, and he says, as good, nay, the best he knows in England, and
he makes the best in the world.  The other he gives me, and is of value;
and a curious curiosity it is to look objects in a darke room with.
Mightly pleased with this I to the office, where all the morning. There
offered by Sir W. Pen his coach to go to Epsum and carry my wife, I stept
out and bade my wife make her ready, but being not very well and other
things advising me to the contrary, I did forbear going, and so Mr. Creed
dining with me I got him to give my wife and me a play this afternoon,
lending him money to do it, which is a fallacy that I have found now once,
to avoyde my vowe with, but never to be more practised I swear, and to the
new play, at the Duke's house, of "Henry the Fifth;" a most noble play,
writ by my Lord Orrery; wherein Betterton, Harris, and Ianthe's parts are
most incomparably wrote and done, and the whole play the most full of
height and raptures of wit and sense, that ever I heard; having but one
incongruity, or what did, not please me in it, that is, that King Harry
promises to plead for Tudor to their Mistresse, Princesse Katherine of
France, more than when it comes to it he seems to do; and Tudor refused by
her with some kind of indignity, not with a difficulty and honour that it
ought to have been done in to him.  Thence home and to my office, wrote by
the post, and then to read a little in Dr. Power's book of discovery by
the Microscope to enable me a little how to use and what to expect from my
glasse.  So to supper and to bed.

14th (Lord's day).  After long lying discoursing with my wife, I up, and
comes Mr. Holliard to see me, who concurs with me that my pain is nothing
but cold in my legs breeding wind, and got only by my using to wear a
gowne, and that I am not at all troubled with any ulcer, but my thickness
of water comes from my overheat in my back.  He gone, comes Mr. Herbert,
Mr. Honiwood's man, and dined with me, a very honest, plain, well-meaning
man, I think him to be; and by his discourse and manner of life, the true
embleme of an old ordinary serving-man.  After dinner up to my chamber and
made an end of Dr. Power's booke of the Microscope, very fine and to my
content, and then my wife and I with great pleasure, but with great
difficulty before we could come to find the manner of seeing any thing by
my microscope.  At last did with good content, though not so much as I
expect when I come to understand it better.  By and by comes W. Joyce, in
his silke suit, and cloake lined with velvett: staid talking with me, and
I very merry at it.  He supped with me; but a cunning, crafty fellow he
is, and dangerous to displease, for his tongue spares nobody.  After
supper I up to read a little, and then to bed.

15th.  Up, and with Sir J. Minnes by coach to St. James's, and there did
our business with the Duke, who tells us more and more signs of a Dutch
warr, and how we must presently set out a fleete for Guinny, for the Dutch
are doing so, and there I believe the warr will begin.  Thence home with
him again, in our way he talking of his cures abroad, while he was with
the King as a doctor, and above all men the pox.  And among others, Sir J.
Denham he told me he had cured, after it was come to an ulcer all over his
face, to a miracle.  To the Coffee-house I, and so to the 'Change a
little, and then home to dinner with Creed, whom I met at the
Coffee-house, and after dinner by coach set him down at the Temple, and I
and my wife to Mr. Blagrave's.  They being none of them at home; I to the
Hall, leaving her there, and thence to the Trumpett, whither came Mrs.
Lane, and there begins a sad story how her husband, as I feared, proves
not worth a farthing, and that she is with child and undone, if I do not
get him a place.  I had my pleasure here of her, and she, like an impudent
jade, depends upon my kindness to her husband, but I will have no more to
do with her, let her brew as she has baked, seeing she would not take my
counsel about Hawly.  After drinking we parted, and I to Blagrave's, and
there discoursed with Mrs. Blagrave about her kinswoman, who it seems is
sickly even to frantiqueness sometimes, and among other things chiefly
from love and melancholy upon the death of her servant,--[Servant =
lover.]--insomuch that she telling us all most simply and innocently I
fear she will not be able to come to us with any pleasure, which I am
sorry for, for I think she would have pleased us very well. In comes he,
and so to sing a song and his niece with us, but she sings very meanly.
So through the Hall and thence by coach home, calling by the way at
Charing Crosse, and there saw the great Dutchman that is come over, under
whose arm I went with my hat on, and could not reach higher than his
eye-browes with the tip of my fingers, reaching as high as I could.  He is
a comely and well-made man, and his wife a very little, but pretty comely
Dutch woman.  It is true, he wears pretty high-heeled shoes, but not very
high, and do generally wear a turbant, which makes him show yet taller
than really he is, though he is very tall, as I have said before.  Home to
my office, and then to supper, and then to my office again late, and so
home to bed, my wife and I troubled that we do not speed better in this
business of her woman.

16th.  Wakened about two o'clock this morning with the noise of thunder,
which lasted for an houre, with such continued lightnings, not flashes,
but flames, that all the sky and ayre was light; and that for a great
while, not a minute's space between new flames all the time; such a thing
as I never did see, nor could have believed had ever been in nature.  And
being put into a great sweat with it, could not sleep till all was over.
And that accompanied with such a storm of rain as I never heard in my
life.  I expected to find my house in the morning overflowed with the rain
breaking in, and that much hurt must needs have been done in the city with
this lightning; but I find not one drop of rain in my house, nor any newes
of hurt done.  But it seems it has been here and all up and down the
countrie hereabouts the like tempest, Sir W. Batten saying much of the
greatness thereof at Epsum.  Up and all the morning at the office. At noon
busy at the 'Change about one business or other, and thence home to
dinner, and so to my office all the afternoon very busy, and so to supper
anon, and then to my office again a while, collecting observations out of
Dr. Power's booke of Microscopes, and so home to bed, very stormy weather
to-night for winde.  This day we had newes that my Lady Pen is landed and
coming hither, so that I hope the family will be in better order and more
neate than it hath been.

17th.  Up, and going to Sir W. Batten to speak to him about business, he
did give me three, bottles of his Epsum water, which I drank and it
wrought well with me, and did give me many good stools, and I found myself
mightily cooled with them and refreshed.  Thence I to Mr. Honiwood and my
father's old house, but he was gone out, and there I staid talking with
his man Herbert, who tells me how Langford and his wife are very
foul-mouthed people, and will speak very ill of my father, calling him old
rogue in reference to the hard penniworths he sold him of his goods when
the rogue need not have bought any of them.  So that I am resolved he
shall get no more money by me, but it vexes me to think that my father
should be said to go away in debt himself, but that I will cause to be
remedied whatever comes of it.  Thence to my Lord Crew, and there with him
a little while.  Before dinner talked of the Dutch war, and find that he
do much doubt that we shall fall into it without the money or consent of
Parliament, that is expected or the reason of it that is fit to have for
every warr.  Dined with him, and after dinner talked with Sir Thomas Crew,
who told me how Mr. Edward Montagu is for ever blown up, and now quite out
with his father again; to whom he pretended that his going down was, not
that he was cast out of the Court, but that he had leave to be absent a
month; but now he finds the truth.  Thence to my Lady Sandwich, where by
agreement my wife dined, and after talking with her I carried my wife to
Mr. Pierce's and left her there, and so to Captain Cooke's, but he was not
at home, but I there spoke with my boy Tom Edwards, and directed him to go
to Mr. Townsend (with whom I was in the morning) to have measure taken of
his clothes to be made him there out of the Wardrobe, which will be so
done, and then I think he will come to me. Thence to White Hall, and after
long staying there was no Committee of the Fishery as was expected.  Here
I walked long with Mr. Pierce, who tells me the King do still sup every
night with my Lady Castlemayne, who he believes has lately slunk a great
belly away, for from very big she is come to be down again.  Thence to
Mrs. Pierce's, and with her and my wife to see Mrs. Clarke, where with him
and her very merry discoursing of the late play of Henry the 5th, which
they conclude the best that ever was made, but confess with me that
Tudor's being dismissed in the manner he is is a great blemish to the
play.  I am mightily pleased with the Doctor, for he is the only man I
know that I could learn to pronounce by, which he do the best that ever I
heard any man.  Thence home and to the office late, and so to supper and
to bed.  My Lady Pen came hither first to-night to Sir W. Pen's lodgings.

18th.  Lay too long in bed, till 8 o'clock, then up and Mr. Reeve came and
brought an anchor and a very fair loadstone.  He would have had me bought
it, and a good stone it is, but when he saw that I would not buy it he
said he [would] leave it for me to sell for him.  By and by he comes to
tell me that he had present occasion for L6 to make up a sum, and that he
would pay me in a day or two, but I had the unusual wit to deny him, and
so by and by we parted, and I to the office, where busy all the morning
sitting.  Dined alone at home, my wife going to-day to dine with Mrs.
Pierce, and thence with her and.  Mrs. Clerke to see a new play, "The
Court Secret."  I busy all the afternoon, toward evening to Westminster,
and there in the Hall a while, and then to my barber, willing to have any
opportunity to speak to Jane, but wanted it.  So to Mrs. Pierces, who was
come home, and she and Mrs. Clerke busy at cards, so my wife being gone
home, I home, calling by the way at the Wardrobe and met Mr. Townsend, Mr.
Moore and others at the Taverne thereby, and thither I to them and spoke
with Mr. Townsend about my boy's clothes, which he says shall be soon
done, and then I hope I shall be settled when I have one in the house that
is musicall.  So home and to supper, and then a little to my office, and
then home to bed.  My wife says the play she saw is the worst that ever
she saw in her life.

19th.  Up and to the office, where Mr. Coventry and Sir W. Pen and I sat
all the morning hiring of ships to go to Guinny, where we believe the warr
with Holland will first break out.  At noon dined at home, and after
dinner my wife and I to Sir W. Pen's, to see his Lady, the first time, who
is a well-looked, fat, short, old Dutchwoman, but one that hath been
heretofore pretty handsome, and is now very discreet, and, I believe, hath
more wit than her husband.  Here we staid talking a good while, and very
well pleased I was with the old woman at first visit.  So away home, and I
to my office, my wife to go see my aunt Wight, newly come to town. Creed
came to me, and he and I out, among other things, to look out a man to
make a case, for to keep my stone, that I was cut of, in, and he to buy
Daniel's history,  which he did, but I missed of my end.  So parted upon
Ludgate Hill, and I home and to the office, where busy till supper, and
home to supper to a good dish of fritters, which I bespoke, and were done
much to my mind.  Then to the office a while again, and so home to bed.
The newes of the Emperour's victory over the Turkes is by some doubted,
but by most confessed to be very small (though great) of what was talked,
which was 80,000 men to be killed and taken of the Turke's side.

20th.  Up and to the office a while, but this day the Parliament meeting
only to be adjourned to November (which was done, accordingly), we did not
meet, and so I forth to bespeak a case to be made to keep my stone in,
which will cost me 25s.  Thence I walked to Cheapside, there to see the
effect of a fire there this morning, since four o'clock; which I find in
the house of Mr. Bois, that married Dr. Fuller's niece, who are both out
of towne, leaving only a mayde and man in towne.  It begun in their house,
and hath burned much and many houses backward, though none forward; and
that in the great uniform pile of buildings in the middle of Cheapside.  I
am very sorry for them, for the Doctor's sake.  Thence to the 'Change, and
so home to dinner.  And thence to Sir W. Batten's, whither Sir Richard
Ford came, the Sheriffe, who hath been at this fire all the while; and he
tells me, upon my question, that he and the Mayor were there, as it is
their dutys to be, not only to keep the peace, but they have power of
commanding the pulling down of any house or houses, to defend the whole
City.  By and by comes in the Common Cryer of the City to speak with him;
and when he was gone, says he, "You may see by this man the constitution
of the Magistracy of this City; that this fellow's place, I dare give him
(if he will be true to me) L1000 for his profits every year, and expect to
get L500 more to myself thereby.  When," says he, "I in myself am forced
to spend many times as much."  By and by came Mr. Coventry, and so we met
at the office, to hire ships for Guinny, and that done broke up.  I to Sir
W. Batten's, there to discourse with Mrs. Falconer, who hath been with Sir
W. Pen this evening, after Mr. Coventry had promised her half what W.
Bodham had given him for his place, but Sir W. Pen, though he knows that,
and that Mr. Bodham hath said that his place hath cost him L100 and would
L100 more, yet is he so high against the poor woman that he will not hear
to give her a farthing, but it seems do listen after a lease where he
expects Mr. Falconer hath put in his daughter's life, and he is afraid
that that is not done, and did tell Mrs. Falconer that he would see it and
know what is done therein in spite of her, when, poor wretch, she neither
do nor can hinder him the knowing it.  Mr. Coventry knows of this business
of the lease, and I believe do think of it as well as I.  But the poor
woman is gone home without any hope, but only Mr. Coventry's own
nobleness.  So I to my office and wrote many letters, and so to supper and
to bed.

21st (Lord's day).  Waked about 4 o'clock with my wife, having a
looseness, and peoples coming in the yard to the pump to draw water
several times, so that fear of this day's fire made me fearful, and called
Besse and sent her down to see, and it was Griffin's maid for water to
wash her house.  So to sleep again, and then lay talking till 9 o'clock.
So up and drunk three bottles of Epsum water, which wrought well with me.
I all the morning and most of the afternoon after dinner putting papers to
rights in my chamber, and the like in the evening till night at my office,
and renewing and writing fair over my vowes.  So home to supper, prayers,
and to bed.  Mr. Coventry told us the Duke was gone ill of a fit of an
ague to bed; so we sent this morning to see how he do.

     [Elizabeth Falkener, wife of John Falkener, announced to Pepys the
     death of "her dear and loving husband" in a letter dated July 19th,
     1664 "begs interest that she may be in something considered by the
     person succeeding her husband in his employment, which has
     occasioned great expenses." ("Calendar of State Papers," Domestic,
     1663-64, p. 646)]

22nd.  Up and abroad, doing very many errands to my great content which
lay as burdens upon my mind and memory.  Home to dinner, and so to White
Hall, setting down my wife at her father's, and I to the Tangier
Committee, where several businesses I did to my mind, and with hopes
thereby to get something.  So to Westminster Hall, where by appointment I
had made I met with Dr. Tom Pepys, but avoided all discourse of difference
with him, though much against my will, and he like a doating coxcomb as he
is, said he could not but demand his money, and that he would have his
right, and that let all anger be forgot, and such sorry stuff, nothing to
my mind, but only I obtained this satisfaction, that he told me about
Sturbridge last was 12 months or 2 years he was at Brampton, and there my
father did tell him that what he had done for my brother in giving him his
goods and setting him up as he had done was upon condition that he should
give my brother John L20 per ann., which he charged upon my father, he
tells me in answer, as a great deal of hard measure that he should expect
that with him that had a brother so able as I am to do that for him.  This
is all that he says he can say as to my father's acknowledging that he had
given Tom his goods.  He says his brother Roger will take his oath that my
father hath given him thanks for his counsel for his giving of Tom his
goods and setting him up in the manner that he hath done, but the former
part of this he did not speak fully so bad nor as certain what he could
say.  So we walked together to my cozen Joyce's, where my wife staid for
me, and then I home and her by coach, and so to my office, then to supper
and to bed.

23rd.  Lay long talking with my wife, and angry awhile about her desiring
to have a French mayde all of a sudden, which I took to arise from
yesterday's being with her mother.  But that went over and friends again,
and so she be well qualitied, I care not much whether she be French or no,
so a Protestant.  Thence to the office, and at noon to the 'Change, where
very busy getting ships for Guinny and for Tangier.  So home to dinner,
and then abroad all the afternoon doing several errands, to comply with my
oath of ending many businesses before Bartholomew's day, which is two days
hence.  Among others I went into New Bridewell, in my way to Mr. Cole, and
there I saw the new model, and it is very handsome. Several at work, among
others, one pretty whore brought in last night, which works very lazily.
I did give them 6d. to drink, and so away.  To Graye's Inn, but missed Mr.
Cole, and so homeward called at Harman's, and there bespoke some chairs
for a room, and so home, and busy late, and then to supper and to bed.
The Dutch East India Fleete are now come home safe, which we are sorry
for.  Our Fleets on both sides are hastening out to Guinny.

24th.  Up by six o'clock, and to my office with Tom Hater dispatching
business in haste.  At nine o'clock to White Hall about Mr. Maes's
business at the Council, which stands in an ill condition still.  Thence
to Graye's Inn, but missed of Mr. Cole the lawyer, and so walked home,
calling among the joyners in Wood Streete to buy a table and bade in many
places, but did not buy it till I come home to see the place where it is
to stand, to judge how big it must be.  So after 'Change home and a good
dinner, and then to White Hall to a Committee of the Fishery, where my
Lord Craven and Mr. Gray mightily against Mr. Creed's being joined in the
warrant for Secretary with Mr. Duke.  However I did get it put off till
the Duke of Yorke was there, and so broke up doing nothing.  So walked
home, first to the Wardrobe, and there saw one suit of clothes made for my
boy and linen set out, and I think to have him the latter end of this
week, and so home, Mr. Creed walking the greatest part of the way with me
advising what to do in his case about his being Secretary to us in
conjunction with Duke, which I did give him the best I could, and so home
and to my office, where very much business, and then home to supper and to
bed.

25th.  Up and to the office after I had spoke to my taylor, Langford (who
came to me about some work), desiring to know whether he knew of any debts
that my father did owe of his own in the City.  He tells me, "No, not
any."  I did on purpose try him because of what words he and his wife have
said of him (as Herbert told me the other day), and further did desire
him, that if he knew of any or could hear of any that he should bid them
come to me, and I would pay them, for I would not that because he do not
pay my brother's debts that therefore he should be thought to deny the
payment of his owne.  All the morning at the office busy.  At noon to the
'Change, among other things busy to get a little by the hire of a ship for
Tangier.  So home to dinner, and after dinner comes Mr. Cooke to see me;
it is true he was kind to me at sea in carrying messages to and fro to my
wife from sea, but I did do him kindnesses too, and therefore I matter not
much to compliment or make any regard of his thinking me to slight him as
I do for his folly about my brother Tom's mistress.  After dinner and some
talk with him, I to my office; there busy, till by and by Jacke Noble came
to me to tell me that he had Cave in prison, and that he would give me and
my father good security that neither we nor any of our family should be
troubled with the child; for he could prove that he was fully satisfied
for him; and that if the worst came to the worst, the parish must keep it;
that Cave did bring the child to his house, but they got it carried back
again, and that thereupon he put him in prison.  When he saw that I would
not pay him the money, nor made anything of being secured against the
child, he then said that then he must go to law, not himself, but come in
as a witness for Cave against us.  I could have told him that he could
bear witness that Cave is satisfied, or else there is no money due to
himself; but I let alone any such discourse, only getting as much out of
him as I could.  I perceive he is a rogue, and hath inquired into
everything and consulted with Dr. Pepys, and that he thinks as Dr. Pepys
told him that my father if he could would not pay a farthing of the debts,
and yet I made him confess that in all his lifetime he never knew my
father to be asked for money twice, nay, not once, all the time he lived
with him, and that for his own debts he believed he would do so still, but
he meant only for those of Tom.  He said now that Randall and his wife and
the midwife could prove from my brother's own mouth that the child was
his, and that Tom had told them the circumstances of time, upon November
5th at night, that he got it on her.  I offered him if he would secure my
father against being forced to pay the money again I would pay him, which
at first he would do, give his own security, and when I asked more than
his own he told me yes he would, and those able men, subsidy men, but when
we came by and by to discourse of it again he would not then do it, but
said he would take his course, and joyne with Cave and release him, and so
we parted.  However, this vexed me so as I could not be quiet, but took
coach to go speak with Mr. Cole, but met him not within, so back, buying a
table by the way, and at my office late, and then home to supper and to
bed, my mind disordered about this roguish business--in every thing else,
I thank God, well at ease.

26th.  Up by 5 o'clock, which I have not been many a day, and down by
water to Deptford, and there took in Mr. Pumpfield the rope-maker, and
down with him to Woolwich to view Clothier's cordage, which I found bad
and stopped the receipt of it.  Thence to the ropeyard, and there among
other things discoursed with Mrs. Falconer, who tells me that she has
found the writing, and Sir W. Pen's daughter is not put into the lease for
her life as he expected, and I am glad of it.  Thence to the Dockyarde,
and there saw the new ship in very great forwardness, and so by water to
Deptford a little, and so home and shifting myself, to the 'Change, and
there did business, and thence down by water to White Hall, by the way, at
the Three Cranes, putting into an alehouse and eat a bit of bread and
cheese.  There I could not get into the Parke, and so was fain to stay in
the gallery over the gate to look to the passage into the Parke, into
which the King hath forbid of late anybody's coming, to watch his coming
that had appointed me to come, which he did by and by with his lady and
went to Guardener's Lane, and there instead of meeting with one that was
handsome and could play well, as they told me, she is the ugliest beast
and plays so basely as I never heard anybody, so that I should loathe her
being in my house.  However, she took us by and by and showed us indeed
some pictures at one Hiseman's, a picture drawer, a Dutchman, which is
said to exceed Lilly, and indeed there is both of the Queenes and Mayds of
Honour (particularly Mrs. Stewart's in a buff doublet like a soldier) as
good pictures, I think, as ever I saw.  The Queene is drawn in one like a
shepherdess, in the other like St. Katharin, most like and most admirably.
I was mightily pleased with this sight indeed, and so back again to their
lodgings, where I left them, but before I went this mare that carried me,
whose name I know not but that they call him Sir John, a pitiful fellow,
whose face I have long known but upon what score I know not, but he could
have the confidence to ask me to lay down money for him to renew the lease
of his house, which I did give eare to there because I was there receiving
a civility from him, but shall not part with my money.  There I left them,
and I by water home, where at my office busy late, then home to supper,
and so to bed.  This day my wife tells me Mr. Pen,

     [William Penn, afterwards the famous Quaker.  P. Gibson, writing to
     him in March, 1711-12, says: "I remember your honour very well,
     when you newly came out of France and wore pantaloon breeches"]

Sir William's son, is come back from France, and come to visit her.  A
most modish person, grown, she says, a fine gentleman.

27th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning.  At noon to the
'Change, and there almost made my bargain about a ship for Tangier, which
will bring me in a little profit with Captain Taylor.  Off the 'Change
with Mr. Cutler and Sir W. Rider to Cutler's house, and there had a very
good dinner, and two or three pretty young ladies of their relations
there.  Thence to my case-maker for my stone case, and had it to my mind,
and cost me 24s., which is a great deale of money, but it is well done and
pleases me.  So doing some other small errands I home, and there find my
boy, Tom Edwards, come, sent me by Captain Cooke, having been bred in the
King's Chappell these four years.  I propose to make a clerke of him, and
if he deserves well, to do well by him.  Spent much of the afternoon to
set his chamber in order, and then to the office leaving him at home, and
late at night after all business was done I called Will and told him my
reason of taking a boy, and that it is of necessity, not out of any
unkindness to him, nor should be to his injury, and then talked about his
landlord's daughter to come to my wife, and I think it will be.  So home
and find my boy a very schoole boy, that talks innocently and
impertinently, but at present it is a sport to us, and in a little time he
will leave it.  So sent him to bed, he saying that he used to go to bed at
eight o'clock, and then all of us to bed, myself pretty well pleased with
my choice of a boy.  All the newes this day is, that the Dutch are, with
twenty-two sayle of ships of warr, crewsing up and down about Ostend; at
which we are alarmed.  My Lord Sandwich is come back into the Downes with
only eight sayle, which is or may be a prey to the Dutch, if they knew our
weakness and inability to set out any more speedily.

28th (Lord's day).  Up the first time I have had great while.  Home to
dined, and with my boy alone to church anybody to attend me to church a
dinner, and there met Creed, who, and we merry together, as his learning
is such and judgment that I cannot but be pleased with it.  After dinner I
took him to church, into our gallery, with me, but slept the best part of
the sermon, which was a most silly one.  So he and I to walk to the
'Change a while, talking from one pleasant discourse to another, and so
home, and thither came my uncle Wight and aunt, and supped with us mighty
merry.  And Creed lay with us all night, and so to bed, very merry to
think how Mr. Holliard (who came in this evening to see me) makes nothing,
but proving as a most clear thing that Rome is Antichrist.

29th.  Up betimes, intending to do business at my office, by 5 o'clock,
but going out met at my door Mr. Hughes come to speak with me about office
business, and told me that as he came this morning from Deptford he left
the King's yarde a-fire.  So I presently took a boat and down, and there
found, by God's providence, the fire out; but if there had been any wind
it must have burned all our stores, which is a most dreadfull
consideration.  But leaving all things well I home, and out abroad doing
many errands, Mr. Creed also out, and my wife to her mother's, and Creed
and I met at my Lady Sandwich's and there dined; but my Lady is become as
handsome, I think, as ever she was; and so good and discreet a woman I
know not in the world.  After dinner I to Westminster to Jervas's a while,
and so doing many errands by the way, and necessary ones, I home, and
thither came the woman with her mother which our Will recommends to my
wife.  I like her well, and I think will please us.  My wife and they
agreed, and she is to come the next week.  At which I am very well
contented, for then I hope we shall be settled, but I must remember that,
never since I was housekeeper, I ever lived so quietly, without any noise
or one angry word almost, as I have done since my present mayds Besse,
Jane, and Susan came and were together.  Now I have taken a boy and am
taking a woman, I pray God we may not be worse, but I will observe it.
After being at my office a while, home to supper and to bed.

30th.  Up and to the office, where sat long, and at noon to dinner at
home; after dinner comes Mr. Pen to visit me, and staid an houre talking
with me.  I perceive something of learning he hath got, but a great deale,
if not too much, of the vanity of the French garbe and affected manner of
speech and gait.  I fear all real profit he hath made of his travel will
signify little.  So, he gone, I to my office and there very busy till late
at night, and so home to supper and to bed.

31st.  Up by five o'clock and to my office, where T. Hater and Will met
me, and so we dispatched a great deal of my business as to the ordering my
papers and books which were behindhand.  All the morning very busy at my
office.  At noon home to dinner, and there my wife hath got me some pretty
good oysters, which is very soon and the soonest, I think, I ever eat any.
After dinner I up to hear my boy play upon a lute, which I have this day
borrowed of Mr. Hunt; and indeed the boy would, with little practice, play
very well upon the lute, which pleases me well.  So by coach to the
Tangier Committee, and there have another small business by which I may
get a little small matter of money.  Staid but little there, and so home
and to my office, where late casting up my monthly accounts, and, blessed
be God!  find myself worth L1020, which is still the most I ever was
worth.  So home and to bed.  Prince Rupert I hear this day is to go to
command this fleete going to Guinny against the Dutch.  I doubt few will
be pleased with his going, being accounted an unhappy' man.  My mind at
good rest, only my father's troubles with Dr. Pepys and my brother Tom's
creditors in general do trouble me.  I have got a new boy that understands
musique well, as coming to me from the King's Chappell, and I hope will
prove a good boy, and my wife and I are upon having a woman, which for her
content I am contented to venture upon the charge of again, and she is one
that our' Will finds out for us, and understands a little musique, and I
think will please us well, only her friends live too near us.  Pretty well
in health, since I left off wearing of a gowne within doors all day, and
then go out with my legs into the cold, which brought me daily pain.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                               SEPTEMBER
                                 1664

Sept.  1st.  A sad rainy night, up and to the office, where busy all the
morning.  At noon to the 'Change and thence brought Mr. Pierce, the
Surgeon, and Creed, and dined very merry and handsomely; but my wife not
being well of those she not with us; and we cut up the great cake
Moorcocke lately sent us, which is very good.  They gone I to my office,
and there very busy till late at night, and so home to supper and to bed.

2nd.  Up very betimes and walked (my boy with me) to Mr. Cole's, and after
long waiting below, he being under the barber's hands, I spoke with him,
and he did give me much hopes of getting my debt that my brother owed me,
and also that things would go well with my father.  But going to his
attorney's, that he directed me to, they tell me both that though I could
bring my father to a confession of a judgment, yet he knowing that there
are specialties out against him he is bound to plead his knowledge of them
to me before he pays me, or else he must do it in his own wrong. I took a
great deal of pains this morning in the thorough understanding hereof, and
hope that I know the truth of our case, though it be but bad, yet better
than to run spending money and all to no purpose.  However, I will inquire
a little more.  Walked home, doing very many errands by the way to my
great content, and at the 'Change met and spoke with several persons about
serving us with pieces of eight at Tangier.  So home to dinner above
stairs, my wife not being well of those in bed.  I dined by her bedside,
but I got her to rise and abroad with me by coach to Bartholomew Fayre,
and our boy with us, and there shewed them and myself the dancing on the
ropes, and several other the best shows; but pretty it is to see how our
boy carries himself so innocently clownish as would make one laugh.  Here
till late and dark, then up and down, to buy combes for my wife to give
her mayds, and then by coach home, and there at the office set down my
day's work, and then home to bed.

3rd.  I have had a bad night's rest to-night, not sleeping well, as my
wife observed, and once or twice she did wake me, and I thought myself to
be mightily bit with fleas, and in the morning she chid her mayds for not
looking the fleas a-days.  But, when I rose, I found that it is only the
change of the weather from hot to cold, which, as I was two winters ago,
do stop my pores, and so my blood tingles and itches all day all over my
body, and so continued to-day all the day long just as I was then, and if
it continues to be so cold I fear I must come to the same pass, but
sweating cured me then, and I hope, and am told, will this also.  At the
office sat all the morning, dined at home, and after dinner to White Hall,
to the Fishing Committee, but not above four of us met, which could do
nothing, and a sad thing it is to see so great a work so ill followed, for
at this pace it can come to any thing at first sight.  Mr. Hill came to
tell me that he had got a gentlewoman for my wife, one Mrs. Ferrabosco,
that sings most admirably.  I seemed glad of it; but I hear she is too
gallant for me, and I am not sorry that I misse her.  Thence to the
office, setting some papers right, and so home to supper and to bed, after
prayers.

5th.  Up and to St. James's, and there did our business with the Duke;
where all our discourse of warr in the highest measure.  Prince Rupert was
with us; who is fitting himself to go to sea in the Heneretta.  And
afterwards in White Hall I met him and Mr. Gray, and he spoke to me, and
in other discourse, says he, "God damn me, I can answer but for one ship,
and in that I will do my part; for it is not in that as in an army, where
a man can command every thing."  By and by to a Committee for the Fishery,
the Duke of Yorke there, where, after Duke was made Secretary, we fell to
name a Committee, whereof I was willing to be one, because I would have my
hand in the business, to understand it and be known in doing something in
it; and so, after cutting out work for the Committee, we rose, and I to my
wife to Unthanke's, and with her from shop to shop, laying out near L10
this morning in clothes for her.  And so I to the 'Change, where a while,
and so home and to dinner, and thither came W. Bowyer and dined with us;
but strange to see how he could not endure onyons in sauce to lamb, but
was overcome with the sight of it, and so-was forced to make his dinner of
an egg or two.  He tells us how Mrs. Lane is undone, by her marrying so
bad, and desires to speak with me, which I know is wholly to get me to do
something for her to get her husband a place, which he is in no wise fit
for.  After dinner down to Woolwich with a gaily, and then to Deptford,
and so home, all the way reading Sir J. Suck[l]ing's "Aglaura," which,
methinks, is but a mean play; nothing of design in it.  Coming home it is
strange to see how I was troubled to find my wife, but in a necessary
compliment, expecting Mr. Pen to see her, who had been there and was by
her people denied, which, he having been three times, she thought not fit
he should be any more.  But yet even this did raise my jealousy presently
and much vex me. However, he did not come, which pleased me, and I to
supper, and to the office till 9 o'clock or thereabouts, and so home to
bed.  My aunt James had been here to-day with Kate Joyce twice to see us.
The second time my wife was at home, and they it seems are going down to
Brampton, which I am sorry for, for the charge that my father will be put
to.  But it must be borne with, and my mother has a mind to see them, but
I do condemn myself mightily for my pride and contempt of my aunt and
kindred that are not so high as myself, that I have not seen her all this
while, nor invited her all this while.

6th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning.  At noon home to
dinner, then to my office and there waited, thinking to have had Bagwell's
wife come to me about business, that I might have talked with her, but she
came not.  So I to White Hall by coach with Mr. Andrews, and there I got
his contract for the victualling of Tangier signed and sealed by us there,
so that all the business is well over, and I hope to have made a good
business of it and to receive L100 by it the next weeke, for which God be
praised!  Thence to W. Joyce's and Anthony's, to invite them to dinner to
meet my aunt James at my house, and the rather because they are all to go
down to my father the next weeke, and so I would be a little kind to them
before they go.  So home, having called upon Doll, our pretty 'Change
woman, for a pair of gloves trimmed with yellow ribbon, to [match the]
petticoate my wife bought yesterday, which cost me 20s.; but she is so
pretty, that, God forgive me!  I could not think it too much--which is a
strange slavery that I stand in to beauty, that I value nothing near it.
So going home, and my coach stopping in Newgate Market over against a
poulterer's shop, I took occasion to buy a rabbit, but it proved a deadly
old one when I came to eat it, as I did do after an hour being at my
office, and after supper again there till past 11 at night.  So home,, and
to bed.  This day Mr. Coventry did tell us how the Duke did receive the
Dutch Embassador the other day; by telling him that, whereas they think us
in jest, he believes that the Prince (Rupert) which goes in this fleete to
Guinny  will soon tell them that we are in earnest, and that he himself
will do the like here, in the head of the fleete here at home, and that
for the meschants, which he told the Duke there were in England, which did
hope to do themselves good by the King's being at warr, says he, the
English have ever united all this private difference to attend foraigne,
and that Cromwell, notwithstanding the meschants in his time, which were
the Cavaliers, did never find them interrupt him in his foraigne
businesses, and that he did not doubt but to live to see the Dutch as
fearfull of provoking the English, under the government of a King, as he
remembers them to have been under that of a Coquin.  I writ all this story
to my Lord Sandwich tonight into the Downes, it being very good and true,
word for word from Mr. Coventry to-day.

7th.  Lay long to-day, pleasantly discoursing with my wife about the
dinner we are to have for the Joyces, a day or two hence.  Then up and
with Mr. Margetts to Limehouse to see his ground and ropeyarde there,
which is very fine, and I believe we shall employ it for the Navy, for the
King's grounds are not sufficient to supply our defence if a warr comes.
Thence back to the 'Change, where great talke of the forwardnesse of the
Dutch, which puts us all to a stand, and particularly myself for my Lord
Sandwich, to think him to lie where he is for a sacrifice, if they should
begin with us.  So home and Creed with me, and to dinner, and after dinner
I out to my office, taking in Bagwell's wife, who I knew waited for me,
but company came to me so soon that I could have no discourse with her, as
I intended, of pleasure.  So anon abroad with Creed walked to Bartholomew
Fayre, this being the last day, and there saw the best dancing on the
ropes that I think I ever saw in my life, and so all say, and so by coach
home, where I find my wife hath had her head dressed by her woman, Mercer,
which is to come to her to-morrow, but my wife being to go to a
christening tomorrow, she came to do her head up to-night.  So a while to
my office, and then to supper and to bed.

8th.  Up and to the office, where busy all the morning.  At noon dined at
home, and I by water down to Woolwich by a galley, and back again in the
evening.  All haste made in setting out this Guinny fleete, but yet not
such as will ever do the King's business if we come to a warr.  My wife
this afternoon being very well dressed by her new woman, Mary Mercer, a
decayed merchant's daughter that our Will helps us to, did go to the
christening of Mrs. Mills, the parson's wife's child, where she never was
before.  After I was come home Mr. Povey came to me and took me out to
supper to Mr. Bland's, who is making now all haste to be gone for Tangier.
Here pretty merry, and good discourse, fain to admire the knowledge and
experience of Mrs. Bland, who I think as good a merchant as her husband.
I went home and there find Mercer, whose person I like well, and I think
will do well, at least I hope so.  So to my office a while and then to
bed.

9th.  Up, and to put things in order against dinner.  I out and bought
several things, among others, a dozen of silver salts; home, and to the
office, where some of us met a little, and then home, and at noon comes my
company, namely, Anthony and Will Joyce and their wives, my aunt James
newly come out of Wales, and my cozen Sarah Gyles.  Her husband did not
come, and by her I did understand afterwards, that it was because he was
not yet able to pay me the 40s. she had borrowed a year ago of me.

     [Pepys would have been more proud of his cousin had he anticipated
     her husband's becoming a knight, for she was probably the same
     person whose burial is recorded in the register of St. Helen's,
     Bishopsgate, September 4th, 1704: "Dame Sarah Gyles, widow, relict
     of Sir John Gyles."--B.]

I was as merry as I could, giving them a good dinner; but W. Joyce did so
talk, that he made every body else dumb, but only laugh at him.  I forgot
there was Mr. Harman and his wife, my aunt, a very good harmlesse woman.
All their talke is of her and my two she-cozen Joyces and Will's little
boy Will (who was also here to-day), down to Brampton to my father's next
week, which will be trouble and charge to them, but however my father and
mother desire to see them, and so let them.  They eyed mightily my great
cupboard of plate, I this day putting my two flaggons upon my table; and
indeed it is a fine sight, and better than ever I did hope to see of my
owne.  Mercer dined with us at table, this being her first dinner in my
house.  After dinner left them and to White Hall, where a small Tangier
Committee, and so back again home, and there my wife and Mercer and Tom
and I sat till eleven at night, singing and fiddling, and a great joy it
is to see me master of so much pleasure in my house, that it is and will
be still, I hope, a constant pleasure to me to be at home.  The girle
plays pretty well upon the harpsicon, but only ordinary tunes, but hath a
good hand; sings a little, but hath a good voyce and eare.  My boy, a
brave boy, sings finely, and is the most pleasant boy at present, while
his ignorant boy's tricks last, that ever I saw.  So to supper, and with
great pleasure to bed.

10th.  Up and to the office, where we sate all the morning, and I much
troubled to think what the end of our great sluggishness will be, for we
do nothing in this office like people able to carry on a warr.  We must be
put out, or other people put in.  Dined at home, and then my wife and I
and Mercer to the Duke's house, and there saw "The Rivalls," which is no
excellent play, but good acting in it; especially Gosnell comes and sings
and dances finely, but, for all that, fell out of the key, so that the
musique could not play to her afterwards, and so did Harris also go out of
the tune to agree with her.  Thence home and late writing letters, and
this night I received, by Will, L105, the first-fruits of my endeavours in
the late contract for victualling of Tangier, for which God be praised!
for I can with a safe conscience say that I have therein saved the King
L5000 per annum, and yet got myself a hope of L300 per annum without the
least wrong to the King.  So to supper and to bed.

11th (Lord's day).  Up and to church in the best manner I have gone a good
while, that is to say, with my wife, and her woman, Mercer, along with us,
and Tom, my boy, waiting on us.  A dull sermon.  Home, dined, left my wife
to go to church alone, and I walked in haste being late to the Abbey at
Westminster, according to promise to meet Jane Welsh, and there wearily
walked, expecting her till 6 o'clock from three, but no Jane came, which
vexed me, only part of it I spent with Mr. Blagrave walking in the Abbey,
he telling me the whole government and discipline of White Hall Chappell,
and the caution now used against admitting any debauched persons, which I
was glad to hear, though he tells me there are persons bad enough.  Thence
going home went by Jarvis's, and there stood Jane at the door, and so I
took her in and drank with her, her master and mistress being out of
doors.  She told me how she could not come to me this afternoon, but
promised another time.  So I walked home contented with my speaking with
her, and walked to my uncle Wight's, where they were all at supper, and
among others comes fair Mrs. Margarett Wight, who indeed is very pretty.
So after supper home to prayers and to bed.  This afternoon, it seems, Sir
J. Minnes fell sicke at church, and going down the gallery stairs fell
down dead, but came to himself again and is pretty well.

12th.  Up, and to my cozen Anthony Joyce's, and there took leave of my
aunt James, and both cozens, their wives, who are this day going down to
my father's by coach.  I did give my Aunt 20s., to carry as a token to my
mother, and 10s.  to Pall.  Thence by coach to St. James's, and there did
our business as usual with the Duke; and saw him with great pleasure play
with his little girle,--[Afterwards Queen Mary II.]--like an ordinary
private father of a child.  Thence walked to Jervas's, where I took Jane
in the shop alone, and there heard of her, her master and mistress were
going out.  So I went away and came again half an hour after.  In the
meantime went to the Abbey, and there went in to see the tombs with great
pleasure.  Back again to Jane, and there upstairs and drank with her, and
staid two hours with her kissing her, but nothing more.  Anon took boat
and by water to the Neat Houses over against Fox Hall to have seen
Greatorex dive, which Jervas and his wife were gone to see, and there I
found them (and did it the rather for a pretence for my having been so
long at their house), but being disappointed of some necessaries to do it
I staid not, but back to Jane, but she would not go out with me.  So I to
Mr. Creed's lodgings, and with him walked up and down in the New Exchange,
talking mightily of the convenience and necessity of a man's wearing good
clothes, and so after eating a messe of creame I took leave of him, he
walking with me as far as Fleete Conduit, he offering me upon my request
to put out some money for me into Backewell's hands at 6 per cent.
interest, which he seldom gives, which I will consider of, being doubtful
of trusting any of these great dealers because of their mortality, but
then the convenience of having one's money, at an houre's call is very
great.  Thence to my uncle Wight's, and there supped with my wife, having
given them a brave barrel of oysters of Povy's giving me. So home and to
bed.

13th.  Up and, to the office, where sat busy all morning, dined at home
and after dinner to Fishmonger's Hall, where we met the first time upon
the Fishery Committee, and many good things discoursed of concerning
making of farthings, which was proposed as a way of raising money for this
business, and then that of lotterys,

     [Among the State Papers is a "Statement of Articles in the Covenant
     proposed by the Commissioners for the Royal Fishing to, Sir Ant.
     Desmarces & Co.  in reference to the regulation of lotteries; which
     are very unreasonable, and of the objections thereto" ("Calendar of
     State Papers," Domestic, 1663-64, p.  576.)]

but with great confusion; but I hope we shall fall into greater order. So
home again and to my office, where after doing business home and to a
little musique, after supper, and so to bed.

14th.  Up, and wanting some things that should be laid ready for my
dressing myself I was angry, and one thing after another made my wife give
Besse warning to be gone, which the jade, whether out of fear or
ill-nature or simplicity I know not, but she took it and asked leave to go
forth to look a place, and did, which vexed me to the heart, she being as
good a natured wench as ever we shall have, but only forgetful.  At the
office all the morning and at noon to the 'Change, and there went off with
Sir W. Warren and took occasion to desire him to lend me L100, which he
said he would let the have with all his heart presently, as he had
promised me a little while ago to give me for my pains in his two great
contracts for masts L100, and that this should be it.  To which end I did
move it to him, and by this means I hope to be, possessed of the L100
presently within 2 or 3 days.  So home to dinner, and then to the office,
and down to Blackwall by water to view a place found out for laying of
masts, and I think it will be most proper.  So home and there find Mr. Pen
come to visit my wife, and staid with them till sent for to Mr. Bland's,
whither by appointment I was to go to supper, and against my will left
them together, but, God knows, without any reason of fear in my conscience
of any evil between them, but such is my natural folly.  Being thither
come they would needs have my wife, and so Mr. Bland and his wife (the
first time she was ever at my house or my wife at hers) very civilly went
forth and brought her and W. Pen, and there Mr. Povy and we supped nobly
and very merry, it being to take leave of Mr. Bland, who is upon going
soon to Tangier.  So late home and to bed.

15th.  At the office all the morning, then to the 'Change, and so home to
dinner, where Luellin dined with us, and after dinner many people came in
and kept me all the afternoon, among other the Master and Wardens of
Chyrurgeon's Hall, who staid arguing their cause with me; I did give them
the best answer I could, and after their being two hours with me parted,
and I to my office to do business, which is much on my hands, and so late
home to supper and to bed.

16th.  Up betimes and to my office, where all the morning very busy
putting papers to rights.  And among other things Mr. Gauden coming to me,
I had a good opportunity to speak to him about his present, which hitherto
hath been a burden: to me, that I could not do it, because I was doubtfull
that he meant it as a temptation to me to stand by him in the business of
Tangier victualling; but he clears me it was not, and that he values me
and my proceedings therein very highly, being but what became me, and that
what he did was for my old kindnesses to him in dispatching of his
business, which I was glad to hear, and with my heart in good rest and
great joy parted, and to my business again.  At noon to the 'Change, where
by appointment I met Sir W. Warren, and afterwards to the Sun taverne,
where he brought to me, being all alone; L100 in a bag, which I offered
him to give him my receipt for, but he told me, no, it was my owne, which
he had a little while since promised me and was glad that (as I had told
him two days since) it would now do me courtesy; and so most kindly he did
give it me, and I as joyfully, even out of myself, carried it home in a
coach, he himself expressly taking care that nobody might see this
business done, though I was willing enough to have carried a servant with
me to have received it, but he advised me to do it myself. So home with it
and to dinner; after dinner I forth with my boy to buy severall things,
stools and andirons and candlesticks, &c., household stuff, and walked to
the mathematical instrument maker in Moorefields and bought a large pair
of compasses, and there met Mr. Pargiter, and he would needs have me drink
a cup of horse-radish ale, which he and a friend of his troubled with the
stone have been drinking of, which we did and then walked into the fields
as far almost as Sir G. Whitmore's, all the way talking of Russia, which,
he says, is a sad place; and, though Moscow is a very great city, yet it
is from the distance between house and house, and few people compared with
this, and poor, sorry houses, the Emperor himself living in a wooden
house, his exercise only flying a hawk at pigeons and carrying pigeons ten
or twelve miles off and then laying wagers which pigeon shall come soonest
home to her house.  All the winter within doors, some few playing at
chesse, but most drinking their time away.  Women live very slavishly
there, and it seems in the Emperor's court no room hath above two or three
windows, and those the greatest not a yard wide or high, for warmth in
winter time; and that the general cure for all diseases there is their
sweating houses, or people that are poor they get into their ovens, being
heated, and there lie.  Little learning among things of any sort.  Not a
man that speaks Latin, unless the Secretary of State by chance.  Mr.
Pargiter and I walked to the 'Change together and there parted, and so I
to buy more things and then home, and after a little at my office, home to
supper and to bed.  This day old Hardwicke came and redeemed a watch he
had left with me in pawne for 40s. seven years ago, and I let him gave it.
Great talk that the Dutch will certainly be out this week, and will sail
directly to Guinny, being convoyed out of the Channel with 42 sail of
ships.

17th.  Up and to the office, where Mr. Coventry very angry to see things
go so coldly as they do, and I must needs say it makes me fearful every
day of having some change of the office, and the truth is, I am of late a
little guilty of being remiss myself of what I used to be, but I hope I
shall come to my old pass again, my family being now settled again. Dined
at home, and to the office, where late busy in setting all my businesses
in order, and I did a very great and a very contenting afternoon's work.
This day my aunt Wight sent my wife a new scarfe, with a compliment for
the many favours she had received of her, which is the several things we
have sent her.  I am glad enough of it, for I see my uncle is so given up
to the Wights that I hope for little more of them. So home to supper and
to bed.

18th (Lord's day).  Up and to church all of us.  At noon comes Anthony and
W. Joyce (their wives being in the country with my father) and dined with
me very merry as I can be in such company.  After dinner walked to
Westminster (tiring them by the way, and so left them, Anthony in
Cheapside and the other in the Strand), and there spent all the afternoon
in the Cloysters as I had agreed with Jane Welsh, but she came not, which
vexed me, staying till 5 o'clock, and then walked homeward, and by coach
to the old Exchange, and thence to my aunt Wight's, and invited her and my
uncle to supper, and so home, and by and by they came, and we eat a brave
barrel of oysters Mr. Povy sent me this morning, and very merry at supper,
and so to prayers and to bed.  Last night it seems my aunt Wight did send
my wife a new scarfe, laced, as a token for her many givings to her.  It
is true now and then we give them some toys, as oranges, &c., but my aime
is to get myself something more from my uncle's favour than this.

19th.  Up, my wife and I having a little anger about her woman already,
she thinking that I take too much care of her at table to mind her (my
wife) of cutting for her, but it soon over, and so up and with Sir W.
Batten and Sir W. Pen to St. James's, and there did our business with the
Duke, and thence homeward straight, calling at the Coffee-house, and there
had very good discourse with Sir----Blunt and Dr. Whistler about Egypt and
other things.  So home to dinner, my wife having put on to-day her winter
new suit of moyre, which is handsome, and so after dinner I did give her
L15 to lay out in linen and necessaries for the house and to buy a suit
for Pall, and I myself to White Hall to a Tangier Committee, where
Colonell Reames hath brought us so full and methodical an account of all
matters there, that I never have nor hope to see the like of any publique
business while I live again.  The Committee up, I to Westminster to
Jervas's, and spoke with Jane; who I find cold and not so desirous of a
meeting as before, and it is no matter, I shall be the freer from the
inconvenience that might follow thereof, besides offending God Almighty
and neglecting my business.  So by coach home and to my office, where
late, and so to supper and to bed.  I met with Dr. Pierce to-day, who,
speaking of Dr. Frazier's being so earnest to have such a one (one
Collins) go chyrurgeon to the Prince's person will have him go in his
terms and with so much money put into his hands, he tells me (when I was
wondering that Frazier should order things with the Prince in that
confident manner) that Frazier is so great with my Lady Castlemayne, and
Stewart, and all the ladies at Court, in helping to slip their calfes when
there is occasion, and with the great men in curing of their claps that he
can do what he please with the King, in spite of any man, and upon the
same score with the Prince; they all having more or less occasion to make
use of him.  Sir G. Carteret tells me this afternoon that the Dutch are
not yet ready to set out; and by that means do lose a good wind which
would carry them out and keep us in, and moreover he says that they begin
to boggle in the business, and he thinks may offer terms of peace for all
this, and seems to argue that it will be well for the King too, and I pray
God send it.  Colonell Reames did, among other things, this day tell me
how it is clear that, if my Lord Tiviott had lived, he would have quite
undone Tangier, or designed himself to be master of it.  He did put the
King upon most great, chargeable, and unnecessary works there, and took
the course industriously to deter, all other merchants but himself to deal
there, and to make both King and all others pay what he pleased for all
that was brought thither.

20th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, at noon to the
'Change, and there met by appointment with Captain Poyntz, who hath some
place, or title to a place, belonging to gameing, and so I discoursed with
him about the business of our improving of the Lotterys, to the King's
benefit, and that of the Fishery, and had some light from him in the
business, and shall, he says, have more in writing from him.  So home to
dinner and then abroad to the Fishing Committee at Fishmongers' Hall, and
there sat and did some business considerable, and so up and home, and
there late at my office doing much business, and I find with great delight
that I am come to my good temper of business again.  God continue me in
it.  So home to supper, it being washing day, and to bed.

21st.  Up, and by coach to Mr. Povy's, and there got him to signe the
payment of Captain Tayler's bills for the remainder of freight for the
Eagle, wherein I shall be gainer about L30, thence with him to Westminster
by coach to Houseman's [Huysman] the great picture drawer, and saw again
very fine pictures, and have his promise, for Mr. Povy's sake, to take
pains in what picture I shall set him about, and I think to have my
wife's.  But it is a strange thing to observe and fit for me to remember
that I am at no time so unwilling to part with money as when I am
concerned in the getting of it most, as I thank God of late I have got
more in this month, viz. near 0250, than ever I did in half a year before
in my life, I think.  Thence to White Hall with him, and so walked to the
old Exchange and back to Povy's to dinner, where great and good company;
among others Sir John Skeffington, whom I knew at Magdalen College, a
fellow-commoner, my fellow-pupil, but one with whom I had no great
acquaintance, he being then, God knows, much above me.  Here I was afresh
delighted with Mr. Povy's house and pictures of perspective, being strange
things to think how they do delude one's eye, that methinks it would make
a man doubtful of swearing that ever he saw any thing.  Thence with him to
St. James's, and so to White Hall to a Tangier Committee, and hope I have
light of another opportunity of getting a little money if Sir W. Warren
will use me kindly for deales to Tangier, and with the hopes went joyfully
home, and there received Captain Tayler's money, received by Will to-day,
out of which (as I said above) I shall get above L30. So with great
comfort to bed, after supper.  By discourse this day I have great hopes
from Mr. Coventry that the Dutch and we shall not fall out.

22nd.  Up and at the office all the morning.  To the 'Change at noon, and
among other things discoursed with Sir William Warren what I might do to
get a little money by carrying of deales to Tangier, and told him the
opportunity I have there of doing it, and he did give me some advice,
though not so good as he would have done at any other time of the year,
but such as I hope to make good use of, and get a little money by.  So to
Sir G. Carteret's to dinner, and he and I and Captain Cocke all alone, and
good discourse, and thence to a Committee of Tangier at White Hall, and so
home, where I found my wife not well, and she tells me she thinks she is
with child, but I neither believe nor desire it.  But God's will be done!
So to my office late, and home to supper and to bed; having got a strange
cold in my head, by flinging off my hat at dinner, and sitting with the
wind in my neck.

     [In Lord Clarendon's Essay, "On the decay of respect paid to Age,"
     he says that in his younger days he never kept his hat on before
     those older than himself, except at dinner.--B.]

23rd.  My cold and pain in my head increasing, and the palate of my mouth
falling, I was in great pain all night.  My wife also was not well, so
that a mayd was fain to sit up by her all night.  Lay long in the morning,
at last up, and amongst others comes Mr. Fuller, that was the wit of
Cambridge, and Praevaricator

     [At the Commencement (Comitia Majora) in July, the Praevaricator, or
     Varier, held a similar position to the Tripos at the Comitia Minora.
     He was so named from varying the question which he proposed, either
     by a play upon the words or by the transposition of the terms in
     which it was expressed.  Under the pretence of maintaining some
     philosophical question, he poured out a medley of absurd jokes and
     'personal ridicule, which gradually led to the abolition of the
     office.  In Thoresby's "Diary" we read, "Tuesday, July 6th.  The
     Praevaricator's speech was smart and ingenious, attended with
     vollies of hurras" (see Wordsworth's "University Life in the
     Eighteenth Century ").--M. B.]

in my time, and staid all the morning with me discoursing, and his
business to get a man discharged, which I did do for him.  Dined with
little heart at noon, in the afternoon against my will to the office,
where Sir G. Carteret and we met about an order of the Council for the
hiring him a house, giving him L1000 fine, and L70 per annum for it. Here
Sir J. Minnes took occasion, in the most childish and most unbeseeming
manner, to reproach us all, but most himself, that he was not valued as
Comptroller among us, nor did anything but only set his hand to paper,
which is but too true; and every body had a palace, and he no house to lie
in, and wished he had but as much to build him a house with, as we have
laid out in carved worke.  It was to no end to oppose, but all bore it,
and after laughed at him for it.  So home, and late reading "The Siege of
Rhodes" to my wife, and then to bed, my head being in great pain and my
palate still down.

24th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning busy, then home to
dinner, and so after dinner comes one Phillips, who is concerned in the
Lottery, and from him I collected much concerning that business.  I
carried him in my way to White Hall and set him down at Somersett House.
Among other things he told me that Monsieur Du Puy, that is so great a man
at the Duke of Yorke's, and this man's great opponent, is a knave and by
quality but a tailor.  To the Tangier Committee, and there I opposed
Colonell Legg's estimate of supplies of provisions to be sent to Tangier
till all were ashamed of it, and he fain after all his good husbandry and
seeming ignorance and joy to have the King's money saved, yet afterwards
he discovered all his design to be to keep the furnishing of these things
to the officers of the Ordnance, but Mr. Coventry seconded me, and between
us we shall save the King some money in the year.  In one business of
deales in L520, I offer to save L172, and yet purpose getting money, to
myself by it.  So home and to my office, and business being done home to
supper and so to bed, my head and throat being still out of order
mightily.  This night Prior of Brampton came and paid me L40, and I find
this poor painful man is the only thriving and purchasing man in the town
almost.  We were told to-day of a Dutch ship of 3 or 400 tons, where all
the men were dead of the plague, and the ship cast ashore at Gottenburgh.

25th (Lord's day).  Up, and my throat being yet very sore, and, my head
out of order, we went not to church, but I spent all the morning reading
of "The Madd Lovers,"  a very good play, and at noon comes Harman and his
wife, whom I sent for to meet the Joyces, but they came not.  It seems
Will has got a fall off his horse and broke his face.  However, we were as
merry as I could in their company, and we had a good chine of beef, but I
had no taste nor stomach through my cold, and therefore little pleased
with my dinner.  It raining, they sat talking with us all the afternoon.
So anon they went away; and then I to read another play, "The Custome of
the Country," which is a very poor one, methinks.  Then to supper,
prayers, and bed.

26th.  Up pretty well again, but my mouth very scabby, my cold being going
away, so that I was forced to wear a great black patch, but that would not
do much good, but it happens we did not go to the Duke to-day, and so I
staid at home busy all the morning.  At noon, after dinner, to the
'Change, and thence home to my office again, where busy, well employed
till 10 at night, and so home to supper and to bed, my mind a little
troubled that I have not of late kept up myself so briske in business; but
mind my ease a little too much and my family upon the coming of Mercer and
Tom.  So that I have not kept company, nor appeared very active with Mr.
Coventry, but now I resolve to settle to it again, not that I have idled
all my time, but as to my ease something.  So I have looked a little too
much after Tangier and the Fishery, and that in the sight of Mr. Coventry,
but I have good reason to love myself for serving Tangier, for it is one
of the best flowers in my garden.

27th.  Lay long, sleeping, it raining and blowing very hard.  Then up and
to the office, my mouth still being scabby and a patch on it.  At the
office all the morning.  At noon dined at home, and so after dinner
(Lewellin dining with me and in my way talking about Deering) to the
Fishing Committee, and had there very many fine things argued, and I hope
some good will cone of it.  So home, where my wife having (after all her
merry discourse of being with child) her months upon her is gone to bed. I
to my office very late doing business, then home to supper and to bed.
To-night Mr. T. Trice and Piggot came to see me, and desire my going down
to Brampton Court, where for Piggot's sake, for whom it is necessary, I
should go, I would be glad to go, and will, contrary to my purpose,
endeavour it, but having now almost L1000, if not above, in my house, I
know not what to do with it, and that will trouble my mind to leave in the
house, and I not at home.

28th.  Up and by water with Mr. Tucker down to Woolwich, first to do
several businesses of the King's, then on board Captain Fisher's ship,
which we hire to carry goods to Tangier.  All the way going and coming I
reading and discoursing over some papers of his which he, poor man, having
some experience, but greater conceit of it than is fit, did at the King's
first coming over make proposals of, ordering in a new manner the whole
revenue of the kingdom, but, God knows, a most weak thing; however, one
paper I keep wherein he do state the main branches of the publick revenue
fit to consider and remember.  So home, very cold, and fearfull of having
got some pain, but, thanks be to God!  I was well after it.  So to dinner,
and after dinner by coach to White Hall, thinking to have met at a
Committee of Tangier, but nobody being there but my Lord Rutherford, he
would needs carry me and another Scotch Lord to a play, and so we saw,
coming late, part of "The Generall," my Lord Orrery's (Broghill) second
play; but, Lord! to see how no more either in words, sense, or design, it
is to his "Harry the 5th" is not imaginable, and so poorly acted, though
in finer clothes, is strange.  And here I must confess breach of a vowe in
appearance, but I not desiring it, but against my will, and my oathe being
to go neither at my own charge nor at another's, as I had done by becoming
liable to give them another, as I am to Sir W. Pen and Mr. Creed; but here
I neither know which of them paid for me, nor, if I did, am I obliged ever
to return the like, or did it by desire or with any willingness.  So that
with a safe conscience I do think my oathe is not broke and judge God
Almighty will not think it other wise.  Thence to W. Joyce's, and there
found my aunt and cozen Mary come home from my father's with great
pleasure and content, and thence to Kate's and found her also mighty
pleased with her journey and their good usage of them, and so home,
troubled in my conscience at my being at a play.  But at home I found
Mercer playing on her Vyall, which is a pretty instrument, and so I to the
Vyall and singing till late, and so to bed.  My mind at a great losse how
to go down to Brampton this weeke, to satisfy Piggott; but what with the
fears of my house, my money, my wife, and my office, I know not how in the
world to think of it, Tom Hater being out of towne, and I having near
L1000 in my house.

29th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning, dined at home and
Creed with me; after dinner I to Sir G. Carteret, and with him to his new
house he is taking in Broad Streete, and there surveyed all the rooms and
bounds, in order to the drawing up a lease thereof; and that done, Mr.
Cutler, his landlord, took me up and down, and showed me all his ground
and house, which is extraordinary great, he having bought all the
Augustine Fryers, and many, many a L1000 he hath and will bury there. So
home to my business, clearing my papers and preparing my accounts against
tomorrow for a monthly and a great auditt.  So to supper and to bed.
Fresh newes come of our beating the Dutch at Guinny quite out of all their
castles almost, which will make them quite mad here at home sure.  And Sir
G. Carteret did tell me, that the King do joy mightily at it; but asked
him laughing, "But," says he, "how shall I do to answer this to the
Embassador when he comes?"  Nay they say that we have beat them out of the
New Netherlands too;

     [Captain (afterwards Sir Robert) Holmes' expedition to attack the
     Dutch settlements in Africa eventuated in an important exploit.
     Holmes suddenly left the coast of Africa, sailed across the
     Atlantic, and reduced the Dutch settlement of New Netherlands to
     English rule, under the title of New York.  "The short and true
     state of the matter is this: the country mentioned was part of the
     province of Virginia, and, as there is no settling an extensive
     country at once, a few Swedes crept in there, who surrendered the
     plantations they could not defend to the Dutch, who, having bought
     the charts and papers of one Hudson, a seaman, who, by the
     commission from the crown of England, discovered a river, to which
     he gave his name, conceited they had purchased a province.
     Sometimes, when we had strength in those parts, they were English
     subjects; at others, when that strength declined, they were subjects
     of the United Provinces.  However, upon King Charles's claim the
     States disowned the title, but resumed it during our confusions.  On
     March 12th, 1663-64, Charles II. granted it to the Duke of York
     .  .  . The King sent Holmes, when he returned, to the Tower, and did
     not discharge him; till he made it evidently appear that he had not
     infringed the law of nations ".  (Campbell's "Naval History," vol.
     ii, p., 89).  How little did the King or Holmes himself foresee
     the effects of the capture,--B.]

so that we have been doing them mischief for a great while in several
parts of the world; without publique knowledge or reason.  Their fleete
for Guinny is now, they say, ready, and abroad, and will be going this
week.  Coming home to-night, I did go to examine my wife's house accounts,
and finding things that seemed somewhat doubtful, I was angry though she
did make it pretty plain, but confessed that when she do misse a sum, she
do add something to other things to make it, and, upon my being very
angry, she do protest she will here lay up something for herself to buy
her a necklace with, which madded me and do still trouble me, for I fear
she will forget by degrees the way of living cheap and under a sense of
want.

30th.  Up, and all day, both morning and afternoon, at my accounts, it
being a great month, both for profit and layings out, the last being L89
for kitchen and clothes for myself and wife, and a few extraordinaries for
the house; and my profits, besides salary, L239; so that I have this
weeke, notwithstanding great layings out, and preparations for laying out,
which I make as paid this month, my balance to come to L1203, for which
the Lord's name be praised!  Dined at home at noon, staying long looking
for Kate Joyce and my aunt James and Mary, but they came not.  So my wife
abroad to see them, and took Mary Joyce to a play.  Then in the evening
came and sat working by me at the office, and late home to supper and to
bed, with my heart in good rest for this day's work, though troubled to
think that my last month's negligence besides the making me neglect
business and spend money, and lessen myself both as to business and the
world and myself, I am fain to preserve my vowe by paying 20s. dry--[ Dry
= hard, as "hard cash." ]--money into the poor's box, because I had not
fulfilled all my memorandums and paid all my petty debts and received all
my petty credits, of the last month, but I trust in God I shall do so no
more.

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     All the men were dead of the plague, and the ship cast ashore
     And with the great men in curing of their claps
     Expressly taking care that nobody might see this business done
     Having some experience, but greater conceit of it than is fit
     Helping to slip their calfes when there is occasion
     Her months upon her is gone to bed
     I had agreed with Jane Welsh, but she came not, which vexed me
     Lay long caressing my wife and talking
     Let her brew as she has baked
     New Netherlands to English rule, under the title of New York
     Reduced the Dutch settlement of New Netherlands to English rule
     Staid two hours with her kissing her, but nothing more
     Strange slavery that I stand in to beauty
     Thinks she is with child, but I neither believe nor desire it
     Up, my mind very light from my last night's accounts
     We do nothing in this office like people able to carry on a warr
     Would either conform, or be more wise, and not be catched!


                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                  AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                         DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                           OCTOBER & NOVEMBER
                                  1664

October 1st.  Up and at the office both forenoon and afternoon very busy,
and with great pleasure in being so.  This morning Mrs. Lane (now Martin)
like a foolish woman, came to the Horseshoe hard by, and sent for me while
I was: at the office; to come to speak with her by a note sealed up, I
know to get me to do something for her husband, but I sent her an answer
that I would see her at Westminster, and so I did not go, and she went
away, poor soul.  At night home to supper, weary, and my eyes sore with
writing and reading, and to bed.  We go now on with great vigour in
preparing against the Dutch, who, they say, will now fall upon us without
doubt upon this high newes come of our beating them so, wholly in Guinny.

2nd (Lord's day).  My wife not being well to go to church I walked with my
boy through the City, putting in at several churches, among others at
Bishopsgate, and there saw the picture usually put before the King's book,
put up in the church, but very ill painted, though it were a pretty piece
to set up in a church.  I intended to have seen the Quakers, who, they
say, do meet every Lord's day at the Mouth at Bishopsgate; but I could see
none stirring, nor was it fit to aske for the place, so I walked over
Moorefields, and thence to Clerkenwell church, and there, as I wished, sat
next pew to the fair Butler, who indeed is a most perfect beauty still;
and one I do very much admire myself for my choice of her for a beauty,
she having the best lower part of her face that ever I saw all days of my
life.  After church I walked to my Lady Sandwich's, through my Lord
Southampton's new buildings in the fields behind Gray's Inn; and, indeed,
they are a very great and a noble work.  So I dined with my Lady, and the
same innocent discourse that we used to have, only after dinner, being
alone, she asked me my opinion about Creed, whether he would have a wife
or no, and what he was worth, and proposed Mrs. Wright for him, which, she
says, she heard he was once inquiring after.  She desired I would take a
good time and manner of proposing it, and I said I would, though I
believed he would love nothing but money, and much was not to be expected
there, she said.  So away back to Clerkenwell Church, thinking to have got
sight of la belle Boteler again, but failed, and so after church walked
all over the fields home, and there my wife was angry with me for not
coming home, and for gadding abroad to look after beauties, she told me
plainly, so I made all peace, and to supper.  This evening came Mrs. Lane
(now Martin) with her husband to desire my helpe about a place for him.
It seems poor Mr. Daniel is dead of the Victualling Office, a place too
good for this puppy to follow him in.  But I did give him the best words I
could, and so after drinking a glasse of wine sent them going, but with
great kindnesse.  Go to supper, prayers, and to bed.

3rd.  Up with Sir J. Minnes, by coach, to St. James's; and there all the
newes now of very hot preparations for the Dutch: and being with the Duke,
he told us he was resolved to make a tripp himself, and that Sir W. Pen
should go in the same ship with him.  Which honour, God forgive me! I
could grudge him, for his knavery and dissimulation, though I do not envy
much the having the same place myself.  Talke also of great haste in the
getting out another fleete, and building some ships; and now it is likely
we have put one another by each other's dalliance past a retreate. Thence
with our heads full of business we broke up, and I to my barber's, and
there only saw Jane and stroked her under the chin, and away to the
Exchange, and there long about several businesses, hoping to get money by
them, and thence home to dinner and there found Hawly. But meeting
Bagwell's wife at the office before I went home I took her into the office
and there kissed her only.  She rebuked me for doing it, saying that did I
do so much to many bodies else it would be a stain to me.  But I do not
see but she takes it well enough, though in the main I believe she is very
honest. So after some kind discourse we parted, and I home to dinner, and
after dinner down to Deptford, where I found Mr. Coventry, and there we
made, an experiment of Holland's and our cordage, and ours outdid it a
great deale, as my book of observations tells particularly. Here we were
late, and so home together by water, and I to my office, where late,
putting things in order.  Mr. Bland came this night to me to take his
leave of me, he going to Tangier, wherein I wish him good successe.  So
home to supper and to bed, my mind troubled at the businesses I have to
do, that I cannot mind them as I ought to do and get money, and more that
I have neglected my frequenting and seeming more busy publicly than I have
done of late in this hurry of business, but there is time left to recover
it, and I trust in God I shall.

4th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and this morning
Sir W. Pen went to Chatham to look: after the ships now going out thence,
and particularly that wherein the Duke and himself go.  He took Sir G.
Ascue with: him, whom, I believe, he hath brought into play.  At noon to
the 'Change and thence home, where I found my aunt James and the two she
joyces.  They dined and were merry with us.  Thence after dinner to a
play, to see "The Generall;" which is so dull and so ill-acted, that I
think it is the worst.  I ever saw or heard in all my days.  I happened to
sit near; to Sir Charles Sidly; who I find a very witty man, and he did at
every line take notice of the dullness of the poet and badness of the
action, that most pertinently; which I was mightily taken with; and among
others where by Altemire's command Clarimont, the Generall, is commanded
to rescue his Rivall, whom she loved, Lucidor, he, after a great deal of
demurre, broke out; "Well, I'le save my Rivall and make her confess, that
I deserve, while he do but possesse."  "Why, what, pox," says Sir Charles
Sydly, "would he have him have more, or what is there more to be had of a
woman than the possessing her?"  Thence-setting all them at home, I home
with my wife and Mercer, vexed at my losing my time and above 20s. in
money, and neglecting my business to see so bad a play. To-morrow they
told us should be acted, or the day after, a new play, called "The
Parson's Dreame," acted all by women.  So to my office, and there did
business; and so home to supper and to bed.

5th.  Up betimes and to my office, and thence by coach to New Bridewell to
meet with Mr. Poyntz to discourse with him (being Master of the Workhouse
there) about making of Bewpers for us.  But he was not within; however his
clerke did lead me up and down through all the house, and there I did with
great pleasure see the many pretty works, and the little children
employed, every one to do something, which was a very fine sight, and
worthy encouragement.  I cast away a crowne among them, and so to the
'Change and among the Linnen Wholesale Drapers to enquire about Callicos,
to see what can be done with them for the supplying our want of Bewpers
for flaggs, and I think I shall do something therein to good purpose for
the King.  So to the Coffeehouse, and there fell in discourse with the
Secretary of the Virtuosi of Gresham College, and had very fine discourse
with him.  He tells me of a new invented instrument to be tried before the
College anon, and I intend to see it.  So to Trinity House, and there I
dined among the old dull fellows, and so home and to my office a while,
and then comes Mr. Cocker to see me, and I discoursed with him about his
writing and ability of sight, and how I shall do to get some glasse or
other to helpe my eyes by candlelight; and he tells me he will bring me
the helps he hath within a day or two, and shew me what he do.  Thence to
the Musique-meeting at the Postoffice, where I was once before.  And
thither anon come all the Gresham College, and a great deal of noble
company: and the new instrument was brought called the Arched Viall,

     ["There seems to be a curious fate reigning over the instruments
     which have the word 'arch' prefixed to their name.  They have no
     vitality, and somehow or other come to grief.  Even the famous
     archlute, which was still a living thing in the time of Handel, has
     now disappeared from the concert room and joined Mr. Pepys's 'Arched
     Viall' in the limbo of things forgotten .  .  .  .  Mr. Pepys's
     verdict that it would never do .  .  .  has been fully confirmed by
     the event, as his predictions usually were, being indeed always
     founded on calm judgment and close observation."--B. (Hueffer's
     Italian and other Studies, 1883, p.  263).]

where being tuned with lute-strings, and played on with kees like an
organ, a piece of parchment is always kept moving; and the strings, which
by the kees are pressed down upon it, are grated in imitation of a bow, by
the parchment; and so it is intended to resemble several vyalls played on
with one bow, but so basely and harshly, that it will never do.  But after
three hours' stay it could not be fixed in tune; and so they were fain to
go to some other musique of instruments, which I am grown quite out of
love with, and so I, after some good discourse with Mr. Spong, Hill,
Grant, and Dr. Whistler, and others by turns, I home to my office and
there late, and so home, where I understand my wife has spoke to Jane and
ended matters of difference between her and her, and she stays with us,
which I am glad of; for her fault is nothing but sleepiness and
forgetfulness, otherwise a good-natured, quiet, well-meaning, honest
servant, and one that will do as she is bid, so one called upon her and
will see her do it.  This morning, by three o'clock, the
Prince--[Rupert]--and King, and Duke with him, went down the River, and
the Prince under sail the next tide after, and so is gone from the Hope.
God give him better successe than he used to have!  This day Mr. Bland
went away hence towards his voyage to Tangier.  This day also I had a
letter from an unknown hand that tells me that Jacke Angier, he believes,
is dead at Lisbon, for he left him there ill.

6th.  Up and to the office, where busy all the morning, among other things
about this of the flags and my bringing in of callicos to oppose Young and
Whistler.  At noon by promise Mr. Pierce and his wife and Madam Clerke and
her niece came and dined with me to a rare chine of beefe and spent the
afternoon very pleasantly all the afternoon, and then to my office in the
evening, they being gone, and late at business, and then home to supper
and to bed, my mind coming to itself in following of my business.

7th.  Lay pretty while with some discontent abed, even to the having bad
words with my wife, and blows too, about the ill-serving up of our
victuals yesterday; but all ended in love, and so I rose and to my office
busy all the morning.  At noon dined at home, and then to my office again,
and then abroad to look after callicos for flags, and hope to get a small
matter by my pains therein and yet save the King a great deal of money,
and so home to my office, and there came Mr. Cocker, and brought me a
globe of glasse, and a frame of oyled paper, as I desired, to show me the
manner of his gaining light to grave by, and to lessen the glaringnesse of
it at pleasure by an oyled paper.  This I bought of him, giving him a
crowne for it; and so, well satisfied, he went away, and I to my business
again, and so home to supper, prayers, and to bed.

8th.  All the morning at the office, and after dinner abroad, and among
other things contracted with one Mr. Bridges, at the White Bear on
Cornhill, for 100 pieces of Callico to make flaggs; and as I know I shall
save the King money, so I hope to get a little for my pains and venture of
my own money myself.  Late in the evening doing business, and then comes
Captain Tayler, and he and I till 12 o'clock at night arguing about the
freight of his ship Eagle, hired formerly by me to Tangier, and at last we
made an end, and I hope to get a little money, some small matter by it.
So home to bed, being weary and cold, but contented that I have made an
end of that business.

9th (Lord's day).  Lay pretty long, but however up time enough with my
wife to go to church.  Then home to dinner, and Mr. Fuller, my Cambridge
acquaintance, coming to me about what he was with me lately, to release a
waterman, he told me he was to preach at Barking Church; and so I to heare
him, and he preached well and neatly.  Thence, it being time enough, to
our owne church, and there staid wholly privately at the great doore to
gaze upon a pretty lady, and from church dogged her home, whither she went
to a house near Tower hill, and I think her to be one of the prettiest
women I ever saw.  So home, and at my office a while busy, then to my
uncle Wight's, whither it seems my wife went after sermon and there
supped, but my aunt and uncle in a very ill humour one with another, but I
made shift with much ado to keep them from scolding, and so after supper
home and to bed without prayers, it being cold, and to-morrow washing day.

10th.  Up and, it being rainy, in Sir W. Pen's coach to St. James's, and
there did our usual business with the Duke, and more and more preparations
every day appear against the Dutch, and (which I must confess do a little
move my envy) Sir W. Pen do grow every day more and more regarded by the
Duke,

     ["The duke had decided that the English fleet should consist of
     three  squadrons to be commanded by himself, Prince Rupert, and Lord
     Sandwich, from which arrangement the two last, who were land
     admirals; had concluded that Penn would have no concern in this
     fleet.  Neither the duke, Rupert, nor Sandwich had ever been engaged
     in an encounter of fleets .  .  .  .  Penn alone of the four was
     familiar with all these things.  By the duke's unexpected
     announcement that he should take Penn with him into his own  ship,
     Rupert and Sandwich at once discovered that they would be really and
     practically under Penn's command in everything."]

because of his service heretofore in the Dutch warr which I am confident
is by some strong obligations he hath laid upon Mr. Coventry; for Mr.
Coventry must needs know that he is a man of very mean parts, but only a
bred seaman: Going home in coach with Sir W. Batten he told me how Sir J.
Minnes by the means of Sir R. Ford was the last night brought to his house
and did discover the reason of his so long discontent with him, and now
they are friends again, which I am sorry for, but he told it me so plainly
that I see there is no thorough understanding between them, nor love, and
so I hope there will be no great combination in any thing, nor do I see
Sir J. Minnes very fond as he used to be.  But: Sir W. Batten do raffle
still against Mr. Turner and his wife, telling me he is a false fellow,
and his wife a false woman, and has rotten teeth and false, set in with
wire, and as I know they are so, so I am glad he finds it so.  To the
Coffee-house, and thence to the 'Change, and therewith Sir W. Warren to
the Coffee-house behind the 'Change, and sat alone with him till 4 o'clock
talking of his businesses first and then of business in general, and
discourse how I might get money and how to carry myself to advantage to
contract no envy and yet make the world see my pains; which was with great
content to me, and a good friend and helpe I am like to find him, for
which God be thanked!  So home to dinner at 4 o'clock, and then to the
office, and there late, and so home to supper and to bed, having sat up
till past twelve at night to look over the account of the collections for
the Fishery, and the loose and base manner that monies so collected are
disposed of in, would make a man never part with a penny in that manner,
and, above all, the inconvenience of having a great man, though never so
seeming pious as my Lord Pembroke is.  He is too great to be called to an
account, and is abused by his servants, and yet obliged to defend them for
his owne sake.  This day, by the blessing of God, my wife and I have been
married nine years: but my head being full of business, I did not think of
it to keep it in any extraordinary manner.  But bless God for our long
lives and loves and health together, which the same God long continue, I
wish, from my very heart!

11th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning.  My wife this
morning went, being invited, to my Lady Sandwich, and I alone at home at
dinner, till by and by Luellin comes and dines with me.  He tells me what
a bawdy loose play this "Parson's Wedding" is, that is acted by nothing
but women at the King's house, and I am glad of it.  Thence to the Fishery
in Thames Street, and there several good discourses about the letting of
the Lotterys, and, among others, one Sir Thomas Clifford, whom yet I knew
not, do speak very well and neatly.  Thence I to my cozen Will Joyce to
get him to go to Brampton with me this week, but I think he will not, and
I am not a whit sorry for it, for his company both chargeable and
troublesome.  So home and to my office, and then to supper and then to my
office again till late, and so home, with my head and heart full of
business, and so to bed.  My wife tells me the sad news of my Lady
Castlemayne's being now become so decayed, that one would not know her; at
least far from a beauty, which I am sorry for.  This day with great joy
Captain Titus told us the particulars of the French's expedition against
Gigery upon the Barbary Coast, in the Straights, with 6,000 chosen men.
They have taken the Fort of Gigery, wherein were five men and three guns,
which makes the whole story of the King of France's policy and power to be
laughed at.

12th.  This morning all the morning at my office ordering things against
my journey to-morrow.  At noon to the Coffeehouse, where very good
discourse.  For newes, all say De Ruyter is gone to Guinny before us. Sir
J. Lawson is come to Portsmouth; and our fleete is hastening all speed: I
mean this new fleete. Prince Rupert with his is got into the Downes.  At
home dined with me W. Joyce and a friend of his.  W. Joyce will go with me
to Brampton.  After dinner I out to Mr. Bridges, the linnen draper, and
evened with (him) for 100 pieces of callico, and did give him L208 18s.,
which I now trust the King for, but hope both to save the King money and
to get a little by it to boot.  Thence by water up and down all the timber
yards to look out some Dram timber, but can find none for our turne at the
price I would have; and so I home, and there at my office late doing
business against my journey to clear my hands of every thing for two days.
So home and to supper and bed.

13th.  After being at the office all the morning, I home and dined, and
taking leave of my wife with my mind not a little troubled how she would
look after herself or house in my absence, especially, too, leaving a
considerable sum of money in the office, I by coach to the Red Lyon in
Aldersgate Street, and there, by agreement, met W. Joyce and Tom Trice,
and mounted, I upon a very fine mare that Sir W. Warren helps me to, and
so very merrily rode till it was very darke, I leading the way through the
darke to Welling, and there, not being very weary, to supper and to bed.
But very bad accommodation at the Swan.  In this day's journey I met with
Mr. White, Cromwell's chaplin that was, and had a great deale of discourse
with him.  Among others, he tells me that Richard is, and hath long been,
in France, and is now going into Italy.  He owns publiquely that he do
correspond, and return him all his money.  That Richard hath been in some
straits at the beginning; but relieved by his friends.  That he goes by
another name, but do not disguise himself, nor deny himself to any man
that challenges him.  He tells me, for certain, that offers had been made
to the old man, of marriage between the King and his daughter, to have
obliged him, but he would not.

     [The Protector wished the Duke of Buckingham to marry his daughter
     Frances.  She married, 1. Robert Rich, grandson and heir to Robert,
     Earl of Warwick, on November 11th, 1657, who died in the following
     February;  2. Sir John Russell, Bart.  She died January 27th,
     1721-22, aged eighty-four. In T. Morrice's life of Roger, Earl of
     Orrery, prefixed to Orrery's "State Letters" (Dublin, 1743, vol.
     i., p. 40), there is a circumstantial account of an interview
     between Orrery (then Lord Broghill) and Cromwell, in which the
     former suggested to the latter that Charles II. should marry Frances
     Cromwell.  Cromwell gave great attention to the reasons urged, "but
     walking two or three turns, and pondering with himself, he told Lord
     Broghill the king would never forgive him the death of his father.
     His lordship desired him to employ somebody to sound the king in
     this matter, to see how he would take it, and offered himself to
     mediate in it for him. But Cromwell would not consent, but again
     repeated, 'The king cannot and will not forgive the death of his
     father;' and so he left his lordship, who durst not tell him he had
     already dealt with his majesty in that affair.  Upon this my lord
     withdrew, and meeting Cromwell's wife and daughter, they inquired
     how he had succeeded; of which having given them an account, he
     added they must try their interest in him, but none could prevail."]

He thinks (with me) that it never was in his power to bring in the King
with the consent of any of his officers about him; and that he scorned to
bring him in as Monk did, to secure himself and deliver every body else.
When I told him of what I found writ in a French book of one Monsieur
Sorbiere, that gives an account of his observations herein England; among
other things he says, that it is reported that Cromwell did, in his
life-time, transpose many of the bodies of the Kings of England from one
grave to another, and that by that means it is not known certainly whether
the head that is now set up upon a post be that of Cromwell, or of one of
the Kings; Mr. White tells me that he believes he never had so poor a low
thought in him to trouble himself about it.  He says the hand of God is
much to be seen; that all his children are in good condition enough as to
estate, and that their relations that betrayed their family are all now
either hanged or very miserable.

14th.  Up by break of day, and got to Brampton by three o'clock, where my
father and mother overjoyed to see me, my mother, ready to weepe every
time she looked upon me.  After dinner my father and I to the Court, and
there did all our business to my mind, as I have set down in a paper
particularly expressing our proceedings at this court.  So home, where W.
Joyce full of talk and pleased with his journey, and after supper I to bed
and left my father, mother, and him laughing.

15th.  My father and I up and walked alone to Hinchingbroke; and among the
other late chargeable works that my Lord hath done there, we saw his
water-works and the Oral which is very fine; and so is the house all over,
but I am sorry to think of the money at this time spent therein. Back to
my father's (Mr. Sheply being out of town) and there breakfasted, after
making an end with Barton about his businesses, and then my mother called
me into the garden, and there but all to no purpose desiring me to be
friends with John, but I told her I cannot, nor indeed easily shall, which
afflicted the poor woman, but I cannot help it.  Then taking leave, W.
Joyce and I set out, calling T. Trice at Bugden, and thence got by night
to Stevenage, and there mighty merry, though I in bed more weary than the
other two days, which, I think, proceeded from our galloping so much, my
other weariness being almost all over; but I find that a coney skin in my
breeches preserves me perfectly from galling, and that eating after I come
to my Inne, without drinking, do keep me from being stomach sick, which
drink do presently make me.  We lay all in several beds in the same room,
and W. Joyce full of his impertinent tricks and talk, which then made us
merry, as any other fool would have done.  So to sleep.

16th (Lord's day).  It raining, we set out, and about nine o'clock got to
Hatfield in church-time; and I 'light and saw my simple Lord Salsbury sit
there in his gallery.  Staid not in the Church, but thence mounted again
and to Barnett by the end of sermon, and there dined at the Red Lyon very
weary again, but all my weariness yesterday night and to-day in my thighs
only, the rest of my weariness in my shoulders and arms being quite gone.
Thence home, parting company at my cozen Anth. Joyce's, by four o'clock,
weary, but very well, to bed at home, where I find all well.  Anon my wife
came to bed, but for my ease rose again and lay with her woman.

17th.  Rose very well and not weary, and with Sir W. Batten to St.
James's; there did our business.  I saw Sir J. Lawson since his return
from sea first this morning, and hear that my Lord Sandwich is come from
Portsmouth to town. Thence I to him, and finding him at my Lord Crew's, I
went with him home to his house and much kind discourse.  Thence my Lord
to Court, and I with Creed to the 'Change, and thence with Sir W. Warren
to a cook's shop and dined, discoursing and advising him about his great
contract he is to make tomorrow, and do every day receive great
satisfaction in his company, and a prospect of a just advantage by his
friendship.  Thence to my office doing some business, but it being very
cold, I, for fear of getting cold, went early home to bed, my wife not
being come home from my Lady Jemimah, with whom she hath been at a play
and at Court to-day.

18th.  Up and to the office, where among other things we made a very great
contract with Sir W. Warren for 3,000 loade of timber.  At noon dined at
home. In the afternoon to the Fishery, where, very confused and very
ridiculous, my Lord Craven's proceedings, especially his finding fault
with Sir J. Collaton and Colonell Griffin's' report in the accounts of the
lottery-men.  Thence I with Mr. Gray in his coach to White Hall, but the
King and Duke being abroad, we returned to Somersett House.  In discourse
I find him a very worthy and studious gentleman in the business of trade,
and among-other things he observed well to me, how it is not the greatest
wits, but the steady man, that is a good merchant: he instanced in Ford
and Cocke, the last of whom he values above all men as his oracle, as Mr.
Coventry do Mr. Jolliffe.  He says that it is concluded among merchants,
that where a trade hath once been and do decay, it never recovers again,
and therefore that the manufacture of cloath of England will never come to
esteem again; that, among other faults, Sir Richard Ford cannot keepe a
secret, and that it is so much the part of a merchant to be guilty of that
fault that the Duke of Yoke is resolved to commit no more secrets to the
merchants of the Royall Company; that Sir Ellis Layton is, for a speech of
forty words, the wittiest man that ever he knew in his life, but longer he
is nothing, his judgment being nothing at all, but his wit most absolute.
At Somersett House he carried me in, and there I saw the Queene's new
rooms, which are most stately and nobly furnished; and there I saw her,
and the Duke of Yorke and Duchesse were there.  The Duke espied me, and
came to me, and talked with me a very great while about our contract this
day with Sir W. Warren, and among other things did with some contempt ask
whether we did except Polliards, which Sir W. Batten did yesterday (in
spite, as the Duke I believe by my Lord Barkely do well enough know) among
other things in writing propose. Thence home by coach, it raining hard,
and to my office, where late, then home to supper and to bed.  This night
the Dutch Embassador desired and had an audience of the King.  What the
issue of it was I know not.  Both sides I believe desire peace, but
neither will begin, and so I believe a warr will follow.  The Prince is
with his fleet at Portsmouth, and the Dutch are making all preparations
for warr.

19th.  Up and to my office all the morning.  At noon dined at home; then
abroad by coach to buy for the office "Herne upon the Statute of
Charitable Uses," in order to the doing something better in the Chest than
we have done, for I am ashamed to see Sir W. Batten possess himself so
long of so much money as he hath done.  Coming home, weighed, my two
silver flaggons at Stevens's.  They weigh 212 oz. 27 dwt., which is about
L50, at 5s. per oz., and then they judge the fashion to be worth above 5s.
per oz. more--nay, some say 10s.  an ounce the fashion.  But I do not
believe, but yet am sorry to see that the fashion is worth so much, and
the silver come to no more.  So home and to my office, where very busy
late.  My wife at Mercer's mother's, I believe, W. Hewer with them, which
I do not like, that he should ask my leave to go about business, and then
to go and spend his time in sport, and leave me here busy.  To supper and
to bed, my wife coming in by and by, which though I know there was no hurt
in it; I do not like.

20th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning.  At noon my uncle
Thomas came, dined with me, and received some money of me.  Then I to my
office, where I took in with me Bagwell's wife, and there I caressed her,
and find her every day more and more coming with good words and promises
of getting her husband a place, which I will do.  So we parted, and I to
my Lord Sandwich at his lodgings, and after a little stay away with Mr.
Cholmely to Fleete Streete; in the way he telling me that Tangier is like
to be in a bad condition with this same Fitzgerald, he being a man of no
honour, nor presence, nor little honesty, and endeavours: to raise the
Irish and suppress the English interest there; and offend every body, and
do nothing that I hear of well, which I am sorry for. Thence home, by the
way taking two silver tumblers home, which I have bought, and so home, and
there late busy at my office, and then home to supper and to bed.

21st.  Up and by coach to Mr. Cole's, and there conferred with him about
some law business, and so to Sir W. Turner's, and there bought my cloth,
coloured, for a suit and cloake, to line with plush the cloak, which will
cost me money, but I find that I must go handsomely, whatever it costs me,
and the charge will be made up in the fruit it brings.  Thence to the
Coffee-house and 'Change, and so home to dinner, and then to the office
all the afternoon, whither comes W. Howe to see me, being come from, and
going presently back to sea with my Lord. Among other things he tells me
Mr. Creed is much out of favour with my Lord from his freedom of talke and
bold carriage, and other things with which my Lord is not pleased, but
most I doubt his not lending my Lord money, and Mr. Moore's reporting what
his answer was I doubt in the worst manner.  But, however, a very unworthy
rogue he is, and, therefore, let him go for one good for nothing, though
wise to the height above most men I converse with.  In the evening (W.
Howe being gone) comes Mr. Martin, to trouble me again to get him a
Lieutenant's place for which he is as fit as a foole can be. But I put him
off like an arse, as he is, and so setting my papers and books in order: I
home to supper and to bed.

22nd.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning.  At noon comes
my uncle Thomas and his daughter Mary about getting me to pay them the L30
due now, but payable in law to her husband.  I did give them the best
answer I could, and so parted, they not desiring to stay to dinner. After
dinner I down to Deptford, and there did business, and so back to my
office, where very late busy, and so home to supper and to bed.

23rd (Lord's day).  Up and to church.  At noon comes unexpected Mr.
Fuller, the minister, and dines with me, and also I had invited Mr. Cooper
with one I judge come from sea, and he and I spent the whole afternoon
together, he teaching me some things in understanding of plates.  At night
to the office, doing business, and then home to supper. Then a psalm, to
prayers, and to bed.

24th.  Up and in Sir J. Minnes' coach (alone with Mrs. Turner as far as
Paternoster Row, where I set her down) to St. James's, and there did our
business, and I had the good lucke to speak what pleased the Duke about
our great contract in hand with Sir W. Warren against Sir W. Batten,
wherein the Duke is very earnest for our contracting.  Thence home to the
office till noon, and then dined and to the 'Change and off with Sir W.
Warren for a while, consulting about managing his contract.  Thence to a
Committee at White Hall of Tangier, where I had the good lucke to speak
something to very good purpose about the Mole at Tangier, which was well
received even by Sir J. Lawson and Mr. Cholmely, the undertakers, against
whose interest I spoke; that I believe I shall be valued for it.  Thence
into the galleries to talk with my Lord Sandwich; among other things,
about the Prince's writing up to tell us of the danger he and his fleete
lie in at Portsmouth, of receiving affronts from the Dutch; which, my Lord
said, he would never have done, had he lain there with one ship alone: nor
is there any great reason for it, because of the sands. However, the
fleete will be ordered to go and lay themselves up at the Cowes. Much
beneath the prowesse of the Prince, I think, and the honour of the nation,
at the first to be found to secure themselves.  My Lord is well pleased to
think, that, if the Duke and the Prince go, all the blame of any
miscarriage will not light on him; and that if any thing goes well, he
hopes he shall have the share of the glory, for the Prince is by no means
well esteemed of by any body.  Thence home, and though not very well yet
up late about the Fishery business, wherein I hope to give an account how
I find the Collections to have been managed, which I did finish to my
great content, and so home to supper and to bed.  This day the great
O'Neale died; I believe, to the content of all the Protestant pretenders
in Ireland.

25th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and finished
Sir W. Warren's great contract for timber, with great content to me,
because just in the terms I wrote last night to Sir W. Warren and against
the terms proposed by Sir W. Batten.  At noon home to dinner, and there
found Creed and Hawley. After dinner comes in Mrs. Ingram, the first time
to make a visit to my wife. After a little stay I left them and to the
Committee of the Fishery, and there did make my report of the late public
collections for the Fishery, much to the satisfaction of the Committee,
and I think much to my reputation, for good notice was taken of it and
much it was commended.  So home, in my way taking care of a piece of plate
for Mr. Christopher Pett, against the launching of his new great ship
tomorrow at Woolwich, which I singly did move to His Royall Highness, and
did obtain it for him, to the value of twenty pieces.  And he, under his
hand, do acknowledge to me that he did never receive so great a kindness
from any man in the world as from me herein.  So to my office, and then to
supper, and then to my office again, where busy late, being very full now
a days of business to my great content, I thank God, and so home to bed,
my house being full of a design, to go to-morrow, my wife and all her
servants, to see the new ship launched.

26th.  Up, my people rising mighty betimes, to fit themselves to go by
water; and my boy, he could not sleep, but wakes about four o'clock, and
in bed lay playing on his lute till daylight, and, it seems, did the like
last night till twelve o'clock.  About eight o'clock, my wife, she and her
woman, and Besse and Jane, and W. Hewer and the boy, to the water-side,
and there took boat, and by and by I out of doors, to look after the
flaggon, to get it ready to carry to Woolwich.  That being not ready, I
stepped aside and found out Nellson, he that Whistler buys his bewpers of,
and did there buy 5 pieces at their price, and am in hopes thereby to
bring them down or buy ourselves all we spend of Nellson at the first
hand.  This jobb was greatly to my content, and by and by the flaggon
being finished at the burnisher's, I home, and there fitted myself, and
took a hackney-coach I hired, it being a very cold and foule day, to
Woolwich, all the way reading in a good book touching the fishery, and
that being done, in the book upon the statute of charitable uses, mightily
to my satisfaction.  At Woolwich; I there up to the King and Duke, and
they liked the plate well.  Here I staid above with them while the ship
was launched, which was done with great success, and the King did very
much like the ship, saying, she had the best bow that ever he saw.  But,
Lord! the sorry talke and discourse among the great courtiers round about
him, without any reverence in the world, but with so much disorder.  By
and by the Queene comes and her Mayds of Honour; one whereof, Mrs.
Boynton, and the Duchesse of Buckingham, had been very siclee coming by
water in the barge (the water being very rough); but what silly sport they
made with them in very common terms, methought, was very poor, and below
what people think these great people say and do. The launching being done,
the King and company went down to take barge; and I sent for Mr. Pett, and
put the flaggon into the Duke's hand, and he, in the presence of the King,
did give it, Mr. Pett taking it upon his knee.  This Mr. Pett is wholly
beholding to me for, and he do know and I believe will acknowledge it.
Thence I to Mr. Ackworth, and there eat and drank with Commissioner Pett
and his wife, and thence to Shelden's, where Sir W. Batten and his Lady
were.  By and by I took coach after I had enquired for my wife or her
boat, but found none.  Going out of the gate, an ordinary woman prayed me
to give her room to London, which I did, but spoke not to her all the way,
but read, as long as I could see, my book again.  Dark when we came to
London, and a stop of coaches in Southwarke. I staid above half an houre
and then 'light, and finding Sir W. Batten's coach, heard they were gone
into the Beare at the Bridge foot, and thither I to them.  Presently the
stop is removed, and then going out to find my coach, I could not find it,
for it was gone with the rest; so I fair to go through the darke and dirt
over the bridge, and my leg fell in a hole broke on the bridge, but, the
constable standing there to keep people from it, I was catched up,
otherwise I had broke my leg; for which mercy the Lord be praised!  So at
Fanchurch I found my coach staying for me, and so home, where the little
girle hath looked to the house well, but no wife come home, which made me
begin to fear [for] her, the water being very rough, and cold and darke.
But by and by she and her company come in all well, at which I was glad,
though angry.  Thence I to Sir W. Batten's, and there sat late with him,
Sir R. Ford, and Sir John Robinson; the last of whom continues still the
same foole he was, crying up what power he has in the City, in knowing
their temper, and being able to do what he will with them.  It seems the
City did last night very freely lend the King L100,000 without any
security but the King's word, which was very noble.  But this loggerhead
and Sir R. Ford would make us believe that they did it.  Now Sir R. Ford
is a cunning man, and makes a foole of the other, and the other believes
whatever the other tells him. But, Lord!  to think that such a man should
be Lieutenant of the Tower, and so great a man as he is, is a strange
thing to me.  With them late and then home and with my wife to bed, after
supper.

27th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning busy.  At noon, Sir G.
Carteret, Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Batten, Sir W. Pen, and myself, were
treated at the Dolphin by Mr. Foly, the ironmonger, where a good plain
dinner, but I expected musique, the missing of which spoiled my dinner,
only very good merry discourse at dinner.  Thence with Sir G. Carteret by
coach to White Hall to a Committee of Tangier, and thence back to London,
and 'light in Cheapside and I to Nellson's, and there met with a rub at
first, but took him out to drink, and there discoursed to my great content
so far with him that I think I shall agree with him for Bewpers to serve
the Navy with.  So with great content home and to my office, where late,
and having got a great cold in my head yesterday home to supper and to
bed.

28th.  Slept ill all night, having got a very great cold the other day at
Woolwich in [my] head, which makes me full of snot.  Up in the morning,
and my tailor brings me home my fine, new, coloured cloth suit, my cloake
lined with plush, as good a suit as ever I wore in my life, and mighty
neat, to my great content.  To my office, and there all the morning.  At
noon to Nellson's, and there bought 20 pieces more of Bewpers, and hope to
go on with him to a contract.  Thence to the 'Change a little, and thence
home with Luellin to dinner, where Mr. Deane met me by appointment, and
after dinner he and I up to my chamber, and there hard at discourse, and
advising him what to do in his business at Harwich, and then to discourse
of our old business of ships and taking new rules of him to my great
pleasure, and he being gone I to my office a little, and then to see Sir
W. Batten, who is sick of a greater cold than I, and thither comes to me
Mr. Holliard, and into the chamber to me, and, poor man (beyond all I ever
saw of him), was a little drunk, and there sat talking and finding
acquaintance with Sir W. Batten and my Lady by relations on both sides,
that there we staid very long.  At last broke up, and he home much
overcome with drink, but well enough to get well home.  So I home to
supper and to bed.

29th.  Up, and it being my Lord Mayor's show, my boy and three mayds went
out; but it being a very foule, rainy day, from morning till night, I was
sorry my wife let them go out.  All the morning at the office.  At dinner
at home.  In the afternoon to the office again, and about 9 o'clock by
appointment to the King's Head tavern upon Fish Street Hill, whither Mr.
Wolfe (and Parham by his means) met me to discourse about the Fishery, and
great light I had by Parham, who is a little conceited, but a very knowing
man in his way, and in the general fishing trade of England. Here I staid
three hours, and eat a barrel of very fine oysters of Wolfe's giving me,
and so, it raining hard, home and to my office, and then home to bed.  All
the talke is that De Ruyter is come over-land home with six or eight of
his captaines to command here at home, and their ships kept abroad in the
Straights; which sounds as if they had a mind to do something with us.

30th (Lord's day).  Up, and this morning put on my new, fine, coloured
cloth suit, with my cloake lined with plush, which is a dear and noble
suit, costing me about L17.  To church, and then home to dinner, and after
dinner to a little musique with my boy, and so to church with my wife, and
so home, and with her all the evening reading and at musique with my boy
with great pleasure, and so to supper, prayers, and to bed.

31st.  Very busy all the morning, at noon Creed to me and dined with me,
and then he and I to White Hall, there to a Committee of Tangier, where it
is worth remembering when Mr. Coventry proposed the retrenching some of
the charge of the horse, the first word asked by the Duke of Albemarle
was, "Let us see who commands them," there being three troops.  One of
them he calls to mind was by Sir Toby Bridges. "Oh!" says he, "there is a
very good man.  If you must reform

     [Reform, i.e.  disband.  See "Memoirs of Sir John Reresby,"
     September 2nd, 1651.  "A great many younger brothers and reformed
     officers of the King's army depended upon him for their meat and
     drink."  So reformado, a discharged or disbanded officer.--M. B.]

two of them, be sure let him command the troop that is left."  Thence
home, and there came presently to me Mr. Young and Whistler, who find that
I have quite overcome them in their business of flags, and now they come
to intreat my favour, but I will be even with them.  So late to my office
and there till past one in the morning making up my month's accounts, and
find that my expense this month in clothes has kept me from laying up
anything; but I am no worse, but a little better than I was, which is
L1205, a great sum, the Lord be praised for it!  So home to bed, with my
mind full of content therein, and vexed for my being so angry in bad words
to my wife to-night, she not giving me a good account of her layings out
to my mind to-night.  This day I hear young Mr. Stanly, a brave young
[gentleman], that went out with young Jermin, with Prince Rupert, is
already dead of the small-pox, at Portsmouth.  All preparations against
the Dutch; and the Duke of Yorke fitting himself with all speed, to go to
the fleete which is hastening for him; being now resolved to go in the
Charles.

                           DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                 NOVEMBER
                                   1664

November 1st.  Up and to the office, where busy all the morning, at noon
(my wife being invited to my Lady Sandwich's) all alone dined at home upon
a good goose with Mr. Wayth, discussing of business.  Thence I to the
Committee of the Fishery, and there we sat with several good discourses
and some bad and simple ones, and with great disorder, and yet by the men
of businesse of the towne. But my report in the business of the
collections is mightily commended and will get me some reputation, and
indeed is the only thing looks like a thing well done since we sat. Then
with Mr. Parham to the tavern, but I drank no wine, only he did give me
another barrel of oysters, and he brought one Major Greene, an able
fishmonger, and good discourse to my information.  So home and late at
business at my office.  Then to supper and to bed.

2nd.  Up betimes, and down with Mr. Castle to Redriffe, and there walked
to Deptford to view a parcel of brave knees--[Knees of timber]--of his,
which indeed are very good, and so back again home, I seeming very
friendly to him, though I know him to be a rogue, and one that hates me
with his heart.  Home and to dinner, and so to my office all the
afternoon, where in some pain in my backe, which troubled me, but I think
it comes only with stooping, and from no other matter.  At night to
Nellson's, and up and down about business, and so home to my office, then
home to supper and to bed.

3rd.  Up and to the office, where strange to see how Sir W. Pen is flocked
to by people of all sorts against his going to sea.  At the office did
much business, among other an end of that that has troubled me long, the
business of the bewpers and flags.  At noon to the 'Change, and thence by
appointment was met with Bagwell's wife, and she followed me into
Moorfields, and there into a drinking house, and all alone eat and drank
together.  I did there caress her, but though I did make some offer did
not receive any compliance from her in what was bad, but very modestly she
denied me, which I was glad to see and shall value her the better for it,
and I hope never tempt her to any evil more. Thence back to the town, and
we parted and I home, and then at the office late, where Sir W. Pen came
to take his leave of me, being to-morrow, which is very sudden to us, to
go on board to lie on board, but I think will come ashore again before the
ship, the Charles,

     ["The Royal Charles" was the Duke of York's ship, and Sir William
     Penn, who hoisted his flag in the "Royal James" on November 8th,
     shifted to the "Royal Charles" on November 30th.  The duke gave Penn
     the command of the fleet immediately under himself.  On Penn's
     monument he is styled "Great Captain Commander under His Royal
     Highness" (Penn's "Memorials of Sir William Penn," vol. ii.,
     p. 296).]

can go away.  So home to supper and to bed.  This night Sir W. Batten did,
among other things, tell me strange newes, which troubles me, that my Lord
Sandwich will be sent Governor to Tangier, which, in some respects,
indeed, I should be glad of, for the good of the place and the safety of
his person; but I think his honour will suffer, and, it may be, his
interest fail by his distance.

4th.  Waked very betimes and lay long awake, my mind being so full of
business. Then up and to St. James's, where I find Mr. Coventry full of
business, packing up for his going to sea with the Duke.  Walked with him,
talking, to White Hall, where to the Duke's lodgings, who is gone thither
to lodge lately.  I appeared to the Duke, and thence Mr. Coventry and I an
hour in the Long Gallery, talking about the management of our office, he
tells me the weight of dispatch will lie chiefly on me, and told me freely
his mind touching Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes, the latter of whom, he
most aptly said, was like a lapwing; that all he did was to keepe a
flutter, to keepe others from the nest that they would find.  He told me
an old story of the former about the light-houses, how just before he had
certified to the Duke against the use of them, and what a burden they are
to trade, and presently after, at his being at Harwich, comes to desire
that he might have the setting one up there, and gets the usefulness of it
certified also by the Trinity House.  After long discoursing and
considering all our stores and other things, as how the King hath resolved
upon Captain Taylor

     [Coventry, writing to Secretary Bennet (November 14th, 1664), refers
     to the objections made to Taylor, and adds: "Thinks the King will
     not easily consent to his rejection, as he is a man of great
     abilities and dispatch, and was formerly laid aside at Chatham on
     the Duchess of Albemarle's earnest interposition for another.  He is
     a fanatic, it is true, but all hands will be needed for the work cut
     out; there is less danger of them in harbour than at sea, and profit
     will convert most of them" ("Calendar of State Papers," Domestic,
     1664-65, p. 68).]

and Colonell Middleton, the first to be Commissioner for Harwich and the
latter for Portsmouth, I away to the 'Change, and there did very much
business, so home to dinner, and Mr. Duke, our Secretary for the Fishery,
dined with me. After dinner to discourse of our business, much to my
content, and then he away, and I by water among the smiths on the other
side, and to the alehouse with one and was near buying 4 or 5 anchors, and
learned something worth my knowing of them, and so home and to my office,
where late, with my head very full of business, and so away home to supper
and to bed.

5th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning, at noon to the 'Change,
and thence home to dinner, and so with my wife to the Duke's house to a
play, "Macbeth,"  a pretty good play, but admirably acted. Thence home;
the coach being forced to go round by London Wall home, because of the
bonefires; the day being mightily observed in the City. To my office late
at business, and then home to supper, and to bed.

6th (Lord's day).  Up and with my wife to church.  Dined at home.  And I
all the afternoon close at my office drawing up some proposals to present
to the Committee for the Fishery to-morrow, having a great good intention
to be serviceable in the business if I can.  At night, to supper with my
uncle Wight, where very merry, and so home.  To prayers and to bed.

7th.  Up and with Sir W. Batten to White Hall, where mighty thrusting
about the Duke now upon his going.  We were with him long.  He advised us
to follow our business close, and to be directed in his absence by the
Committee of the Councell for the Navy.  By and by a meeting of the
Fishery, where the Duke was, but in such haste, and things looked so
superficially over, that I had not a fit opportunity to propose my paper
that I wrote yesterday, but I had chewed it to Mr. Gray and Wren before,
who did like it most highly, as they said, and I think they would not
dissemble in that manner in a business of this nature, but I see the
greatest businesses are done so superficially that I wonder anything
succeeds at all among us, that is publique.  Thence somewhat vexed to see
myself frustrated in the good I hoped to have done and a little reputation
to have gained, and thence to my barber's, but Jane not being in the way I
to my Lady Sandwich's, and there met my wife and dined, but I find that I
dine as well myself, that is, as neatly, and my meat as good and
well-dressed, as my good Lady do, in the absence of my Lord. Thence by
water I to my barber's again, and did meet in the street my Jane, but
could not talk with her, but only a word or two, and so by coach called my
wife, and home, where at my office late, and then, it being washing day,
to supper and to bed.

8th.  Up and to the office, where by and by Mr. Coventry come, and after
doing a little business, took his leave of us, being to go to sea with the
Duke to-morrow.  At noon, I and Sir J. Minnes and Lord Barkeley (who with
Sir J. Duncum, and Mr. Chichly, are made Masters of the Ordnance), to the
office of the Ordnance, to discourse about wadding for guns. Thence to
dinner, all of us to the Lieutenant's of the Tower; where a good dinner,
but disturbed in the middle of it by the King's coming into the Tower: and
so we broke up, and to him, and went up and down the store-houses and
magazines; which are, with the addition of the new great store-house, a
noble sight.  He gone, I to my office, where Bagwell's wife staid for me,
and together with her a good while, to meet again shortly.  So all the
afternoon at my office till late, and then to bed, joyed in my love and
ability to follow my business.  This day, Mr. Lever sent my wife a pair of
silver candlesticks, very pretty ones.  The first man that ever presented
me, to whom I have not only done little service, but apparently did him
the greatest disservice in his business of accounts, as Purser-Generall,
of any man at the board.

9th.  Called up, as I had appointed, by H. Russell, between two and three
o'clock, and I and my boy Tom by water with a gally down to the Hope, it
being a fine starry night.  Got thither by eight o'clock, and there, as
expected, found the Charles, her mainmast setting.  Commissioner Pett
aboard.  I up and down to see the ship I was so well acquainted with, and
a great worke it is, the setting so great a mast.  Thence the Commissioner
and I on board Sir G. Ascue, in the Henery, who lacks men mightily, which
makes me think that there is more believed to be in a man that hath
heretofore been employed than truly there is; for one would never have
thought, a month ago, that he would have wanted 1000 men at his heels.
Nor do I think he hath much of a seaman in him: for he told me, says he,
"Heretofore, we used to find our ships clear and ready, everything to our
hands in the Downes.  Now I come, and must look to see things done like a
slave, things that I never minded, nor cannot look after." And by his
discourse I find that he hath not minded anything in her at all. Thence
not staying, the wind blowing hard, I made use of the Jemmy yacht and
returned to the Tower in her, my boy being a very droll boy and good
company. Home and eat something, and then shifted myself, and to White
Hall, and there the King being in his Cabinet Council (I desiring to speak
with Sir G. Carteret), I was called in, and demanded by the King himself
many questions, to which I did give him full answers. There were at this
Council my Lord Chancellor, Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord Treasurer, the
two Secretarys, and Sir G. Carteret.  Not a little contented at this
chance of being made known to these persons, and called often by my name
by the King, I to Mr. Pierces to take leave of him, but he not within, but
saw her and made very little stay, but straight home to my office, where I
did business, and then to supper and to bed.  The Duke of York is this day
gone away to Portsmouth.

10th.  Up, and not finding my things ready, I was so angry with Besse as
to bid my wife for good and all to bid her provide herself a place, for
though she be very good-natured, she hath no care nor memory of her
business at all.  So to the office, where vexed at the malice of Sir W.
Batten and folly of Sir J. Minnes against Sir W. Warren, but I prevented,
and shall do, though to my own disquiet and trouble.  At noon dined with
Sir W. Batten and the Auditors of the Exchequer at the Dolphin by Mr.
Wayth's desire, and after dinner fell to business relating to Sir G.
Carteret's account, and so home to the office, where Sir W. Batten begins,
too fast, to shew his knavish tricks in giving what price he pleases for
commodities.  So abroad, intending to have spoke with my Lord Chancellor
about the old business of his wood at Clarendon, but could not, and so
home again, and late at my office, and then home to supper and bed.  My
little girle Susan is fallen sicke of the meazles, we fear, or, at least,
of a scarlett feavour.

11th.  Up, and with Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten to the Council Chamber
at White Hall, to the Committee of the Lords for the Navy, where we were
made to wait an houre or two before called in.  In that time looking upon
some books of heraldry of Sir Edward Walker's making, which are very fine,
there I observed the Duke of Monmouth's armes are neatly done, and his
title, "The most noble and high-born Prince, James Scott, Duke of
Monmouth, &c.;" nor could Sir J. Minnes, nor any body there, tell whence
he should take the name of Scott?  And then I found my Lord Sandwich, his
title under his armes is, "The most noble and mighty Lord, Edward, Earl of
Sandwich, &c."  Sir Edward Walker afterwards coming in, in discourse did
say that there was none of the families of princes in Christendom that do
derive themselves so high as Julius Caesar, nor so far by 1000 years, that
can directly prove their rise; only some in Germany do derive themselves
from the patrician familys of Rome, but that uncertainly; and, among other
things, did much inveigh against the writing of romances, that 500 years
hence being wrote of matters in general, true as the romance of Cleopatra,
the world will not know which is the true and which the false. Here was a
gentleman attending here that told us he saw the other day (and did bring
the draught of it to Sir Francis Prigeon) of a monster born of an
hostler's wife at Salisbury, two women children perfectly made, joyned at
the lower part of their bellies, and every part perfect as two bodies, and
only one payre of legs coming forth on one side from the middle where they
were joined. It was alive 24 hours, and cried and did as all hopefull
children do; but, being showed too much to people, was killed.  By and by
we were called in, where a great many lords:  Annesly in the chair.  But,
Lord! to see what work they will make us, and what trouble we shall have
to inform men in a business they are to begin to know, when the greatest
of our hurry is, is a thing to be lamented; and I fear the consequence
will be bad to us. Thence I by coach to the 'Change, and thence home to
dinner, my head akeing mightily with much business.  Our little girl
better than she was yesterday. After dinner out again by coach to my Lord
Chancellor's, but could not speak with him, then up and down to seek Sir
Ph. Warwicke, Sir G. Carteret, and my Lord Berkely, but failed in all, and
so home and there late at business.  Among other things Mr. Turner making
his complaint to me how my clerks do all the worke and get all the profit,
and he hath no comfort, nor cannot subsist, I did make him apprehend how
he is beholding to me more than to any body for my suffering him to act as
Pourveyour of petty provisions, and told him so largely my little value of
any body's favour, that I believe he will make no complaints again a good
while.  So home to supper and to bed, after prayers, and having my boy and
Mercer give me some, each of them some, musique.

12th.  Up, being frighted that Mr. Coventry was come to towne and now at
the office, so I run down without eating or drinking or washing to the
office and it proved my Lord Berkeley.  There all the morning, at noon to
the 'Change, and so home to dinner, Mr. Wayth with me, and then to the
office, where mighty busy till very late, but I bless God I go through
with it very well and hope I shall.

13th (Lord's day).  This morning to church, where mighty sport, to hear
our clerke sing out of tune, though his master sits by him that begins and
keeps the tune aloud for the parish.  Dined at home very well, and spent
all the afternoon with my wife within doors, and getting a speech out of
Hamlett, "To bee or not to bee,"' without book.  In the evening to sing
psalms, and in come Mr. Hill to see me, and then he and I and the boy
finely to sing, and so anon broke up after much pleasure, he gone I to
supper, and so prayers and to bed.

14th.  Up, and with Sir W. Batten to White Hall, to the Lords of the
Admiralty, and there did our business betimes.  Thence to Sir Philip
Warwicke about Navy business: and my Lord Ashly; and afterwards to my Lord
Chancellor, who is very well pleased with me, and my carrying of his
business.  And so to the 'Change, where mighty busy; and so home to
dinner, where Mr. Creed and Moore: and after dinner I to my Lord
Treasurer's, to Sir Philip Warwicke there, and then to White Hall, to the
Duke of Albemarle, about Tangier; and then homeward to the Coffee-house to
hear newes.  And it seems the Dutch, as I afterwards found by Mr.
Coventry's letters, have stopped a ship of masts of Sir W. Warren's,
coming for us in a Swede's ship, which they will not release upon Sir G.
Downing's claiming her: which appears as the first act of hostility; and
is looked upon as so by Mr. Coventry.  The Elias,' coming from New England
(Captain Hill, commander), is sunk; only the captain and a few men saved.
She foundered in the sea.  So home, where infinite busy till 12 at night,
and so home to supper and to bed.

15th.  That I might not be too fine for the business I intend this day, I
did leave off my fine new cloth suit lined with plush and put on my poor
black suit, and after office done (where much business, but little done),
I to the 'Change, and thence Bagwell's wife with much ado followed me
through Moorfields to a blind alehouse, and there I did caress her and eat
and drink, and many hard looks and sooth the poor wretch did give me, and
I think verily was troubled at what I did, but at last after many
protestings by degrees I did arrive at what I would, with great pleasure,
and then in the evening, it raining, walked into town to where she knew
where she was, and then I took coach and to White Hall to a Committee of
Tangier, where, and every where else, I thank God, I find myself growing
in repute; and so home, and late, very late, at business, nobody minding
it but myself, and so home to bed, weary and full of thoughts. Businesses
grow high between the Dutch and us on every side.

16th.  My wife not being well, waked in the night, and strange to see how
dead sleep our people sleep that she was fain to ring an hour before any
body would wake.  At last one rose and helped my wife, and so to sleep
again.  Up and to my business, and then to White Hall, there to attend the
Lords Commissioners, and so directly home and dined with Sir W. Batten and
my Lady, and after dinner had much discourse tending to profit with Sir W.
Batten, how to get ourselves into the prize office

     [The Calendars of State Papers are full of references to
     applications for Commissionerships of the Prize Office.  In
     December, 1664, the Navy Committee appointed themselves the
     Commissioners for Prize Goods, Sir Henry Bennet being appointed
     comptroller, and Lord Ashley treasurer.]

or some other fair way of obliging the King to consider us in our
extraordinary pains.  Then to the office, and there all the afternoon very
busy, and so till past 12 at night, and so home to bed.  This day my wife
went to the burial of a little boy of W. Joyce's.

17th.  Up and to my office, and there all the morning mighty busy, and
taking upon me to tell the Comptroller how ill his matters were done, and
I think indeed if I continue thus all the business of the office will come
upon me whether I will or no.  At noon to the 'Change, and then home with
Creed to dinner, and thence I to the office, where close at it all the
afternoon till 12 at night, and then home to supper and to bed.  This day
I received from Mr. Foley, but for me to pay for it, if I like it, an iron
chest, having now received back some money I had laid out for the King,
and I hope to have a good sum of money by me, thereby, in a few days, I
think above L800.  But when I come home at night, I could not find the way
to open it; but, which is a strange thing, my little girle Susan could
carry it alone from one table clear from the ground and set upon another,
when neither I nor anyone in my house but Jane the cook-mayde could do it.

18th.  Up and to the office, and thence to the Committee of the Fishery at
White Hall, where so poor simple doings about the business of the Lottery,
that I was ashamed to see it, that a thing so low and base should have any
thing to do with so noble an undertaking.  But I had the advantage this
day to hear Mr. Williamson discourse, who come to be a contractor with
others for the Lotterys, and indeed I find he is a very logicall man and a
good speaker.  But it was so pleasant to see my Lord Craven, the
chaireman, before many persons of worth and grave, use this comparison in
saying that certainly these that would contract for all the lotteries
would not suffer us to set up the Virginia lottery for plate before them,
"For," says he, "if I occupy a wench first, you may occupy her again your
heart out you can never have her maidenhead after I have once had it,"
which he did more loosely, and yet as if he had fetched a most grave and
worthy instance.  They made mirth, but I and others were ashamed of it.
Thence to the 'Change and thence home to dinner, and thence to the office
a good while, and thence to the Council chamber at White Hall to speake
with Sir G. Carteret, and here by accident heard a great and famous cause
between Sir G. Lane and one Mr. Phill. Whore, an Irish business about Sir
G. Lane's endeavouring to reverse a decree of the late Commissioners of
Ireland in a Rebells case for his land, which the King had given as
forfeited to Sir G. Lane, for whom the Sollicitor did argue most angell
like, and one of the Commissioners, Baron, did argue for the other and for
himself and his brethren who had decreed it. But the Sollicitor do so pay
the Commissioners, how four all along did act for the Papists, and three
only for the Protestants, by which they were overvoted, but at last one
word (which was omitted in the Sollicitor's repeating of an Act of
Parliament in the case) being insisted on by the other part, the
Sollicitor was put to a great stop, and I could discern he could not tell
what to say, but was quite out. Thence home well pleased with this
accident, and so home to my office, where late, and then to supper and to
bed.  This day I had a letter from Mr. Coventry, that tells me that my
Lord Brunkard is to be one of our Commissioners, of which I am very glad,
if any more must be.

19th.  All the morning at the office, and without dinner down by galley up
and down the river to visit the yards and ships now ordered forth with
great delight, and so home to supper, and then to office late to write
letters, then home to bed.

20th (Lord's day).  Up, and with my wife to church, where Pegg Pen very
fine in her new coloured silk suit laced with silver lace.  Dined at home,
and Mr. Sheply, lately come to town, with me.  A great deal of ordinary
discourse with him.  Among other things praying him to speak to Stankes to
look after our business.  With him and in private with Mr. Bodham talking
of our ropeyarde stores at Woolwich, which are mighty low, even to
admiration.  They gone, in the evening comes Mr. Andrews and sings with
us, and he gone, I to Sir W. Batten's, where Sir J. Minnes and he and I to
talk about our letter to my Lord Treasurer, where his folly and simple
confidence so great in a report so ridiculous that he hath drawn up to
present to my Lord, nothing of it being true, that I was ashamed, and did
roundly and in many words for an houre together talk boldly to him, which
pleased Sir W. Batten and my Lady, but I was in the right, and was the
willinger to do so before them, that they might see that I am somebody,
and shall serve him so in his way another time.  So home vexed at this
night's passage, for I had been very hot with him, so to supper and to
bed, out of order with this night's vexation.

21st.  Up, and with them to the Lords at White Hall, where they do single
me out to speake to and to hear, much to my content, and received their
commands, particularly in several businesses.  Thence by their order to
the Attorney General's about a new warrant for Captain Taylor which I
shall carry for him to be Commissioner in spite of Sir W. Batten, and yet
indeed it is not I, but the ability of the man, that makes the Duke and
Mr. Coventry stand by their choice. I to the 'Change and there staid long
doing business, and this day for certain newes is come that Teddiman hath
brought in eighteen or twenty Dutchmen, merchants, their Bourdeaux fleete,
and two men of wary to Portsmouth.

     [Captain Sir Thomas Teddiman (or Tyddiman) had been appointed
     Rear-Admiral of Lord Sandwich's squadron of the English fleet.  In a
     letter from Sir William Coventry to Secretary Bennet, dated November
     13th, 1664, we read, "Rear Admiral Teddeman with four or five ships
     has gone to course in the Channel, and if he meet any refractory
     Dutchmen will teach them their duty" ("Calendar of State Papers,"
     Domestic, 1664.-65, p. 66).]

And I had letters this afternoon, that three are brought into the Downes
and Dover; so that the warr is begun: God give a good end to it!  After
dinner at home all the afternoon busy, and at night with Sir W. Batten and
Sir J. Minnes looking over the business of stating the accounts of the
navy charge to my Lord Treasurer, where Sir J. Minnes's paper served us in
no stead almost, but was all false, and after I had done it with great
pains, he being by, I am confident he understands not one word in it.  At
it till 10 at night almost. Thence by coach to Sir Philip Warwicke's, by
his desire to have conferred with him, but he being in bed, I to White
Hall to the Secretaries, and there wrote to Mr. Coventry, and so home by
coach again, a fine clear moonshine night, but very cold. Home to my
office awhile, it being past 12 at night; and so to supper and to bed.

22nd.  At the office all the morning.  Sir G. Carteret, upon a motion of
Sir W. Batten's, did promise, if we would write a letter to him, to shew
it to the King on our behalf touching our desire of being Commissioners of
the Prize office.  I wrote a letter to my mind and, after eating a bit at
home (Mr. Sheply dining and taking his leave of me), abroad and to Sir G.
Carteret with the letter and thence to my Lord Treasurer's; wherewith Sir
Philip Warwicke long studying all we could to make the last year swell as
high as we could. And it is much to see how he do study for the King, to
do it to get all the money from the Parliament all he can: and I shall be
serviceable to him therein, to help him to heads upon which to enlarge the
report of the expense. He did observe to me how obedient this Parliament
was for awhile, and the last sitting how they begun to differ, and to carp
at the King's officers; and what they will do now, he says, is to make
agreement for the money, for there is no guess to be made of it.  He told
me he was prepared to convince the Parliament that the Subsidys are a most
ridiculous tax (the four last not rising to L40,000), and unequall.  He
talks of a tax of Assessment of L70,000 for five years; the people to be
secured that it shall continue no longer than there is really a warr; and
the charges thereof to be paid.  He told me, that one year of the late
Dutch warr cost L1,623,000.  Thence to my Lord Chancellor's, and there
staid long with Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes, to speak with my lord
about our Prize Office business; but, being sicke and full of visitants,
we could not speak with him, and so away home. Where Sir Richard Ford did
meet us with letters from Holland this day, that it is likely the Dutch
fleete will not come out this year; they have not victuals to keep them
out, and it is likely they will be frozen before they can get back.
Captain Cocke is made Steward for sick and wounded seamen.  So home to
supper, where troubled to hear my poor boy Tom has a fit of the stone, or
some other pain like it.  I must consult Mr. Holliard for him.  So at one
in the morning home to bed.

23rd.  Up and to my office, where close all the morning about my Lord
Treasurer's accounts, and at noon home to dinner, and then to the office
all the afternoon very busy till very late at night, and then to supper
and to bed. This evening Mr. Hollyard came to me and told me that he hath
searched my boy, and he finds he hath a stone in his bladder, which
grieves me to the heart, he being a good-natured and well-disposed boy,
and more that it should be my misfortune to have him come to my house. Sir
G. Carteret was here this afternoon; and strange to see how we plot to
make the charge of this warr to appear greater than it is, because of
getting money.

24th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning busy answering of
people. About noon out with Commissioner Pett, and he and I to a
Coffee-house, to drink jocolatte, very good; and so by coach to
Westminster, being the first day of the Parliament's meeting.  After the
House had received the King's speech, and what more he had to say,
delivered in writing, the Chancellor being sicke, it rose, and I with Sir
Philip Warwicke home and conferred our matters about the charge of the
Navy, and have more to give him in the excessive charge of this year's
expense.  I dined with him, and Mr. Povy with us and Sir Edmund Pooly, a
fine gentleman, and Mr. Chichly, and fine discourse we had and fine talke,
being proud to see myself accepted in such company and thought better than
I am. After dinner Sir Philip and I to talk again, and then away home to
the office, where sat late; beginning our sittings now in the afternoon,
because of the Parliament; and they being rose, I to my office, where late
till almost one o'clock, and then home to bed.

25th.  Up and at my office all the morning, to prepare an account of the
charge we have been put to extraordinary by the Dutch already; and I have
brought it to appear L852,700; but God knows this is only a scare to the
Parliament, to make them give the more money.  Thence to the Parliament
House, and there did give it to Sir Philip Warwicke; the House being hot
upon giving the King a supply of money, and I by coach to the 'Change and
took up Mr. Jenings along with me (my old acquaintance), he telling me the
mean manner that Sir Samuel Morland lives near him, in a house he hath
bought and laid out money upon, in all to the value of L1200, but is
believed to be a beggar; and so I ever thought he would be.  From the
'Change with Mr. Deering and Luellin to the White Horse tavern in Lombard
Street, and there dined with them, he giving me a dish of meat to
discourse in order to my serving Deering, which I am already obliged to
do, and shall do it, and would be glad he were a man trusty that I might
venture something along with him.  Thence home, and by and by in the
evening took my wife out by coach, leaving her at Unthanke's while I to
White Hall and to Westminster Hall, where I have not been to talk a great
while, and there hear that Mrs. Lane and her husband live a sad life
together, and he is gone to be a paymaster to a company to Portsmouth to
serve at sea.  She big with child. Thence I home, calling my wife, and at
Sir W. Batten's hear that the House have given the King L2,500,000 to be
paid for this warr, only for the Navy, in three years' time; which is a
joyfull thing to all the King's party I see, but was much opposed by Mr.
Vaughan and others, that it should be so much. So home and to supper and
to bed.

26th.  Up and to the office, where busy all the morning.  Home a while to
dinner and then to the office, where very late busy till quite weary, but
contented well with my dispatch of business, and so home to supper and to
bed.

27th (Lord's day).  To church in the morning, then dined at home, and to
my office, and there all the afternoon setting right my business of
flaggs, and after all my pains find reason not to be sorry, because I
think it will bring me considerable profit.  In the evening come Mr.
Andrews and Hill, and we sung, with my boy, Ravenscroft's 4-part psalms,
most admirable musique.  Then (Andrews not staying) we to supper, and
after supper fell into the rarest discourse with Mr. Hill about Rome and
Italy; but most pleasant that I ever had in my life.  At it very late and
then to bed.

28th.  Up, and with Sir J. Minnes and W. Batten to White Hall, but no
Committee of Lords (which is like to do the King's business well).  So to
Westminster, and there to Jervas's and was a little while with Jane, and
so to London by coach and to the Coffee-house, where certain news of our
peace made by Captain Allen with Argier, which is good news; and that the
Dutch have sent part of their fleete round by Scotland; and resolve to pay
off the rest half-pay, promising the rest in the Spring, hereby keeping
their men.  But how true this, I know not.  Home to dinner, then come Dr.
Clerke to speak with me about sick and wounded men, wherein he is like to
be concerned.  After him Mr. Cutler, and much talk with him, and with him
to White Hall, to have waited on the Lords by order, but no meeting,
neither to-night, which will spoil all.  I think I shall get something by
my discourse with Cutler.  So home, and after being at my office an hour
with Mr. Povy talking about his business of Tangier, getting him some
money allowed him for freight of ships, wherein I hope to get something
too.  He gone, home hungry and almost sick for want of eating, and so to
supper and to bed.

29th.  Up, and with Sir W. Batten to the Committee of Lords at the Council
Chamber, where Sir G. Carteret told us what he had said to the King, and
how the King inclines to our request of making us Commissioners of the
Prize office, but meeting him anon in the gallery, he tells me that my
Lord Barkely is angry we should not acquaint him with it, so I found out
my Lord and pacified him, but I know not whether he was so in earnest or
no, for he looked very frowardly.  Thence to the Parliament House, and
with Sir W. Batten home and dined with him, my wife being gone to my Lady
Sandwich's, and then to the office, where we sat all the afternoon, and I
at my office till past 12 at night, and so home to bed. This day I hear
that the King should say that the Dutch do begin to comply with him.  Sir
John Robinson told Sir W. Batten that he heard the King say so.  I pray
God it may be so.

30th.  Up, and with Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes to the Committee of
the Lords, and there did our business; but, Lord! what a sorry dispatch
these great persons give to business.  Thence to the 'Change, and there
hear the certainty and circumstances of the Dutch having called in their
fleete and paid their men half-pay, the other to be paid them upon their
being ready upon beat of drum to come to serve them again, and in the
meantime to have half-pay.  This is said. Thence home to dinner, and so to
my office all the afternoon.  In the evening my wife and Sir W. Warren
with me to White Hall, sending her with the coach to see her father and
mother.  He and I up to Sir G. Carteret, and first I alone and then both
had discourse with him about things of the Navy, and so I and he calling
my wife at Unthanke's, home again, and long together talking how to order
things in a new contract for Norway goods, as well to the King's as to his
advantage.  He gone, I to my monthly accounts, and, bless God!  I find I
have increased my last balance, though but little; but I hope ere long to
get more.  In the meantime praise God for what I have, which is L1209.
So, with my heart glad to see my accounts fall so right in this time of
mixing of monies and confusion, I home to bed.

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     About several businesses, hoping to get money by them
     After many protestings by degrees I did arrive at what I would
     All ended in love
     Below what people think these great people say and do
     Even to the having bad words with my wife, and blows too
     Expected musique, the missing of which spoiled my dinner
     Gadding abroad to look after beauties
     Greatest businesses are done so superficially
     Little children employed, every one to do something
     Meazles, we fear, or, at least, of a scarlett feavour
     My leg fell in a hole broke on the bridge
     My wife was angry with me for not coming home, and for gadding
     Not the greatest wits, but the steady man
     Rotten teeth and false, set in with wire
     Till 12 at night, and then home to supper and to bed
     What a sorry dispatch these great persons give to business
     What is there more to be had of a woman than the possessing her
     Where a trade hath once been and do decay, it never recovers


                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                DECEMBER
                                  1664

December 1st.  Up betimes and to White Hall to a Committee of Tangier, and
so straight home and hard to my business at my office till noon, then to
dinner, and so to my office, and by and by we sat all the afternoon, then
to my office again till past one in the morning, and so home to supper and
to bed.

2nd.  Lay long in bed.  Then up and to the office, where busy all the
morning.  At home dined.  After dinner with my wife and Mercer to the
Duke's House, and there saw "The Rivalls," which I had seen before; but
the play not good, nor anything but the good actings of Betterton and his
wife and Harris.  Thence homeward, and the coach broke with us in
Lincoln's Inn Fields, and so walked to Fleete Streete, and there took
coach and home, and to my office, whither by and by comes Captain Cocke,
and then Sir W. Batten, and we all to Sir J. Minnes, and I did give them a
barrel of oysters I had given to me, and so there sat and talked, where
good discourse of the late troubles, they knowing things, all of them,
very well; and Cocke, from the King's own mouth, being then entrusted
himself much, do know particularly that the King's credulity to Cromwell's
promises, private to him, against the advice of his friends and the
certain discovery of the practices and discourses of Cromwell in council
(by Major Huntington)

     [According to Clarendon the officer here alluded to was a major in
     Cromwell's own regiment of horse, and employed by him to treat with
     Charles I. whilst at Hampton Court; but being convinced of the
     insincerity of the proceeding, communicated his suspicions to that
     monarch, and immediately gave up his commission.  We hear no more of
     Huntington till the Restoration, when his name occurs with those of
     many other officers, who tendered their services to the king.  His
     reasons for laying down his commission are printed in Thurloe's
     "State Papers" and Maseres's "Tracts."--B.]

did take away his life and nothing else.  Then to some loose atheisticall
discourse of Cocke's, when he was almost drunk, and then about 11 o'clock
broke up, and I to my office, to fit up an account for Povy, wherein I
hope to get something.  At it till almost two o'clock, then to supper and
to bed.

3rd.  Up, and at the office all the morning, and at noon to Mr. Cutler's,
and there dined with Sir W. Rider and him, and thence Sir W. Rider and I
by coach to White Hall to a Committee of the Fishery; there only to hear
Sir Edward Ford's proposal about farthings, wherein, O God! to see almost
every body interested for him; only my Lord Annesly, who is a grave,
serious man.  My Lord Barkeley was there, but is the most hot, fiery man
in discourse, without any cause, that ever I saw, even to breach of
civility to my Lord Anglesey, in his discourse opposing to my Lord's.  At
last, though without much satisfaction to me, it was voted that it should
be requested of the King, and that Sir Edward Ford's proposal is the best
yet made.  Thence by coach home.  The Duke of Yorke being expected
to-night with great joy from Portsmouth, after his having been abroad at
sea three or four days with the fleete; and the Dutch are all drawn into
their harbours.  But it seems like a victory: and a matter of some
reputation to us it is, and blemish to them; but in no degree like what it
is esteemed at, the weather requiring them to do so.  Home and at my
office late, and then to supper and to bed.

4th (Lord's day).  Lay long in bed, and then up and to my office, there to
dispatch a business in order to the getting something out of the Tangier
business, wherein I have an opportunity to get myself paid upon the score
of freight.  I hope a good sum.  At noon home to dinner, and then in the
afternoon to church.  So home, and by and by comes Mr. Hill and Andrews,
and sung together long and with great content.  Then to supper and broke
up.  Pretty discourse, very pleasant and ingenious, and so to my office a
little, and then home (after prayers) to bed.  This day I hear the Duke of
Yorke is come to towne, though expected last night, as I observed, but by
what hindrance stopped I can't tell.

5th.  Up, and to White Hall with Sir J. Minnes; and there, among an
infinite crowd of great persons, did kiss the Duke's hand; but had no time
to discourse.  Thence up and down the gallery, and got my Lord of
Albemarle's hand to my bill for Povy, but afterwards was asked some scurvy
questions by Povy about my demands, which troubled [me], but will do no
great hurt I think.  Thence vexed home, and there by appointment comes my
cozen Roger Pepys and Mrs. Turner, and dined with me, and very merry we
were.  They staid all the afternoon till night, and then after I had
discoursed an hour with Sir W. Warren plainly declaring my resolution to
desert him if he goes on to join with Castle, who and his family I, for
great provocation, love not, which he takes with some trouble, but will
concur in everything with me, he says.  Now I am loth, I confess, to lose
him, he having been the best friend I have had ever in this office. So he
being gone, we all, it being night, in Madam Turner's coach to her house,
there to see, as she tells us, how fat Mrs. The.  is grown, and so I find
her, but not as I expected, but mightily pleased I am to hear the mother
commend her daughter Betty that she is like to be a great beauty, and she
sets much by her.  Thence I to White Hall, and there saw Mr. Coventry come
to towne, and, with all my heart, am glad to see him, but could have no
talke with him, he being but just come.  Thence back and took up my wife,
and home, where a while, and then home to supper and to bed.

5th.  Up, and in Sir W. Batten's coach to White Hall, but the Duke being
gone forth, I to Westminster Hall, and there spent much time till towards
noon to and fro with people.  So by and by Mrs. Lane comes and plucks me
by the cloak to speak to me, and I was fain to go to her shop, and
pretending to buy some bands made her go home, and by and by followed her,
and there did what I would with her, and so after many discourses and her
intreating me to do something for her husband, which I promised to do, and
buying a little band of her, which I intend to keep to, I took leave,
there coming a couple of footboys to her with a coach to fetch her abroad
I know not to whom.  She is great with child, and she says I must be
godfather, but I do not intend it.  Thence by coach to the Old Exchange,
and there hear that the Dutch are fitting their ships out again, which
puts us to new discourse, and to alter our thoughts of the Dutch, as to
their want of courage or force.  Thence by appointment to the White Horse
Taverne in Lumbard Streete, and there dined with my Lord Rutherford, Povy,
Mr. Gauden, Creed, and others, and very merry, and after dinner among
other things Povy and I withdrew, and I plainly told him that I was
concerned in profit, but very justly, in this business of the Bill that I
have been these two or three days about, and he consents to it, and it
shall be paid.  He tells me how he believes, and in part knows, Creed to
be worth L10,000; nay, that now and then he [Povy] hath three or L4,000 in
his hands, for which he gives the interest that the King gives, which is
ten per cent., and that Creed do come and demand it every three months the
interest to be paid him, which Povy looks upon as a cunning and mean
tricke of him; but for all that, he will do and is very rich.  Thence to
the office, where we sat and where Mr. Coventry came the first time after
his return from sea, which I was glad of.  So after office to my office,
and then home to supper, and to my office again, and then late home to
bed.

7th.  Lay long, then up, and among others Bagwell's wife coming to speak
with me put new thoughts of folly into me which I am troubled at.  Thence
after doing business at my office, I by coach to my Lady Sandwich's, and
there dined with her, and found all well and merry.  Thence to White Hall,
and we waited on the Duke, who looks better than he did, methinks, before
his voyage; and, I think, a little more stern than he used to do. Thence
to the Temple to my cozen Roger Pepys, thinking to have met the Doctor to
have discoursed our business, but he came not, so I home, and there by
agreement came my Lord Rutherford, Povy, Gauden, Creed, Alderman
Backewell, about Tangier business of accounts between Rutherford and
Gauden.  Here they were with me an hour or more, then after drinking away,
and Povy and Creed staid and eat with me; but I was sorry I had no better
cheer for Povy; for the foole may be useful, and is a cunning fellow in
his way, which is a strange one, and that, that I meet not in any other
man, nor can describe in him.  They late with me, and when gone my boy and
I to musique, and then to bed.

8th.  Up, and to my office, where all the morning busy.  At noon dined at
home, and then to the office, where we sat all the afternoon.  In the
evening comes my aunt and uncle Wight, Mrs. Norbury, and her daughter, and
after them Mr. Norbury, where no great pleasure, my aunt being out of
humour in her fine clothes, and it raining hard.  Besides, I was a little
too bold with her about her doating on Dr. Venner.  Anon they went away,
and I till past 12 at night at my office, and then home to bed.

9th.  Up betimes and walked to Mr. Povy's, and there, not without some few
troublesome questions of his, I got a note, and went and received L117 5s.
of Alderman Viner upon my pretended freight of the "William" for Tangier,
which overbears me on one side with joy and on the other to think of my
condition if I shall be called into examination about it, and (though in
strictness it is due) not be able to give a good account of it.  Home with
it, and there comes Captain Taylor to me, and he and I did set even the
business of the ship Union lately gone for Tangier, wherein I hope to get
L50 more, for all which the Lord be praised.  At noon home to dinner, Mr.
Hunt and his wife with us, and very pleasant. Then in the afternoon I
carried them home by coach, and I to Westminster Hall, and thence to
Gervas's, and there find I cannot prevail with Jane to go forth with me,
but though I took a good occasion of going to the Trumpet she declined
coming, which vexed me.  'Je avait grande envie envers elle, avec vrai
amour et passion'.  Thence home and to my office till one in the morning,
setting to rights in writing this day's two accounts of Povy and Taylor,
and then quietly to bed.  This day I had several letters from several
places, of our bringing in great numbers of Dutch ships.

10th.  Lay long, at which I am ashamed, because of so many people
observing it that know not how late I sit up, and for fear of Sir W.
Batten's speaking of it to others, he having staid for me a good while. At
the office all the morning, where comes my Lord Brunkard with his patent
in his hand, and delivered it to Sir J. Minnes and myself, we alone being
there all the day, and at noon I in his coach with him to the 'Change,
where he set me down; a modest civil person he seems to be, but wholly
ignorant in the business of the Navy as possible, but I hope to make a
friend of him, being a worthy man.  Thence after hearing the great newes
of so many Dutchmen being brought in to Portsmouth and elsewhere, which it
is expected will either put them upon present revenge or despair, I with
Sir W. Rider and Cutler to dinner all alone to the Great James, where good
discourse, and, I hope, occasion of getting something hereafter.  After
dinner to White Hall to the Fishery, where the Duke was with us.  So home,
and late at my office, writing many letters, then home to supper and to
bed.  Yesterday come home, and this night I visited Sir W. Pen, who
dissembles great respect and love to me, but I understand him very well.
Major Holmes is come from Guinny, and is now at Plymouth with great
wealth, they say.

11th (Lord's day).  Up and to church alone in the morning.  Dined at home,
mighty pleasantly.  In the afternoon I to the French church, where much
pleased with the three sisters of the parson, very handsome, especially in
their noses, and sing prettily.  I heard a good sermon of the old man,
touching duty to parents.  Here was Sir Samuel Morland and his lady very
fine, with two footmen in new liverys (the church taking much notice of
them), and going into their coach after sermon with great gazeing.  So I
home, and my cozen, Mary Pepys's husband, comes after me, and told me that
out of the money he received some months since he did receive 18d. too
much, and did now come and give it me, which was very pretty.  So home,
and there found Mr. Andrews and his lady, a well-bred and a tolerable
pretty woman, and by and by Mr. Hill and to singing, and then to supper,
then to sing again, and so good night.  To prayers and tonight [bed].  It
is a little strange how these Psalms of Ravenscroft after 2 or 3 times
singing prove but the same again, though good.  No diversity appearing at
all almost.

12th.  Up, and with Sir W. Batten by coach to White Hall, where all of us
with the Duke; Mr. Coventry privately did tell me the reason of his advice
against our pretences to the Prize Office (in his letter from Portsmouth),
because he knew that the King and the Duke had resolved to put in some
Parliament men that have deserved well, and that would needs be obliged,
by putting them in.  Thence homeward, called at my bookseller's and
bespoke some books against the year's out, and then to the 'Change, and so
home to dinner, and then to the office, where my Lord Brunkard comes and
reads over part of our Instructions in the Navy--and I expounded it to
him, so he is become my disciple.  He gone, comes Cutler to tell us that
the King of France hath forbid any canvass to be carried out of his
kingdom, and I to examine went with him to the East India house to see a
letter, but came too late.  So home again, and there late till 12 at night
at my office, and then home to supper and to bed.  This day (to see how
things are ordered in the world), I had a command from the Earle of
Sandwich, at Portsmouth, not to be forward with Mr. Cholmly and Sir J.
Lawson about the Mole at Tangier, because that what I do therein will
(because of his friendship to me known) redound against him, as if I had
done it upon his score.  So I wrote to my Lord my mistake, and am
contented to promise never to pursue it more, which goes against my mind
with all my heart.

13th.  Lay long in bed, then up, and many people to speak with me.  Then
to my office, and dined at noon at home, then to the office again, where
we sat all the afternoon, and then home at night to a little supper, and
so after my office again at 12 at night home to bed.

14th.  Up, and after a while at the office, I abroad in several places,
among others to my bookseller's, and there spoke for several books against
New Year's day, I resolving to lay out about L7 or L8, God having given me
some profit extraordinary of late; and bespoke also some plate, spoons,
and forks.  I pray God keep me from too great expenses, though these will
still be pretty good money.  Then to the 'Change, and I home to dinner,
where Creed and Mr. Caesar, my boy's lute master, who plays indeed mighty
finely, and after dinner I abroad, parting from Creed, and away to and
fro, laying out or preparing for laying out more money, but I hope and
resolve not to exceed therein, and to-night spoke for some fruit for the
country for my father against Christmas, and where should I do it, but at
the pretty woman's, that used to stand at the doore in Fanchurch Streete,
I having a mind to know her.  So home, and late at my office, evening
reckonings with Shergoll, hoping to get money by the business, and so away
home to supper and to bed, not being very well through my taking cold of
late, and so troubled with some wind.

15th.  Called up very betimes by Mr. Cholmly, and with him a good while
about some of his Tangier accounts; and, discoursing of the condition of
Tangier, he did give me the whole account of the differences between
Fitzgerald and Norwood, which were very high on both sides, but most
imperious and base on Fitzgerald's, and yet through my Lord FitzHarding's
means, the Duke of York is led rather to blame Norwood and to speake that
he should be called home, than be sensible of the other.  He is a creature
of FitzHarding's, as a fellow that may be done with what he will, and,
himself certainly pretending to be Generall of the King's armies, when
Monk dyeth, desires to have as few great or wise men in employment as he
can now, but such as he can put in and keep under, which he do this
coxcomb Fitzgerald.  It seems, of all mankind there is no man so led by
another as the Duke is by Lord Muskerry and this FitzHarding. insomuch, as
when the King would have him to be Privy-Purse, the Duke wept, and said,
"But, Sir, I must have your promise, if you will have my dear Charles from
me, that if ever you have occasion for an army again, I may have him with
me; believing him to be the best commander of an army in the world."  But
Mr. Cholmly thinks, as all other men I meet with do, that he is a very
ordinary fellow.  It is strange how the Duke also do love naturally, and
affect the Irish above the English.  He, of the company he carried with
him to sea, took above two-thirds Irish and French.  He tells me the King
do hate my Lord Chancellor; and that they, that is the King and my Lord
FitzHarding, do laugh at him for a dull fellow; and in all this business
of the Dutch war do nothing by his advice, hardly consulting him.  Only he
is a good minister in other respects, and the King cannot be without him;
but, above all, being the Duke's father-in-law, he is kept in; otherwise
FitzHarding were able to fling down two of him.  This, all the wise and
grave lords see, and cannot help it; but yield to it.  But he bemoans what
the end of it may be, the King being ruled by these men, as he hath been
all along since his coming; to the razing all the strong-holds in
Scotland, and giving liberty to the Irish in Ireland, whom Cromwell had
settled all in one corner; who are now able, and it is feared everyday a
massacre again among them.  He being gone I abroad to the carrier's, to
see some things sent away to my father against Christmas, and thence to
Moorfields, and there up and down to several houses to drink to look for a
place 'pour rencontrer la femme de je sais quoi' against next Monday, but
could meet none.  So to the Coffeehouse, where great talke of the Comet
seen in several places; and among our men at sea, and by my Lord Sandwich,
to whom I intend to write about it to-night.  Thence home to dinner, and
then to the office, where all the afternoon, and in the evening home to
supper, and then to the office late, and so to bed.  This night I begun to
burn wax candles in my closett at the office, to try the charge, and to
see whether the smoke offends like that of tallow candles.

16th.  Up, and by water to Deptford, thinking to have met 'la femme de'
Bagwell, but failed, and having done some business at the yard, I back
again, it being a fine fresh morning to walk.  Back again, Mr. Wayth
walking with me to Half-Way House talking about Mr. Castle's fine knees
lately delivered in.  In which I am well informed that they are not as
they should be to make them knees, and I hope shall make good use of it to
the King's service.  Thence home, and having dressed myself, to the
'Change, and thence home to dinner, and so abroad by coach with my wife,
and bought a looking glasse by the Old Exchange, which costs me L5 5s. and
6s. for the hooks.  A very fair glasse.  So toward my cozen Scott's, but
meeting my Lady Sandwich's coach, my wife turned back to follow them,
thinking they might, as they did, go to visit her, and I 'light and to
Mrs. Harman, and there staid and talked in her shop with her, and much
pleased I am with her.  We talked about Anthony Joyce's giving over trade
and that he intends to live in lodgings, which is a very mad, foolish
thing.  She tells me she hears and believes it is because he, being now
begun to be called on offices, resolves not to take the new oathe, he
having formerly taken the Covenant or Engagement, but I think he do very
simply and will endeavour for his wife's sake to advise him therein.
Thence to my cozen Scott's, and there met my cozen Roger Pepys, and Mrs.
Turner, and The. and Joyce, and prated all the while, and so with the
"corps" to church and heard a very fine sermon of the Parson of the
parish, and so homeward with them in their coach, but finding it too late
to go home with me, I took another coach and so home, and after a while at
my office, home to supper and to bed.

17th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning.  At noon I to
the 'Change, and there, among others, had my first meeting with Mr.
L'Estrange, who hath endeavoured several times to speak with me.  It is to
get, now and then, some newes of me, which I shall, as I see cause, give
him.  He is a man of fine conversation, I think, but I am sure most
courtly and full of compliments.  Thence home to dinner, and then come the
looking-glass man to set up the looking-glass I bought yesterday, in my
dining-room, and very handsome it is.  So abroad by coach to White Hall,
and there to the Committee of Tangier, and then the Fishing.  Mr. Povy did
in discourse give me a rub about my late bill for money that I did get of
him, which vexed me and stuck in my mind all this evening, though I know
very well how to cleare myself at the worst.  So home and to my office,
where late, and then home to bed.  Mighty talke there is of this Comet
that is seen a'nights; and the King and Queene did sit up last night to
see it, and did, it seems.  And to-night I thought to have done so too;
but it is cloudy, and so no stars appear.  But I will endeavour it.  Mr.
Gray did tell me to-night, for certain, that the Dutch, as high as they
seem, do begin to buckle; and that one man in this Kingdom did tell the
King that he is offered L40,000 to make a peace, and others have been
offered money also.  It seems the taking of their Bourdeaux fleete thus,
arose from a printed Gazette of the Dutch's boasting of fighting, and
having beaten the English: in confidence whereof (it coming to Bourdeaux),
all the fleete comes out, and so falls into our hands.

18th (Lord's day).  To church, where, God forgive me! I spent most of my
time in looking [on] my new Morena--[a brunette]--at the other side of the
church, an acquaintance of Pegg Pen's.  So home to dinner, and then to my
chamber to read Ben Johnson's Cataline, a very excellent piece, and so to
church again, and thence we met at the office to hire ships, being in
great haste and having sent for several masters of ships to come to us.
Then home, and there Mr. Andrews and Hill come and we sung finely, and by
and by Mr. Fuller, the Parson, and supped with me, he and a friend of his,
but my musique friends would not stay supper.  At and after supper Mr.
Fuller and I told many storys of apparitions and delusions thereby, and I
out with my storys of Tom Mallard.  He gone, I a little to my office, and
then to prayers and to bed.

19th.  Going to bed betimes last night we waked betimes, and from our
people's being forced to take the key to go out to light a candle, I was
very angry and begun to find fault with my wife for not commanding her
servants as she ought.  Thereupon she giving me some cross answer I did
strike her over her left eye such a blow as the poor wretch did cry out
and was in great pain, but yet her spirit was such as to endeavour to bite
and scratch me.  But I coying--[stroking or caressing]--with her made her
leave crying, and sent for butter and parsley, and friends presently one
with another, and I up, vexed at my heart to think what I had done, for
she was forced to lay a poultice or something to her eye all day, and is
black, and the people of the house observed it.  But I was forced to rise,
and up and with Sir J. Minnes to White Hall, and there we waited on the
Duke.  And among other things Mr. Coventry took occasion to vindicate
himself before the Duke and us, being all there, about the choosing of
Taylor for Harwich.  Upon which the Duke did clear him, and did tell us
that he did expect, that, after he had named a man, none of us shall then
oppose or find fault with the man; but if we had anything to say, we ought
to say it before he had chose him.  Sir G. Carteret thought himself
concerned, and endeavoured to clear himself: and by and by Sir W. Batten
did speak, knowing himself guilty, and did confess, that being pressed by
the Council he did say what he did, that he was accounted a fanatique; but
did not know that at that time he had been appointed by his Royal
Highness.  To which the Duke [replied] that it was impossible but he must
know that he had appointed him; and so it did appear that the Duke did
mean all this while Sir W. Batten.  So by and by we parted, and Mr.
Coventry did privately tell me that he did this day take this occasion to
mention the business to give the Duke an opportunity of speaking his mind
to Sir W. Batten in this business, of which I was heartily glad.  Thence
home, and not finding Bagwell's wife as I expected, I to the 'Change and
there walked up and down, and then home, and she being come I bid her go
and stay at Mooregate for me, and after going up to my wife (whose eye is
very bad, but she is in very good temper to me), and after dinner I to the
place and walked round the fields again and again, but not finding her I
to the 'Change, and there found her waiting for me and took her away, and
to an alehouse, and there I made much of her, and then away thence and to
another and endeavoured to caress her, but 'elle ne voulait pas', which
did vex me, but I think it was chiefly not having a good easy place to do
it upon.  So we broke up and parted and I to the office, where we sat
hiring of ships an hour or two, and then to my office, and thence (with
Captain Taylor home to my house) to give him instructions and some notice
of what to his great satisfaction had happened to-day.  Which I do because
I hope his coming into this office will a little cross Sir W. Batten and
may do me good. He gone, I to supper with my wife, very pleasant, and then
a little to my office and to bed.  My mind, God forgive me, too much
running upon what I can 'ferais avec la femme de Bagwell demain', having
promised to go to Deptford and 'a aller a sa maison avec son mari' when I
come thither.

20th.  Up and walked to Deptford, where after doing something at the yard
I walked, without being observed, with Bagwell home to his house, and
there was very kindly used, and the poor people did get a dinner for me in
their fashion, of which I also eat very well.  After dinner I found
occasion of sending him abroad, and then alone 'avec elle je tentais a
faire ce que je voudrais et contre sa force je le faisais biens que passe
a mon contentment'.  By and by he coming back again I took leave and
walked home, and then there to dinner, where Dr. Fayrebrother come to see
me and Luellin.  We dined, and I to the office, leaving them, where we sat
all the afternoon, and I late at the office.  To supper and to the office
again very late, then home to bed.

21st.  Up, and after evening reckonings to this day with Mr. Bridges, the
linnen draper, for callicos, I out to Doctors' Commons, where by agreement
my cozen Roger and I did meet my cozen Dr. Tom Pepys, and there a great
many and some high words on both sides, but I must confess I was troubled;
first, to find my cozen Roger such a simple but well-meaning man as he is;
next to think that my father, out of folly and vain glory, should now and
then (as by their words I gather) be speaking how he had set up his son
Tom with his goods and house, and now these words are brought against
him--I fear to the depriving him of all the profit the poor man intended
to make of the lease of his house and sale of his owne goods.  I intend to
make a quiet end if I can with the Doctor, being a very foul-tounged fool
and of great inconvenience to be at difference with such a one that will
make the base noise about it that he will. Thence, very much vexed to find
myself so much troubled about other men's matters, I to Mrs. Turner's, in
Salsbury Court, and with her a little, and carried her, the porter staying
for me, our eagle, which she desired the other day, and we were glad to be
rid of her, she fouling our house of office mightily.  They are much
pleased with her.  And thence I home and after dinner to the office, where
Sir W. Rider and Cutler come, and in dispute I very high with them against
their demands, I hope to no hurt to myself, for I was very plain with them
to the best of my reason.  So they gone I home to supper, then to the
office again and so home to bed. My Lord Sandwich this day writes me word
that he hath seen (at Portsmouth) the Comet, and says it is the most
extraordinary thing that ever he saw.

22nd.  Up and betimes to my office, and then out to several places, among
others to Holborne to have spoke with one Mr. Underwood about some English
hemp, he lies against Gray's Inn.  Thereabouts I to a barber's shop to
have my hair cut, and there met with a copy of verses, mightily commended
by some gentlemen there, of my Lord Mordaunt's, in excuse of his going to
sea this late expedition, with the Duke of Yorke.  But, Lord! they are but
sorry things; only a Lord made them.  Thence to the 'Change; and there,
among the merchants, I hear fully the news of our being beaten to dirt at
Guinny, by De Ruyter with his fleete.  The particulars, as much as by Sir
G. Carteret afterwards I heard, I have said in a letter to my Lord
Sandwich this day at Portsmouth; it being most wholly to the utter ruine
of our Royall Company, and reproach and shame to the whole nation, as well
as justification to them in their doing wrong to no man as to his private
[property], only takeing whatever is found to belong to the Company, and
nothing else.  Dined at the Dolphin, Sir G. Carteret, Sir J. Minnes, Sir
W. Batten, and I, with Sir W. Boreman and Sir Theophilus Biddulph and
others, Commissioners of the Sewers, about our place below to lay masts
in.  But coming a little too soon, I out again, and tooke boat down to
Redriffe; and just in time within two minutes, and saw the new vessel of
Sir William Petty's launched, the King and Duke being there.

     [Pepys was wrong as to the name of Sir William Petty's new
     doublekeeled boat.  On February 13th, 1664-65, he gives the correct
     title, which was "The Experiment."]

It swims and looks finely, and I believe will do well.  The name I think
is Twilight, but I do not know certainly.  Coming away back immediately to
dinner, where a great deal of good discourse, and Sir G. Carteret's
discourse of this Guinny business, with great displeasure at the losse of
our honour there, and do now confess that the trade brought all these
troubles upon us between the Dutch and us.  Thence to the office and there
sat late, then I to my office and there till 12 at night, and so home to
bed weary.

23rd.  Up and to my office, then come by appointment cozen Tom Trice to
me, and I paid him the L20 remaining due to him upon the bond of L100
given him by agreement November, 1663, to end the difference between us
about my aunt's, his mother's, money.  And here, being willing to know the
worst, I told him, "I hope now there is nothing remaining between you and
I of future dispute."  "No," says he, "nothing at all that I know of, but
only a small matter of about 20 or 30s. that my father Pepys received for
me of rent due to me in the country, which I will in a day or two bring
you an account of," and so we parted.  Dined at home upon a good turkey
which Mr. Sheply sent us, then to the office all the afternoon, Mr. Cutler
and others coming to me about business.  I hear that the Dutch have
prepared a fleete to go the backway to the Streights, where without doubt
they will master our fleete.  This put to that of Guinny makes me fear
them mightily, and certainly they are a most wise people, and careful of
their business.  The King of France, they say, do declare himself obliged
to defend them, and lays claim by his Embassador to the wines we have
taken from the Dutch Bourdeaux men, and more, it is doubted whether the
Swede will be our friend or no.  Pray God deliver us out of these
troubles!  This day Sir W. Batten sent and afterwards spoke to me, to have
me and my wife come and dine with them on Monday next: which is a mighty
condescension in them, and for some great reason I am sure, or else it
pleases God by my late care of business to make me more considerable even
with them than I am sure they would willingly owne me to be.  God make me
thankfull and carefull to preserve myself so, for I am sure they hate me
and it is hope or fear that makes them flatter me. It being a bright
night, which it has not been a great while, I purpose to endeavour to be
called in the morning to see the Comet, though I fear we shall not see it,
because it rises in the east but 16 degrees, and then the houses will
hinder us.

24th.  Having sat up all night to past two o'clock this morning, our
porter, being appointed, comes and tells us that the bellman tells him
that the star is seen upon Tower Hill; so I, that had been all night
setting in order all my old papers in my chamber, did leave off all, and
my boy and I to Tower Hill, it being a most fine, bright moonshine night,
and a great frost; but no Comet to be seen.  So after running once round
the Hill, I and Tom, we home and then to bed.  Rose about 9 o'clock and
then to the office, where sitting all the morning.  At noon to the
'Change, to the Coffee-house; and there heard Sir Richard Ford tell the
whole story of our defeat at Guinny.  Wherein our men are guilty of the
most horrid cowardice and perfidiousness, as he says and tells it, that
ever Englishmen were.  Captain Raynolds, that was the only commander of
any of the King's ships there, was shot at by De Ruyter, with a bloody
flag flying.  He, instead of opposing (which, indeed, had been to no
purpose, but only to maintain honour), did poorly go on board himself, to
ask what De Ruyter would have; and so yielded to whatever Ruyter would
desire.  The King and Duke are highly vexed at it, it seems, and the
business deserves it.  Thence home to dinner, and then abroad to buy some
things, and among others to my bookseller's, and there saw several books I
spoke for, which are finely bound and good books to my great content. So
home and to my office, where late.  This evening I being informed did look
and saw the Comet, which is now, whether worn away or no I know not, but
appears not with a tail, but only is larger and duller than any other
star, and is come to rise betimes, and to make a great arch, and is gone
quite to a new place in the heavens than it was before: but I hope in a
clearer night something more will be seen.  So home to bed.

25th (Lord's day and Christmas day).  Up (my wife's eye being ill still of
the blow I did in a passion give her on Monday last) to church alone,
where Mr. Mills, a good sermon.  To dinner at home, where very pleasant
with my wife and family.  After dinner I to Sir W. Batten's, and there
received so much good usage (as I have of late done) from him and my Lady,
obliging me and my wife, according to promise, to come and dine with them
to-morrow with our neighbours, that I was in pain all the day, and night
too after, to know how to order the business of my wife's not going, and
by discourse receive fresh instances of Sir J. Minnes's folly in
complaining to Sir G. Carteret of Sir W. Batten and me for some family
offences, such as my having of a stopcock to keepe the water from them,
which vexes me, but it would more but that Sir G. Carteret knows him very
well.  Thence to the French church, but coming too late I returned and to
Mr. Rawlinson's church, where I heard a good sermon of one that I remember
was at Paul's with me, his name Maggett; and very great store of fine
women there is in this church, more than I know anywhere else about us.
So home and to my chamber, looking over and setting in order my papers and
books, and so to supper, and then to prayers and to bed.

26th.  Up, and with Sir W. Pen to White Hall, and there with the rest did
our usual business before the Duke, and then with Sir W. Batten back and
to his house, where I by sicknesse excused my wife's coming to them
to-day.  Thence I to the Coffeehouse, where much good discourse, and all
the opinion now is that the Dutch will avoid fighting with us at home, but
do all the hurte they can to us abroad; which it may be they may for a
while, but that, I think, cannot support them long.  Thence to Sir W.
Batten's, where Mr. Coventry and all our families here, women and all, and
Sir R. Ford and his, and a great feast and good discourse and merry, there
all the afternoon and evening till late, only stepped in to see my wife,
then to my office to enter my day's work, and so home to bed, where my
people and wife innocently at cards very merry, and I to bed, leaving them
to their sport and blindman's buff.

27th.  My people came to bed, after their sporting, at four o'clock in the
morning; I up at seven, and to Deptford and Woolwich in a gally; the Duke
calling to me out of the barge in which the King was with him going down
the river, to know whither I was going.  I told him to Woolwich, but was
troubled afterward I should say no farther, being in a gally, lest he
think me too profuse in my journeys.  Did several businesses, and then
back again by two o'clock to Sir J. Minnes's to dinner by appointment,
where all yesterday's company but Mr. Coventry, who could not come.  Here
merry, and after an hour's chat I down to the office, where busy late, and
then home to supper and to bed.  The Comet appeared again to-night, but
duskishly.  I went to bed, leaving my wife and all her folks, and Will
also, too, come to make Christmas gambolls to-night.

28th.  I waked in the morning about 6 o'clock and my wife not come to bed;
I lacked a pot, but there was none, and bitter cold, so was forced to rise
and piss in the chimney, and to bed again.  Slept a little longer, and
then hear my people coming up, and so I rose, and my wife to bed at eight
o'clock in the morning, which vexed me a little, but I believe there was
no hurt in it all, but only mirthe, therefore took no notice.  I abroad
with Sir W. Batten to the Council Chamber, where all of us to discourse
about the way of measuring ships and the freight fit to give for them by
the tun, where it was strange methought to hear so poor discourses among
the Lords themselves, and most of all to see how a little empty matter
delivered gravely by Sir W. Pen was taken mighty well, though nothing in
the earth to the purpose.  But clothes, I perceive more and more every
day, is a great matter.  Thence home with Sir W. Batten by coach, and I
home to dinner, finding my wife still in bed.  After dinner abroad, and
among other things visited my Lady Sandwich, and was there, with her and
the young ladies, playing at cards till night.  Then home and to my office
late, then home to bed, leaving my wife and people up to more sports, but
without any great satisfaction to myself therein.

29th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning.  Then whereas I
should have gone and dined with Sir W. Pen (and the rest of the officers
at his house), I pretended to dine with my Lady Sandwich and so home,
where I dined well, and began to wipe and clean my books in my chamber in
order to the settling of my papers and things there thoroughly, and then
to the office, where all the afternoon sitting, and in the evening home to
supper, and then to my work again.

30th.  Lay very long in bed with my wife, it being very cold, and my wife
very full of a resolution to keepe within doors, not so much as to go to
church or see my Lady Sandwich before Easter next, which I am willing
enough to, though I seem the contrary.  This and other talke kept me a-bed
till almost 10 a'clock.  Then up and made an end of looking over all my
papers and books and taking everything out of my chamber to have all made
clean.  At noon dined, and after dinner forth to several places to pay
away money, to clear myself in all the world, and, among others, paid my
bookseller L6 for books I had from him this day, and the silversmith L22
18s. for spoons, forks, and sugar box, and being well pleased with seeing
my business done to my mind as to my meeting with people and having my
books ready for me, I home and to my office, and there did business late,
and then home to supper, prayers, and to bed.

31st.  At the office all the morning, and after dinner there again,
dispatched first my letters, and then to my accounts, not of the month but
of the whole yeare also, and was at it till past twelve at night, it being
bitter cold; but yet I was well satisfied with my worke, and, above all,
to find myself, by the great blessing of God, worth L1349, by which, as I
have spent very largely, so I have laid up above L500 this yeare above
what I was worth this day twelvemonth.  The Lord make me for ever thankful
to his holy name for it!  Thence home to eat a little and so to bed.  Soon
as ever the clock struck one, I kissed my wife in the kitchen by the
fireside, wishing her a merry new yeare, observing that I believe I was
the first proper wisher of it this year, for I did it as soon as ever the
clock struck one.

So ends the old yeare, I bless God, with great joy to me, not only from my
having made so good a yeare of profit, as having spent L420 and laid up
L540 and upwards; but I bless God I never have been in so good plight as
to my health in so very cold weather as this is, nor indeed in any hot
weather, these ten years, as I am at this day, and have been these four or
five months.  But I am at a great losse to know whether it be my hare's
foote, or taking every morning of a pill of turpentine, or my having left
off the wearing of a gowne.  My family is, my wife, in good health, and
happy with her; her woman Mercer, a pretty, modest, quiett mayde; her
chambermayde Besse, her cook mayde Jane, the little girl Susan, and my
boy, which I have had about half a yeare, Tom Edwards, which I took from
the King's chappell, and a pretty and loving quiett family I have as any
man in England.  My credit in the world and my office grows daily, and I
am in good esteeme with everybody, I think. My troubles of my uncle's
estate pretty well over; but it comes to be but of little profit to us, my
father being much supported by my purse.  But great vexations remain upon
my father and me from my brother Tom's death and ill condition, both to
our disgrace and discontent, though no great reason for either.  Publique
matters are all in a hurry about a Dutch warr.  Our preparations great;
our provocations against them great; and, after all our presumption, we
are now afeard as much of them, as we lately contemned them.  Every thing
else in the State quiett, blessed be God!  My Lord Sandwich at sea with
the fleete at Portsmouth; sending some about to cruise for taking of
ships, which we have done to a great number.  This Christmas I judged it
fit to look over all my papers and books; and to tear all that I found
either boyish or not to be worth keeping, or fit to be seen, if it should
please God to take me away suddenly.  Among others, I found these two or
three notes, which I thought fit to keep.

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Irish in Ireland, whom Cromwell had settled all in one corner
     Tear all that I found either boyish or not to be worth keeping

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS, PEPY'S DIARY 1664, COMPLETE:

     A real and not a complimentary acknowledgment
     A mad merry slut she is
     About several businesses, hoping to get money by them
     After many protestings by degrees I did arrive at what I would
     All divided that were bred so long at school together
     All ended in love
     All the men were dead of the plague, and the ship cast ashore
     And with the great men in curing of their claps
     At least 12 or 14,000 people in the street (to see the hanging)
     Bath at the top of his house
     Bearing more sayle will go faster than any other ships (multihull)
     Began discourse of my not getting of children
     Below what people think these great people say and do
     But the wench went, and I believe had her turn served
     Came to bed to me, but all would not make me friends
     Chatted with her, her husband out of the way
     Could not saw above 4 inches of the stone in a day
     Do look upon me as a remembrancer of his former vanity
     Doubtfull of himself, and easily be removed from his own opinion
     Drink a dish of coffee
     Even to the having bad words with my wife, and blows too
     Expected musique, the missing of which spoiled my dinner
     Expressly taking care that nobody might see this business done
     Fear of making her think me to be in a better condition
     Fear all his kindness is but only his lust to her
     Feared I might meet with some people that might know me
     Fetch masts from New England
     Few in any age that do mind anything that is abstruse
     Find myself to over-value things when a child
     Gadding abroad to look after beauties
     Generally with corruption, but most indeed with neglect
     God forgive me! what thoughts and wishes I had
     Good writers are not admired by the present
     Greatest businesses are done so superficially
     Had no mind to meddle with her
     Having some experience, but greater conceit of it than is fit
     Hear something of the effects of our last meeting (pregnancy?)
     Helping to slip their calfes when there is occasion
     Her months upon her is gone to bed
     Her impudent tricks and ways of getting money
     How little to be presumed of in our greatest undertakings
     I had agreed with Jane Welsh, but she came not, which vexed me
     I do not like his being angry and in debt both together to me
     I will not by any over submission make myself cheap
     I slept soundly all the sermon
     Ill from my late cutting my hair so close to my head
     In my dining-room she was doing something upon the pott
     In a hackney and full of people, was ashamed to be seen
     Ireland in a very distracted condition
     Irish in Ireland, whom Cromwell had settled all in one corner
     Jane going into the boat did fall down and show her arse
     King is mighty kind to these his bastard children
     King still do doat upon his women, even beyond all shame
     Lay long caressing my wife and talking
     Let her brew as she has baked
     Little children employed, every one to do something
     Mankind pleasing themselves in the easy delights of the world
     Meazles, we fear, or, at least, of a scarlett feavour
     Methought very ill, or else I am grown worse to please
     Mind to have her bring it home
     Mrs. Lane was gone forth, and so I missed of my intent
     My wife was angry with me for not coming home, and for gadding
     My leg fell in a hole broke on the bridge
     My wife made great means to be friends, coming to my bedside
     Never to trust too much to any man in the world
     New Netherlands to English rule, under the title of New York
     Not well, and so had no pleasure at all with my poor wife
     Not when we can, but when we list
     Not the greatest wits, but the steady man
     Nothing of the memory of a man, an houre after he is dead!
     Now against her going into the country (lay together)
     Periwigg he lately made me cleansed of its nits
     Play good, but spoiled with the ryme, which breaks the sense
     Pleased to look upon their pretty daughter
     Pray God give me a heart to fear a fall, and to prepare for it!
     Presse seamen, without which we cannot really raise men
     Pretty sayings, which are generally like paradoxes
     Reduced the Dutch settlement of New Netherlands to English rule
     Rotten teeth and false, set in with wire
     Ryme, which breaks the sense
     Saw "The German Princess" acted, by the woman herself
     Sent my wife to get a place to see Turner hanged
     Shakespeare's plays
     She had the cunning to cry a great while, and talk and blubber
     She had got and used some puppy-dog water
     Sheriffs did endeavour to get one jewell
     Slabbering my band sent home for another
     So home to prayers and to bed
     Staid two hours with her kissing her, but nothing more
     Strange slavery that I stand in to beauty
     Subject to be put into a disarray upon very small occasions
     Such open flattery is beastly
     Talked with Mrs. Lane about persuading her to Hawly
     Tear all that I found either boyish or not to be worth keeping
     That hair by hair had his horse's tail pulled off indeed
     Their saws have no teeth, but it is the sand only
     There eat and drank, and had my pleasure of her twice
     There did see Mrs. Lane.  .  .  .  .
     These Lords are hard to be trusted
     Things wear out of themselves and come fair again
     Thinks she is with child, but I neither believe nor desire it
     Till 12 at night, and then home to supper and to bed
     To my Lord Sandwich, thinking to have dined there
     Travels over the high hills in Asia above the clouds
     Up, my mind very light from my last night's accounts
     Upon a very small occasion had a difference again broke out
     Very angry we were, but quickly friends again
     Very high and very foule words from her to me
     We do nothing in this office like people able to carry on a warr
     Went against me to have my wife and servants look upon them
     What wine you drinke, lett it bee at meales
     What a sorry dispatch these great persons give to business
     What is there more to be had of a woman than the possessing her
     Where a trade hath once been and do decay, it never recovers
     Wherein every party has laboured to cheat another
     Willing to receive a bribe if it were offered me
     Would either conform, or be more wise, and not be catched!
     Would make a dogg laugh


                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

   TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                        DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.

                              1665 N.S.

                               JANUARY
                              1664-1665

January 1st (Lord's day).  Lay long in bed, having been busy late last
night, then up and to my office, where upon ordering my accounts and
papers with respect to my understanding my last year's gains and expense,
which I find very great, as I have already set down yesterday.  Now this
day I am dividing my expense, to see what my clothes and every particular
hath stood me in: I mean all the branches of my expense.  At noon a good
venison pasty and a turkey to ourselves without any body so much as
invited by us, a thing unusuall for so small a family of my condition: but
we did it and were very merry.  After dinner to my office again, where
very late alone upon my accounts, but have not brought them to order yet,
and very intricate I find it, notwithstanding my care all the year to keep
things in as good method as any man can do.  Past 11 o'clock home to
supper and to bed.

2nd.  Up, and it being a most fine, hard frost I walked a good way toward
White Hall, and then being overtaken with Sir W. Pen's coach, went into
it, and with him thither, and there did our usual business with the Duke.
Thence, being forced to pay a great deale of money away in boxes (that is,
basins at White Hall), I to my barber's, Gervas, and there had a little
opportunity of speaking with my Jane alone, and did give her something,
and of herself she did tell me a place where I might come to her on Sunday
next, which I will not fail, but to see how modestly and harmlessly she
brought it out was very pretty.  Thence to the Swan, and there did sport a
good while with Herbert's young kinswoman without hurt, though they being
abroad, the old people.  Then to the Hall, and there agreed with Mrs.
Martin, and to her lodgings which she has now taken to lie in, in Bow
Streete, pitiful poor things, yet she thinks them pretty, and so they are
for her condition I believe good enough.  Here I did 'ce que je voudrais
avec' her most freely, and it having cost 2s. in wine and cake upon her, I
away sick of her impudence, and by coach to my Lord Brunker's, by
appointment, in the Piazza, in Covent-Guarding; where I occasioned much
mirth with a ballet I brought with me, made from the seamen at sea to
their ladies in town; saying Sir W. Pen, Sir G. Ascue, and Sir J. Lawson
made them.  Here a most noble French dinner and banquet, the best I have
seen this many a day and good discourse. Thence to my bookseller's and at
his binder's saw Hooke's book of the Microscope,

     ["Micrographia: or some physiological descriptions of minute bodies
     made by Magnifying Glasses.  London, 1665," a very remarkable work
     with elaborate plates, some of which have been used for lecture
     illustrations almost to our own day.  On November 23rd, 1664, the
     President of the Royal Society was "desired to sign a licence for
     printing of Mr. Hooke's microscopical book."  At this time the book
     was mostly printed, but it was delayed, much to Hooke's disgust, by
     the examination of several Fellows of the Society.  In spite of this
     examination the council were anxious that the author should make it
     clear that he alone was responsible for any theory put forward, and
     they gave him notice to that effect.  Hooke made this clear in his
     dedication (see Birch's "History," vol. i., pp. 490-491)]

which is so pretty that I presently bespoke it, and away home to the
office, where we met to do something, and then though very late by coach
to Sir Ph. Warwicke's, but having company with him could not speak with
him.  So back again home, where thinking to be merry was vexed with my
wife's having looked out a letter in Sir Philip Sidney about jealousy for
me to read, which she industriously and maliciously caused me to do, and
the truth is my conscience told me it was most proper for me, and
therefore was touched at it, but tooke no notice of it, but read it out
most frankly, but it stucke in my stomach, and moreover I was vexed to
have a dog brought to my house to line our little bitch, which they make
him do in all their sights, which, God forgive me, do stir my jealousy
again, though of itself the thing is a very immodest sight.  However, to
cards with my wife a good while, and then to bed.

3rd.  Up, and by coach to Sir Ph. Warwicke's, the streete being full of
footballs, it being a great frost, and found him and Mr. Coventry walking
in St. James's Parke.  I did my errand to him about the felling of the
King's timber in the forests, and then to my Lord of Oxford, Justice in
Eyre, for his consent thereto, for want whereof my Lord Privy Seale stops
the whole business.  I found him in his lodgings, in but an ordinary
furnished house and roome where he was, but I find him to be a man of good
discreet replys.  Thence to the Coffee-house, where certain newes that the
Dutch have taken some of our colliers to the North; some say four, some
say seven.  Thence to the 'Change a while, and so home to dinner and to
the office, where we sat late, and then I to write my letters, and then to
Sir W. Batten's, who is going out of towne to Harwich to-morrow to set up
a light-house there, which he hath lately got a patent from the King to
set up, that will turne much to his profit. Here very merry, and so to my
office again, where very late, and then home to supper and to bed, but sat
up with my wife at cards till past two in the morning.

4th.  Lay long, and then up and to my Lord of Oxford's, but his Lordshipp
was in bed at past ten o'clock: and, Lord helpe us! so rude a dirty family
I never saw in my life.  He sent me out word my business was not done, but
should against the afternoon.  I thence to the Coffee-house, there but
little company, and so home to the 'Change, where I hear of some more of
our ships lost to the Northward.  So to Sir W. Batten's, but he was set
out before I got thither.  I sat long talking with my lady, and then home
to dinner.  Then come Mr. Moore to see me, and he and I to my Lord of
Oxford's, but not finding him within Mr. Moore and I to "Love in a Tubb,"
which is very merry, but only so by gesture, not wit at all, which
methinks is beneath the House.  So walked home, it being a very hard
frost, and I find myself as heretofore in cold weather to begin to burn
within and pimples and pricks all over my body, my pores with cold being
shut up.  So home to supper and to cards and to bed.

5th.  Up, it being very cold and a great snow and frost tonight.  To the
office, and there all the morning.  At noon dined at home, troubled at my
wife's being simply angry with Jane, our cook mayde (a good servant,
though perhaps hath faults and is cunning), and given her warning to be
gone.  So to the office again, where we sat late, and then I to my office,
and there very late doing business.  Home to supper and to the office
again, and then late home to bed.

6th.  Lay long in bed, but most of it angry and scolding with my wife
about her warning Jane our cookemayde to be gone and upon that she desires
to go abroad to-day to look a place.  A very good mayde she is and fully
to my mind, being neat, only they say a little apt to scold, but I hear
her not.  To my office all the morning busy.  Dined at home. To my office
again, being pretty well reconciled to my wife, which I did desire to be,
because she had designed much mirthe to-day to end Christmas with among
her servants.  At night home, being twelfenight, and there chose my piece
of cake, but went up to my viall, and then to bed, leaving my wife and
people up at their sports, which they continue till morning, not coming to
bed at all.

7th.  Up and to the office all the morning.  At noon dined alone, my wife
and family most of them a-bed.  Then to see my Lady Batten and sit with
her a while, Sir W. Batten being out of town, and then to my office doing
very much business very late, and then home to supper and to bed.

8th (Lord's day).  Up betimes, and it being a very fine frosty day, I and
my boy walked to White Hall, and there to the Chappell, where one Dr.
Beaumont' preached a good sermon, and afterwards a brave anthem upon the
150 Psalm, where upon the word "trumpet" very good musique was made.  So
walked to my Lady's and there dined with her (my boy going home), where
much pretty discourse, and after dinner walked to Westminster, and there
to the house where Jane Welsh had appointed me, but it being sermon time
they would not let me in, and said nobody was there to speak with me.  I
spent the whole afternoon walking into the Church and Abbey, and up and
down, but could not find her, and so in the evening took a coach and home,
and there sat discoursing with my wife, and by and by at supper, drinking
some cold drink I think it was, I was forced to go make water, and had
very great pain after it, but was well by and by and continued so, it
being only I think from the drink, or from my straining at stool to do
more than my body would.  So after prayers to bed.

9th.  Up and walked to White Hall, it being still a brave frost, and I in
perfect good health, blessed be God!  In my way saw a woman that broke her
thigh, in her heels slipping up upon the frosty streete.  To the Duke, and
there did our usual worke.  Here I saw the Royal Society bring their new
book, wherein is nobly writ their charter' and laws, and comes to be
signed by the Duke as a Fellow; and all the Fellows' hands are to be
entered there, and lie as a monument; and the King hath put his with the
word Founder.  Thence I to Westminster, to my barber's, and found occasion
to see Jane, but in presence of her mistress, and so could not speak to
her of her failing me yesterday, and then to the Swan to Herbert's girl,
and lost time a little with her, and so took coach, and to my Lord Crew's
and dined with him, who receives me with the greatest respect that could
be, telling me that he do much doubt of the successe of this warr with
Holland, we going about it, he doubts, by the instigation of persons that
do not enough apprehend the consequences of the danger of it, and therein
I do think with him.  Holmes was this day sent to the Tower,--[For taking
New York from the Dutch]--but I perceive it is made matter of jest only;
but if the Dutch should be our masters, it may come to be of earnest to
him, to be given over to them for a sacrifice, as Sir W. Rawly [Raleigh]
was.  Thence to White Hall to a Tangier Committee, where I was accosted
and most highly complimented by my Lord Bellasses,

     [John Belasyse, second son of Thomas, first Viscount Fauconberg,
     created Baron Belasyse of Worlaby, January 27th, 1644, Lord
     Lieutenant of the East Riding of Yorkshire, and Governor of Hull.
     He was appointed Governor of Tangier, and Captain of the Band of
     Gentlemen Pensioners.  He was a Roman Catholic, and therefore was
     deprived of all his appointments in 1672 by the provisions of the
     Test Act, but in 1684 James II. made him First Commissioner of the
     Treasury.  He died 1689.]

our new governor, beyond my expectation, or measure I could imagine he
would have given any man, as if I were the only person of business that he
intended to rely on, and desires my correspondence with him.  This I was
not only surprized at, but am well pleased with, and may make good use of
it.  Our patent is renewed, and he and my Lord Barkeley, and Sir Thomas
Ingram put in as commissioners.  Here some business happened which may
bring me some profit.  Thence took coach and calling my wife at her
tailor's (she being come this afternoon to bring her mother some apples,
neat's tongues, and wine); I home, and there at my office late with Sir W.
Warren, and had a great deal of good discourse and counsel from him, which
I hope I shall take, being all for my good in my deportment in my office,
yet with all honesty.  He gone I home to supper and to bed.

10th.  Lay long, it being still very cold, and then to the office, where
till dinner, and then home, and by and by to the office, where we sat and
were very late, and I writing letters till twelve at night, and then after
supper to bed.

11th.  Up, and very angry with my boy for lying long a bed and forgetting
his lute.  To my office all the morning.  At noon to the 'Change, and so
home to dinner.  After dinner to Gresham College to my Lord Brunker and
Commissioner Pett, taking, Mr. Castle with me there to discourse over his
draught of a ship he is to build for us.  Where I first found reason to
apprehend Commissioner Pett to be a man of an ability extraordinary in any
thing, for I found he did turn and wind Castle like a chicken in his
business, and that most pertinently and mister-like, and great pleasure it
was to me to hear them discourse, I, of late having studied something
thereof, and my Lord Brunker is a very able person also himself in this
sort of business, as owning himself to be a master in the business of all
lines and Conicall Sections: Thence home, where very late at my office
doing business to my content, though [God] knows with what ado it was that
when I was out I could get myself to come home to my business, or when I
was there though late would stay there from going abroad again. To supper
and to bed.  This evening, by a letter from Plymouth, I hear that two of
our ships, the Leopard and another, in the Straights, are lost by running
aground; and that three more had like to have been so, but got off,
whereof Captain Allen one: and that a Dutch fleete are gone thither; which
if they should meet with our lame ships, God knows what would become of
them.  This I reckon most sad newes; God make us sensible of it!  This
night, when I come home, I was much troubled to hear my poor canary bird,
that I have kept these three or four years, is dead.

12th.  Up, and to White Hall about getting a privy seal for felling of the
King's timber for the navy, and to the Lords' House to speak with my Lord
Privy Seale about it, and so to the 'Change, where to my last night's ill
news I met more.  Spoke with a Frenchman who was taken, but released, by a
Dutch man-of-war of thirty-six guns (with seven more of the like or
greater ships), off the North Foreland, by Margett.  Which is a strange
attempt, that they should come to our teeth; but the wind being easterly,
the wind that should bring our force from Portsmouth, will carry them away
home.  God preserve us against them, and pardon our making them in our
discourse so contemptible an enemy!  So home and to dinner, where Mr.
Hollyard with us dined.  So to the office, and there late till 11 at night
and more, and then home to supper and to bed.

13th.  Up betimes and walked to my Lord Bellasses's lodgings in Lincolne's
Inne Fieldes, and there he received and discoursed with me in the most
respectfull manner that could be, telling me what a character of my
judgment, and care, and love to Tangier he had received of me, that he
desired my advice and my constant correspondence, which he much valued,
and in my courtship, in which, though I understand his designe very well,
and that it is only a piece of courtship, yet it is a comfort to me that I
am become so considerable as to have him need to say that to me, which, if
I did not do something in the world, would never have been.  Here well
satisfied I to Sir Ph. Warwicke, and there did some business with him;
thence to Jervas's and there spent a little idle time with him, his wife,
Jane, and a sweetheart of hers.  So to the Hall awhile and thence to the
Exchange, where yesterday's newes confirmed, though in a little different
manner; but a couple of ships in the Straights we have lost, and the Dutch
have been in Margaret [Margate] Road.  Thence home to dinner and so abroad
and alone to the King's house, to a play, "The Traytor," where,
unfortunately, I met with Sir W. Pen, so that I must be forced to confess
it to my wife, which troubles me.  Thence walked home, being ill-satisfied
with the present actings of the House, and prefer the other House before
this infinitely.  To my Lady Batten's, where I find Pegg Pen, the first
time that ever I saw her to wear spots.  Here very merry, Sir W. Batten
being looked for to-night, but is not yet come from Harwich.  So home to
supper and to bed.

14th.  Up and to White Hall, where long waited in the Duke's chamber for a
Committee intended for Tangier, but none met, and so I home and to the
office, where we met a little, and then to the 'Change, where our late ill
newes confirmed in loss of two ships in the Straights, but are now the
Phoenix and Nonsuch!  Home to dinner, thence with my wife to the King's
house, there to see "Vulpone," a most excellent play; the best I think I
ever saw, and well, acted.  So with Sir W. Pen home in his coach, and then
to the office.  So home, to supper, and bed, resolving by the grace of God
from this day to fall hard to my business again, after some weeke or
fortnight's neglect.

15th (Lord's day).  Up, and after a little at my office to prepare a fresh
draught of my vowes for the next yeare, I to church, where a most insipid
young coxcomb preached.  Then home to dinner, and after dinner to read in
"Rushworth's Collections" about the charge against the late Duke of
Buckingham, in order to the fitting me to speak and understand the
discourse anon before the King about the suffering the Turkey merchants to
send out their fleete at this dangerous time, when we can neither spare
them ships to go, nor men, nor King's ships to convoy them.  At four
o'clock with Sir W. Pen in his coach to my Lord Chancellor's, where by and
by Mr. Coventry, Sir W. Pen, Sir J. Lawson, Sir G. Ascue, and myself were
called in to the King, there being several of the Privy Council, and my
Lord Chancellor lying at length upon a couch (of the goute I suppose); and
there Sir W. Pen begun, and he had prepared heads in a paper, and spoke
pretty well to purpose, but with so much leisure and gravity as was
tiresome; besides, the things he said were but very poor to a man in his
trade after a great consideration, but it was to purpose, indeed to
dissuade the King from letting these Turkey ships to go out: saying (in
short) the King having resolved to have 130 ships out by the spring, he
must have above 20 of them merchantmen.  Towards which, he in the whole
River could find but 12 or 14, and of them the five ships taken up by
these merchants were a part, and so could not be spared. That we should
need 30,000 [sailors] to man these 130 ships, and of them in service we
have not above 16,000; so we shall need 14,000 more.  That these ships
will with their convoys carry above 2,000 men, and those the best men that
could be got; it being the men used to the Southward that are the best men
for warr, though those bred in the North among the colliers are good for
labour.  That it will not be safe for the merchants, nor honourable for
the King, to expose these rich ships with his convoy of six ships to go,
it not being enough to secure them against the Dutch, who, without doubt,
will have a great fleete in the Straights. This, Sir J. Lawson enlarged
upon.  Sir G. Ascue he chiefly spoke that the warr and trade could not be
supported together, and, therefore, that trade must stand still to give
way to them.  This Mr. Coventry seconded, and showed how the medium of the
men the King hath one year with another employed in his Navy since his
coming, hath not been above 3,000 men, or at most 4,000 men; and now
having occasion of 30,000, the remaining 26,000 must be found out of the
trade of the nation.  He showed how the cloaths, sending by these
merchants to Turkey, are already bought and paid for to the workmen, and
are as many as they would send these twelve months or more; so the poor do
not suffer by their not going, but only the merchant, upon whose hands
they lit dead; and so the inconvenience is the less.  And yet for them he
propounded, either the King should, if his Treasure would suffer it, buy
them, and showed the losse would not be so great to him: or, dispense with
the Act of Navigation, and let them be carried out by strangers; and
ending that he doubted not but when the merchants saw there was no remedy,
they would and could find ways of sending them abroad to their profit.
All ended with a conviction (unless future discourse with the merchants
should alter it) that it was not fit for them to go out, though the ships
be loaded.  The King in discourse did ask me two or three questions about
my newes of Allen's loss in the Streights, but I said nothing as to the
business, nor am not much sorry for it, unless the King had spoke to me as
he did to them, and then I could have said something to the purpose I
think.  So we withdrew, and the merchants were called in.  Staying
without, my Lord Fitz Harding come thither, and fell to discourse of
Prince Rupert, and made nothing to say that his disease was the pox and
that he must be fluxed, telling the horrible degree of the disease upon
him with its breaking out on his head.  But above all I observed how he
observed from the Prince, that courage is not what men take it to be, a
contempt of death; for, says he, how chagrined the Prince was the other
day when he thought he should die, having no more mind to it than another
man.  But, says he, some men are more apt to think they shall escape than
another man in fight, while another is doubtfull he shall be hit.  But
when the first man is sure he shall die, as now the Prince is, he is as
much troubled and apprehensive of it as any man else; for, says he, since
we told [him] that we believe he would overcome his disease, he is as
merry, and swears and laughs and curses, and do all the things of a [man]
in health, as ever he did in his life; which, methought, was a most
extraordinary saying before a great many persons there of quality.  So by
and by with Sir W. Pen home again, and after supper to the office to
finish my vows, and so to bed.

16th.  Up and with Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen to White Hall, where we
did our business with the Duke.  Thence I to Westminster Hall and walked
up and down.  Among others Ned Pickering met me and tells me how active my
Lord is at sea, and that my Lord Hinchingbroke is now at Rome, and, by all
report, a very noble and hopefull gentleman.  Thence to Mr. Povy's, and
there met Creed, and dined well after his old manner of plenty and
curiosity.  But I sat in pain to think whether he would begin with me
again after dinner with his enquiry after my bill, but he did not, but
fell into other discourse, at which I was glad, but was vexed this morning
meeting of Creed at some bye questions that he demanded of me about some
such thing, which made me fear he meant that very matter, but I perceive
he did not.  Thence to visit my Lady Sandwich and so to a Tangier
Committee, where a great company of the new Commissioners, Lords, that in
behalfe of my Lord Bellasses are very loud and busy and call for Povy's
accounts, but it was a most sorrowful thing to see how he answered to
questions so little to the purpose, but to his owne wrong.  All the while
I sensible how I am concerned in my bill of L100 and somewhat more. So
great a trouble is fear, though in a case that at the worst will bear
enquiry.  My Lord Barkeley was very violent against Povy.  But my Lord
Ashly, I observe, is a most clear man in matters of accounts, and most
ingeniously did discourse and explain all matters.  We broke up, leaving
the thing to a Committee of which I am one.  Povy, Creed, and I staid
discoursing, I much troubled in mind seemingly for the business, but
indeed only on my own behalf, though I have no great reason for it, but so
painfull a thing is fear.  So after considering how to order business,
Povy and I walked together as far as the New Exchange and so parted, and I
by coach home.  To the office a while, then to supper and to bed.  This
afternoon Secretary Bennet read to the Duke of Yorke his letters, which
say that Allen

     [Among the State Papers is a letter from Captain Thomas Allin to Sir
     Richard Fanshaw, dated from "The Plymouth, Cadiz Bay," December
     25th, 1664, in which he writes: "On the 19th attacked with his seven
     ships left, a Dutch fleet of fourteen, three of which were men-of-
     war; sunk two vessels and took two others, one a rich prize from
     Smyrna; the others retired much battered.  Has also taken a Dutch
     prize laden with iron and planks, coming from Lisbon ("Calendar,"
     Domestic, 1664-65, p. 122).]

has met with the Dutch Smyrna fleet at Cales,--[The old form of the name
Cadiz.]--and sunk one and taken three.  How true or what these ships are
time will show, but it is good newes and the newes of our ships being lost
is doubted at dales and Malaga.  God send it false!

17th.  Up and walked to Mr. Povy's by appointment, where I found him and
Creed busy about fitting things for the Committee, and thence we to my
Lord Ashly's, where to see how simply, beyond all patience, Povy did
again, by his many words and no understanding, confound himself and his
business, to his disgrace, and rendering every body doubtfull of his being
either a foole or knave, is very wonderfull.  We broke up all
dissatisfied, and referred the business to a meeting of Mr. Sherwin and
others to settle, but here it was mighty strange methought to find myself
sit herein Committee with my hat on, while Mr. Sherwin stood bare as a
clerke, with his hat off to his Lord Ashlyand the rest, but I thank God I
think myself never a whit the better man for all that.  Thence with Creed
to the 'Change and Coffee-house, and so home, where a brave dinner, by
having a brace of pheasants and very merry about Povy's folly.  So anon to
the office, and there sitting very late, and then after a little time at
Sir W. Batten's, where I am mighty great and could if I thought it fit
continue so, I to the office again, and there very late, and so home to
the sorting of some of my books, and so to bed, the weather becoming
pretty warm, and I think and hope the frost will break.

18th.  Up and by and by to my bookseller's, and there did give thorough
direction for the new binding of a great many of my old books, to make my
whole study of the same binding, within very few.  Thence to my Lady
Sandwich's, who sent for me this morning.  Dined with her, and it was to
get a letter of hers conveyed by a safe hand to my Lord's owne hand at
Portsmouth, which I did undertake.  Here my Lady did begin to talk of what
she had heard concerning Creed, of his being suspected to be a fanatique
and a false fellow.  I told her I thought he was as shrewd and cunning a
man as any in England, and one that I would feare first should outwit me
in any thing.  To which she readily concurred.  Thence to Mr. Povy's by
agreement, and there with Mr. Sherwin, Auditor Beale, and Creed and I hard
at it very late about Mr. Povy's accounts, but such accounts I never did
see, or hope again to see in my days.  At night, late, they gone, I did
get him to put out of this account our sums that are in posse only yet,
which he approved of when told, but would never have stayed it if I had
been gone.  Thence at 9 at night home, and so to supper vexed and my head
akeing and to bed.

19th.  Up, and it being yesterday and to-day a great thaw it is not for a
man to walk the streets, but took coach and to Mr. Povy's, and there
meeting all of us again agreed upon an answer to the Lords by and by, and
thence we did come to Exeter House, and there was a witness of most [base]
language against Mr. Povy, from my Lord Peterborough, who is most
furiously angry with him, because the other, as a foole, would needs say
that the L26,000 was my Lord Peterborough's account, and that he had
nothing to do with it.  The Lords did find fault also with our answer, but
I think really my Lord Ashly would fain have the outside of an
Exchequer,--[This word is blotted, and the whole sentence is
confused.]--but when we come better to be examined.  So home by coach,
with my Lord Barkeley, who, by his discourse, I find do look upon Mr.
Coventry as an enemy, but yet professes great justice and pains.  I at
home after dinner to the office, and there sat all the afternoon and
evening, and then home to supper and to bed.  Memorandum.  This day and
yesterday, I think it is the change of the weather, I have a great deal of
pain, but nothing like what I use to have.  I can hardly keep myself
loose, but on the contrary am forced to drive away my pain.  Here I am so
sleepy I cannot hold open my eyes, and therefore must be forced to break
off this day's passages more shortly than I would and should have done.
This day was buried (but I could not be there) my cozen Percivall Angier;
and yesterday I received the newes that Dr. Tom Pepys is dead, at
Impington, for which I am but little sorry, not only because he would have
been troublesome to us, but a shame to his family and profession; he was
such a coxcomb.

20th.  Up and to Westminster, where having spoke with Sir Ph. Warwicke, I
to Jervas, and there I find them all in great disorder about Jane, her
mistress telling me secretly that she was sworn not to reveal anything,
but she was undone.  At last for all her oath she told me that she had
made herself sure to a fellow that comes to their house that can only
fiddle for his living, and did keep him company, and had plainly told her
that she was sure to him never to leave him for any body else.  Now they
were this day contriving to get her presently to marry one Hayes that was
there, and I did seem to persuade her to it.  And at last got them to
suffer me to advise privately, and by that means had her company and think
I shall meet her next Sunday, but I do really doubt she will be undone in
marrying this fellow.  But I did give her my advice, and so let her do her
pleasure, so I have now and then her company.  Thence to the Swan at noon,
and there sent for a bit of meat and dined, and had my baiser of the fille
of the house there, but nothing plus.  So took coach and to my Lady
Sandwich's, and so to my bookseller's, and there took home Hooke's book of
microscopy, a most excellent piece, and of which I am very proud.  So
home, and by and by again abroad with my wife about several businesses,
and met at the New Exchange, and there to our trouble found our pretty
Doll is gone away to live they say with her father in the country, but I
doubt something worse.  So homeward, in my way buying a hare and taking it
home, which arose upon my discourse to-day with Mr. Batten, in Westminster
Hall, who showed me my mistake that my hare's foote hath not the joynt to
it; and assures me he never had his cholique since he carried it about
him: and it is a strange thing how fancy works, for I no sooner almost
handled his foote but my belly began to be loose and to break wind, and
whereas I was in some pain yesterday and t'other day and in fear of more
to-day, I became very well, and so continue.  At home to my office a
while, and so to supper, read, and to cards, and to bed.

21st.  At the office all the morning.  Thence my Lord Brunker carried me
as far as Mr. Povy's, and there I 'light and dined, meeting Mr. Sherwin,
Creed, &c., there upon his accounts.  After dinner they parted and Mr.
Povy carried me to Somersett House, and there showed me the
Queene-Mother's chamber and closett, most beautiful places for furniture
and pictures; and so down the great stone stairs to the garden, and tried
the brave echo upon the stairs; which continues a voice so long as the
singing three notes, concords, one after another, they all three shall
sound in consort together a good while most pleasantly.  Thence to a
Tangier Committee at White Hall, where I saw nothing ordered by judgment,
but great heat and passion and faction now in behalf of my Lord Bellasses,
and to the reproach of my Lord Tiviott, and dislike as it were of former
proceedings.  So away with Mr. Povy, he carrying me homeward to Mark Lane
in his coach, a simple fellow I now find him, to his utter shame in his
business of accounts, as none but a sorry foole would have discovered
himself; and yet, in little, light, sorry things very cunning; yet, in the
principal, the most ignorant man I ever met with in so great trust as he
is.  To my office till past 12, and then home to supper and to bed, being
now mighty well, and truly I cannot but impute it to my fresh hare's
foote.  Before I went to bed I sat up till two o'clock in my chamber
reading of Mr. Hooke's Microscopicall Observations, the most ingenious
book that ever I read in my life.

22nd (Lord's day).  Up, leaving my wife in bed, being sick of her months,
and to church.  Thence home, and in my wife's chamber dined very merry,
discoursing, among other things, of a design I have come in my head this
morning at church of making a match between Mrs. Betty Pickering and Mr.
Hill, my friend the merchant, that loves musique and comes to me
a'Sundays, a most ingenious and sweet-natured and highly accomplished
person.  I know not how their fortunes may agree, but their disposition
and merits are much of a sort, and persons, though different, yet equally,
I think, acceptable.  After dinner walked to Westminster, and after being
at the Abbey and heard a good anthem well sung there, I as I had appointed
to the Trumpett, there expecting when Jane Welsh should come, but anon
comes a maid of the house to tell me that her mistress and master would
not let her go forth, not knowing of my being here, but to keep her from
her sweetheart.  So being defeated, away by coach home, and there spent
the evening prettily in discourse with my wife and Mercer, and so to
supper, prayers, and to bed.

23rd.  Up, and with Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen to White Hall; but there
finding the Duke gone to his lodgings at St. James's for all together, his
Duchesse being ready to lie in, we to him, and there did our usual
business.  And here I met the great newes confirmed by the Duke's own
relation, by a letter from Captain Allen.  First, of our own loss of two
ships, the Phoenix and Nonesuch, in the Bay of Gibraltar: then of his, and
his seven ships with him, in the Bay of Cales, or thereabouts, fighting
with the 34 Dutch Smyrna fleete; sinking the King Salamon, a ship worth a
L150,000 or more, some say L200,000, and another; and taking of three
merchant-ships.  Two of our ships were disabled, by the Dutch
unfortunately falling against their will against them; the Advice, Captain
W. Poole, and Antelope, Captain Clerke: The Dutch men-of-war did little
service.  Captain Allen did receive many shots at distance before he would
fire one gun, which he did not do till he come within pistol-shot of his
enemy.  The Spaniards on shore at Cales did stand laughing at the Dutch,
to see them run away and flee to the shore, 34 or thereabouts, against
eight Englishmen at most.  I do purpose to get the whole relation, if I
live, of Captain Allen himself.  In our loss of the two ships in the Bay
of Gibraltar, it is observable how the world do comment upon the
misfortune of Captain Moone of the Nonesuch (who did lose, in the same
manner, the Satisfaction), as a person that hath ill-luck attending him;
without considering that the whole fleete was ashore. Captain Allen led
the way, and Captain Allen himself writes that all the masters of the
fleete, old and young, were mistaken, and did carry their ships aground.
But I think I heard the Duke say that Moone, being put into the Oxford,
had in this conflict regained his credit, by sinking one and taking
another.  Captain Seale of the Milford hath done his part very well, in
boarding the King Salamon, which held out half an hour after she was
boarded; and his men kept her an hour after they did master her, and then
she sunk, and drowned about 17 of her men.  Thence to Jervas's, my mind,
God forgive me, running too much after some folly, but 'elle' not being
within I away by coach to the 'Change, and thence home to dinner. And
finding Mrs. Bagwell waiting at the office after dinner, away she and I to
a cabaret where she and I have eat before, and there I had her company
'tout' and had 'mon plaisir' of 'elle'.  But strange to see how a woman,
notwithstanding her greatest pretences of love 'a son mari' and religion,
may be 'vaincue'.  Thence to the Court of the Turkey Company at Sir Andrew
Rickard's to treat about carrying some men of ours to Tangier, and had
there a very civil reception, though a denial of the thing as not
practicable with them, and I think so too.  So to my office a little and
to Jervas's again, thinking 'avoir rencontrais' Jane, 'mais elle n'etait
pas dedans'.  So I back again and to my office, where I did with great
content 'ferais' a vow to mind my business, and 'laisser aller les femmes'
for a month, and am with all my heart glad to find myself able to come to
so good a resolution, that thereby I may follow my business, which and my
honour thereby lies a bleeding.  So home to supper and to bed.

24th.  Up and by coach to Westminster Hall and the Parliament House, and
there spoke with Mr. Coventry and others about business and so back to the
'Change, where no news more than that the Dutch have, by consent of all
the Provinces, voted no trade to be suffered for eighteen months, but that
they apply themselves wholly to the warr.

     [This statement of a total prohibition of all trade, and for so long
     a period as eighteen months, by a government so essentially
     commercial as that of the United Provinces, seems extraordinary.
     The fact was, that when in the beginning of the year 1665 the States
     General saw that the war with England was become inevitable, they
     took several vigorous measures, and determined to equip a formidable
     fleet, and with a view to obtain a sufficient number of men to man
     it, prohibited all navigation, especially in the great and small
     fisheries as they were then called, and in the whale fishery.  This
     measure appears to have resembled the embargoes so commonly resorted
     to in this country on similar occasions, rather than a total
     prohibition of trade.--B.]

And they say it is very true, but very strange, for we use to believe they
cannot support themselves without trade.  Thence home to dinner and then
to the office, where all the afternoon, and at night till very late, and
then home to supper and bed, having a great cold, got on Sunday last, by
sitting too long with my head bare, for Mercer to comb my hair and wash my
eares.

25th.  Up, and busy all the morning, dined at home upon a hare pye, very
good meat, and so to my office again, and in the afternoon by coach to
attend the Council at White Hall, but come too late, so back with Mr.
Gifford, a merchant, and he and I to the Coffee-house, where I met Mr.
Hill, and there he tells me that he is to be Assistant to the Secretary of
the Prize Office (Sir Ellis Layton), which is to be held at Sir Richard
Ford's, which, methinks, is but something low, but perhaps may bring him
something considerable; but it makes me alter my opinion of his being so
rich as to make a fortune for Mrs. Pickering.  Thence home and visited Sir
J. Minnes, who continues ill, but is something better; there he told me
what a mad freaking fellow Sir Ellis Layton hath been, and is, and once at
Antwerp was really mad.  Thence to my office late, my cold troubling me,
and having by squeezing myself in a coach hurt my testicles, but I hope
will cease its pain without swelling.  So home out of order, to supper and
to bed.

26th.  Lay, being in some pain, but not much, with my last night's bruise,
but up and to my office, where busy all the morning, the like after dinner
till very late, then home to supper and to bed.  My wife mightily troubled
with the tooth ake, and my cold not being gone yet, but my bruise
yesterday goes away again, and it chiefly occasioned I think now from the
sudden change of the weather from a frost to a great rayne on a sudden.

27th.  Called up by Mr. Creed to discourse about some Tangier business,
and he gone I made me ready and found Jane Welsh, Mr. Jervas his mayde,
come to tell me that she was gone from her master, and is resolved to
stick to this sweetheart of hers, one Harbing (a very sorry little fellow,
and poor), which I did in a word or two endeavour to dissuade her from,
but being unwilling to keep her long at my house, I sent her away and by
and by followed her to the Exchange, and thence led her about down to the
3 Cranes, and there took boat for the Falcon, and at a house looking into
the fields there took up and sat an hour or two talking and discoursing
.  .  .  . Thence having endeavoured to make her think of making herself
happy by staying out her time with her master and other counsels, but she
told me she could not do it, for it was her fortune to have this man,
though she did believe it would be to her ruine, which is a strange,
stupid thing, to a fellow of no kind of worth in the world and a beggar to
boot.  Thence away to boat again and landed her at the Three Cranes again,
and I to the Bridge, and so home, and after shifting myself, being dirty,
I to the 'Change, and thence to Mr. Povy's and there dined, and thence
with him and Creed to my Lord Bellasses', and there debated a great while
how to put things in order against his going, and so with my Lord in his
coach to White Hall, and with him to my Lord Duke of Albemarle, finding
him at cards.  After a few dull words or two, I away to White Hall again,
and there delivered a letter to the Duke of Yorke about our Navy business,
and thence walked up and down in the gallery, talking with Mr. Slingsby,
who is a very ingenious person, about the Mint and coynage of money.
Among other things, he argues that there being L700,000 coined in the Rump
time, and by all the Treasurers of that time, it being their opinion that
the Rump money was in all payments, one with another, about a tenth part
of all their money.  Then, says he, to my question, the nearest guess we
can make is, that the money passing up and down in business is L7,000,000.
To another question of mine he made me fully understand that the old law
of prohibiting bullion to be exported, is, and ever was a folly and an
injury, rather than good. Arguing thus, that if the exportations exceed
importations, then the balance must be brought home in money, which, when
our merchants know cannot be carried out again, they will forbear to bring
home in money, but let it lie abroad for trade, or keepe in foreign banks:
or if our importations exceed our exportations, then, to keepe credit, the
merchants will and must find ways of carrying out money by stealth, which
is a most easy thing to do, and is every where done; and therefore the law
against it signifies nothing in the world.  Besides, that it is seen, that
where money is free, there is great plenty; where it is restrained, as
here, there is a great want, as in Spayne.  These and many other fine
discourses I had from him.  Thence by coach home (to see Sir J. Minnes
first), who is still sick, and I doubt worse than he seems to be.  Mrs.
Turner here took me into her closet, and there did give me a glass of most
pure water, and shewed me her Rocke, which indeed is a very noble thing
but a very bawble.  So away to my office, where late, busy, and then home
to supper and to bed.

28th.  Up and to my office, where all the morning, and then home to
dinner, and after dinner abroad, walked to Paul's Churchyard, but my books
not bound, which vexed me.  So home to my office again, where very late
about business, and so home to supper and to bed, my cold continuing in a
great degree upon me still.  This day I received a good sum of money due
to me upon one score or another from Sir G. Carteret, among others to
clear all my matters about Colours,--[Flags]--wherein a month or two since
I was so embarrassed and I thank God I find myself to have got clear, by
that commodity, L50 and something more; and earned it with dear pains and
care and issuing of my owne money, and saved the King near L100 in it.

29th (Lord's day).  Up and to my office, where all the morning, putting
papers to rights which now grow upon my hands.  At noon dined at home. All
the afternoon at my business again.  In the evening come Mr. Andrews and
Hill, and we up to my chamber and there good musique, though my great cold
made it the less pleasing to me.  Then Mr. Hill (the other going away) and
I to supper alone, my wife not appearing, our discourse upon the
particular vain humours of Mr. Povy, which are very extraordinary indeed.
After supper I to Sir W. Batten's, where I found him, Sir W. Pen, Sir J.
Robinson, Sir R. Ford and Captain Cocke and Mr. Pen, junior. Here a great
deal of sorry disordered talk about the Trinity House men, their being
exempted from land service.  But, Lord! to see how void of method and
sense their discourse was, and in what heat, insomuch as Sir R. Ford (who
we judged, some of us, to be a little foxed) fell into very high terms
with Sir W. Batten, and then with Captain Cocke.  So that I see that no
man is wise at all times.  Thence home to prayers and to bed.

30th.  This is solemnly kept as a Fast all over the City, but I kept my
house, putting my closett to rights again, having lately put it out of
order in removing my books and things in order to being made clean.  At
this all day, and at night to my office, there to do some business, and
being late at it, comes Mercer to me, to tell me that my wife was in bed,
and desired me to come home; for they hear, and have, night after night,
lately heard noises over their head upon the leads.  Now it is strange to
think how, knowing that I have a great sum of money in my house, this puts
me into a most mighty affright, that for more than two hours, I could not
almost tell what to do or say, but feared this and that, and remembered
that this evening I saw a woman and two men stand suspiciously in the
entry, in the darke; I calling to them, they made me only this answer, the
woman said that the men came to see her; but who she was I could not tell.
The truth is, my house is mighty dangerous, having so many ways to be come
to; and at my windows, over the stairs, to see who goes up and down; but,
if I escape to-night, I will remedy it.  God preserve us this night safe!
So at almost two o'clock, I home to my house, and, in great fear, to bed,
thinking every running of a mouse really a thiefe; and so to sleep, very
brokenly, all night long, and found all safe in the morning.

31st.  Up and with Sir W. Batten to Westminster, where to speak at the
House with my Lord Bellasses, and am cruelly vexed to see myself put upon
businesses so uncertainly about getting ships for Tangier being ordered, a
servile thing, almost every day.  So to the 'Change, back by coach with
Sir W. Batten, and thence to the Crowne, a taverne hard by, with Sir W.
Rider and Cutler, where we alone, a very good dinner.  Thence home to the
office, and there all the afternoon late.  The office being up, my wife
sent for me, and what was it but to tell me how Jane carries herself, and
I must put her away presently.  But I did hear both sides and find my wife
much in fault, and the grounds of all the difference is my wife's fondness
of Tom, to the being displeased with all the house beside to defend the
boy, which vexes me, but I will cure it.  Many high words between my wife
and I, but the wench shall go, but I will take a course with the boy, for
I fear I have spoiled him already.  Thence to the office, to my accounts,
and there at once to ease my mind I have made myself debtor to Mr. Povy
for the L117  5s. got with so much joy the last month, but seeing that it
is not like to be kept without some trouble and question, I do even
discharge my mind of it, and so if I come now to refund it, as I fear I
shall, I shall now be ne'er a whit the poorer for it, though yet it is
some trouble to me to be poorer by such a sum than I thought myself a
month since.  But, however, a quiet mind and to be sure of my owne is
worth all.  The Lord be praised for what I have, which is this month come
down to L1257.  I staid up about my accounts till almost two in the
morning.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                               FEBRUARY
                               1664-1665

February 1st.  Lay long in bed, which made me, going by coach to St.
James's by appointment to have attended the Duke of Yorke and my Lord
Bellasses, lose the hopes of my getting something by the hire of a ship to
carry men to Tangier.  But, however, according to the order of the Duke
this morning, I did go to the 'Change, and there after great pains did
light of a business with Mr. Gifford and Hubland [Houblon] for bringing me
as much as I hoped for, which I have at large expressed in my stating the
case of the "King's Fisher," which is the ship that I have hired, and got
the Duke of Yorke's agreement this afternoon after much pains and not
eating a bit of bread till about 4 o'clock.  Going home I put in to an
ordinary by Temple Barr and there with my boy Tom eat a pullet, and thence
home to the office, being still angry with my wife for yesterday's
foolery.  After a good while at the office, I with the boy to the Sun
behind the Exchange, by agreement with Mr. Young the flag-maker, and there
was met by Mr. Hill, Andrews, and Mr. Hubland, a pretty serious man.  Here
two very pretty savoury dishes and good discourse.  After supper a song,
or three or four (I having to that purpose carried Lawes's book), and
staying here till 12 o'clock got the watch to light me home, and in a
continued discontent to bed.  After being in bed, my people come and say
there is a great stinke of burning, but no smoake.  We called up Sir J.
Minnes's and Sir W. Batten's people, and Griffin, and the people at the
madhouse, but nothing could be found to give occasion to it.  At this
trouble we were till past three o'clock, and then the stinke ceasing, I to
sleep, and my people to bed, and lay very long in the morning.

2nd.  Then up and to my office, where till noon and then to the 'Change,
and at the Coffee-house with Gifford, Hubland, the Master of the ship, and
I read over and approved a charter-party for carrying goods for Tangier,
wherein I hope to get some money.  Thence home, my head akeing for want of
rest and too much business.  So to the office.  At night comes, Povy, and
he and I to Mrs. Bland's to discourse about my serving her to helpe her to
a good passage for Tangier.  Here I heard her kinswoman sing 3 or 4 very
fine songs and in good manner, and then home and to supper.  My cook mayd
Jane and her mistresse parted, and she went away this day.  I vexed to
myself, but was resolved to have no more trouble, and so after supper to
my office and then to bed.

3rd.  Up, and walked with my boy (whom, because of my wife's making him
idle, I dare not leave at home) walked first to Salsbury court, there to
excuse my not being at home at dinner to Mrs. Turner, who I perceive is
vexed, because I do not serve her in something against the great feasting
for her husband's Reading--[On his appointment as Reader in Law.]--in
helping her to some good penn'eths, but I care not.  She was dressing
herself by the fire in her chamber, and there took occasion to show me her
leg, which indeed is the finest I ever saw, and she not a little proud of
it.  Thence to my Lord Bellasses; thence to Mr. Povy's, and so up and down
at that end of the town about several businesses, it being a brave frosty
day and good walking.  So back again on foot to the 'Change, in my way
taking my books from binding from my bookseller's.  My bill for the
rebinding of some old books to make them suit with my study, cost me,
besides other new books in the same bill, L3; but it will be very
handsome.  At the 'Change did several businesses, and here I hear that
newes is come from Deale, that the same day my Lord Sandwich sailed thence
with the fleete, that evening some Dutch men of warr were seen on the back
side of the Goodwin, and, by all conjecture, must be seen by my Lord's
fleete; which, if so, they must engage.  Thence, being invited, to my
uncle Wight's, where the Wights all dined; and, among the others, pretty
Mrs. Margaret, who indeed is a very pretty lady; and though by my vowe it
costs me 12d. a kiss after the first, yet I did adventure upon a couple.
So home, and among other letters found one from Jane, that is newly gone,
telling me how her mistresse won't pay her her Quarter's wages, and withal
tells me how her mistress will have the boy sit 3 or 4 hours together in
the dark telling of stories, but speaks of nothing but only her
indiscretion in undervaluing herself to do it, but I will remedy that, but
am vexed she should get some body to write so much because of making it
publique.  Then took coach and to visit my Lady Sandwich, where she
discoursed largely to me her opinion of a match, if it could be thought
fit by my Lord, for my Lady Jemimah, with Sir G. Carteret's eldest son;
but I doubt he hath yet no settled estate in land.  But I will inform
myself, and give her my opinion.  Then Mrs. Pickering (after private
discourse ended, we going into the other room) did, at my Lady's command,
tell me the manner of a masquerade

     [The masquerade at Court took place on the 2nd, and is referred to
     by Evelyn, who was present, in his Diary.  Some amusing incidents
     connected with the entertainment are related in the "Grammont
     Memoirs" (chapter vii.).]

before the King and Court the other day.  Where six women (my Lady
Castlemayne and Duchesse of Monmouth being two of them) and six men (the
Duke of Monmouth and Lord Arran and Monsieur Blanfort, being three of
them) in vizards, but most rich and antique dresses, did dance admirably
and most gloriously.  God give us cause to continue the mirthe!  So home,
and after awhile at my office to supper and to bed.

4th.  Lay long in bed discoursing with my wife about her mayds, which by
Jane's going away in discontent and against my opinion do make some
trouble between my wife and me.  But these are but foolish troubles and so
not to be set to heart, yet it do disturb me mightily these things. To my
office, and there all the morning.  At noon being invited, I to the Sun
behind the 'Change, to dinner to my Lord Belasses, where a great deal of
discourse with him, and some good, among others at table he told us a very
handsome passage of the King's sending him his message about holding out
the town of Newarke, of which he was then governor for the King. This
message he sent in a sluggbullet, being writ in cypher, and wrapped up in
lead and swallowed.  So the messenger come to my Lord and told him he had
a message from the King, but it was yet in his belly; so they did give him
some physique, and out it come.  This was a month before the King's flying
to the Scotts; and therein he told him that at such a day, being the 3d or
6th of May, he should hear of his being come to the Scotts, being assured
by the King of France that in coming to them he should be used with all
the liberty, honour, and safety, that could be desired.  And at the just
day he did come to the Scotts.  He told us another odd passage: how the
King having newly put out Prince Rupert of his generallshipp, upon some
miscarriage at Bristoll, and Sir Richard Willis

     [Sir Richard Willis, the betrayer of the Royalists, was one of the
     "Sealed Knot."  When the Restoration had become a certainty, he
     wrote to Clarendon imploring him to intercede for him with the king
     (see Lister's "Life of Clarendon," vol. iii., p. 87).]

of his governorship of Newarke, at the entreaty of the gentry of the
County, and put in my Lord Bellasses, the great officers of the King's
army mutinyed, and come in that manner with swords drawn, into the
market-place of the towne where the King was; which the King hearing,
says, "I must to horse."  And there himself personally, when every body
expected they should have been opposed, the King come, and cried to the
head of the mutineers, which was Prince Rupert, "Nephew, I command you to
be gone."  So the Prince, in all his fury and discontent, withdrew, and
his company scattered, which they say was the greatest piece of mutiny in
the world.  Thence after dinner home to my office, and in the evening was
sent to by Jane that I would give her her wages.  So I sent for my wife to
my office, and told her that rather than be talked on I would give her all
her wages for this Quarter coming on, though two months is behind, which
vexed my wife, and we begun to be angry, but I took myself up and sent her
away, but was cruelly vexed in my mind that all my trouble in this world
almost should arise from my disorders in my family and the indiscretion of
a wife that brings me nothing almost (besides a comely person) but only
trouble and discontent.  She gone I late at my business, and then home to
supper and to bed.

5th (Lord's day).  Lay in bed most of the morning, then up and down to my
chamber, among my new books, which is now a pleasant sight to me to see my
whole study almost of one binding.  So to dinner, and all the afternoon
with W. Hewer at my office endorsing of papers there, my business having
got before me much of late.  In the evening comes to see me Mr. Sheply,
lately come out of the country, who goes away again to-morrow, a good and
a very kind man to me.  There come also Mr. Andrews and Hill, and we sang
very pleasantly; and so, they being gone, I and my wife to supper, and to
prayers and bed.

6th.  Up and with Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Pen to St. James's, but the
Duke is gone abroad.  So to White Hall to him, and there I spoke with him,
and so to Westminster, did a little business, and then home to the
'Change, where also I did some business, and went off and ended my
contract with the "Kingfisher" I hired for Tangier, and I hope to get
something by it.  Thence home to dinner, and visited Sir W. Batten, who is
sick again, worse than he was, and I am apt to think is very ill.  So to
my office, and among other things with Sir W. Warren 4 hours or more till
very late, talking of one thing or another, and have concluded a firm
league with him in all just ways to serve him and myself all I can, and I
think he will be a most usefull and thankfull man to me.  So home to
supper and to bed.  This being one of the coldest days, all say, they ever
felt in England; and I this day, under great apprehensions of getting an
ague from my putting a suit on that hath lain by without ayring a great
while, and I pray God it do not do me hurte.

7th.  Up and to my office, where busy all the morning, and at home to
dinner.  It being Shrove Tuesday, had some very good fritters.  All the
afternoon and evening at the office, and at night home to supper and to
bed.  This day, Sir W. Batten, who hath been sicke four or five days, is
now very bad, so as people begin to fear his death; and I am at a loss
whether it will be better for me to have him die, because he is a bad man,
or live, for fear a worse should come.

8th.  Up and by coach to my Lord Peterborough's, where anon my Lord Ashly
and Sir Thomas Ingram met, and Povy about his accounts, who is one of the
most unhappy accountants that ever I knew in all my life, and one that if
I were clear in reference to my bill of L117 he should be hanged before I
would ever have to do with him, and as he understands nothing of his
business himself, so he hath not one about him that do.  Here late till I
was weary, having business elsewhere, and thence home by coach, and after
dinner did several businesses and very late at my office, and so home to
supper and to bed.

9th.  Up and to my office, where all the morning very busy.  At noon home
to dinner, and then to my office again, where Sir William Petty come,
among other things to tell me that Mr. Barlow

     [Thomas Barlow, Pepys's predecessor as Clerk of the Acts, to whom he
     paid part of the salary.  Barlow held the office jointly with Dennis
     Fleeting.]

is dead; for which, God knows my heart, I could be as sorry as is possible
for one to be for a stranger, by whose death he gets L100 per annum, he
being a worthy, honest man; but after having considered that when I come
to consider the providence of God by this means unexpectedly to give me
L100 a year more in my estate, I have cause to bless God, and do it from
the bottom of my heart.  So home late at night, after twelve o'clock, and
so to bed.

10th.  Up and abroad to Paul's Churchyard, there to see the last of my
books new bound: among others, my "Court of King James,"

     ["The Court and Character of King James, written and taken by Sir
     Anthony Weldon, being an eye and eare witnesse," was published in
     1650, and reprinted in 1651 under the title of "Truth brought to
     Light" Weldon's book was answered in a work entitled "Aulicus
     Coquinariae."  Both the original book and the answer were reprinted
     in "The Secret History of the Court of King James," Edinburgh, 1811,
     two vols.  (edited by Sir Walter Scott).]

and "The Rise and Fall of the Family of the Stewarts;" and much pleased I
am now with my study; it being, methinks, a beautifull sight.  Thence (in
Mr. Grey's coach, who took me up), to Westminster, where I heard that
yesterday the King met the Houses to pass the great bill for the
L2,500,000.  After doing a little business I home, where Mr. Moore dined
with me, and evened our reckonings on my Lord Sandwich's bond to me for
principal and interest.  So that now on both there is remaining due to me
L257. 7s., and I bless God it is no more.  So all the afternoon at my
office, and late home to supper, prayers, and to bed.

11th.  Up and to my office, where all the morning.  At noon to 'Change by
coach with my Lord Brunkard, and thence after doing much business home to
dinner, and so to my office all the afternoon till past 12 at night very
busy.  So home to bed.

12th (Lord's day).  Up and to church to St. Lawrence to hear Dr. Wilkins,
the great scholar, for curiosity, I having never heard him: but was not
satisfied with him at all, only a gentleman sat in the pew I by chance sat
in, that sang most excellently, and afterward I found by his face that he
had been a Paul's scholler, but know not his name, and I was also well
pleased with the church, it being a very fine church.  So home to dinner,
and then to my office all the afternoon doing of business, and in the
evening comes Mr. Hill (but no Andrews) and we spent the evening very
finely, singing, supping and discoursing.  Then to prayers and to bed.

13th.  Up and to St. James's, did our usual business before the Duke.
Thence I to Westminster and by water (taking Mr. Stapely the rope-maker by
the way), to his rope-ground and to Limehouse, there to see the manner of
stoves and did excellently inform myself therein, and coming home did go
on board Sir W. Petty's "Experiment," which is a brave roomy vessel, and I
hope may do well.  So went on shore to a Dutch [house] to drink some mum,
and there light upon some Dutchmen, with whom we had good discourse
touching stoveing

     [Stoveing, in sail-making, is the heating of the bolt-ropes, so as
     to make them pliable.--B.]

and making of cables.  But to see how despicably they speak of us for our
using so many hands more to do anything than they do, they closing a cable
with 20, that we use 60 men upon.  Thence home and eat something, and then
to my office, where very late, and then to supper and to bed. Captain
Stokes, it seems, is at last dead at Portsmouth.

14th (St. Valentine).  This morning comes betimes Dicke Pen, to be my
wife's Valentine, and come to our bedside.  By the same token, I had him
brought to my side, thinking to have made him kiss me; but he perceived
me, and would not; so went to his Valentine: a notable, stout, witty boy.
I up about business, and, opening the door, there was Bagwell's wife, with
whom I talked afterwards, and she had the confidence to say she came with
a hope to be time enough to be my Valentine, and so indeed she did, but my
oath preserved me from loosing any time with her, and so I and my boy
abroad by coach to Westminster, where did two or three businesses, and
then home to the 'Change, and did much business there.  My Lord Sandwich
is, it seems, with his fleete at Alborough Bay.  So home to dinner and
then to the office, where till 12 almost at night, and then home to supper
and to bed.

15th.  Up and to my office, where busy all the morning.  At noon with
Creed to dinner to Trinity-house, where a very good dinner among the old
sokers, where an extraordinary discourse of the manner of the loss of the
"Royall Oake" coming home from Bantam, upon the rocks of Scilly, many
passages therein very extraordinary, and if I can I will get it in
writing.  Thence with Creed to Gresham College, where I had been by Mr.
Povy the last week proposed to be admitted a member;

     [According to the minutes of the Royal Society for February 15th,
     1664-65, "Mr. Pepys was unanimously elected and admitted."  Notes of
     the experiments shown by Hooke and Boyle are given in Birch's
     "History of the Royal Society," vol. ii., p. 15.]

and was this day admitted, by signing a book and being taken by the hand
by the President, my Lord Brunkard, and some words of admittance said to
me.  But it is a most acceptable thing to hear their discourse, and see
their experiments; which were this day upon the nature of fire, and how it
goes out in a place where the ayre is not free, and sooner out where the
ayre is exhausted, which they showed by an engine on purpose.  After this
being done, they to the Crowne Taverne, behind the 'Change, and there my
Lord and most of the company to a club supper; Sir P. Neale, Sir R.
Murrey, Dr. Clerke, Dr. Whistler, Dr. Goddard, and others of most eminent
worth.  Above all, Mr. Boyle to-day was at the meeting, and above him Mr.
Hooke, who is the most, and promises the least, of any man in the world
that ever I saw.  Here excellent discourse till ten at night, and then
home, and to Sir W. Batten's, where I hear that Sir Thos. Harvy intends to
put Mr. Turner out of his house and come in himself, which will be very
hard to them, and though I love him not, yet for his family's sake I pity
him.  So home and to bed.

16th.  Up, and with Mr. Andrews to White Hall, where a Committee of
Tangier, and there I did our victuallers' business for some more money,
out of which I hope to get a little, of which I was glad; but, Lord! to
see to what a degree of contempt, nay, scorn, Mr. Povy, through his
prodigious folly, hath brought himself in his accounts, that if he be not
a man of a great interest, he will be kicked out of his employment for a
foole, is very strange, and that most deservedly that ever man was, for
never any man, that understands accounts so little, ever went through so
much, and yet goes through it with the greatest shame and yet with
confidence that ever I saw man in my life.  God deliver me in my owne
business of my bill out of his hands, and if ever I foul my fingers with
him again let me suffer for it!  Back to the 'Change, and thence home to
dinner, where Mrs. Hunt dined with me, and poor Mrs. Batters; who brought
her little daughter with her, and a letter from her husband, wherein, as a
token, the foole presents me very seriously with his daughter for me to
take the charge of bringing up for him, and to make my owne.  But I took
no notice to her at all of the substance of the letter, but fell to
discourse, and so went away to the office, where all the afternoon till
almost one in the morning, and then home to bed.

17th.  Up, and it being bitter cold, and frost and snow, which I had
thought had quite left us, I by coach to Povy's, where he told me, as I
knew already, how he was handled the other day, and is still, by my Lord
Barkeley, and among other things tells me, what I did not know, how my
Lord Barkeley will say openly, that he hath fought more set
fields--[Battles or actions]--than any man in England hath done.  I did my
business with him, which was to get a little sum of money paid, and so
home with Mr. Andrews, who met me there, and there to the office.  At noon
home and there found Lewellin, which vexed me out of my old jealous
humour.  So to my office, where till 12 at night, being only a little
while at noon at Sir W. Batten's to see him, and had some high words with
Sir J. Minnes about Sir W. Warren, he calling him cheating knave, but I
cooled him, and at night at Sir W. Pen's, he being to go to Chatham
to-morrow.  So home to supper and to bed.

18th.  Up, and to the office, where sat all the morning; at noon to the
'Change, and thence to the Royall Oake taverne in Lumbard Streete, where
Sir William Petty and the owners of the double-bottomed boat (the
Experiment) did entertain my Lord Brunkard, Sir R. Murrey, myself, and
others, with marrow bones and a chine of beefe of the victuals they have
made for this ship; and excellent company and good discourse: but, above
all, I do value Sir William Petty.  Thence home; and took my Lord
Sandwich's draught of the harbour of Portsmouth down to Ratcliffe, to one
Burston, to make a plate for the King, and another for the Duke, and
another for himself; which will be very neat.  So home, and till almost
one o'clock in the morning at my office, and then home to supper and to
bed.  My Lord Sandwich, and his fleete of twenty-five ships in the Downes,
returned from cruising, but could not meet with any Dutchmen.

19th.  Lay in bed, it being Lord's day, all the morning talking with my
wife, sometimes pleased, sometimes displeased, and then up and to dinner.
All the afternoon also at home, and Sir W. Batten's, and in the evening
comes Mr. Andrews, and we sung together, and then to supper, he not
staying, and at supper hearing by accident of my mayds their letting in a
rogueing Scotch woman that haunts the office, to helpe them to washe and
scoure in our house, and that very lately, I fell mightily out, and made
my wife, to the disturbance of the house and neighbours, to beat our
little girle, and then we shut her down into the cellar, and there she lay
all night.  So we to bed.

20th.  Up, and with Sir J. Minnes to attend the Duke, and then we back
again and rode into the beginning of my Lord Chancellor's new house, near
St. James's; which common people have already called Dunkirke-house, from
their opinion of his having a good bribe for the selling of that towne.
And very noble I believe it will be.  Near that is my Lord Barkeley
beginning another on one side, and Sir J. Denham on the other.  Thence I
to the House of Lords and spoke with my Lord Bellasses, and so to the
'Change, and there did business, and so to the Sun taverne, haling in the
morning had some high words with Sir J. Lawson about his sending of some
bayled goods to Tangier, wherein the truth is I did not favour him, but
being conscious that some of my profits may come out by some words that
fell from him, and to be quiet, I have accommodated it.  Here we dined
merry; but my club and the rest come to 7s. 6d., which was too much.
Thence to the office, and there found Bagwell's wife, whom I directed to
go home, and I would do her business, which was to write a letter to my
Lord Sandwich for her husband's advance into a better ship as there should
be occasion.  Which I did, and by and by did go down by water to Deptford,
and then down further, and so landed at the lower end of the town, and it
being dark 'entrer en la maison de la femme de Bagwell', and there had 'sa
compagnie', though with a great deal of difficulty, 'neanmoins en fin
j'avais ma volont d'elle', and being sated therewith, I walked home to
Redriffe, it being now near nine o'clock, and there I did drink some
strong waters and eat some bread and cheese, and so home. Where at my
office my wife comes and tells me that she hath hired a chamber mayde, one
of the prettiest maydes that ever she saw in her life, and that she is
really jealous of me for her, but hath ventured to hire her from month to
month, but I think she means merrily.  So to supper and to bed.

21st.  Up, and to the office (having a mighty pain in my forefinger of my
left hand, from a strain that it received last night) in struggling 'avec
la femme que je' mentioned yesterday, where busy till noon, and then my
wife being busy in going with her woman to a hot-house to bathe herself,
after her long being within doors in the dirt, so that she now pretends to
a resolution of being hereafter very clean.  How long it will hold I can
guess.  I dined with Sir W. Batten and my Lady, they being now a'days very
fond of me.  So to the 'Change, and off of the 'Change with Mr. Wayth to a
cook's shop, and there dined again for discourse with him about Hamaccos

     [Or hammock-battens: cleats or battens nailed to the sides of a
     vessel's beams, from which to suspend the seamen's hammocks.]

and the abuse now practised in tickets, and more like every day to be.
Also of the great profit Mr. Fen makes of his place, he being, though he
demands but 5 per cent. of all he pays, and that is easily computed, but
very little pleased with any man that gives him no more.  So to the
office, and after office my Lord Brunkerd carried me to Lincolne's Inne
Fields, and there I with my Lady Sandwich (good lady) talking of innocent
discourse of good housewifery and husbands for her daughters, and the
luxury and looseness of the times and other such things till past 10
o'clock at night, and so by coach home, where a little at my office, and
so to supper and to bed.  My Lady tells me how my Lord Castlemayne is
coming over from France, and is believed will be made friends with his
Lady again.  What mad freaks the Mayds of Honour at Court have: that Mrs.
Jenings, one of the Duchesses mayds, the other day dressed herself like an
orange wench, and went up and down and cried oranges; till falling down,
or by such accident, though in the evening, her fine shoes were discerned,
and she put to a great deale of shame; that such as these tricks being
ordinary, and worse among them, thereby few will venture upon them for
wives: my Lady Castlemayne will in merriment say that her daughter (not
above a year old or two) will be the first mayde in the Court that will be
married.  This day my Lord Sandwich writ me word from the Downes, that he
is like to be in towne this week.

22nd.  Lay last night alone, my wife after her bathing lying alone in
another bed.  So cold all night.  Up and to the office, where busy all the
morning.  At noon at the 'Change, busy; where great talk of a Dutch ship
in the North put on shore, and taken by a troop of horse.  Home to dinner
and Creed with me.  Thence to Gresham College, where very noble discourse,
and thence home busy till past 12 at night, and then home to supper and to
bed.  Mrs. Bland come this night to take leave of me and my wife, going to
Tangier.

23rd.  This day, by the blessing of Almighty God, I have lived thirty-two
years in the world, and am in the best degree of health at this minute
that I have been almost in my life time, and at this time in the best
condition of estate that ever I was in-the Lord make me thankfull.  Up,
and to the office, where busy all the morning.  At noon to the 'Change,
where I hear the most horrid and astonishing newes that ever was yet told
in my memory, that De Ruyter with his fleete in Guinny hath proceeded to
the taking of whatever we have, forts, goods, ships, and men, and tied our
men back to back, and thrown them all into the sea, even women and
children also.  This a Swede or Hamburgher is come into the River and
tells that he saw the thing done.

     [Similar reports of the cruelty of the English to the Dutch in
     Guinea were credited in Holland, and were related by Downing in a
     letter to Clarendon from the Hague, dated April 14th, 1665 (Lister's
     "Life of Clarendon," vol. iii., p. 374).]

But, Lord!  to see the consternation all our merchants are in is
observable, and with what fury and revenge they discourse of it.  But I
fear it will like other things in a few days cool among us.  But that
which I fear most is the reason why he that was so kind to our men at
first should afterward, having let them go, be so cruel when he went
further.  What I fear is that there he was informed (which he was not
before) of some of Holmes's dealings with his countrymen, and so was moved
to this fury.  God grant it be not so!  But a more dishonourable thing was
never suffered by Englishmen, nor a more barbarous done by man, as this by
them to us.  Home to dinner, and then to the office, where we sat all the
afternoon, and then at night to take my finall leave of Mrs. Bland, who
sets out to-morrow for Tangier, and then I back to my office till past 12,
and so home to supper and to bed.

24th.  Up, and to my office, where all the morning upon advising again
with some fishermen and the water bayliffe of the City, by Mr. Coventry's
direction, touching the protections which are desired for the fishermen
upon the River, and I am glad of the occasion to make me understand
something of it.  At noon home to dinner, and all the afternoon till 9 at
night in my chamber, and Mr. Hater with me (to prevent being disturbed at
the office), to perfect my contract book, which, for want of time, hath a
long time lain without being entered in as I used to do from month to
month.  Then to my office, where till almost 12, and so home to bed.

25th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning.  At noon to the
'Change; where just before I come, the Swede that had told the King and
the Duke so boldly this great lie of the Dutch flinging our men back to
back into the sea at Guinny, so particularly, and readily, and
confidently, was whipt round the 'Change: he confessing it a lie, and that
he did it in hopes to get something.  It is said the judges, upon demand,
did give it their opinion that the law would judge him to be whipt, to
lose his eares, or to have his nose slit but I do not hear that anything
more is to be done to him.  They say he is delivered over to the Dutch
Embassador to do what he pleased with him.  But the world do think that
there is some design on one side or other, either of the Dutch or French,
for it is not likely a fellow would invent such a lie to get money whereas
he might have hoped for a better reward by telling something in behalf of
us to please us.  Thence to the Sun taverne, and there dined with Sir W.
Warren and Mr. Gifford, the merchant: and I hear how Nich. Colborne, that
lately lived and got a great estate there, is gone to live like a prince
in the country, and that this Wadlow, that did the like at the Devil by
St. Dunstane's, did go into the country, and there spent almost all he had
got, and hath now choused this Colborne out of his house, that he might
come to his old trade again.  But, Lord! to see how full the house is, no
room for any company almost to come into it.  Thence home to the office,
where dispatched much business; at night late home, and to clean myself
with warm water; my wife will have me, because she do herself, and so to
bed.

26th (Sunday).  Up and to church, and so home to dinner, and after dinner
to my office, and there busy all the afternoon, till in the evening comes
Mr. Andrews and Hill, and so home and to singing.  Hill staid and supped
with me, and very good discourse of Italy, where he was, which is always
to me very agreeable.  After supper, he gone, we to prayers and to bed.

27th.  Up and to St. James's, where we attended the Duke as usual.  This
morning I was much surprized and troubled with a letter from Mrs. Bland,
that she is left behind, and much trouble it cost me this day to find out
some way to carry her after the ships to Plymouth, but at last I hope I
have done it.  At noon to the 'Change to inquire what wages the Dutch give
in their men-of-warr at this day, and I hear for certain they give but
twelve guilders at most, which is not full 24s., a thing I wonder at. At
home to dinner, and then in Sir J. Minnes's coach, my wife and I with him,
and also Mercer, abroad, he and I to White Hall, and he would have his
coach to wait upon my wife on her visits, it being the first time my wife
hath been out of doors (but the other day to bathe her) several weeks.  We
to a Committee of the Council to discourse concerning pressing of men;
but, Lord! how they meet; never sit down: one comes, now another goes,
then comes another; one complaining that nothing is done, another swearing
that he hath been there these two hours and nobody come.  At last it come
to this, my Lord Annesly, says he, "I think we must be forced to get the
King to come to every committee; for I do not see that we do any thing at
any time but when he is here."  And I believe he said the truth and very
constant he is at the council table on council-days; which his
predecessors, it seems, very rarely did; but thus I perceive the greatest
affair in the world at this day is likely to be managed by us.  But to
hear how my Lord Barkeley and others of them do cry up the discipline of
the late times here, and in the former Dutch warr is strange, wishing with
all their hearts that the business of religion were not so severely
carried on as to discourage the sober people to come among us, and wishing
that the same law and severity were used against drunkennesse as there was
then, saying that our evil living will call the hand of God upon us again.
Thence to walk alone a good while in St. James's Parke with Mr. Coventry,
who I perceive is grown a little melancholy and displeased to see things
go as they do so carelessly. Thence I by coach to Ratcliffe highway, to
the plate-maker's, and he has begun my Lord Sandwich's plate very neatly,
and so back again.  Coming back I met Colonell Atkins, who in other
discourse did offer to give me a piece to receive of me 20 when he proves
the late news of the Dutch, their drowning our men, at Guinny, and the
truth is I find the generality of the world to fear that there is
something of truth in it, and I do fear it too.  Thence back by coach to
Sir Philip Warwicke's; and there he did contract with me a kind of
friendship and freedom of communication, wherein he assures me to make me
understand the whole business of the Treasurer's business of the Navy,
that I shall know as well as Sir G. Carteret what money he hath; and will
needs have me come to him sometimes, or he meet me, to discourse of things
tending to the serving the King: and I am mighty proud and happy in
becoming so known to such a man.  And I hope shall pursue it.  Thence back
home to the office a little tired and out of order, and then to supper and
to bed.

28th: At the office all the morning.  At noon dined at home.  After dinner
my wife and I to my Lady batten's, it being the first time my wife hath
been there, I think, these two years, but I had a mind in part to take
away the strangenesse, and so we did, and all very quiett and kind. Come
home, I to the taking my wife's kitchen accounts at the latter end of the
month, and there find 7s. wanting, which did occasion a very high falling
out between us, I indeed too angrily insisting upon so poor a thing, and
did give her very provoking high words, calling her beggar, and
reproaching her friends, which she took very stomachfully and reproached
me justly with mine; and I confess, being myself, I cannot see what she
could have done less.  I find she is very cunning, and when she least
shews it hath her wit at work; but it is an ill one, though I think not so
bad but with good usage I might well bear with it, and the truth is I do
find that my being over-solicitous and jealous and froward and ready to
reproach her do make her worse.  However, I find that now and then a
little difference do no hurte, but too much of it will make her know her
force too much.  We parted after many high words very angry, and I to my
office to my month's accounts, and find myself worth L1270, for which the
Lord God be praised!  So at almost 2 o'clock in the morning I home to
supper and to bed, and so ends this month, with great expectation of the
Hollanders coming forth, who are, it seems, very high and rather more
ready than we.  God give a good issue to it!

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Accounts I never did see, or hope again to see in my days
     At a loss whether it will be better for me to have him die
     By his many words and no understanding, confound himself
     Church, where a most insipid young coxcomb preached
     Clean myself with warm water; my wife will have me
     Costs me 12d. a kiss after the first
     Find that now and then a little difference do no hurte
     Going with her woman to a hot-house to bathe herself
     Good discourse and counsel from him, which I hope I shall take
     Great thaw it is not for a man to walk the streets
     Heard noises over their head upon the leads
     His disease was the pox and that he must be fluxed (Rupert)
     I know not how their fortunes may agree
     If the exportations exceed importations
     It is a strange thing how fancy works
     Law against it signifies nothing in the world
     Law and severity were used against drunkennesse
     Luxury and looseness of the times
     Must be forced to confess it to my wife, which troubles me
     My wife after her bathing lying alone in another bed
     No man is wise at all times
     Offer to give me a piece to receive of me 20
     Pretends to a resolution of being hereafter very clean
     Sat an hour or two talking and discoursing .  .  .  .
     So great a trouble is fear
     Those bred in the North among the colliers are good for labour
     Tied our men back to back, and thrown them all into the sea
     Too much of it will make her know her force too much
     Up, leaving my wife in bed, being sick of her months
     When she least shews it hath her wit at work
     Where money is free, there is great plenty
     Who is the most, and promises the least, of any man
     Wife that brings me nothing almost (besides a comely person)


                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

   TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                             MARCH & APRIL
                               1664-1665

March 1st.  Up, and this day being the day than: by a promise, a great
while ago, made to my wife, I was to give her L20 to lay out in clothes
against Easter, she did, notwithstanding last night's falling out, come to
peace with me and I with her, but did boggle mightily at the parting with
my money, but at last did give it her, and then she abroad to buy her
things, and I to my office, where busy all the morning.  At noon I to
dinner at Trinity House, and thence to Gresham College, where Mr. Hooke
read a second very curious lecture about the late Comett; among other
things proving very probably that this is the very same Comett that
appeared before in the year 1618, and that in such a time probably it will
appear again, which is a very new opinion; but all will be in print. Then
to the meeting, where Sir G. Carteret's two sons, his owne, and Sir N.
Slaning, were admitted of the society: and this day I did pay my admission
money, 40s. to the society.  Here was very fine discourses and
experiments, but I do lacke philosophy enough to understand them, and so
cannot remember them.  Among others, a very particular account of the
making of the several sorts of bread in France, which is accounted the
best place for bread in the world.  So home, where very busy getting an
answer to some question of Sir Philip Warwicke touching the expense of the
navy, and that being done I by coach at 8 at night with my wife and Mercer
to Sir Philip's and discoursed with him (leaving them in the coach), and
then back with them home and to supper and to bed.

2nd.  Begun this day to rise betimes before six o'clock, and, going down
to call my people, found Besse and the girle with their clothes on, lying
within their bedding upon the ground close by the fireside, and a candle
burning all night, pretending they would rise to scoure.  This vexed me,
but Besse is going and so she will not trouble me long.  Up, and by water
to Burston about my Lord's plate, and then home to the office, so there
all the morning sitting.  At noon dined with Sir W. Batten (my wife being
gone again to-day to buy things, having bought nothing yesterday for lack
of Mrs. Pierces company), and thence to the office again, where very busy
till 12 at night, and vexed at my wife's staying out so late, she not
being at home at 9 o'clock, but at last she is come home, but the reason
of her stay I know not yet.  So shut up my books, and home to supper and
to bed.

3rd.  Up, and abroad about several things, among others to see Mr. Peter
Honiwood, who was at my house the other day, and I find it was for nothing
but to pay me my brother John's Quarterage.  Thence to see Mrs. Turner,
who takes it mighty ill I did not come to dine with the Reader, her
husband, which, she says, was the greatest feast that ever was yet kept by
a Reader, and I believe it was well.  But I am glad I did not go, which
confirms her in an opinion that I am growne proud.  Thence to the 'Change,
and to several places, and so home to dinner and to my office, where till
12 at night writing over a discourse of mine to Mr. Coventry touching the
Fishermen of the Thames upon a reference of the business by him to me
concerning their being protected from presse.  Then home to supper and to
bed.

4th.  Up very betimes, and walked, it being bitter cold, to Ratcliffe, to
the plate-maker's and back again.  To the office, where we sat all the
morning, I, with being empty and full of ayre and wind, had some pain
to-day.  Dined alone at home, my wife being gone abroad to buy some more
things.  All the afternoon at the office.  William Howe come to see me,
being come up with my Lord from sea: he is grown a discreet, but very
conceited fellow.  He tells me how little respectfully Sir W. Pen did
carry it to my Lord onboard the Duke's ship at sea; and that Captain
Minnes, a favourite of Prince Rupert's, do shew my Lord little respect;
but that every body else esteems my Lord as they ought.  I am sorry for
the folly of the latter, and vexed at the dissimulation of the former. At
night home to supper and to bed.  This day was proclaimed at the 'Change
the war with Holland.

5th (Lord's day).  Up, and Mr. Burston bringing me by order my Lord's
plates, which he has been making this week.  I did take coach and to my
Lord Sandwich's and dined with my Lord; it being the first time he hath
dined at home since his coming from sea: and a pretty odd demand it was of
my Lord to my Lady before me: "How do you, sweetheart?  How have you done
all this week?" himself taking notice of it to me, that he had hardly seen
her the week before.  At dinner he did use me with the greatest solemnity
in the world, in carving for me, and nobody else, and calling often to my
Lady to cut for me; and all the respect possible. After dinner looked over
the plates, liked them mightily, and indeed I think he is the most exact
man in what he do in the world of that kind. So home again, and there
after a song or two in the evening with Mr. Hill, I to my office, and then
home to supper and to bed.

6th.  Up, and with Sir J. Minnes by coach, being a most lamentable cold
day as any this year, to St. James's, and there did our business with the
Duke.  Great preparations for his speedy return to sea.  I saw him try on
his buff coat and hatpiece covered with black velvet.  It troubles me more
to think of his venture, than of anything else in the whole warr. Thence
home to dinner, where I saw Besse go away; she having of all wenches that
ever lived with us received the greatest love and kindnesse and good
clothes, besides wages, and gone away with the greatest ingratitude.  I
then abroad to look after my Hamaccoes, and so home, and there find our
new chamber-mayde, Mary, come, which instead of handsome, as my wife spoke
and still seems to reckon, is a very ordinary wench, I think, and therein
was mightily disappointed.  To my office, where busy late, and then home
to supper and to bed, and was troubled all this night with a pain in my
left testicle, that run up presently into my left kidney and there kept
akeing all night.  In great pain.

7th.  Up, and was pretty well, but going to the office, and I think it was
sitting with my back to the fire, it set me in a great rage again, that I
could not continue till past noon at the office, but was forced to go
home, nor could sit down to dinner, but betook myself to my bed, and being
there a while my pain begun to abate and grow less and less.  Anon I went
to make water, not dreaming of any thing but my testicle that by some
accident I might have bruised as I used to do, but in pissing there come
from me two stones, I could feel them, and caused my water to be looked
into; but without any pain to me in going out, which makes me think that
it was not a fit of the stone at all; for my pain was asswaged upon my
lying down a great while before I went to make water.  Anon I made water
again very freely and plentifully.  I kept my bed in good ease all the
evening, then rose and sat up an hour or two, and then to bed and lay till
8 o'clock, and then,

8th.  Though a bitter cold day, yet I rose, and though my pain and
tenderness in my testicle remains a little, yet I do verily think that my
pain yesterday was nothing else, and therefore I hope my disease of the
stone may not return to me, but void itself in pissing, which God grant,
but I will consult my physitian.  This morning is brought me to the office
the sad newes of "The London," in which Sir J. Lawson's men were all
bringing her from Chatham to the Hope, and thence he was to go to sea in
her; but a little a'this side the buoy of the Nower, she suddenly blew up.
About 24 [men] and a woman that were in the round-house and coach saved;
the rest, being above 300, drowned: the ship breaking all in pieces, with
80 pieces of brass ordnance.  She lies sunk, with her round-house above
water.  Sir J. Lawson hath a great loss in this of so many good chosen
men, and many relations among them.  I went to the 'Change, where the news
taken very much to heart.  So home to dinner, and Mr. Moore with me.  Then
I to Gresham College, and there saw several pretty experiments, and so
home and to my office, and at night about I I home to supper and to bed.

9th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the afternoon.  At noon to
dinner at home, and then abroad with my wife, left her at the New Exchange
and I to Westminster, where I hear Mrs. Martin is brought to bed of a boy
and christened Charles, which I am very glad of, for I was fearful of
being called to be a godfather to it.  But it seems it was to be done
suddenly, and so I escaped.  It is strange to see how a liberty and going
abroad without purpose of doing anything do lead a man to what is bad, for
I was just upon going to her, where I must of necessity [have] broken my
oath or made a forfeit.  But I did not, company being (I heard by my
porter) with her, and so I home again, taking up my wife, and was set down
by her at Paule's Schoole, where I visited Mr. Crumlum at his house; and,
Lord! to see how ridiculous a conceited pedagogue he is, though a learned
man, he being so dogmaticall in all he do and says.  But among other
discourse, we fell to the old discourse of Paule's Schoole; and he did,
upon my declaring my value of it, give me one of Lilly's grammars of a
very old impression, as it was in the Catholique times, which I shall much
set by.  And so, after some small discourse, away and called upon my wife
at a linen draper's shop buying linen, and so home, and to my office,
where late, and home to supper and to bed.  This night my wife had a new
suit of flowered ash-coloured silke, very noble.

10th.  Up, and to the office all the morning.  At noon to the 'Change,
where very hot, people's proposal of the City giving the King' another
ship for "The London," that is lately blown up, which would be very
handsome, and if well managed, might be done; but I fear if it be put into
ill hands, or that the courtiers do solicit it, it will never be done.
Home to dinner, and thence to the Committee of Tangier at White Hall,
where my Lord Barkely and Craven and others; but, Lord! to see how
superficially things are done in the business of the Lottery, which will
be the disgrace of the Fishery, and without profit.  Home, vexed at my
loss of time, and thereto my office.  Late at night come the two Bellamys,
formerly petty warrant Victuallers of the Navy, to take my advice about a
navy debt of theirs for the compassing of which they offer a great deal of
money, and the thing most just.  Perhaps I may undertake it, and get
something by it, which will be a good job.  So home late to bed.

11th.  Up and to the office, at noon home to dinner, and to the office
again, where very late, and then home to supper and to bed.  This day
returned Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes from Lee Roade, where they have
been to see the wrecke of "The London," out of which, they say, the guns
may be got, but the hull of her will be wholly lost, as not being capable
of being weighed.

12th (Lord's day).  Up, and borrowing Sir J. Minnes's coach, to my Lord
Sandwich's, but he was gone abroad.  I sent the coach back for my wife, my
Lord a second time dining at home on purpose to meet me, he having not
dined once at home but those times since his coming from sea.  I sat down
and read over the Bishop of Chichester's' sermon upon the anniversary of
the King's death, much cried up, but, methinks, but a mean sermon.  By and
by comes in my Lord, and he and I to talke of many things in the Navy, one
from another, in general, to see how the greatest things are committed to
very ordinary men, as to parts and experience, to do; among others, my
Lord Barkeley.  We talked also of getting W. Howe to be put into the
Muster-Mastershipp in the roome of Creed, if Creed will give way, but my
Lord do it without any great gusto, calling Howe a proud coxcomb in
passion.  Down to dinner, where my wife in her new lace whiske, which,
indeed, is very noble, and I much pleased with it, and so my Lady also.
Here very pleasant my Lord was at dinner, and after dinner did look over
his plate, which Burston hath brought him to-day, and is the last of the
three that he will have made.  After satisfied with that, he abroad, and I
after much discourse with my Lady about Sir G. Carteret's son, of whom she
hath some thoughts for a husband for my Lady Jemimah, we away home by
coach again, and there sang a good while very pleasantly with Mr. Andrews
and Hill.  They gone; we to supper, and betimes to bed.

13th.  Up betimes, this being the first morning of my promise upon a
forfeite not to lie in bed a quarter of an hour after my first waking.
Abroad to St. James's, and there much business, the King also being with
us a great while.  Thence to the 'Change, and thence with Captain Tayler
and Sir W. Warren dined at a house hard by for discourse sake, and so I
home, and there meeting a letter from Mrs. Martin desiring to speak with
me, I (though against my promise of visiting her) did go, and there found
her in her childbed dress desiring my favour to get her husband a place. I
staid not long, but taking Sir W. Warren up at White Hall home, and among
other discourse fell to a business which he says shall if accomplished
bring me L100.  He gone, I to supper and to bed.  This day my wife begun
to wear light-coloured locks, quite white almost, which, though it makes
her look very pretty, yet not being natural, vexes me, that I will not
have her wear them.  This day I saw my Lord Castlemayne at St. James's,
lately come from France.

14th.  Up before six, to the office, where busy all the morning.  At noon
dined with Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes, at the Tower, with Sir J.
Robinson, at a farewell dinner which he gives Major Holmes at his going
out of the Tower, where he hath for some time, since his coming from
Guinny, been a prisoner, and, it seems, had presented the Lieutenant with
fifty pieces yesterday.  Here a great deale of good victuals and company.
Thence home to my office, where very late, and home to supper and to bed
weary of business.

15th.  Up and by coach with Sir W. Batten to St. James's, where among
other things before the Duke, Captain Taylor was called in, and, Sir J.
Robinson his accuser not appearing, was acquitted quite from his charge,
and declared that he should go to Harwich, which I was very well pleased
at.  Thence I to Mr. Coventry's chamber, and there privately an houre with
him in discourse of the office, and did deliver to him many notes of
things about which he is to get the Duke's command, before he goes, for
the putting of business among us in better order.  He did largely owne his
dependance as to the office upon my care, and received very great
expressions of love from him, and so parted with great satisfaction to
myself.  So home to the 'Change, and thence home to dinner, where my wife
being gone down upon a sudden warning from my Lord Sandwich's daughters to
the Hope with them to see "The Prince," I dined alone.  After dinner to
the office, and anon to Gresham College, where, among other good
discourse, there was tried the great poyson of Maccassa upon a dogg,

     ["The experiment of trying to poison a dog with some of the Macassar
     powder in which a needle had been dipped was made, but without
     success."--Pepys himself made a communication at this meeting of
     the information he had received from the master of the Jersey ship,
     who had been in company of Major Holmes in the Guinea voyage,
     concerning the pendulum watches (Birch's "History," vol. ii., p.
     23).]

but it had no effect all the time we sat there.  We anon broke up and I
home, where late at my office, my wife not coming home.  I to bed,
troubled, about 12 or past.

16th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, my wife coming
home from the water this morning, having lain with them on board "The
Prince" all night.  At noon home to dinner, where my wife told me the
unpleasant journey she had yesterday among the children, whose fear upon
the water and folly made it very unpleasing to her.  A good dinner, and
then to the office again.  This afternoon Mr. Harris, the sayle-maker,
sent me a noble present of two large silver candlesticks and snuffers, and
a slice to keep them upon, which indeed is very handsome.  At night come
Mr. Andrews with L36, the further fruits of my Tangier contract, and so to
bed late and weary with business, but in good content of mind, blessing
God for these his benefits.

17th.  Up and to my office, and then with Sir W. Batten to St. James's,
where many come to take leave, as was expected, of the Duke, but he do not
go till Monday.  This night my Lady Wood died of the small-pox, and is
much lamented among the great persons for a good-natured woman and a good
wife, but for all that it was ever believed she was as others are. The
Duke did give us some commands, and so broke up, not taking leave of him.
But the best piece of newes is, that instead of a great many troublesome
Lords, the whole business is to be left with the Duke of Albemarle to act
as Admirall in his stead; which is a thing that do cheer my heart.  For
the other would have vexed us with attendance, and never done the
business.  Thence to the Committee of Tangier, where the Duke a little,
and then left us and we staid.  A very great Committee, the Lords
Albemarle, Sandwich, Barkely, Fitzharding, Peterborough, Ashley, Sir Thos.
Ingram, Sir G. Carteret and others.  The whole business was the stating of
Povy's accounts, of whom to say no more, never could man say worse himself
nor have worse said of him than was by the company to his face; I mean, as
to his folly and very reflecting words to his honesty. Broke up without
anything but trouble and shame, only I got my businesses done to the
signing of two bills for the Contractors and Captain Taylor, and so come
away well pleased, and home, taking up my wife at the 'Change, to dinner.
After dinner out again bringing my wife to her father's again at Charing
Cross, and I to the Committee again, where a new meeting of trouble about
Povy, who still makes his business worse and worse, and broke up with the
most open shame again to him, and high words to him of disgrace that they
would not trust him with any more money till he had given an account of
this.  So broke up.  Then he took occasion to desire me to step aside, and
he and I by water to London together.  In the way, of his owne accord, he
proposed to me that he would surrender his place of Treasurer' to me to
have half the profit.  The thing is new to me; but the more I think the
more I like it, and do put him upon getting it done by the Duke.  Whether
it takes or no I care not, but I think at present it may have some
convenience in it.  Home, and there find my wife come home and gone to
bed, of a cold got yesterday by water. At the office Bellamy come to me
again, and I am in hopes something may be got by his business.  So late
home to supper and bed.

18th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning.  At noon to the
'Change, and took Mr. Hill along with me to Mr. Povy's, where we dined,
and shewed him the house to his good content, and I expect when we meet we
shall laugh at it.  But I having business to stay, he went away, and Povy
and Creed and I to do some business upon Povy's accounts all the afternoon
till late at night, where, God help him!  never man was so confounded, and
all his people about him in this world as he and his are. After we had
done something [to the] purpose we broke up, and Povy acquainted me before
Creed (having said something of it also this morning at our office to me)
what he had done in speaking to the Duke and others about his making me
Treasurer, and has carried it a great way, so as I think it cannot well be
set back.  Creed, I perceive, envies me in it, but I think as that will do
me no hurte, so if it did I am at a great losse to think whether it were
not best for me to let it wholly alone, for it will much disquiett me and
my business of the Navy, which in this warr will certainly be worth all my
time to me.  Home, continuing in this doubtfull condition what to think of
it, but God Almighty do his will in it for the best.  To my office, where
late, and then home to supper and to bed.

19th (Lord's day).  Mr. Povy sent his coach for me betimes, and I to him,
and there to our great trouble do find that my Lord FitzHarding do appear
for Mr. Brunkard

     [Henry Brouncker, younger brother of William, Viscount Brouncker,
     President of the Royal Society.  He was Groom of the Bedchamber to
     the Duke of York, and succeeded to the office of Cofferer on the
     death of William Ashburnham in 1671.  His character was bad, and his
     conduct in the sea-fight of 1665 was impugned.  He was expelled from
     the House of Commons, but succeeded to his brother's title in 1684.
     He died in January, 1687.]

to be Paymaster upon Povy's going out, by a former promise of the Duke's,
and offering to give as much as any for it.  This put us all into a great
dumpe, and so we went to Creed's new lodging in the Mewes, and there we
found Creed with his parrot upon his shoulder, which struck Mr. Povy
coming by just by the eye, very deep, which, had it hit his eye, had put
it out.  This a while troubled us, but not proving very bad, we to our
business consulting what to do; at last resolved, and I to Mr. Coventry,
and there had his most friendly and ingenuous advice, advising me not to
decline the thing, it being that that will bring me to be known to great
persons, while now I am buried among three or four of us, says he, in the
Navy; but do not make a declared opposition to my Lord FitzHarding. Thence
I to Creed, and walked talking in the Park an hour with him, and then to
my Lord Sandwich's to dinner, and after dinner to Mr. Povy's, who hath
been with the Duke of Yorke, and, by the mediation of Mr. Coventry, the
Duke told him that the business shall go on, and he will take off
Brunkerd, and my Lord FitzHarding is quiett too.  But to see the mischief,
I hear that Sir G. Carteret did not seem pleased, but said nothing when he
heard me proposed to come in Povy's room, which may learn me to
distinguish between that man that is a man's true and false friend. Being
very glad of this news Mr. Povy and I in his coach to Hyde Parke, being
the first day of the tour there.  Where many brave ladies; among others,
Castlemayne lay impudently upon her back in her coach asleep, with her
mouth open.  There was also my Lady Kerneguy,

     [Daughter of William, Duke of Hamilton, wife of Lord Carnegy, who
     became Earl of Southesk on his father's death.  She is frequently
     mentioned in the "Memoires de Grammont," and in the letters of the
     second Earl of Chesterfield.--B.]

once my Lady Anne Hambleton, that is said to have given the Duke a clap
upon his first coming over.  Here I saw Sir J. Lawson's daughter and
husband, a fine couple, and also Mr. Southwell and his new lady, very
pretty.  Thence back, putting in at Dr. Whore's, where I saw his lady, a
very fine woman.  So home, and thither by my desire comes by and by Creed
and lay with me, very merry and full of discourse, what to do to-morrow,
and the conveniences that will attend my having of this place, and I do
think they may be very great.

20th.  Up, Creed and I, and had Mr. Povy's coach sent for us, and we to
his house; where we did some business in order to the work of this day.
Povy and I to my Lord Sandwich, who tells me that the Duke is not only a
friend to the business, but to me, in terms of the greatest love and
respect and value of me that can be thought, which overjoys me.  Thence to
St. James's, and there was in great doubt of Brunkerd, but at last I hear
that Brunkerd desists.  The Duke did direct Secretary Bennet, who was
there, to declare his mind to the Tangier Committee, that he approves of
me for Treasurer; and with a character of me to be a man whose industry
and discretion he would trust soon as any man's in England: and did the
like to my Lord Sandwich.  So to White Hall to the Committee of Tangier,
where there were present, my Lord of Albemarle, my Lord Peterborough,
Sandwich, Barkeley, FitzHarding, Secretary Bennet, Sir Thomas Ingram, Sir
John Lawson, Povy and I.  Where, after other business, Povy did declare
his business very handsomely; that he was sorry he had been so unhappy in
his accounts, as not to give their Lordships the satisfaction he intended,
and that he was sure his accounts are right, and continues to submit them
to examination, and is ready to lay down in ready money the fault of his
account; and that for the future, that the work might be better done and
with more quiet to him, he desired, by approbation of the Duke, he might
resign his place to Mr. Pepys. Whereupon, Secretary Bennet did deliver the
Duke's command, which was received with great content and allowance beyond
expectation; the Secretary repeating also the Duke's character of me.  And
I could discern my Lord FitzHarding was well pleased with me, and
signified full satisfaction, and whispered something seriously of me to
the Secretary. And there I received their constitution under all their
hands presently; so that I am already confirmed their Treasurer, and put
into a condition of striking of tallys;

     [The practice of striking tallies at the Exchequer was a curious
     survival of an ancient method of keeping accounts.  The method
     adopted is described in Hubert Hall's "Antiquities and Curiosities
     of the Exchequer," 1891.  The following account of the use of
     tallies, so frequently alluded to in the Diary, was supplied by Lord
     Braybrooke.  Formerly accounts were kept, and large sums of money
     paid and received, by the King's Exchequer, with little other form
     than the exchange or delivery of tallies, pieces of wood notched or
     scored, corresponding blocks being kept by the parties to the
     account; and from this usage one of the head officers of the
     Exchequer was called the tallier, or teller.  These tallies were
     often negotiable; Adam Smith, in his "Wealth of Nations," book ii.,
     ch. xi., says that "in 1696 tallies had been at forty, and fifty,
     and sixty per cent. discount, and bank-notes at twenty per cent."
     The system of tallies was discontinued in 1824; and the destruction
     of the old Houses of Parliament, in the night of October 16th, 1834,
     is thought to have been occasioned by the overheating of the flues,
     when the furnaces were employed to consume the tallies rendered
     useless by the alteration in the mode of keeping the Exchequer
     accounts.]

and all without one harsh word or word of dislike, but quite the contrary;
which is a good fortune beyond all imagination.  Here we rose, and Povy
and Creed and I, all full of joy, thence to dinner, they setting me down
at Sir J. Winter's, by promise, and dined with him; and a worthy fine man
he seems to be, and of good discourse, our business was to discourse of
supplying the King with iron for anchors, if it can be judged good enough,
and a fine thing it is to see myself come to the condition of being
received by persons of this rank, he being, and having long been,
Secretary to the Queene-Mother.  Thence to Povy's, and there sat and
considered of business a little and then home, where late at it, W. Howe
being with me about his business of accounts for his money laid out in the
fleet, and he gone, I home to supper and to bed.  Newes is this day come
of Captain Allen's being come home from the Straights, as far as Portland,
with eleven of the King's ships, and about twenty-two of merchantmen.

21st. Up, and my taylor coming to me, did consult all my wardrobe how to
order my clothes against next summer.  Then to the office, where busy all
the morning.  At noon to the 'Change, and brought home Mr. Andrews, and
there with Mr. Sheply dined and very merry, and a good dinner.  Thence to
Mr. Povy's to discourse about settling our business of Treasurer, and I
think all things will go very fayre between us and to my content, but the
more I see the more silly the man seems to me.  Thence by coach to the
Mewes, but Creed was not there.  In our way the coach drove through a lane
by Drury Lane, where abundance of loose women stood at the doors, which,
God forgive me, did put evil thoughts in me, but proceeded no further,
blessed be God.  So home, and late at my office, then home and there found
a couple of state cups, very large, coming, I suppose, each to about L6 a
piece, from Burrows the slopseller.

22nd.  Up, and to Mr. Povy's about our business, and thence I to see Sir
Ph. Warwicke, but could not meet with him.  So to Mr. Coventry, whose
profession of love and esteem for me to myself was so large and free that
I never could expect or wish for more, nor could have it from any man in
England, that I should value it more.  Thence to Mr. Povy's, and with
Creed to the 'Change and to my house, but, it being washing day, dined not
at home, but took him (I being invited) to Mr. Hubland's, the merchant,
where Sir William Petty, and abundance of most ingenious men, owners and
freighters of "The Experiment," now going with her two bodies to sea.
Most excellent discourse.  Among others, Sir William Petty did tell me
that in good earnest he hath in his will left such parts of his estate to
him that could invent such and such things.  As among others, that could
discover truly the way of milk coming into the breasts of a woman; and he
that could invent proper characters to express to another the mixture of
relishes and tastes.  And says, that to him that invents gold, he gives
nothing for the philosopher's stone; for (says he) they that find out
that, will be able to pay themselves.  But, says he, by this means it is
better than to give to a lecture; for here my executors, that must part
with this, will be sure to be well convinced of the invention before they
do part with their money.  After dinner Mr. Hill took me with Mrs.
Hubland, who is a fine gentlewoman, into another room, and there made her
sing, which she do very well, to my great content. Then to Gresham
College, and there did see a kitling killed almost quite, but that we
could not quite kill her, with such a way; the ayre out of a receiver,
wherein she was put, and then the ayre being let in upon her revives her
immediately;

     ["Two experiments were made for the finding out a way to breathe
     under water, useful for divers."  The first was on a bird and the
     second on "a kitling" (Birch's "History," vol. ii., p. 25).]

nay, and this ayre is to be made by putting together a liquor and some
body that ferments, the steam of that do do the work.  Thence home, and
thence to White Hall, where the house full of the Duke's going to-morrow,
and thence to St. James's, wherein these things fell out: (1) I saw the
Duke, kissed his hand, and had his most kind expressions of his value and
opinion of me, which comforted me above all things in the world, (2) the
like from Mr. Coventry most heartily and affectionately.  (3) Saw, among
other fine ladies, Mrs. Middleton,

     [Jane, daughter to Sir Robert Needham, is frequently mentioned in
     the "Grammont Memoirs," and Evelyn calls her "that famous and indeed
     incomparable beauty" ("Diary," August 2nd, 1683).  Her portrait is
     in the Royal Collection amongst the beauties of Charles II.'s Court.
     Sir Robert Needham was related to John Evelyn.]

a very great beauty I never knew or heard of before; (4) I saw Waller the
poet, whom I never saw before.  So, very late, by coach home with W. Pen,
who was there.  To supper and to bed, with my heart at rest, and my head
very busy thinking of my several matters now on foot, the new comfort of
my old navy business, and the new one of my employment on Tangier.

23rd.  Up and to my Lord Sandwich, who follows the Duke this day by water
down to the Hope, where "The Prince" lies.  He received me, busy as he
was, with mighty kindness and joy at my promotions; telling me most
largely how the Duke hath expressed on all occasions his good opinion of
my service and love for me.  I paid my thanks and acknowledgement to him;
and so back home, where at the office all the morning.  At noon to the
'Change.  Home, and Lewellin dined with me.  Thence abroad, carried my
wife to Westminster by coach, I to the Swan, Herbert's, and there had much
of the good company of Sarah and to my wish, and then to see Mrs. Martin,
who was very kind, three weeks of her month of lying in is over. So took
up my wife and home, and at my office a while, and thence to supper and to
bed.  Great talk of noises of guns heard at Deale, but nothing
particularly whether in earnest or not.

24th.  Up betimes, and by agreement to the Globe taverne in Fleet Street
to Mr. Clerke, my sollicitor, about the business of my uncle's accounts,
and we went with one Jefferys to one of the Barons (Spelman), and there my
accounts were declared and I sworn to the truth thereof to my knowledge,
and so I shall after a few formalities be cleared of all. Thence to
Povy's, and there delivered him his letters of greatest import to him that
is possible, yet dropped by young Bland, just come from Tangier, upon the
road by Sittingburne, taken up and sent to Mr. Pett, at Chatham.  Thus
everything done by Povy is done with a fatal folly and neglect.  Then to
our discourse with him, Creed, Mr. Viner, myself and Poyntz about the
business of the Workehouse at Clerkenwell, and after dinner went thither
and saw all the works there, and did also consult the Act concerning the
business and other papers in order to our coming in to undertake it with
Povy, the management of the House, but I do not think we can safely meddle
with it, at least I, unless I had time to look after it myself, but the
thing is very ingenious and laudable.  Thence to my Lady Sandwich's, where
my wife all this day, having kept Good Friday very strict with fasting.
Here we supped, and talked very merry.  My Lady alone with me, very
earnest about Sir G. Carteret's son, with whom I perceive they do desire
my Lady Jemimah may be matched.  Thence home and to my office, and then to
bed.

25th (Lady day).  Up betimes and to my office, where all the morning. At
noon dined alone with Sir W. Batten, where great discourse of Sir W. Pen,
Sir W. Batten being, I perceive, quite out of love with him, thinking him
too great and too high, and began to talk that the world do question his
courage, upon which I told him plainly I have been told that he was
articled against for it, and that Sir H. Vane was his great friend
therein.  This he was, I perceive, glad to hear.  Thence to the office,
and there very late, very busy, to my great content.  This afternoon of a
sudden is come home Sir W. Pen from the fleete, but upon what score I know
not.  Late home to supper and to bed.

26th (Lord's day and Easter day).  Up (and with my wife, who has not been
at church a month or two) to church.  At noon home to dinner, my wife and
I (Mercer staying to the Sacrament) alone.  This is the day seven years
which, by the blessing of God, I have survived of my being cut of the
stone, and am now in very perfect good health and have long been; and
though the last winter hath been as hard a winter as any have been these
many years, yet I never was better in my life, nor have not, these ten
years, gone colder in the summer than I have done all this winter, wearing
only a doublet, and a waistcoate cut open on the back; abroad, a cloake
and within doors a coate I slipped on.  Now I am at a losse to know
whether it be my hare's foot which is my preservative against wind, for I
never had a fit of the collique since I wore it, and nothing but wind
brings me pain, and the carrying away of wind takes away my pain, or my
keeping my back cool; for when I do lie longer than ordinary upon my back
in bed, my water the next morning is very hot, or whether it be my taking
of a pill of turpentine every morning, which keeps me always loose, or all
together, but this I know, with thanks to God Almighty, that I am now as
well as ever I can wish or desire to be, having now and then little
grudgings of wind, that brings me a little pain, but it is over presently,
only I do find that my backe grows very weak, that I cannot stoop to write
or tell money without sitting but I have pain for a good while after it.
Yet a week or two ago I had one day's great pain; but it was upon my
getting a bruise on one of my testicles, and then I did void two small
stones, without pain though, and, upon my going to bed and bearing up of
my testicles, I was well the next.  But I did observe that my sitting with
my back to the fire at the office did then, as it do at all times, make my
back ake, and my water hot, and brings me some pain.  I sent yesterday an
invitation to Mrs. Turner and her family to come to keep this day with me,
which she granted, but afterward sent me word that it being Sunday and
Easter day she desired to choose another and put off this.  Which I was
willing enough to do; and so put it off as to this day, and will leave it
to my own convenience when to choose another, and perhaps shall escape a
feast by it.  At my office all the afternoon drawing up my agreement with
Mr. Povy for me to sign to him tomorrow morning.  In the evening spent an
hour in the garden walking with Sir J. Minnes, talking of the Chest
business, wherein Sir W. Batten deals so unfairly, wherein the old man is
very hot for the present, but that zeal will not last nor is to be
trusted.  So home to supper, prayers, and to bed.

27th.  Up betimes to Mr. Povy's, and there did sign and seal my agreement
with him about my place of being Treasurer for Tangier, it being the
greatest part of it drawnout of a draught of his own drawing up, only I
have added something here and there in favour of myself.  Thence to the
Duke of Albemarle, the first time that we officers of the Navy have waited
upon him since the Duke of Yorke's going, who hath deputed him to be
Admirall in his absence.  And I find him a quiet heavy man, that will help
business when he can, and hinder nothing, and am very well pleased with
our attendance on him.  I did afterwards alone give him thanks for his
favour to me about my Tangier business, which he received kindly, and did
speak much of his esteem of me.  Thence, and did the same to Sir H.
Bennet, who did the like to me very fully, and did give me all his letters
lately come from hence for me to read, which I returned in the afternoon
to him.  Thence to Mrs. Martin, who, though her husband is gone away, as
he writes, like a fool into France, yet is as simple and wanton as ever
she was, with much I made myself merry and away.  So to my Lord
Peterborough's; where Povy, Creed, Williamson, Auditor Beale, and myself,
and mighty merry to see how plainly my Lord and Povy did abuse one another
about their accounts, each thinking the other a foole, and I thinking they
were not either of them, in that point, much in the wrong, though in
everything, and even in this manner of reproaching one another, very witty
and pleasant.  Among other things, we had here the genteelest dinner and
the neatest house that I have seen many a day, and the latter beyond
anything I ever saw in a nobleman's house.  Thence visited my Lord
Barkeley, and did sit discoursing with him in his chamber a good while,
and [he] mighty friendly to me about the same business of Tangier.  From
that to other discourse of the times and the want of money, and he said
that the Parliament must be called again soon, and more money raised, not
by tax, for he said he believed the people could not pay it, but he would
have either a general excise upon everything, or else that every city
incorporate should pay a toll into the King's revenue, as he says it is in
all the cities in the world; for here a citizen hath no more laid on them
than their neighbours in the country, whereas, as a city, it ought to pay
considerably to the King for their charter; but I fear this will breed ill
blood.  Thence to Povy, and after a little talk home to my office late.
Then to supper and to bed.

28th.  Up betimes and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and I
did most of the business there, God wot.  Then to the 'Change, and thence
to the Coffee-house with Sir W. Warren, where much good discourse for us
both till 9 o'clock with great pleasure and content, and then parted and I
home to dinner, having eat nothing, and so to my office.  At night supped
with my wife at Sir W. Pen's, who is to go back for good and all to the
fleete to-morrow.  Took leave and to my office, where till 12 at night,
and then home to bed.

29th.  Up betimes and to Povy's, where a good while talking about our
business; thence abroad into the City, but upon his tally could not get
any money in Lumbard Streete, through the disrepute which he suffers, I
perceive, upon his giving up his place, which people think was not choice,
but necessity, as indeed it was.  So back to his house, after we had been
at my house to taste my wine, but my wife being abroad nobody could come
at it, and so we were defeated.  To his house, and before dinner he and I
did discourse of the business of freight, wherein I am so much concerned,
above L100 for myself, and in my over hasty making a bill out for the rest
for him, but he resolves to move Creed in it.  Which troubled me much, and
Creed by and by comes, and after dinner he did, but in the most cunning
ingenious manner, do his business with Creed by bringing it in by the by,
that the most subtile man in the world could never have done it better,
and I must say that he is a most witty, cunning man and one that I (am)
most afeard of in my conversation, though in all serious matters of
business the eeriest foole that ever I met with.  The bill was produced
and a copy given Creed, whereupon he wrote his Intratur upon the
originall, and I hope it will pass, at least I am now put to it that I
must stand by it and justify it, but I pray God it may never come to that
test.  Thence between vexed and joyed, not knowing what yet to make of it,
home, calling for my Lord Cooke's 3 volumes at my bookseller's, and so
home, where I found a new cook mayd, her name is-----that promises very
little.  So to my office, where late about drawing up a proposal for
Captain Taylor, for him to deliver to the City about his building the new
ship, which I have done well, and I hope will do the business, and so home
to supper and to bed.

30th.  Up, and to my Lord Ashly, but did nothing, and to Sir Ph. Warwicke
and spoke with him about business, and so back to the office, where all
the morning.  At noon home to dinner, and thence to the Tangier Committee,
where, Lord! to see how they did run into the giving of Sir J. Lawson (who
is come to towne to-day to get this business done) L4000 about his Mole
business, and were going to give him 4s. per yarde more, which arises in
the whole Mole to L36,000, is a strange thing, but the latter by chance
was stopped, the former was given.  Thence to see Mrs. Martin, whose
husband being it seems gone away, and as she is informed he hath another
woman whom he uses, and has long done, as a wife, she is mighty reserved
and resolved to keep herself so till the return of her husband, which a
pleasant thing to think of her.  Thence home, and to my office, where
late, and to bed.

31st.  Up betimes and walked to my Lord Ashly, and there with Creed after
long waiting spoke with him, and was civilly used by him; thence to Sir
Ph. Warwicke, and then to visit my Lord of Falmouth, who did also receive
me pretty civilly, but not as I expected; he, I perceive, believing that I
had undertaken to justify Povy's accounts, taking them upon myself, but I
rectified him therein.  So to my Lady Sandwich's to dinner, and up to her
chamber after dinner, and there discoursed about Sir G. Carteret's son, in
proposition between us two for my Lady Jemimah.  So to Povy, and with him
spent the afternoon very busy, till I was weary of following this and
neglecting my navy business.  So at night called my wife at my Lady's, and
so home.  To my office and there made up my month's account, which, God be
praised! rose to L1300.  Which I bless God for.  So after 12 o'clock home
to supper and to bed.  I find Creed mightily transported by my Lord of
Falmouth's kind words to him, and saying that he hath a place in his
intention for him, which he believes will be considerable. A witty man he
is in every respect, but of no good nature, nor a man ordinarily to be
dealt with.  My Lady Castlemayne is sicke again, people think, slipping
her filly.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                 APRIL
                                 1665

April 1st.  All the morning very busy at the office preparing a last
half-year's account for my Lord Treasurer.  At noon eat a bit and stepped
to Sir Ph. Warwicke, by coach to my Lord Treasurer's, and after some
private conference and examining of my papers with him I did return into
the City and to Sir G. Carteret, whom I found with the Commissioners of
Prizes dining at Captain Cocke's, in Broad Streete, very merry.  Among
other tricks, there did come a blind fiddler to the doore, and Sir G.
Carteret did go to the doore and lead the blind fiddler by the hand in.
Thence with Sir G. Carteret to my Lord Treasurer, and by and by come Sir
W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes, and anon we come to my Lord, and there did
lay open the expence for the six months past, and an estimate of the seven
months to come, to November next: the first arising to above L500,000, and
the latter will, as we judge, come to above L1,000,000. But to see how my
Lord Treasurer did bless himself, crying he could do no more than he
could, nor give more money than he had, if the occasion and expence were
never so great, which is but a sad story.  And then to hear how like a
passionate and ignorant asse Sir G. Carteret did harangue upon the abuse
of Tickets did make me mad almost and yet was fain to hold my tongue.
Thence home, vexed mightily to see how simply our greatest ministers do
content themselves to understand and do things, while the King's service
in the meantime lies a-bleeding.  At my office late writing letters till
ready to drop down asleep with my late sitting up of late, and running up
and down a-days.  So to bed.

2nd (Lord's day).  At my office all the morning, renewing my vowes in
writing and then home to dinner.  All the afternoon, Mr. Tasborough, one
of Mr. Povy's clerks, with me about his master's accounts.  In the evening
Mr. Andrews and Hill sang, but supped not with me, then after supper to
bed.

3rd.  Up and to the Duke of Albemarle and White Hall, where much business.
Thence home and to dinner, and then with Creed, my wife, and Mercer to a
play at the Duke's, of my Lord Orrery's, called "Mustapha," which being
not good, made Betterton's part and Ianthe's but ordinary too, so that we
were not contented with it at all.  Thence home and to the office a while,
and then home to supper and to bed.  All the pleasure of the play was, the
King and my Lady Castlemayne were there; and pretty witty Nell,--[Nell
Gwynne]--at the King's house, and the younger Marshall sat next us; which
pleased me mightily.

4th.  All the morning at the office busy, at noon to the 'Change, and then
went up to the 'Change to buy a pair of cotton stockings, which I did at
the husband's shop of the most pretty woman there, who did also invite me
to buy some linnen of her, and I was glad of the occasion, and bespoke
some bands of her, intending to make her my seamstress, she being one of
the prettiest and most modest looked women that ever I did see. Dined at
home and to the office, where very late till I was ready to fall down
asleep, and did several times nod in the middle of my letters.

5th.  This day was kept publiquely by the King's command, as a fast day
against the Dutch warr, and I betimes with Mr. Tooker, whom I have brought
into the Navy to serve us as a husband to see goods timely shipped off
from hence to the Fleete and other places, and took him with me to
Woolwich and Deptford, where by business I have been hindered a great
while of going, did a very great deale of business, and home, and there by
promise find Creed, and he and my wife, Mercer and I by coach to take the
ayre; and, where we had formerly been, at Hackney, did there eat some
pullets we carried with us, and some things of the house; and after a game
or two at shuffle-board, home, and Creed lay with me; but, being sleepy,
he had no mind to talk about business, which indeed I intended, by
inviting him to lie with me, but I would not force it on him, and so to
bed, he and I, and to sleep, being the first time I have been so much at
my ease and taken so much fresh ayre these many weeks or months.

6th.  At the office sat all the morning, where, in the absence of Sir W.
Batten, Sir G. Carteret being angry about the business of tickets, spoke
of Sir W. Batten for speaking some words about the signing of tickets, and
called Sir W. Batten in his discourse at the table to us (the clerks being
withdrawn) "shitten foole," which vexed me.  At noon to the 'Change, and
there set my business of lighters' buying for the King, to Sir W. Warren,
and I think he will do it for me to very great advantage, at which I am
mightily rejoiced.  Home and after a mouthfull of dinner to the office,
where till 6 o'clock, and then to White Hall, and there with Sir G.
Carteret and my Lord Brunkerd attended the Duke of Albemarle about the
business of money.  I also went to Jervas's, my barber, for my periwigg
that was mending there, and there do hear that Jane is quite undone,
taking the idle fellow for her husband yet not married, and lay with him
several weeks that had another wife and child, and she is now going into
Ireland.  So called my wife at the 'Change and home, and at my office
writing letters till one o'clock in the morning, that I was ready to fall
down asleep again.  Great talke of a new Comett; and it is certain one do
now appear as bright as the late one at the best; but I have not seen it
myself.

7th.  Up betimes to the Duke of Albemarle about money to be got for the
Navy, or else we must shut up shop.  Thence to Westminster Hall and up and
down, doing not much; then to London, but to prevent Povy's dining with me
(who I see is at the 'Change) I went back again and to Herbert's at
Westminster, there sent for a bit of meat and dined, and then to my Lord
Treasurer's, and there with Sir Philip Warwicke, and thence to White Hall
in my Lord Treasurer's chamber with Sir Philip Warwicke till dark night,
about fower hours talking of the business of the Navy Charge, and how Sir
G. Carteret do order business, keeping us in ignorance what he do with his
money, and also Sir Philip did shew me nakedly the King's condition for
money for the Navy; and he do assure me, unless the King can get some
noblemen or rich money-gentlemen to lend him money, or to get the City to
do it, it is impossible to find money: we having already, as he says,
spent one year's share of the three-years' tax, which comes to L2,500,000.
Being very glad of this day's discourse in all but that I fear I shall
quite lose Sir G. Carteret, who knows that I have been privately here all
this day with Sir Ph. Warwicke.  However, I will order it so as to give
him as little offence as I can.  So home to my office, and then to supper
and to bed.

8th.  Up, and all the morning full of business at the office.  At noon
dined with Mr. Povy, and then to the getting some business looked over of
his, and then I to my Lord Chancellor's, where to have spoke with the Duke
of Albemarle, but the King and Council busy, I could not; then to the Old
Exchange and there of my new pretty seamstress bought four bands, and so
home, where I found my house mighty neat and clean.  Then to my office
late, till past 12, and so home to bed.  The French Embassadors

     [The French ambassadors were Henri de Bourbon, Duc de Verneuil,
     natural son of Henry IV. and brother of Henrietta Maria, and M. de
     Courtin.--B.]

are come incognito before their train, which will hereafter be very
pompous.  It is thought they come to get our King to joyne with the King
of France in helping him against Flanders, and they to do the like to us
against Holland.  We have laine a good while with a good fleete at
Harwich.  The Dutch not said yet to be out.  We, as high as we make our
shew, I am sure, are unable to set out another small fleete, if this
should be worsted.  Wherefore, God send us peace!  I cry.

9th (Lord's day).  To church with my wife in the morning, in her new
light-coloured silk gowne, which is, with her new point, very noble. Dined
at home, and in the afternoon to Fanchurch, the little church in the
middle of Fanchurch Streete, where a very few people and few of any rank.
Thence, after sermon, home, and in the evening walking in the garden, my
Lady Pen and her daughter walked with my wife and I, and so to my house to
eat with us, and very merry, and so broke up and to bed.

10th.  Up, and to the Duke of Albemarle's, and thence to White Hall to a
Committee for Tangier, where new disorder about Mr. Povy's accounts, that
I think I shall never be settled in my business of Treasurer for him. Here
Captain Cooke met me, and did seem discontented about my boy Tom's having
no time to mind his singing nor lute, which I answered him fully in, that
he desired me that I would baste his coate.  So home and to the 'Change,
and thence to the "Old James" to dine with Sir W. Rider, Cutler, and Mr.
Deering, upon the business of hemp, and so hence to White Hall to have
attended the King and Lord Chancellor about the debts of the navy and to
get some money, but the meeting failed.  So my Lord Brunkard took me and
Sir Thomas Harvy in his coach to the Parke, which is very troublesome with
the dust; and ne'er a great beauty there to-day but Mrs. Middleton, and so
home to my office, where Mr. Warren proposed my getting of L100 to get him
a protection for a ship to go out, which I think I shall do.  So home to
supper and to bed.

11th.  Up and betimes to Alderman Cheverton to treat with him about hempe,
and so back to the office.  At noon dined at the Sun, behind the 'Change,
with Sir Edward Deering and his brother and Commissioner Pett, we having
made a contract with Sir Edward this day about timber.  Thence to the
office, where late very busy, but with some trouble have also some hopes
of profit too.  So home to supper and to bed.

12th.  Up, and to White Hall to a Committee of Tangier, where, contrary to
all expectation, my Lord Ashly, being vexed with Povy's accounts, did
propose it as necessary that Povy should be still continued Treasurer of
Tangier till he had made up his accounts; and with such arguments as, I
confess, I was not prepared to answer, but by putting off of the
discourse, and so, I think, brought it right again; but it troubled me so
all the day after, and night too, that I was not quiet, though I think it
doubtfull whether I shall be much the worse for it or no, if it should
come to be so.  Dined at home and thence to White Hall again (where I lose
most of my time now-a-days to my great trouble, charge, and loss of time
and benefit), and there, after the Council rose, Sir G. Carteret, my Lord
Brunkard, Sir Thomas Harvy, and myself, down to my Lord Treasurer's
chamber to him and the Chancellor, and the Duke of Albemarle; and there I
did give them a large account of the charge of the Navy, and want of
money.  But strange to see how they held up their hands crying, "What
shall we do?" Says my Lord Treasurer, "Why, what means all this, Mr.
Pepys?  This is true, you say; but what would you have me to do?  I have
given all I can for my life.  Why will not people lend their money?  Why
will they not trust the King as well as Oliver?  Why do our prizes come to
nothing, that yielded so much heretofore?"  And this was all we could get,
and went away without other answer, which is one of the saddest things
that, at such a time as this, with the greatest action on foot that ever
was in England, nothing should be minded, but let things go on of
themselves do as well as they can.  So home, vexed, and going to my Lady
Batten's, there found a great many women with her, in her chamber merry,
my Lady Pen and her daughter, among others; where my Lady Pen flung me
down upon the bed, and herself and others, one after another, upon me, and
very merry we were, and thence I home and called my wife with my Lady Pen
to supper, and very merry as I could be, being vexed as I was.  So home to
bed.

13th.  Lay long in bed, troubled a little with wind, but not much.  So to
the office, and there all the morning.  At noon to Sheriff Waterman's to
dinner, all of us men of the office in towne, and our wives, my Lady
Carteret and daughters, and Ladies Batten, Pen, and my wife, &c., and very
good cheer we had and merry; musique at and after dinner, and a fellow
danced a jigg; but when the company begun to dance, I came away lest I
should be taken out; and God knows how my wife carried herself, but I left
her to try her fortune.  So home, and late at the office, and then home to
supper and to bed.

14th.  Up, and betimes to Mr. Povy, being desirous to have an end of my
trouble of mind touching my Tangier business, whether he hath any desire
of accepting what my Lord Ashly offered, of his becoming Treasurer again;
and there I did, with a seeming most generous spirit, offer him to take it
back again upon his owne terms; but he did answer to me that he would not
above all things in the world, at which I was for the present satisfied;
but, going away thence and speaking with Creed, he puts me in doubt that
the very nature of the thing will require that he be put in again; and did
give me the reasons of the auditors, which, I confess, are so plain, that
I know not how to withstand them.  But he did give me most ingenious
advice what to do in it, and anon, my Lord Barkeley and some of the
Commissioners coming together, though not in a meeting, I did procure that
they should order Povy's payment of his remain of accounts to me; which
order if it do pass will put a good stop to the fastening of the thing
upon me.  At noon Creed and I to a cook's shop at Charing Cross, and there
dined and had much discourse, and his very good upon my business, and upon
other things, among the rest upon Will Howe's dissembling with us, we
discovering one to another his carriage to us, present and absent, being a
very false fellow.  Thence to White Hall again, and there spent the
afternoon, and then home to fetch a letter for the Council, and so back to
White Hall, where walked an hour with Mr. Wren, of my Lord Chancellor's,
and Mr. Ager, and then to Unthanke's and called my wife, and with her
through the city to Mile-End Greene, and eat some creame and cakes and so
back home, and I a little at the office, and so home to supper and to bed.
This morning I was saluted with newes that the fleetes, ours and the
Dutch, were engaged, and that the guns were heard at Walthamstow to play
all yesterday, and that Captain Teddiman's legs were shot off in the
Royall Katherine.  But before night I hear the contrary, both by letters
of my owne and messengers thence, that they were all well of our side and
no enemy appears yet, and that the Royall Katherine is come to the fleete,
and likely to prove as good a ship as any the King hath, of which I am
heartily glad, both for Christopher Pett's sake and Captain Teddiman that
is in her.

15th.  Up, and to White Hall about several businesses, but chiefly to see
the proposals of my warrants about Tangier under Creed, but to my trouble
found them not finished.  So back to the office, where all the morning,
busy, then home to dinner, and then all the afternoon till very late at my
office, and then home to supper and to bed, weary.

16th (Lord's day).  Lay long in bed, then up and to my chamber and my
office, looking over some plates which I find necessary for me to
understand pretty well, because of the Dutch warr.  Then home to dinner,
where Creed dined with us, and so after dinner he and I walked to the
Rolls' Chappell, expecting to hear the great Stillingfleete preach, but he
did not; but a very sorry fellow, which vexed me.  The sermon done, we
parted, and I home, where I find Mr. Andrews, and by and by comes Captain
Taylor, my old acquaintance at Westminster, that understands musique very
well and composes mighty bravely; he brought us some things of two parts
to sing, very hard; but that that is the worst, he is very conceited of
them, and that though they are good makes them troublesome to one, to see
him every note commend and admire them.  He supped with me, and a good
understanding man he is and a good scholler, and, among other things, a
great antiquary, and among other things he can, as he says, show the very
originall Charter to Worcester, of King Edgar's, wherein he stiles
himself, Rex Marium Brittanniae, &c.; which is the great text that Mr.
Selden and others do quote, but imperfectly and upon trust.  But he hath
the very originall, which he says he will shew me.  He gone we to bed.
This night I am told that newes is come of our taking of three Dutch
men-of-warr, with the loss of one of our Captains.

17th.  Up and to the Duke of Albemarle's, where he shewed me Mr.
Coventry's letters, how three Dutch privateers are taken, in one whereof
Everson's' son is captaine.  But they have killed poor Captaine Golding in
The Diamond.  Two of them, one of 32 and the other of 20 odd guns, did
stand stoutly up against her, which hath 46, and the Yarmouth that hath 52
guns, and as many more men as they.  So that they did more than we could
expect, not yielding till many of their men were killed.  And Everson,
when he was brought before the Duke of Yorke, and was observed to be shot
through the hat, answered, that he wished it had gone through his head,
rather than been taken.  One thing more is written: that two of our ships
the other day appearing upon the coast of Holland, they presently fired
their beacons round the country to give notice.  And newes is brought the
King, that the Dutch Smyrna fleete is seen upon the back of Scotland; and
thereupon the King hath wrote to the Duke, that he do appoint a fleete to
go to the Northward to try to meet them coming home round: which God send!
Thence to White Hall; where the King seeing me, did come to me, and
calling me by name, did discourse with me about the ships in the River:
and this is the first time that ever I knew the King did know me
personally; so that hereafter I must not go thither, but with expectation
to be questioned, and to be ready to give good answers. So home, and
thence with Creed, who come to dine with me, to the Old James, where we
dined with Sir W. Rider and Cutler, and, by and by, being called by my
wife, we all to a play, "The Ghosts," at the Duke's house, but a very
simple play.  Thence up and down, with my wife with me, to look [for] Sir
Ph. Warwicke (Mr. Creed going from me), but missed of him and so home, and
late and busy at my office.  So home to supper and to bed.  This day was
left at my house a very neat silver watch, by one Briggs, a scrivener and
sollicitor, at which I was angry with my wife for receiving, or, at least,
for opening the box wherein it was, and so far witnessing our receipt of
it, as to give the messenger 5s. for bringing it; but it can't be helped,
and I will endeavour to do the man a kindnesse, he being a friend of my
uncle Wight's.

18th.  Up and to Sir Philip Warwicke, and walked with him an houre with
great delight in the Parke about Sir G. Carteret's accounts, and the
endeavours that he hath made to bring Sir G. Carteret to show his accounts
and let the world see what he receives and what he pays.  Thence home to
the office, where I find Sir J. Minnes come home from Chatham, and Sir W.
Batten both this morning from Harwich, where they have been these 7 or 8
days.  At noon with my wife and Mr. Moore by water to Chelsey about my
Privy Seale for Tangier, but my Lord Privy Seale was gone abroad, and so
we, without going out of the boat, forced to return, and found him not at
White Hall.  So I to Sir Philip Warwicke and with him to my Lord
Treasurer, who signed my commission for Tangier-Treasurer and the docquet
of my Privy Seale, for the monies to be paid to me. Thence to White Hall
to Mr. Moore again, and not finding my Lord I home, taking my wife and
woman up at Unthanke's.  Late at my office, then to supper and to bed.

19th.  Up by five o'clock, and by water to White Hall; and there took
coach, and with Mr. Moore to Chelsy; where, after all my fears what doubts
and difficulties my Lord Privy Seale would make at my Tangier Privy Seale,
he did pass it at first reading, without my speaking with him.  And then
called me in, and was very civil to me.  I passed my time in contemplating
(before I was called in) the picture of my Lord's son's lady, a most
beautiful woman, and most like to Mrs. Butler.  Thence very much joyed to
London back again, and found out Mr. Povy; told him this; and then went
and left my Privy Seale at my Lord Treasurer's; and so to the 'Change, and
thence to Trinity-House; where a great dinner of Captain Crisp, who is
made an Elder Brother.  And so, being very pleasant at dinner, away home,
Creed with me; and there met Povy; and we to Gresham College, where we saw
some experiments upon a hen, a dogg, and a cat, of the Florence poyson.

     ["Sir Robert Moray presented the Society from the King with a phial
     of Florentine poison sent for by his Majesty from Florence, on
     purpose to have those experiments related of the efficacy thereof,
     tried by the Society."  The poison had little effect upon the kitten
     (Birch's "History;" vol. ii., p. 31).]

The first it made for a time drunk, but it come to itself again quickly;
the second it made vomitt mightily, but no other hurt.  The third I did
not stay to see the effect of it, being taken out by Povy.  He and I
walked below together, he giving me most exceeding discouragements in the
getting of money (whether by design or no I know not, for I am now come to
think him a most cunning fellow in most things he do, but his accounts),
and made it plain to me that money will be hard to get, and that it is to
be feared Backewell hath a design in it to get the thing forced upon
himself.  This put me into a cruel melancholy to think I may lose what I
have had so near my hand; but yet something may be hoped for which
to-morrow will shew.  He gone, Creed and I together a great while
consulting what to do in this case, and after all I left him to do what he
thought fit in his discourse to-morrow with my Lord Ashly.  So home, and
in my way met with Mr. Warren, from whom my hopes I fear will fail of what
I hoped for, by my getting him a protection.  But all these troubles will
if not be over, yet we shall see the worst of there in a day or two. So to
my office, and thence to supper, and my head akeing, betimes, that is by
10 or 11 o'clock, to bed.

20th.  Up, and all the morning busy at the office.  At noon dined, and Mr.
Povy by agreement with me (where his boldness with Mercer, poor innocent
wench, did make both her and me blush, to think how he were able to
debauch a poor girl if he had opportunity) at a dish or two of plain meat
of his own choice.  After dinner comes Creed and then Andrews, where want
of money to Andrews the main discourse, and at last in confidence of
Creed's judgement I am resolved to spare him 4 or L500 of what lies by me
upon the security of some Tallys.  This went against my heart to begin,
but when obtaining Mr. Creed to joyne with me we do resolve to assist Mr.
Andrews.  Then anon we parted, and I to my office, where late, and then
home to supper and to bed.  This night I am told the first play is played
in White Hall noon-hall, which is now turned to a house of playing.  I had
a great mind, but could not go to see it.

21st.  Up and to my office about business.  Anon comes Creed and Povy, and
we treat about the business of our lending money, Creed and I, upon a
tally for the satisfying of Andrews, and did conclude it as in papers is
expressed, and as I am glad to have an opportunity of having 10 per cent.
for my money, so I am as glad that the sum I begin this trade with is no
more than L350.  We all dined at Andrews' charge at the Sun behind the
'Change, a good dinner the worst dressed that ever I eat any, then home,
and there found Kate Joyce and Harman come to see us.  With them, after
long talk, abroad by coach, a tour in the fields, and drunk at Islington,
it being very pleasant, the dust being laid by a little rain, and so home
very well pleased with this day's work.  So after a while at my office to
supper and to bed.  This day we hear that the Duke and the fleete are
sailed yesterday.  Pray God go along with them, that they have good speed
in the beginning of their worke.

22nd.  Up, and Mr. Caesar, my boy's lute-master, being come betimes to
teach him, I did speak with him seriously about the boy, what my mind was,
if he did not look after his lute and singing that I would turn him away;
which I hope will do some good upon the boy.  All the morning busy at the
office.  At noon dined at home, and then to the office again very busy
till very late, and so home to supper and to bed.  My wife making great
preparation to go to Court to Chappell to-morrow.  This day I have newes
from Mr. Coventry that the fleete is sailed yesterday from Harwich to the
coast of Holland to see what the Dutch will do.  God go along with them!

23rd (Lord's day).  Mr. Povy, according to promise, sent his coach
betimes, and I carried my wife and her woman to White Hall Chappell and
set them in the Organ Loft, and I having left to untruss went to the Harp
and Ball and there drank also, and entertained myself in talke with the
mayde of the house, a pretty mayde and very modest.  Thence to the
Chappell and heard the famous young Stillingfleete, whom I knew at
Cambridge, and is now newly admitted one of the King's chaplains; and was
presented, they say, to my Lord Treasurer for St. Andrew's, Holborne,
where he is now minister, with these words: that they (the Bishops of
Canterbury, London, and another) believed he is the ablest young man to
preach the Gospel of any since the Apostles.  He did make the most plain,
honest, good, grave sermon, in the most unconcerned and easy yet
substantial manner, that ever I heard in my life, upon the words of
Samuell to the people, "Fear the Lord in truth with all your heart, and
remember the great things that he hath done for you."  It being proper to
this day, the day of the King's Coronation.  Thence to Mr. Povy's, where
mightily treated, and Creed with us.  But Lord! to see how Povy overdoes
every thing in commending it, do make it nauseous to me, and was not (by
reason of my large praise of his house) over acceptable to my wife. Thence
after dinner Creed and we by coach took the ayre in the fields beyond St.
Pancras, it raining now and then, which it seems is most welcome weather,
and then all to my house, where comes Mr. Hill, Andrews, and Captain
Taylor, and good musique, but at supper to hear the arguments we had
against Taylor concerning a Corant, he saying that the law of a dancing
Corant is to have every barr to end in a pricked crochet and quaver, which
I did deny, was very strange.  It proceeded till I vexed him, but all
parted friends, for Creed and I to laugh at when he was gone.  After
supper, Creed and I together to bed, in Mercer's bed, and so to sleep.

24th.  Up and with Creed in Sir W. Batten's coach to White Hall.  Sir W.
Batten and I to the Duke of Albemarle, where very busy.  Then I to Creed's
chamber, where I received with much ado my two orders about receiving
Povy's monies and answering his credits, and it is strange how he will
preserve his constant humour of delaying all business that comes before
him.  Thence he and I to London to my office, and back again to my Lady
Sandwich's to dinner, where my wife by agreement.  After dinner alone, my
Lady told me, with the prettiest kind of doubtfullnesse, whether it would
be fit for her with respect to Creed to do it, that is, in the world, that
Creed had broke his desire to her of being a servant to Mrs. Betty
Pickering, and placed it upon encouragement which he had from some
discourse of her ladyship, commending of her virtues to him, which, poor
lady, she meant most innocently.  She did give him a cold answer, but not
so severe as it ought to have been; and, it seems, as the lady since to my
Lady confesses, he had wrote a letter to her, which she answered slightly,
and was resolved to contemn any motion of his therein. My Lady takes the
thing very ill, as it is fit she should; but I advise her to stop all
future occasions of the world's taking notice of his coming thither so
often as of late he hath done.  But to think that he should have this
devilish presumption to aime at a lady so near to my Lord is strange, both
for his modesty and discretion.  Thence to the Cockepitt, and there walked
an houre with my Lord Duke of Albemarle alone in his garden, where he
expressed in great words his opinion of me; that I was the right hand of
the Navy here, nobody but I taking any care of any thing therein; so that
he should not know what could be done without me.  At which I was (from
him) not a little proud.  Thence to a Committee of Tangier, where because
not a quorum little was done, and so away to my wife (Creed with me) at
Mrs. Pierce's, who continues very pretty and is now great with child.  I
had not seen her a great while.  Thence by coach to my Lord Treasurer's,
but could not speak with Sir Ph. Warwicke.  So by coach with my wife and
Mercer to the Parke; but the King being there, and I now-a-days being
doubtfull of being seen in any pleasure, did part from the tour, and away
out of the Parke to Knightsbridge, and there eat and drank in the coach,
and so home, and after a while at my office, home to supper and to bed,
having got a great cold I think by my pulling off my periwigg so often.

25th.  At the office all the morning, and the like after dinner, at home
all the afternoon till very late, and then to bed, being very hoarse with
a cold I did lately get with leaving off my periwigg.  This afternoon W.
Pen, lately come from his father in the fleete, did give me an account how
the fleete did sayle, about 103 in all, besides small catches, they being
in sight of six or seven Dutch scouts, and sent ships in chase of them.

26th.  Up very betimes, my cold continuing and my stomach sick with the
buttered ale that I did drink the last night in bed, which did lie upon me
till I did this morning vomitt it up.  So walked to Povy's, where Creed
met me, and there I did receive the first parcel of money as Treasurer of
Tangier, and did give him my receipt for it, which was about L2,800 value
in Tallys; we did also examine and settle several other things, and then I
away to White Hall, talking, with Povy alone, about my opinion of Creed's
indiscretion in looking after Mrs. Pickering, desiring him to make no more
a sport of it, but to correct him, if he finds that he continues to owne
any such thing.  This I did by my Lady's desire, and do intend to pursue
the stop of it.  So to the Carrier's by Cripplegate, to see whether my
mother be come to towne or no, I expecting her to-day, but she is not
come.  So to dinner to my Lady Sandwich's, and there after dinner above in
the diningroom did spend an houre or two with her talking again about
Creed's folly; but strange it is that he should dare to propose this
business himself of Mrs. Pickering to my Lady, and to tell my Lady that he
did it for her virtue sake, not minding her money, for he could have a
wife with more, but, for that, he did intend to depend upon her Ladyshipp
to get as much of her father and mother for her as she could; and that,
what he did, was by encouragement from discourse of her Ladyshipp's: he
also had wrote to Mrs. Pickering, but she did give him a slighting answer
back again.  But I do very much fear that Mrs. Pickering's honour, if the
world comes to take notice of it, may be wronged by it.  Thence home, and
all the afternoon till night at my office, then home to supper and to bed.

27th.  Up, and to my office, where all the morning, at noon Creed dined
with me; and, after dinner, walked in the garden, he telling me that my
Lord Treasurer now begins to be scrupulous, and will know what becomes of
the L26,000 saved by my Lord Peterborough, before he parts with any more
money, which puts us into new doubts, and me into a great fear, that all
my cake will be doe still.

     [An obsolete proverb, signifying to lose one's hopes, a cake coming
     out of the oven in a state of dough being considered spoiled.

         "My cake is dough; but I'll in among the rest;
          Out of hope of all, but my share in the feast."
               Shakespeare, Taming of the Shrew, act v., sc.  i.-M. B.]

But I am well prepared for it to bear it, being not clear whether it will
be more for my profit to have it, or go without it, as my profits of the
Navy are likely now to be.  All the afternoon till late hard at the
office.  Then to supper and to bed.  This night William Hewer is returned
from Harwich, where he hath been paying off of some ships this fortnight,
and went to sea a good way with the fleete, which was 96 in company then,
men of warr, besides some come in, and following them since, which makes
now above 100, whom God bless!

28th.  Up by 5 o'clock, and by appointment with Creed by 6 at his chamber,
expecting Povy, who come not.  Thence he and I out to Sir Philip
Warwicke's, but being not up we took a turn in the garden hard by, and
thither comes Povy to us.  After some discourse of the reason of the
difficulty that Sir Philip Warwicke makes in issuing a warrant for my
striking of tallys, namely, the having a clear account of the L26,000
saved by my Lord of Peterborough, we parted, and I to Sir P. Warwicke, who
did give me an account of his demurr, which I applied myself to remove by
taking Creed with me to my Lord Ashly, from whom, contrary to all
expectation, I received a very kind answer, just as we could have wished
it, that he would satisfy my Lord Treasurer.  Thence very well satisfied I
home, and down the River to visit the victualling-ships, where I find all
out of order.  And come home to dinner, and then to write a letter to the
Duke of Albemarle about the victualling-ships, and carried it myself to
the Council-chamber, where it was read; and when they rose, my Lord
Chancellor passing by stroked me on the head, and told me that the Board
had read my letter, and taken order for the punishing of the watermen for
not appearing on board the ships.

     [Among the State Papers are lists of watermen impressed and put on
     board the victualling ships.  Attached to one of these is a "note of
     their unfitness and refractory conduct; also that many go ashore to
     sleep, and are discontent that they, as masters of families, are
     pressed, while single men are excused on giving money to the
     pressmen" ("Calendar," Domestic, 1664-65, p. 323).]

And so did the King afterwards, who do now know me so well, that he never
sees me but he speaks to me about our Navy business.  Thence got my Lord
Ashly to my Lord Treasurer below in his chamber, and there removed the
scruple, and by and by brought Mr. Sherwin to Sir Philip Warwicke and did
the like, and so home, and after a while at my office, to bed.

29th.  All the morning busy at the office.  In the afternoon to my Lord
Treasurer's, and there got my Lord Treasurer to sign the warrant for my
striking of tallys, and so doing many jobbs in my way home, and there late
writeing letters, being troubled in my mind to hear that Sir W. Batten and
Sir J. Minnes do take notice that I am now-a-days much from the office
upon no office business, which vexes me, and will make me mind my business
the better, I hope in God; but what troubles me more is, that I do omit to
write, as I should do, to Mr. Coventry, which I must not do, though this
night I minded it so little as to sleep in the middle of my letter to him,
and committed forty blotts and blurrs in my letter to him, but of this I
hope never more to be guilty, if I have not already given him sufficient
offence.  So, late home, and to bed.

30th (Lord's day).  Up and to my office alone all the morning, making up
my monthly accounts, which though it hath been very intricate, and very
great disbursements and receipts and odd reckonings, yet I differed not
from the truth; viz.: between my first computing what my profit ought to
be and then what my cash and debts do really make me worth, not above
10s., which is very much, and I do much value myself upon the account, and
herein I with great joy find myself to have gained this month above L100
clear, and in the whole to be worth above L1400, the greatest sum I ever
yet was worth.  Thence home to dinner, and there find poor Mr. Spong
walking at my door, where he had knocked, and being told I was at the
office staid modestly there walking because of disturbing me, which
methinks was one of the most modest acts (of a man that hath no need of
being so to me) that ever I knew in my life.  He dined with me, and then
after dinner to my closet, where abundance of mighty pretty discourse,
wherein, in a word, I find him the man of the world that hath of his own
ingenuity obtained the most in most things, being withall no scholler. He
gone, I took boat and down to Woolwich and Deptford, and made it late
home, and so to supper and to bed.  Thus I end this month in great content
as to my estate and gettings: in much trouble as to the pains I have
taken, and the rubs I expect yet to meet with, about the business of
Tangier.  The fleete, with about 106 ships upon the coast of Holland, in
sight of the Dutch, within the Texel.  Great fears of the sickenesse here
in the City, it being said that two or three houses are already shut up.
God preserve as all!

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Castlemayne is sicke again, people think, slipping her filly
     Desired me that I would baste his coate
     Did put evil thoughts in me, but proceeded no further
     France, which is accounted the best place for bread
     How Povy overdoes every thing in commending it
     Never could man say worse himself nor have worse said
     Wanton as ever she was, with much I made myself merry and away


                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                               MAY & JUNE
                                  1665

May 1st.  Up and to Mr. Povy's, and by his bedside talked a good while.
Among other things he do much insist I perceive upon the difficulty of
getting of money, and would fain have me to concur in the thinking of some
other way of disposing of the place of Treasurer to one Mr. Bell, but I
did seem slight of it, and resolved to try to do the best or to give it
up.  Thence to the Duke of Albemarle, where I was sorry to find myself to
come a little late, and so home, and at noon going to the 'Change I met my
Lord Brunkard, Sir Robert Murry, Deane Wilkins, and Mr. Hooke, going by
coach to Colonell Blunts to dinner.  So they stopped and took me with
them.  Landed at the Tower-wharf, and thence by water to Greenwich; and
there coaches met us; and to his house, a very stately sight for situation
and brave plantations; and among others, a vineyard, the first that ever I
did see.  No extraordinary dinner, nor any other entertainment good; but
only after dinner to the tryall of some experiments about making of
coaches easy.  And several we tried; but one did prove mighty easy (not
here for me to describe, but the whole body of the coach lies upon one
long spring), and we all, one after another, rid in it; and it is very
fine and likely to take.  These experiments were the intent of their
coming, and pretty they are.  Thence back by coach to Greenwich, and in
his pleasure boat to Deptford, and there stopped and in to Mr.
Evelyn's,--[Sayes Court, the well-known residence of John Evelyn.]--which
is a most beautiful place; but it being dark and late, I staid not; but
Deane Wilkins and Mr. Hooke and I walked to Redriffe; and noble discourse
all day long did please me, and it being late did take them to my house to
drink, and did give them some sweetmeats, and thence sent them with a
lanthorn home, two worthy persons as are in England, I think, or the
world.  So to my Lady Batten, where my wife is tonight, and so after some
merry talk home and to bed.

2nd.  Up and to the office all day, where sat late, and then to the office
again, and by and by Sir W. Batten and my Lady and my wife and I by
appointment yesterday (my Lady Pen failed us, who ought to have been with
us) to the Rhenish winehouse at the Steelyard, and there eat a couple of
lobsters and some prawns, and pretty merry, especially to see us four
together, while my wife and my Lady did never intend ever to be together
again after a year's distance between one another.  Hither by and by come
Sir Richard Ford and also Mrs. Esther, that lived formerly with my Lady
Batten, now well married to a priest, come to see my Lady. Thence toward
evening home, and to my office, where late, and then home to supper and to
bed.

3rd.  Up betimes and walked to Sir Ph. Warwicke's, where a long time with
him in his chamber alone talking of Sir G. Carteret's business, and the
abuses he puts on the nation by his bad payments to both our vexations,
but no hope of remedy for ought I see.  Thence to my Lord Ashly to a
Committee of Tangier for my Lord Rutherford's accounts, and that done we
to my Lord Treasurer's, where I did receive my Lord's warrant to Sir R.
Long for drawing a warrant for my striking of tallys.  So to the Inne
again by Cripplegate, expecting my mother's coming to towne, but she is
not come this weeke neither, the coach being too full.  So to the 'Change
and thence home to dinner, and so out to Gresham College, and saw a cat
killed with the Duke of Florence's poyson, and saw it proved that the oyle
of tobacco

     ["Mr. Daniel Coxe read an account of the effects of tobacco-oil
     distilled in a retort, by one drop of which given at the mouth he
     had killed a lusty cat, which being opened, smelled strongly of the
     oil, and the blood of the heart more strongly than the rest ....
     One drop of the Florentine 'oglio di tobacco' being again given to a
     dog, it proved stupefying and vomitive, as before" (Birch's "History
     of the Royal Society," vol, ii., pp. 42, 43).]

drawn by one of the Society do the same effect, and is judged to be the
same thing with the poyson both in colour and smell, and effect.  I saw
also an abortive child preserved fresh in spirits of salt.  Thence parted,
and to White Hall to the Councilchamber about an order touching the Navy
(our being empowered to commit seamen or Masters that do not, being hired
or pressed, follow their worke), but they could give us none. So a little
vexed at that, because I put in the memorial to the Duke of Albemarle
alone under my own hand, home, and after some time at the office home to
bed.  My Lord Chief Justice Hide did die suddenly this week, a day or two
ago, of an apoplexy.

4th.  Up, and to the office, where we sat busy all the morning.  At noon
home to dinner, and then to the office again all day till almost midnight,
and then, weary, home to supper and to bed.

5th.  Up betimes, and by water to Westminster, there to speak the first
time with Sir Robert Long, to give him my Privy Seal and my Lord
Treasurer's order for Tangier Tallys; he received me kindly enough. Thence
home by water, and presently down to Woolwich and back to Blackewall, and
there, viewed the Breach, in order to a Mast Docke, and so to Deptford to
the Globe, where my Lord Brunkard, Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Batten, and
Commissioner Pett were at dinner, having been at the Breach also, but they
find it will be too great charge to make use of it. After dinner to Mr.
Evelyn's; he being abroad, we walked in his garden, and a lovely noble
ground he hath indeed.  And among other rarities, a hive of bees, so as
being hived in glass, you may see the bees making their honey and combs
mighty pleasantly.  Thence home, and I by and by to Mr. Povy's to see him,
who is yet in his chamber not well, and thence by his advice to one
Lovett's, a varnisher, to see his manner of new varnish, but found not him
at home, but his wife, a very beautiful woman, who shewed me much variety
of admirable work, and is in order to my having of some papers fitted with
his lines for my use for tables and the like.  I know not whether I was
more pleased with the thing, or that I was shewed it by her, but resolved
I am to have some made.  So home to my office late, and then to supper and
to bed.  My wife tells me that she hears that my poor aunt James hath had
her breast cut off here in town, her breast having long been out of order.
This day, after I had suffered my owne hayre to grow long, in order to
wearing it, I find the convenience of periwiggs is so great, that I have
cut off all short again, and will keep to periwiggs.

6th.  Up, and all day at the office, but a little at dinner, and there
late till past 12.  So home to bed, pleased as I always am after I have
rid a great deal of work, it being very satisfactory to me.

7th (Lord's day).  Up, and to church with my wife.  Home and dined. After
dinner come Mr. Andrews and spent the afternoon with me, about our Tangier
business of the victuals, and then parted, and after sermon comes Mr. Hill
and a gentleman, a friend of his, one Mr. Scott, that sings well also, and
then comes Mr. Andrews, and we all sung and supped, and then to sing again
and passed the Sunday very pleasantly and soberly, and so I to my office a
little, and then home to prayers and to bed.  Yesterday begun my wife to
learn to, limn of one Browne,

     [Alexander Browne, a printseller, who taught drawing, and practised
     it with success.  He published in 1669, "Ars Pictoria, or an Academy
     treating of Drawing, Painting, Limning and Etching."]

which Mr. Hill helps her to, and, by her beginning upon some eyes, I think
she will [do] very fine things, and I shall take great delight in it.

8th.  Up very betimes, and did much business before I went out with
several persons, among others Captain Taylor, who would leave the
management of most of his business now he is going to Harwich, upon me,
and if I can get money by it, which I believe it will, I shall take some
of it upon me.  Thence with Sir W. Batten to the Duke of Albemarle's and
there did much business, and then to the 'Change, and thence off with Sir
W. Warren to an ordinary, where we dined and sat talking of most usefull
discourse till 5 in the afternoon, and then home, and very busy till late,
and so home and to bed.

9th.  Up betimes, and to my business at the office, where all the morning.
At noon comes Mrs. The. Turner, and dines with us, and my wife's
painting-master staid and dined; and I take great pleasure in thinking
that my wife will really come to something in that business. Here dined
also Luellin.  So after dinner to my office, and there very busy till
almost midnight, and so home to supper and to bed.  This day we have newes
of eight ships being taken by some of ours going into the Texel, their two
men of warr, that convoyed them, running in.  They come from about
Ireland, round to the north.

10th.  Up betimes, and abroad to the Cocke-Pitt, where the Duke [of
Albemarle] did give Sir W. Batten and me an account of the late taking of
eight ships, and of his intent to come back to the Gunfleete--[The
Gunfleet Sand off the Essex coast.]--with the fleete presently; which
creates us much work and haste therein, against the fleete comes.  So to
Mr. Povy, and after discourse with him home, and thence to the Guard in
Southwarke, there to get some soldiers, by the Duke's order, to go keep
pressmen on board our ships.  So to the 'Change and did much business, and
then home to dinner, and there find my poor mother come out of the country
today in good health, and I am glad to see her, but my business, which I
am sorry for, keeps me from paying the respect I ought to her at her first
coming, she being grown very weak in her judgement, and doating again in
her discourse, through age and some trouble in her family.  I left her and
my wife to go abroad to buy something, and then I to my office.  In the
evening by appointment to Sir W. Warren and Mr. Deering at a taverne hard
by with intent to do some good upon their agreement in a great bargain of
planks.  So home to my office again, and then to supper and to bed, my
mother being in bed already.

11th.  Up betimes, and at the office all the morning.  At home dined, and
then to the office all day till late at night, and then home to supper,
weary with business, and to bed.

12th.  Up betimes, and find myself disappointed in my receiving presently
of my L50 I hoped for sure of Mr. Warren upon the benefit of my press
warrant, but he promises to make it good.  So by water to the Exchequer,
and there up and down through all the offices to strike my tallys for
L17,500, which methinks is so great a testimony of the goodness of God to
me, that I, from a mean clerke there, should come to strike tallys myself
for that sum, and in the authority that I do now, is a very stupendous
mercy to me.  I shall have them struck to-morrow.  But to see how every
little fellow looks after his fees, and to get what he can for everything,
is a strange consideration; the King's fees that he must pay himself for
this L17,500 coming to above L100.  Thence called my wife at Unthanke's to
the New Exchange and elsewhere to buy a lace band for me, but we did not
buy, but I find it so necessary to have some handsome clothes that I
cannot but lay out some money thereupon.  To the 'Change and thence to my
watchmaker, where he has put it [i.e. the watch] in order, and a good and
brave piece it is, and he tells me worth L14 which is a greater present
than I valued it.  So home to dinner, and after dinner comes several
people, among others my cozen, Thomas Pepys, of Hatcham,

     [Thomas Pepys, of Hatcham Barnes, Surrey, Master of the Jewel House
     to Charles II. and James II.]

to receive some money, of my Lord Sandwich's, and there I paid him what
was due to him upon my uncle's score, but, contrary to my expectation, did
get him to sign and seale to my sale of lands for payment of debts. So
that now I reckon myself in better condition by L100 in my content than I
was before, when I was liable to be called to an account and others after
me by my uncle Thomas or his children for every foot of land we had sold
before.  This I reckon a great good fortune in the getting of this done.
He gone, come Mr. Povy, Dr. Twisden, and Mr. Lawson about settling my
security in the paying of the L4000 ordered to Sir J. Lawson. So a little
abroad and then home, and late at my office and closet settling this day's
disordering of my papers, then to supper and to bed.

13th.  Up, and all day in some little gruntings of pain, as I used to have
from winde, arising I think from my fasting so long, and want of exercise,
and I think going so hot in clothes, the weather being hot, and the same
clothes I wore all winter.  To the 'Change after office, and received my
watch from the watchmaker, and a very fine [one] it is, given me by
Briggs, the Scrivener.  Home to dinner, and then I abroad to the Atturney
Generall, about advice upon the Act for Land Carriage, which he desired
not to give me before I had received the King's and Council's order
therein; going home bespoke the King's works, will cost me 50s., I
believe.  So home and late at my office.  But, Lord!  to see how much of
my old folly and childishnesse hangs upon me still that I cannot forbear
carrying my watch in my hand in the coach all this afternoon, and seeing
what o'clock it is one hundred times; and am apt to think with myself, how
could I be so long without one; though I remember since, I had one, and
found it a trouble, and resolved to carry one no more about me while I
lived.  So home to supper and to bed, being troubled at a letter from Mr.
Gholmly from Tangier, wherein he do advise me how people are at worke to
overthrow our Victualling business, by which I shall lose L300 per annum,
I am much obliged to him for this, secret kindnesse, and concerned to
repay it him in his own concernments and look after this.

14th (Lord's day).  Up, and with my wife to church, it being Whitsunday;
my wife very fine in a new yellow bird's-eye hood, as the fashion is now.
We had a most sorry sermon; so home to dinner, my mother having her new
suit brought home, which makes her very fine.  After dinner my wife and
she and Mercer to Thomas Pepys's wife's christening of his first child,
and I took a coach, and to Wanstead, the house where Sir H. Mildmay died,
and now Sir Robert Brookes lives, having bought it of the Duke of Yorke,
it being forfeited to him.  A fine seat, but an old-fashioned house; and
being not full of people looks desolately.  Thence to Walthamstow, where
(failing at the old place) Sir W. Batten by and by come home, I walking up
and down the house and garden with my Lady very pleasantly, then to supper
very merry, and then back by coach by dark night.  I all the afternoon in
the coach reading the treasonous book of the Court of King James, printed
a great while ago, and worth reading, though ill intended. As soon as I
come home, upon a letter from the Duke of Albemarle, I took boat at about
12 at night, and down the River in a gally, my boy and I, down to the Hope
and so up again, sleeping and waking, with great pleasure, my business to
call upon every one of

15th.  Our victualling ships to set them agoing, and so home, and after
dinner to the King's playhouse, all alone, and saw "Love's Maistresse."
Some pretty things and good variety in it, but no or little fancy in it.
Thence to the Duke of Albemarle to give him account of my day's works,
where he shewed me letters from Sir G. Downing, of four days' date, that
the Dutch are come out and joyned, well-manned, and resolved to board our
best ships, and fight for certain they will.  Thence to the Swan at
Herbert's, and there the company of Sarah a little while, and so away and
called at the Harp and Ball, where the mayde, Mary, is very
'formosa'--[handsome]--;  but, Lord! to see in what readiness I am, upon
the expiring of my vowes this day, to begin to run into all my pleasures
and neglect of business.  Thence home, and being sleepy to bed.

16th.  Up betimes, and to the Duke of Albemarle with an account of my
yesterday's actions in writing.  So back to the office, where all the
morning very busy.  After dinner by coach to see and speak with Mr. Povy,
and after little discourse back again home, where busy upon letters till
past 12 at night, and so home to supper and to bed, weary.

17th.  Up, and by appointment to a meeting of Sir John Lawson and Mr.
Cholmly's atturney and Mr. Povy at the Swan taverne at Westminster to
settle their business about my being secured in the payment of money to
Sir J. Lawson in the other's absence.  Thence at Langford's, where I never
was since my brother died there.  I find my wife and Mercer, having with
him agreed upon two rich silk suits for me, which is fit for me to have,
but yet the money is too much, I doubt, to lay out altogether; but it is
done, and so let it be, it being the expense of the world that I can the
best bear with and the worst spare.  Thence home, and after dinner to the
office, where late, and so home to supper and to bed.  Sir J. Minnes and I
had an angry bout this afternoon with Commissioner Pett about his
neglecting his duty and absenting himself, unknown to us, from his place
at Chatham, but a most false man I every day find him more and more, and
in this very full of equivocation.  The fleete we doubt not come to
Harwich by this time.  Sir W. Batten is gone down this day thither, and
the Duchesse of Yorke went down yesterday to meet the Duke.

18th.  Up, and with Sir J. Minnes to the Duke of Albemarle, where we did
much business, and I with good content to myself; among other things we
did examine Nixon and Stanesby, about their late running from two
Dutchmen;

     [Captain Edward Nixon, of the "Elizabeth," and Captain John
     Stanesby, of the "Eagle."  John Lanyon wrote to the Navy
     Commissioners from Plymouth, May 16th: "Understands from the seamen
     that the conduct of Captains Nixon and Stanesby in their late
     engagement with two Dutch capers was very foul; the night they left
     the Dutch, no lights were put out as formerly, and though in sight
     of them in the morning, they still kept on their way; the Eagle lay
     by some time, and both the enemy's ships plied on her, but finding
     the Elizabeth nearly out of sight she also made sail; it is true the
     wind and sea were high, but there were no sufficient reasons for
     such endeavours to get from them." ("Calendar of State Papers,"
     Domestic, 1664-65, p. 367).  Both captains were tried; Nixon was
     condemned to be shot but Stanesby was cleared, and Charnock asserts
     that he was commander the "Happy Return" in 1672.]

for which they are committed to a vessel to carry them to the fleete to be
tried.  A most fowle unhandsome thing as ever was heard, for plain
cowardice on Nixon's part.  Thence with the Duke of Albemarle in his coach
to my Lord Treasurer, and there was before the King (who ever now calls me
by my name) and Lord Chancellor, and many other great Lords, discoursing
about insuring of some of the King's goods, wherein the King accepted of
my motion that we should; and so away, well pleased.  To the office, and
dined, and then to the office again, and abroad to speak with Sir G.
Carteret; but, Lord! to see how fraile a man I am, subject to my vanities,
that can hardly forbear, though pressed with never so much business, my
pursuing of pleasure, but home I got, and there very busy very late.
Among other things consulting with Mr. Andrews about our Tangier business,
wherein we are like to meet with some trouble, and my Lord Bellasses's
endeavour to supplant us, which vexes my mind; but, however, our
undertaking is so honourable that we shall stand a tug for it I think.  So
home to supper and to bed.

19th.  Up, and to White Hall, where the Committee for Tangier met, and
there, though the case as to the merit of it was most plain and most of
the company favourable to our business, yet it was with much ado that I
got the business not carried fully against us, but put off to another day,
my Lord Arlington being the great man in it, and I was sorry to be found
arguing so greatly against him.  The business I believe will in the end be
carried against us, and the whole business fall; I must therefore
endeavour the most I can to get money another way.  It vexed me to see
Creed so hot against it, but I cannot much blame him, having never
declared to him my being concerned in it.  But that that troubles me most
is my Lord Arlington calls to me privately and asks me whether I had ever
said to any body that I desired to leave this employment, having not time
to look after it.  I told him, No, for that the thing being settled it
will not require much time to look after it.  He told me then he would do
me right to the King, for he had been told so, which I desired him to do,
and by and by he called me to him again and asked me whether I had no
friend about the Duke, asking me (I making a stand) whether Mr. Coventry
was not my friend.  I told him I had received many friendships from him.
He then advised me to procure that the Duke would in his next letter write
to him to continue me in my place and remove any obstruction; which I told
him I would, and thanked him.  So parted, vexed at the first and amazed at
this business of my Lord Arlington's.  Thence to the Exchequer, and there
got my tallys for L17,500, the first payment I ever had out of the
Exchequer, and at the Legg spent 14s. upon my old acquaintance, some of
them the clerks, and away home with my tallys in a coach, fearful every
step of having one of them fall out, or snatched from me.  Being come
home, I much troubled out again by coach (for company taking Sir W. Warren
with me), intending to have spoke to my Lord Arlington to have known the
bottom of it, but missed him, and afterwards discoursing the thing as a
confidant to Sir W. Warren, he did give me several good hints and
principles not to do anything suddenly, but consult my pillow upon that
and every great thing of my life, before I resolve anything in it. Away
back home, and not being fit for business I took my wife and Mercer down
by water to Greenwich at 8 at night, it being very fine and cool and
moonshine afterward.  Mighty pleasant passage it was; there eat a cake or
two, and so home by 10 or 11 at night, and then to bed, my mind not
settled what to think.

20th.  Up, and to my office, where busy all the morning.  At noon dined at
home, and to my office, very busy.

21st.  Till past one, Lord's day, in the morning writing letters to the
fleete and elsewhere, and my mind eased of much business, home to bed and
slept till 8.  So up, and this day is brought home one of my new silk
suits, the plain one, but very rich camelott and noble.  I tried it and it
pleases me, but did not wear it, being I would not go out today to church.
So laid it by, and my mind changed, thinking to go see my Lady Sandwich,
and I did go a little way, but stopped and returned home to dinner, after
dinner up to my chamber to settle my Tangier accounts, and then to my
office, there to do the like with other papers.  In the evening home to
supper and to bed.

22nd.  Up, and down to the ships, which now are hindered from going down
to the fleete (to our great sorrow and shame) with their provisions, the
wind being against them.  So to the Duke of Albemarle, and thence down by
water to Deptford, it being Trinity Monday, and so the day of choosing the
Master of Trinity House for the next yeare, where, to my great content, I
find that, contrary to the practice and design of Sir W. Batten, to breake
the rule and custom of the Company in choosing their Masters by
succession, he would have brought in Sir W. Rider or Sir W. Pen, over the
head of Hurleston (who is a knave too besides, I believe), the younger
brothers did all oppose it against the elder, and with great heat did
carry it for Hurleston, which I know will vex him to the heart. Thence,
the election being over, to church, where an idle sermon from that
conceited fellow, Dr. Britton, saving that his advice to unity, and laying
aside all envy and enmity among them was very apposite.  Thence walked to
Redriffe, and so to the Trinity House, and a great dinner, as is usual,
and so to my office, where busy all the afternoon till late, and then home
to bed, being much troubled in mind for several things, first, for the
condition of the fleete for lacke of provisions, the blame this office
lies under and the shame that they deserve to have brought upon them for
the ships not being gone out of the River, and then for my business of
Tangier which is not settled, and lastly for fear that I am not observed
to have attended the office business of late as much as I ought to do,
though there has been nothing but my attendance on Tangier that has
occasioned my absence, and that of late not much.

23rd.  Up, and at the office busy all the morning.  At noon dined alone,
my wife and mother being gone by invitation to dine with my mother's old
servant Mr. Cordery, who made them very welcome.  So to Mr. Povy's, where
after a little discourse about his business I home again, and late at the
office busy.  Late comes Sir Arthur Ingram to my office, to tell me that,
by letters from Amsterdam of the 28th of this month (their style),

     [The new style was adopted by most of the countries of Europe long
     before it was legalized in England, although Russia still retains
     the old style.]

the Dutch fleete, being about 100 men-of-war, besides fire-ships, &c., did
set out upon the 23rd and 24th inst.  Being divided into seven squadrons;
viz., 1.  Generall Opdam.  2.  Cottenar, of Rotterdam. 3.  Trump.  4.
Schram, of Horne.  5.  Stillingworth, of Freezland. 6.  Everson.   7.  One
other, not named, of Zealand.

24th.  Up, and by 4 o'clock in the morning, and with W. Hewer, there till
12 without intermission putting some papers in order.  Thence to the
Coffee-house with Creed, where I have not been a great while, where all
the newes is of the Dutch being gone out, and of the plague growing upon
us in this towne; and of remedies against it: some saying one thing, some
another.  So home to dinner, and after dinner Creed and I to Colvill's,
thinking to shew him all the respect we could by obliging him in carrying
him 5 tallys of L5000 to secure him for so much credit he has formerly
given Povy to Tangier, but he, like an impertinent fool, cavills at it,
but most ignorantly that ever I heard man in my life.  At last Mr. Viner
by chance comes, who I find a very moderate man, but could not persuade
the fool to reason, but brought away the tallys again, and so vexed to my
office, where late, and then home to my supper and to bed.

25th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning.  At noon dined at
home, and then to the office all the afternoon, busy till almost 12 at
night, and then home to supper and to bed.

26th.  Up at 4 o'clock, and all the morning in my office with W. Hewer
finishing my papers that were so long out of order, and at noon to my
bookseller's, and there bespoke a book or two, and so home to dinner,
where Creed dined with me, and he and I afterwards to Alderman Backewell's
to try him about supplying us with money, which he denied at first and
last also, saving that he spoke a little fairer at the end than before.
But the truth is I do fear I shall have a great deale of trouble in
getting of money.  Thence home, and in the evening by water to the Duke of
Albemarle, whom I found mightily off the hooks, that the ships are not
gone out of the River; which vexed me to see, insomuch that I am afeard
that we must expect some change or addition of new officers brought upon
us, so that I must from this time forward resolve to make myself appear
eminently serviceable in attending at my office duly and no where else,
which makes me wish with all my heart that I had never anything to do with
this business of Tangier.  After a while at my office, home to supper
vexed, and to bed.

27th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning; at noon dined at
home, and then to my office again,, where late, and so to bed, with my
mind full of fears for the business of this office and troubled with that
of Tangier, concerning which Mr. Povy was with me, but do give me little
help, but more reason of being troubled.  So that were it not for our
Plymouth business I would be glad to be rid of it.

28th (Lord's day).  By water to the Duke of Albemarle, where I hear that
Nixon is condemned to be shot to death, for his cowardice, by a Council of
War.  Went to chapel and heard a little musique, and there met with Creed,
and with him a little while walking, and to Wilkinson's for me to drink,
being troubled with winde, and at noon to Sir Philip Warwicke's to dinner,
where abundance of company come in unexpectedly; and here I saw one pretty
piece of household stuff, as the company increaseth, to put a larger leaf
upon an oval table.  After dinner much good discourse with Sir Philip, who
I find, I think, a most pious, good man, and a professor of a
philosophical manner of life and principles like Epictetus, whom he cites
in many things.  Thence to my Lady Sandwich's, where, to my shame, I had
not been a great while before.  Here, upon my telling her a story of my
Lord Rochester's running away on Friday night last with Mrs. Mallett, the
great beauty and fortune of the North, who had supped at White Hall with
Mrs. Stewart, and was going home to her lodgings with her grandfather, my
Lord Haly, by coach; and was at Charing Cross seized on by both horse and
foot men, and forcibly taken from him, and put into a coach with six
horses, and two women provided to receive her, and carried away.  Upon
immediate pursuit, my Lord of Rochester (for whom the King had spoke to
the lady often, but with no successe) was taken at Uxbridge; but the lady
is not yet heard of, and the King mighty angry, and the Lord sent to the
Tower.  Hereupon my Lady did confess to me, as a great secret, her being
concerned in this story.  For if this match breaks between my Lord
Rochester and her, then, by the consent of all her friends, my Lord
Hinchingbroke stands fair, and is invited for her.  She is worth, and will
be at her mother's death (who keeps but a little from her), L2500 per
annum.  Pray God give a good success to it!  But my poor Lady, who is
afeard of the sickness, and resolved to be gone into the country, is
forced to stay in towne a day or two, or three about it, to see the event
of it.  Thence home and to see my Lady Pen, where my wife and I were shown
a fine rarity: of fishes kept in a glass of water, that will live so for
ever; and finely marked they are, being foreign.--[Gold-fish introduced
from China.]--So to supper at home and to bed, after many people being
with me about business, among others the two Bellamys about their old debt
due to them from the King for their victualling business, out of which I
hope to get some money.

29th.  Lay long in bed, being in some little pain of the wind collique,
then up and to the Duke of Albemarle, and so to the Swan, and there drank
at Herbert's, and so by coach home, it being kept a great holiday through
the City, for the birth and restoration of the King.  To my office, where
I stood by and saw Symson the joyner do several things, little jobbs, to
the rendering of my closet handsome and the setting up of some neat plates
that Burston has for my money made me, and so home to dinner, and then
with my wife, mother, and Mercer in one boat, and I in another, down to
Woolwich.  I walking from Greenwich, the others going to and fro upon the
water till my coming back, having done but little business.  So home and
to supper, and, weary, to bed.  We have every where taken some prizes.
Our merchants have good luck to come home safe: Colliers from the North,
and some Streights men just now.  And our Hambrough ships, of whom we were
so much afeard, are safe in Hambrough.  Our fleete resolved to sail out
again from Harwich in a day or two.

30th.  Lay long, and very busy all the morning, at noon to the 'Change,
and thence to dinner to Sir G. Carteret's, to talk upon the business of
insuring our goods upon the Hambrough [ships].  Here a very fine, neat
French dinner, without much cost, we being all alone with my Lady and one
of the house with her; thence home and wrote letters, and then in the
evening, by coach, with my wife and mother and Mercer, our usual tour by
coach, and eat at the old house at Islington; but, Lord! to see how my
mother found herself talk upon every object to think of old stories. Here
I met with one that tells me that Jack Cole, my old schoolefellow, is dead
and buried lately of a consumption, who was a great crony of mine.  So
back again home, and there to my closet to write letters.  Hear to my
great trouble that our Hambrough ships,

     [On May 29th Sir William Coventry wrote to Lord Arlington: "Capt.
     Langhorne has arrived with seven ships, and reports the taking of
     the Hamburg fleet with the man of war their convoy; mistaking the
     Dutch fleet for the English, he fell into it" ("Calendar of State
     Papers," Domestic, 1664-65, p. 393)]

valued of the King's goods and the merchants' (though but little of the
former) to L200,000 [are lost].  By and by, about 11 at night, called into
the garden by my Lady Pen and daughter, and there walked with them and my
wife till almost twelve, and so in and closed my letters, and home to bed.

31st.  Up, and to my office, and to Westminster, doing business till noon,
and then to the 'Change, where great the noise and trouble of having our
Hambrough ships lost; and that very much placed upon Mr. Coventry's
forgetting to give notice to them of the going away of our fleete from the
coast of Holland.  But all without reason, for he did; but the merchants
not being ready, staid longer than the time ordered for the convoy to
stay, which was ten days.  Thence home with Creed and Mr. Moore to dinner.
Anon we broke up, and Creed and I to discourse about our Tangier matters
of money, which vex me.  So to Gresham College, staid a very little while,
and away and I home busy, and busy late, at the end of the month, about my
month's accounts, but by the addition of Tangier it is rendered more
intricate, and so (which I have not done these 12 months, nor would
willingly have done now) failed of having it done, but I will do it as
soon as I can.  So weary and sleepy to bed.  I endeavoured but missed of
seeing Sir Thomas Ingram at Westminster, so went to Houseman's the
Painter, who I intend shall draw my wife, but he was not within, but I saw
several very good pictures.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                  JUNE
                                  1665

June 1st.  Up and to the office, where sat all the morning, at noon to the
'Change, and there did some business, and home to dinner, whither Creed
comes, and after dinner I put on my new silke camelott sute; the best that
ever I wore in my life, the sute costing me above L24.  In this I went
with Creed to Goldsmiths' Hall, to the burial of Sir Thomas Viner; which
Hall, and Haberdashers also, was so full of people, that we were fain for
ease and coolness to go forth to Pater Noster Row, to choose a silke to
make me a plain ordinary suit.  That done, we walked to Cornehill, and
there at Mr. Cade's' stood in the balcon and saw all the funeral, which
was with the blue-coat boys and old men, all the Aldermen, and Lord Mayor,
&c., and the number of the company very great; the greatest I ever did see
for a taverne.  Hither come up to us Dr. Allen, and then Mr. Povy and Mr.
Fox.  The show being over, and my discourse with Mr. Povy, I took coach
and to Westminster Hall, where I took the fairest flower, and by coach to
Tothill Fields for the ayre till it was dark.  I 'light, and in with the
fairest flower to eat a cake, and there did do as much as was safe with my
flower, and that was enough on my part.  Broke up, and away without any
notice, and, after delivering the rose where it should be, I to the Temple
and 'light, and come to the middle door, and there took another coach, and
so home to write letters, but very few, God knows, being by my pleasure
made to forget everything that is.  The coachman that carried [us] cannot
know me again, nor the people at the house where we were.  Home to bed,
certain news being come that our fleete is in sight of the Dutch ships.

2nd.  Lay troubled in mind abed a good while, thinking of my Tangier and
victualling business, which I doubt will fall.  Up and to the Duke of
Albemarle, but missed him.  Thence to the Harp and Ball and to Westminster
Hall, where I visited "the flowers" in each place, and so met with Mr.
Creed, and he and I to Mrs. Croft's to drink and did, but saw not her
daughter Borroughes.  I away home, and there dined and did business.  In
the afternoon went with my tallys, made a fair end with Colvill and Viner,
delivering them L5000 tallys to each and very quietly had credit given me
upon other tallys of Mr. Colvill for L2000 and good words for more, and of
Mr. Viner too.  Thence to visit the Duke of Albemarle, and thence my Lady
Sandwich and Lord Crew.  Thence home, and there met an expresse from Sir
W. Batten at Harwich, that the fleete is all sailed from Solebay, having
spied the Dutch fleete at sea, and that, if the calmes hinder not, they
must needs now be engaged with them. Another letter also come to me from
Mr. Hater, committed by the Council this afternoon to the Gate House, upon
the misfortune of having his name used by one, without his knowledge or
privity, for the receiving of some powder that he had bought.  Up to Court
about these two, and for the former was led up to my Lady Castlemayne's
lodgings, where the King and she and others were at supper, and there I
read the letter and returned; and then to Sir G. Carteret about Hater, and
shall have him released to-morrow, upon my giving bail for his appearance,
which I have promised to do.  Sir G. Carteret did go on purpose to the
King to ask this, and it was granted.  So home at past 12, almost one
o'clock in the morning.  To my office till past two, and then home to
supper and to bed.

3rd.  Up and to White Hall, where Sir G. Carteret did go with me to
Secretary Morris, and prevailed with him to let Mr. Hater be released upon
bail for his appearance.  So I at a loss how to get another besides
myself, and got Mr. Hunt, who did patiently stay with me all the morning
at Secretary Morris's chamber, Mr. Hater being sent for with his keeper,
and at noon comes in the Secretary, and upon entering [into]
recognizances, he for L200, and Mr. Hunt and I for L100 each for his
appearance upon demand, he was released, it costing him, I think, above
L3.  I thence home, vexed to be kept from the office all the morning,
which I had not been in many months before, if not some years.  At home to
dinner, and all the afternoon at the office, where late at night, and much
business done, then home to supper and to bed.  All this day by all people
upon the River, and almost every where else hereabout were heard the guns,
our two fleets for certain being engaged; which was confirmed by letters
from Harwich, but nothing particular: and all our hearts full of
concernment for the Duke, and I particularly for my Lord Sandwich and Mr.
Coventry after his Royall Highnesse.

4th (Sunday).  Up and at my chamber all the forenoon, at evening my
accounts, which I could not do sooner, for the last month, and, blessed be
God!  am worth L1400 odd money, something more than ever I was yet in the
world.  Dined very well at noon, and then to my office, and there and in
the garden discoursed with several people about business, among others Mr.
Howell, the turner, who did give me so good a discourse about the
practices of the Paymaster J. Fenn that I thought fit to recollect all
when he was gone, and have entered it down to be for ever remembered.
Thence to my chamber again to settle my Tangier accounts against tomorrow
and some other things, and with great joy ended them, and so to supper,
where a good fowl and tansy, and so to bed.  Newes being come that our
fleete is pursuing the Dutch, who, either by cunning, or by being worsted,
do give ground, but nothing more for certain.  Late to bed upon my papers
being quite finished.

5th.  Up very betimes to look some other papers, and then to White Hall to
a Committee of Tangier, where I offered my accounts with great
acceptation, and so had some good words and honour by it, and one or two
things done to my content in my business of Treasurer, but I do clearly
see that we shall lose our business of victualling, Sir Thomas Ingram
undertaking that it shall be done by persons there as cheap as we do it,
and give the seamen their full allowance and themselves give good security
here for performance of contract, upon which terms there is no opposing
it.  This would trouble me, but that I hope when that fails to spend my
time to some good advantage other ways, and so shall permit it all to God
Almighty's pleasure.  Thence home to dinner, after 'Change, where great
talke of the Dutch being fled and we in pursuit of them, and that our ship
Charity

     [Sir William Coventry and Sir William Penn to the Navy
     Commissioners, June 4th: "Engaged yesterday with the Dutch; they
     began to stand away at 3 p.m.  Chased them all the rest of the day
     and night; 20 considerable ships are destroyed and taken; we have
     only lost the Great Charity.  The Earl of Marlborough, Rear-Admiral
     Sansum, and Captain Kirby are slain, and Sir John Lawson wounded"
     ("Calendar of State Papers," Domestic, 1664-65, p. 406).]

is lost upon our Captain's, Wilkinson, and Lieutenant's yielding, but of
this there is no certainty, save the report of some of the sicke men of
the Charity, turned adrift in a boat out of the Charity and taken up and
brought on shore yesterday to Sole Bay, and the newes hereof brought by
Sir Henry Felton. Home to dinner, and Creed with me.  Then he and I down
to Deptford, did some business, and back again at night.  He home, and I
to my office, and so to supper and to bed.  This morning I had great
discourse with my Lord Barkeley about Mr. Hater, towards whom from a great
passion reproaching him with being a fanatique and dangerous for me to
keepe, I did bring him to be mighty calme and to ask me pardons for what
he had thought of him and to desire me to ask his pardon of Hater himself
for the ill words he did give him the other day alone at White Hall (which
was, that he had always thought him a man that was no good friend to the
King, but did never think it would breake out in a thing of this nature),
and did advise him to declare his innocence to the Council and pray for
his examination and vindication.  Of which I shall consider and say no
more, but remember one compliment that in great kindness to me he did give
me, extolling my care and diligence, that he did love me heartily for my
owne sake, and more that he did will me whatsoever I thought for Mr.
Coventry's sake, for though the world did think them enemies, and to have
an ill aspect, one to another, yet he did love him with all his heart,
which was a strange manner of noble compliment, confessing his owning me
as a confidant and favourite of Mr. Coventry's.

6th.  Waked in the morning before 4 o'clock with great pain to piss, and
great pain in pissing by having, I think, drank too great a draught of
cold drink before going to bed.  But by and by to sleep again, and then
rose and to the office, where very busy all the morning, and at noon to
dinner with Sir G. Carteret to his house with all our Board, where a good
pasty and brave discourse.  But our great fear was some fresh news of the
fleete, but not from the fleete, all being said to be well and beaten the
Dutch, but I do not give much belief to it, and indeed the news come from
Sir W. Batten at Harwich, and writ so simply that we all made good mirth
of it.  Thence to the office, where upon Sir G. Carteret's accounts, to my
great vexation there being nothing done by the Controller to right the
King therein.  I thence to my office and wrote letters all the afternoon,
and in the evening by coach to Sir Ph. Warwicke's about my Tangier
business to get money, and so to my Lady Sandwich's, who, poor lady,
expects every hour to hear of my Lord; but in the best temper, neither
confident nor troubled with fear, that I ever did see in my life.  She
tells me my Lord Rochester is now declaredly out of hopes of Mrs. Mallett,
and now she is to receive notice in a day or two how the King stands
inclined to the giving leave for my Lord Hinchingbroke to look after her,
and that being done to bring it to an end shortly.  Thence by coach home,
and to my office a little, and so before 12 o'clock home and to bed.

7th.  This morning my wife and mother rose about two o'clock; and with
Mercer, Mary, the boy, and W. Hewer, as they had designed, took boat and
down to refresh themselves on the water to Gravesend.  Lay till 7 o'clock,
then up and to the office upon Sir G. Carteret's accounts again, where
very busy; thence abroad and to the 'Change, no news of certainty being
yet come from the fleete.  Thence to the Dolphin Taverne, where Sir J.
Minnes, Lord Brunkard, Sir Thomas Harvy, and myself dined, upon Sir G.
Carteret's charge, and very merry we were, Sir Thomas Harvy being a very
drolle.  Thence to the office, and meeting Creed away with him to my Lord
Treasurer's, there thinking to have met the goldsmiths, at White Hall, but
did not, and so appointed another time for my Lord to speak to them to
advance us some money.  Thence, it being the hottest day that ever I felt
in my life, and it is confessed so by all other people the hottest they
ever knew in England in the beginning of June, we to the New Exchange, and
there drunk whey, with much entreaty getting it for our money, and [they]
would not be entreated to let us have one glasse more. So took water and
to Fox-Hall, to the Spring garden, and there walked an houre or two with
great pleasure, saving our minds ill at ease concerning the fleete and my
Lord Sandwich, that we have no newes of them, and ill reports run up and
down of his being killed, but without ground.  Here staid pleasantly
walking and spending but 6d. till nine at night, and then by water to
White Hall, and there I stopped to hear news of the fleete, but none come,
which is strange, and so by water home, where, weary with walking and with
the mighty heat of the weather, and for my wife's not coming home, I
staying walking in the garden till twelve at night, when it begun to
lighten exceedingly, through the greatness of the heat.  Then despairing
of her coming home, I to bed.  This day, much against my will, I did in
Drury Lane see two or three houses marked with a red cross upon the doors,
and "Lord have mercy upon us" writ there; which was a sad sight to me,
being the first of the kind that, to my remembrance, I ever saw.  It put
me into an ill conception of myself and my smell, so that I was forced to
buy some roll-tobacco to smell to and chaw, which took away the
apprehension.

8th.  About five o'clock my wife come home, it having lightened all night
hard, and one great shower of rain.  She come and lay upon the bed; I up
and to the office, where all the morning.  Alone at home to dinner, my
wife, mother, and Mercer dining at W. Joyce's; I giving her a caution to
go round by the Half Moone to his house, because of the plague.  I to my
Lord Treasurer's by appointment of Sir Thomas Ingram's, to meet the
Goldsmiths; where I met with the great news at last newly come, brought by
Bab May' from the Duke of Yorke, that we have totally routed the Dutch;
that the Duke himself, the Prince, my Lord Sandwich, and Mr. Coventry are
all well: which did put me into such joy, that I forgot almost all other
thoughts.  The particulars I shall set down by and by. By and by comes
Alderman Maynell and Mr. Viner, and there my Lord Treasurer did intreat
them to furnish me with money upon my tallys, Sir Philip Warwicke before
my Lord declaring the King's changing of the hand from Mr. Povy to me,
whom he called a very sober person, and one whom the Lord Treasurer would
owne in all things that I should concern myself with them in the business
of money.  They did at present declare they could not part with money at
present.  My Lord did press them very hard, and I hope upon their
considering we shall get some of them.  Thence with great joy to the
Cocke-pitt; where the Duke of Albemarle, like a man out of himself with
content, new-told me all; and by and by comes a letter from Mr. Coventry's
own hand to him, which he never opened (which was a strange thing), but
did give it me to open and read, and consider what was fit for our office
to do in it, and leave the letter with Sir W. Clerke; which upon such a
time and occasion was a strange piece of indifference, hardly pardonable.
I copied out the letter, and did also take minutes out of Sir W. Clerke's
other letters; and the sum of the newes is:

                 VICTORY OVER THE DUTCH, JUNE 3RD, 1665.

This day they engaged; the Dutch neglecting greatly the opportunity of the
wind they had of us, by which they lost the benefit of their fire-ships.
The Earl of Falmouth, Muskerry, and Mr. Richard Boyle killed on board the
Duke's ship, the Royall Charles, with one shot: their blood and brains
flying in the Duke's face; and the head of Mr. Boyle striking down the
Duke, as some say.  Earle of Marlborough, Portland, Rear-Admirall Sansum
(to Prince Rupert) killed, and Capt. Kirby and Ableson.  Sir John Lawson
wounded on the knee; hath had some bones taken out, and is likely to be
well again.  Upon receiving the hurt, he sent to the Duke for another to
command the Royall Oake.  The Duke sent Jordan

     [Afterwards Sir Joseph Jordan, commander of the "Royal Sovereign,"
     and Vice-Admiral of the Red, 1672.  He was knighted on July 1st,
     1665.--B.]

out of the St. George, who did brave things in her.  Capt. Jer. Smith of
the Mary was second to the Duke, and stepped between him and Captain
Seaton of the Urania (76 guns and 400 men), who had sworn to board the
Duke; killed him, 200 men, and took the ship; himself losing 99 men, and
never an officer saved but himself and lieutenant.  His master indeed is
saved, with his leg cut off: Admirall Opdam blown up, Trump killed, and
said by Holmes; all the rest of their admiralls, as they say, but Everson
(whom they dare not trust for his affection to the Prince of Orange), are
killed: we having taken and sunk, as is believed, about 24 of their best
ships; killed and taken near 8 or 10,000 men, and lost, we think, not
above 700.  A great[er] victory never known in the world.  They are all
fled, some 43 got into the Texell, and others elsewhere, and we in pursuit
of the rest.  Thence, with my heart full of joy; home, and to my office a
little; then to my Lady Pen's, where they are all joyed and not a little
puffed up at the good successe of their father;

     [In the royal charter granted by Charles II. in 1680 to William Penn
     for the government of his American province, to be styled
     Pennsylvania, special reference is made to "the memory and merits of
     Sir William Penn in divers services, and particularly his conduct,
     courage, and discretion under our dearest brother, James, Duke of
     York, in that signal battle and victory fought and obtained against
     the Dutch fleet commanded by Heer van Opdam in 1665" ("Penn's
     Memorials of Sir W. Penn," vol. ii., p. 359).]

and good service indeed is said to have been done by him.  Had a great
bonefire at the gate; and I with my Lady Pen's people and others to Mrs.
Turner's great room, and then down into the streete.  I did give the boys
4s. among them, and mighty merry.  So home to bed, with my heart at great
rest and quiett, saving that the consideration of the victory is too great
for me presently to comprehend.

     [Mrs. Ady (Julia Cartwright), in her fascinating life of Henrietta,
     Duchess of Orleans, gives an account of the receipt of the news of
     the great sea-fight in Paris, and quotes a letter of Charles II. to
     his sister, dated, "Whitehall, June 8th, 1665"  The first report
     that reached Paris was that "the Duke of York's ship had been blown
     up, and he himself had been drowned."  "The shock was too much for
     Madame .  .  .  she was seized with convulsions, and became so
     dangerously ill that Lord Hollis wrote to the king, 'If things had
     gone ill at sea I really believe Madame would have died.'"  Charles
     wrote: "I thanke God we have now the certayne newes of a very
     considerable victory over the Duch; you will see most of the
     particulars by the relation my Lord Hopis will shew you, though I
     have had as great a losse as 'tis possible in a good frinde, poore
     C. Barckely.  It troubles me so much, as I hope you will excuse the
     shortnesse of this letter, haveing receaved the newes of it but two
     houres agoe" ("Madame," 1894, pp.  215, 216).]

9th.  Lay long in bed, my head akeing with too much thoughts I think last
night.  Up and to White Hall, and my Lord Treasurer's to Sir Ph. Warwicke,
about Tangier business, and in my way met with Mr. Moore, who eases me in
one point wherein I was troubled; which was, that I heard of nothing said
or done by my Lord Sandwich: but he tells me that Mr. Cowling, my Lord
Chamberlain's secretary, did hear the King say that my Lord Sandwich had
done nobly and worthily.  The King, it seems, is much troubled at the fall
of my Lord of Falmouth; but I do not meet with any man else that so much
as wishes him alive again, the world conceiving him a man of too much
pleasure to do the King any good, or offer any good office to him.  But I
hear of all hands he is confessed to have been a man of great honour, that
did show it in this his going with the Duke, the most that ever any man
did.  Home, where my people busy to make ready a supper against night for
some guests, in lieu of my stonefeast. At noon eat a small dinner at home,
and so abroad to buy several things, and among others with my taylor to
buy a silke suit, which though I had one lately, yet I do, for joy of the
good newes we have lately had of our victory over the Dutch, which makes
me willing to spare myself something extraordinary in clothes; and after
long resolution of having nothing but black, I did buy a coloured silk
ferrandin.  So to the Old Exchange, and there at my pretty seamstresses
bought a pair of stockings of her husband, and so home, where by and by
comes Mr. Honiwood and Mrs. Wilde, and Roger Pepys and, after long time
spent, Mrs. Turner, The. and Joyce. We had a very good venison pasty, this
being instead of my stone-feast the last March, and very merry we were,
and the more I know the more I like Mr. Honiwood's conversation.  So after
a good supper they parted, walking to the 'Change for a coach, and I with
them to see them there. So home and to bed, glad it was over.

10th.  Lay long in bed, and then up and at the office all the morning. At
noon dined at home, and then to the office busy all the afternoon.  In the
evening home to supper; and there, to my great trouble, hear that the
plague is come into the City (though it hath these three or four weeks
since its beginning been wholly out of the City); but where should it
begin but in my good friend and neighbour's, Dr. Burnett, in Fanchurch
Street: which in both points troubles me mightily.  To the office to
finish my letters and then home to bed, being troubled at the sicknesse,
and my head filled also with other business enough, and particularly how
to put my things and estate in order, in case it should please God to call
me away, which God dispose of to his glory!

11th (Lord's day).  Up, and expected long a new suit; but, coming not,
dressed myself in my late new black silke camelott suit; and, when fully
ready, comes my new one of coloured ferrandin, which my wife puts me out
of love with, which vexes me, but I think it is only my not being used to
wear colours which makes it look a little unusual upon me.  To my chamber
and there spent the morning reading.  At noon, by invitation, comes my two
cozen Joyces and their wives, my aunt James and he-cozen Harman, his wife
being ill.  I had a good dinner for them, and as merry as I could be in
such company.  They being gone, I out of doors a little, to shew,
forsooth, my new suit, and back again, and in going I saw poor Dr.
Burnett's door shut; but he hath, I hear, gained great goodwill among his
neighbours; for he discovered it himself first, and caused himself to be
shut up of his own accord: which was very handsome.  In the evening comes
Mr. Andrews and his wife and Mr. Hill, and staid and played, and sung and
supped, most excellent pretty company, so pleasant, ingenious, and
harmless, I cannot desire better.  They gone we to bed, my mind in great
present ease.

12th.  Up, and in my yesterday's new suit to the Duke of Albemarle, and
after a turne in White Hall, and then in Westminster Hall, returned, and
with my taylor bought some gold lace for my sleeve hands in Pater Noster
Row.  So home to dinner, and then to the office, and down the River to
Deptford, and then back again and to my Lord Treasurer's, and up and down
to look after my Tangier business, and so home to my office, then to
supper and to bed.  The Duke of Yorke is sent for last night and expected
to be here to-morrow.

13th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning doing business.  At
noon with Sir G. Carteret to my Lord Mayor's to dinner, where much company
in a little room, and though a good, yet no extraordinary table. His name,
Sir John Lawrence, whose father, a very ordinary old man, sat there at
table, but it seems a very rich man.  Here were at table three Sir Richard
Brownes, viz.: he of the Councill, a clerk, and the Alderman, and his son;
and there was a little grandson also Richard, who will hereafter be Sir
Richard Browne.  The Alderman did here openly tell in boasting how he had,
only upon suspicion of disturbances, if there had been any bad newes from
sea, clapped up several persons that he was afeard of; and that he had
several times done the like and would do, and take no bail where he saw it
unsafe for the King.  But by and by he said that he was now sued in the
Exchequer by a man for false imprisonment, that he had, upon the same
score, imprisoned while he was Mayor four years ago, and asked advice upon
it.  I told him I believed there was none, and told my story of Field, at
which he was troubled, and said that it was then unsafe for any man to
serve the King, and, I believed, knows not what to do therein; but that
Sir Richard Browne, of the Councill, advised him to speak with my Lord
Chancellor about it.  My Lord Mayor very respectfull to me; and so I after
dinner away and found Sir J. Minnes ready with his coach and four horses
at our office gate, for him and me to go out of towne to meet the Duke of
Yorke coming from Harwich to-night, and so as far as Ilford, and there
'light.  By and by comes to us Sir John Shaw and Mr. Neale, that married
the rich widow Gold, upon the same errand.  After eating a dish of creame,
we took coach again, hearing nothing of the Duke, and away home, a most
pleasant evening and road.  And so to my office, where, after my letters
wrote, to supper and to bed.  All our discourse in our way was Sir J.
Minnes's telling me passages of the late King's and his father's, which I
was mightily pleased to hear for information, though the pride of some
persons and vice of most was but a sad story to tell how that brought the
whole kingdom and King to ruine.

14th.  Up, and to Sir Ph. Warwicke's and other places, about Tangier
business, but to little purpose.  Among others to my Lord Treasurer's,
there to speak with him, and waited in the lobby three long hours for to
speake with him, to the trial of my utmost patience, but missed him at
last, and forced to go home without it, which may teach me how I make
others wait.  Home to dinner and staid Mr. Hater with me, and after dinner
drew up a petition for Mr. Hater to present to the Councill about his
troublesome business of powder, desiring a trial that his absence may be
vindicated, and so to White Hall, but it was not proper to present it
to-day.  Here I met with Mr. Cowling, who observed to me how he finds
every body silent in the praise of my Lord Sandwich, to set up the Duke
and the Prince; but that the Duke did both to the King and my Lord
Chancellor write abundantly of my Lord's courage and service.

     [Charles II.'s letter of thanks to Lord Sandwich, dated "Whitehall,
     June 9th, 1665," written entirely in the king's hand, is printed in
     Ellis's "Original Letters," 1st series, vol. iii., p. 327.]

And I this day met with a letter of Captain Ferrers, wherein he tells [us]
my Lord was with his ship in all the heat of the day, and did most
worthily.  Met with Creed, and he and I to Westminster; and there saw my
Lord Marlborough

     [Of the four distinguished men who died after the late action with
     the Dutch and were buried in Westminster Abbey, the Earl of
     Marlborough was interred on June 14th, Viscount Muskerry on the
     19th, the Earl of Falmouth on the 22nd, and Sir Edward Broughton on
     the 26th.  After the entries in the Abbey Registers is this note:
     "These four last Honble Persons dyed in his Majy's service against
     the Dutch, excepting only that ST Ed Br received his death's wound
     at sea, but dyed here at home" (Chester's "Westminster Abbey
     Registers," p. 162).]

brought to be buried, several Lords of the Council carrying him, and with
the herald in some state.  Thence, vexed in my mind to think that I do so
little in my Tangier business, and so home, and after supper to bed.

15th.  Up, and put on my new stuff suit with close knees, which becomes me
most nobly, as my wife says.  At the office all day.  At noon, put on my
first laced band, all lace; and to Kate Joyce's to dinner, where my
mother, wife, and abundance of their friends, and good usage.  Thence,
wife and Mercer and I to the Old Exchange, and there bought two lace bands
more, one of my semstresse, whom my wife concurs with me to be a pretty
woman.  So down to Deptford and Woolwich, my boy and I.  At Woolwich,
discoursed with Mr. Sheldon about my bringing my wife down for a month or
two to his house, which he approves of, and, I think, will be very
convenient.  So late back, and to the office, wrote letters, and so home
to supper and to bed.  This day the Newes book upon Mr. Moore's showing
L'Estrange

     ["The Public Intelligencer," published by Roger L'Estrange, the
     predecessor of the "London Gazette."]

(Captain Ferrers's letter) did do my Lord Sandwich great right as to the
late victory.  The Duke of Yorke not yet come to towne.  The towne grows
very sickly, and people to be afeard of it; there dying this last week of
the plague 112, from 43 the week before, whereof but [one] in
Fanchurch-streete, and one in Broad-streete, by the Treasurer's office.

16th.  Up and to the office, where I set hard to business, but was
informed that the Duke of Yorke is come, and hath appointed us to attend
him this afternoon.  So after dinner, and doing some business at the
office, I to White Hall, where the Court is full of the Duke and his
courtiers returned from sea.  All fat and lusty, and ruddy by being in the
sun.  I kissed his hands, and we waited all the afternoon.  By and by saw
Mr. Coventry, which rejoiced my very heart.  Anon he and I, from all the
rest of the company, walked into the Matted Gallery; where after many
expressions of love, we fell to talk of business.  Among other things, how
my Lord Sandwich, both in his counsells and personal service, hath done
most honourably and serviceably.  Sir J. Lawson is come to Greenwich; but
his wound in his knee yet very bad.  Jonas Poole, in the Vantguard, did
basely, so as to be, or will be, turned out of his ship. Captain Holmes

     [Captain Robert Holmes (afterwards knighted).  Sir William Coventry,
     in a letter to Lord Arlington (dated from "The Royal Charles,"
     Southwold Bay, June 13th), writes: "Capt. Holmes asked to be rear
     admiral of the white squadron in place of Sansum who was killed, but
     the Duke gave the place to Captain Harman, on which he delivered up
     his commission, which the Duke received, and put Captain Langhorne
     in his stead" ("Calendar of State Papers," Domestic, 1664-65, p.
     423).]

expecting upon Sansum's death to be made Rear-admirall to the Prince (but
Harman is

     [John Harman, afterwards knighted.  He had served with great
     reputation in several naval fights, and was desperately wounded in
     1673, while]

put in) hath delivered up to the Duke his commission, which the Duke took
and tore.  He, it seems, had bid the Prince, who first told him of
Holmes's intention, that he should dissuade him from it; for that he was
resolved to take it if he offered it.  Yet Holmes would do it, like a
rash, proud coxcombe.  But he is rich, and hath, it seems, sought an
occasion of leaving the service.  Several of our captains have done ill.
The great ships are the ships do the business, they quite deadening the
enemy.  They run away upon sight of "The Prince."

     ["The Prince" was Lord Sandwich's ship; the captain was Roger
     Cuttance.  It was put up at Chatham for repair at this date.]

It is strange to see how people do already slight Sir William Barkeley,

     [Sir William Berkeley, see note, vol.  iii., p.  334.  His behaviour
     after the death of his brother, Lord Falmouth, is severely commented
     on in "Poems on State Affairs," vol. i., p. 29

              "Berkeley had heard it soon, and thought not good
               To venture more of royal Harding's blood;
               To be immortal he was not of age,
               And did e'en now the Indian Prize presage;
               And judged it safe and decent, cost what cost,
               To lose the day, since his dear brother's lost.
               With his whole squadron straight away he bore,
               And, like good boy, promised to fight no more."--B.]

my Lord FitzHarding's brother, who, three months since, was the delight of
the Court.  Captain Smith of "The Mary" the Duke talks mightily of; and
some great thing will be done for him.  Strange to hear how the Dutch do
relate, as the Duke says, that they are the conquerors; and bonefires are
made in Dunkirke in their behalf; though a clearer victory can never be
expected.  Mr. Coventry thinks they cannot have lost less than 6000 men,
and we not dead above 200, and wounded about 400; in all about 600. Thence
home and to my office till past twelve, and then home to supper and to
bed, my wife and mother not being yet come home from W. Hewer's chamber,
who treats my mother tonight.  Captain Grovel the Duke told us this day,
hath done the basest thing at Lowestoffe, in hearing of the guns, and
could not (as others) be got out, but staid there; for which he will be
tried; and is reckoned a prating coxcombe, and of no courage.

17th.  My wife come to bed about one in the morning.  I up and abroad
about Tangier business, then back to the office, where we sat, and at noon
home to dinner, and then abroad to Mr. Povy's, after I and Mr. Andrews had
been with Mr. Ball and one Major Strange, who looks after the getting of
money for tallys and is helping Mr. Andrews.  I had much discourse with
Ball, and it may be he may prove a necessary man for our turns.  With Mr.
Povy I spoke very freely my indifference as to my place of Treasurer,
being so much troubled in it, which he took with much seeming trouble,
that I should think of letting go so lightly the place, but if the place
can't be held I will.  So hearing that my Lord Treasurer was gone out of
town with his family because of the sicknesse, I returned home without
staying there, and at the office find Sir W. Pen come home, who looks very
well; and I am gladder to see him than otherwise I should be because of my
hearing so well of him for his serviceablenesse in this late great action.
To the office late, and then home to bed.  It struck me very deep this
afternoon going with a hackney coach from my Lord Treasurer's down
Holborne, the coachman I found to drive easily and easily, at last stood
still, and come down hardly able to stand, and told me that he was
suddenly struck very sicke, and almost blind, he could not see; so I
'light and went into another coach, with a sad heart for the poor man and
trouble for myself, lest he should have been struck with the plague, being
at the end of the towne that I took him up; but God have mercy upon us
all!  Sir John Lawson, I hear, is worse than yesterday: the King went to
see him to-day most kindly.  It seems his wound is not very bad; but he
hath a fever, a thrush, and a hickup, all three together, which are, it
seems, very bad symptoms.

18th (Lord's day).  Up, and to church, where Sir W. Pen was the first time
[since he] come from sea, after the battle.  Mr. Mills made a sorry sermon
to prove that there was a world to come after this.  Home and dined and
then to my chamber, where all the afternoon.  Anon comes Mr. Andrews to
see and sing with me, but Mr. Hill not coming, and having business, we
soon parted, there coming Mr. Povy and Creed to discourse about our
Tangier business of money.  They gone, I hear Sir W. Batten and my Lady
are returned from Harwich.  I went to see them, and it is pretty to see
how we appear kind one to another, though neither of us care 2d. one for
another.  Home to supper, and there coming a hasty letter from
Commissioner Pett for pressing of some calkers (as I would ever on his
Majesty's service), with all speed, I made a warrant presently and issued
it.  So to my office a little, and then home to bed.

19th.  Up, and to White Hall with Sir W. Batten (calling at my Lord
Ashly's, but to no purpose, by the way, he being not up), and there had
our usual meeting before the Duke with the officers of the Ordnance with
us, which in some respects I think will be the better for us, for despatch
sake.  Thence home to the 'Change and dined alone (my wife gone to her
mother's), after dinner to my little new goldsmith's,

     [John Colvill of Lombard Street, see ante, May 24th.  He lost
     L85,832  17s. 2d.  by the closing of the Exchequer in 1672, and he
     died between 1672 and 1677 (Price's "Handbook of London Bankers ").]

whose wife indeed is one of the prettiest, modest black women that ever I
saw.  I paid for a dozen of silver salts L6 14s. 6d.  Thence with Sir W.
Pen from the office down to Greenwich to see Sir J. Lawson, who is better,
but continues ill; his hickupp not being yet gone, could have little
discourse with him.  So thence home and to supper, a while to the office,
my head and mind mightily vexed to see the multitude of papers and
business before [me] and so little time to do it in.  So to bed.

20th.  Thankes-giving-day for victory over ye Dutch.  Up, and to the
office, where very busy alone all the morning till church time, and there
heard a mean sorry sermon of Mr. Mills.  Then to the Dolphin Taverne,
where all we officers of the Navy met with the Commissioners of the
Ordnance by agreement, and dined: where good musique at my direction. Our
club--[share]

             ["Next these a sort of Sots there are,
               Who crave more wine than they can bear,
               Yet hate, when drunk, to pay or spend
               Their equal Club or Dividend,
               But wrangle, when the Bill is brought,
               And think they're cheated when they're not."

     The Delights of the Bottle, or the Compleat Vintner, 3rd ed., 1721,
     p. 29.]

--come to 34s. a man, nine of us.  Thence after dinner, to White Hall with
Sir W. Berkely in his coach, and so walked to Herbert's and there spent a
little time .  .  .  .  Thence by water to Fox-hall, and there walked an
hour alone, observing the several humours of the citizens that were there
this holyday, pulling of cherries,--[The game of bob-cherry]--and God
knows what, and so home to my office, where late, my wife not being come
home with my mother, who have been this day all abroad upon the water, my
mother being to go out of town speedily.  So I home and to supper and to
bed, my wife come home when I come from the office.  This day I informed
myself that there died four or five at Westminster of the plague in one
alley in several houses upon Sunday last, Bell Alley, over against the
Palace-gate; yet people do think that the number will be fewer in the
towne than it was the last weeke!  The Dutch are come out again with 20
sail under Bankert; supposed gone to the Northward to meete their East
India fleete.

21st.  Up, and very busy all the morning.  At noon with Creed to the
Excise Office, where I find our tallys will not be money in less than
sixteen months, which is a sad thing for the King to pay all that interest
for every penny he spends; and, which is strange, the goldsmiths with whom
I spoke, do declare that they will not be moved to part with money upon
the increase of their consideration of ten per cent. which they have, and
therefore desire I would not move in it, and indeed the consequence would
be very ill to the King, and have its ill consequences follow us through
all the King's revenue.  Home, and my uncle Wight and aunt James dined
with me, my mother being to go away to-morrow.  So to White Hall, and
there before and after Council discoursed with Sir Thomas Ingram about our
ill case as to Tangier for money.  He hath got the King to appoint a
meeting on Friday, which I hope will put an end one way or other to my
pain.  So homewards and to the Cross Keys at Cripplegate, where I find all
the towne almost going out of towne, the coaches and waggons being all
full of people going into the country.  Here I had some of the company of
the tapster's wife a while, and so home to my office, and then home to
supper and to bed.

22nd.  Up pretty betimes, and in great pain whether to send my another
into the country to-day or no, I hearing, by my people, that she, poor
wretch, hath a mind to stay a little longer, and I cannot blame her,
considering what a life she will through her own folly lead when she comes
home again, unlike the pleasure and liberty she hath had here.  At last I
resolved to put it to her, and she agreed to go, so I would not oppose it,
because of the sicknesse in the towne, and my intentions of removing my
wife.  So I did give her money and took a kind leave of her, she, poor
wretch, desiring that I would forgive my brother John, but I refused it to
her, which troubled her, poor soul, but I did it in kind words and so let
the discourse go off, she leaving me though in a great deal of sorrow.  So
I to my office and left my wife and people to see her out of town, and I
at the office all the morning.  At noon my wife tells me that she is with
much ado gone, and I pray God bless her, but it seems she was to the last
unwilling to go, but would not say so, but put it off till she lost her
place in the coach, and was fain to ride in the waggon part.  After dinner
to the office again till night, very busy, and so home not very late to
supper and to bed.

23rd.  Up and to White Hall to a Committee for Tangier, where his Royal
Highness was.  Our great design was to state to them the true condition of
this Committee for want of money, the want whereof was so great as to need
some sudden help, and it was with some content resolved to see it supplied
and means proposed towards the doing of it.  At this Committee, unknown to
me, comes my Lord of Sandwich, who, it seems, come to towne last night.
After the Committee was up, my Lord Sandwich did take me aside, and we
walked an hour alone together in the robe-chamber, the door shut, telling
me how much the Duke and Mr. Coventry did, both in the fleete and here,
make of him, and that in some opposition to the Prince; and as a more
private message, he told me that he hath been with them both when they
have made sport of the Prince and laughed at him: yet that all the
discourse of the towne, and the printed relation, should not give him one
word of honour my Lord thinks mighty strange; he assuring me, that though
by accident the Prince was in the van the beginning of the fight for the
first pass, yet all the rest of the day my Lord was in the van, and
continued so.  That notwithstanding all this noise of the Prince, he had
hardly a shot in his side nor a man killed, whereas he hath above 30 in
her hull, and not one mast whole nor yard; but the most battered ship of
the fleet, and lost most men, saving Captain Smith of "The Mary."  That
the most the Duke did was almost out of gun-shot; but that, indeed, the
Duke did come up to my Lord's rescue after he had a great while fought
with four of them.  How poorly Sir John Lawson performed, notwithstanding
all that was said of him; and how his ship turned out of the way, while
Sir J. Lawson himself was upon the deck, to the endangering of the whole
fleete.  It therefore troubles my Lord that Mr. Coventry should not
mention a word of him in his relation.  I did, in answer, offer that I was
sure the relation was not compiled by Mr. Coventry, but by L'Estrange, out
of several letters, as I could witness; and that Mr. Coventry's letter
that he did give the Duke of Albemarle did give him as much right as the
Prince, for I myself read it first and then copied it out, which I
promised to show my Lord, with which he was somewhat satisfied.  From that
discourse my Lord did begin to tell me how much he was concerned to
dispose of his children, and would have my advice and help; and propounded
to match my Lady Jemimah to Sir G. Carteret's eldest son, which I approved
of, and did undertake the speaking with him about it as from myself, which
my Lord liked.  So parted, with my head full of care about this business.
Thence home to the 'Change, and so to dinner, and thence by coach to Mr.
Povy's.  Thence by appointment with him and Creed to one Mr. Finch; one of
the Commissioners for the Excise, to be informed about some things of the
Excise, in order to our settling matters therein better for us for our
Tangier business.  I find him a very discreet, grave person.  Thence well
satisfied I and Creed to Mr. Fox at White Hall to speak with him about the
same matter, and having some pretty satisfaction from him also, he and I
took boat and to Fox Hall, where we spent two or three hours talking of
several matters very soberly and contentfully to me, which, with the ayre
and pleasure of the garden, was a great refreshment to me, and, 'methinks,
that which we ought to joy ourselves in.  Thence back to White Hall, where
we parted, and I to find my Lord to receive his farther direction about
his proposal this morning.  Wherein I did that I should first by another
hand break my intentions to Sir G. Carteret.  I pitched upon Dr. Clerke,
which my Lord liked, and so I endeavoured but in vain to find him out
to-night.  So home by hackney-coach, which is become a very dangerous
passage now-a-days, the sickness increasing mightily, and to bed.

24th (Midsummer-day).  Up very betimes, by six, and at Dr. Clerke's at
Westminster by 7 of the clock, having over night by a note acquainted him
with my intention of coming, and there I, in the best manner I could,
broke my errand about a match between Sir G. Carteret's eldest son and my
Lord Sandwich's eldest daughter, which he (as I knew he would) took with
great content: and we both agreed that my Lord and he, being both men
relating to the sea, under a kind aspect of His Majesty, already good
friends, and both virtuous and good familys, their allyance might be of
good use to us; and he did undertake to find out Sir George this morning,
and put the business in execution.  So being both well pleased with the
proposition, I saw his niece there and made her sing me two or three songs
very prettily, and so home to the office, where to my great trouble I
found Mr. Coventry and the board met before I come.  I excused my late
coming by having been on the River about office business.  So to business
all the morning.  At noon Captain Ferrers and Mr. Moore dined with me, the
former of them the first time I saw him since his corning from sea, who do
give me the best conversation in general, and as good an account of the
particular service of the Prince and my Lord of Sandwich in the late
sea-fight that I could desire.  After dinner they parted.  So I to White
Hall, where I with Creed and Povy attended my Lord Treasurer, and did
prevail with him to let us have an assignment for 15 or L20,000, which, I
hope, will do our business for Tangier.  So to Dr. Clerke, and there found
that he had broke the business to Sir G. Carteret, and that he takes the
thing mighty well.  Thence I to Sir G. Carteret at his chamber, and in the
best manner I could, and most obligingly, moved the business: he received
it with great respect and content, and thanks to me, and promised that he
would do what he could possibly for his son, to render him fit for my
Lord's daughter, and shewed great kindness to me, and sense of my kindness
to him herein.  Sir William Pen told me this day that Mr. Coventry is to
be sworn a Privy Counsellor, at which my soul is glad.  So home and to my
letters by the post, and so home to supper and bed.

25th (Lord's day).  Up, and several people about business come to me by
appointment relating to the office.  Thence I to my closet about my
Tangier papers.  At noon dined, and then I abroad by water, it raining
hard, thinking to have gone down to Woolwich, but I did not, but back
through bridge to White Hall, where, after I had again visited Sir G.
Carteret, and received his (and now his Lady's) full content in my
proposal, I went to my Lord Sandwich, and having told him how Sir G.
Carteret received it, he did direct me to return to Sir G. Carteret, and
give him thanks for his kind reception of this offer, and that he would
the next day be willing to enter discourse with him about the business.
Which message I did presently do, and so left the business with great joy
to both sides.  My Lord, I perceive, intends to give L5000 with her, and
expects about L800 per annum joynture.  So by water home and to supper and
bed, being weary with long walking at Court, but had a Psalm or two with
my boy and Mercer before bed, which pleased me mightily.  This night Sir
G. Carteret told me with great kindnesse that the order of the Council did
run for the making of Hater and Whitfield incapable of any serving the
King again, but that he had stopped the entry of it, which he told me with
great kindnesse, but the thing troubles me.  After dinner, before I went
to White Hall, I went down to Greenwich by water, thinking to have visited
Sir J. Lawson, where, when I come, I find that he is dead, and died this
morning, at which I was much surprized; and indeed the nation hath a great
loss; though I cannot, without dissembling, say that I am sorry for it,
for he was a man never kind to me at all.  Being at White Hall, I visited
Mr. Coventry, who, among other talk, entered about the great question now
in the House about the Duke's going to sea again; about which the whole
House is divided.  He did concur with me that, for the Duke's honour and
safety, it were best, after so great a service and victory and danger, not
to go again; and, above all, that the life of the Duke cannot but be a
security to the Crowne; if he were away, it being more easy to attempt
anything upon the King; but how the fleete will be governed without him,
the Prince--[Rupert]--being a man of no government and severe in council,
that no ordinary man can offer any advice against his; saying truly that
it had been better he had gone to Guinny, and that were he away, it were
easy to say how matters might be ordered, my Lord Sandwich being a man of
temper and judgment as much as any man he ever knew, and that upon good
observation he said this, and that his temper must correct the Prince's.
But I perceive he is much troubled what will be the event of the question.
And so I left him.

26th.  Up and to White Hall with Sir J. Minnes, and to the Committee of
Tangier, where my Lord Treasurer was, the first and only time he ever was
there, and did promise us L15,000 for Tangier and no more, which will be
short.  But if I can pay Mr. Andrews all his money I care for no more, and
the bills of Exchange.  Thence with Mr. Povy and Creed below to a new
chamber of Mr. Povy's, very pretty, and there discourse about his
business, not to his content, but with the most advantage I could to him,
and Creed also did the like.  Thence with Creed to the King's Head, and
there dined with him at the ordinary, and good sport with one Mr.
Nicholls, a prating coxcombe, that would be thought a poet, but would not
be got to repeat any of his verses.  Thence I home, and there find my
wife's brother and his wife, a pretty little modest woman, where they
dined with my wife.  He did come to desire my assistance for a living,
and, upon his good promises of care, and that it should be no burden to
me, I did say and promise I would think of finding something for him, and
the rather because his wife seems a pretty discreet young thing, and
humble, and he, above all things, desirous to do something to maintain
her, telling me sad stories of what she endured with him in Holland, and I
hope it will not be burdensome.  So down by water to Woolwich, walking to
and again from Greenwich thither and back again, my business being to
speak again with Sheldon, who desires and expects my wife coming thither
to spend the summer, and upon second thoughts I do agree that it will be a
good place for her and me too.  So, weary, home, and to my office a while,
till almost midnight, and so to bed.  The plague encreases mightily, I
this day seeing a house, at a bitt-maker's over against St. Clement's
Church, in the open street, shut up; which is a sad sight.

27th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning.  At noon dined by
chance at my Lady Batten's, and they sent for my wife, and there was my
Lady Pen and Pegg.  Very merry, and so I to my office again, where till 12
o'clock at night, and so home to supper and to bed.

28th.  Sir J. Minnes carried me and my wife to White Hall, and thence his
coach along with my wife where she would.  There after attending the Duke
to discourse of the navy.  We did not kiss his hand, nor do I think, for
all their pretence, of going away to-morrow.  Yet I believe they will not
go for good and all, but I did take my leave of Sir William Coventry, who,
it seems, was knighted and sworn a Privy-Counsellor two days since; who
with his old kindness treated me, and I believe I shall ever find [him] a
noble friend.  Thence by water to Blackfriars, and so to Paul's churchyard
and bespoke severall books, and so home and there dined, my man William
giving me a lobster sent him by my old maid Sarah.  This morning I met
with Sir G. Carteret, who tells me how all things proceed between my Lord
Sandwich and himself to full content, and both sides depend upon having
the match finished presently, and professed great kindnesse to me, and
said that now we were something akin.  I am mightily, both with respect to
myself and much more of my Lord's family, glad of this alliance.  After
dinner to White Hall, thinking to speak with my Lord Ashly, but failed,
and I whiled away some time in Westminster Hall against he did come, in my
way observing several plague houses in King's Street and [near] the
Palace.  Here I hear Mrs. Martin is gone out of town, and that her
husband, an idle fellow, is since come out of France, as he pretends, but
I believe not that he hath been.  I was fearful of going to any house, but
I did to the Swan, and thence to White Hall, giving the waterman a
shilling, because a young fellow and belonging to the Plymouth.  Thence by
coach to several places, and so home, and all the evening with Sir J.
Minnes and all the women of the house (excepting my Lady Batten) late in
the garden chatting.  At 12 o'clock home to supper and to bed.  My Lord
Sandwich is gone towards the sea to-day, it being a sudden resolution, I
having taken no leave of him.

29th.  Up and by water to White Hall, where the Court full of waggons and
people ready to go out of towne.  To the Harp and Ball, and there drank
and talked with Mary, she telling me in discourse that she lived lately at
my neighbour's, Mr. Knightly, which made me forbear further discourse.
This end of the towne every day grows very bad of the plague.  The
Mortality Bill is come to 267;

     [According to the Bills of Mortality, the total number of deaths in
     London for the week ending June 27th was 684, of which number 267
     were deaths from the plague.  The number of deaths rose week by week
     until September 19th, when the total was 8,297, and the deaths from
     the plague 7,165.  On September 26th the total had fallen to 6,460,
     and deaths from the plague to 5,533 The number fell gradually, week
     by week, till October 31st, when the total was 1,388, and deaths
     from the plague 1,031.  On November 7th there was a rise to 1,787
     and 1,414 respectively.  On November 14th the numbers had gone down
     to 1,359 and 1,050 respectively.  On December 12th the total had
     fallen to 442, and deaths from the plague to 243.  On December 19th
     there was a rise to 525 and 281 respectively.  The total of burials
     in 1665 was 97,506, of which number the plague claimed 68,596
     victims.]

which is about ninety more than the last: and of these but four in the
City, which is a great blessing to us.  Thence to Creed, and with him up
and down about Tangier business, to no purpose.  Took leave again of Mr.
Coventry; though I hope the Duke has not gone to stay, and so do others
too.  So home, calling at Somersett House, where all are packing up too:
the Queene-Mother setting out for France this day to drink Bourbon waters
this year, she being in a consumption; and intends not to come till winter
come twelvemonths.

     [The Queen-Mother never came to England again.  She retired to her
     chateau at Colombes, near Paris, where she died in August, 1669,
     after a long illness; the immediate cause of her death being an
     opiate ordered by her physicians.  She was buried, September 12th,
     in the church of St. Denis.  Her funeral sermon was preached by
     Bossuet.  Sir John Reresby speaks of Queen Henrietta Maria in high
     terms.  He says that in the winter, 1659-60, although the Court of
     France was very splendid, there was a greater resort to the Palais
     Royal, "the good humour and wit of our Queen Mother, and the beauty
     of the Princess [Henrietta] her daughter, giving greater invitation
     than the more particular humour of the French Queen, being a
     Spaniard."  In another place he says: "Her majesty had a great
     affection for England, notwithstanding the severe usage she and hers
     had received from it.  Her discourse was much with the great men and
     ladies of France in praise of the people and of the country; of
     their courage, generosity, good nature; and would excuse all their
     miscarriages in relation to unfortunate effects of the late war, as
     if it were a convulsion of some desperate and infatuated persons,
     rather than from the genius and temper of the kingdom" ("Memoirs of
     Sir John Reresby," ed.  Cartwright, pp. 43, 45).]

So by coach home, where at the office all the morning, and at noon Mrs.
Hunt dined with us.  Very merry, and she a very good woman.  To the
office, where busy a while putting some things in my office in order, and
then to letters till night.  About 10 a'clock home, the days being
sensibly shorter before I have once kept a summer's day by shutting up
office by daylight; but my life hath been still as it was in winter
almost.  But I will for a month try what I can do by daylight.  So home to
supper and to bed.

30th.  Up and to White Hall, to the Duke of Albemarle, who I find at
Secretary Bennet's, there being now no other great Statesman, I think, but
my Lord Chancellor, in towne.  I received several commands from them;
among others, to provide some bread and cheese for the garrison at
Guernsey, which they promised to see me paid for.  So to the 'Change, and
home to dinner.  In the afternoon I down to Woolwich and after me my wife
and Mercer, whom I led to Mr. Sheldon's to see his house, and I find it a
very pretty place for them to be at.  So I back again, walking both
forward and backward, and left my wife to come by water.  I straight to
White Hall, late, to Secretary Bennet's to give him an account of the
business I received from him to-day, and there staid weary and sleepy till
past 12 at night.  Then writ my mind to him, and so back by water and in
the dark and against tide shot the bridge, groping with their pole for the
way, which troubled me before I got through.  So home, about one or two
o'clock in the morning, my family at a great losse what was become of me.
To supper, and to bed.  Thus this book of two years ends.  Myself and
family in good health, consisting of myself and wife, Mercer, her woman,
Mary, Alice, and Susan our maids, and Tom my boy.  In a sickly time of the
plague growing on.  Having upon my hands the troublesome care of the
Treasury of Tangier, with great sums drawn upon me, and nothing to pay
them with: also the business of the office great.  Consideration of
removing my wife to Woolwich; she lately busy in learning to paint, with
great pleasure and successe.  All other things well; especially a new
interest I am making, by a match in hand between the eldest son of Sir G.
Carteret, and my Lady Jemimah Montage.  The Duke of Yorke gone down to the
fleete, but all suppose not with intent to stay there, as it is not fit,
all men conceive, he should.

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     A vineyard, the first that ever I did see
     All the towne almost going out of towne (Plague panic)
     Buy some roll-tobacco to smell to and chaw
     Consult my pillow upon that and every great thing of my life
     Convenience of periwiggs is so great
     Dying this last week of the plague 112, from 43 the week before
     Hear that the plague is come into the City
     Houses marked with a red cross upon the doors
     My old folly and childishnesse hangs upon me still
     Plague claimed 68,596 victims (in 1665)
     Pride of some persons and vice of most was but a sad story
     The coachman that carried [us] cannot know me again
     Though neither of us care 2d. one for another
     Which may teach me how I make others wait


                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                  JULY
                                  1665

July 1st, 1665.   Called up betimes, though weary and sleepy, by
appointment by Mr. Povy and Colonell Norwood to discourse about some
payments of Tangier.  They gone, I to the office and there sat all the
morning.  At noon dined at home, and then to the Duke of Albemarle's, by
appointment, to give him an account of some disorder in the Yarde at
Portsmouth, by workmen's going away of their owne accord, for lacke of
money, to get work of hay-making, or any thing else to earne themselves
bread.

     [There are several letters among the State Papers from Commissioner
     Thomas Middleton relating to the want of workmen at Portsmouth
     Dockyard.  On June 29th Middleton wrote to Pepys, "The ropemakers
     have discharged themselves for want of money, and gone into the
     country to make hay."  The blockmakers, the joiners, and the sawyers
     all refused to work longer without money ("Calendar," 1664-65, p.
     453).]

Thence to Westminster, where I hear the sicknesse encreases greatly, and
to the Harp and Ball with Mary talking, who tells me simply her losing of
her first love in the country in Wales, and coming up hither unknown to
her friends, and it seems Dr. Williams do pretend love to her, and I have
found him there several times.  Thence by coach and late at the office,
and so to bed.  Sad at the newes that seven or eight houses in Bazing Hall
street, are shut up of the plague.

2nd (Sunday).  Up, and all the morning dressing my closet at the office
with my plates, very neatly, and a fine place now it is, and will be a
pleasure to sit in, though I thank God I needed none before.  At noon
dined at home, and after dinner to my accounts and cast them up, and find
that though I have spent above L90 this month yet I have saved L17, and am
worth in all above L1450, for which the Lord be praised!  In the evening
my Lady Pen and daughter come to see, and supped with us, then a messenger
about business of the office from Sir G. Carteret at Chatham, and by word
of mouth did send me word that the business between my Lord and him is
fully agreed on,

     [The arrangements for the marriage of Lady Jemimah Montagu to Philip
     Carteret were soon settled, for the wedding took place on July 31st]

and is mightily liked of by the King and the Duke of Yorke, and that he
sent me this word with great joy; they gone, we to bed.  I hear this night
that Sir J. Lawson was buried late last night at St. Dunstan's by us,
without any company at all, and that the condition of his family is but
very poor, which I could be contented to be sorry for, though he never was
the man that ever obliged me by word or deed.

3rd.  Up and by water with Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes to White Hall
to the Duke of Albemarle, where, after a little business, we parted, and I
to the Harp and Ball, and there staid a while talking to Mary, and so home
to dinner.  After dinner to the Duke of Albemarle's again, and so to the
Swan, and there 'demeurais un peu'de temps con la fille', and so to the
Harp and Ball, and alone 'demeurais un peu de temps baisant la', and so
away home and late at the office about letters, and so home, resolving
from this night forwards to close all my letters, if possible, and end all
my business at the office by daylight, and I shall go near to do it and
put all my affairs in the world in good order, the season growing so
sickly, that it is much to be feared how a man can escape having a share
with others in it, for which the good Lord God bless me, or to be fitted
to receive it.  So after supper to bed, and mightily troubled in my sleep
all night with dreams of Jacke Cole, my old schoolfellow, lately dead, who
was born at the same time with me, and we reckoned our fortunes pretty
equal.  God fit me for his condition!

4th.  Up, and sat at the office all the morning.  At noon to the 'Change
and thence to the Dolphin, where a good dinner at the cost of one Mr.
Osbaston, who lost a wager to Sir W. Batten, Sir W. Rider, and Sir R.
Ford, a good while since and now it is spent.  The wager was that ten of
our ships should not have a fight with ten of the enemy's before
Michaelmas.  Here was other very good company, and merry, and at last in
come Mr. Buckeworth, a very fine gentleman, and proves to be a
Huntingdonshire man.  Thence to my office and there all the afternoon till
night, and so home to settle some accounts of Tangier and other papers.  I
hear this day the Duke and Prince Rupert are both come back from sea, and
neither of them go back again.  The latter I much wonder at, but it seems
the towne reports so, and I am very glad of it.  This morning I did a good
piece of work with Sir W. Warren, ending the business of the lotterys,
wherein honestly I think I shall get above L100.  Bankert, it seems, is
come home with the little fleete he hath been abroad with, without doing
any thing, so that there is nobody of an enemy at sea.  We are in great
hopes of meeting with the Dutch East India fleete, which is mighty rich,
or with De Ruyter, who is so also.  Sir Richard Ford told me this day, at
table, a fine account, how the Dutch were like to have been mastered by
the present Prince of Orange

     [The period alluded to is 1650, when the States-General disbanded
     part of the forces which the Prince of Orange (William) wished to
     retain.  The prince attempted, but unsuccessfully, to possess
     himself of Amsterdam.  In the same year he died, at the early age of
     twenty-four; some say of the small-pox; others, with Sir Richard
     Ford, say of poison.--B.]

his father to be besieged in Amsterdam, having drawn an army of foot into
the towne, and horse near to the towne by night, within three miles of the
towne, and they never knew of it; but by chance the Hamburgh post in the
night fell among the horse, and heard their design, and knowing the way,
it being very dark and rainy, better than they, went from them, and did
give notice to the towne before the others could reach the towne, and so
were saved.  It seems this De Witt and another family, the Beckarts, were
among the chief of the familys that were enemys to the Prince, and were
afterwards suppressed by the Prince, and continued so till he was, as they
say, poysoned; and then they turned all again, as it was, against the
young Prince, and have so carried it to this day, it being about 12 and 14
years, and De Witt in the head of them.

5th.  Up, and advised about sending of my wife's bedding and things to
Woolwich, in order to her removal thither.  So to the office, where all
the morning till noon, and so to the 'Change, and thence home to dinner.
In the afternoon I abroad to St. James's, and there with Mr. Coventry a
good while, and understand how matters are ordered in the fleete: that is,
my Lord Sandwich goes Admiral; under him Sir G. Ascue, and Sir T.
Teddiman; Vice-Admiral, Sir W. Pen; and under him Sir W. Barkeley, and Sir
Jos. Jordan: Reere-Admiral, Sir Thomas Allen; and under him Sir
Christopher Mings,

     [The son of a shoemaker, bred to the sea-service; he rose to the
     rank of an admiral, and was killed in the fight with the Dutch,
     June, 1666.--B.  See post, June 10th, 1666.]

and Captain Harman.  We talked in general of business of the Navy, among
others how he had lately spoken to Sir G. Carteret, and professed great
resolution of friendship with him and reconciliation, and resolves to make
it good as well as he can, though it troubles him, he tells me, that
something will come before him wherein he must give him offence, but I do
find upon the whole that Mr. Coventry do not listen to these complaints of
money with the readiness and resolvedness to remedy that he used to do,
and I think if he begins to draw in it is high time for me to do so too.
From thence walked round to White Hall, the Parke being quite locked up;
and I observed a house shut up this day in the Pell Mell, where heretofore
in Cromwell's time we young men used to keep our weekly clubs.  And so to
White Hall to Sir G. Carteret, who is come this day from Chatham, and
mighty glad he is to see me, and begun to talk of our great business of
the match, which goes on as fast as possible, but for convenience we took
water and over to his coach to Lambeth, by which we went to Deptford, all
the way talking, first, how matters are quite concluded with all possible
content between my Lord and him and signed and sealed, so that my Lady
Sandwich is to come thither to-morrow or next day, and the young lady is
sent for, and all likely to be ended between them in a very little while,
with mighty joy on both sides, and the King, Duke, Lord Chancellor, and
all mightily pleased.  Thence to newes, wherein I find that Sir G.
Carteret do now take all my Lord Sandwich's business to heart, and makes
it the same with his owne.  He tells me how at Chatham it was proposed to
my Lord Sandwich to be joined with the Prince in the command of the
fleete, which he was most willing to; but when it come to the Prince, he
was quite against it; saying, there could be no government, but that it
would be better to have two fleetes, and neither under the command of the
other, which he would not agree to.  So the King was not pleased; but,
without any unkindnesse, did order the fleete to be ordered as above, as
to the Admirals and commands: so the Prince is come up; and Sir G.
Carteret, I remember, had this word thence, that, says he, by this means,
though the King told him that it would be but for this expedition, yet I
believe we shall keepe him out for altogether.  He tells me how my Lord
was much troubled at Sir W. Pen's being ordered forth (as it seems he is,
to go to Solebay, and with the best fleete he can, to go forth), and no
notice taken of my Lord Sandwich going after him, and having the command
over him.  But after some discourse Mr. Coventry did satisfy, as he says,
my Lord, so as they parted friends both in that point and upon the other
wherein I know my Lord was troubled, and which Mr. Coventry did speak to
him of first thinking that my Lord might justly take offence at, his not
being mentioned in the relation of the fight in the news book, and did
clear all to my Lord how little he was concerned in it, and therewith my
Lord also satisfied, which I am mightily glad of, because I should take it
a very great misfortune to me to have them two to differ above all the
persons in the world.  Being come to Deptford, my Lady not being within,
we parted, and I by water to Woolwich, where I found my wife come, and her
two mayds, and very prettily accommodated they will be; and I left them
going to supper, grieved in my heart to part with my wife, being worse by
much without her, though some trouble there is in having the care of a
family at home in this plague time, and so took leave, and I in one boat
and W. Hewer in another home very late, first against tide, we having
walked in the dark to Greenwich.  Late home and to bed, very lonely.

6th.  Up and forth to give order to my pretty grocer's wife's house, who,
her husband tells me, is going this day for the summer into the country. I
bespoke some sugar, &c., for my father, and so home to the office, where
all the morning.  At noon dined at home, and then by water to White Hall
to Sir G. Carteret about money for the office, a sad thought, for in a
little while all must go to wracke, winter coming on apace, when a great
sum must be ready to pay part of the fleete, and so far we are from it
that we have not enough to stop the mouths of poor people and their hands
from falling about our eares here almost in the office.  God give a good
end to it!  Sir G. Carteret told me one considerable thing: Alderman
Backewell is ordered abroad upon some private score with a great sum of
money; wherein I was instrumental the other day in shipping him away.  It
seems some of his creditors have taken notice of it, and he was like to be
broke yesterday in his absence; Sir G. Carteret telling me that the King
and the kingdom must as good as fall with that man at this time; and that
he was forced to get L4000 himself to answer Backewell's people's
occasions, or he must have broke; but committed this to me as a great
secret and which I am heartily sorry to hear.  Thence, after a little
merry discourse of our marrying business, I parted, and by coach to
several places, among others to see my Lord Brunkerd, who is not well, but
was at rest when I come.  I could not see him, nor had much mind, one of
the great houses within two doors of him being shut up: and, Lord! the
number of houses visited, which this day I observed through the town quite
round in my way by Long Lane and London Wall.  So home to the office, and
thence to Sir W. Batten, and spent the evening at supper; and, among other
discourse, the rashness of Sir John Lawson, for breeding up his daughter
so high and proud, refusing a man of great interest, Sir W. Barkeley, to
match her with a melancholy fellow, Colonell Norton's' son, of no interest
nor good nature nor generosity at all, giving her L6000, when the other
would have taken her with two; when he himself knew that he was not worth
the money himself in all the world, he did give her that portion, and is
since dead, and left his wife and two daughters beggars, and the other
gone away with L6000, and no content in it, through the ill qualities of
her father-in-law and husband, who, it seems, though a pretty woman,
contracted for her as if he had been buying a horse; and, worst of all, is
now of no use to serve the mother and two little sisters in any stead at
Court, whereas the other might have done what he would for her: so here is
an end of this family's pride, which, with good care, might have been what
they would, and done well.  Thence, weary of this discourse, as the act of
the greatest rashness that ever I heard of in all my little conversation,
we parted, and I home to bed. Sir W. Pen, it seems, sailed last night from
Solebay with, about sixty sail of ship, and my Lord Sandwich in "The
Prince" and some others, it seems, going after them to overtake them, for
I am sure my Lord Sandwich will do all possible to overtake them, and will
be troubled to the heart if he do it not.

7th.  Up, and having set my neighbour, Mr. Hudson, wine coopers, at work
drawing out a tierce of wine for the sending of some of it to my wife, I
abroad, only taking notice to what a condition it hath pleased God to
bring me that at this time I have two tierces of Claret, two quarter casks
of Canary, and a smaller vessel of Sack; a vessel of Tent, another of
Malaga, and another of white wine, all in my wine cellar together; which,
I believe, none of my friends of my name now alive ever had of his owne at
one time.  To Westminster, and there with Mr. Povy and Creed talking of
our Tangier business, and by and by I drew Creed aside and acquainted him
with what Sir G. Carteret did tell me about Backewell the other day,
because he hath money of his in his hands.  So home, taking some new
books, L5 worth, home to my great content.  At home all the day after
busy.  Some excellent discourse and advice of Sir W. Warren's in the
afternoon, at night home to look over my new books, and so late to bed.

8th.  All day very diligent at the office, ended my letters by 9 at night,
and then fitted myself to go down to Woolwich to my wife, which I did,
calling at Sir G. Carteret's at Deptford, and there hear that my Lady
Sandwich is come, but not very well.  By 12 o'clock to Woolwich, found my
wife asleep in bed, but strange to think what a fine night I had down, but
before I had been one minute on shore, the mightiest storm come of wind
and rain that almost could be for a quarter of an houre and so left.  I to
bed, being the first time I come to her lodgings, and there lodged well.

9th (Lord's day).  Very pleasant with her and among my people, while she
made her ready, and, about 10 o'clock, by water to Sir G. Carteret, and
there find my Lady [Sandwich] in her chamber, not very well, but looks the
worst almost that ever I did see her in my life.  It seems her drinking of
the water at Tunbridge did almost kill her before she could with most
violent physique get it out of her body again.  We are received with most
extraordinary kindnesse by my Lady Carteret and her children, and dined
most nobly.  Sir G. Carteret went to Court this morning.  After dinner I
took occasion to have much discourse with Mr. Ph. Carteret, and find him a
very modest man; and I think verily of mighty good nature, and pretty
understanding.  He did give me a good account of the fight with the Dutch.
My Lady Sandwich dined in her chamber.  About three o'clock I, leaving my
wife there, took boat and home, and there shifted myself into my black
silke suit, and having promised Harman yesterday, I to his house, which I
find very mean, and mean company.  His wife very ill; I could not see her.
Here I, with her father and Kate Joyce, who was also very ill, were
godfathers and godmother to his boy, and was christened Will.  Mr. Meriton
christened him.  The most observable thing I found there to my content,
was to hear him and his clerk tell me that in this parish of Michell's,
Cornhill, one of the middlemost parishes and a great one of the towne,
there hath, notwithstanding this sickliness, been buried of any disease,
man, woman, or child, not one for thirteen months last past; which [is]
very strange.  And the like in a good degree in most other parishes, I
hear, saving only of the plague in them, but in this neither the plague
nor any other disease.  So back again home and reshifted myself, and so
down to my Lady Carteret's, where mighty merry and great pleasantnesse
between my Lady Sandwich and the young ladies and me, and all of us mighty
merry, there never having been in the world sure a greater business of
general content than this match proposed between Mr. Carteret and my Lady
Jemimah.  But withal it is mighty pretty to think how my poor Lady
Sandwich, between her and me, is doubtfull whether her daughter will like
of it or no, and how troubled she is for fear of it, which I do not fear
at all, and desire her not to do it, but her fear is the most discreet and
pretty that ever I did see.  Late here, and then my wife and I, with most
hearty kindnesse from my Lady Carteret by boat to Woolwich, come thither
about 12 at night, and so to bed.

10th.  Up, and with great pleasure looking over a nest of puppies of Mr.
Shelden's, with which my wife is most extraordinary pleased, and one of
them is promised her.  Anon I took my leave, and away by water to the Duke
of Albemarle's, where he tells me that I must be at Hampton Court anon.
So I home to look over my Tangier papers, and having a coach of Mr. Povy's
attending me, by appointment, in order to my coming to dine at his country
house at Brainford, where he and his family is, I went and Mr. Tasbrough
with me therein, it being a pretty chariot, but most inconvenient as to
the horses throwing dust and dirt into one's eyes and upon one's clothes.
There I staid a quarter of an houre, Creed being there, and being able to
do little business (but the less the better). Creed rode before, and Mr.
Povy and I after him in the chariot; and I was set down by him at the
Parke pale, where one of his saddle horses was ready for me, he himself
not daring to come into the house or be seen, because that a servant of
his, out of his horse, happened to be sicke, but is not yet dead, but was
never suffered to come into his house after he was ill.  But this
opportunity was taken to injure Povy, and most horribly he is abused by
some persons hereupon, and his fortune, I believe, quite broke; but that
he hath a good heart to bear, or a cunning one to conceal his evil.  There
I met with Sir W. Coventry, and by and by was heard by my Lord Chancellor
and Treasurer about our Tangier money, and my Lord Treasurer had ordered
me to forbear meddling with the L15,000 he offered me the other day, but,
upon opening the case to them, they did offer it again, and so I think I
shall have it, but my Lord General must give his consent in it, this money
having been promised to him, and he very angry at the proposal.  Here
though I have not been in many years, yet I lacke time to stay, besides
that it is, I perceive, an unpleasing thing to be at Court, everybody
being fearful one of another, and all so sad, enquiring after the plague,
so that I stole away by my horse to Kingston, and there with trouble was
forced, to press two sturdy rogues to carry me to London, and met at the
waterside with Mr. Charnocke, Sir Philip Warwicke's clerke, who had been
in company and was quite foxed. I took him with me in my boat, and so away
to Richmond, and there, by night, walked with him to Moreclacke, a very
pretty walk, and there staid a good while, now and then talking and
sporting with Nan the servant, who says she is a seaman's wife, and at
last bade good night.

11th.  And so all night down by water, a most pleasant passage, and come
thither by two o'clock, and so walked from the Old Swan home, and there to
bed to my Will, being very weary, and he lodging at my desire in my house.
At 6 o'clock up and to Westminster (where and all the towne besides, I
hear, the plague encreases), and, it being too soon to go to the Duke of
Albemarle, I to the Harp and Ball, and there made a bargain with Mary to
go forth with me in the afternoon, which she with much ado consented to.
So I to the Duke of Albemarle's, and there with much ado did get his
consent in part to my having the money promised for Tangier, and the other
part did not concur.  So being displeased with this, I back to the office
and there sat alone a while doing business, and then by a solemn
invitation to the Trinity House, where a great dinner and company, Captain
Dobbin's feast for Elder Brother.  But I broke up before the dinner half
over and by water to the Harp and Ball, and thence had Mary meet me at the
New Exchange, and there took coach and I with great pleasure took the ayre
to Highgate, and thence to Hampstead, much pleased with her company,
pretty and innocent, and had what pleasure almost I would with her, and so
at night, weary and sweaty, it being very hot beyond bearing, we back
again, and I set her down in St. Martin's Lane, and so I to the evening
'Change, and there hear all the towne full that Ostend is delivered to us,
and that Alderman Backewell

     [Among the State Papers is a letter from the king to the Lord
     General (dated August 8th, 1665): "Alderman Backwell being in great
     straits for the second payment he has to make for the service in
     Flanders, as much tin is to be transmitted to him as will raise the
     sum.  Has authorized him and Sir George Carteret to treat with the
     tin farmers for 500 tons of tin to be speedily transported under
     good convoy; but if, on consulting with Alderman Backwell, this plan
     of the tin seems insufficient, then without further difficulty he is
     to dispose for that purpose of the L10,000 assigned for pay of the
     Guards, not doubting that before that comes due, other ways will be
     found for supplying it; the payment in Flanders is of such
     importance that some means must be found of providing for it"
     ("Calendar," Domestic, 1664-65, pp. 508, 509)]

did go with L50,000 to that purpose.  But the truth of it I do not know,
but something I believe there is extraordinary in his going.  So to the
office, where I did what I could as to letters, and so away to bed,
shifting myself, and taking some Venice treakle, feeling myself out of
order, and thence to bed to sleep.

12th.  After doing what business I could in the morning, it being a solemn
fast-day

     ["A form of Common Prayer; together with an order for fasting for
     the averting of God's heavy visitation upon many places of this
     realm.  The fast to be observed within the cities of London and
     Westminster and places adjacent, on Wednesday the twelfth of this
     instant July, and both there and in all parts of this realm on the
     first Wednesday in every month during the visitation" ("Calendar of
     State Papers," Domestic, 1664-65, p. 466).]

for the plague growing upon us, I took boat and down to Deptford, where I
stood with great pleasure an houre or two by my Lady Sandwich's bedside,
talking to her (she lying prettily in bed) of my Lady Jemimah's being from
my Lady Pickering's when our letters come to that place; she being at my
Lord Montagu's, at Boughton.  The truth is, I had received letters of it
two days ago, but had dropped them, and was in a very extraordinary
straite what to do for them, or what account to give my Lady, but sent to
every place; I sent to Moreclacke, where I had been the night before, and
there they were found, which with mighty joy come safe to me; but all
ending with satisfaction to my Lady and me, though I find my Lady Carteret
not much pleased with this delay, and principally because of the plague,
which renders it unsafe to stay long at Deptford.  I eat a bit (my Lady
Carteret being the most kind lady in the world), and so took boat, and a
fresh boat at the Tower, and so up the river, against tide all the way, I
having lost it by staying prating to and with my Lady, and, from before
one, made it seven ere we got to Hampton Court; and when I come there all
business was over, saving my finding Mr. Coventry at his chamber, and with
him a good while about several businesses at his chamber, and so took
leave, and away to my boat, and all night upon the water, staying a while
with Nan at Moreclacke, very much pleased and merry with her, and so on
homeward, and come home by two o'clock, shooting the bridge at that time
of night, and so to bed, where I find Will is not, he staying at Woolwich
to come with my wife to dinner tomorrow to my Lady Carteret's.  Heard Mr.
Williamson repeat at Hampton Court to-day how the King of France hath
lately set out a most high arrest against the Pope, which is reckoned very
lofty and high.

     [Arret.  The rupture between Alexander VII. and Louis XIV. was
     healed in 1664, by the treaty signed at Pisa, on February 12th.  On
     August 9th, the pope's nephew, Cardinal Chigi, made his entry into
     Paris, as legate, to give the king satisfaction for the insult
     offered at Rome by the Corsican guard to the Duc de Crequi, the
     French ambassador; (see January 25th, 1662-63).  Cardinal Imperiali,
     Governor of Rome, asked pardon of the king in person, and all the
     hard conditions of the treaty were fulfilled.  But no arret against
     the pope was set forth in 1665.  On the contrary, Alexander, now
     wishing to please the king, issued a constitution on February 2nd,
     1665, ordering all the clergy of France, without any exception, to
     sign a formulary condemning the famous five propositions extracted
     from the works of Jansenius; and on April 29th, the king in person
     ordered the parliament to register the bull.  The Jansenist party,
     of course, demurred to this proceeding; the Bishops of Alais,
     Angers, Beauvais, and Pamiers, issuing mandates calling upon their
     clergy to refuse.  It was against these mandates, as being contrary
     to the king's declaration and the pope's intentions, that the arret
     was directed.--B.]

13th.  Lay long, being sleepy, and then up to the office, my Lord Brunker
(after his sickness) being come to the office, and did what business there
was, and so I by water, at night late, to Sir G. Carteret's, but there
being no oars to carry me, I was fain to call a skuller that had a
gentleman already in it, and he proved a man of love to musique, and he
and I sung together the way down with great pleasure, and an incident
extraordinary to be met with.  There come to dinner, they haveing dined,
but my Lady caused something to be brought for me, and I dined well and
mighty merry, especially my Lady Slaning and I about eating of creame and
brown bread, which she loves as much as I.  Thence after long discourse
with them and my Lady alone, I and [my] wife, who by agreement met here,
took leave, and I saw my wife a little way down (it troubling me that this
absence makes us a little strange instead of more fond), and so parted,
and I home to some letters, and then home to bed.  Above 700 died of the
plague this week.

14th.  Up, and all the morning at the Exchequer endeavouring to strike
tallys for money for Tangier, and mightily vexed to see how people attend
there, some out of towne, and others drowsy, and to others it was late, so
that the King's business suffers ten times more than all their service is
worth.  So I am put off to to-morrow. Thence to the Old Exchange, by
water, and there bespoke two fine shirts of my pretty seamstress, who, she
tells me, serves Jacke Fenn.  Upon the 'Change all the news is that guns
have been heard and that news is come by a Dane that my Lord was in view
of De Ruyter, and that since his parting from my Lord of Sandwich he hath
heard guns, but little of it do I think true.  So home to dinner, where
Povy by agreement, and after dinner we to talk of our Tangier matters,
about keeping our profit at the pay and victualling of the garrison, if
the present undertakers should leave it, wherein I did [not] nor will do
any thing unworthy me and any just man, but they being resolved to quit
it, it is fit I should suffer Mr. Povy to do what he can with Mr. Gauden
about it to our profit.  Thence to the discoursing of putting some sums of
money in order and tallys, which we did pretty well.  So he in the evening
gone, I by water to Sir G. Carteret's, and there find my Lady Sandwich and
her buying things for my Lady Jem.'s wedding; and my Lady Jem. is beyond
expectation come to Dagenhams, where Mr. Carteret is to go to visit her
to-morrow; and my proposal of waiting on him, he being to go alone to all
persons strangers to him, was well accepted, and so I go with him.  But,
Lord! to see how kind my Lady Carteret is to her!  Sends her most rich
jewells, and provides bedding and things of all sorts most richly for her,
which makes my Lady and me out of our wits almost to see the kindnesse she
treats us all with, as if they would buy the young lady.  Thence away home
and, foreseeing my being abroad two days, did sit up late making of
letters ready against tomorrow, and other things, and so to bed, to be up
betimes by the helpe of a larum watch, which by chance I borrowed of my
watchmaker to-day, while my owne is mending.

15th.  Up, and after all business done, though late, I to Deptford, but
before I went out of the office saw there young Bagwell's wife returned,
but could not stay to speak to her, though I had a great mind to it, and
also another great lady, as to fine clothes, did attend there to have a
ticket signed; which I did do, taking her through the garden to my office,
where I signed it and had a salute--[kiss]--of her, and so I away by boat
to Redriffe, and thence walked, and after dinner, at Sir G. Carteret's,
where they stayed till almost three o'clock for me, and anon took boat,
Mr. Carteret and I to the ferry-place at Greenwich, and there staid an
hour crossing the water to and again to get our coach and horses over; and
by and by set out, and so toward Dagenhams.  But, Lord! what silly
discourse we had by the way as to love-matters, he being the most awkerd
man I ever met with in my life as to that business.  Thither we come, by
that time it begun to be dark, and were kindly received by Lady Wright and
my Lord Crew.  And to discourse they went, my Lord discoursing with him,
asking of him questions of travell, which he answered well enough in a few
words; but nothing to the lady from him at all.  To supper, and after
supper to talk again, he yet taking no notice of the lady.  My Lord would
have had me have consented to leaving the young people together to-night,
to begin their amours, his staying being but to be little.  But I advised
against it, lest the lady might be too much surprised.  So they led him up
to his chamber, where I staid a little, to know how he liked the lady,
which he told me he did mightily; but, Lord! in the dullest insipid manner
that ever lover did.  So I bid him good night, and down to prayers with my
Lord Crew's family, and after prayers, my Lord, and Lady Wright, and I, to
consult what to do; and it was agreed at last to have them go to church
together, as the family used to do, though his lameness was a great
objection against it.  But at last my Lady Jem. sent me word by my Lady
Wright that it would be better to do just as they used to do before his
coming; and therefore she desired to go to church, which was yielded then
to.

16th (Lord's day).  I up, having lain with Mr. Moore in the chaplin's
chamber.  And having trimmed myself, down to Mr. Carteret; and he being
ready we down and walked in the gallery an hour or two, it being a most
noble and pretty house that ever, for the bigness, I saw.  Here I taught
him what to do: to take the lady always by the hand to lead her, and
telling him that I would find opportunity to leave them two together, he
should make these and these compliments, and also take a time to do the
like to Lord Crew and Lady Wright.  After I had instructed him, which he
thanked me for, owning that he needed my teaching him, my Lord Crew come
down and family, the young lady among the rest; and so by coaches to
church four miles off; where a pretty good sermon, and a declaration of
penitence of a man that had undergone the Churches censure for his wicked
life.  Thence back again by coach, Mr. Carteret having not had the
confidence to take his lady once by the hand, coming or going, which I
told him of when we come home, and he will hereafter do it.  So to dinner.
My Lord excellent discourse.  Then to walk in the gallery, and to sit
down.  By and by my Lady Wright and I go out (and then my Lord Crew, he
not by design), and lastly my Lady Crew come out, and left the young
people together.  And a little pretty daughter of my Lady Wright's most
innocently come out afterward, and shut the door to, as if she had done
it, poor child, by inspiration; which made us without, have good sport to
laugh at.  They together an hour, and by and by church-time, whither he
led her into the coach and into the church, and so at church all the
afternoon, several handsome ladies at church.  But it was most
extraordinary hot that ever I knew it.  So home again and to walk in the
gardens, where we left the young couple a second time; and my Lady Wright
and I to walk together, who to my trouble tells me that my Lady Jem. must
have something done to her body by Scott before she can be married, and
therefore care must be had to send him, also that some more new clothes
must of necessity be made her, which and other things I took care of.
Anon to supper, and excellent discourse and dispute between my Lord Crew
and the chaplin, who is a good scholler, but a nonconformist.  Here this
evening I spoke with Mrs. Carter, my old acquaintance, that hath lived
with my Lady these twelve or thirteen years, the sum of all whose
discourse and others for her, is, that I would get her a good husband;
which I have promised, but know not when I shall perform.  After Mr.
Carteret was carried to his chamber, we to prayers again and then to bed.

17th.  Up all of us, and to billiards; my Lady Wright, Mr. Carteret,
myself, and every body.  By and by the young couple left together.  Anon
to dinner; and after dinner Mr. Carteret took my advice about giving to
the servants, and I led him to give L10 among them, which he did, by
leaving it to the chief man-servant, Mr. Medows, to do for him.  Before we
went, I took my Lady Jem. apart, and would know how she liked this
gentleman, and whether she was under any difficulty concerning him.  She
blushed, and hid her face awhile; but at last I forced her to tell me. She
answered that she could readily obey what her father and mother had done;
which was all she could say, or I expect.  So anon I took leave, and for
London.  But, Lord! to see, among other things, how all these great people
here are afeard of London, being doubtfull of anything that comes from
thence, or that hath lately been there, that I was forced to say that I
lived wholly at Woolwich.  In our way Mr. Carteret did give me mighty
thanks for my care and pains for him, and is mightily pleased, though the
truth is, my Lady Jem. hath carried herself with mighty discretion and
gravity, not being forward at all in any degree, but mighty serious in her
answers to him, as by what he says and I observed, I collect.  To London
to my office, and there took letters from the office, where all well, and
so to the Bridge, and there he and I took boat and to Deptford, where
mighty welcome, and brought the good newes of all being pleased to them.
Mighty mirth at my giving them an account of all; but the young man could
not be got to say one word before me or my Lady Sandwich of his
adventures, but, by what he afterwards related to his father and mother
and sisters, he gives an account that pleases them mightily.  Here Sir G.
Carteret would have me lie all night, which I did most nobly, better than
ever I did in my life, Sir G. Carteret being mighty kind to me, leading me
to my chamber; and all their care now is, to have the business ended, and
they have reason, because the sicknesse puts all out of order, and they
cannot safely stay where they are.

18th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning, and so to my house and
eat a bit of victuals, and so to the 'Change, where a little business and
a very thin Exchange; and so walked through London to the Temple, where I
took water for Westminster to the Duke of Albemarle, to wait on him, and
so to Westminster Hall, and there paid for my newes-books, and did give
Mrs. Michell, who is going out of towne because of the sicknesse, and her
husband, a pint of wine, and so Sir W. Warren coming to me by appointment
we away by water home, by the way discoursing about the project I have of
getting some money and doing the King good service too about the mast
docke at Woolwich, which I fear will never be done if I do not go about
it.  After dispatching letters at the office, I by water down to Deptford,
where I staid a little while, and by water to my wife, whom I have not
seen 6 or 5 days, and there supped with her, and mighty pleasant, and saw
with content her drawings, and so to bed mighty merry.  I was much
troubled this day to hear at Westminster how the officers do bury the dead
in the open Tuttle-fields, pretending want of room elsewhere; whereas the
New Chappell churchyard was walled-in at the publick charge in the last
plague time, merely for want of room and now none, but such as are able to
pay dear for it, can be buried there.

19th.  Up and to the office, and thence presently to the Exchequer, and
there with much trouble got my tallys, and afterwards took Mr. Falconer,
Spicer, and another or two to the Leg and there give them a dinner, and so
with my tallys and about 30 dozen of bags, which it seems are my due,
having paid the fees as if I had received the money I away home, and after
a little stay down by water to Deptford, where I find all full of joy, and
preparing to go to Dagenhams to-morrow.  To supper, and after supper to
talk without end.  Very late I went away, it raining, but I had a design
'pour aller a la femme de Bagwell' and did so .  .  .  .  So away about
12, and it raining hard I back to Sir G. Carteret and there called up the
page, and to bed there, being all in a most violent sweat.

20th.  Up, in a boat among other people to the Tower, and there to the
office, where we sat all the morning.  So down to Deptford and there
dined, and after dinner saw my Lady Sandwich and Mr. Carteret and his two
sisters over the water, going to Dagenhams, and my Lady Carteret towards
Cranburne.

     [The royal lodge of that name in Windsor Forest, occupied by Sir
     George Carteret as Vice-Chamberlain to the King.--B.]

So all the company broke up in most extraordinary joy, wherein I am mighty
contented that I have had the good fortune to be so instrumental, and I
think it will be of good use to me.  So walked to Redriffe, where I hear
the sickness is, and indeed is scattered almost every where, there dying
1089 of the plague this week.  My Lady Carteret did this day give me a
bottle of plague-water home with me.  So home to write letters late, and
then home to bed, where I have not lain these 3 or 4 nights.  I received
yesterday a letter from my Lord Sandwich, giving me thanks for my care
about their marriage business, and desiring it to be dispatched, that no
disappointment may happen therein, which I will help on all I can.  This
afternoon I waited on the Duke of Albemarle, and so to Mrs. Croft's, where
I found and saluted Mrs. Burrows, who is a very pretty woman for a mother
of so many children. But, Lord! to see how the plague spreads.  It being
now all over King's Streete, at the Axe, and next door to it, and in other
places.

21st.  Up and abroad to the goldsmiths, to see what money I could get upon
my present tallys upon the advance of the Excise, and I hope I shall get
L10,000.  I went also and had them entered at the Excise Office. Alderman
Backewell is at sea.  Sir R. Viner come to towne but this morning.  So
Colvill was the only man I could yet speak withal to get any money of.
Met with Mr. Povy, and I with him and dined at the Custom House Taverne,
there to talk of our Tangier business, and Stockedale and Hewet with us.
So abroad to several places, among others to Anthony Joyce's, and there
broke to him my desire to have Pall married to Harman, whose wife, poor
woman, is lately dead, to my trouble, I loving her very much, and he will
consider it.  So home and late at my chamber, setting some papers in
order; the plague growing very raging, and my apprehensions of it great.
So very late to bed.

22nd.  As soon as up I among my goldsmiths, Sir Robert Viner and Colvill,
and there got L10,000 of my new tallys accepted, and so I made it my work
to find out Mr. Mervin and sent for others to come with their bills of
Exchange, as Captain Hewett, &c., and sent for Mr. Jackson, but he was not
in town.  So all the morning at the office, and after dinner, which was
very late, I to Sir R. Viner's, by his invitation in the morning, and got
near L5000 more accepted, and so from this day the whole, or near,
L15,000, lies upon interest.  Thence I by water to Westminster, and the
Duke of Albemarle being gone to dinner to my Lord of Canterbury's, I
thither, and there walked and viewed the new hall, a new old-fashion hall
as much as possible.  Begun, and means left for the ending of it, by
Bishop Juxon.  Not coming proper to speak with him, I to Fox-hall, where
to the Spring garden; but I do not see one guest there, the town being so
empty of any body to come thither.  Only, while I was there, a poor woman
come to scold with the master of the house that a kinswoman, I think, of
hers, that was newly dead of the plague, might be buried in the
church-yard; for, for her part, she should not be buried in the commons,
as they said she should.  Back to White Hall, and by and by comes the Duke
of Albemarle, and there, after a little discourse, I by coach home, not
meeting with but two coaches, and but two carts from White Hall to my own
house, that I could observe; and the streets mighty thin of people.  I met
this noon with Dr. Burnett, who told me, and I find in the newsbook this
week that he posted upon the 'Change, that whoever did spread the report
that, instead of the plague, his servant was by him killed, it was
forgery, and shewed me the acknowledgment of the master of the pest-house,
that his servant died of a bubo on his right groine, and two spots on his
right thigh, which is the plague.  To my office, where late writing
letters, and getting myself prepared with business for Hampton Court
to-morrow, and so having caused a good pullet to be got for my supper, all
alone, I very late to bed.  All the news is great: that we must of
necessity fall out with France, for He will side with the Dutch against
us.  That Alderman Backewell is gone over (which indeed he is) with money,
and that Ostend is in our present possession.  But it is strange to see
how poor Alderman Backewell is like to be put to it in his absence, Mr.
Shaw his right hand being ill.  And the Alderman's absence gives doubts to
people, and I perceive they are in great straits for money, besides what
Sir G. Carteret told me about fourteen days ago. Our fleet under my Lord
Sandwich being about the latitude 55 (which is a great secret) to the
Northward of the Texell.  So to bed very late.  In my way I called upon
Sir W. Turner, and at Mr. Shelcrosse's (but he was not at home, having
left his bill with Sir W. Turner), that so I may prove I did what I could
as soon as I had money to answer all bills.

23rd (Lord's day).  Up very betimes, called by Mr. Cutler, by appointment,
and with him in his coach and four horses over London Bridge to Kingston,
a very pleasant journey, and at Hampton Court by nine o'clock, and in our
way very good and various discourse, as he is a man, that though I think
he be a knave, as the world thinks him, yet a man of great experience and
worthy to be heard discourse.  When we come there, we to Sir W. Coventry's
chamber, and there discoursed long with him, he and I alone, the others
being gone away, and so walked together through the garden to the house,
where we parted, I observing with a little trouble that he is too great
now to expect too much familiarity with, and I find he do not mind me as
he used to do, but when I reflect upon him and his business I cannot think
much of it, for I do not observe anything but the same great kindness from
him.  I followed the King to chappell, and there hear a good sermon; and
after sermon with my Lord Arlington, Sir Thomas Ingram and others, spoke
to the Duke about Tangier, but not to much purpose.  I was not invited any
whither to dinner, though a stranger, which did also trouble me; but yet I
must remember it is a Court, and indeed where most are strangers; but,
however, Cutler carried me to Mr. Marriott's the house-keeper, and there
we had a very good dinner and good company, among others Lilly, the
painter.  Thence to the councill-chamber, where in a back room I sat all
the afternoon, but the councill begun late to sit, and spent most of the
time upon Morisco's Tarr businesse.  They sat long, and I forced to follow
Sir Thomas Ingram, the Duke, and others, so that when I got free and come
to look for Cutler, he was gone with his coach, without leaving any word
with any body to tell me so; so that I was forced with great trouble to
walk up and down looking of him, and at last forced to get a boat to carry
me to Kingston, and there, after eating a bit at a neat inne, which
pleased me well, I took boat, and slept all the way, without intermission,
from thence to Queenhive, where, it being about two o'clock, too late and
too soon to go home to bed, I lay and slept till about four,

24th.  And then up and home, and there dressed myself, and by appointment
to Deptford, to Sir G. Carteret's, between six and seven o'clock, where I
found him and my Lady almost ready, and by and by went over to the ferry,
and took coach and six horses nobly for Dagenhams, himself and lady and
their little daughter, Louisonne, and myself in the coach; where, when we
come, we were bravely entertained and spent the day most pleasantly with
the young ladies, and I so merry as never more.  Only for want of sleep,
and drinking of strong beer had a rheum in one of my eyes, which troubled
me much.  Here with great content all the day, as I think I ever passed a
day in my life, because of the contentfulnesse of our errand, and the
noblenesse of the company and our manner of going.  But I find Mr.
Carteret yet as backward almost in his caresses, as he was the first day.
At night, about seven o'clock, took coach again; but, Lord! to see in what
a pleasant humour Sir G. Carteret hath been both coming and going; so
light, so fond, so merry, so boyish (so much content he takes in this
business), it is one of the greatest wonders I ever saw in my mind.  But
once in serious discourse he did say that, if he knew his son to be a
debauchee, as many and, most are now-a-days about the Court, he would tell
it, and my Lady Jem. should not have him; and so enlarged both he and she
about the baseness and looseness of the Court, and told several stories of
the Duke of Monmouth, and Richmond, and some great person, my Lord of
Ormond's second son, married to a lady of extraordinary quality (fit and
that might have been made a wife for the King himself), about six months
since, that this great person hath given the pox to------; and discoursed
how much this would oblige the Kingdom if the King would banish some of
these great persons publiquely from the Court, and wished it with all
their hearts.  We set out so late that it grew dark, so as we doubted the
losing of our way; and a long time it was, or seemed, before we could get
to the water-side, and that about eleven at night, where, when we come,
all merry (only my eye troubled me, as I said), we found no ferryboat was
there, nor no oares to carry us to Deptford.  However, afterwards oares
was called from the other side at Greenwich; but, when it come, a
frolique, being mighty merry, took us, and there we would sleep all night
in the coach in the Isle of Doggs.  So we did, there being now with us my
Lady Scott, and with great pleasure drew up the glasses, and slept till
daylight, and then some victuals and wine being brought us, we ate a bit,
and so up and took boat, merry as might be; and when come to Sir G.
Carteret's, there all to bed.

25th.  Our good humour in every body continuing, and there I slept till
seven o'clock.  Then up and to the office, well refreshed, my eye only
troubling me, which by keeping a little covered with my handkercher and
washing now and then with cold water grew better by night.  At noon to the
'Change, which was very thin, and thence homeward, and was called in by
Mr. Rawlinson, with whom I dined and some good company very harmlessly
merry.  But sad the story of the plague in the City, it growing mightily.
This day my Lord Brunker did give me Mr. Grant's' book upon the Bills of
Mortality, new printed and enlarged.  Thence to my office awhile, full of
business, and thence by coach to the Duke of Albemarle's, not meeting one
coach going nor coming from my house thither and back again, which is very
strange.  One of my chief errands was to speak to Sir W. Clerke about my
wife's brother, who importunes me, and I doubt he do want mightily, but I
can do little for him there as to employment in the army, and out of my
purse I dare not for fear of a precedent, and letting him come often to me
is troublesome and dangerous too, he living in the dangerous part of the
town, but I will do what I can possibly for him and as soon as I can.
Mightily troubled all this afternoon with masters coming to me about Bills
of Exchange and my signing them upon my Goldsmiths, but I did send for
them all and hope to ease myself this weeke of all the clamour.  These two
or three days Mr. Shaw at Alderman Backewell's hath lain sick, like to
die, and is feared will not live a day to an end.  At night home and to
bed, my head full of business, and among others, this day come a letter to
me from Paris from my Lord Hinchingbroke, about his coming over; and I
have sent this night an order from the Duke of Albemarle for a ship of 36
guns to [go] to Calais to fetch him.

26th.  Up, and after doing a little business, down to Deptford with Sir W.
Batten, and there left him, and I to Greenwich to the Park, where I hear
the King and Duke are come by water this morn from Hampton Court. They
asked me several questions.  The King mightily pleased with his new
buildings there.  I followed them to Castle's ship in building, and there,
met Sir W. Batten, and thence to Sir G. Carteret's, where all the morning
with them; they not having any but the Duke of Monmouth, and Sir W.
Killigrew, and one gentleman, and a page more.  Great variety of talk, and
was often led to speak to the King and Duke.  By and by they to dinner,
and all to dinner and sat down to the King saving myself, which, though I
could not in modesty expect, yet, God forgive my pride!  I was sorry I was
there, that Sir W. Batten should say that he could sit down where I could
not, though he had twenty times more reason than I, but this was my pride
and folly.  I down and walked with Mr. Castle, who told me the design of
Ford and Rider to oppose and do all the hurt they can to Captain Taylor in
his new ship "The London," and how it comes, and that they are a couple of
false persons, which I believe, and withal that he himself is a knave too.
He and I by and by to dinner mighty nobly, and the King having dined, he
come down, and I went in the barge with him, I sitting at the door.  Down
to Woolwich (and there I just saw and kissed my wife, and saw some of her
painting, which is very curious; and away again to the King) and back
again with him in the barge, hearing him and the Duke talk, and seeing and
observing their manner of discourse.  And God forgive me! though I admire
them with all the duty possible, yet the more a man considers and observes
them, the less he finds of difference between them and other men, though
(blessed be God!) they are both princes of great nobleness and spirits.
The barge put me into another boat that come to our side, Mr. Holder with
a bag of gold to the Duke, and so they away and I home to the office.  The
Duke of Monmouth is the most skittish leaping gallant that ever I saw,
always in action, vaulting or leaping, or clambering.  Thence mighty full
of the honour of this day, I took coach and to Kate Joyce's, but she not
within, but spoke with Anthony, who tells me he likes well of my proposal
for Pall to Harman, but I fear that less than L500 will not be taken, and
that I shall not be able to give, though I did not say so to him.  After a
little other discourse and the sad news of the death of so many in the
parish of the plague, forty last night, the bell always going, I back to
the Exchange, where I went up and sat talking with my beauty, Mrs.
Batelier, a great while, who is indeed one of the finest women I ever saw
in my life. After buying some small matter, I home, and there to the
office and saw Sir J. Minnes now come from Portsmouth, I home to set my
Journall for these four days in order, they being four days of as great
content and honour and pleasure to me as ever I hope to live or desire, or
think any body else can live.  For methinks if a man would but reflect
upon this, and think that all these things are ordered by God Almighty to
make me contented, and even this very marriage now on foot is one of the
things intended to find me content in, in my life and matter of mirth,
methinks it should make one mightily more satisfied in the world than he
is.  This day poor Robin Shaw at Backewell's died, and Backewell himself
now in Flanders.  The King himself asked about Shaw, and being told he was
dead, said he was very sorry for it.  The sicknesse is got into our parish
this week, and is got, indeed, every where; so that I begin to think of
setting things in order, which I pray God enable me to put both as to soul
and body.

27th.  Called up at 4 o'clock.  Up and to my preparing some papers for
Hampton Court, and so by water to Fox Hall, and there Mr. Gauden's coach
took me up, and by and by I took up him, and so both thither, a brave
morning to ride in and good discourse with him.  Among others he begun
with me to speak of the Tangier Victuallers resigning their employment,
and his willingness to come on.  Of which I was glad, and took the
opportunity to answer him with all kindness and promise of assistance. He
told me a while since my Lord Berkeley did speak of it to him, and
yesterday a message from Sir Thomas Ingram.  When I come to Hampton Court
I find Sir T. Ingram and Creed ready with papers signed for the putting of
Mr. Gawden in, upon a resignation signed to by Lanyon and sent to Sir
Thos. Ingram.  At this I was surprized but yet was glad, and so it passed
but with respect enough to those that are in, at least without any thing
ill taken from it.  I got another order signed about the boats, which I
think I shall get something by.  So dispatched all my business, having
assurance of continuance of all hearty love from Sir W. Coventry, and so
we staid and saw the King and Queene set out toward Salisbury, and after
them the Duke and Duchesse, whose hands I did kiss.  And it was the first
time I did ever, or did see any body else, kiss her hand, and it was a
most fine white and fat hand.  But it was pretty to see the young pretty
ladies dressed like men, in velvet coats, caps with ribbands, and with
laced bands, just like men.  Only the Duchesse herself it did not become.
They gone, we with great content took coach again, and hungry come to
Clapham about one o'clock, and Creed there too before us, where a good
dinner, the house having dined, and so to walk up and down in the gardens,
mighty pleasant.  By and by comes by promise to me Sir G. Carteret, and
viewed the house above and below, and sat and drank there, and I had a
little opportunity to kiss and spend some time with the ladies above, his
daughter, a buxom lass, and his sister Fissant, a serious lady, and a
little daughter of hers, that begins to sing prettily.  Thence, with
mighty pleasure, with Sir G. Carteret by coach, with great discourse of
kindnesse with him to my Lord Sandwich, and to me also; and I every day
see more good by the alliance.  Almost at Deptford I 'light and walked
over to Half-way House, and so home, in my way being shown my cozen
Patience's house, which seems, at distance, a pretty house.  At home met
the weekly Bill, where above 1000 encreased in the Bill, and of them, in
all about 1,700 of the plague, which hath made the officers this day
resolve of sitting at Deptford, which puts me to some consideration what
to do.  Therefore home to think and consider of every thing about it, and
without determining any thing eat a little supper and to bed, full of the
pleasure of these 6 or 7 last days.

28th.  Up betimes, and down to Deptford, where, after a little discourse
with Sir G. Carteret, who is much displeased with the order of our
officers yesterday to remove the office to Deptford, pretending other
things, but to be sure it is with regard to his own house (which is much
because his family is going away).  I am glad I was not at the order
making, and so I will endeavour to alter it.  Set out with my Lady all
alone with her with six horses to Dagenhams; going by water to the Ferry.
And a pleasant going, and good discourse; and when there, very merry, and
the young couple now well acquainted.  But, Lord! to see in what fear all
the people here do live would make one mad, they are afeard of us that
come to them, insomuch that I am troubled at it, and wish myself away. But
some cause they have; for the chaplin, with whom but a week or two ago we
were here mighty high disputing, is since fallen into a fever and dead,
being gone hence to a friend's a good way off.  A sober and a healthful
man.  These considerations make us all hasten the marriage, and resolve it
upon Monday next, which is three days before we intended it. Mighty merry
all of us, and in the evening with full content took coach again and home
by daylight with great pleasure, and thence I down to Woolwich, where find
my wife well, and after drinking and talking a little we to bed.

29th.  Up betimes, and after viewing some of my wife's pictures, which now
she is come to do very finely to my great satisfaction beyond what I could
ever look for, I went away and by water to the office, where nobody to
meet me, but busy all the morning.  At noon to dinner, where I hear that
my Will is come in thither and laid down upon my bed, ill of the headake,
which put me into extraordinary fear; and I studied all I could to get him
out of the house, and set my people to work to do it without discouraging
him, and myself went forth to the Old Exchange to pay my fair Batelier for
some linnen, and took leave of her, they breaking up shop for a while; and
so by coach to Kate Joyce's, and there used all the vehemence and
rhetorique I could to get her husband to let her go down to Brampton, but
I could not prevail with him; he urging some simple reasons, but most that
of profit, minding the house, and the distance, if either of them should
be ill.  However, I did my best, and more than I had a mind to do, but
that I saw him so resolved against it, while she was mightily troubled at
it.  At last he yielded she should go to Windsor, to some friends there.
So I took my leave of them, believing that it is great odds that we ever
all see one another again; for I dare not go any more to that end of the
towne.  So home, and to writing of letters--hard, and then at night home,
and fell to my Tangier papers till late, and then to bed, in some ease of
mind that Will is gone to his lodging, and that he is likely to do well,
it being only the headake.

30th (Lord's day).  Up, and in my night gowne, cap and neckcloth,
undressed all day long, lost not a minute, but in my chamber, setting my
Tangier accounts to rights.  Which I did by night to my very heart's
content, not only that it is done, but I find every thing right, and even
beyond what, after so long neglecting them, I did hope for.  The Lord of
Heaven be praised for it!  Will was with me to-day, and is very well
again.  It was a sad noise to hear our bell to toll and ring so often
to-day, either for deaths or burials; I think five or six times.  At night
weary with my day's work, but full of joy at my having done it, I to bed,
being to rise betimes tomorrow to go to the wedding at Dagenhams. So to
bed, fearing I have got some cold sitting in my loose garments all this
day.

31st.  Up, and very betimes by six o'clock at Deptford, and there find Sir
G. Carteret, and my Lady ready to go: I being in my new coloured silk
suit, and coat trimmed with gold buttons and gold broad lace round my
hands, very rich and fine.  By water to the Ferry, where, when we come, no
coach there; and tide of ebb so far spent as the horse-boat could not get
off on the other side the river to bring away the coach.  So we were fain
to stay there in the unlucky Isle of Doggs, in a chill place, the morning
cool, and wind fresh, above two if not three hours to our great
discontent.  Yet being upon a pleasant errand, and seeing that it could
not be helped, we did bear it very patiently; and it was worth my
observing, I thought, as ever any thing, to see how upon these two scores,
Sir G. Carteret, the most passionate man in the world, and that was in
greatest haste to be gone, did bear with it, and very pleasant all the
while, at least not troubled much so as to fret and storm at it. Anon the
coach comes: in the mean time there coming a News thither with his horse
to go over, that told us he did come from Islington this morning; and that
Proctor the vintner of the Miter in Wood-street, and his son, are dead
this morning there, of the plague; he having laid out abundance of money
there, and was the greatest vintner for some time in London for great
entertainments.  We, fearing the canonicall hour would be past before we
got thither, did with a great deal of unwillingness send away the license
and wedding ring.  So that when we come, though we drove hard with six
horses, yet we found them gone from home; and going towards the church,
met them coming from church, which troubled us. But, however, that trouble
was soon over; hearing it was well done: they being both in their old
cloaths; my Lord Crew giving her, there being three coach fulls of them.
The young lady mighty sad, which troubled me; but yet I think it was only
her gravity in a little greater degree than usual.  All saluted her, but I
did not till my Lady Sandwich did ask me whether I had saluted her or no.
So to dinner, and very merry we were; but yet in such a sober way as never
almost any wedding was in so great families: but it was much better.
After dinner company divided, some to cards, others to talk.  My Lady
Sandwich and I up to settle accounts, and pay her some money.  And mighty
kind she is to me, and would fain have had me gone down for company with
her to Hinchingbroke; but for my life I cannot.  At night to supper, and
so to talk; and which, methought, was the most extraordinary thing, all of
us to prayers as usual, and the young bride and bridegroom too and so
after prayers, soberly to bed; only I got into the bridegroom's chamber
while he undressed himself, and there was very merry, till he was called
to the bride's chamber, and into bed they went.  I kissed the bride in
bed, and so the curtaines drawne with the greatest gravity that could be,
and so good night.  But the modesty and gravity of this business was so
decent, that it was to me indeed ten times more delightfull than if it had
been twenty times more merry and joviall.  Whereas I feared I must have
sat up all night, we did here all get good beds, and I lay in the same I
did before with Mr. Brisband, who is a good scholler and sober man; and we
lay in bed, getting him to give me an account of home, which is the most
delightfull talke a man can have of any traveller: and so to sleep.  My
eyes much troubled already with the change of my drink.  Thus I ended this
month with the greatest joy that ever I did any in my life, because I have
spent the greatest part of it with abundance of joy, and honour, and
pleasant journeys, and brave entertainments, and without cost of money;
and at last live to see the business ended with great content on all
sides.  This evening with Mr. Brisband, speaking of enchantments and
spells; I telling him some of my charms; he told me this of his owne
knowledge, at Bourdeaux, in France. The words these:

                         Voyci un Corps mort,
                         Royde come un Baston,
                         Froid comme Marbre,
                         Leger come un esprit,
                         Levons to au nom de Jesus Christ.

He saw four little girles, very young ones, all kneeling, each of them,
upon one knee; and one begun the first line, whispering in the eare of the
next, and the second to the third, and the third to the fourth, and she to
the first.  Then the first begun the second line, and so round quite
through, and, putting each one finger only to a boy that lay flat upon his
back on the ground, as if he was dead; at the end of the words, they did
with their four fingers raise this boy as high as they could reach, and he
[Mr. Brisband] being there, and wondering at it, as also being afeard to
see it, for they would have had him to have bore a part in saying the
words, in the roome of one of the little girles that was so young that
they could hardly make her learn to repeat the words, did, for feare there
might be some sleight used in it by the boy, or that the boy might be
light, call the cook of the house, a very lusty fellow, as Sir G.
Carteret's cook, who is very big, and they did raise him in just the same
manner.  This is one of the strangest things I ever heard, but he tells it
me of his owne knowledge, and I do heartily believe it to be true.  I
enquired of him whether they were Protestant or Catholique girles; and he
told me they were Protestant, which made it the more strange to me.  Thus
we end this month, as I said, after the greatest glut of content that ever
I had; only under some difficulty because of the plague, which grows
mightily upon us, the last week being about 1700 or 1800 of the plague.
My Lord Sandwich at sea with a fleet of about 100 sail, to the Northward,
expecting De Ruyter, or the Dutch East India fleet.  My Lord Hinchingbroke
coming over from France, and will meet his sister at Scott's-hall.  Myself
having obliged both these families in this business very much; as both my
Lady, and Sir G. Carteret and his Lady do confess exceedingly, and the
latter do also now call me cozen, which I am glad of.  So God preserve us
all friends long, and continue health among us.

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     About two o'clock, too late and too soon to go home to bed
     And all to dinner and sat down to the King saving myself
     Baseness and looseness of the Court
     Being able to do little business (but the less the better)
     Contracted for her as if he had been buying a horse
     Did bear with it, and very pleasant all the while
     Doubtfull whether her daughter will like of it or no
     Endeavouring to strike tallys for money for Tangier
     For, for her part, she should not be buried in the commons
     Had what pleasure almost I would with her
     Hath a good heart to bear, or a cunning one to conceal his evil
     I have promised, but know not when I shall perform
     I kissed the bride in bed, and so the curtaines drawne
     Less he finds of difference between them and other men
     Lord! in the dullest insipid manner that ever lover did
     Nan at Moreclacke, very much pleased and merry with her
     Not had the confidence to take his lady once by the hand
     Out of my purse I dare not for fear of a precedent
     Plague, forty last night, the bell always going
     Pretty to see the young pretty ladies dressed like men
     So to bed, to be up betimes by the helpe of a larum watch
     This absence makes us a little strange instead of more fond
     What silly discourse we had by the way as to love-matters


                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                 AUGUST
                                  1665

August 1st.  Slept, and lay long; then up and my Lord [Crew] and Sir G.
Carteret being gone abroad, I first to see the bridegroom and bride, and
found them both up, and he gone to dress himself.  Both red in the face,
and well enough pleased this morning with their night's lodging.  Thence
down and Mr. Brisband and I to billiards: anon come my Lord and Sir G.
Carteret in, who have been looking abroad and visiting some farms that Sir
G. Carteret hath thereabouts, and, among other things, report the greatest
stories of the bigness of the calfes they find there, ready to sell to the
butchers, as big, they say, as little Cowes, and that they do give them a
piece of chalke to licke, which they hold makes them white in the flesh
within.  Very merry at dinner, and so to talk and laugh after dinner, and
up and down, some to [one] place, some to another, full of content on all
sides.  Anon about five o'clock, Sir G. Carteret and his lady and I took
coach with the greatest joy and kindnesse that could be from the two
familys or that ever I saw with so much appearance, and, I believe,
reality in all my life.  Drove hard home, and it was night ere we got to
Deptford, where, with much kindnesse from them to me, I left them, and
home to the office, where I find all well, and being weary and sleepy, it
being very late, I to bed.

2nd.  Up, it being a publique fast, as being the first Wednesday of the
month, for the plague; I within doors all day, and upon my monthly
accounts late, and there to my great joy settled almost all my private
matters of money in my books clearly, and allowing myself several sums
which I had hitherto not reckoned myself sure of, because I would not be
over sure of any thing, though with reason I might do it, I did find
myself really worth L1900, for which the great God of Heaven and Earth be
praised!  At night to the office to write a few letters, and so home to
bed, after fitting myself for tomorrow's journey.

3rd.  Up, and betimes to Deptford to Sir G. Carteret's, where, not liking
the horse that had been hired by Mr. Uthwayt for me, I did desire Sir G.
Carteret to let me ride his new L40 horse, which he did, and so I left my
'hacquenee'--[Haquenee = an ambling nag fitted for ladies'
riding.]--behind, and so after staying a good while in their bedchamber
while they were dressing themselves, discoursing merrily, I parted and to
the ferry, where I was forced to stay a great while before I could get my
horse brought over, and then mounted and rode very finely to Dagenhams;
all the way people, citizens, walking to and again to enquire how the
plague is in the City this week by the Bill; which by chance, at
Greenwich, I had heard was 2,020 of the plague, and 3,000 and odd of all
diseases; but methought it was a sad question to be so often asked me.
Coming to Dagenhams, I there met our company coming out of the house,
having staid as long as they could for me; so I let them go a little
before, and went and took leave of my Lady Sandwich, good woman, who seems
very sensible of my service in this late business, and having her
directions in some things, among others, to get Sir G. Carteret and my
Lord to settle the portion, and what Sir G. Carteret is to settle, into
land, soon as may be, she not liking that it should lie long undone, for
fear of death on either side.  So took leave of her, and then down to the
buttery, and eat a piece of cold venison pie, and drank and took some
bread and cheese in my hand; and so mounted after them, Mr. Marr very
kindly staying to lead me the way.  By and by met my Lord Crew returning,
after having accompanied them a little way, and so after them, Mr. Marr
telling me by the way how a mayde servant of Mr. John Wright's (who lives
thereabouts) falling sick of the plague, she was removed to an out-house,
and a nurse appointed to look to her; who, being once absent, the mayde
got out of the house at the window, and run away.  The nurse coming and
knocking, and having no answer, believed she was dead, and went and told
Mr. Wright so; who and his lady were in great strait what to do to get her
buried. At last resolved to go to Burntwood hard by, being in the parish,
and there get people to do it.  But they would not; so he went home full
of trouble, and in the way met the wench walking over the common, which
frighted him worse than before; and was forced to send people to take her,
which he did; and they got one of the pest coaches and put her into it to
carry her to a pest house.  And passing in a narrow lane, Sir Anthony
Browne, with his brother and some friends in the coach, met this coach
with the curtains drawn close.  The brother being a young man, and
believing there might be some lady in it that would not be seen, and the
way being narrow, he thrust his head out of his own into her coach, and to
look, and there saw somebody look very ill, and in a sick dress, and stunk
mightily; which the coachman also cried out upon.  And presently they come
up to some people that stood looking after it, and told our gallants that
it was a mayde of Mr. Wright's carried away sick of the plague; which put
the young gentleman into a fright had almost cost him his life, but is now
well again.  I, overtaking our young people, 'light, and into the coach to
them, where mighty merry all the way; and anon come to the Blockehouse,
over against Gravesend, where we staid a great while, in a little
drinking-house.  Sent back our coaches to Dagenhams.  I, by and by, by
boat to Gravesend, where no newes of Sir G. Carteret come yet; so back
again, and fetched them all over, but the two saddle-horses that were to
go with us, which could not be brought over in the horseboat, the wind and
tide being against us, without towing; so we had some difference with some
watermen, who would not tow them over under 20s., whereupon I swore to
send one of them to sea and will do it.  Anon some others come to me and
did it for 10s.  By and by comes Sir G. Carteret, and so we set out for
Chatham: in my way overtaking some company, wherein was a lady, very
pretty, riding singly, her husband in company with her.  We fell into
talke, and I read a copy of verses which her husband showed me, and he
discommended, but the lady commended: and I read them, so as to make the
husband turn to commend them.  By and by he and I fell into acquaintance,
having known me formerly at the Exchequer.  His name is Nokes, over
against Bow Church.  He was servant to Alderman Dashwood. We promised to
meet, if ever we come both to London again; and, at parting, I had a fair
salute on horseback, in Rochester streets, of the lady, and so parted.
Come to Chatham mighty merry, and anon to supper, it being near 9 o'clock
ere we come thither.  My Lady Carteret come thither in a coach, by
herself, before us.  Great mind they have to buy a little 'hacquenee' that
I rode on from Greenwich, for a woman's horse. Mighty merry, and after
supper, all being withdrawn, Sir G. Carteret did take an opportunity to
speak with much value and kindness to me, which is of great joy to me.  So
anon to bed.  Mr. Brisband and I together to my content.

4th.  Up at five o'clock, and by six walked out alone, with my Lady
Slanning, to the Docke Yard, where walked up and down, and so to Mr.
Pett's, who led us into his garden, and there the lady, the best humoured
woman in the world, and a devout woman (I having spied her on her knees
half an houre this morning in her chamber), clambered up to the top of the
banquetting-house to gather nuts, and mighty merry, and so walked back
again through the new rope house, which is very usefull; and so to the
Hill-house to breakfast and mighty merry.  Then they took coach, and Sir
G. Carteret kissed me himself heartily, and my Lady several times, with
great kindnesse, and then the young ladies, and so with much joy, bade
"God be with you!" and an end I think it will be to my mirthe for a great
while, it having been the passage of my whole life the most pleasing for
the time, considering the quality and nature of the business, and my noble
usage in the doing of it, and very many fine journys, entertainments and
great company.  I returned into the house for a while to do business there
with Commissioner Pett, and there with the officers of the Chest, where I
saw more of Sir W. Batten's business than ever I did before, for whereas
he did own once under his hand to them that he was accountable for L2200,
of which he had yet paid but L1600, he writes them a letter lately that he
hath but about L50 left that is due to the Chest, but I will do something
in it and that speedily. That being done I took horse, and Mr. Barrow with
me bore me company to Gravesend, discoursing of his business, wherein I
vexed him, and he me, I seeing his frowardness, but yet that he is in my
conscience a very honest man, and some good things he told me, which I
shall remember to the King's advantage.  There I took boat alone, and, the
tide being against me, landed at Blackwall and walked to Wapping, Captain
Bowd whom I met with talking with me all the way, who is a sober man.  So
home, and found all things well, and letters from Dover that my Lord
Hinchingbroke is arrived at Dover, and would be at Scott's hall this
night, where the whole company will meet.  I wish myself with them.  After
writing a few letters I took boat and down to Woolwich very late, and
there found my wife and her woman upon the key hearing a fellow in a
barge, that lay by, fiddle.  So I to them and in, very merry, and to bed,
I sleepy and weary.

5th.  In the morning up, and my wife showed me several things of her
doing, especially one fine woman's Persian head mighty finely done, beyond
what I could expect of her; and so away by water, having ordered in the
yarde six or eight bargemen to be whipped, who had last night stolen some
of the King's cordage from out of the yarde.  I to Deptford, and there by
agreement met with my Lord Bruncker, and there we kept our office, he and
I, and did what there was to do, and at noon parted to meet at the office
next week.  Sir W. Warren and I thence did walk through the rain to
Half-Way House, and there I eat a piece of boiled beef and he and I talked
over several businesses, among others our design upon the mast docke,
which I hope to compass and get 2 or L300 by. Thence to Redriffe, where we
parted, and I home, where busy all the afternoon.  Stepped to Colvill's to
set right a business of money, where he told me that for certain De Ruyter
is come home, with all his fleete, which is very ill newes, considering
the charge we have been at in keeping a fleete to the northward so long,
besides the great expectation of snapping him, wherein my Lord Sandwich
will I doubt suffer some dishonour.  I am told also of a great ryott upon
Thursday last in Cheapside; Colonell Danvers, a delinquent, having been
taken, and in his way to the Tower was rescued from the captain of the
guard, and carried away; only one of the rescuers being taken.  I am told
also that the Duke of Buckingham is dead, but I know not of a certainty.
So home and very late at letters, and then home to supper and to bed.

6th (Lord's day).  Dressed and had my head combed by my little girle, to
whom I confess 'que je sum demasiado kind, nuper ponendo mes mains in su
des choses de son breast, mais il faut que je' leave it lest it bring me
to 'alcun major inconvenience'.  So to my business in my chamber, look
over and settling more of my papers than I could the two last days I have
spent about them.  In the evening, it raining hard, down to Woolwich,
where after some little talk to bed.

7th.  Up, and with great pleasure looking over my wife's pictures, and
then to see my Lady Pen, whom I have not seen since her coming hither, and
after being a little merry with her, she went forth and I staid there
talking with Mrs. Pegg and looking over her pictures, and commended them;
but, Lord! so far short of my wife's, as no comparison.  Thence to my
wife, and there spent, talking, till noon, when by appointment Mr. Andrews
come out of the country to speake with me about their Tangier business,
and so having done with him and dined, I home by water, where by
appointment I met Dr. Twisden, Mr. Povy, Mr. Lawson, and Stockdale about
settling their business of money; but such confusion I never met with, nor
could anything be agreed on, but parted like a company of fools, I vexed
to lose so much time and pains to no purpose.  They gone, comes Rayner,
the boatmaker, about some business, and brings a piece of plate with him,
which I refused to take of him, thinking indeed that the poor man hath no
reason nor encouragement from our dealings with him to give any of us any
presents.  He gone, there comes Luellin, about Mr. Deering's business of
planke, to have the contract perfected, and offers me twenty pieces in
gold, as Deering had done some time since himself, but I both then and now
refused it, resolving not to be bribed to dispatch business, but will have
it done however out of hand forthwith. So he gone, I to supper and to bed.

8th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning we sat.  At noon I home
to dinner alone, and after dinner Bagwell's wife waited at the door, and
went with me to my office .  .  .  .  So parted, and I to Sir W. Batten's,
and there sat the most of the afternoon talking and drinking too much with
my Lord Bruncker, Sir G. Smith, G. Cocke and others very merry.  I drunk a
little mixed, but yet more than I should do.  So to my office a little,
and then to the Duke of Albemarle's about some business. The streets
mighty empty all the way, now even in London, which is a sad sight.  And
to Westminster Hall, where talking, hearing very sad stories from Mrs.
Mumford; among others, of Mrs. Michell's son's family.  And poor Will,
that used to sell us ale at the Hall-door, his wife and three children
died, all, I think, in a day.  So home through the City again, wishing I
may have taken no ill in going; but I will go, I think, no more thither.
Late at the office, and then home to supper, having taken a pullet home
with me, and then to bed.  The news of De Kuyter's coming home is certain;
and told to the great disadvantage of our fleete, and the praise of De
Kuyter; but it cannot be helped, nor do I know what to say to it.

9th.  Up betimes to my office, where Tom Hater to the writing of letters
with me, which have for a good while been in arreare, and we close at it
all day till night, only made a little step out for half an houre in the
morning to the Exchequer about striking of tallys, but no good done
therein, people being most out of towne.  At noon T. Hater dined with me,
and so at it all the afternoon.  At night home and supped, and after
reading a little in Cowley's poems, my head being disturbed with overmuch
business to-day, I to bed.

10th.  Up betimes, and called upon early by my she-cozen Porter, the
turner's wife, to tell me that her husband was carried to the Tower, for
buying of some of the King's powder, and would have my helpe, but I could
give her none, not daring any more to appear in the business, having too
much trouble lately therein.  By and by to the office, where we sat all
the morning; in great trouble to see the Bill this week rise so high, to
above 4,000 in all, and of them above 3,000 of the plague.  And an odd
story of Alderman Bence's stumbling at night over a dead corps in the
streete, and going home and telling his wife, she at the fright, being
with child, fell sicke and died of the plague.  We sat late, and then by
invitation my Lord Brunker, Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Batten and I to Sir G.
Smith's to dinner, where very good company and good cheer.  Captain Cocke
was there and Jacke Fenn, but to our great wonder Alderman Bence, and
tells us that not a word of all this is true, and others said so too, but
by his owne story his wife hath been ill, and he fain to leave his house
and comes not to her, which continuing a trouble to me all the time I was
there.  Thence to the office and, after writing letters, home, to
draw-over anew my will, which I had bound myself by oath to dispatch by
to-morrow night; the town growing so unhealthy, that a man cannot depend
upon living two days to an end.  So having done something of it, I to bed.

11th.  Up, and all day long finishing and writing over my will twice, for
my father and my wife, only in the morning a pleasant rencontre happened
in having a young married woman brought me by her father, old Delkes, that
carries pins always in his mouth, to get her husband off that he should
not go to sea, 'une contre pouvait avoir done any cose cum else, but I did
nothing, si ni baisser her'.  After they were gone my mind run upon having
them called back again, and I sent a messenger to Blackwall, but he
failed.  So I lost my expectation.  I to the Exchequer, about striking new
tallys, and I find the Exchequer, by proclamation, removing to
Nonesuch.--[Nonsuch Palace, near Epsom, where the Exchequer money was kept
during the time of the plague.]--Back again and at my papers, and putting
up my books into chests, and settling my house and all things in the best
and speediest order I can, lest it should please God to take me away, or
force me to leave my house.  Late up at it, and weary and full of wind,
finding perfectly that so long as I keepe myself in company at meals and
do there eat lustily (which I cannot do alone, having no love to eating,
but my mind runs upon my business), I am as well as can be, but when I
come to be alone, I do not eat in time, nor enough, nor with any good
heart, and I immediately begin to be full of wind, which brings my pain,
till I come to fill my belly a-days again, then am presently well.

12th.  The office now not sitting, but only hereafter on Thursdays at the
office, I within all the morning about my papers and setting things still
in order, and also much time in settling matters with Dr. Twisden.  At
noon am sent for by Sir G. Carteret, to meet him and my Lord Hinchingbroke
at Deptford, but my Lord did not come thither, he having crossed the river
at Gravesend to Dagenhams, whither I dare not follow him, they being
afeard of me; but Sir G. Carteret says, he is a most sweet youth in every
circumstance.  Sir G. Carteret being in haste of going to the Duke of
Albemarle and the Archbishop, he was pettish, and so I could not fasten
any discourse, but take another time.  So he gone, I down to Greenwich and
sent away the Bezan, thinking to go with my wife to-night to come back
again to-morrow night to the Soveraigne at the buoy off the Nore.  Coming
back to Deptford, old Bagwell walked a little way with me, and would have
me in to his daughter's, and there he being gone 'dehors, ego had my
volunte de su hiza'.  Eat and drank and away home, and after a little at
the office to my chamber to put more things still in order, and late to
bed.  The people die so, that now it seems they are fain to carry the dead
to be buried by day-light, the nights not sufficing to do it in.  And my
Lord Mayor commands people to be within at nine at night all, as they say,
that the sick may have liberty to go abroad for ayre.  There is one also
dead out of one of our ships at Deptford, which troubles us mightily; the
Providence fire-ship, which was just fitted to go to sea.  But they tell
me to-day no more sick on board. And this day W. Bodham tells me that one
is dead at Woolwich, not far from the Rope-yard.  I am told, too, that a
wife of one of the groomes at Court is dead at Salsbury; so that the King
and Queene are speedily to be all gone to Milton.  God preserve us!

13th (Lord's day).  Up betimes and to my chamber, it being a very wet day
all day, and glad am I that we did not go by water to see "The Soveraigne"

     ["The Sovereign of the Seas" was built at Woolwich in 1637 of timber
     which had been stripped of its bark while growing in the spring, and
     not felled till the second autumn afterwards; and it is observed by
     Dr. Plot ("Phil.  Trans."  for 1691), in his discourse on the most
     seasonable time for felling timber, written by the advice of Pepys,
     that after forty-seven years, "all the ancient timber then remaining
     in her, it was no easy matter to drive a nail into it" ("Quarterly
     Review," vol. viii., p. 35).--B.]

to-day, as I intended, clearing all matters in packing up my papers and
books, and giving instructions in writing to my executors, thereby
perfecting the whole business of my will, to my very great joy; so that I
shall be in much better state of soul, I hope, if it should please the
Lord to call me away this sickly time.  At night to read, being weary with
this day's great work, and then after supper to bed, to rise betimes
to-morrow, and to bed with a mind as free as to the business of the world
as if I were not worth L100 in the whole world, every thing being evened
under my hand in my books and papers, and upon the whole I find myself
worth, besides Brampton estate, the sum of L2164, for which the Lord be
praised!

14th.  Up, and my mind being at mighty ease from the dispatch of my
business so much yesterday, I down to Deptford to Sir G. Carteret, where
with him a great while, and a great deale of private talke concerning my
Lord Sandwich's and his matters, and chiefly of the latter, I giving him
great deale of advice about the necessity of his having caution concerning
Fenn, and the many ways there are of his being abused by any man in his
place, and why he should not bring his son in to look after his business,
and more, to be a Commissioner of the Navy, which he listened to and
liked, and told me how much the King was his good Master, and was sure not
to deny him that or any thing else greater than that, and I find him a
very cunning man, whatever at other times he seems to be, and among other
things he told me he was not for the fanfaroone

     [Fanfaron, French, from fanfare, a sounding of trumpets; hence, a
     swaggerer, or empty boaster.]

to make a show with a great title, as he might have had long since, but
the main thing to get an estate; and another thing, speaking of minding of
business, "By God," says he, "I will and have already almost brought it to
that pass, that the King shall not be able to whip a cat, but I must be at
the tayle of it."  Meaning so necessary he is, and the King and my Lord
Treasurer and all do confess it; which, while I mind my business, is my
own case in this office of the Navy, and I hope shall be more, if God give
me life and health.  Thence by agreement to Sir J. Minnes's lodgings,
where I found my Lord Bruncker, and so by water to the ferry, and there
took Sir W. Batten's coach that was sent for us, and to Sir W. Batten's,
where very merry, good cheer, and up and down the garden with great
content to me, and, after dinner, beat Captain Cocke at billiards, won
about 8s. of him and my Lord Bruncker.  So in the evening after, much
pleasure back again and I by water to Woolwich, where supped with my wife,
and then to bed betimes, because of rising to-morrow at four of the clock
in order to the going out with Sir G. Carteret toward Cranborne to my Lord
Hinchingbrooke in his way to Court.  This night I did present my wife with
the dyamond ring, awhile since given me by Mr. Dicke Vines's brother, for
helping him to be a purser, valued at about L10, the first thing of that
nature I did ever give her.  Great fears we have that the plague will be a
great Bill this weeke.

15th.  Up by 4 o'clock and walked to Greenwich, where called at Captain
Cocke's and to his chamber, he being in bed, where something put my last
night's dream into my head, which I think is the best that ever was
dreamt, which was that I had my Lady Castlemayne in my armes and was
admitted to use all the dalliance I desired with her, and then dreamt that
this could not be awake, but that it was only a dream; but that since it
was a dream, and that I took so much real pleasure in it, what a happy
thing it would be if when we are in our graves (as Shakespeere resembles
it) we could dream, and dream but such dreams as this, that then we should
not need to be so fearful of death, as we are this plague time.  Here I
hear that news is brought Sir G. Carteret that my Lord Hinchingbrooke is
not well, and so cannot meet us at Cranborne to-night. So I to Sir G.
Carteret's; and there was sorry with him for our disappointment.  So we
have put off our meeting there till Saturday next. Here I staid talking
with Sir G. Carteret, he being mighty free with me in his business, and
among other things hath ordered Rider and Cutler to put into my hands
copper to the value of L5,000 (which Sir G. Carteret's share it seems come
to in it), which is to raise part of the money he is to layout for a
purchase for my Lady Jemimah.  Thence he and I to Sir J. Minnes's by
invitation, where Sir W. Batten and my Lady, and my Lord Bruncker, and all
of us dined upon a venison pasty and other good meat, but nothing well
dressed.  But my pleasure lay in getting some bills signed by Sir G.
Carteret, and promise of present payment from Mr. Fenn, which do rejoice
my heart, it being one of the heaviest things I had upon me, that so much
of the little I have should lie (viz. near L1000) in the King's hands.
Here very merry and (Sir G. Carteret being gone presently after dinner) to
Captain Cocke's, and there merry, and so broke up and I by water to the
Duke of Albemarle, with whom I spoke a great deale in private, they being
designed to send a fleete of ships privately to the Streights.  No news
yet from our fleete, which is much wondered at, but the Duke says for
certain guns have been heard to the northward very much.  It was dark
before I could get home, and so land at Church-yard stairs, where, to my
great trouble, I met a dead corps of the plague, in the narrow ally just
bringing down a little pair of stairs.  But I thank God I was not much
disturbed at it.  However, I shall beware of being late abroad again.

16th.  Up, and after doing some necessary business about my accounts at
home, to the office, and there with Mr. Hater wrote letters, and I did
deliver to him my last will, one part of it to deliver to my wife when I
am dead.  Thence to the Exchange, where I have not been a great while.
But, Lord! how sad a sight it is to see the streets empty of people, and
very few upon the 'Change.  Jealous of every door that one sees shut up,
lest it should be the plague; and about us two shops in three, if not
more, generally shut up.  From the 'Change to Sir G. Smith's' with Mr.
Fenn, to whom I am nowadays very complaisant, he being under payment of my
bills to me, and some other sums at my desire, which he readily do. Mighty
merry with Captain Cocke and Fenn at Sir G. Smith's, and a brave dinner,
but I think Cocke is the greatest epicure that is, eats and drinks with
the greatest pleasure and liberty that ever man did.  Very contrary newes
to-day upon the 'Change, some that our fleete hath taken some of the Dutch
East India ships, others that we did attaque it at Bergen and were
repulsed, others that our fleete is in great danger after this attaque by
meeting with the great body now gone out of Holland, almost 100 sayle of
men of warr.  Every body is at a great losse and nobody can tell.  Thence
among the goldsmiths to get some money, and so home, settling some new
money matters, and to my great joy have got home L500 more of the money
due to me, and got some more money to help Andrews first advanced.  This
day I had the ill news from Dagenhams, that my poor lord of Hinchingbroke
his indisposition is turned to the small-pox.  Poor gentleman! that he
should be come from France so soon to fall sick, and of that disease too,
when he should be gone to see a fine lady, his mistresse.  I am most
heartily sorry for it.  So late setting papers to rights, and so home to
bed.

17th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and at noon
dined together upon some victuals I had prepared at Sir W. Batten's upon
the King's charge, and after dinner, I having dispatched some business and
set things in order at home, we down to the water and by boat to Greenwich
to the Bezan yacht, where Sir W. Batten, Sir J. Minnes, my Lord Bruncker
and myself, with some servants (among others Mr. Carcasse, my Lord's
clerk, a very civil gentleman), embarked in the yacht and down we went
most pleasantly, and noble discourse I had with my Lord Bruneker, who is a
most excellent person.  Short of Gravesend it grew calme, and so we come
to an anchor, and to supper mighty merry, and after it, being moonshine,
we out of the cabbin to laugh and talk, and then, as we grew sleepy, went
in and upon velvet cushions of the King's that belong to the yacht fell to
sleep, which we all did pretty well till 3 or 4 of the clock, having risen
in the night to look for a new comet which is said to have lately shone,
but we could see no such thing.

18th.  Up about 5 o'clock and dressed ourselves, and to sayle again down
to the Soveraigne at the buoy of the Nore, a noble ship, now rigged and
fitted and manned; we did not stay long, but to enquire after her
readinesse and thence to Sheernesse, where we walked up and down, laying
out the ground to be taken in for a yard to lay provisions for cleaning
and repairing of ships, and a most proper place it is for the purpose.
Thence with great pleasure up the Meadeway, our yacht contending with
Commissioner Pett's, wherein he met us from Chatham, and he had the best
of it.  Here I come by, but had not tide enough to stop at Quinbrough, a
with mighty pleasure spent the day in doing all and seeing these places,
which I had never done before.  So to the Hill house at Chatham and there
dined, and after dinner spent some time discoursing of business.  Among
others arguing with the Commissioner about his proposing the laying out so
much money upon Sheerenesse, unless it be to the slighting of Chatham
yarde, for it is much a better place than Chatham, which however the King
is not at present in purse to do, though it were to be wished he were.
Thence in Commissioner Pett's coach (leaving them there).  I late in the
darke to Gravesend, where great is the plague, and I troubled to stay
there so long for the tide.  At 10 at night, having supped, I took boat
alone, and slept well all the way to the Tower docke about three o'clock
in the morning.  So knocked up my people, and to bed.

19th.  Slept till 8 o'clock, and then up and met with letters from the
King and Lord Arlington, for the removal of our office to Greenwich. I
also wrote letters, and made myself ready to go to Sir G. Carteret, at
Windsor; and having borrowed a horse of Mr. Blackbrough, sent him to wait
for me at the Duke of Albemarle's door: when, on a sudden, a letter comes
to us from the Duke of Albemarle, to tell us that the fleete is all come
back to Solebay, and are presently to be dispatched back again. Whereupon
I presently by water to the Duke of Albemarle to know what news; and there
I saw a letter from my Lord Sandwich to the Duke of Albemarle, and also
from Sir W. Coventry and Captain Teddiman; how my Lord having commanded
Teddiman with twenty-two ships

     [A news letter of August 19th (Salisbury), gives the following
     account of this affair:--"The Earl of Sandwich being on the Norway
     coast, ordered Sir Thomas Teddeman with 20 ships to attack 50 Dutch
     merchant ships in Bergen harbour; six convoyers had so placed
     themselves that only four or five of the ships could be reached at
     once.  The Governor of Bergen fired on our ships, and placed 100
     pieces of ordnance and two regiments of foot on the rocks to attack
     them, but they got clear without the loss of a ship, only 500 men
     killed or wounded, five or six captains among them. The fleet has
     gone to Sole Bay to repair losses and be ready to encounter the
     Dutch fleet, which is gone northward" ("Calendar of State Papers,"
     1664-65, pp. 526, 527).  Medals were struck in Holland, the
     inscription in Dutch on one of these is thus translated: "Thus we
     arrest the pride of the English, who extend their piracy even
     against their friends, and who insulting the forts of Norway,
     violate the rights of the harbours of King Frederick; but, for the
     reward of their audacity, see their vessels destroyed by the balls
     of the Dutch" (Hawkins's "Medallic Illustrations of the History of
     Great Britain and Ireland," ed.  Franks and Grueber, 1885, vol. i.,
     p. 508).  Sir Gilbert Talbot's "True Narrative of the Earl of
     Sandwich's Attempt upon Bergen with the English Fleet on the 3rd of
     August, 1665, and the Cause of his Miscarriage thereupon," is in the
     British Museum (Harl. MS., No. 6859).  It is printed in
     "Archaeologia," vol.  xxii., p. 33.  The Earl of Rochester also gave
     an account of the action in a letter to his mother (Wordsworth's
     "Ecclesiastical Biography," fourth edition, vol. iv., p. 611).  Sir
     John Denham, in his "Advice to a Painter," gives a long satirical
     account of the affair.  A coloured drawing of the attack upon
     Bergen, on vellum, showing the range of the ships engaged, is in the
     British Museum.  Shortly after the Bergen affair forty of the Dutch
     merchant vessels, on their way to Holland, fell into the hands of
     the English, and in Penn's "Memorials of Sir William Penn," vol.
     ii., p. 364, is a list of the prizes taken on the 3rd and 4th
     September.  The troubles connected with these prizes and the
     disgrace into which Lord Sandwich fell are fully set forth in
     subsequent pages of the Diary.  Evelyn writes in his Diary (November
     27th, 1665): "There was no small suspicion of my Lord Sandwich
     having permitted divers commanders who were at ye taking of ye East
     India prizes to break bulk and take to themselves jewels, silkes,
     &c., tho' I believe some whom I could name fill'd their pockets, my
     Lo. Sandwich himself had the least share.  However, he underwent the
     blame, and it created him enemies, and prepossess'd ye Lo. Generall
     [Duke of Albemarle], for he spake to me of it with much zeale and
     concerne, and I believe laid load enough on Lo.  Sandwich at
     Oxford."]

(of which but fifteen could get thither, and of those fifteen but eight or
nine could come up to play) to go to Bergen; where, after several messages
to and fro from the Governor of the Castle, urging that Teddiman ought not
to come thither with more than five ships, and desiring time to think of
it, all the while he suffering the Dutch ships to land their guns to their
best advantage; Teddiman on the second pretence, began to play at the
Dutch ships, (wherof ten East India-men,) and in three hours' time (the
town and castle, without any provocation, playing on our ships,) they did
cut all our cables, so as the wind being off the land, did force us to go
out, and rendered our fire-ships useless; without doing any thing, but
what hurt of course our guns must have done them: we having lost five
commanders, besides Mr. Edward Montagu, and Mr. Windham.

     [This Mr. Windham had entered into a formal engagement with the Earl
     of Rochester, "not without ceremonies of religion, that if either of
     them died, he should appear, and give the other notice of the future
     state, if there was any."  He was probably one of the brothers of
     Sir William Wyndham, Bart.  See Wordsworth's "Ecclesiastical
     Biography," fourth.  edition, vol. iv., p. 615.--B.]

Our fleete is come home to our great grief with not above five weeks' dry,
and six days' wet provisions: however, must out again; and the Duke hath
ordered the Soveraigne, and all other ships ready, to go out to the fleete
to strengthen them.  This news troubles us all, but cannot be helped.
Having read all this news, and received commands of the Duke with great
content, he giving me the words which to my great joy he hath several
times said to me, that his greatest reliance is upon me.  And my Lord
Craven also did come out to talk with me, and told me that I am in mighty
esteem with the Duke, for which I bless God.  Home, and having given my
fellow-officers an account hereof, to Chatham, and wrote other letters, I
by water to Charing-Cross, to the post-house, and there the people tell me
they are shut up; and so I went to the new post-house, and there got a
guide and horses to Hounslow, where I was mightily taken with a little
girle, the daughter of the master of the house (Betty Gysby), which, if
she lives, will make a great beauty.  Here I met with a fine fellow who,
while I staid for my horses, did enquire newes, but I could not make him
remember Bergen in Norway, in 6 or 7 times telling, so ignorant he was.
So to Stanes, and there by this time it was dark night, and got a guide
who lost his way in the forest, till by help of the moone (which
recompenses me for all the pains I ever took about studying of her
motions,) I led my guide into the way back again; and so we made a man
rise that kept a gate, and so he carried us to Cranborne.  Where in the
dark I perceive an old house new building with a great deal of rubbish,
and was fain to go up a ladder to Sir G. Carteret's chamber.  And there in
his bed I sat down, and told him all my bad newes, which troubled him
mightily; but yet we were very merry, and made the best of it; and being
myself weary did take leave, and after having spoken with Mr. Fenn in bed,
I to bed in my Lady's chamber that she uses to lie in, and where the
Duchesse of York, that now is, was born.  So to sleep; being very well,
but weary, and the better by having carried with me a bottle of strong
water; whereof now and then a sip did me good.

20th (Lord's day).  Sir G. Carteret come and walked by my bedside half an
houre, talking and telling me how my Lord is in this unblameable in all
this ill-successe, he having followed orders; and that all ought to be
imputed to the falsenesse of the King of Denmarke, who, he told me as a
secret, had promised to deliver up the Dutch ships to us, and we expected
no less; and swears it will, and will easily, be the ruine of him and his
kingdom, if we fall out with him, as we must in honour do; but that all
that can be, must be to get the fleete out again to intercept De Witt, who
certainly will be coming home with the East India ships, he being gone
thither.  He being gone, I up and with Fenn, being ready to walk forth to
see the place; and I find it to be a very noble seat in a noble forest,
with the noblest prospect towards Windsor, and round about over many
countys, that can be desired; but otherwise a very melancholy place, and
little variety save only trees.  I had thoughts of going home by water,
and of seeing Windsor Chappell and Castle, but finding at my coming in
that Sir G. Carteret did prevent me in speaking for my sudden return to
look after business, I did presently eat a bit off the spit about 10
o'clock, and so took horse for Stanes, and thence to Brainford to Mr.
Povy's, the weather being very pleasant to ride in.  Mr. Povy not being at
home I lost my labour, only eat and drank there with his lady, and told my
bad newes, and hear the plague is round about them there. So away to
Brainford; and there at the inn that goes down to the water-side, I 'light
and paid off my post-horses, and so slipped on my shoes, and laid my
things by, the tide not serving, and to church, where a dull sermon, and
many Londoners.  After church to my inn, and eat and drank, and so about
seven o'clock by water, and got between nine and ten to Queenhive, very
dark.  And I could not get my waterman to go elsewhere for fear of the
plague.  Thence with a lanthorn, in great fear of meeting of dead corpses,
carried to be buried; but, blessed be God, met none, but did see now and
then a linke (which is the mark of them) at a distance. So got safe home
about 10 o'clock, my people not all abed, and after supper I weary to bed.

21st.  Called up, by message from Lord Bruncker and the rest of my
fellows, that they will meet me at the Duke of Albemarle's this morning;
so I up, and weary, however, got thither before them, and spoke with my
Lord, and with him and other gentlemen to walk in the Parke, where, I
perceive, he spends much of his time, having no whither else to go; and
here I hear him speake of some Presbyter people that he caused to be
apprehended yesterday, at a private meeting in Covent Garden, which he
would have released upon paying L5 per man to the poor, but it was
answered, they would not pay anything; so he ordered them to another
prison from the guard.  By and by comes my fellow-officers, and the Duke
walked in, and to counsel with us; and that being done we departed, and
Sir W. Batten and I to the office, where, after I had done a little
business, I to his house to dinner, whither comes Captain Cocke, for whose
epicurisme a dish of partriges was sent for, and still gives me reason to
think is the greatest epicure in the world.  Thence, after dinner, I by
water to Sir W. Warren's and with him two hours, talking of things to his
and my profit, and particularly good advice from him what use to make of
Sir G. Carteret's kindnesse to me and my interest in him, with exceeding
good cautions for me not using it too much nor obliging him to fear by
prying into his secrets, which it were easy for me to do. Thence to my
Lord Bruncker, at Greenwich, and Sir J. Minnes by appointment, to looke
after the lodgings appointed for us there for our office, which do by no
means please me, they being in the heart of all the labourers and workmen
there, which makes it as unsafe as to be, I think, at London.  Mr. Hugh
May, who is a most ingenuous man, did show us the lodgings, and his
acquaintance I am desirous of.  Thence walked, it being now dark, to Sir
J. Minnes's, and there staid at the door talking with him an hour while
messengers went to get a boat for me, to carry me to Woolwich, but all to
no purpose; so I was forced to walk it in the darke, at ten o'clock at
night, with Sir J. Minnes's George with me, being mightily troubled for
fear of the doggs at Coome farme, and more for fear of rogues by the way,
and yet more because of the plague which is there, which is very strange,
it being a single house, all alone from the towne, but it seems they use
to admit beggars, for their owne safety, to lie in their barns, and they
brought it to them; but I bless God I got about eleven of the clock well
to my wife, and giving 4s. in recompence to George, I to my wife, and
having first viewed her last piece of drawing since I saw her, which is
seven or eight days, which pleases me beyond any thing in the world, to
bed with great content but weary.

22nd.  Up, and after much pleasant talke and being importuned by my wife
and her two mayds, which are both good wenches, for me to buy a necklace
of pearle for her, and I promising to give her one of L60 in two years at
furthest, and in less if she pleases me in her painting, I went away and
walked to Greenwich, in my way seeing a coffin with a dead body therein,
dead of the plague, lying in an open close belonging to Coome farme, which
was carried out last night, and the parish have not appointed any body to
bury it; but only set a watch there day and night, that nobody should go
thither or come thence, which is a most cruel thing: this disease making
us more cruel to one another than if we are doggs.  So to the King's
House, and there met my Lord Bruncker and Sir J. Minnes, and to our
lodgings again that are appointed for us, which do please me better to day
than last night, and are set a doing.  Thence I to Deptford, where by
appointment I find Mr. Andrews come, and to the Globe, where we dined
together and did much business as to our Plymouth gentlemen; and after a
good dinner and good discourse, he being a very good man, I think verily,
we parted and I to the King's yard, walked up and down, and by and by out
at the back gate, and there saw the Bagwell's wife's mother and daughter,
and went to them, and went in to the daughter's house with the mother, and
'faciebam le cose que ego tenebam a mind to con elle', and drinking and
talking, by and by away, and so walked to Redriffe, troubled to go through
the little lane, where the plague is, but did and took water and home,
where all well; but Mr. Andrews not coming to even accounts, as I
expected, with relation to something of my own profit, I was vexed that I
could not settle to business, but home to my viall, though in the evening
he did come to my satisfaction.  So after supper (he being gone first) I
to settle my journall and to bed.

23rd.  Up, and whereas I had appointed Mr. Hater and Will to come betimes
to the office to meet me about business there, I was called upon as soon
as ready by Mr. Andrews to my great content, and he and I to our Tangier
accounts, where I settled, to my great joy, all my accounts with him, and,
which is more, cleared for my service to the contractors since the last
sum I received of them, L222 13s. profit to myself, and received the money
actually in the afternoon.  After he was gone comes by a pretence of mine
yesterday old Delks the waterman, with his daughter Robins, and several
times to and again, he leaving her with me, about the getting of his son
Robins off, who was pressed yesterday again .  .  .  .  All the afternoon
at my office mighty busy writing letters, and received a very kind and
good one from my Lord Sandwich of his arrival with the fleete at Solebay,
and the joy he has at my last newes he met with, of the marriage of my
Lady Jemimah; and he tells me more, the good newes that all our ships,
which were in such danger that nobody would insure upon them, from the
Eastland,

     [Eastland was a name given to the eastern countries of Europe.  The
     Eastland Company, or Company of Merchants trading to the East
     Country, was incorporated in Queen Elizabeth's reign (anno 21), and
     the charter was confirmed 13 Car. II. They were also called "The
     Merchants of Elbing."]

were all safe arrived, which I am sure is a great piece of good luck,
being in much more danger than those of Hambrough which were lost, and
their value much greater at this time to us.  At night home, much
contented with this day's work, and being at home alone looking over my
papers, comes a neighbour of ours hard by to speak with me about business
of the office, one Mr. Fuller, a great merchant, but not my acquaintance,
but he come drunk, and would have had me gone and drunk with him at home,
or have let him send for wine hither, but I would do neither, nor offered
him any, but after some sorry discourse parted, and I up to [my] chamber
and to bed.

24th.  Up betimes to my office, where my clerks with me, and very busy all
the morning writing letters.  At noon down to Sir J. Minnes and Lord
Bruncker to Greenwich to sign some of the Treasurer's books, and there
dined very well; and thence to look upon our rooms again at the King's
house, which are not yet ready for us.  So home and late writing letters,
and so, weary with business, home to supper and to bed.

25th.  Up betimes to the office, and there, as well as all the afternoon,
saving a little dinner time, all alone till late at night writing letters
and doing business, that I may get beforehand with my business again,
which hath run behind a great while, and then home to supper and to bed.
This day I am told that Dr. Burnett, my physician, is this morning dead of
the plague; which is strange, his man dying so long ago, and his house
this month open again.  Now himself dead.  Poor unfortunate man!

26th.  Up betimes, and prepared to my great satisfaction an account for
the board of my office disbursements, which I had suffered to run on to
almost L120.  That done I down by water to Greenwich, where we met the
first day my Lord Bruncker, Sir J. Minnes, and I, and I think we shall do
well there, and begin very auspiciously to me by having my account
abovesaid passed, and put into a way of having it presently paid.  When we
rose I find Mr. Andrews and Mr. Yeabsly, who is just come from Plymouth,
at the door, and we walked together toward my Lord Brunker's, talking
about their business, Yeabsly being come up on purpose to discourse with
me about it, and finished all in a quarter of an hour, and is gone again.
I perceive they have some inclination to be going on with their
victualling-business for a while longer before they resign it to Mr.
Gauden, and I am well contented, for it brings me very good profit with
certainty, yet with much care and some pains.  We parted at my Lord
Bruncker's doore, where I went in, having never been there before, and
there he made a noble entertainment for Sir J. Minnes, myself, and Captain
Cocke, none else saving some painted lady that dined there, I know not who
she is.  But very merry we were, and after dinner into the garden, and to
see his and her chamber, where some good pictures, and a very handsome
young woman for my lady's woman.  Thence I by water home, in my way seeing
a man taken up dead, out of the hold of a small catch that lay at
Deptford.  I doubt it might be the plague, which, with the thought of Dr.
Burnett, did something disturb me, so that I did not what I intended and
should have done at the office, as to business, but home sooner than
ordinary, and after supper, to read melancholy alone, and then to bed.

27th (Lord's day).  Very well in the morning, and up and to my chamber all
the morning to put my things and papers yet more in order, and so to
dinner.  Thence all the afternoon at my office till late making up my
papers and letters there into a good condition of order, and so home to
supper, and after reading a good while in the King's works,--[Charles I.'s
Works, now in the Pepysian Library]--which is a noble book, to bed.

28th.  Up, and being ready I out to Mr. Colvill, the goldsmith's, having
not for some days been in the streets; but now how few people I see, and
those looking like people that had taken leave of the world.  I there, and
made even all accounts in the world between him and I, in a very good
condition, and I would have done the like with Sir Robert Viner, but he is
out of towne, the sicknesse being every where thereabouts.  I to the
Exchange, and I think there was not fifty people upon it, and but few more
like to be as they told me, Sir G. Smith and others.  Thus I think to take
adieu to-day of the London streets, unless it be to go again to Viner's.
Home to dinner, and there W. Hewer brings me L119 he hath received for my
office disbursements, so that I think I have L1800 and more in the house,
and, blessed be God! no money out but what I can very well command and
that but very little, which is much the best posture I ever was in in my
life, both as to the quantity and the certainty I have of the money I am
worth; having most of it in my own hand.  But then this is a trouble to me
what to do with it, being myself this day going to be wholly at Woolwich;
but for the present I am resolved to venture it in an iron chest, at least
for a while.  In the afternoon I sent down my boy to Woolwich with some
things before me, in order to my lying there for good and all, and so I
followed him.  Just now comes newes that the fleete is gone, or going this
day, out again, for which God be praised!  and my Lord Sandwich hath done
himself great right in it, in getting so soon out again.  I pray God, he
may meet the enemy.  Towards the evening, just as I was fitting myself,
comes W. Hewer and shows me a letter which Mercer had wrote to her mother
about a great difference between my wife and her yesterday, and that my
wife will have her go away presently.  This, together with my natural
jealousy that some bad thing or other may be in the way, did trouble me
exceedingly, so as I was in a doubt whether to go thither or no, but
having fitted myself and my things I did go, and by night got thither,
where I met my wife walking to the waterside with her paynter, Mr. Browne,
and her mayds.  There I met Commissioner Pett, and my Lord Brunker, and
the lady at his house had been thereto-day, to see her.  Commissioner Pett
staid a very little while, and so I to supper with my wife and Mr.
Shelden, and so to bed with great pleasure.

29th.  In the morning waking, among other discourse my wife begun to tell
me the difference between her and Mercer, and that it was only from
restraining her to gad abroad to some Frenchmen that were in the town,
which I do not wholly yet in part believe, and for my quiet would not
enquire into it.  So rose and dressed myself, and away by land walking a
good way, then remembered that I had promised Commissioner Pett to go with
him in his coach, and therefore I went back again to him, and so by his
coach to Greenwich, and called at Sir Theophilus Biddulph's, a sober,
discreet man, to discourse of the preventing of the plague in Greenwich,
and Woolwich, and Deptford, where in every place it begins to grow very
great.  We appointed another meeting, and so walked together to Greenwich
and there parted, and Pett and I to the office, where all the morning, and
after office done I to Sir J. Minnes and dined with him, and thence to
Deptford thinking to have seen Bagwell, but did not, and so straight to
Redriffe, and home, and late at my business to dispatch away letters, and
then home to bed, which I did not intend, but to have staid for altogether
at Woolwich, but I made a shift for a bed for Tom, whose bed is gone to
Woolwich, and so to bed.

30th.  Up betimes and to my business of settling my house and papers, and
then abroad and met with Hadley, our clerke, who, upon my asking how the
plague goes, he told me it encreases much, and much in our parish; for,
says he, there died nine this week, though I have returned but six: which
is a very ill practice, and makes me think it is so in other places; and
therefore the plague much greater than people take it to be.  Thence, as I
intended, to Sir R. Viner's, and there found not Mr. Lewes ready for me,
so I went forth and walked towards Moorefields to see (God forbid my
presumption!) whether I could see any dead corps going to the grave; but,
as God would have it, did not.  But, Lord! how every body's looks, and
discourse in the street is of death, and nothing else, and few people
going up and down, that the towne is like a place distressed and forsaken.
After one turne there back to Viner's, and there found my business ready
for me, and evened all reckonings with them to this day to my great
content.  So home, and all day till very late at night setting my Tangier
and private accounts in order, which I did in both, and in the latter to
my great joy do find myself yet in the much best condition that ever I was
in, finding myself worth L2180 and odd, besides plate and goods, which I
value at L250 more, which is a very great blessing to me. The Lord make me
thankfull! and of this at this day above L1800 in cash in my house, which
speaks but little out of my hands in desperate condition, but this is very
troublesome to have in my house at this time. So late to bed, well pleased
with my accounts, but weary of being so long at them.

31st.  Up and, after putting several things in order to my removal, to
Woolwich; the plague having a great encrease this week, beyond all
expectation of almost 2,000, making the general Bill 7,000, odd 100; and
the plague above 6,000.  I down by appointment to Greenwich, to our
office, where I did some business, and there dined with our company and
Sir W. Boreman, and Sir The. Biddulph, at Mr. Boreman's, where a good
venison pasty, and after a good merry dinner I to my office, and there
late writing letters, and then to Woolwich by water, where pleasant with
my wife and people, and after supper to bed.  Thus this month ends with
great sadness upon the publick, through the greatness of the plague every
where through the kingdom almost.  Every day sadder and sadder news of its
encrease.  In the City died this week 7,496 and of them 6,102 of the
plague.  But it is feared that the true number of the dead, this week is
near 10,000; partly from the poor that cannot be taken notice of, through
the greatness of the number, and partly from the Quakers and others that
will not have any bell ring for them.  Our fleete gone out to find the
Dutch, we having about 100 sail in our fleete, and in them the Soveraigne
one; so that it is a better fleete than the former with the Duke was. All
our fear is that the Dutch should be got in before them; which would be a
very great sorrow to the publick, and to me particularly, for my Lord
Sandwich's sake.  A great deal of money being spent, and the kingdom not
in a condition to spare, nor a parliament without much difficulty to meet
to give more.  And to that; to have it said, what hath been done by our
late fleetes?  As to myself I am very well, only in fear of the plague,
and as much of an ague by being forced to go early and late to Woolwich,
and my family to lie there continually.  My late gettings have been very
great to my great content, and am likely to have yet a few more profitable
jobbs in a little while; for which Tangier, and Sir W. Warren I am wholly
obliged to.

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     A fair salute on horseback, in Rochester streets, of the lady
     Bagwell's wife waited at the door, and went with me to my office
     Because I would not be over sure of any thing
     Being the first Wednesday of the month
     Bottle of strong water; whereof now and then a sip did me good
     Copper to the value of L5,000
     Disease making us more cruel to one another than if we are doggs
     Every body is at a great losse and nobody can tell
     Every body's looks, and discourse in the street is of death
     First thing of that nature I did ever give her (L10 ring)
     For my quiet would not enquire into it
     Give the other notice of the future state, if there was any
     His wife and three children died, all, I think, in a day
     How sad a sight it is to see the streets empty of people
     I met a dead corps of the plague, in the narrow ally
     In our graves (as Shakespeere resembles it) we could dream
     King is not at present in purse to do
     King shall not be able to whip a cat
     Not liking that it should lie long undone, for fear of death
     Ordered in the yarde six or eight bargemen to be whipped
     Pest coaches and put her into it to carry her to a pest house
     Quakers and others that will not have any bell ring for them
     Resolving not to be bribed to dispatch business
     Two shops in three, if not more, generally shut up
     Well enough pleased this morning with their night's lodging


                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                SEPTEMBER
                                  1665

September 1st.  Up, and to visit my Lady Pen and her daughter at the
Ropeyarde where I did breakfast with them and sat chatting a good while.
Then to my lodging at Mr. Shelden's, where I met Captain Cocke and eat a
little bit of dinner, and with him to Greenwich by water, having good
discourse with him by the way.  After being at Greenwich a little while, I
to London, to my house, there put many more things in order for my totall
remove, sending away my girle Susan and other goods down to Woolwich, and
I by water to the Duke of Albemarle, and thence home late by water.  At
the Duke of Albemarle's I overheard some examinations of the late plot
that is discoursed of and a great deale of do there is about it.  Among
other discourses, I heard read, in the presence of the Duke, an
examination and discourse of Sir Philip Howard's, with one of the plotting
party.  In many places these words being, "Then," said Sir P. Howard, "if
you so come over to the King, and be faithfull to him, you shall be
maintained, and be set up with a horse and armes," and I know not what.
And then said such a one, "Yes, I will be true to the King." "But, damn
me," said Sir Philip, "will you so and so?"  And thus I believe twelve
times Sir P. Howard answered him a "damn me," which was a fine way of
rhetorique to persuade a Quaker or Anabaptist from his persuasion.  And
this was read in the hearing of Sir P. Howard, before the Duke and twenty
more officers, and they make sport of it, only without any reproach, or he
being anything ashamed of it!

     [This republican plot was described by the Lord Chancellor in a
     speech delivered on October 9th, when parliament met at Oxford.]

But it ended, I remember, at last, "But such a one (the plotter) did at
last bid them remember that he had not told them what King he would be
faithfull to."

2nd.  This morning I wrote letters to Mr. Hill and Andrews to come to dine
with me to-morrow, and then I to the office, where busy, and thence to
dine with Sir J. Minnes, where merry, but only that Sir J. Minnes who hath
lately lost two coach horses, dead in the stable, has a third now a dying.
After dinner I to Deptford, and there took occasion to 'entrar a la casa
de la gunaica de ma Minusier', and did what I had a mind .  .  . To
Greenwich, where wrote some letters, and home in pretty good time.

3rd (Lord's day).  Up; and put on my coloured silk suit very fine, and my
new periwigg, bought a good while since, but durst not wear, because the
plague was in Westminster when I bought it; and it is a wonder what will
be the fashion after the plague is done, as to periwiggs, for nobody will
dare to buy any haire, for fear of the infection, that it had been cut off
of the heads of people dead of the plague.  Before church time comes Mr.
Hill (Mr. Andrews failing because he was to receive the Sacrament), and to
church, where a sorry dull parson, and so home and most excellent company
with Mr. Hill and discourse of musique.  I took my Lady Pen home, and her
daughter Pegg, and merry we were; and after dinner I made my wife show
them her pictures, which did mad Pegg Pen, who learns of the same man and
cannot do so well.  After dinner left them and I by water to Greenwich,
where much ado to be suffered to come into the towne because of the
sicknesse, for fear I should come from London, till I told them who I was.
So up to the church, where at the door I find Captain Cocke in my Lord
Brunker's coach, and he come out and walked with me in the church-yarde
till the church was done, talking of the ill government of our Kingdom,
nobody setting to heart the business of the Kingdom, but every body
minding their particular profit or pleasures, the King himself minding
nothing but his ease, and so we let things go to wracke.  This arose upon
considering what we shall do for money when the fleete comes in, and more
if the fleete should not meet with the Dutch, which will put a disgrace
upon the King's actions, so as the Parliament and Kingdom will have the
less mind to give more money, besides so bad an account of the last money,
we fear, will be given, not half of it being spent, as it ought to be,
upon the Navy.  Besides, it is said that at this day our Lord Treasurer
cannot tell what the profit of Chimney money is, what it comes to per
annum, nor looks whether that or any other part of the revenue be duly
gathered as it ought; the very money that should pay the City the L200,000
they lent the King, being all gathered and in the hands of the Receiver
and hath been long and yet not brought up to pay the City, whereas we are
coming to borrow 4 or L500,000 more of the City, which will never be lent
as is to be feared.  Church being done, my Lord Bruncker, Sir J. Minnes,
and I up to the Vestry at the desire of the justices of the Peace, Sir
Theo. Biddulph and Sir W. Boreman and Alderman Hooker, in order to the
doing something for the keeping of the plague from growing; but Lord! to
consider the madness of the people of the town, who will (because they are
forbid) come in crowds along with the dead corps to see them buried; but
we agreed on some orders for the prevention thereof.  Among other stories,
one was very passionate, methought, of a complaint brought against a man
in the towne for taking a child from London from an infected house.
Alderman Hooker told us it was the child of a very able citizen in
Gracious Street, a saddler, who had buried all the rest of his children of
the plague, and himself and wife now being shut up and in despair of
escaping, did desire only to save the life of this little child; and so
prevailed to have it received stark-naked into the arms of a friend, who
brought it (having put it into new fresh clothes) to Greenwich; where upon
hearing the story, we did agree it should be permitted to be received and
kept in the towne.  Thence with my Lord Bruncker to Captain Cocke's, where
we mighty merry and supped, and very late I by water to Woolwich, in great
apprehensions of an ague. Here was my Lord Bruncker's lady of pleasure,
who, I perceive, goes every where with him; and he, I find, is obliged to
carry her, and make all the courtship to her that can be.

4th.  Writing letters all the morning, among others to my Lady Carteret,
the first I have wrote to her, telling her the state of the city as to
health and other sorrowfull stories, and thence after dinner to Greenwich,
to Sir J. Minnes, where I found my Lord Bruncker, and having staid our
hour for the justices by agreement, the time being past we to walk in the
Park with Mr. Hammond and Turner, and there eat some fruit out of the
King's garden and walked in the Parke, and so back to Sir J. Minnes, and
thence walked home, my Lord Bruncker giving me a very neat cane to walk
with; but it troubled me to pass by Coome farme where about twenty-one
people have died of the plague, and three or four days since I saw a dead
corps in a coffin lie in the Close unburied, and a watch is constantly
kept there night and day to keep the people in, the plague making us
cruel, as doggs, one to another.

5th.  Up, and walked with some Captains and others talking to me to
Greenwich, they crying out upon Captain Teddiman's management of the
business of Bergen, that he staid treating too long while he saw the Dutch
fitting themselves, and that at first he might have taken every ship, and
done what he would with them.  How true I cannot tell.  Here we sat very
late and for want of money, which lies heavy upon us, did nothing of
business almost.  Thence home with my Lord Bruncker to dinner where very
merry with him and his doxy.  After dinner comes Colonell Blunt in his new
chariot made with springs; as that was of wicker, wherein a while since we
rode at his house.  And he hath rode, he says, now this journey, many
miles in it with one horse, and out-drives any coach, and out-goes any
horse, and so easy, he says.  So for curiosity I went into it to try it,
and up the hill to the heath, and over the cart-rutts and found it pretty
well, but not so easy as he pretends, and so back again, and took leave of
my Lord and drove myself in the chariot to the office, and there ended my
letters and home pretty betimes and there found W. Pen, and he staid
supper with us and mighty merry talking of his travells and the French
humours, etc., and so parted and to bed.

6th.  Busy all the morning writing letters to several, so to dinner, to
London, to pack up more things thence; and there I looked into the street
and saw fires burning in the street, as it is through the whole City, by
the Lord Mayor's order.  Thence by water to the Duke of Albemarle's: all
the way fires on each side of the Thames, and strange to see in broad
daylight two or three burials upon the Bankeside, one at the very heels of
another: doubtless all of the plague; and yet at least forty or fifty
people going along with every one of them.  The Duke mighty pleasant with
me; telling me that he is certainly informed that the Dutch were not come
home upon the 1st instant, and so he hopes our fleete may meet with them,
and here to my great joy I got him to sign bills for the several sums I
have paid on Tangier business by his single letter, and so now I can get
more hands to them.  This was a great joy to me: Home to Woolwich late by
water, found wife in bed, and yet late as [it] was to write letters in
order to my rising betimes to go to Povy to-morrow.  So to bed, my wife
asking me to-night about a letter of hers I should find, which indeed Mary
did the other day give me as if she had found it in my bed, thinking it
had been mine, brought to her from a man without name owning great
kindness to her and I know not what.  But looking it over seriously, and
seeing it bad sense and ill writ, I did believe it to be her brother's and
so had flung it away, but finding her now concerned at it and vexed with
Mary about it, it did trouble me, but I would take no notice of it
to-night, but fell to sleep as if angry.

7th.  Up by 5 of the clock, mighty full of fear of an ague, but was
obliged to go, and so by water, wrapping myself up warm, to the Tower, and
there sent for the Weekely Bill, and find 8,252 dead in all, and of them
6,878 of the plague; which is a most dreadfull number, and shows reason to
fear that the plague hath got that hold that it will yet continue among
us.  Thence to Brainford, reading "The Villaine," a pretty good play, all
the way.  There a coach of Mr. Povy's stood ready for me, and he at his
house ready to come in, and so we together merrily to Swakely, Sir R.
Viner's.  A very pleasant place, bought by him of Sir James Harrington's
lady.  He took us up and down with great respect, and showed us all his
house and grounds; and it is a place not very moderne in the garden nor
house, but the most uniforme in all that ever I saw; and some things to
excess.  Pretty to see over the screene of the hall (put up by Sir J.
Harrington, a Long Parliamentman) the King's head, and my Lord of Essex on
one side, and Fairfax on the other; and upon the other side of the
screene, the parson of the parish, and the lord of the manor and his
sisters.  The window-cases, door-cases, and chimnys of all the house are
marble.  He showed me a black boy that he had, that died of a consumption,
and being dead, he caused him to be dried in an oven, and lies there
entire in a box.  By and by to dinner, where his lady I find yet handsome,
but hath been a very handsome woman; now is old.  Hath brought him near
L100,000 and now he lives, no man in England in greater plenty, and
commands both King and Council with his credit he gives them. Here was a
fine lady a merchant's wife at dinner with us, and who should be here in
the quality of a woman but Mrs. Worship's daughter, Dr. Clerke's niece,
and after dinner Sir Robert led us up to his long gallery, very fine,
above stairs (and better, or such, furniture I never did see), and there
Mrs. Worship did give us three or four very good songs, and sings very
neatly, to my great delight.  After all this, and ending the chief
business to my content about getting a promise of some money of him, we
took leave, being exceedingly well treated here, and a most pleasant
journey we had back, Povy and I, and his company most excellent in
anything but business, he here giving me an account of as many persons at
Court as I had a mind or thought of enquiring after.  He tells me by a
letter he showed me, that the King is not, nor hath been of late, very
well, but quite out of humour; and, as some think, in a consumption, and
weary of every thing.  He showed me my Lord Arlington's house that he was
born in, in a towne called Harlington: and so carried me through a most
pleasant country to Brainford, and there put me into my boat, and good
night.  So I wrapt myself warm, and by water got to Woolwich about one in
the morning, my wife and all in bed.

8th.  Waked, and fell in talk with my wife about the letter, and she
satisfied me that she did not know from whence it come, but believed it
might be from her cozen Franke Moore lately come out of France.  The truth
is the thing I think cannot have much in it, and being unwilling (being in
other things so much at ease) to vex myself in a strange place at a
melancholy time, passed all by and were presently friends.  Up, and
several with me about business.  Anon comes my Lord Bruncker, as I
expected, and we to the enquiring into the business of the late desertion
of the Shipwrights from worke, who had left us for three days together for
want of money, and upon this all the morning, and brought it to a pretty
good issue, that they, we believe, will come to-morrow to work. To dinner,
having but a mean one, yet sufficient for him, and he well enough pleased,
besides that I do not desire to vye entertainments with him or any else.
Here was Captain Cocke also, and Mr. Wayth.  We staid together talking
upon one business or other all the afternoon.  In the evening my Lord
Bruncker hearing that Mr. Ackeworth's clerke, the Dutchman who writes and
draws so well, was transcribing a book of Rates and our ships for Captain
Millet a gallant of his mistress's, we sent for him for it.  He would not
deliver it, but said it was his mistress's and had delivered it to her.
At last we were forced to send to her for it; she would come herself, and
indeed the book was a very neat one and worth keeping as a rarity, but we
did think fit, and though much against my will, to cancell all that he had
finished of it, and did give her the rest, which vexed her, and she bore
it discreetly enough, but with a cruel deal of malicious rancour in her
looks.  I must confess I would have persuaded her to have let us have it
to the office, and it may be the board would not have censured too hardly
of it, but my intent was to have had it as a Record for the office, but
she foresaw what would be the end of it and so desired it might rather be
cancelled, which was a plaguy deal of spite.  My Lord Bruncker being gone
and company, and she also, afterwards I took my wife and people and walked
into the fields about a while till night, and then home, and so to sing a
little and then to bed. I was in great trouble all this day for my boy Tom
who went to Greenwich yesterday by my order and come not home till
to-night for fear of the plague, but he did come home to-night, saying he
staid last night by Mr. Hater's advice hoping to have me called as I come
home with my boat to come along with me.

9th.  Up and walked to Greenwich, and there we sat and dispatched a good
deal of business I had a mind to.  At noon, by invitation, to my Lord
Bruncker's, all of us, to dinner, where a good venison pasty, and mighty
merry.  Here was Sir W. Doyly, lately come from Ipswich about the sicke
and wounded, and Mr. Evelyn and Captain Cocke.  My wife also was sent for
by my Lord Bruncker, by Cocke, and was here.  After dinner, my Lord and
his mistress would see her home again, it being a most cursed rainy
afternoon, having had none a great while before, and I, forced to go to
the office on foot through all the rain, was almost wet to my skin, and
spoiled my silke breeches almost.  Rained all the afternoon and evening,
so as my letters being done, I was forced to get a bed at Captain Cocke's,
where I find Sir W. Doyly, and he, and Evelyn at supper; and I with them
full of discourse of the neglect of our masters, the great officers of
State, about all business, and especially that of money: having now some
thousands prisoners, kept to no purpose at a great charge, and no money
provided almost for the doing of it.  We fell to talk largely of the want
of some persons understanding to look after businesses, but all goes to
rack.  "For," says Captain Cocke, "my Lord Treasurer, he minds his ease,
and lets things go how they will: if he can have his L8000 per annum, and
a game at l'ombre,--[Spanish card game]--he is well.  My Lord Chancellor
he minds getting of money and nothing else; and my Lord Ashly will rob the
Devil and the Alter, but he will get money if it be to be got."  But that
that put us into this great melancholy, was newes brought to-day, which
Captain Cocke reports as a certain truth, that all the Dutch fleete,
men-of-war and merchant East India ships, are got every one in from Bergen
the 3d of this month, Sunday last; which will make us all ridiculous.  The
fleete come home with shame to require a great deale of money, which is
not to be had, to discharge many men that must get the plague then or
continue at greater charge on shipboard, nothing done by them to encourage
the Parliament to give money, nor the Kingdom able to spare any money, if
they would, at this time of the plague, so that, as things look at
present, the whole state must come to ruine.  Full of these melancholy
thoughts, to bed; where, though I lay the softest I ever did in my life,
with a downe bed, after the Danish manner, upon me, yet I slept very ill,
chiefly through the thoughts of my Lord Sandwich's concernment in all this
ill successe at sea.

10th (Lord's day).  Walked home; being forced thereto by one of my
watermen falling sick yesterday, and it was God's great mercy I did not go
by water with them yesterday, for he fell sick on Saturday night, and it
is to be feared of the plague.  So I sent him away to London with his
fellow; but another boat come to me this morning, whom I sent to
Blackewall for Mr. Andrews.  I walked to Woolwich, and there find Mr.
Hill, and he and I all the morning at musique and a song he hath set of
three parts, methinks, very good.  Anon comes Mr. Andrews, though it be a
very ill day, and so after dinner we to musique and sang till about 4 or 5
o'clock, it blowing very hard, and now and then raining, and wind and tide
being against us, Andrews and I took leave and walked to Greenwich. My
wife before I come out telling me the ill news that she hears that her
father is very ill, and then I told her I feared of the plague, for that
the house is shut up.  And so she much troubled she did desire me to send
them something; and I said I would, and will do so.  But before I come out
there happened newes to come to the by an expresse from Mr. Coventry,
telling me the most happy news of my Lord Sandwich's meeting with part of
the Dutch; his taking two of their East India ships, and six or seven
others, and very good prizes and that he is in search of the rest of the
fleet, which he hopes to find upon the Wellbancke, with the loss only of
the Hector, poor Captain Cuttle.  This newes do so overjoy me that I know
not what to say enough to express it, but the better to do it I did walk
to Greenwich, and there sending away Mr. Andrews, I to Captain Cocke's,
where I find my Lord Bruncker and his mistress, and Sir J. Minnes.  Where
we supped (there was also Sir W. Doyly and Mr. Evelyn); but the receipt of
this newes did put us all into such an extacy of joy, that it inspired
into Sir J. Minnes and Mr. Evelyn such a spirit of mirth, that in all my
life I never met with so merry a two hours as our company this night was.
Among other humours, Mr. Evelyn's repeating of some verses made up of
nothing but the various acceptations of may and can, and doing it so aptly
upon occasion of something of that nature, and so fast, did make us all
die almost with laughing, and did so stop the mouth of Sir J. Minnes in
the middle of all his mirth (and in a thing agreeing with his own manner
of genius), that I never saw any man so out-done in all my life; and Sir
J. Minnes's mirth too to see himself out-done, was the crown of all our
mirth.  In this humour we sat till about ten at night, and so my Lord and
his mistress home, and we to bed, it being one of the times of my life
wherein I was the fullest of true sense of joy.

11th.  Up and walked to the office, there to do some business till ten of
the clock, and then by agreement my Lord, Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Doyly, and
I took boat and over to the ferry, where Sir W. Batten's coach was ready
for us, and to Walthamstow drove merrily, excellent merry discourse in the
way, and most upon our last night's revells; there come we were very
merry, and a good plain venison dinner.  After dinner to billiards, where
I won an angel,

     [A gold coin, so called because it bore the image of an angel,
     varying in value from six shillings and eightpence to ten
     shillings.]

and among other sports we were merry with my pretending to have a warrant
to Sir W. Hickes (who was there, and was out of humour with Sir W. Doyly's
having lately got a warrant for a leash of buckes, of which we were now
eating one) which vexed him, and at last would compound with me to give my
Lord Bruncker half a buck now, and me a Doe for it a while hence when the
season comes in, which we agreed to and had held, but that we fear Sir W.
Doyly did betray our design, which spoiled all; however, my Lady Batten
invited herself to dine with him this week, and she invited us all to dine
with her there, which we agreed to, only to vex him, he being the most
niggardly fellow, it seems, in the world.  Full of good victuals and mirth
we set homeward in the evening, and very merry all the way.  So to
Greenwich, where when come I find my Lord Rutherford and Creed come from
Court, and among other things have brought me several orders for money to
pay for Tangier; and, among the rest L7000 and more, to this Lord, which
is an excellent thing to consider, that, though they can do nothing else,
they can give away the King's money upon their progresse.  I did give him
the best answer I could to pay him with tallys, and that is all they could
get from me.  I was not in humour to spend much time with them, but walked
a little before Sir J. Minnes's door and then took leave, and I by water
to Woolwich, where with my wife to a game at tables,

     [The old name for backgammon, used by Shakespeare and others.  The
     following lines are from an epitaph entirely made up of puns on
     backgammon

              "Man's life's a game at tables, and he may
               Mend his bad fortune by his wiser play."

                              Wit's Recre., i. 250, reprint, 1817.]

and to bed.

12th.  Up, and walked to the office, where we sat late, and thence to
dinner home with Sir J. Minnes, and so to the office, where writing
letters, and home in the evening, where my wife shews me a letter from her
brother speaking of their father's being ill, like to die, which, God
forgive me! did not trouble me so much as it should, though I was indeed
sorry for it.  I did presently resolve to send him something in a letter
from my wife, viz. 20s.  So to bed.

13th.  Up, and walked to Greenwich, taking pleasure to walk with my minute
watch in my hand, by which I am come now to see the distances of my way
from Woolwich to Greenwich, and do find myself to come within two minutes
constantly to the same place at the end of each quarter of an houre.  Here
we rendezvoused at Captain Cocke's, and there eat oysters, and so my Lord
Bruncker, Sir J. Minnes, and I took boat, and in my Lord's coach to Sir W.
Hickes's, whither by and by my Lady Batten and Sir William comes.  It is a
good seat, with a fair grove of trees by it, and the remains of a good
garden; but so let to run to ruine, both house and every thing in and
about it, so ill furnished and miserably looked after, I never did see in
all my life.  Not so much as a latch to his dining-room door; which saved
him nothing, for the wind blowing into the room for want thereof, flung
down a great bow pott that stood upon the side-table, and that fell upon
some Venice glasses, and did him a crown's worth of hurt.  He did give us
the meanest dinner (of beef, shoulder and umbles of venison

     [Dr. Johnson was puzzled by the following passage in "The Merry
     Wives of Windsor," act v., sc. 3: "Divide me like a bribe-buck, each
     a haunch.  I will keep the sides to myself; my shoulders for the
     fellow of this walk."  If he could have read the account of Sir
     William Hickes's dinner, he would at once have understood the
     allusion to the keeper's perquisites of the shoulders of all deer
     killed in his walk.--B.]

which he takes away from the keeper of the Forest, and a few pigeons, and
all in the meanest manner) that ever I did see, to the basest degree.
After dinner we officers of the Navy stepped aside to read some letters
and consider some business, and so in again.  I was only pleased at a very
fine picture of the Queene-Mother, when she was young, by Van-Dike; a very
good picture, and a lovely sweet face.  Thence in the afternoon home, and
landing at Greenwich I saw Mr. Pen walking my way, so we walked together,
and for discourse I put him into talk of France, when he took delight to
tell me of his observations, some good, some impertinent, and all ill
told, but it served for want of better, and so to my house, where I find
my wife abroad, and hath been all this day, nobody knows where, which
troubled me, it being late and a cold evening.  So being invited to his
mother's to supper, we took Mrs. Barbara, who was mighty finely dressed,
and in my Lady's coach, which we met going for my wife, we thither, and
there after some discourse went to supper.  By and by comes my wife and
Mercer, and had been with Captain Cocke all day, he coming and taking her
out to go see his boy at school at Brumly [Bromley], and brought her home
again with great respect.  Here pretty merry, only I had no stomach,
having dined late, to eat.  After supper Mr. Pen and I fell to discourse
about some words in a French song my wife was saying, "D'un air tout
interdict," wherein I laid twenty to one against him which he would not
agree with me, though I know myself in the right as to the sense of the
word, and almost angry we were, and were an houre and more upon the
dispute, till at last broke up not satisfied, and so home in their coach
and so to bed.  H. Russell did this day deliver my 20s. to my wife's
father or mother, but has not yet told us how they do.

14th.  Up, and walked to Greenwich, and there fitted myself in several
businesses to go to London, where I have not been now a pretty while. But
before I went from the office newes is brought by word of mouth that
letters are now just now brought from the fleete of our taking a great
many more of the Dutch fleete, in which I did never more plainly see my
command of my temper in my not admitting myself to receive any kind of joy
from it till I had heard the certainty of it, and therefore went by water
directly to the Duke of Albemarle, where I find a letter of the Lath from
Solebay, from my Lord Sandwich, of the fleete's meeting with about
eighteen more of the Dutch fleete, and his taking of most of them; and the
messenger says, they had taken three after the letter was wrote and
sealed; which being twenty-one, and the fourteen took the other day, is
forty-five sail; some of which are good, and others rich ships, which is
so great a cause of joy in us all that my Lord and everybody is highly
joyed thereat.  And having taken a copy of my Lord's letter, I away back
again to the Beare at the Bridge foot, being full of wind and out of
order, and there called for a biscuit and a piece of cheese and gill of
sacke, being forced to walk over the Bridge, toward the 'Change, and the
plague being all thereabouts.  Here my news was highly welcome, and I did
wonder to see the 'Change so full, I believe 200 people; but not a man or
merchant of any fashion, but plain men all.  And Lord! to see how I did
endeavour all I could to talk with as few as I could, there being now no
observation of shutting up of houses infected, that to be sure we do
converse and meet with people that have the plague upon them.  I to Sir
Robert Viner's, where my main business was about settling the business of
Debusty's L5000 tallys, which I did for the present to enable me to have
some money, and so home, buying some things for my wife in the way.  So
home, and put up several things to carry to Woolwich, and upon serious
thoughts I am advised by W. Griffin to let my money and plate rest there,
as being as safe as any place, nobody imagining that people would leave
money in their houses now, when all their families are gone.  So for the
present that being my opinion, I did leave them there still.  But, Lord!
to see the trouble that it puts a man to, to keep safe what with pain a
man hath been getting together, and there is good reason for it.  Down to
the office, and there wrote letters to and again about this good newes of
our victory, and so by water home late.  Where, when I come home I spent
some thoughts upon the occurrences of this day, giving matter for as much
content on one hand and melancholy on another, as any day in all my life.
For the first; the finding of my money and plate, and all safe at London,
and speeding in my business of money this day.  The hearing of this good
news to such excess, after so great a despair of my Lord's doing anything
this year; adding to that, the decrease of 500 and more, which is the
first decrease we have yet had in the sickness since it begun: and great
hopes that the next week it will be greater.  Then, on the other side, my
finding that though the Bill in general is abated, yet the City within the
walls is encreased, and likely to continue so, and is close to our house
there.  My meeting dead corpses of the plague, carried to be buried close
to me at noon-day through the City in Fanchurch-street.  To see a person
sick of the sores, carried close by me by Gracechurch in a hackney-coach.
My finding the Angell tavern, at the lower end of Tower-hill, shut up, and
more than that, the alehouse at the Tower-stairs, and more than that, the
person was then dying of the plague when I was last there, a little while
ago, at night, to write a short letter there, and I overheard the
mistresse of the house sadly saying to her husband somebody was very ill,
but did not think it was of the plague.  To hear that poor Payne, my
waiter, hath buried a child, and is dying himself.  To hear that a
labourer I sent but the other day to Dagenhams, to know how they did
there, is dead of the plague; and that one of my own watermen, that
carried me daily, fell sick as soon as he had landed me on Friday morning
last, when I had been all night upon the water (and I believe he did get
his infection that day at Brainford), and is now dead of the plague.  To
hear that Captain Lambert and Cuttle are killed in the taking these ships;
and that Mr. Sidney Montague is sick of a desperate fever at my Lady
Carteret's, at Scott's-hall.  To hear that Mr. Lewes hath another daughter
sick.  And, lastly, that both my servants, W. Hewer and Tom Edwards, have
lost their fathers, both in St. Sepulchre's parish, of the plague this
week, do put me into great apprehensions of melancholy, and with good
reason.  But I put off the thoughts of sadness as much as I can, and the
rather to keep my wife in good heart and family also.  After supper
(having eat nothing all this day) upon a fine tench of Mr. Shelden's
taking, we to bed.

15th.  Up, it being a cold misting morning, and so by water to the office,
where very busy upon several businesses.  At noon got the messenger,
Marlow, to get me a piece of bread and butter and cheese and a bottle of
beer and ale, and so I went not out of the office but dined off that, and
my boy Tom, but the rest of my clerks went home to dinner. Then to my
business again, and by and by sent my waterman to see how Sir W. Warren
do, who is sicke, and for which I have reason to be very sorry, he being
the friend I have got most by of most friends in England but the King: who
returns me that he is pretty well again, his disease being an ague.  I by
water to Deptford, thinking to have seen my valentine, but I could not,
and so come back again, and to the office, where a little business, and
thence with Captain Cocke, and there drank a cup of good drink, which I am
fain to allow myself during this plague time, by advice of all, and not
contrary to my oathe, my physician being dead, and chyrurgeon out of the
way, whose advice I am obliged to take, and so by water home and eat my
supper, and to bed, being in much pain to think what I shall do this
winter time; for go every day to Woolwich I cannot, without endangering my
life; and staying from my wife at Greenwich is not handsome.

16th.  Up, and walked to Greenwich reading a play, and to the office,
where I find Sir J. Minnes gone to the fleete, like a doating foole, to do
no good, but proclaim himself an asse; for no service he can do there, nor
inform my Lord, who is come in thither to the buoy of the Nore, in
anything worth his knowledge.  At noon to dinner to my Lord Bruncker,
where Sir W. Batten and his Lady come, by invitation, and very merry we
were, only that the discourse of the likelihood of the increase of the
plague this weeke makes us a little sad, but then again the thoughts of
the late prizes make us glad.  After dinner, by appointment, comes Mr.
Andrews, and he and I walking alone in the garden talking of our Tangier
business, and I endeavoured by the by to offer some encouragements for
their continuing in the business, which he seemed to take hold of, and the
truth is my profit is so much concerned that I could wish they would, and
would take pains to ease them in the business of money as much as was
possible.  He being gone (after I had ordered him L2000, and he paid me my
quantum out of it) I also walked to the office, and there to my business;
but find myself, through the unfitness of my place to write in, and my
coming from great dinners, and drinking wine, that I am not in the good
temper of doing business now a days that I used to be and ought still to
be.  At night to Captain Cocke's, meaning to lie there, it being late, and
he not being at home, I walked to him to my Lord Bruncker's, and there
staid a while, they being at tables; and so by and by parted, and walked
to his house; and, after a mess of good broth, to bed, in great pleasure,
his company being most excellent.

17th (Lord's day).  Up, and before I went out of my chamber did draw a
musique scale, in order to my having it at any time ready in my hand to
turn to for exercise, for I have a great mind in this Vacation to perfect
myself in my scale, in order to my practising of composition, and so that
being done I down stairs, and there find Captain Cocke under the barber's
hands, the barber that did heretofore trim Commissioner Pett, and with
whom I have been.  He offered to come this day after dinner with his
violin to play me a set of Lyra-ayres upon it, which I was glad of, hoping
to be merry thereby.  Being ready we to church, where a company of fine
people to church, and a fine Church, and very good sermon, Mr. Plume'
being a very excellent scholler and preacher.  Coming out of the church I
met Mrs. Pierce, whom I was ashamed to see, having not been with her since
my coming to town, but promised to visit her.  Thence with Captain Cocke,
in his coach, home to dinner, whither comes by invitation my Lord Bruncker
and his mistresse and very good company we were, but in dinner time comes
Sir J. Minnes from the fleete, like a simple weak man, having nothing to
say of what he hath done there, but tells of what value he imagines the
prizes to be, and that my Lord Sandwich is well, and mightily concerned to
hear that I was well.  But this did put me upon a desire of going thither;
and, moving of it to my Lord, we presently agreed upon it to go this very
tide, we two and Captain Cocke.  So every body prepared to fit himself for
his journey, and I walked to Woolwich to trim and shift myself, and by the
time I was ready they come down in the Bezan yacht, and so I aboard and my
boy Tom, and there very merrily we sailed to below Gravesend, and there
come to anchor for all night, and supped and talked, and with much
pleasure at last settled ourselves to sleep having very good lodging upon
cushions in the cabbin.

18th.  By break of day we come to within sight of the fleete, which was a
very fine thing to behold, being above 100 ships, great and small; with
the flag-ships of each squadron, distinguished by their several flags on
their main, fore, or mizen masts.  Among others, the Soveraigne, Charles,
and Prince; in the last of which my Lord Sandwich was.  When we called by
her side his Lordshipp was not stirring, so we come to anchor a little
below his ship, thinking to have rowed on board him, but the wind and tide
was so strong against us that we could not get up to him, no, though rowed
by a boat of the Prince's that come to us to tow us up; at last however he
brought us within a little way, and then they flung out a rope to us from
the Prince and so come on board, but with great trouble and tune and
patience, it being very cold; we find my Lord newly up in his night-gown
very well.  He received us kindly; telling us the state of the fleet,
lacking provisions, having no beer at all, nor have had most of them these
three weeks or month, and but few days' dry provisions.  And indeed he
tells us that he believes no fleete was ever set to sea in so ill
condition of provision, as this was when it went out last.  He did inform
us in the business of Bergen,

     [Lord Sandwich was not so successful in convincing other people as
     to the propriety of his conduct at Bergen as he was with Pepys.]

so as to let us see how the judgment of the world is not to be depended on
in things they know not; it being a place just wide enough, and not so
much hardly, for ships to go through to it, the yardarmes sticking in the
very rocks.  He do not, upon his best enquiry, find reason to except
against any part of the management of the business by Teddiman; he having
staid treating no longer than during the night, whiles he was fitting
himself to fight, bringing his ship a-breast, and not a quarter of an hour
longer (as is said); nor could more ships have been brought to play, as is
thought.  Nor could men be landed, there being 10,000 men effectively
always in armes of the Danes; nor, says he, could we expect more from the
Dane than he did, it being impossible to set fire on the ships but it must
burn the towne.  But that wherein the Dane did amisse is, that he did
assist them, the Dutch, all the while, while he was treating with us,
while he should have been neutrall to us both.  But, however, he did
demand but the treaty of us; which is, that we should not come with more
than five ships.  A flag of truce is said, and confessed by my Lord, that
he believes it was hung out; but while they did hang it out, they did
shoot at us; so that it was not either seen perhaps, or fit to cease upon
sight of it, while they continued actually in action against us.  But the
main thing my Lord wonders at, and condemns the Dane for, is, that the
blockhead, who is so much in debt to the Hollander, having now a treasure
more by much than all his Crowne was worth, and that which would for ever
have beggared the Hollanders, should not take this time to break with the
Hollander, and, thereby paid his debt which must have been forgiven him,
and got the greatest treasure into his hands that ever was together in the
world.  By and by my Lord took me aside to discourse of his private
matters, who was very free with me touching the ill condition of the
fleete that it hath been in, and the good fortune that he hath had, and
nothing else that these prizes are to be imputed to.  He also talked with
me about Mr. Coventry's dealing with him in sending Sir W. Pen away before
him, which was not fair nor kind; but that he hath mastered and cajoled
Sir W. Pen, that he hath been able to do, nothing in the fleete, but been
obedient to him; but withal tells me he is a man that is but of very mean
parts, and a fellow not to be lived with, so false and base he is; which I
know well enough to be very true, and did, as I had formerly done, give my
Lord my knowledge of him.  By and by was called a Council of Warr on
board, when come Sir W. Pen there, and Sir Christopher Mings, Sir Edward
Spragg, Sir Jos. Jordan, Sir Thomas Teddiman, and Sir Roger Cuttance, and
so the necessity of the fleete for victuals, clothes, and money was
discoursed, but by the discourse there of all but my Lord, that is to say,
the counterfeit grave nonsense of Sir W. Pen and the poor mean discourse
of the rest, methinks I saw how the government and management of the
greatest business of the three nations is committed to very ordinary
heads, saving my Lord, and in effect is only upon him, who is able to do
what he pleases with them, they not having the meanest degree of reason to
be able to oppose anything that he says, and so I fear it is ordered but
like all the rest of the King's publique affayres.  The council being up
they most of them went away, only Sir W. Pen who staid to dine there and
did so, but the wind being high the ship (though the motion of it was
hardly discernible to the eye) did make me sick, so as I could not eat any
thing almost.  After dinner Cocke did pray me to helpe him to L500 of W.
How, who is deputy Treasurer, wherein my Lord Bruncker and I am to be
concerned and I did aske it my Lord, and he did consent to have us
furnished with L500, and I did get it paid to Sir Roger Cuttance and Mr.
Pierce in part for above L1000 worth of goods, Mace, Nutmegs, Cynamon, and
Cloves, and he tells us we may hope to get L1500 by it, which God send!
Great spoil, I hear, there hath been of the two East India ships, and that
yet they will come in to the King very rich: so that I hope this journey
will be worth L100 to me.

     [There is a shorthand journal of proceedings relating to Pepys's
     purchase of some East India prize goods among the Rawlinson MSS. in
     the Bodleian Library.]

After having paid this money, we took leave of my Lord and so to our Yacht
again, having seen many of my friends there.  Among others I hear that W.
Howe will grow very rich by this last business and grows very proud and
insolent by it; but it is what I ever expected.  I hear by every body how
much my poor Lord of Sandwich was concerned for me during my silence a
while, lest I had been dead of the plague in this sickly time.  No sooner
come into the yacht, though overjoyed with the good work we have done
to-day, but I was overcome with sea sickness so that I begun to spue
soundly, and so continued a good while, till at last I went into the
cabbin and shutting my eyes my trouble did cease that I fell asleep, which
continued till we come into Chatham river where the water was smooth, and
then I rose and was very well, and the tide coming to be against us we did
land before we come to Chatham and walked a mile, having very good
discourse by the way, it being dark and it beginning to rain just as we
got thither.  At Commissioner Pett's we did eat and drink very well and
very merry we were, and about 10 at night, it being moonshine and very
cold, we set out, his coach carrying us, and so all night travelled to
Greenwich, we sometimes sleeping a little and then talking and laughing by
the way, and with much pleasure, but that it was very horrible cold, that
I was afeard of an ague.  A pretty passage was that the coach stood of a
sudden and the coachman come down and the horses stirring, he cried, Hold!
which waked me, and the coach[man] standing at the boote to [do] something
or other and crying, Hold!  I did wake of a sudden and not knowing who he
was, nor thinking of the coachman between sleeping and waking I did take
up the heart to take him by the shoulder, thinking verily he had been a
thief.  But when I waked I found my cowardly heart to discover a fear
within me and that I should never have done it if I had been awake.

19th.  About 4 or 5 of the clock we come to Greenwich, and, having first
set down my Lord Bruncker, Cocke and I went to his house, it being light,
and there to our great trouble, we being sleepy and cold, we met with the
ill newes that his boy Jacke was gone to bed sicke, which put Captain
Cocke and me also into much trouble, the boy, as they told us, complaining
of his head most, which is a bad sign it seems.  So they presently betook
themselves to consult whither and how to remove him. However I thought it
not fit for me to discover too much fear to go away, nor had I any place
to go to.  So to bed I went and slept till 10 of the clock and then comes
Captain Cocke to wake me and tell me that his boy was well again.  With
great joy I heard the newes and he told it, so I up and to the office
where we did a little, and but a little business.  At noon by invitation
to my Lord Bruncker's where we staid till four of the clock for my Lady
Batten and she not then coming we to dinner and pretty merry but
disordered by her making us stay so long.  After dinner I to the office,
and there wrote letters and did business till night and then to Sir J.
Minnes's, where I find my Lady Batten come, and she and my Lord Bruncker
and his mistresse, and the whole house-full there at cards.  But by and by
my Lord Bruncker goes away and others of the company, and when I expected
Sir J. Minnes and his sister should have staid to have made Sir W. Batten
and Lady sup, I find they go up in snuffe to bed without taking any manner
of leave of them, but left them with Mr. Boreman.  The reason of this I
could not presently learn, but anon I hear it is that Sir J. Minnes did
expect and intend them a supper, but they without respect to him did first
apply themselves to Boreman, which makes all this great feude.  However I
staid and there supped, all of us being in great disorder from this, and
more from Cocke's boy's being ill, where my Lady Batten and Sir W. Batten
did come to town with an intent to lodge, and I was forced to go seek a
lodging which my W. Hewer did get me, viz., his own chamber in the towne,
whither I went and found it a very fine room, and there lay most
excellently.

20th.  Called up by Captain Cocke (who was last night put into great
trouble upon his boy's being rather worse than better, upon which he
removed him out of his house to his stable), who told me that to my
comfort his boy was now as well as ever he was in his life.  So I up, and
after being trimmed, the first time I have been touched by a barber these
twelvemonths, I think, and more, went to Sir J. Minnes's, where I find all
out of order still, they having not seen one another till by and by Sir J.
Minnes and Sir W. Batten met, to go into my Lord Bruncker's coach, and so
we four to Lambeth, and thence to the Duke of Albemarle, to inform him
what we have done as to the fleete, which is very little, and to receive
his direction.  But, Lord!  what a sad time it is to see no boats upon the
River; and grass grows all up and down White Hall court, and nobody but
poor wretches in the streets!  And, which is worst of all, the Duke showed
us the number of the plague this week, brought in the last night from the
Lord Mayor; that it is encreased about 600 more than the last, which is
quite contrary to all our hopes and expectations, from the coldness of the
late season.  For the whole general number is 8,297, and of them the
plague 7,165; which is more in the whole by above 50, than the biggest
Bill yet; which is very grievous to us all.  I find here a design in my
Lord Bruncker and Captain Cocke to have had my Lord Bruncker chosen as one
of us to have been sent aboard one of the East Indiamen, and Captain Cocke
as a merchant to be joined with him, and Sir J. Minnes for the other, and
Sir G. Smith to be joined with him.  But I did order it so that my Lord
Bruncker and Sir J. Minnes were ordered, but I did stop the merchants to
be added, which would have been a most pernicious thing to the King I am
sure.  In this I did, I think, a very good office, though I cannot acquit
myself from some envy of mine in the business to have the profitable
business done by another hand while I lay wholly imployed in the trouble
of the office.  Thence back again by my Lord's coach to my Lord Bruncker's
house, where I find my Lady Batten, who is become very great with Mrs.
Williams (my Lord Bruncker's whore), and there we dined and were mighty
merry.  After dinner I to the office there to write letters, to fit myself
for a journey to-morrow to Nonsuch to the Exchequer by appointment.  That
being done I to Sir J. Minnes where I find Sir W. Batten and his Lady gone
home to Walthamstow in great snuffe as to Sir J. Minnes, but yet with some
necessity, hearing that a mayde-servant of theirs is taken ill.  Here I
staid and resolved of my going in my Lord Bruncker's coach which he would
have me to take, though himself cannot go with me as he intended, and so
to my last night's lodging to bed very weary.

21st. Up between five and six o'clock; and by the time I was ready, my
Lord's coach comes for me; and taking Will Hewer with me, who is all in
mourning for his father, who is lately dead of the plague, as my boy Tom's
is also, I set out, and took about L100 with me to pay the fees there, and
so rode in some fear of robbing.  When I come thither, I find only Mr.
Ward, who led me to Burgess's bedside, and Spicer's, who, watching of the
house, as it is their turns every night, did lie long in bed to-day, and I
find nothing at all done in my business, which vexed me.  But not seeing
how to helpe it I did walk up and down with Mr. Ward to see the house; and
by and by Spicer and Mr. Falconbrige come to me and he and I to a towne
near by, Yowell, there drink and set up my horses and also bespoke a
dinner, and while that is dressing went with Spicer and walked up and down
the house and park; and a fine place it hath heretofore been, and a fine
prospect about the house.  A great walk of an elme and a walnutt set one
after another in order.  And all the house on the outside filled with
figures of stories, and good painting of Rubens' or Holben's doing.  And
one great thing is, that most of the house is covered, I mean the posts,
and quarters in the walls; covered with lead, and gilded.  I walked into
the ruined garden, and there found a plain little girle, kinswoman of Mr.
Falconbridge, to sing very finely by the eare only, but a fine way of
singing, and if I come ever to lacke a girle again I shall think of
getting her.  Thence to the towne, and there Spicer, Woodruffe, and W.
Bowyer and I dined together and a friend of Spicer's; and a good dinner I
had for them.  Falconbrige dined somewhere else, by appointment.  Strange
to see how young W. Bowyer looks at 41 years; one would not take him for
24 or more, and is one of the greatest wonders I ever did see.  After
dinner, about 4 of the clock we broke up, and I took coach and home (in
fear for the money I had with me, but that this friend of Spicer's, one of
the Duke's guard did ride along the best part of the way with us).  I got
to my Lord Bruncker's before night, and there I sat and supped with him
and his mistresse, and Cocke whose boy is yet ill.  Thence, after losing a
crowne betting at Tables--[Cribbage]--, we walked home, Cocke seeing me at
my new lodging, where I went to bed. All my worke this day in the coach
going and coming was to refresh myself in my musique scale, which I would
fain have perfecter than ever I had yet.

22nd.  Up betimes and to the office, meaning to have entered my last 5 or
6 days' Journall, but was called away by my Lord Bruncker and Sir J.
Minnes, and to Blackwall, there to look after the storehouses in order to
the laying of goods out of the East India ships when they shall be
unloaden.  That being done, we into Johnson's house, and were much made
of, eating and drinking.  But here it is observable what he tells us, that
in digging his late Docke, he did 12 foot under ground find perfect trees
over-covered with earth.  Nut trees, with the branches and the very nuts
upon them; some of whose nuts he showed us.  Their shells black with age,
and their kernell, upon opening, decayed, but their shell perfectly hard
as ever.  And a yew tree he showed us (upon which, he says, the very ivy
was taken up whole about it), which upon cutting with an addes [adze], we
found to be rather harder than the living tree usually is. They say, very
much, but I do not know how hard a yew tree naturally is.

     [The same discovery was made in 1789, in digging the Brunswick Dock,
     also at Blackwall, and elsewhere in the neighbourhood.]

The armes, they say, were taken up at first whole, about the body, which
is very strange.  Thence away by water, and I walked with my Lord Bruncker
home, and there at dinner comes a letter from my Lord Sandwich to tell me
that he would this day be at Woolwich, and desired me to meet him.  Which
fearing might have lain in Sir J. Minnes' pocket a while, he sending it
me, did give my Lord Bruncker, his mistress, and I occasion to talk of him
as the most unfit man for business in the world.  Though at last
afterwards I found that he was not in this faulty, but hereby I have got a
clear evidence of my Lord Bruncker's opinion of him.  My Lord Bruncker
presently ordered his coach to be ready and we to Woolwich, and my Lord
Sandwich not being come, we took a boat and about a mile off met him in
his Catch, and boarded him, and come up with him; and, after making a
little halt at my house, which I ordered, to have my wife see him, we all
together by coach to Mr. Boreman's, where Sir J. Minnes did receive him
very handsomely, and there he is to lie; and Sir J. Minnes did give him on
the sudden, a very handsome supper and brave discourse, my Lord Bruncker,
and Captain Cocke, and Captain Herbert being there, with myself.  Here my
Lord did witness great respect to me, and very kind expressions, and by
other occasions, from one thing to another did take notice how I was
overjoyed at first to see the King's letter to his Lordship, and told them
how I did kiss it, and that, whatever he was, I did always love the King.
This my Lord Bruncker did take such notice [of] as that he could not
forbear kissing me before my Lord, professing his finding occasion every
day more and more to love me, and Captain Cocke has since of himself taken
notice of that speech of my Lord then concerning me, and may be of good
use to me.  Among other discourse concerning long life, Sir J. Minnes
saying that his great-grandfather was alive in Edward the Vth's time; my
Lord Sandwich did tell us how few there have been of his family since King
Harry the VIIIth; that is to say, the then Chiefe Justice, and his son the
Lord Montagu, who was father to Sir Sidney,

     [These are the words in the MS., and not "his son and the Lord
     Montagu," as in some former editions.  Pepys seems to have written
     Lord Montagu by mistake for Sir Edward Montagu.]

who was his father. And yet, what is more wonderfull, he did assure us
from the mouth of my Lord Montagu himself, that in King James's time
([when he] had a mind to get the King to cut off the entayle of some land
which was given in Harry the VIIIth's time to the family, with the
remainder in the Crowne); he did answer the King in showing how unlikely
it was that ever it could revert to the Crown, but that it would be a
present convenience to him; and did show that at that time there were
4,000 persons derived from the very body of the Chiefe Justice.  It seems
the number of daughters in the family having been very great, and
they too had most of them many children, and grandchildren, and
great-grandchildren.  This he tells as a most known and certain truth.
After supper, my Lord Bruncker took his leave, and I also did mine, taking
Captain Herbert home to my lodging to lie with me, who did mighty
seriously inquire after who was that in the black dress with my wife
yesterday, and would not believe that it was my wife's mayde, Mercer,
but it was she.

23rd.  Up, and to my Lord Sandwich, who did advise alone with me how far
he might trust Captain Cocke in the business of the prize-goods, my Lord
telling me that he hath taken into his hands 2 or L3000 value of them: it
being a good way, he says, to get money, and afterwards to get the King's
allowance thereof, it being easier, he observes, to keepe money when got
of the King than to get it when it is too late.  I advised him not to
trust Cocke too far, and did therefore offer him ready money for a L1000
or two, which he listens to and do agree to, which is great joy to me,
hoping thereby to get something!  Thence by coach to Lambeth, his
Lordship, and all our office, and Mr. Evelyn, to the Duke of Albemarle,
where, after the compliment with my Lord very kind, we sat down to consult
of the disposing and supporting of the fleete with victuals and money, and
for the sicke men and prisoners; and I did propose the taking out some
goods out of the prizes, to the value of L10,000, which was accorded to,
and an order, drawn up and signed by the Duke and my Lord, done in the
best manner I can, and referred to my Lord Bruncker and Sir J. Minnes, but
what inconveniences may arise from it I do not yet see, but fear there may
be many.  Here we dined, and I did hear my Lord Craven whisper, as he is
mightily possessed with a good opinion of me, much to my advantage, which
my good Lord did second, and anon my Lord Craven did speak publiquely of
me to the Duke, in the hearing of all the rest; and the Duke did say
something of the like advantage to me; I believe, not much to the
satisfaction of my brethren; but I was mightily joyed at it. Thence took
leave, leaving my Lord Sandwich to go visit the Bishop of Canterbury, and
I and Sir W. Batten down to the Tower, where he went further by water, and
I home, and among other things took out all my gold to carry along with me
to-night with Captain Cocke downe to the fleete, being L180 and more,
hoping to lay out that and a great deal more to good advantage.  Thence
down to Greenwich to the office, and there wrote several letters, and so
to my Lord Sandwich, and mighty merry and he mighty kind to me in the face
of all, saying much in my favour, and after supper I took leave and with
Captain Cocke set out in the yacht about ten o'clock at night, and after
some discourse, and drinking a little, my mind full of what we are going
about and jealous of Cocke's outdoing me. So to sleep upon beds brought by
Cocke on board mighty handsome, and never slept better than upon this bed
upon the floor in the Cabbin.

24th (Lord's day).  Waked, and up and drank, and then to discourse; and
then being about Grayes, and a very calme, curious morning, we took our
wherry, and to the fishermen, and bought a great deal of fine fish, and to
Gravesend to White's, and had part of it dressed; and, in the meantime, we
to walk about a mile from the towne, and so back again; and there, after
breakfast, one of our watermen told us he had heard of a bargain of cloves
for us, and we went to a blind alehouse at the further end wretched dirty
seamen, who, of the towne to a couple of poor wretches, had got together
about 37 lb. of cloves and to 10 of nutmeggs, and we bought them of them,
the first at 5s. 6d.  per lb. and the latter at 4s.; and paid them in
gold; but, Lord!  to see how silly these men are in the selling of it, and
easily to be persuaded almost to anything, offering a bag to us to pass as
20 lbs. of cloves, which upon weighing proved 25 lbs.  But it would never
have been allowed by my conscience to have wronged the poor wretches, who
told us how dangerously they had got some, and dearly paid for the rest of
these goods.  This being done we with great content herein on board again
and there Captain Cocke and I to discourse of our business, but he will
not yet be open to me, nor am I to him till I hear what he will say and do
with Sir Roger Cuttance. However, this discourse did do me good, and got
me a copy of the agreement made the other day on board for the parcel of
Mr. Pierce and Sir Roger Cuttance, but this great parcel is of my Lord
Sandwich's.  By and by to dinner about 3 o'clock and then I in the cabbin
to writing down my journall for these last seven days to my, great
content, it having pleased God that in this sad time of the plague every
thing else has conspired to my happiness and pleasure more for these last
three months than in all my, life before in so little time.  God long
preserve it and make me thankful) for it!  After finishing my Journal),
then to discourse and to read, and then to supper and to bed, my mind not
being at full ease, having not fully satisfied myself how Captain Cocke
will deal with me as to the share of the profits.

25th.  Found ourselves come to the fleete, and so aboard the Prince; and
there, after a good while in discourse, we did agree a bargain of L5,000
with Sir Roger Cuttance for my Lord Sandwich for silk, cinnamon, nutmeggs,
and indigo.  And I was near signing to an undertaking for the payment of
the whole sum; but I did by chance escape it; having since, upon second
thoughts, great cause to be glad of it, reflecting upon the craft and not
good condition, it may be, of Captain Cocke.  I could get no trifles for
my wife.  Anon to dinner and thence in great haste to make a short visit
to Sir W. Pen, where I found them and his lady and daughter and many
commanders at dinner.  Among others Sir G. Askue, of whom whatever the
matter is, the world is silent altogether.  But a very pretty dinner there
was, and after dinner Sir W. Pen made a bargain with Cocke for ten bales
of silke, at 16s. per lb., which, as Cocke says, will be a good
pennyworth, and so away to the Prince and presently comes my Lord on board
from Greenwich, with whom, after a little discourse about his trusting of
Cocke, we parted and to our yacht; but it being calme, we to make haste,
took our wherry toward Chatham; but, it growing darke, we were put to
great difficultys, our simple, yet confident waterman, not knowing a step
of the way; and we found ourselves to go backward and forward, which, in
the darke night and a wild place, did vex us mightily. At last we got a
fisher boy by chance, and took him into the boat, and being an odde kind
of boy, did vex us too; for he would not answer us aloud when we spoke to
him, but did carry us safe thither, though with a mistake or two; but I
wonder they were not more.  In our way I was [surprised] and so were we
all, at the strange nature of the sea-water in a darke night, that it
seemed like fire upon every stroke of the oare, and, they say, is a sign
of winde.  We went to the Crowne Inne, at Rochester, and there to supper,
and made ourselves merry with our poor fisher-boy, who told us he had not
been in a bed in the whole seven years since he came to 'prentice, and
hath two or three more years to serve. After eating something, we in our
clothes to bed.

26th.  Up by five o'clock and got post horses and so set out for
Greenwich, calling and drinking at Dartford.  Being come to Greenwich and
shifting myself I to the office, from whence by and by my Lord Bruncker
and Sir J. Minnes set out toward Erith to take charge of the two East
India shipps, which I had a hand in contriving for the King's service and
may do myself a good office too thereby.  I to dinner with Mr. Wright to
his father-in-law in Greenwich, one of the most silly, harmless, prating
old men that ever I heard in my life.  Creed dined with me, and among
other discourses got of me a promise of half that he could get my Lord
Rutherford to give me upon clearing his business, which should not be
less, he says, than L50 for my half, which is a good thing, though
cunningly got of him.  By and by Luellin comes, and I hope to get
something of Deering shortly.  They being gone, Mr. Wright and I went into
the garden to discourse with much trouble for fear of losing all the
profit and principal of what we have laid out in buying of prize goods,
and therefore puts me upon thoughts of flinging up my interest, but yet I
shall take good advice first.  Thence to the office, and after some
letters down to Woolwich, where I have not lain with my wife these eight
days I think, or more.  After supper, and telling her my mind in my
trouble in what I have done as to buying' of these goods, we to bed.

27th.  Up, and saw and admired my wife's picture of our Saviour,

     [This picture by Mrs. Pepys may have given trouble when Pepys was
     unjustifiably attacked for having Popish pictures in his house.]

now finished, which is very pretty.  So by water to Greenwich, where with
Creed and Lord Rutherford, and there my Lord told me that he would give me
L100 for my pains, which pleased me well, though Creed, like a cunning
rogue, hath got a promise of half of it from me.  We to the King's Head,
the great musique house, the first time I was ever there, and had a good
breakfast, and thence parted, I being much troubled to hear from Creed,
that he was told at Salsbury that I am come to be a great swearer and
drinker, though I know the contrary; but, Lord! to see how my late little
drinking of wine is taken notice of by envious men to my disadvantage. I
thence to Captain Cocke's, [and] (he not yet come from town) to Mr.
Evelyn's, where much company; and thence in his coach with him to the Duke
of Albemarle by Lambeth, who was in a mighty pleasant humour; there the
Duke tells us that the Dutch do stay abroad, and our fleet must go out
again, or to be ready to do so.  Here we got several things ordered as we
desired for the relief of the prisoners, and sick and wounded men. Here I
saw this week's Bill of Mortality, wherein, blessed be God! there is above
1800 decrease, being the first considerable decrease we have had.  Back
again the same way and had most excellent discourse of Mr. Evelyn touching
all manner of learning; wherein I find him a very fine gentleman, and
particularly of paynting, in which he tells me the beautifull Mrs.
Middleton is rare, and his own wife do brave things.  He brought me to the
office, whither comes unexpectedly Captain Cocke, who hath brought one
parcel of our goods by waggons, and at first resolved to have lodged them
at our office; but then the thoughts of its being the King's house altered
our resolution, and so put them at his friend's, Mr. Glanvill's, and there
they are safe.  Would the rest of them were so too! In discourse, we come
to mention my profit, and he offers me L500 clear, and I demand L600 for
my certain profit.  We part to-night, and I lie there at Mr. Glanvill's
house, there being none there but a maydeservant and a young man; being in
some pain, partly from not knowing what to do in this business, having a
mind to be at a certainty in my profit, and partly through his having
Jacke sicke still, and his blackemore now also fallen sicke.  So he being
gone, I to bed.

28th.  Up, and being mightily pleased with my night's lodging, drank a cup
of beer, and went out to my office, and there did some business, and so
took boat and down to Woolwich (having first made a visit to Madam
Williams, who is going down to my Lord Bruncker) and there dined, and then
fitted my papers and money and every thing else for a journey to Nonsuch
to-morrow.  That being done I walked to Greenwich, and there to the office
pretty late expecting Captain Cocke's coming, which he did, and so with me
to my new lodging (and there I chose rather to lie because of my interest
in the goods that we have brought there to lie), but the people were abed,
so we knocked them up, and so I to bed, and in the night was mightily
troubled with a looseness (I suppose from some fresh damp linen that I put
on this night), and feeling for a chamber-pott, there was none, I having
called the mayde up out of her bed, she had forgot I suppose to put one
there; so I was forced in this strange house to rise and shit in the
chimney twice; and so to bed and was very well again, and

29th.  To sleep till 5 o'clock, when it is now very dark, and then rose,
being called up by order by Mr. Marlow, and so up and dressed myself, and
by and by comes Mr. Lashmore on horseback, and I had my horse I borrowed
of Mr. Gillthropp, Sir W. Batten's clerke, brought to me, and so we set
out and rode hard and was at Nonsuch by about eight o'clock, a very fine
journey and a fine day.  There I come just about chappell time and so I
went to chappell with them and thence to the several offices about my
tallys, which I find done, but strung for sums not to my purpose, and so
was forced to get them to promise me to have them cut into other sums.
But, Lord! what ado I had to persuade the dull fellows to it, especially
Mr. Warder, Master of the Pells, and yet without any manner of reason for
their scruple.  But at last I did, and so left my tallies there against
another day, and so walked to Yowell, and there did spend a peece upon
them, having a whole house full, and much mirth by a sister of the
mistresse of the house, an old mayde lately married to a lieutenant of a
company that quarters there, and much pleasant discourse we had and,
dinner being done, we to horse again and come to Greenwich before night,
and so to my lodging, and there being a little weary sat down and fell to
order some of my pocket papers, and then comes Captain Cocke, and after a
great deal of discourse with him seriously upon the disorders of our state
through lack of men to mind the public business and to understand it, we
broke up, sitting up talking very late.  We spoke a little of my late
business propounded of taking profit for my money laid out for these
goods, but he finds I rise in my demand, he offering me still L500
certain.  So we did give it over, and I to bed.  I hear for certain this
night upon the road that Sir Martin Noell is this day dead of the plague
in London, where he hath lain sick of it these eight days.

30th.  Up and to the office, where busy all the morning, and at noon with
Sir W. Batten to Coll. Cleggat to dinner, being invited, where a very
pretty dinner to my full content and very merry.  The great burden we have
upon us at this time at the office, is the providing for prisoners and
sicke men that are recovered, they lying before our office doors all night
and all day, poor wretches.  Having been on shore, the captains won't
receive them on board, and other ships we have not to put them on, nor
money to pay them off, or provide for them.  God remove this difficulty!
This made us followed all the way to this gentleman's house and there are
waited for our coming out after dinner.  Hither come Luellin to me and
would force me to take Mr. Deering's 20 pieces in gold he did offer me a
good while since, which I did, yet really and sincerely against my will
and content, I seeing him a man not likely to do well in his business, nor
I to reap any comfort in having to do with, and be beholden to, a man that
minds more his pleasure and company than his business.  Thence mighty
merry and much pleased with the dinner and company and they with me I
parted and there was set upon by the poor wretches, whom I did give good
words and some little money to, and the poor people went away like lambs,
and in good earnest are not to be censured if their necessities drive them
to bad courses of stealing or the like, while they lacke wherewith to
live.  Thence to the office, and there wrote a letter or two and
dispatched a little business, and then to Captain Cocke's, where I find
Mr. Temple, the fat blade, Sir Robert. Viner's chief man.  And we three
and two companions of his in the evening by agreement took ship in the
Bezan and the tide carried us no further than Woolwich about 8 at night,
and so I on shore to my wife, and there to my great trouble find my wife
out of order, and she took me downstairs and there alone did tell me her
falling out with both her mayds and particularly Mary, and how Mary had to
her teeth told her she would tell me of something that should stop her
mouth and words of that sense. Which I suspect may be about Brown, but my
wife prays me to call it to examination, and this, I being of myself
jealous, do make me mightily out of temper, and seeing it not fit to enter
into the dispute did passionately go away, thinking to go on board again.
But when I come to the stairs I considered the Bezan would not go till the
next ebb, and it was best to lie in a good bed and, it may be, get myself
into a better humour by being with my wife.  So I back again and to bed
and having otherwise so many reasons to rejoice and hopes of good profit,
besides considering the ill that trouble of mind and melancholly may in
this sickly time bring a family into, and that if the difference were
never so great, it is not a time to put away servants, I was resolved to
salve up the business rather than stir in it, and so become pleasant with
my wife and to bed, minding nothing of this difference.  So to sleep with
a good deal of content, and saving only this night and a day or two about
the same business a month or six weeks ago, I do end this month with the
greatest content, and may say that these last three months, for joy,
health, and profit, have been much the greatest that ever I received in
all my life in any twelve months almost in my life, having nothing upon me
but the consideration of the sicklinesse of the season during this great
plague to mortify mee.  For all which the Lord God be praised!

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     And feeling for a chamber-pott, there was none
     Discourse of Mr. Evelyn touching all manner of learning
     Fell to sleep as if angry
     King himself minding nothing but his ease
     Not to be censured if their necessities drive them to bad
     Ordered him L2000, and he paid me my quantum out of it
     Sicke men that are recovered, they lying before our office doors
     Told us he had not been in a bed in the whole seven years


                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                 OCTOBER
                                  1665

October 1st (Lord's day).  Called up about 4 of the clock and so dressed
myself and so on board the Bezan, and there finding all my company asleep
I would not wake them, but it beginning to be break of day I did stay upon
the decke walking, and then into the Maister's cabbin and there laid and
slept a little, and so at last was waked by Captain Cocke's calling of me,
and so I turned out, and then to chat and talk and laugh, and mighty
merry.  We spent most of the morning talking and reading of "The Siege of
Rhodes," which is certainly (the more I read it the more I think so) the
best poem that ever was wrote.  We breakfasted betimes and come to the
fleete about two of the clock in the afternoon, having a fine day and a
fine winde.  My Lord received us mighty kindly, and after discourse with
us in general left us to our business, and he to his officers, having
called a council of wary, we in the meantime settling of papers with Mr.
Pierce and everybody else, and by and by with Captain Cuttance. Anon
called down to my Lord, and there with him till supper talking and
discourse; among other things, to my great joy, he did assure me that he
had wrote to the King and Duke about these prize-goods, and told me that
they did approve of what he had done, and that he would owne what he had
done, and would have me to tell all the world so, and did, under his hand,
give Cocke and me his certificate of our bargains, and giving us full
power of disposal of what we have so bought.  This do ease my mind of all
my fear, and makes my heart lighter by L100 than it was before. He did
discourse to us of the Dutch fleete being abroad, eighty-five of them
still, and are now at the Texell, he believes, in expectation of our
Eastland ships coming home with masts and hempe, and our loaden Hambrough
ships going to Hambrough.  He discoursed against them that would have us
yield to no conditions but conquest over the Dutch, and seems to believe
that the Dutch will call for the protection of the King of France and come
under his power, which were to be wished they might be brought to do under
ours by fair means, and to that end would have all Dutch men and familys,
that would come hither and settled, to be declared denizens; and my Lord
did whisper to me alone that things here must break in pieces, nobody
minding any thing, but every man his owne business of profit or pleasure,
and the King some little designs of his owne, and that certainly the
kingdom could not stand in this condition long, which I fear and believe
is very true.  So to supper and there my Lord the kindest man to me,
before all the table talking of me to my advantage and with tenderness too
that it overjoyed me.  So after supper Captain Cocke and I and Temple on
board the Bezan, and there to cards for a while and then to read again in
"Rhodes" and so to sleep.  But, Lord! the mirth which it caused me to be
waked in the night by their snoaring round about me; I did laugh till I
was ready to burst, and waked one of the two companions of Temple, who
could not a good while tell where he was that he heard one laugh so, till
he recollected himself, and I told him what it was at, and so to sleep
again, they still snoaring.

2nd.  We having sailed all night (and I do wonder how they in the dark
could find the way) we got by morning to Gillingham, and thence all walked
to Chatham; and there with Commissioner Pett viewed the Yard; and among
other things, a teame of four horses come close by us, he being with me,
drawing a piece of timber that I am confident one man could easily have
carried upon his back.  I made the horses be taken away, and a man or two
to take the timber away with their hands.  This the Commissioner did see,
but said nothing, but I think had cause to be ashamed of.  We walked, he
and I and Cocke, to the Hill-house, where we find Sir W. Pen in bed and
there much talke and much dissembling of kindnesse from him, but he is a
false rogue, and I shall not trust him, but my being there did procure his
consent to have his silk carried away before the money received, which he
would not have done for Cocke I am sure.  Thence to Rochester, walked to
the Crowne, and while dinner was getting ready, I did there walk to visit
the old Castle ruines, which hath been a noble place, and there going up I
did upon the stairs overtake three pretty mayds or women and took them up
with me, and I did 'baiser sur mouches et toucher leur mains' and necks to
my great pleasure: but, Lord! to see what a dreadfull thing it is to look
down the precipices, for it did fright me mightily, and hinder me of much
pleasure which I would have made to myself in the company of these three,
if it had not been for that.  The place hath been very noble and great and
strong in former ages.  So to walk up and down the Cathedral, and thence
to the Crowne, whither Mr. Fowler, the Mayor of the towne, was come in his
gowne, and is a very reverend magistrate.  After I had eat a bit, not
staying to eat with them, I went away, and so took horses and to
Gravesend, and there staid not, but got a boat, the sicknesse being very
much in the towne still, and so called on board my Lord Bruncker and Sir
John Minnes, on board one of the East Indiamen at Erith, and there do find
them full of envious complaints for the pillageing of the ships, but I did
pacify them, and discoursed about making money of some of the goods, and
do hope to be the better by it honestly.  So took leave (Madam Williams
being here also with my Lord), and about 8 o'clock got to Woolwich and
there supped and mighty pleasant with my wife, who is, for ought I see,
all friends with her mayds, and so in great joy and content to bed.

3rd.  Up, and to my great content visited betimes by Mr. Woolly, my uncle
Wight's cozen, who comes to see what work I have for him about these East
India goods, and I do find that this fellow might have been of great use,
and hereafter may be of very great use to me, in this trade of prize
goods, and glad I am fully of his coming hither.  While I dressed myself,
and afterwards in walking to Greenwich we did discourse over all the
business of the prize goods, and he puts me in hopes I may get some money
in what I have done, but not so much as I expected, but that I may
hereafter do more.  We have laid a design of getting more, and are to talk
again of it a few days hence.  To the office, where nobody to meet me, Sir
W. Batten being the only man and he gone this day to meet to adjourne the
Parliament to Oxford.  Anon by appointment comes one to tell me my Lord
Rutherford is come; so I to the King's Head to him, where I find his lady,
a fine young Scotch lady, pretty handsome and plain.  My wife also, and
Mercer, by and by comes, Creed bringing them; and so presently to dinner
and very merry; and after to even our accounts, and I to give him tallys,
where he do allow me L100, of which to my grief the rogue Creed has
trepanned me out of L50.  But I do foresee a way how it may be I may get a
greater sum of my Lord to his content by getting him allowance of interest
upon his tallys.  That being done, and some musique and other diversions,
at last away goes my Lord and Lady, and I sent my wife to visit Mrs.
Pierce, and so I to my office, where wrote important letters to the Court,
and at night (Creed having clownishly left my wife), I to Mrs. Pierces and
brought her and Mrs. Pierce to the King's Head and there spent a piece
upon a supper for her and mighty merry and pretty discourse, she being as
pretty as ever, most of our mirth being upon "my Cozen" (meaning my Lord
Bruncker's ugly mistress, whom he calls cozen), and to my trouble she
tells me that the fine Mrs. Middleton is noted for carrying about her body
a continued sour base smell, that is very offensive, especially if she be
a little hot.  Here some bad musique to close the night and so away and
all of us saw Mrs. Belle Pierce (as pretty as ever she was almost) home,
and so walked to Will's lodging where I used to lie, and there made shift
for a bed for Mercer, and mighty pleasantly to bed.  This night I hear
that of our two watermen that use to carry our letters, and were well on
Saturday last, one is dead, and the other dying sick of the plague.  The
plague, though decreasing elsewhere, yet being greater about the Tower and
thereabouts.

4th.  Up and to my office, where Mr. Andrews comes, and reckoning with him
I get L64 of him.  By and by comes Mr. Gawden, and reckoning with him he
gives me L60 in his account, which is a great mercy to me.  Then both of
them met and discoursed the business of the first man's resigning and the
other's taking up the business of the victualling of Tangier, and I do not
think that I shall be able to do as well under Mr. Gawden as under these
men, or within a little as to profit and less care upon me.  Thence to the
King's Head to dinner, where we three and Creed and my wife and her woman
dined mighty merry and sat long talking, and so in the afternoon broke up,
and I led my wife to our lodging again, and I to the office where did much
business, and so to my wife.  This night comes Sir George Smith to see me
at the office, and tells me how the plague is decreased this week 740, for
which God be praised!  but that it encreases at our end of the town still,
and says how all the towne is full of Captain Cocke's being in some ill
condition about prize-goods, his goods being taken from him, and I know
not what.  But though this troubles me to have it said, and that it is
likely to be a business in Parliament, yet I am not much concerned at it,
because yet I believe this newes is all false, for he would have wrote to
me sure about it.  Being come to my wife, at our lodging, I did go to bed,
and left my wife with her people to laugh and dance and I to sleep.

5th.  Lay long in bed talking among other things of my sister Pall, and my
wife of herself is very willing that I should give her L400 to her
portion, and would have her married soon as we could; but this great
sicknesse time do make it unfit to send for her up.  I abroad to the
office and thence to the Duke of Albemarle, all my way reading a book of
Mr. Evelyn's translating and sending me as a present, about directions for
gathering a Library;

     [Instructions concerning erecting of a Library, presented to my
     Lord the President De Mesme by Gilbert Naudeus, and now interpreted
     by Jo.  Evelyn, Esquire.  London, 1661: This little book was
     dedicated to Lord Clarendon by the translator.  It was printed while
     Evelyn was abroad, and is full of typographical errors; these are
     corrected in a copy mentioned in Evelyn's "Miscellaneous Writings,"
     1825, p.  xii, where a letter to Dr. Godolphin on the subject is
     printed.]

but the book is above my reach, but his epistle to my Lord Chancellor is a
very fine piece.  When I come to the Duke it was about the victuallers'
business, to put it into other hands, or more hands, which I do advise in,
but I hope to do myself a jobb of work in it.  So I walked through
Westminster to my old house the Swan, and there did pass some time with
Sarah, and so down by water to Deptford and there to my Valentine.

          [A Mrs. Bagwell.  See ante, February 14th, 1664-65]

Round about and next door on every side is the plague, but I did not value
it, but there did what I would 'con elle', and so away to Mr. Evelyn's to
discourse of our confounded business of prisoners, and sick and wounded
seamen, wherein he and we are so much put out of order.

     [Each of the Commissioners for the Sick and Wounded was appointed to
     a particular district, and Evelyn's district was Kent and Sussex.
     On September 25th, 1665, Evelyn wrote in his Diary: "My Lord Admiral
     being come from ye fleete to Greenewich, I went thence with him to
     ye Cockpit to consult with the Duke of Albemarle.  I was peremptory
     that unlesse we had L10,000 immediately, the prisoners would starve,
     and 'twas proposed it should be rais'd out of the E. India prizes
     now taken by Lord Sandwich.  They being but two of ye Commission,
     and so not impower'd to determine, sent an expresse to his Majesty
     and Council to know what they should do."]

And here he showed me his gardens, which are for variety of evergreens,
and hedge of holly, the finest things I ever saw in my life.

     [Evelyn purchased Sayes Court, Deptford, in 1653, and laid out his
     gardens, walks, groves, enclosures, and plantations, which
     afterwards became famous for their beauty.  When he took the place
     in hand it was nothing but an open field of one hundred acres, with
     scarcely a hedge in it.]

Thence in his coach to Greenwich, and there to my office, all the way
having fine discourse of trees and the nature of vegetables.  And so to
write letters, I very late to Sir W. Coventry of great concernment, and so
to my last night's lodging, but my wife is gone home to Woolwich.  The
Bill, blessed be God! is less this week by 740 of what it was the last
week.  Being come to my lodging I got something to eat, having eat little
all the day, and so to bed, having this night renewed my promises of
observing my vowes as I used to do; for I find that, since I left them
off, my mind is run a'wool-gathering and my business neglected.

6th.  Up, and having sent for Mr. Gawden he come to me, and he and I
largely discoursed the business of his Victualling, in order to the adding
of partners to him or other ways of altering it, wherein I find him ready
to do anything the King would have him do.  So he and I took his coach and
to Lambeth and to the Duke of Albemarle about it, and so back again, where
he left me.  In our way discoursing of the business and contracting a
great friendship with him, and I find he is a man most worthy to be made a
friend, being very honest and gratefull, and in the freedom of our
discourse he did tell me his opinion and knowledge of Sir W. Pen to be,
what I know him to be, as false a man as ever was born, for so, it seems,
he hath been to him.  He did also tell me, discoursing how things are
governed as to the King's treasure, that, having occasion for money in the
country, he did offer Alderman Maynell to pay him down money here, to be
paid by the Receiver in some county in the country, upon whom Maynell had
assignments, in whose hands the money also lay ready.  But Maynell refused
it, saying that he could have his money when he would, and had rather it
should lie where it do than receive it here in towne this sickly time,
where he hath no occasion for it.  But now the evil is that he hath lent
this money upon tallys which are become payable, but he finds that nobody
looks after it, how long the money is unpaid, and whether it lies dead in
the Receiver's hands or no, so the King he pays Maynell 10 per cent. while
the money lies in his Receiver's hands to no purpose but the benefit of
the Receiver.  I to dinner to the King's Head with Mr. Woolly, who is come
to instruct me in the business of my goods, but gives me not so good
comfort as I thought I should have had.  But, however, it will be well
worth my time though not above 2 or L300.  He gone I to my office, where
very busy drawing up a letter by way of discourse to the Duke of Albemarle
about my conception how the business of the Victualling should be ordered,
wherein I have taken great pains, and I think have hitt the right if they
will but follow it.  At this very late and so home to our lodgings to bed.

7th.  Up and to the office along with Mr. Childe, whom I sent for to
discourse about the victualling business, who will not come into
partnership (no more will Captain Beckford ), but I do find him a mighty
understanding man, and one I will keep a knowledge of.  Did business,
though not much, at the office; because of the horrible crowd and
lamentable moan of the poor seamen that lie starving in the streets for
lack of money.  Which do trouble and perplex me to the heart; and more at
noon when we were to go through them, for then a whole hundred of them
followed us; some cursing, some swearing, and some praying to us.  And
that that made me more troubled was a letter come this afternoon from the
Duke of Albemarle, signifying the Dutch to be in sight, with 80 sayle,
yesterday morning, off of Solebay, coming right into the bay.  God knows
what they will and may do to us, we having no force abroad able to oppose
them, but to be sacrificed to them.  Here come Sir W. Rider to me, whom I
sent for about the victualling business also, but he neither will not come
into partnership, but desires to be of the Commission if there be one.
Thence back the back way to my office, where very late, very busy. But
most of all when at night come two waggons from Rochester with more goods
from Captain Cocke; and in houseing them at Mr. Tooker's lodgings come two
of the Custome-house to seize them, and did seize them but I showed them
my 'Transire'.  However, after some hot and angry words, we locked them
up, and sealed up the key, and did give it to the constable to keep till
Monday, and so parted.  But, Lord!  to think how the poor constable come
to me in the dark going home; "Sir," says he, "I have the key, and if you
would have me do any service for you, send for me betimes to-morrow
morning, and I will do what you would have me."  Whether the fellow do
this out of kindness or knavery, I cannot tell; but it is pretty to
observe.  Talking with him in the high way, come close by the bearers with
a dead corpse of the plague; but, Lord! to see what custom is, that I am
come almost to think nothing of it.  So to my lodging, and there, with Mr.
Hater and Will, ending a business of the state of the last six months'
charge of the Navy, which we bring to L1,000,000 and above, and I think we
do not enlarge much in it if anything.  So to bed.

8th (Lord's day).  Up and, after being trimmed, to the office, whither I
upon a letter from the Duke of Albemarle to me, to order as many ships
forth out of the river as I can presently, to joyne to meet the Dutch;
having ordered all the Captains of the ships in the river to come to me, I
did some business with them, and so to Captain Cocke's to dinner, he being
in the country.  But here his brother Solomon was, and, for guests,
myself, Sir G. Smith, and a very fine lady, one Mrs. Penington, and two
more gentlemen.  But, both [before] and after dinner, most witty discourse
with this lady, who is a very fine witty lady, one of the best I ever
heard speake, and indifferent handsome.  There after dinner an houre or
two, and so to the office, where ended my business with the Captains; and
I think of twenty-two ships we shall make shift to get out seven.  (God
helpe us! men being sick, or provisions lacking.) And so to write letters
to Sir Ph. Warwicke, Sir W. Coventry, and Sir G. Carteret to Court about
the last six months' accounts, and sent away by an express to-night.  This
day I hear the Pope is dead;--[a false report]--and one said, that the
newes is, that the King of France is stabbed, but that the former is very
true, which will do great things sure, as to the troubling of that part of
the world, the King of Spayne

     [Philip IV., King of Spain, who succeeded to the throne in 1621,
     died in 1665.  He was succeeded by his son Charles II.]

being so lately dead.  And one thing more, Sir Martin Noell's lady is dead
with griefe for the death of her husband and nothing else, as they say, in
the world; but it seems nobody can make anything of his estate, whether he
be dead worth anything or no, he having dealt in so many things, publique
and private, as nobody can understand whereabouts his estate is, which is
the fate of these great dealers at everything.  So after my business being
done I home to my lodging and to bed,

9th.  Up, my head full of business, and called upon also by Sir John Shaw,
to whom I did give a civil answer about our prize goods, that all his dues
as one of the Farmers of the Customes are paid, and showed him our
Transire; with which he was satisfied, and parted, ordering his servants
to see the weight of them.  I to the office, and there found an order for
my coming presently to the Duke of Albemarle, and what should it be, but
to tell me, that, if my Lord Sandwich do not come to towne, he do resolve
to go with the fleete to sea himself, the Dutch, as he thinks, being in
the Downes, and so desired me to get a pleasure boat for to take him in
to-morrow morning, and do many other things, and with a great liking of
me, and my management especially, as that coxcombe my Lord Craven do tell
me, and I perceive it, and I am sure take pains enough to deserve it.
Thence away and to the office at London, where I did some business about
my money and private accounts, and there eat a bit of goose of Mr.
Griffin's, and so by water, it raining most miserably, to Greenwich,
calling on several vessels in my passage.  Being come there I hear another
seizure hath been made of our goods by one Captain Fisher that hath been
at Chatham by warrant of the Duke of Albemarle, and is come in my absence
to Tooker's and viewed them, demanding the key of the constable, and so
sealed up the door.  I to the house, but there being no officers nor
constable could do nothing, but back to my office full of trouble about
this, and there late about business, vexed to see myself fall into this
trouble and concernment in a thing that I want instruction from my Lord
Sandwich whether I should appear in it or no, and so home to bed, having
spent two hours, I and my boy, at Mr. Glanvill's removing of faggots to
make room to remove our goods to, but when done I thought it not fit to
use it.  The newes of the killing of the [King of] France is wholly
untrue, and they say that of the Pope too.

10th.  Up, and receive a stop from the Duke of Albemarle of setting out
any more ships, or providing a pleasure boat for himself, which I am glad
of, and do see, what I thought yesterday, that this resolution of his was
a sudden one and silly.  By and by comes Captain Cocke's Jacob to tell me
that he is come from Chatham this morning, and that there are four waggons
of goods at hand coming to towne, which troubles me.  I directed him to
bring them to his master's house.  But before I could send him away to
bring them thither, newes is brought me that they are seized on in the
towne by this Captain Fisher and they will carry them to another place.
So I to them and found our four waggons in the streete stopped by the
church by this Fisher and company and 100 or 200 people in the streetes
gazing.  I did give them good words, and made modest desires of carrying
the goods to Captain Cocke's, but they would have them to a house of their
hiring, where in a barne the goods were laid.  I had transires to show for
all, and the tale was right, and there I spent all the morning seeing this
done.  At which Fisher was vexed that I would not let it be done by any
body else for the merchant, and that I must needs be concerned therein,
which I did not think fit to owne.  So that being done, I left the goods
to be watched by men on their part and ours, and so to the office by noon,
whither by and by comes Captain Cocke, whom I had with great care sent for
by expresse the last night, and so I with him to his house and there eat a
bit, and so by coach to Lambeth, and I took occasion first to go to the
Duke of Albemarle to acquaint him with some thing of what had been done
this morning in behalf of a friend absent, which did give a good entrance
and prevented their possessing the Duke with anything of evil of me by
their report, and by and by in comes. Captain Cocke and tells his whole
story.  So an order was made for the putting him in possession upon giving
security to, be accountable for the goods, which for the present did
satisfy us, and so away, giving Locke that drew the order a piece.  (Lord!
to see how unhappily a man may fall into a necessity of bribing people to
do him right in a thing, wherein he hath done nothing but fair, and bought
dear.) So to the office, there to write my letters, and Cocke comes to
tell me that Fisher is come to him, and that he doubts not to cajole
Fisher and his companion and make them friends with drink and a bribe.
This night comes Sir Christopher Mings to towne, and I went to see him,
and by and by he being then out of the town comes to see me.  He is newly
come from Court, and carries direction for the making a show of getting
out the fleete again to go fight the Dutch, but that it will end in a
fleete of 20 good sayling frigates to go to the Northward or Southward,
and that will be all.  I enquired, but he would not be to know that he had
heard any thing at Oxford about the business of the prize goods, which I
did suspect, but he being gone, anon comes Cocke and tells me that he hath
been with him a great while, and that he finds him sullen and speaking
very high what disrespect he had received of my Lord, saying that he hath
walked 3 or 4 hours together at that Earle's cabbin door for audience and
could not be received, which, if true, I am sorry for.  He tells me that
Sir G. Ascue says, that he did from the beginning declare against these
[prize] goods, and would not receive his dividend; and that he and Sir W.
Pen are at odds about it, and that he fears Mings hath been doing ill
offices to my Lord.  I did to-night give my Lord an account of all this,
and so home and to bed.

11th.  Up, and so in my chamber staid all the morning doing something
toward my Tangier accounts, for the stating of them, and also comes up my
landlady, Mrs. Clerke, to make an agreement for the time to come; and I,
for the having room enough, and to keepe out strangers, and to have a
place to retreat to for my wife, if the sicknesse should come to Woolwich,
am contented to pay dear; so for three rooms and a dining-room, and for
linen and bread and beer and butter, at nights and mornings, I am to give
her L5 10s.  per month, and I wrote and we signed to an agreement.  By and
by comes Cocke to tell me that Fisher and his fellow were last night
mightily satisfied and promised all friendship, but this morning he finds
them to have new tricks and shall be troubled with them. So he being to go
down to Erith with them this afternoon about giving security, I advised
him to let them go by land, and so he and I (having eat something at his
house) by water to Erith, but they got thither before us, and there we met
Mr. Seymour, one of the Commissioners for Prizes, and a Parliament-man,
and he was mighty high, and had now seized our goods on their behalf; and
he mighty imperiously would have all forfeited, and I know not what.  I
thought I was in the right in a thing I said and spoke somewhat earnestly,
so we took up one another very smartly, for which I was sorry afterwards,
shewing thereby myself too much concerned, but nothing passed that I
valued at all.  But I could not but think [it odd] that a Parliament-man,
in a serious discourse before such persons as we and my Lord Bruncker, and
Sir John Minnes, should quote Hudibras, as being the book I doubt he hath
read most.  They I doubt will stand hard for high security, and Cocke
would have had me bound with him for his appearing, but I did stagger at
it, besides Seymour do stop the doing it at all till he has been with the
Duke of Albemarle.  So there will be another demurre.  It growing late,
and I having something to do at home, took my leave alone, leaving Cocke
there for all night, and so against tide and in the darke and very cold
weather to Woolwich, where we had appointed to keepe the night merrily;
and so, by Captain Cocke's coach, had brought a very pretty child, a
daughter of one Mrs. Tooker's, next door to my lodging, and so she, and a
daughter and kinsman of Mrs. Pett's made up a fine company at my lodgings
at Woolwich, where my wife and Mercer, and Mrs. Barbara danced, and mighty
merry we were, but especially at Mercer's dancing a jigg, which she does
the best I ever did see, having the most natural way of it, and keeps time
the most perfectly I ever did see.  This night is kept in lieu of
yesterday, for my wedding day of ten years; for which God be praised!
being now in an extreme good condition of health and estate and honour,
and a way of getting more money, though at this houre under some
discomposure, rather than damage, about some prize goods that I have
bought off the fleete, in partnership with Captain Cocke; and for the
discourse about the world concerning my Lord Sandwich, that he hath done a
thing so bad; and indeed it must needs have been a very rash act; and the
rather because of a Parliament now newly met to give money, and will have
some account of what hath already been spent, besides the precedent for a
General to take what prizes he pleases, and the giving a pretence to take
away much more than he intended, and all will lie upon him; and not giving
to all the Commanders, as well as the Flaggs, he displeases all them, and
offends even some of them, thinking others to be better served than
themselves; and lastly, puts himself out of a power of begging anything
again a great while of the King.  Having danced with my people as long as
I saw fit to sit up, I to bed and left them to do what they would.  I
forgot that we had W. Hewer there, and Tom, and Golding, my barber at
Greenwich, for our fiddler, to whom I did give 10s.

12th.  Called up before day, and so I dressed myself and down, it being
horrid cold, by water to my Lord Bruncker's ship, who advised me to do so,
and it was civilly to show me what the King had commanded about the
prize-goods, to examine most severely all that had been done in the taking
out any with or without order, without respect to my Lord Sandwich at all,
and that he had been doing of it, and find him examining one man, and I do
find that extreme ill use was made of my Lord's order.  For they did toss
and tumble and spoil, and breake things in hold to a great losse and shame
to come at the fine goods, and did take a man that knows where the fine
goods were, and did this over and over again for many days, Sir W.
Berkeley being the chief hand that did it, but others did the like at
other times, and they did say in doing it that my Lord Sandwich's back was
broad enough to bear it.  Having learned as much as I could, which was,
that the King and Duke were very severe in this point, whatever order they
before had given my Lord in approbation of what he had done, and that all
will come out and the King see, by the entries at the Custome House, what
all do amount to that had been taken, and so I took leave, and by water,
very cold, and to Woolwich where it was now noon, and so I staid dinner
and talking part of the afternoon, and then by coach, Captain Cocke's, to
Greenwich, taking the young lady home, and so to Cocke, and he tells me
that he hath cajolled with Seymour, who will be our friend; but that,
above all, Seymour tells him, that my Lord Duke did shew him to-day an
order from Court, for having all respect paid to the Earle of Sandwich,
and what goods had been delivered by his order, which do overjoy us, and
that to-morrow our goods shall be weighed, and he doubts not possession
to-morrow or next day.  Being overjoyed at this I to write my letters, and
at it very late.  Good newes this week that there are about 600 less dead
of the plague than the last.  So home to bed.

13th.  Lay long, and this morning comes Sir Jer. Smith

     [Captain Jeremiah Smith (or Smyth), knighted June, 1665; Admiral of
     the Blue in 1666.  He succeeded Sir William Penn as Comptroller of
     the Victualling Accounts in 1669, and held the office until 1675.]

to see me in his way to Court, and a good man he is, and one that I must
keep fair with, and will, it being I perceive my interest to have
kindnesse with the Commanders.  So to the office, and there very busy till
about noon comes Sir W. Warren, and he goes and gets a bit of meat ready
at the King's Head for us, and I by and by thither, and we dined together,
and I am not pleased with him about a little business of Tangier that I
put to him to do for me, but however, the hurt is not much, and his other
matters of profit to me continue very likely to be good.  Here we spent
till 2 o'clock, and so I set him on shore, and I by water to the Duke of
Albemarle, where I find him with Lord Craven and Lieutenant of the Tower
about him; among other things, talking of ships to get of the King to
fetch coles for the poore of the city, which is a good worke.  But, Lord!
to hear the silly talke between these three great people!  Yet I have no
reason to find fault, the Duke and Lord Craven being my very great
friends.  Here did the business I come about, and so back home by water,
and there Cocke comes to me and tells me that he is come to an
understanding with Fisher, and that he must give him L100, and that he
shall have his goods in possession to-morrow, they being all weighed
to-day, which pleases me very well.  This day the Duke tells me that there
is no news heard of the Dutch, what they do or where they are, but
believes that they are all gone home, for none of our spyes can give us
any tideings of them.  Cocke is fain to keep these people, Fisher and his
fellow, company night and day to keep them friends almost and great
troubles withal.  My head is full of settling the victualling business
also, that I may make some profit out of it, which I hope justly to do to
the King's advantage.  To-night come Sir J. Bankes to me upon my letter to
discourse it with him, and he did give me the advice I have taken almost
as fully as if I had been directed by him what to write.  The business
also of my Tangier accounts to be sent to Court is upon my hands in great
haste; besides, all my owne proper accounts are in great disorder, having
been neglected now above a month, which grieves me, but it could not be
settled sooner.  These together and the feare of the sicknesse and
providing for my family do fill my head very full, besides the infinite
business of the office, and nobody here to look after it but myself.  So
late from my office to my lodgings, and to bed.

14th.  Up, and to the office, where mighty busy, especially with Mr.
Gawden, with whom I shall, I think, have much to do, and by and by comes
the Lieutenant of the Tower by my invitation yesterday, but I had got
nothing for him, it is to discourse about the Cole shipps.  So he went
away to Sheriffe Hooker's, and I staid at the office till he sent for me
at noon to dinner, I very hungry.  When I come to the Sheriffe's he was
not there, nor in many other places, nor could find him at all, so was
forced to come to the office and get a bit of meat from the taverne, and
so to my business.  By and by comes the Lieutenant and reproaches me with
my not treating him as I ought, but all in jest, he it seemed dined with
Mr. Adrian May.  Very late writing letters at the office, and much
satisfied to hear from Captain Cocke that he had got possession of some of
his goods to his own house, and expected to have all to-night.  The towne,
I hear, is full of talke that there are great differences in the fleete
among the great Commanders, and that Mings at Oxford did impeach my Lord
of something, I think about these goods, but this is but talke. But my
heart and head to-night is full of the Victualling business, being
overjoyed and proud at my success in my proposal about it, it being read
before the King, Duke, and the Caball with complete applause and
satisfaction.  This Sir G. Carteret and Sir W. Coventry both writ me,
besides Sir W. Coventry's letter to the Duke of Albemarle, which I read
yesterday, and I hope to find my profit in it also.  So late home to bed.

15th (Lord's day).  Up, and while I staid for the barber, tried to compose
a duo of counterpoint, and I think it will do very well, it being by Mr.
Berckenshaw's rule.  By and by by appointment comes Mr. Povy's coach, and,
more than I expected, him himself, to fetch me to Brainford: so he and I
immediately set out, having drunk a draft of mulled sacke; and so rode
most nobly, in his most pretty and best contrived charriott in the world,
with many new conveniences, his never having till now, within a day or
two, been yet finished; our discourse upon Tangier business, want of
money, and then of publique miscarriages, nobody minding the publique, but
every body himself and his lusts.  Anon we come to his house, and there I
eat a bit, and so with fresh horses, his noble fine horses, the best
confessedly in England, the King having none such, he sent me to Sir
Robert Viner's, whom I met coming just from church, and so after having
spent half-an-hour almost looking upon the horses with some gentlemen that
were in company, he and I into his garden to discourse of money, but none
is to be had, he confessing himself in great straits, and I believe it.
Having this answer, and that I could not get better, we fell to publique
talke, and to think how the fleete and seamen will be paid, which he
protests he do not think it possible to compass, as the world is now: no
money got by trade, nor the persons that have it by them in the City to be
come at.  The Parliament, it seems, have voted the King L1,250,000 at
L50,000 per month, tax for the war; and voted to assist the King against
the Dutch, and all that shall adhere to them; and thanks to be given him
for his care of the Duke of Yorke, which last is a very popular vote on
the Duke's behalf.  He tells me how the taxes of the last assessment,
which should have been in good part gathered, are not yet laid, and that
even in part of the City of London; and the Chimny-money comes almost to
nothing, nor any thing else looked after.  Having done this I parted, my
mind not eased by any money, but only that I had done my part to the
King's service.  And so in a very pleasant evening back to Mr. Povy's, and
there supped, and after supper to talke and to sing, his man Dutton's wife
singing very pleasantly (a mighty fat woman), and I wrote out one song
from her and pricked the tune, both very pretty. But I did never heare one
sing with so much pleasure to herself as this lady do, relishing it to her
very heart, which was mighty pleasant.

16th.  Up about seven o'clock; and, after drinking, and I observing Mr.
Povy's being mightily mortifyed in his eating and drinking, and coaches
and horses, he desiring to sell his best, and every thing else, his
furniture of his house, he walked with me to Syon,

     [Sion House, granted by Edward VI. to his uncle, the Duke of
     Somerset.  After his execution, 1552, it was forfeited, and given to
     John Dudley, Duke of Northumberland.  The duke being beheaded in
     1553, it reverted to the Crown, and was granted in 1604 to Henry
     Percy, Earl of Northumberland.  It still belongs to the Duke of
     Northumberland.]

and there I took water, in our way he discoursing of the wantonnesse of
the Court, and how it minds nothing else, and I saying that that would
leave the King shortly if he did not leave it, he told me "No," for the
King do spend most of his time in feeling and kissing them naked .  .  .
But this lechery will never leave him.  Here I took boat (leaving him
there) and down to the Tower, where I hear the Duke of Albemarle is, and I
to Lumbard Streete, but can get no money.  So upon the Exchange, which is
very empty, God knows! and but mean people there.  The newes for certain
that the Dutch are come with their fleete before Margett, and some men
were endeavouring to come on shore when the post come away, perhaps to
steal some sheep.  But, Lord! how Colvill talks of the businesse of
publique revenue like a madman, and yet I doubt all true; that nobody
minds it, but that the King and Kingdom must speedily be undone, and rails
at my Lord about the prizes, but I think knows not my relation to him.
Here I endeavoured to satisfy all I could, people about Bills of Exchange
from Tangier, but it is only with good words, for money I have not, nor
can get.  God knows what will become of all the King's matters in a little
time, for he runs in debt every day, and nothing to pay them looked after.
Thence I walked to the Tower; but, Lord! how empty the streets are and
melancholy, so many poor sick people in the streets full of sores; and so
many sad stories overheard as I walk, every body talking of this dead, and
that man sick, and so many in this place, and so many in that.  And they
tell me that, in Westminster, there is never a physician and but one
apothecary left, all being dead; but that there are great hopes of a great
decrease this week: God send it!  At the Tower found my Lord Duke and
Duchesse at dinner; so I sat down.  And much good cheer, the Lieutenant
and his lady, and several officers with the Duke.  But, Lord! to hear the
silly talk that was there, would make one mad; the Duke having none almost
but fools about him.  Much of their talke about the Dutch coming on shore,
which they believe they may some of them have been and steal sheep, and
speak all in reproach of them in whose hands the fleete is; but, Lord
helpe him, there is something will hinder him and all the world in going
to sea, which is want of victuals; for we have not wherewith to answer our
service; and how much better it would have been if the Duke's advice had
been taken for the fleete to have gone presently out; but, God helpe the
King! while no better counsels are given, and what is given no better
taken.  Thence after dinner receiving many commands from the Duke, I to
our office on the Hill, and there did a little business and to Colvill's
again, and so took water at the Tower, and there met with Captain Cocke,
and he down with me to Greenwich, I having received letters from my Lord
Sandwich to-day, speaking very high about the prize goods, that he would
have us to fear nobody, but be very confident in what we have done, and
not to confess any fault or doubt of what he hath done; for the King hath
allowed it, and do now confirm it, and sent orders, as he says, for
nothing to be disturbed that his Lordshipp hath ordered therein as to the
division of the goods to the fleete; which do comfort us, but my Lord
writes to me that both he and I may hence learn by what we see in this
business.  But that which pleases me best is that Cocke tells me that he
now understands that Fisher was set on in this business by the design of
some of the Duke of Albemarle's people, Warcupp and others, who lent him
money to set him out in it, and he has spent high.  Who now curse him for
a rogue to take L100 when he might have had as well L1,500, and they are
mightily fallen out about it.  Which in due time shall be discovered, but
that now that troubles me afresh is, after I am got to the office at
Greenwich that some new troubles are come, and Captain Cocke's house is
beset before and behind with guards, and more, I do fear they may come to
my office here to search for Cocke's goods and find some small things of
my clerk's.  So I assisted them in helping to remove their small trade,
but by and by I am told that it is only the Custome House men who came to
seize the things that did lie at Mr. Glanville's, for which they did never
yet see our Transire, nor did know of them till to-day.  So that my fear
is now over, for a transire is ready for them.  Cocke did get a great many
of his goods to London to-day.  To the Still Yarde, which place, however,
is now shut up of the plague; but I was there, and we now make no bones of
it.  Much talke there is of the Chancellor's speech and the King's at the
Parliament's meeting, which are very well liked; and that we shall
certainly, by their speeches, fall out with France at this time, together
with the Dutch, which will find us work.  Late at the office entering my
Journall for 8 days past, the greatness of my business hindering me of
late to put it down daily, but I have done it now very true and
particularly, and hereafter will, I hope, be able to fall into my old way
of doing it daily.  So to my lodging, and there had a good pullet to my
supper, and so to bed, it being very cold again, God be thanked for it!

17th.  Up, and all day long busy at the office, mighty busy, only stepped
to my lodging and had a fowl for my dinner, and at night my wife and
Mercer comes to me, which troubled me a little because I am to be mighty
busy to-morrow all day seriously about my accounts.  So late from my
office to her, and supped, and so to bed.

18th.  Up, and after some pleasant discourse with my wife (though my head
full of business) I out and left her to go home, and myself to the office,
and thence by water to the Duke of Albemarle's, and so back again and find
my wife gone.  So to my chamber at my lodgings, and to the making of my
accounts up of Tangier, which I did with great difficulty, finding the
difference between short and long reckonings where I have had occasion to
mix my moneys, as I have of late done my Tangier treasure upon other
occasions, and other moneys upon that.  However, I was at it late and did
it pretty perfectly, and so, after eating something, to bed, my mind eased
of a great deal of figures and castings.

19th.  Up, and to my accounts again, and stated them very clear and fair,
and at noon dined at my lodgings with Mr. Hater and W. Hewer at table with
me, I being come to an agreement yesterday with my landlady for L6 per
month, for so many rooms for myself, them, and my wife and mayde, when she
shall come, and to pay besides for my dyett.  After dinner I did give them
my accounts and letters to write against I went to the Duke of Albemarle's
this evening, which I did; and among other things, spoke to him for my
wife's brother, Balty, to be of his guard, which he kindly answered that
he should.  My business of the Victualling goes on as I would have it; and
now my head is full how to make some profit of it to myself or people.  To
that end, when I came home, I wrote a letter to Mr. Coventry, offering
myself to be the Surveyor Generall, and am apt to think he will assist me
in it, but I do not set my heart much on it, though it would be a good
helpe.  So back to my office, and there till past one before I could get
all these letters and papers copied out, which vexed me, but so sent them
away without hopes of saving the post, and so to my lodging to bed.

20th.  Up, and had my last night's letters brought back to me, which
troubles me, because of my accounts, lest they should be asked for before
they come, which I abhorr, being more ready to give than they can be to
demand them: so I sent away an expresse to Oxford with them, and another
to Portsmouth, with a copy of my letter to Mr. Coventry about my
victualling business, for fear he should be gone from Oxford, as he
intended, thither.  So busy all the morning and at noon to Cocke, and
dined there.  He and I alone, vexed that we are not rid of all our trouble
about our goods, but it is almost over, and in the afternoon to my
lodging, and there spent the whole afternoon and evening with Mr. Hater,
discoursing of the business of the office, where he tells me that among
others Thomas Willson do now and then seem to hint that I do take too much
business upon me, more than I can do, and that therefore some do lie
undone.  This I confess to my trouble is true, but it arises from my being
forced to take so much on me, more than is my proper task to undertake.
But for this at last I did advise to him to take another clerk if he
thinks fit, I will take care to have him paid.  I discoursed also much
with him about persons fit to be put into the victualling business, and
such as I could spare something out of their salaries for them, but
without trouble I cannot, I see, well do it, because Thomas Willson must
have the refusal of the best place which is London of L200 per annum,
which I did intend for Tooker, and to get L50 out of it as a help to Mr.
Hater.  How[ever], I will try to do something of this kind for them.
Having done discourse with him late, I to enter my Tangier accounts fair,
and so to supper and to bed.

21 st.  Up, and to my office, where busy all the morning, and then with my
two clerks home to dinner, and so back again to the office, and there very
late very busy, and so home to supper and to bed.

22nd (Lord's day).  Up, and after ready and going to Captain Cocke's,
where I find we are a little further safe in some part of our goods, I to
Church, in my way was meeting with some letters, which made me resolve to
go after church to my Lord Duke of Albemarle's, so, after sermon, I took
Cocke's chariott, and to Lambeth; but, in going and getting over the
water, and through White Hall, I spent so much time, the Duke had almost
dined.  However, fresh meat was brought for me to his table, and there I
dined, and full of discourse and very kind.  Here they are again talking
of the prizes, and my Lord Duke did speake very broad that my Lord
Sandwich and Pen should do what they would, and answer for themselves.
For his part, he would lay all before the King.  Here he tells me the
Dutch Embassador at Oxford is clapped up, but since I hear it is not true.
Thence back again, it being evening before I could get home, and there
Cocke not being within, I and Mr. Salomon to Mr. Glanville's, and there we
found Cocke and sat and supped, and was mighty merry with only Madam
Penington, who is a fine, witty lady.  Here we spent the evening late with
great mirth, and so home and to bed.

23rd.  Up, and after doing some business I down by water, calling to see
my wife, with whom very merry for ten minutes, and so to Erith, where my
Lord Bruncker and I kept the office, and dispatched some business by
appointment on the Bezan.  Among other things about the slopsellers, who
have trusted us so long, they are not able, nor can be expected to trust
us further, and I fear this winter the fleete will be undone by that
particular.  Thence on board the East India ship, where my Lord Bruncker
had provided a great dinner, and thither comes by and by Sir John Minnes
and before him Sir W. Warren and anon a Perspective glasse maker, of whom
we, every one, bought a pocket glasse.  But I am troubled with the much
talke and conceitedness of Mrs. Williams and her impudence, in case she be
not married to my Lord.  They are getting themselves ready to deliver the
goods all out to the East India Company, who are to have the goods in
their possession and to advance two thirds of the moderate value thereof
and sell them as well as they can and the King to give them 6 per cent.
for the use of the money they shall so advance.  By this means the company
will not suffer by the King's goods bringing down the price of their own.
Thence in the evening back again with Sir W. Warren and Captain Taylor in
my boat, and the latter went with me to the office, and there he and I
reckoned; and I perceive I shall get L100 profit by my services of late to
him, which is a very good thing.  Thence to my lodging, where I find my
Lord Rutherford, of which I was glad.  We supped together and sat up late,
he being a mighty wanton man with a daughter in law of my landlady's, a
pretty conceited woman big with child, and he would be handling her
breasts, which she coyly refused.  But they gone, my Lord and I to
business, and he would have me forbear paying Alderman Backewell the money
ordered him, which I, in hopes to advantage myself, shall forbear, but do
not think that my Lord will do any thing gratefully more to me than he
hath done, not that I shall get any thing as I pretended by helping him to
interest for his last L7700, which I could do, and do him a courtesy too.
Discourse being done, he to bed in my chamber and I to another in the
house.

24th.  Lay long, having a cold.  Then to my Lord and sent him going to
Oxford, and I to my office, whither comes Sir William Batten now newly
from Oxford.  I can gather nothing from him about my Lord Sandwich about
the business of the prizes, he being close, but he shewed me a bill which
hath been read in the House making all breaking of bulke for the time to
come felony, but it is a foolish Act, and will do no great matter, only is
calculated to my Lord Sandwich's case.  He shewed me also a good letter
printed from the Bishopp of Munster to the States of Holland shewing the
state of their case.  Here we did some business and so broke up and I to
Cocke, where Mr. Evelyn was, to dinner, and there merry, yet vexed again
at publique matters, and to see how little heed is had to the prisoners
and sicke and wounded.  Thence to my office, and no sooner there but to my
great surprise am told that my Lord Sandwich is come to towne; so I
presently to Boreman's, where he is and there found him: he mighty kind to
me, but no opportunity of discourse private yet, which he tells me he must
have with me; only his business is sudden to go to the fleece, to get out
a few ships to drive away the Dutch.  I left him in discourse with Sir W.
Batten and others, and myself to the office till about 10 at night and so,
letters being done, I to him again to Captain Cocke's, where he supped,
and lies, and never saw him more merry, and here is Charles Herbert, who
the King hath lately knighted.

     [This person, erroneously called by Pepys Sir C. Herbert, will be
     best defined by subjoining the inscription on his monument in
     Westminster Abbey: "Sir Charles Harbord, Knight, third son of Sir
     Charles Harbord, Knight, Surveyor-General, and First Lieutenant of
     the Royall James, under the most noble and illustrious Captaine,
     Edward, Earle of Sandwich, Vice-Admirall of England, which, after a
     terrible fight, maintained to admiration against a squadron of the
     Holland fleet, above six hours, neere the Suffolk coast, having put
     off two fireships; at last, being utterly disabled, and few of her
     men remaining unhurt, was, by a third, unfortunately set on fire.
     But he (though he swome well) neglected to save himselfe, as some
     did, and out of perfect love to that worthy Lord, whom, for many
     yeares, he had constantly accompanyed, in all his honourable
     employments, and in all the engagements of the former warre, dyed
     with him, at the age of xxxii., much bewailed by his father, whom he
     never offended; and much beloved by all for his knowne piety,
     vertue, loyalty, fortitude, and fidelity."--B.]

My Lord, to my great content, did tell me before them, that never anything
was read to the King and Council, all the chief Ministers of State being
there, as my letter about the Victualling was, and no more said upon it
than a most thorough consent to every word was said, and directed, that it
be pursued and practised.  After much mirth, and my Lord having travelled
all night last night, he to bed, and we all parted, I home.

25th.  Up and to my Lord Sandwich's, where several Commanders, of whom I
took the state of all their ships, and of all could find not above four
capable of going out.  The truth is, the want of victuals being the whole
overthrow of this yeare both at sea, and now at the Nore here and
Portsmouth, where all the fleete lies.  By and by comes down my Lord, and
then he and I an houre together alone upon private discourse.  He tells me
that Mr. Coventry and he are not reconciled, but declared enemies: the
only occasion of it being, he tells me, his ill usage from him about the
first fight, wherein he had no right done him, which, methinks, is a poor
occasion, for, in my conscience, that was no design of Coventry's.  But,
however, when I asked my Lord whether it were not best, though with some
condescension, to be friends with him, he told me it was not possible, and
so I stopped.  He tells me, as very private, that there are great factions
at the Court between the King's party and the Duke of Yorke's, and that
the King, which is a strange difficulty, do favour my Lord in opposition
to the Duke's party; that my Lord Chancellor, being, to be sure, the
patron of the Duke's, it is a mystery whence it should be that Mr.
Coventry is looked upon by him [Clarendon] as an enemy to him; that if he
had a mind himself to be out of this employment, as Mr. Coventry, he
believes, wishes, and himself and I do incline to wish it also, in many
respects, yet he believes he shall not be able, because of the King, who
will keepe him in on purpose, in opposition to the other party; that
Prince Rupert and he are all possible friends in the world; that Coventry
hath aggravated this business of the prizes, though never so great
plundering in the world as while the Duke and he were at sea; and in Sir
John Lawson's time he could take and pillage, and then sink a whole ship
in the Streights, and Coventry say nothing to it; that my Lord Arlington
is his fast friend; that the Chancellor is cold to him, and though I told
him that I and the world do take my Lord Chancellor, in his speech the
other day, to have said as much as could be wished, yet he thinks he did
not.  That my Lord Chancellor do from hence begin to be cold to him,
because of his seeing him and Arlington so great: that nothing at Court is
minded but faction and pleasure, and nothing intended of general good to
the kingdom by anybody heartily; so that he believes with me, in a little
time confusion will certainly come over all the nation.  He told me how a
design was carried on a while ago, for the Duke of Yorke to raise an army
in the North, and to be the Generall of it, and all this without the
knowledge or advice of the Duke of Albemarle, which when he come to know,
he was so vexed, they were fain to let it fall to content him: that his
matching with the family of Sir G. Carteret do make the difference greater
between Coventry and him, they being enemies; that the Chancellor did, as
every body else, speak well of me the other day, but yet was, at the
Committee for Tangier, angry that I should offer to suffer a bill of
exchange to be protested.  So my Lord did bid me take heed, for that I
might easily suppose I could not want enemies, no more than others.  In
all he speaks with the greatest trust and love and confidence in what I
say or do, that a man can do.  After this discourse ended we sat down to
dinner and mighty merry, among other things, at the Bill brought into the
House to make it felony to break bulke, which, as my Lord says well, will
make that no prizes shall be taken, or, if taken, shall be sunke after
plundering; and the Act for the method of gathering this last L1,250,000
now voted, and how paid wherein are several strange imperfections.  After
dinner my Lord by a ketch down to Erith, where the Bezan was, it blowing
these last two days and now both night and day very hard southwardly, so
that it has certainly drove the Dutch off the coast. My Lord being gone I
to the office, and there find Captain Ferrers, who tells me his wife is
come to town to see him, having not seen him since 15 weeks ago at his
first going to sea last.  She is now at a Taverne and stays all night, so
I was obliged to give him my house and chamber to lie in, which he with
great modesty and after much force took, and so I got Mr. Evelyn's coach
to carry her thither, and the coach coming back, I with Mr. Evelyn to
Deptford, where a little while with him doing a little business, and so in
his coach back again to my lodgings, and there sat with Mrs. Ferrers two
hours, and with my little girle, Mistress Frances Tooker, and very
pleasant.  Anon the Captain comes, and then to supper very merry, and so I
led them to bed.  And so to bed myself, having seen my pretty little girle
home first at the next door.

26th.  Up, and, leaving my guests to make themselves ready, I to the
office, and thither comes Sir Jer. Smith and Sir Christopher Mings to see
me, being just come from Portsmouth and going down to the Fleete.  Here I
sat and talked with them a good while and then parted, only Sir
Christopher Mings and I together by water to the Tower; and I find him a
very witty well-spoken fellow, and mighty free to tell his parentage,
being a shoemaker's son, to whom he is now going, and I to the 'Change,
where I hear how the French have taken two and sunk one of our
merchant-men in the Streights, and carried the ships to Toulon; so that
there is no expectation but we must fall out with them.  The 'Change
pretty full, and the town begins to be lively again, though the streets
very empty, and most shops shut.  So back again I and took boat and called
for Sir Christopher Mings at St. Katharine's, who was followed with some
ordinary friends, of which, he says, he is proud, and so down to
Greenwich, the wind furious high, and we with our sail up till I made it
be taken down. I took him, it being 3 o'clock, to my lodgings and did give
him a good dinner and so parted, he being pretty close to me as to any
business of the fleete, knowing me to be a servant of my Lord Sandwich's.
He gone I to the office till night, and then they come and tell me my wife
is come to towne, so I to her vexed at her coming, but it was upon
innocent business, so I was pleased and made her stay, Captain Ferrers and
his lady being yet there, and so I left them to dance, and I to the office
till past nine at night, and so to them and there saw them dance very
prettily, the Captain and his wife, my wife and Mrs. Barbary, and Mercer
and my landlady's daughter, and then little Mistress Frances Tooker and
her mother, a pretty woman come to see my wife.  Anon to supper, and then
to dance again (Golding being our fiddler, who plays very well and all
tunes) till past twelve at night, and then we broke up and every one to
bed, we make shift for all our company, Mrs. Tooker being gone.

27th.  Up, and after some pleasant discourse with my wife, I out, leaving
her and Mrs. Ferrers there, and I to Captain Cocke's, there to do some
business, and then away with Cocke in his coach through Kent Streete, a
miserable, wretched, poor place, people sitting sicke and muffled up with
plasters at every 4 or 5 doors.  So to the 'Change, and thence I by water
to the Duke of Albemarle's, and there much company, but I staid and dined,
and he makes mighty much of me; and here he tells us the Dutch are gone,
and have lost above 160 cables and anchors, through the last foule
weather.  Here he proposed to me from Mr. Coventry, as I had desired of
Mr. Coventry, that I should be Surveyor-Generall of the Victualling
business, which I accepted.  But, indeed, the terms in which Mr. Coventry
proposes it for me are the most obliging that ever I could expect from any
man, and more; it saying me to be the fittest man in England, and that he
is sure, if I will undertake, I will perform it; and that it will be also
a very desirable thing that I might have this encouragement, my
encouragement in the Navy alone being in no wise proportionable to my
pains or deserts.  This, added to the letter I had three days since from
Mr. Southerne, signifying that the Duke of Yorke had in his master's
absence opened my letter, and commanded him to tell me that he did approve
of my being the Surveyor-General, do make me joyful beyond myself that I
cannot express it, to see that as I do take pains, so God blesses me, and
hath sent me masters that do observe that I take pains.  After having done
here, I back by water and to London, and there met with Captain Cocke's
coach again, and I went in it to Greenwich and thence sent my wife in it
to Woolwich, and I to the office, and thence home late with Captain
Taylor, and he and I settled all accounts between us, and I do find that I
do get above L129 of him for my services for him within these six months.
At it till almost one in the morning, and after supper he away and I to
bed, mightily satisfied in all this, and in a resolution I have taken
to-night with Mr. Hater to propose the port of London for the victualling
business for Thomas Willson, by which it will be better done and I at more
ease, in case he should grumble.

     [The Duke of York's letter appointing Thomas Wilson Surveyor of the
     Victualling of His Majesty's Navy in the Port of London, and
     referring to Pepys as Surveyor-General of the Victualling Affairs,
     is printed in "Memoirs of the English Affairs, chiefly Naval, 1660-
     73," by James, Duke of York, 1729, p. 131.]

So to bed.

28th.  Up, and sent for Thomas Willson, and broke the victualling business
to him and he is mightily contented, and so am I that I have bestowed it
on him, and so I to Mr. Boreman's, where Sir W. Batten is, to tell him
what I had proposed to Thomas Willson, and the newes also I have this
morning from Sir W. Clerke, which is, that notwithstanding all the care
the Duke of Albemarle hath taken about the putting the East India prize
goods into the East India Company's hands, and my Lord Bruncker and Sir J.
Minnes having laden out a great part of the goods, an order is come from
Court to stop all, and to have the goods delivered to the
Sub-Commissioners of prizes.  At which I am glad, because it do vex this
simple weake man, and we shall have a little reparation for the disgrace
my Lord Sandwich has had in it.  He tells me also that the Parliament hath
given the Duke of Yorke L120,000, to be paid him after the L1,250,000 is
gathered upon the tax which they have now given the King.

     [This sum was granted by the Commons to Charles, with a request that
     he would bestow it on his brother.--B.]

He tells me that the Dutch have lately launched sixteen new ships; all
which is great news.  Thence by horsebacke with Mr. Deane to Erith, and so
aboard my Lord Bruncker and dined, and very merry with him and good
discourse between them about ship building, and, after dinner and a little
pleasant discourse, we away and by horse back again to Greenwich, and
there I to the office very late, offering my persons for all the
victualling posts much to my satisfaction.  Also much other business I did
to my mind, and so weary home to my lodging, and there after eating and
drinking a little I to bed.  The King and Court, they say, have now
finally resolved to spend nothing upon clothes, but what is of the growth
of England; which, if observed, will be very pleasing to the people, and
very good for them.

29th (Lord's day).  Up, and being ready set out with Captain Cocke in his
coach toward Erith, Mr. Deane riding along with us, where we dined and
were very merry.  After dinner we fell to discourse about the Dutch, Cocke
undertaking to prove that they were able to wage warr with us three years
together, which, though it may be true, yet, not being satisfied with his
arguments, my Lord and I did oppose the strength of his arguments, which
brought us to a great heate, he being a conceited man, but of no Logique
in his head at all, which made my Lord and I mirth. Anon we parted, and
back again, we hardly having a word all the way, he being so vexed at our
not yielding to his persuasion.  I was set down at Woolwich towne end, and
walked through the towne in the darke, it being now night.  But in the
streete did overtake and almost run upon two women crying and carrying a
man's coffin between them.  I suppose the husband of one of them, which,
methinks, is a sad thing.  Being come to Shelden's, I find my people in
the darke in the dining room, merry and laughing, and, I thought, sporting
one with another, which, God helpe me! raised my jealousy presently.  Come
in the darke, and one of them touching me (which afterward I found was
Susan) made them shreeke, and so went out up stairs, leaving them to light
a candle and to run out.  I went out and was very vexed till I found my
wife was gone with Mr. Hill and Mercer this day to see me at Greenwich,
and these people were at supper, and the candle on a sudden falling out of
the candlesticke (which I saw as I come through the yarde) and Mrs.
Barbary being there I was well at ease again, and so bethought myself what
to do, whether to go to Greenwich or stay there; at last go I would, and
so with a lanthorne, and 3 or 4  people with me, among others Mr. Browne,
who was there, would go, I walked with a lanthorne and discoursed with him
about paynting and the several sorts of it.  I came in good time to
Greenwich, where I found Mr. Hill with my wife, and very glad I was to see
him.  To supper and discourse of musique and so to bed, I lying with him
talking till midnight about Berckenshaw's musique rules, which I did to
his great satisfaction inform him in, and so to sleep.

30th.  Up, and to my office about business.  At noon to dinner, and after
some discourse of musique, he and I to the office awhile, and he to get
Mr. Coleman, if he can, against night.  By and by I back again home, and
there find him returned with Mr. Coleman (his wife being ill) and Mr.
Laneare, with whom with their Lute we had excellent company and good
singing till midnight, and a good supper I did give them, but Coleman's
voice is quite spoiled, and when he begins to be drunk he is excellent
company, but afterward troublesome and impertinent.  Laneare sings in a
melancholy method very well, and a sober man he seems to be.  They being
gone, we to bed.  Captain Ferrers coming this day from my Lord is forced
to lodge here, and I put him to Mr. Hill.

31st.  Up, and to the office, Captain Ferrers going back betimes to my
Lord.  I to the office, where Sir W. Batten met me, and did tell me that
Captain Cocke's black was dead of the plague, which I had heard of before,
but took no notice.  By and by Captain Cocke come to the office, and Sir
W. Batten and I did send to him that he would either forbear the office,
or forbear going to his owne office.  However, meeting yesterday the
Searchers with their rods in their hands coming from Captain Cocke's
house, I did overhear them say that the fellow did not die of the plague,
but he had I know been ill a good while, and I am told that his boy Jack
is also ill.  At noon home to dinner, and then to the office again,
leaving Mr. Hill if he can to get Mrs. Coleman at night.  About nine at
night I come home, and there find Mrs. Pierce come and little Fran.
Tooker, and Mr. Hill, and other people, a great many dancing, and anon
comes Mrs. Coleman with her husband and Laneare.  The dancing ended and to
sing, which Mrs. Coleman do very finely, though her voice is decayed as to
strength but mighty sweet though soft, and a pleasant jolly woman, and in
mighty good humour was to-night.  Among other things Laneare did, at the
request of Mr. Hill, bring two or three the finest prints for my wife to
see that ever I did see in all my life.  But for singing, among other
things, we got Mrs. Coleman to sing part of the Opera, though she won't
owne that ever she did get any of it without book in order to the stage;
but, above all, her counterfeiting of Captain Cooke's part, in his
reproaching his man with cowardice, "Base slave," &c., she do it most
excellently.  At it till past midnight, and then broke up and to bed.
Hill and I together again, and being very sleepy we had little discourse
as we had the other night. Thus we end the month merrily; and the more for
that, after some fears that the plague would have increased again this
week, I hear for certain that there is above 400 [less], the whole number
being 1,388, and of them of the plague, 1,031. Want of money in the Navy
puts everything out of order.  Men grow mutinous; and nobody here to mind
the business of the Navy but myself.  At least Sir W. Batten for the few
days he has been here do nothing.  I in great hopes of my place of
Surveyor-Generall of the Victualling, which will bring me L300 per annum.

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     A conceited man, but of no Logique in his head at all
     Best poem that ever was wrote (Siege of Rhodes)
     French have taken two and sunk one of our merchant-men
     Hath sent me masters that do observe that I take pains
     How little heed is had to the prisoners and sicke and wounded
     How unhppily a man may fall into a necessity of bribing people
     Lechery will never leave him
     Money I have not, nor can get
     Mr. Evelyn's translating and sending me as a present
     Poor seamen that lie starving in the streets
     Saying me to be the fittest man in England
     Searchers with their rods in their hands


                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                           NOVEMBER & DECEMBER
                                  1665

November 1st.  Lay very long in bed discoursing with Mr. Hill of most
things of a man's life, and how little merit do prevail in the world, but
only favour; and that, for myself, chance without merit brought me in; and
that diligence only keeps me so, and will, living as I do among so many
lazy people that the diligent man becomes necessary, that they cannot do
anything without him, and so told him of my late business of the
victualling, and what cares I am in to keepe myself having to do with
people of so different factions at Court, and yet must be fair with them
all, which was very pleasant discourse for me to tell, as well as he
seemed to take it, for him to hear.  At last up, and it being a very foule
day for raine and a hideous wind, yet having promised I would go by water
to Erith, and bearing sayle was in danger of oversetting, but ordered them
take down their sayle, and so cold and wet got thither, as they had ended
their dinner.  How[ever], I dined well, and after dinner all on shore, my
Lord Bruncker with us to Mrs. Williams's lodgings, and Sir W. Batten, Sir
Edmund Pooly, and others; and there, it being my Lord's birth-day, had
every one a green riband tied in our hats very foolishly; and methinks
mighty disgracefully for my Lord to have his folly so open to all the
world with this woman.  But by and by Sir W. Batten and I took coach, and
home to Boreman, and so going home by the backside I saw Captain Cocke
'lighting out of his coach (having been at Erith also with her but not on
board) and so he would come along with me to my lodging, and there sat and
supped and talked with us, but we were angry a little a while about our
message to him the other day about bidding him keepe from the office or
his owne office, because of his black dying.  I owned it and the reason of
it, and would have been glad he had been out of the house, but I could not
bid him go, and so supped, and after much other talke of the sad condition
and state of the King's matters we broke up, and my friend and I to bed.
This night coming with Sir W. Batten into Greenwich we called upon Coll.
Cleggatt, who tells us for certaine that the King of Denmark hath declared
to stand for the King of England, but since I hear it is wholly false.

2nd.  Up, left my wife and to the office, and there to my great content
Sir W. Warren come to me to settle the business of the Tangier boates,
wherein I shall get above L100, besides L100 which he gives me in the
paying for them out of his owne purse.  He gone, I home to my lodgings to
dinner, and there comes Captain Wagers newly returned from the Streights,
who puts me in great fear for our last ships that went to Tangier with
provisions, that they will be taken.  A brave, stout fellow this Captain
is, and I think very honest.  To the office again after dinner and there
late writing letters, and then about 8 at night set out from my office and
fitting myself at my lodgings intended to have gone this night in a Ketch
down to the Fleete, but calling in my way at Sir J. Minnes's, who is come
up from Erith about something about the prizes, they persuaded me not to
go till the morning, it being a horrible darke and a windy night. So I
back to my lodging and to bed.

3rd.  Was called up about four o'clock and in the darke by lanthorne took
boat and to the Ketch and set sayle, sleeping a little in the Cabbin till
day and then up and fell to reading of Mr. Evelyn's book about Paynting,

     [This must surely have been Evelyn's "Sculptura, or the History and
     Art of Chalcography and Engraving in Copper," published in 1662.
     The translation of Freart's "Idea of the Perfection of Painting
     demonstrated" was not published until 1668.]

which is a very pretty book.  Carrying good victuals and Tom with me I to
breakfast about 9 o'clock, and then to read again and come to the Fleete
about twelve, where I found my Lord (the Prince being gone in) on board
the Royall James, Sir Thomas Allen commander, and with my Lord an houre
alone discoursing what was my chief and only errand about what was
adviseable for his Lordship to do in this state of things, himself being
under the Duke of Yorke's and Mr. Coventry's envy, and a great many more
and likely never to do anything honourably but he shall be envied and the
honour taken as much as can be from it.  His absence lessens his interest
at Court, and what is worst we never able to set out a fleete fit for him
to command, or, if out, to keepe them out or fit them to do any great
thing, or if that were so yet nobody at home minds him or his condition
when he is abroad, and lastly the whole affairs of state looking as if
they would all on a sudden break in pieces, and then what a sad thing it
would be for him to be out of the way.  My Lord did concur in every thing
and thanked me infinitely for my visit and counsel, telling me that in
every thing he concurs, but puts a query, what if the King will not think
himself safe, if any man should go but him.  How he should go off then? To
that I had no answer ready, but the making the King see that he may be of
as good use to him here while another goes forth.  But for that I am not
able to say much.  We after this talked of some other little things and so
to dinner, where my Lord infinitely kind to me, and after dinner I rose
and left him with some Commanders at the table taking tobacco and I took
the Bezan back with me, and with a brave gale and tide reached up that
night to the Hope, taking great pleasure in learning the seamen's manner
of singing when they sound the depths, and then to supper and to sleep,
which I did most excellently all night, it being a horrible foule night
for wind and raine.

4th.  They sayled from midnight, and come to Greenwich about 5 o'clock in
the morning.  I however lay till about 7 or 8, and so to my office, my
head a little akeing, partly for want of natural rest, partly having so
much business to do to-day, and partly from the newes I hear that one of
the little boys at my lodging is not well; and they suspect, by their
sending for plaister and fume, that it may be the plague; so I sent Mr.
Hater and W. Hewer to speake with the mother; but they returned to me,
satisfied that there is no hurt nor danger, but the boy is well, and
offers to be searched, however, I was resolved myself to abstain coming
thither for a while.  Sir W. Batten and myself at the office all the
morning.  At noon with him to dinner at Boreman's, where Mr. Seymour with
us, who is a most conceited fellow and not over much in him.  Here Sir W.
Batten told us (which I had not heard before) that the last sitting day
his cloake was taken from Mingo he going home to dinner, and that he was
beaten by the seamen and swears he will come to Greenwich, but no more to
the office till he can sit safe.  After dinner I to the office and there
late, and much troubled to have 100 seamen all the afternoon there,
swearing below and cursing us, and breaking the glasse windows, and swear
they will pull the house down on Tuesday next.  I sent word of this to
Court, but nothing will helpe it but money and a rope.  Late at night to
Mr. Glanville's there to lie for a night or two, and to bed.

5th (Lord's day).  Up, and after being trimmed, by boat to the Cockpitt,
where I heard the Duke of Albemarle's chaplin make a simple sermon: among
other things, reproaching the imperfection of humane learning, he cried:
"All our physicians cannot tell what an ague is, and all our arithmetique
is not able to number the days of a man;" which, God knows, is not the
fault of arithmetique, but that our understandings reach not the thing. To
dinner, where a great deale of silly discourse, but the worst is I hear
that the plague increases much at Lambeth, St. Martin's and Westminster,
and fear it will all over the city.  Thence I to the Swan, thinking to
have seen Sarah but she was at church, and so I by water to Deptford, and
there made a visit to Mr. Evelyn, who, among other things, showed me most
excellent painting in little; in distemper, Indian incke, water colours:
graveing; and, above all, the whole secret of mezzo-tinto, and the manner
of it, which is very pretty, and good things done with it. He read to me
very much also of his discourse, he hath been many years and now is about,
about Guardenage; which will be a most noble and pleasant piece.  He read
me part of a play or two of his making, very good, but not as he conceits
them, I think, to be.  He showed me his Hortus Hyemalis; leaves laid up in
a book of several plants kept dry, which preserve colour, however, and
look very finely, better than any Herball.  In fine, a most excellent
person he is, and must be allowed a little for a little conceitedness; but
he may well be so, being a man so much above others.  He read me, though
with too much gusto, some little poems of his own, that were not
transcendant, yet one or two very pretty epigrams; among others, of a lady
looking in at a grate, and being pecked at by an eagle that was there.
Here comes in, in the middle of our discourse Captain Cocke, as drunk as a
dogg, but could stand, and talk and laugh.  He did so joy himself in a
brave woman that he had been with all the afternoon, and who should it be
but my Lady Robinson, but very troublesome he is with his noise and talke,
and laughing, though very pleasant.  With him in his coach to Mr.
Glanville's, where he sat with Mrs. Penington and myself a good while
talking of this fine woman again and then went away.  Then the lady and I
to very serious discourse and, among other things, of what a bonny lasse
my Lady Robinson is, who is reported to be kind to the prisoners, and has
said to Sir G. Smith, who is her great crony, "Look! there is a pretty
man, I would be content to break a commandment with him," and such loose
expressions she will have often.  After an houre's talke we to bed, the
lady mightily troubled about a pretty little bitch she hath, which is very
sicke, and will eat nothing, and the worst was, I could hear her in her
chamber bemoaning the bitch, and by and by taking her into bed with her.
The bitch pissed and shit a bed, and she was fain to rise and had coals
out of my chamber to dry the bed again.  This night I had a letter that
Sir G. Carteret would be in towne to-morrow, which did much surprize me.

6th.  Up, and to my office, where busy all the morning and then to dinner
to Captain Cocke's with Mr. Evelyn, where very merry, only vexed after
dinner to stay too long for our coach.  At last, however, to Lambeth and
thence the Cockpitt, where we found Sir G. Carteret come, and in with the
Duke and the East India Company about settling the business of the prizes,
and they have gone through with it.  Then they broke up, and Sir G.
Carteret come out, and thence through the garden to the water side and by
water I with him in his boat down with Captain Cocke to his house at
Greenwich, and while supper was getting ready Sir G. Carteret and I did
walk an houre in the garden before the house, talking of my Lord
Sandwich's business; what enemies he hath, and how they have endeavoured
to bespatter him: and particularly about his leaving of 30 ships of the
enemy, when Pen would have gone, and my Lord called him back again: which
is most false.  However, he says, it was purposed by some hot-heads in the
House of Commons, at the same time when they voted a present to the Duke
of Yorke, to have voted L10,000 to the Prince, and half-a-crowne to my
Lord of Sandwich; but nothing come of it.

     [The tide of popular indignation ran high against Lord Sandwich, and
     he was sent to Spain as ambassador to get him honourably out of the
     way (see post, December 6th).]

But, for all this, the King is most firme to my Lord, and so is my Lord
Chancellor, and my Lord Arlington.  The Prince, in appearance, kind; the
Duke of Yorke silent, says no hurt; but admits others to say it in his
hearing.  Sir W. Pen, the falsest rascal that ever was in the world; and
that this afternoon the Duke of Albemarle did tell him that Pen was a very
cowardly rogue, and one that hath brought all these rogueish fanatick
Captains into the fleete, and swears he should never go out with the
fleete again.  That Sir W. Coventry is most kind to Pen still; and says
nothing nor do any thing openly to the prejudice of my Lord.  He agrees
with me, that it is impossible for the King [to] set out a fleete again
the next year; and that he fears all will come to ruine, there being no
money in prospect but these prizes, which will bring, it may be, L20,000,
but that will signify nothing in the world for it.  That this late Act of
Parliament for bringing the money into the Exchequer, and making of it
payable out there, intended as a prejudice to him and will be his
convenience hereafter and ruine the King's business, and so I fear it will
and do wonder Sir W. Coventry would be led by Sir G. Downing to persuade
the King and Duke to have it so, before they had thoroughly weighed all
circumstances; that for my Lord, the King has said to him lately that I
was an excellent officer, and that my Lord Chancellor do, he thinks, love
and esteem of me as well as he do of any man in England that he hath no
more acquaintance with.  So having done and received from me the sad newes
that we are like to have no money here a great while, not even of the very
prizes, I set up my rest

     [The phrase "set up my rest" is a metaphor from the once fashionable
     game of Primero, meaning, to stand upon the cards you have in your
     hand, in hopes they may prove better than those of your adversary.
     Hence, to make up your mind, to be determined (see Nares's
     "Glossary").]

in giving up the King's service to be ruined and so in to supper, where
pretty merry, and after supper late to Mr. Glanville's, and Sir G.
Carteret to bed.  I also to bed, it being very late.

7th.  Up, and to Sir G. Carteret, and with him, he being very passionate
to be gone, without staying a minute for breakfast, to the Duke of
Albemarle's and I with him by water and with Fen: but, among other things,
Lord! to see how he wondered to see the river so empty of boats, nobody
working at the Custome-house keys; and how fearful he is, and vexed that
his man, holding a wine-glasse in his hand for him to drinke out of, did
cover his hands, it being a cold, windy, rainy morning, under the
waterman's coate, though he brought the waterman from six or seven miles
up the river, too.  Nay, he carried this glasse with him for his man to
let him drink out of at the Duke of Albemarle's, where he intended to
dine, though this he did to prevent sluttery, for, for the same reason he
carried a napkin with him to Captain Cocke's, making him believe that he
should eat with foule linnen.  Here he with the Duke walked a good while
in the Parke, and I with Fen, but cannot gather that he intends to stay
with us, nor thinks any thing at all of ever paying one farthing of money
more to us here, let what will come of it.  Thence in, and Sir W. Batten
comes in by and by, and so staying till noon, and there being a great deal
of company there, Sir W. Batten and I took leave of the Duke and Sir G.
Carteret, there being no good to be done more for money, and so over the
River and by coach to Greenwich, where at Boreman's we dined, it being
late.  Thence my head being full of business and mind out of order for
thinking of the effects which will arise from the want of money, I made an
end of my letters by eight o'clock, and so to my lodging and there spent
the evening till midnight talking with Mrs. Penington, who is a very
discreet, understanding lady and very pretty discourse we had and great
variety, and she tells me with great sorrow her bitch is dead this
morning, died in her bed.  So broke up and to bed.

8th.  Up, and to the office, where busy among other things to looke my
warrants for the settling of the Victualling business, the warrants being
come to me for the Surveyors of the ports and that for me also to be
Surveyor-Generall.  I did discourse largely with Tom Willson about it and
doubt not to make it a good service to the King as well, as the King gives
us very good salarys.  It being a fast day, all people were at church and
the office quiett; so I did much business, and at noon adventured to my
old lodging, and there eat, but am not yet well satisfied, not seeing of
Christopher, though they say he is abroad. Thence after dinner to the
office again, and thence am sent for to the King's Head by my Lord
Rutherford, who, since I can hope for no more convenience from him, his
business is troublesome to me, and therefore I did leave him as soon as I
could and by water to Deptford, and there did order my matters so, walking
up and down the fields till it was dark night, that 'je allais a la maison
of my valentine,--[Bagwell's wife]--and there 'je faisais whatever je
voudrais avec' her, and, about eight at night, did take water, being glad
I was out of the towne; for the plague, it seems, rages there more than
ever, and so to my lodgings, where my Lord had got a supper and the
mistresse of the house, and her daughters, and here staid Mrs. Pierce to
speake with me about her husband's business, and I made her sup with us,
and then at night my Lord and I walked with her home, and so back again.
My Lord and I ended all we had to say as to his business overnight, and so
I took leave, and went again to Mr. Glanville's and so to bed, it being
very late.

9th.  Up, and did give the servants something at Mr. Glanville's and so
took leave, meaning to lie to-night at my owne lodging.  To my office,
where busy with Mr. Gawden running over the Victualling business, and he
is mightily pleased that this course is taking and seems sensible of my
favour and promises kindnesse to me.  At noon by water, to the King's Head
at Deptford, where Captain Taylor invites Sir W: Batten, Sir John Robinson
(who come in with a great deale of company from hunting, and brought in a
hare alive and a great many silly stories they tell of their sport, which
pleases them mightily, and me not at all, such is the different sense of
pleasure in mankind), and others upon the score of a survey of his new
ship; and strange to see how a good dinner and feasting reconciles
everybody, Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Robinson being now as kind to him, and
report well of his ship and proceedings, and promise money, and Sir W.
Batten is a solicitor for him, but it is a strange thing to observe, they
being the greatest enemys he had, and yet, I believe, hath in the world in
their hearts.  Thence after dinner stole away and to my office, where did
a great deale of business till midnight, and then to Mrs. Clerk's, to
lodge again, and going home W. Hewer did tell me my wife will be here
to-morrow, and hath put away Mary, which vexes me to the heart, I cannot
helpe it, though it may be a folly in me, and when I think seriously on
it, I think my wife means no ill design in it, or, if she do, I am a foole
to be troubled at it, since I cannot helpe it.  The Bill of Mortality, to
all our griefs, is encreased 399 this week, and the encrease generally
through the whole City and suburbs, which makes us all sad.

10th.  Up, and entered all my Journall since the 28th of October, having
every day's passages well in my head, though it troubles me to remember
it, and which I was forced to, being kept from my lodging, where my books
and papers are, for several days.  So to my office, where till two or
three o'clock busy before I could go to my lodging to dinner, then did it
and to my office again.  In the evening newes is brought me my wife is
come: so I to her, and with her spent the evening, but with no great
pleasure, I being vexed about her putting away of Mary in my absence, but
yet I took no notice of it at all, but fell into other discourse, and she
told me, having herself been this day at my house at London, which was
boldly done, to see Mary have her things, that Mr. Harrington, our
neighbour, an East country merchant, is dead at Epsum of the plague, and
that another neighbour of ours, Mr. Hollworthy, a very able man, is also
dead by a fall in the country from his horse, his foot hanging in the
stirrup, and his brains beat out.  Here we sat talking, and after supper
to bed.

11th.  I up and to the office (leaving my wife in bed) and there till
noon, then to dinner and back again to the office, my wife going to
Woolwich again, and I staying very late at my office, and so home to bed.

12th (Lord's day).  Up, and invited by Captain Cocke to dinner.  So after
being ready I went to him, and there he and I and Mr. Yard (one of the
Guinny Company) dined together and very merry.  After dinner I by water to
the Duke of Albemarle, and there had a little discourse and business with
him, chiefly to receive his commands about pilotts to be got for our
Hambro' ships, going now at this time of the year convoy to the merchant
ships, that have lain at great pain and charge, some three, some four
months at Harwich for a convoy.  They hope here the plague will be less
this weeke.  Thence back by water to Captain Cocke's, and there he and I
spent a great deale of the evening as we had done of the day reading and
discoursing over part of Mr. Stillingfleet's "Origines Sacrae," wherein
many things are very good and some frivolous.  Thence by and by he and I
to Mrs. Penington's, but she was gone to bed.  So we back and walked a
while, and then to his house and to supper, and then broke up, and I home
to my lodging to bed.

13th.  Up, and to my office, where busy all the morning, and at noon to
Captain Cocke's to dinner as we had appointed in order to settle our
business of accounts.  But here came in an Alderman, a merchant, a very
merry man, and we dined, and, he being gone, after dinner Cocke and I
walked into the garden, and there after a little discourse he did
undertake under his hand to secure me in L500 profit, for my share of the
profit of what we have bought of the prize goods.  We agreed upon the
terms, which were easier on my side than I expected, and so with
extraordinary inward joy we parted till the evening.  So I to the office
and among other business prepared a deed for him to sign and seale to me
about our agreement, which at night I got him to come and sign and seale,
and so he and I to Glanville's, and there he and I sat talking and playing
with Mrs. Penington, whom we found undrest in her smocke and petticoats by
the fireside, and there we drank and laughed, and she willingly suffered
me to put my hand in her bosom very wantonly, and keep it there long.
Which methought was very strange, and I looked upon myself as a man
mightily deceived in a lady, for I could not have thought she could have
suffered it, by her former discourse with me; so modest she seemed and I
know not what.  We staid here late, and so home after he and I had walked
till past midnight, a bright moonshine, clear, cool night, before his door
by the water, and so I home after one of the clock.

14th.  Called up by break of day by Captain Cocke, by agreement, and he
and I in his coach through Kent-streete (a sad place through the plague,
people sitting sicke and with plaisters about them in the street begging)
to Viner's and Colvill's about money business, and so to my house, and
there I took L300 in order to the carrying it down to my Lord Sandwich in
part of the money I am to pay for Captain Cocke by our agreement.  So I
took it down, and down I went to Greenwich to my office, and there sat
busy till noon, and so home to dinner, and thence to the office again, and
by and by to the Duke of Albemarle's by water late, where I find he had
remembered that I had appointed to come to him this day about money, which
I excused not doing sooner; but I see, a dull fellow, as he is, do
sometimes remember what another thinks he mindeth not.  My business was
about getting money of the East India Company; but, Lord! to see how the
Duke himself magnifies himself in what he had done with the Company; and
my Lord Craven what the King could have done without my Lord Duke, and a
deale of stir, but most mightily what a brave fellow I am.  Back by water,
it raining hard, and so to the office, and stopped my going, as I
intended, to the buoy of the Nore, and great reason I had to rejoice at
it, for it proved the night of as great a storme as was almost ever
remembered.  Late at the office, and so home to bed.  This day, calling at
Mr. Rawlinson's to know how all did there, I hear that my pretty grocer's
wife, Mrs. Beversham, over the way there, her husband is lately dead of
the plague at Bow, which I am sorry for, for fear of losing her
neighbourhood.

15th.  Up and all the morning at the office, busy, and at noon to the
King's Head taverne, where all the Trinity House dined to-day, to choose a
new Master in the room of Hurlestone, that is dead, and Captain Crispe is
chosen.  But, Lord! to see how Sir W. Batten governs all and tramples upon
Hurlestone, but I am confident the Company will grow the worse for that
man's death, for now Batten, and in him a lazy, corrupt, doating rogue,
will have all the sway there.  After dinner who comes in but my Lady
Batten, and a troop of a dozen women almost, and expected, as I found
afterward, to be made mighty much of, but nobody minded them; but the best
jest was, that when they saw themselves not regarded, they would go away,
and it was horrible foule weather; and my Lady Batten walking through the
dirty lane with new spicke and span white shoes, she dropped one of her
galoshes in the dirt, where it stuck, and she forced to go home without
one, at which she was horribly vexed, and I led her; and after vexing her
a little more in mirth, I parted, and to Glanville's, where I knew Sir
John Robinson, Sir G. Smith, and Captain Cocke were gone, and there, with
the company of Mrs. Penington, whose father, I hear, was one of the Court
of justice, and died prisoner, of the stone, in the Tower, I made them,
against their resolutions, to stay from houre to houre till it was almost
midnight, and a furious, darke and rainy, and windy, stormy night, and,
which was best, I, with drinking small beer, made them all drunk drinking
wine, at which Sir John Robinson made great sport.  But, they being gone,
the lady and I very civilly sat an houre by the fireside observing the
folly of this Robinson, that makes it his worke to praise himself, and all
he say and do, like a heavy-headed coxcombe.  The plague, blessed be God!
is decreased 400; making the whole this week but 1300 and odd; for which
the Lord be praised!

16th.  Up, and fitted myself for my journey down to the fleete, and
sending my money and boy down by water to Eriffe,--[Erith]--I borrowed a
horse of Mr. Boreman's son, and after having sat an houre laughing with my
Lady Batten and Mrs. Turner, and eat and drank with them, I took horse and
rode to Eriffe, where, after making a little visit to Madam Williams, who
did give me information of W. Howe's having bought eight bags of precious
stones taken from about the Dutch Vice-Admirall's neck, of which there
were eight dyamonds which cost him L60,000 sterling, in India, and hoped
to have made L2000 here for them.  And that this is told by one that sold
him one of the bags, which hath nothing but rubys in it, which he had for
35s.; and that it will be proved he hath made L125 of one stone that he
bought.  This she desired, and I resolved I would give my Lord Sandwich
notice of.  So I on board my Lord Bruncker; and there he and Sir Edmund
Pooly carried me down into the hold of the India shipp, and there did show
me the greatest wealth lie in confusion that a man can see in the world.
Pepper scattered through every chink, you trod upon it; and in cloves and
nutmegs, I walked above the knees; whole rooms full.  And silk in bales,
and boxes of copper-plate, one of which I saw opened.  Having seen this,
which was as noble a sight as ever I saw in my life, I away on board the
other ship in despair to get the pleasure-boat of the gentlemen there to
carry me to the fleet.  They were Mr. Ashburnham and Colonell Wyndham; but
pleading the King's business, they did presently agree I should have it.
So I presently on board, and got under sail, and had a good bedd by the
shift, of Wyndham's; and so,

17th.  Sailed all night, and got down to Quinbrough water, where all the
great ships are now come, and there on board my Lord, and was soon
received with great content.  And after some little discourse, he and I on
board Sir W. Pen; and there held a council of Warr about many wants of the
fleete, but chiefly how to get slopps and victuals for the fleete now
going out to convoy our Hambro' ships, that have been so long detained for
four or five months for want of convoy, which we did accommodate one way
or other, and so, after much chatt, Sir W. Pen did give us a very good and
neat dinner, and better, I think, than ever I did see at his owne house at
home in my life, and so was the other I eat with him. After dinner much
talke, and about other things, he and I about his money for his prize
goods, wherein I did give him a cool answer, but so as we did not disagree
in words much, and so let that fall, and so followed my Lord Sandwich, who
was gone a little before me on board the Royall James. And there spent an
houre, my Lord playing upon the gittarr, which he now commends above all
musique in the world, because it is base enough for a single voice, and is
so portable and manageable without much trouble. That being done, I got my
Lord to be alone, and so I fell to acquaint him with W. Howe's business,
which he had before heard a little of from Captain Cocke, but made no
great matter of it, but now he do, and resolves nothing less than to lay
him by the heels, and seize on all he hath, saying that for this yeare or
two he hath observed him so proud and conceited he could not endure him.
But though I was not at all displeased with it, yet I prayed him to
forbear doing anything therein till he heard from me again about it, and I
had made more enquiry into the truth of it, which he agreed to.  Then we
fell to publique discourse, wherein was principally this: he cleared it to
me beyond all doubt that Coventry is his enemy, and has been long so.  So
that I am over that, and my Lord told it me upon my proposal of a
friendship between them, which he says is impossible, and methinks that my
Lord's displeasure about the report in print of the first fight was not of
his making, but I perceive my Lord cannot forget it, nor the other think
he can.  I shewed him how advisable it were upon almost any terms for him
to get quite off the sea employment.  He answers me again that he agrees
to it, but thinks the King will not let him go off: He tells me he lacks
now my Lord Orrery to solicit it for him, who is very great with the King.
As an infinite secret, my Lord tells me, the factions are high between the
King and the Duke, and all the Court are in an uproare with their loose
amours; the Duke of Yorke being in love desperately with Mrs. Stewart.
Nay, that the Duchesse herself is fallen in love with her new Master of
the Horse, one Harry Sidney, and another, Harry Savill.  So that God knows
what will be the end of it.  And that the Duke is not so obsequious as he
used to be, but very high of late; and would be glad to be in the head of
an army as Generall; and that it is said that he do propose to go and
command under the King of Spayne, in Flanders.  That his amours to Mrs.
Stewart are told the King.  So that all is like to be nought among them.
That he knows that the Duke of Yorke do give leave to have him spoken
slightly of in his owne hearing, and doth not oppose it, and told me from
what time he hath observed this to begin.  So that upon the whole my Lord
do concur to wish with all his heart that he could with any honour get
from off the imployment.  After he had given thanks to me for my kind
visit and good counsel, on which he seems to set much by, I left him, and
so away to my Bezan againe, and there to read in a pretty French book, "La
Nouvelle Allegorique," upon the strife between rhetorique and its enemies,
very pleasant.  So, after supper, to sleepe, and sayled all night, and
came to Erith before break of day.

18th.  About nine of the clock, I went on shore, there (calling by the way
only to look upon my Lord Bruncker) to give Mrs. Williams an account of
her matters, and so hired an ill-favoured horse, and away to Greenwich to
my lodgings, where I hear how rude the souldiers have been in my absence,
swearing what they would do with me, which troubled me, but, however,
after eating a bit I to the office and there very late writing letters,
and so home and to bed.

19th (Lord's day).  Up, and after being trimmed, alone by water to Erith,
all the way with my song book singing of Mr. Lawes's long recitative song
in the beginning of his book.  Being come there, on board my Lord
Bruncker, I find Captain Cocke and other company, the lady not well, and
mighty merry we were; Sir Edmund Pooly being very merry, and a right
English gentleman, and one of the discontented Cavaliers, that think their
loyalty is not considered.  After dinner, all on shore to my Lady
Williams, and there drank and talked; but, Lord! the most impertinent bold
woman with my Lord that ever I did see.  I did give her an account again
of my business with my Lord touching W. Howe, and she did give me some
more information about it, and examination taken about it, and so we
parted and I took boat, and to Woolwich, where we found my wife not well
of them, and I out of humour begun to dislike her paynting, the last
things not pleasing me so well as the former, but I blame myself for my
being so little complaisant.  So without eating or drinking, there being
no wine (which vexed me too), we walked with a lanthorne to Greenwich and
eat something at his house, and so home to bed.

20th.  Up before day, and wrote some letters to go to my Lord, among
others that about W. Howe, which I believe will turn him out, and so took
horse for Nonesuch, with two men with me, and the ways very bad, and the
weather worse, for wind and rayne.  But we got in good time thither, and I
did get my tallys got ready, and thence, with as many as could go, to
Yowell, and there dined very well, and I saw my Besse, a very
well-favoured country lass there, and after being very merry and having
spent a piece I took horse, and by another way met with a very good road,
but it rained hard and blew, but got home very well.  Here I find Mr.
Deering come to trouble me about business, which I soon dispatched and
parted, he telling me that Luellin hath been dead this fortnight, of the
plague, in St. Martin's Lane, which much surprised me.

21st.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning doing business, and at
noon home to dinner and quickly back again to the office, where very busy
all the evening and late sent a long discourse to Mr. Coventry by his
desire about the regulating of the method of our payment of bills in the
Navy, which will be very good, though, it may be, he did ayme principally
at striking at Sir G. Carteret.  So weary but pleased with this business
being over I home to supper and to bed.

22nd.  Up, and by water to the Duke of Albemarle, and there did some
little business, but most to shew myself, and mightily I am yet in his and
Lord Craven's books, and thence to the Swan and there drank and so down to
the bridge, and so to the 'Change, where spoke with many people, and about
a great deale of business, which kept me late.  I heard this day that Mr.
Harrington is not dead of the plague, as we believed, at which I was very
glad, but most of all, to hear that the plague is come very low; that is,
the whole under 1,000, and the plague 600 and odd: and great hopes of a
further decrease, because of this day's being a very exceeding hard frost,
and continues freezing.  This day the first of the Oxford Gazettes come
out, which is very pretty, full of newes, and no folly in it.  Wrote by
Williamson.  Fear that our Hambro' ships at last cannot go, because of the
great frost, which we believe it is there, nor are our ships cleared at
the Pillow [Pillau], which will keepe them there too all this winter, I
fear.  From the 'Change, which is pretty full again, I to my office and
there took some things, and so by water to my lodging at Greenwich and
dined, and then to the office awhile and at night home to my lodgings, and
took T. Willson and T. Hater with me, and there spent the evening till
midnight discoursing and settling of our Victualling business, that
thereby I might draw up instructions for the Surveyours and that we might
be doing something to earne our money.  This done I late to bed.  Among
other things it pleased me to have it demonstrated, that a Purser without
professed cheating is a professed loser, twice as much as he gets.

23rd.  Up betimes, and so, being trimmed, I to get papers ready against
Sir H. Cholmly come to me by appointment, he being newly come over from
Tangier.  He did by and by come, and we settled all matters about his
money, and he is a most satisfied man in me, and do declare his resolution
to give me 200 per annum.  It continuing to be a great frost, which gives
us hope for a perfect cure of the plague, he and I to walk in the parke,
and there discoursed with grief of the calamity of the times; how the
King's service is performed, and how Tangier is governed by a man, who,
though honourable, yet do mind his ways of getting and little else
compared, which will never make the place flourish.  I brought him and had
a good dinner for him, and there come by chance Captain Cuttance, who
tells me how W. Howe is laid by the heels, and confined to the Royall
Katharine, and his things all seized and how, also, for a quarrel, which
indeed the other night my Lord told me, Captain Ferrers, having cut all
over the back of another of my Lord's servants, is parted from my Lord. I
sent for little Mrs. Frances Tooker, and after they were gone I sat
dallying with her an hour, doing what I would with my hands about her. And
a very pretty creature it is.  So in the evening to the office, where late
writing letters, and at my lodging later writing for the last twelve days
my Journall and so to bed.  Great expectation what mischief more the
French will do us, for we must fall out.  We in extraordinary lacke of
money and everything else to go to sea next year.  My Lord Sandwich is
gone from the fleete yesterday toward Oxford.

24th.  Up, and after doing some business at the office, I to London, and
there, in my way, at my old oyster shop in Gracious Streete, bought two
barrels of my fine woman of the shop, who is alive after all the plague,
which now is the first observation or inquiry we make at London concerning
everybody we knew before it.  So to the 'Change, where very busy with
several people, and mightily glad to see the 'Change so full, and hopes of
another abatement still the next week.  Off the 'Change I went home with
Sir G. Smith to dinner, sending for one of my barrels of oysters, which
were good, though come from Colchester, where the plague hath been so
much.  Here a very brave dinner, though no invitation; and, Lord! to see
how I am treated, that come from so mean a beginning, is matter of wonder
to me.  But it is God's great mercy to me, and His blessing upon my taking
pains, and being punctual in my dealings.  After dinner Captain Cocke and
I about some business, and then with my other barrel of oysters home to
Greenwich, sent them by water to Mrs. Penington, while he and I landed,
and visited Mr. Evelyn, where most excellent discourse with him; among
other things he showed me a ledger of a Treasurer of the Navy, his great
grandfather, just 100 years old; which I seemed mighty fond of, and he did
present me with it, which I take as a great rarity; and he hopes to find
me more, older than it.  He also shewed us several letters of the old Lord
of Leicester's, in Queen Elizabeth's time, under the very hand-writing of
Queen Elizabeth, and Queen Mary, Queen of Scotts; and others, very
venerable names.  But, Lord! how poorly, methinks, they wrote in those
days, and in what plain uncut paper.  Thence, Cocke having sent for his
coach, we to Mrs. Penington, and there sat and talked and eat our oysters
with great pleasure, and so home to my lodging late and to bed.

25th.  Up, and busy at the office all day long, saving dinner time, and in
the afternoon also very late at my office, and so home to bed.  All our
business is now about our Hambro fleete, whether it can go or no this
yeare, the weather being set in frosty, and the whole stay being for want
of Pilotts now, which I have wrote to the Trinity House about, but have so
poor an account from them, that I did acquaint Sir W. Coventry with it
this post.

26th (Lord's day).  Up, though very late abed, yet before day to dress
myself to go toward Erith, which I would do by land, it being a horrible
cold frost to go by water: so borrowed two horses of Mr. Howell and his
friend, and with much ado set out, after my horses being frosted

     [Frosting means, having the horses' shoes turned up by the smith.]

(which I know not what it means to this day), and my boy having lost one
of my spurs and stockings, carrying them to the smith's; but I borrowed a
stocking, and so got up, and Mr. Tooker with me, and rode to Erith, and
there on board my Lord Bruncker, met Sir W. Warren upon his business,
among others, and did a great deale, Sir J. Minnes, as God would have it,
not being there to hinder us with his impertinences.  Business done, we to
dinner very merry, there being there Sir Edmund Pooly, a very worthy
gentleman.  They are now come to the copper boxes in the prizes, and hope
to have ended all this weeke.  After dinner took leave, and on shore to
Madam Williams, to give her an account of my Lord's letter to me about
Howe, who he has clapped by the heels on suspicion of having the jewells,
and she did give me my Lord Bruncker's examination of the fellow, that
declares his having them; and so away, Sir W. Warren riding with me, and
the way being very bad, that is, hard and slippery by reason of the frost,
so we could not come to past Woolwich till night.  However, having a great
mind to have gone to the Duke of Albemarle, I endeavoured to have gone
farther, but the night come on and no going, so I 'light and sent my horse
by Tooker, and returned on foot to my wife at Woolwich, where I found, as
I had directed, a good dinner to be made against to-morrow, and invited
guests in the yarde, meaning to be merry, in order to her taking leave,
for she intends to come in a day or two to me for altogether.  But here,
they tell me, one of the houses behind them is infected, and I was fain to
stand there a great while, to have their back-door opened, but they could
not, having locked them fast, against any passing through, so was forced
to pass by them again, close to their sicke beds, which they were removing
out of the house, which troubled me; so I made them uninvite their guests,
and to resolve of coming all away to me to-morrow, and I walked with a
lanthorne, weary as I was, to Greenwich; but it was a fine walke, it being
a hard frost, and so to Captain Cocke's, but he I found had sent for me to
come to him to Mrs. Penington's, and there I went, and we were very merry,
and supped, and Cocke being sleepy he went away betimes.  I stayed alone
talking and playing with her till past midnight, she suffering me whatever
'ego voulais avec ses mamilles .  . .  .  Much pleased with her company we
parted, and I home to bed at past one, all people being in bed thinking I
would have staid out of town all night.

27th.  Up, and being to go to wait on the Duke of Albemarle, who is to go
out of towne to Oxford to-morrow, and I being unwilling to go by water, it
being bitter cold, walked it with my landlady's little boy Christopher to
Lambeth, it being a very fine walke and calling at half the way and drank,
and so to the Duke of Albemarle, who is visited by every body against his
going; and mighty kind to me: and upon my desiring his grace to give me
his kind word to the Duke of Yorke, if any occasion there were of speaking
of me, he told me he had reason to do so; for there had been nothing done
in the Navy without me.  His going, I hear, is upon putting the sea
business into order, and, as some say, and people of his owne family, that
he is agog to go to sea himself the next year.  Here I met with a letter
from Sir G. Carteret, who is come to Cranborne, that he will be here this
afternoon and desires me to be with him.  So the Duke would have me dine
with him.  So it being not dinner time, I to the Swan, and there found
Sarah all alone in the house .  .  .  .  So away to the Duke of Albemarle
again, and there to dinner, he most exceeding kind to me to the
observation of all that are there.  At dinner comes Sir G. Carteret and
dines with us.  After dinner a great deal alone with Sir G. Carteret, who
tells me that my Lord hath received still worse and worse usage from some
base people about the Court.  But the King is very kind, and the Duke do
not appear the contrary; and my Lord Chancellor swore to him "by---I will
not forsake my Lord of Sandwich."  Our next discourse is upon this Act for
money, about which Sir G. Carteret comes to see what money can be got upon
it.  But none can be got, which pleases him the thoughts of, for, if the
Exchequer should succeede in this, his office would faile.  But I am apt
to think at this time of hurry and plague and want of trade, no money will
be got upon a new way which few understand. We walked, Cocke and I,
through the Parke with him, and so we being to meet the Vice-Chamberlayne
to-morrow at Nonesuch, to treat with Sir Robert Long about the same
business, I into London, it being dark night, by a hackney coach; the
first I have durst to go in many a day, and with great pain now for fear.
But it being unsafe to go by water in the dark and frosty cold, and unable
being weary with my morning walke to go on foot, this was my only way.
Few people yet in the streets, nor shops open, here and there twenty in a
place almost; though not above five or sixe o'clock at night.  So to
Viner's, and there heard of Cocke, and found him at the Pope's Head,
drinking with Temple.  I to them, where the Goldsmiths do decry the new
Act, for money to be all brought into the Exchequer, and paid out thence,
saying they will not advance one farthing upon it; and indeed it is their
interest to say and do so.  Thence Cocke and I to Sir G. Smith's, it being
now night, and there up to his chamber and sat talking, and I
barbing--[shaving]--against to-morrow; and anon, at nine at night, comes
to us Sir G. Smith and the Lieutenant of the Tower, and there they sat
talking and drinking till past midnight, and mighty merry we were, the
Lieutenant of the Tower being in a mighty vein of singing, and he hath a
very good eare and strong voice, but no manner of skill.  Sir G. Smith
shewed me his lady's closett, which was very fine; and, after being very
merry, here I lay in a noble chamber, and mighty highly treated, the first
time I have lain in London a long time.

28th.  Up before day, and Cocke and I took a hackney coach appointed with
four horses to take us up, and so carried us over London Bridge.  But
there, thinking of some business, I did 'light at the foot of the bridge,
and by helpe of a candle at a stall, where some payers were at work, I
wrote a letter to Mr. Hater, and never knew so great an instance of the
usefulness of carrying pen and ink and wax about one: so we, the way being
very bad, to Nonesuch, and thence to Sir Robert Longs house; a fine place,
and dinner time ere we got thither; but we had breakfasted a little at Mr.
Gawden's, he being out of towne though, and there borrowed Dr. Taylor's
sermons, and is a most excellent booke and worth my buying, where had a
very good dinner, and curiously dressed, and here a couple of ladies,
kinswomen of his, not handsome though, but rich, that knew me by report of
The. Turner, and mighty merry we were.  After dinner to talk of our
business, the Act of Parliament, where in short I see Sir R. Long mighty
fierce in the great good qualities of it.  But in that and many other
things he was stiff in, I think without much judgement, or the judgement I
expected from him, and already they have evaded the necessity of bringing
people into the Exchequer with their bills to be paid there. Sir G.
Carteret is titched--[fretful, tetchy]--at this, yet resolves with me to
make the best use we can of this Act for the King, but all our care, we
think, will not render it as it should be.  He did again here alone
discourse with me about my Lord, and is himself strongly for my Lord's not
going to sea, which I am glad to hear and did confirm him in it.  He tells
me too that he talked last night with the Duke of Albemarle about my Lord
Sandwich, by the by making him sensible that it is his interest to
preserve his old friends, which he confessed he had reason to do, for he
knows that ill offices were doing of him, and that he honoured my Lord
Sandwich with all his heart.  After this discourse we parted, and all of
us broke up and we parted.  Captain Cocke and I through Wandsworth.  Drank
at Sir Allen Broderick's, a great friend and comrade of Cocke's, whom he
values above the world for a witty companion, and I believe he is so.  So
to Fox-Hall and there took boat, and down to the Old Swan, and thence to
Lumbard Streete, it being darke night, and thence to the Tower.  Took boat
and down to Greenwich, Cocke and I, he home and I to the office, where did
a little business, and then to my lodgings, where my wife is come, and I
am well pleased with it, only much trouble in those lodgings we have, the
mistresse of the house being so deadly dear in everything we have; so that
we do resolve to remove home soon as we know how the plague goes this
weeke, which we hope will be a good decrease.  So to bed.

29th.  Up, my wife and I talking how to dispose of our goods, and resolved
upon sending our two mayds Alce (who has been a day or two at Woolwich
with my wife, thinking to have had a feast there) and Susan home.  So my
wife after dinner did take them to London with some goods, and I in the
afternoon after doing other business did go also by agreement to meet
Captain Cocke and from him to Sir Roger Cuttance, about the money due from
Cocke to him for the late prize goods, wherein Sir Roger is troubled that
he hath not payment as agreed, and the other, that he must pay without
being secured in the quiett possession of them, but some accommodation to
both, I think, will be found.  But Cocke do tell me that several have
begged so much of the King to be discovered out of stolen prize goods and
so I am afeard we shall hereafter have trouble, therefore I will get
myself free of them as soon as I can and my money paid.  Thence home to my
house, calling my wife, where the poor wretch is putting things in a way
to be ready for our coming home, and so by water together to Greenwich,
and so spent the night together.

30th.  Up, and at the office all the morning.  At noon comes Sir Thomas
Allen, and I made him dine with me, and very friendly he is, and a good
man, I think, but one that professes he loves to get and to save.  He
dined with my wife and me and Mrs. Barbary, whom my wife brings along with
her from Woolwich for as long as she stays here.  In the afternoon to the
office, and there very late writing letters and then home, my wife and
people sitting up for me, and after supper to bed.  Great joy we have this
week in the weekly Bill, it being come to 544 in all, and but 333 of the
plague; so that we are encouraged to get to London soon as we can. And my
father writes as great news of joy to them, that he saw Yorke's waggon go
again this week to London, and was full of passengers; and tells me that
my aunt Bell hath been dead of the plague these seven weeks.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                DECEMBER
                                  1665

December 1st.  This morning to the office, full of resolution to spend the
whole day at business, and there, among other things, I did agree with
Poynter to be my clerke for my Victualling business, and so all alone all
the day long shut up in my little closett at my office, drawing up
instructions, which I should long since have done for my Surveyours of the
Ports, Sir W. Coventry desiring much to have them, and he might well have
expected them long since.  After dinner to it again, and at night had long
discourse with Gibson, who is for Yarmouth, who makes me understand so
much of the victualling business and the pursers' trade, that I am ashamed
I should go about the concerning myself in a business which I understand
so very very little of, and made me distrust all I had been doing to-day.
So I did lay it by till to-morrow morning to think of it afresh, and so
home by promise to my wife, to have mirth there.  So we had our
neighbours, little Miss Tooker and Mrs. Daniels, to dance, and after
supper I to bed, and left them merry below, which they did not part from
till two or three in the morning.

2nd.  Up, and discoursing with my wife, who is resolved to go to London
for good and all this day, we did agree upon giving Mr. Sheldon L10, and
Mrs. Barbary two pieces, and so I left her to go down thither to fetch
away the rest of the things and pay him the money, and so I to the office,
where very busy setting Mr. Poynter to write out my last night's worke,
which pleases me this day, but yet it is pretty to reflect how much I am
out of confidence with what I had done upon Gibson's discourse with me,
for fear I should have done it sillily, but Poynter likes them, and Mr.
Hater also, but yet I am afeard lest they should do it out of flattery, so
conscious I am of my ignorance.  Dined with my wife at noon and took leave
of her, she being to go to London, as I said, for altogether, and I to the
office, busy till past one in the morning.

3rd.  It being Lord's day, up and dressed and to church, thinking to have
sat with Sir James Bunce to hear his daughter and her husband sing, that
are so much commended, but was prevented by being invited into Coll.
Cleggatt's pew.  However, there I sat, near Mr. Laneare, with whom I
spoke, and in sight, by chance, and very near my fat brown beauty of our
Parish, the rich merchant's lady, a very noble woman, and Madame Pierce. A
good sermon of Mr. Plume's, and so to Captain Cocke's, and there dined
with him, and Colonell Wyndham, a worthy gentleman, whose wife was nurse
to the present King, and one that while she lived governed him and every
thing else, as Cocke says, as a minister of state; the old King putting
mighty weight and trust upon her.  They talked much of matters of State
and persons, and particularly how my Lord Barkeley hath all along been a
fortunate, though a passionate and but weak man as to policy; but as a
kinsman brought in and promoted by my Lord of St. Alban's, and one that is
the greatest vapourer in the world, this Colonell Wyndham says; and one to
whom only, with Jacke Asheburnel and Colonel Legg, the King's removal to
the Isle of Wight from Hampton Court was communicated; and (though
betrayed by their knavery, or at best by their ignorance, insomuch that
they have all solemnly charged one another with their failures therein,
and have been at daggers-drawing publickly about it), yet now none greater
friends in the world.  We dined, and in comes Mrs. Owen, a kinswoman of my
Lord Bruncker's, about getting a man discharged, which I did for her, and
by and by Mrs. Pierce to speake with me (and Mary my wife's late maid, now
gone to her) about her husband's business of money, and she tells us how
she prevented Captain Fisher the other day in his purchase of all her
husband's fine goods, as pearls and silks, that he had seized in an
Apothecary's house, a friend of theirs, but she got in and broke them open
and removed all before Captain Fisher came the next day to fetch them
away, at which he is starke mad.  She went home, and I to my lodgings.  At
night by agreement I fetched her again with Cocke's coach, and he come and
we sat and talked together, thinking to have had Mrs. Coleman and my
songsters, her husband and Laneare, but they failed me.  So we to supper,
and as merry as was sufficient, and my pretty little Miss with me; and so
after supper walked [with] Pierce home, and so back and to bed.  But,
Lord! I stand admiring of the wittinesse of her little boy, which is one
of the wittiest boys, but most confident that ever I did see of a child of
9 years old or under in all my life, or indeed one twice his age almost,
but all for roguish wit.  So to bed.

4th.  Several people to me about business, among others Captain Taylor,
intended Storekeeper for Harwich, whom I did give some assistance in his
dispatch by lending him money.  So out and by water to London and to the
'Change, and up and down about several businesses, and after the observing
(God forgive me!) one or two of my neighbour Jason's women come to towne,
which did please me very well, home to my house at the office, where my
wife had got a dinner for me: and it was a joyfull thing for us to meet
here, for which God be praised!  Here was her brother come to see her, and
speake with me about business.  It seems my recommending of him hath not
only obtained his presently being admitted into the Duke of Albemarle's
guards, and present pay, but also by the Duke's and Sir Philip Howard's
direction, to be put as a right-hand man, and other marks of special
respect, at which I am very glad, partly for him, and partly to see that I
am reckoned something in my recommendations, but wish he may carry himself
that I may receive no disgrace by him.  So to the 'Change.  Up and down
again in the evening about business and to meet Captain Cocke, who waited
for Mrs. Pierce (with whom he is mightily stricken), to receive and hide
for her her rich goods she saved the other day from seizure.  Upon the
'Change to-day Colvill tells me, from Oxford, that the King in person hath
justified my Lord Sandwich to the highest degree; and is right in his
favour to the uttermost.  So late by water home, taking a barrel of
oysters with me, and at Greenwich went and sat with Madam Penington
.  .  .  . and made her undress her head and sit dishevilled all night
sporting till two in the morning, and so away to my lodging and so to bed.
Over-fasting all the morning hath filled me mightily with wind, and
nothing else hath done it, that I fear a fit of the cholique.

5th.  Up and to the office, where very busy about several businesses all
the morning.  At noon empty, yet without stomach to dinner, having spoiled
myself with fasting yesterday, and so filled with wind.  In the afternoon
by water, calling Mr. Stevens (who is with great trouble paying of seamen
of their tickets at Deptford) and to London, to look for Captain Kingdom
whom we found at home about 5 o'clock.  I tried him, and he promised to
follow us presently to the East India House to sign papers to-night in
order to the settling the business of my receiving money for Tangier.  We
went and stopt the officer there to shut up.  He made us stay above an
houre.  I sent for him; he comes, but was not found at home, but abroad on
other business, and brings a paper saying that he had been this houre
looking for the Lord Ashley's order.  When he looks for it, that is not
the paper.  He would go again to look; kept us waiting till almost 8 at
night.  Then was I to go home by water this weather and darke, and to
write letters by the post, besides keeping the East India officers there
so late.  I sent for him again; at last he comes, and says he cannot find
the paper (which is a pretty thing to lay orders for L100,000 no better).
I was angry; he told me I ought to give people ease at night, and all
business was to be done by day.  I answered him sharply, that I did [not]
make, nor any honest man, any difference between night and day in the
King's business, and this was such, and my Lord Ashley should know.  He
answered me short.  I told him I knew the time (meaning the Rump's time)
when he did other men's business with more diligence.  He cried, "Nay, say
not so," and stopped his mouth, not one word after.  We then did our
business without the order in less than eight minutes, which he made me to
no purpose stay above two hours for the doing.  This made him mad, and so
we exchanged notes, and I had notes for L14,000 of the Treasurer of the
Company, and so away and by water to Greenwich and wrote my letters, and
so home late to bed.

6th.  Up betimes, it being fast-day; and by water to the Duke of
Albemarle, who come to towne from Oxford last night.  He is mighty brisk,
and very kind to me, and asks my advice principally in every thing.  He
surprises me with the news that my Lord Sandwich goes Embassador to Spayne
speedily; though I know not whence this arises, yet I am heartily glad of
it.  He did give me several directions what to do, and so I home by water
again and to church a little, thinking to have met Mrs. Pierce in order to
our meeting at night; but she not there, I home and dined, and comes
presently by appointment my wife.  I spent the afternoon upon a song of
Solyman's words to Roxalana that I have set, and so with my wife walked
and Mercer to Mrs. Pierce's, where Captain Rolt and Mrs. Knipp, Mr.
Coleman and his wife, and Laneare, Mrs. Worshipp and her singing daughter,
met; and by and by unexpectedly comes Mr. Pierce from Oxford. Here the
best company for musique I ever was in, in my life, and wish I could live
and die in it, both for musique and the face of Mrs. Pierce, and my wife
and Knipp, who is pretty enough; but the most excellent, mad-humoured
thing, and sings the noblest that ever I heard in my life, and Rolt, with
her, some things together most excellently.  I spent the night in extasy
almost; and, having invited them to my house a day or two hence, we broke
up, Pierce having told me that he is told how the King hath done my Lord
Sandwich all the right imaginable, by shewing him his countenance before
all the world on every occasion, to remove thoughts of discontent; and
that he is to go Embassador, and that the Duke of Yorke is made generall
of all forces by land and sea, and the Duke of Albemarle,
lieutenant-generall.  Whether the two latter alterations be so, true or
no, he knows not, but he is told so; but my Lord is in full favour with
the King.  So all home and to bed.

7th.  Up and to the office, where very busy all day.  Sir G. Carteret's
letter tells me my Lord Sandwich is, as I was told, declared Embassador
Extraordinary to Spayne, and to go with all speed away, and that his
enemies have done him as much good as he could wish.  At noon late to
dinner, and after dinner spent till night with Mr. Gibson and Hater
discoursing and making myself more fully [know] the trade of pursers, and
what fittest to be done in their business, and so to the office till
midnight writing letters, and so home, and after supper with my wife about
one o'clock to bed.

8th.  Up, well pleased in my mind about my Lord Sandwich, about whom I
shall know more anon from Sir G. Carteret, who will be in towne, and also
that the Hambrough [ships] after all difficulties are got out.  God send
them good speed!  So, after being trimmed, I by water to London, to the
Navy office, there to give order to my mayde to buy things to send down to
Greenwich for supper to-night; and I also to buy other things, as oysters,
and lemons, 6d. per piece, and oranges, 3d.  That done I to the 'Change,
and among many other things, especially for getting of my Tangier money, I
by appointment met Mr. Gawden, and he and I to the Pope's Head Taverne,
and there he did give me alone a very pretty dinner. Our business to talk
of his matters and his supply of money, which was necessary for us to talk
on before the Duke of Albemarle this afternoon and Sir G. Carteret.  After
that I offered now to pay him the L4000 remaining of his L8000 for
Tangier, which he took with great kindnesse, and prayed me most frankly to
give him a note for L3500 and accept the other L500 for myself, which in
good earnest was against my judgement to do, for [I] expected about L100
and no more, but however he would have me do it, and ownes very great
obligations to me, and the man indeed I love, and he deserves it.  This
put me into great joy, though with a little stay to it till we have time
to settle it, for for so great a sum I was fearfull any accident might by
death or otherwise defeate me, having not now time to change papers.  So
we rose, and by water to White Hall, where we found Sir G. Carteret with
the Duke, and also Sir G. Downing, whom I had not seen in many years
before.  He greeted me very kindly, and I him; though methinks I am
touched, that it should be said that he was my master heretofore, as
doubtless he will.  So to talk of our Navy business, and particularly
money business, of which there is little hopes of any present supply upon
this new Act, the goldsmiths being here (and Alderman Backewell newly come
from Flanders), and none offering any.  So we rose without doing more than
my stating the case of the Victualler, that whereas there is due to him on
the last year's declaration L80,000, and the charge of this year's amounts
to L420,000 and odd, he must be supplied between this and the end of
January with L150,000, and the remainder in 40 weeks by weekly payments,
or else he cannot go through his business.  Thence after some discourse
with Sir G. Carteret, who, though he tells me that he is glad of my Lord's
being made Embassador, and that it is the greatest courtesy his enemies
could do him; yet I find he is not heartily merry upon it, and that it was
no design of my Lord's friends, but the prevalence of his enemies, and
that the Duke of Albemarle and Prince Rupert are like to go to sea
together the next year. I pray God, when my Lord is gone, they do not fall
hard upon the Vice-Chamberlain, being alone, and in so envious a place,
though by this late Act and the instructions now a brewing for our office
as to method of payments will destroy the profit of his place of itself
without more trouble.  Thence by water down to Greenwich, and there found
all my company come; that is, Mrs. Knipp, and an ill, melancholy,
jealous-looking fellow, her husband, that spoke not a word to us all the
night, Pierce and his wife, and Rolt, Mrs. Worshipp and her daughter,
Coleman and his wife, and Laneare, and, to make us perfectly happy, there
comes by chance to towne Mr. Hill to see us.  Most excellent musique we
had in abundance, and a good supper, dancing, and a pleasant scene of Mrs.
Knipp's rising sicke from table, but whispered me it was for some hard
word or other her husband gave her just now when she laughed and was more
merry than ordinary.  But we got her in humour again, and mighty merry;
spending the night, till two in the morning, with most complete content as
ever in my life, it being increased by my day's work with Gawden. Then
broke up, and we to bed, Mr. Hill and I, whom I love more and more, and he
us.

9th.  Called up betimes by my Lord Bruncker, who is come to towne from his
long water worke at Erith last night, to go with him to the Duke of
Albemarle, which by his coach I did.  Our discourse upon the ill posture
of the times through lacke of money.  At the Duke's did some business, and
I believe he was not pleased to see all the Duke's discourse and
applications to me and everybody else.  Discoursed also with Sir G.
Carteret about office business, but no money in view.  Here my Lord and I
staid and dined, the Vice-Chamberlain taking his leave.  At table the
Duchesse, a damned ill-looked woman, complaining of her Lord's going to
sea the next year, said these cursed words: "If my Lord had been a coward
he had gone to sea no more: it may be then he might have been excused, and
made an Embassador" (meaning my Lord Sandwich).

     [When Lord Sandwich was away a new commander had to be chosen, and
     rank and long service pointed out Prince Rupert for the office, it
     having been decided that the heir presumptive should be kept at
     home.  It was thought, however, that the same confidence could not
     be placed in the prince's discretion as in his courage, and
     therefore the Duke of Albemarle was induced to take a joint command
     with him, "and so make one admiral of two persons" (see Lister's
     "Life of Clarendon," vol. ii., pp. 360,361).]

This made me mad, and I believed she perceived my countenance change, and
blushed herself very much.  I was in hopes others had not minded it, but
my Lord Bruncker, after we were come away, took notice of the words to me
with displeasure.  Thence after dinner away by water, calling and taking
leave of Sir G. Carteret, whom we found going through at White Hall, and
so over to Lambeth and took coach and home, and so to the office, where
late writing letters, and then home to Mr. Hill, and sang, among other
things, my song of "Beauty retire," which he likes, only excepts against
two notes in the base, but likes the whole very well.  So late to bed.

10th (Lord's day).  Lay long talking, Hill and I, with great pleasure, and
then up, and being ready walked to Cocke's for some newes, but heard none,
only they would have us stay their dinner, and sent for my wife, who come,
and very merry we were, there being Sir Edmund Pooly and Mr. Evelyn.
Before we had dined comes Mr. Andrews, whom we had sent for to Bow, and so
after dinner home, and there we sang some things, but not with much
pleasure, Mr. Andrews being in so great haste to go home, his wife looking
every hour to be brought to bed.  He gone Mr. Hill and I continued our
musique, one thing after another, late till supper, and so to bed with
great pleasure.

11th.  Lay long with great pleasure talking.  So I left him and to London
to the 'Change, and after discoursed with several people about business;
met Mr. Gawden at the Pope's Head, where he brought Mr. Lewes and T.
Willson to discourse about the Victualling business, and the alterations
of the pursers' trade, for something must be done to secure the King a
little better, and yet that they may have wherewith to live. After dinner
I took him aside, and perfected to my great joy my business with him,
wherein he deals most nobly in giving me his hand for the L4,000, and
would take my note but for L3500.  This is a great blessing, and God make
me thankfull truly for it.  With him till it was darke putting in writing
our discourse about victualling, and so parted, and I to Viner's, and
there evened all accounts, and took up my notes setting all straight
between us to this day.  The like to Colvill, and paying several bills due
from me on the Tangier account.  Then late met Cocke and Temple at the
Pope's Head, and there had good discourse with Temple, who tells me that
of the L80,000 advanced already by the East India Company, they have had
L5000 out of their hands.  He discoursed largely of the quantity of money
coyned, and what may be thought the real sum of money in the kingdom.  He
told me, too, as an instance of the thrift used in the King's business,
that the tools and the interest of the money-using to the King for the
money he borrowed while the new invention of the mill money was perfected,
cost him L35,000, and in mirthe tells me that the new fashion money is
good for nothing but to help the Prince if he can secretly get copper
plates shut up in silver it shall never be discovered, at least not in his
age.  Thence Cocke and I by water, he home and I home, and there sat with
Mr. Hill and my wife supping, talking and singing till midnight, and then
to bed.  [That I may remember it the more particularly, I thought fit to
insert this additional memorandum of Temple's discourse this night with
me, which I took in writing from his mouth.  Before the Harp and Crosse
money was cried down, he and his fellow goldsmiths did make some
particular trials what proportion that money bore to the old King's money,
and they found that generally it come to, one with another, about L25 in
every L100.  Of this money there was, upon the calling of it in, L650,000
at least brought into the Tower; and from thence he computes that the
whole money of England must be full L6,250,000.  But for all this believes
that there is above L30,000,000; he supposing that about the King's coming
in (when he begun to observe the quantity of the new money) people begun
to be fearfull of this money's being cried down, and so picked it out and
set it a-going as fast as they could, to be rid of it; and he thinks
L30,000,000 the rather, because if there were but L16,250,000 the King
having L2,000,000 every year, would have the whole money of the kingdom in
his hands in eight years.  He tells me about L350,000 sterling was coined
out of the French money, the proceeds of Dunkirke; so that, with what was
coined of the Crosse money, there is new coined about L1,000,000 besides
the gold, which is guessed at L500,000.  He tells me, that, though the
King did deposit the French money in pawn all the while for the L350,000
he was forced to borrow thereupon till the tools could be made for the new
Minting in the present form, yet the interest he paid for that time came
to L35,000, Viner having to his knowledge L10,000 for the use of L100,000
of it.]--(The passage between brackets is from a piece of paper inserted
in this place.)

12th.  Up, and to the office, where my Lord Bruncker met, and among other
things did finish a contract with Cocke for hemp, by which I hope to get
my money due from him paid presently.  At noon home to dinner, only eating
a bit, and with much kindness taking leave of Mr. Hill who goes away
to-day, and so I by water saving the tide through Bridge and to Sir G.
Downing by appointment at Charing Crosse, who did at first mightily please
me with informing me thoroughly the virtue and force of this Act, and
indeed it is ten times better than ever I thought could have been said of
it, but when he come to impose upon me that without more ado I must get by
my credit people to serve in goods and lend money upon it and none could
do it better than I, and the King should give me thanks particularly in
it, and I could not get him to excuse me, but I must come to him though to
no purpose on Saturday, and that he is sure I will bring him some bargains
or other made upon this Act, it vexed me more than all the pleasure I took
before, for I find he will be troublesome to me in it, if I will let him
have as much of my time as he would have.  So late I took leave and in the
cold (the weather setting in cold) home to the office and, after my
letters being wrote, home to supper and to bed, my wife being also gone to
London.

13th.  Up betimes and finished my journall for five days back, and then
after being ready to my Lord Bruncker by appointment, there to order the
disposing of some money that we have come into the office, and here to my
great content I did get a bill of imprest to Captain Cocke to pay myself
in part of what is coming to me from him for my Lord Sandwich's
satisfaction and my owne, and also another payment or two wherein I am
concerned, and having done that did go to Mr. Pierce's, where he and his
wife made me drink some tea, and so he and I by water together to London.
Here at a taverne in Cornhill he and I did agree upon my delivering up to
him a bill of Captain Cocke's, put into my hand for Pierce's use upon
evening of reckonings about the prize goods, and so away to the 'Change,
and there hear the ill news, to my great and all our great trouble, that
the plague is encreased again this week, notwithstanding there hath been a
day or two great frosts; but we hope it is only the effects of the late
close warm weather, and if the frosts continue the next week, may fall
again; but the town do thicken so much with people, that it is much if the
plague do not grow again upon us.  Off the 'Change invited by Sheriff
Hooker, who keeps the poorest, mean, dirty table in a dirty house that
ever I did see any Sheriff of London; and a plain, ordinary, silly man I
think he is, but rich; only his son, Mr. Lethulier, I like, for a pretty,
civil, understanding merchant; and the more by much, because he happens to
be husband to our noble, fat, brave lady in our parish, that I and my wife
admire so.  Thence away to the Pope's Head Taverne, and there met first
with Captain Cocke, and dispatched my business with him to my content, he
being ready to sign his bill of imprest of L2,000, and gives it me in part
of his payment to me, which glads my heart.  He being gone, comes Sir W.
Warren, who advised with me about several things about getting money, and
L100 I shall presently have of him.  We advised about a business of
insurance, wherein something may be saved to him and got to me, and to
that end he and I did take a coach at night and to the Cockepitt, there to
get the Duke of Albemarle's advice for our insuring some of our Sounde
goods coming home under Harman's convoy, but he proved shy of doing it
without knowledge of the Duke of Yorke, so we back again and calling at my
house to see my wife, who is well; though my great trouble is that our
poor little parish is the greatest number this weeke in all the city
within the walls, having six, from one the last weeke; and so by water to
Greenwich leaving Sir W. Warren at home, and I straight to my Lord
Bruncker, it being late, and concluded upon insuring something and to send
to that purpose to Sir W. Warren to come to us to-morrow morning.  So I
home and, my mind in great rest, to bed.

14th.  Up, and to the office a while with my Lord Bruncker, where we
directed Sir W. Warren in the business of the insurance as I desired, and
ended some other businesses of his, and so at noon I to London, but the
'Change was done before I got thither, so I to the Pope's Head Taverne,
and there find Mr. Gawden and Captain Beckford and Nick Osborne going to
dinner, and I dined with them and very exceeding merry we were as I had
[not] been a great while, and dinner being done I to the East India House
and there had an assignment on Mr. Temple for the L2,000 of Cocke's, which
joyed my heart; so, having seen my wife in the way, I home by water and to
write my letters and then home to bed.

15th.  Up, and spent all the morning with my Surveyors of the Ports for
the Victualling, and there read to them what instructions I had provided
for them and discoursed largely much of our business and the business of
the pursers.  I left them to dine with my people, and to my Lord
Bruncker's where I met with a great good dinner and Sir T. Teddiman, with
whom my Lord and I were to discourse about the bringing of W. Howe to a
tryall for his jewells, and there till almost night, and so away toward
the office and in my way met with Sir James Bunce; and after asking what
newes, he cried "Ah!"  says he (I know [not] whether in earnest or jest),
"this is the time for you," says he, "that were for Oliver heretofore; you
are full of employment, and we poor Cavaliers sit still and can get
nothing;" which was a pretty reproach, I thought, but answered nothing to
it, for fear of making it worse.  So away and I to see Mrs. Penington, but
company being to come to her, I staid not, but to the office a little and
so home, and after supper to bed.

16th.  Up, and met at the office; Sir W. Batten with us, who come from
Portsmouth on Monday last, and hath not been with us to see or discourse
with us about any business till this day.  At noon to dinner, Sir W.
Warren with me on boat, and thence I by water, it being a fearfull cold,
snowing day to Westminster to White Hall stairs and thence to Sir G.
Downing, to whom I brought the happy newes of my having contracted, as we
did this day with Sir W. Warren, for a ship's lading of Norway goods here
and another at Harwich to the value of above L3,000, which is the first
that hath been got upon the New Act, and he is overjoyed with it and tells
me he will do me all the right to Court about it in the world, and I am
glad I have it to write to Sir W. Coventry to-night.  He would fain have
me come in L200 to lend upon the Act, but I desire to be excused in doing
that, it being to little purpose for us that relate to the King to do it,
for the sum gets the King no courtesy nor credit.  So I parted from him
and walked to Westminster Hall, where Sir W. Warren, who come along with
me, staid for me, and there I did see Betty Howlet come after the
sicknesse to the Hall.  Had not opportunity to salute her, as I desired,
but was glad to see her and a very pretty wench she is.  Thence back,
landing at the Old Swan and taking boat again at Billingsgate, and setting
ashore we home and I to the office .  .  .  .  and there wrote my letters,
and so home to supper and to bed, it being a great frost.  Newes is come
to-day of our Sounde fleete being come, but I do not know what Sir W.
Warren hath insured.

17th (Lord's day).  After being trimmed word brought me that Cutler's
coach is, by appointment, come to the Isle of Doggs for me, and so I over
the water; and in his coach to Hackney, a very fine, cold, clear, frosty
day.  At his house I find him with a plain little dinner, good wine, and
welcome.  He is still a prating man; and the more I know him, the less I
find in him.  A pretty house he hath here indeed, of his owne building.
His old mother was an object at dinner that made me not like it; and,
after dinner, to visit his sicke wife I did not also take much joy in, but
very friendly he is to me, not for any kindnesse I think he hath to any
man, but thinking me, I perceive, a man whose friendship is to be looked
after.  After dinner back again and to Deptford to Mr. Evelyn's, who was
not within, but I had appointed my cozen Thos. Pepys of Hatcham to meet me
there, to discourse about getting his L1000 of my Lord Sandwich, having
now an opportunity of my having above that sum in my hands of his.  I
found this a dull fellow still in all his discourse, but in this he is
ready enough to embrace what I counsel him to, which is, to write
importunately to my Lord and me about it and I will look after it. I do
again and again declare myself a man unfit to be security for such a sum.
He walked with me as far as Deptford upper towne, being mighty respectfull
to me, and there parted, he telling me that this towne is still very bad
of the plague.  I walked to Greenwich first, to make a short visit to my
Lord Bruncker, and next to Mrs. Penington and spent all the evening with
her with the same freedom I used to have and very pleasant company.  With
her till one of the clock in the morning and past, and so to my lodging to
bed, and

18th.  Betimes, up, it being a fine frost, and walked it to Redriffe,
calling and drinking at Half-way house, thinking, indeed, to have
overtaken some of the people of our house, the women, who were to walk the
same walke, but I could not.  So to London, and there visited my wife, and
was a little displeased to find she is so forward all of a spurt to make
much of her brother and sister since my last kindnesse to him in getting
him a place, but all ended well presently, and I to the 'Change and up and
down to Kingdon and the goldsmith's to meet Mr. Stephens, and did get all
my money matters most excellently cleared to my complete satisfaction.
Passing over Cornhill I spied young Mrs. Daniel and Sarah, my landlady's
daughter, who are come, as I expected, to towne, and did say they spied me
and I dogged them to St. Martin's, where I passed by them being shy, and
walked down as low as Ducke Lane and enquired for some Spanish books, and
so back again and they were gone. So to the 'Change, hoping to see them in
the streete, and missing them, went back again thither and back to the
'Change, but no sight of them, so went after my business again, and,
though late, was sent to by Sir W. Warren (who heard where I was) to
intreat me to come dine with him, hearing that I lacked a dinner, at the
Pope's Head; and there with Mr. Hinton, the goldsmith, and others, very
merry; but, Lord! to see how Dr. Hinton come in with a gallant or two from
Court, and do so call "Cozen" Mr. Hinton, the goldsmith, but I that know
him to be a beggar and a knave, did make great sport in my mind at it.

     [John Hinton, M.D., a strong royalist, who attended Henrietta Maria
     in her confinement at Exeter when she gave birth to the Princess
     Henrietta.  He was knighted by Charles II., and appointed physician
     in ordinary to the king and queen.  His knighthood was a reward for
     having procured a private advance of money from his kinsman, the
     goldsmith, to enable the Duke of Albemarle to pay the army (see
     "Memorial to King Charles II. from Sir John Hinton, A.D. 1679,"
     printed in Ellis's "Original Letters," 3rd series, vol. iv.,
     p  296).]

After dinner Sir W. Warren and I alone in another room a little while
talking about business, and so parted, and I hence, my mind full of
content in my day's worke, home by water to Greenwich, the river beginning
to be very full of ice, so as I was a little frighted, but got home well,
it being darke.  So having no mind to do any business, went home to my
lodgings, and there got little Mrs. Tooker, and Mrs. Daniel, the,
daughter, and Sarah to my chamber to cards and sup with me, when in comes
Mr. Pierce to me, who tells me how W. Howe has been examined on shipboard
by my Lord Bruncker to-day, and others, and that he has charged him out of
envy with sending goods under my Lord's seale and in my Lord Bruncker's
name, thereby to get them safe passage, which, he tells me, is false, but
that he did use my name to that purpose, and hath acknowledged it to my
Lord Bruncker, but do also confess to me that one parcel he thinks he did
use my Lord Bruncker's name, which do vexe me mightily that my name should
be brought in question about such things, though I did not say much to him
of my discontent till I have spoke with my Lord Bruncker about it.  So he
being gone, being to go to Oxford to-morrow, we to cards again late, and
so broke up, I having great pleasure with my little girle, Mrs. Tooker.

19th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning.  At noon by agreement
comes Hatcham Pepys to dine with me.  I thought to have had him to Sir J.
Minnes to a good venison pasty with the rest of my fellows, being invited,
but seeing much company I went away with him and had a good dinner at
home.  He did give me letters he hath wrote to my Lord and Moore about my
Lord's money to get it paid to my cozen, which I will make good use of.  I
made mighty much of him, but a sorry dull fellow he is, fit for nothing
that is ingenious, nor is there a turd of kindnesse or service to be had
from him.  So I shall neglect him if I could get but him satisfied about
this money that I may be out of bonds for my Lord to him.  To see that
this fellow could desire me to helpe him to some employment, if it were
but of L100 per annum: when he is not worth less than, I believe, L20,000.
He gone, I to Sir J. Minnes, and thence with my Lord Bruncker on board the
Bezan to examine W. Howe again, who I find upon this tryall one of much
more wit and ingenuity in his answers than ever I expected, he being very
cunning and discreet and well spoken in them.  I said little to him or
concerning him; but, Lord! to see how he writes to me a-days, and styles
me "My Honour."  So much is a man subjected and dejected under afflictions
as to flatter me in that manner on this occasion.  Back with my Lord to
Sir J. Minnes, where I left him and the rest of a great deale of company,
and so I to my office, where late writing letters and then home to bed.

20th.  Up, and was trimmed, but not time enough to save my Lord Bruncker's
coach or Sir J. Minnes's, and so was fain to walk to Lambeth on foot, but
it was a very fine frosty walke, and great pleasure in it, but troublesome
getting over the River for ice.  I to the Duke of Albemarle, whither my
brethren were all come, but I was not too late. There we sat in discourse
upon our Navy business an houre, and thence in my Lord Bruncker's coach
alone, he walking before (while I staid awhile talking with Sir G. Downing
about the Act, in which he is horrid troublesome) to the Old Exchange.
Thence I took Sir Ellis Layton to Captain Cocke's, where my Lord Bruncker
and Lady Williams dine, and we all mighty merry; but Sir Ellis Layton one
of the best companions at a meale in the world.  After dinner I to the
Exchange to see whether my pretty seamstress be come again or no, and I
find she is, so I to her, saluted her over her counter in the open
Exchange above, and mightily joyed to see her, poor pretty woman!  I must
confess I think her a great beauty.  After laying out a little money there
for two pair of thread stockings, cost 8s., I to Lumbard Streete to see
some business to-night there at the goldsmith's, among others paying in
L1258 to Viner for my Lord Sandwich's use upon Cocke's account.  I was
called by my Lord Bruncker in his coach with his mistresse, and Mr. Cottle
the lawyer, our acquaintance at Greenwich, and so home to Greenwich, and
thence I to Mrs. Penington, and had a supper from the King's Head for her,
and there mighty merry and free as I used to be with her, and at last,
late, I did pray her to undress herself into her nightgowne, that I might
see how to have her picture drawne carelessly (for she is mighty proud of
that conceit), and I would walk without in the streete till she had done.
So I did walk forth, and whether I made too many turns or no in the darke
cold frosty night between the two walls up to the Parke gate I know not,
but she was gone to bed when I come again to the house, upon pretence of
leaving some papers there, which I did on purpose by her consent.  So I
away home, and was there sat up for to be spoken with my young Mrs.
Daniel, to pray me to speake for her husband to be a Lieutenant.  I had
the opportunity here of kissing her again and again, and did answer that I
would be very willing to do him any kindnesse, and so parted, and I to
bed, exceedingly pleased in all my matters of money this month or two, it
having pleased God to bless me with several opportunities of good sums,
and that I have them in effect all very well paid, or in my power to have.
But two things trouble me; one, the sicknesse is increased above 80 this
weeke (though in my owne parish not one has died, though six the last
weeke); the other, most of all, which is, that I have so complexed an
account for these last two months for variety of layings out upon Tangier,
occasions and variety of gettings that I have not made even with myself
now these 3 or 4 months, which do trouble me mightily, finding that I
shall hardly ever come to understand them thoroughly again, as I used to
do my accounts when I was at home.

21st.  At the office all the morning.  At noon all of us dined at Captain
Cocke's at a good chine of beef, and other good meat; but, being all
frost-bitten, was most of it unroast; but very merry, and a good dish of
fowle we dressed ourselves.  Mr. Evelyn there, in very good humour.  All
the afternoon till night pleasant, and then I took my leave of them and to
the office, where I wrote my letters, and away home, my head full of
business and some trouble for my letting my accounts go so far that I have
made an oathe this night for the drinking no wine, &c., on such penalties
till I have passed my accounts and cleared all.  Coming home and going to
bed, the boy tells me his sister Daniel has provided me a supper of little
birds killed by her husband, and I made her sup with me, and after supper
were alone a great while, and I had the pleasure of her lips, she being a
pretty woman, and one whom a great belly becomes as well as ever I saw
any.  She gone, I to bed.  This day I was come to by Mrs. Burrows, of
Westminster, Lieutenant Burrows (lately dead) his wife, a most pretty
woman and my old acquaintance; I had a kiss or two of her, and a most
modest woman she is.

22nd.  Up betimes and to my Lord Bruncker to consider the late
instructions sent us for the method of our signing bills hereafter and
paying them.  By and by, by agreement, comes Sir J. Minnes and Sir W.
Batten, and then to read them publicly and consider of putting them in
execution.  About this all the morning, and, it appearing necessary for
the Controller to have another Clerke, I recommended Poynter to him, which
he accepts, and I by that means rid of one that I fear would not have been
fit for my turne, though he writes very well.  At noon comes Mr. Hill to
towne, and finds me out here, and brings Mr. Houbland, who met him here.
So I was compelled to leave my Lord and his dinner and company, and with
them to the Beare, and dined with them and their brothers, of which Hill
had his and the other two of his, and mighty merry and very fine company
they are, and I glad to see them.  After dinner I forced to take leave of
them by being called upon by Mr. Andrews, I having sent for him, and by a
fine glosse did bring him to desire tallys for what orders I have to pay
him and his company for Tangier victualls, and I by that means cleared to
myself L210 coming to me upon their two orders, which is also a noble
addition to my late profits, which have been very considerable of late,
but how great I know not till I come to cast up my accounts, which burdens
my mind that it should be so backward, but I am resolved to settle to
nothing till I have done it.  He gone, I to my Lord Bruncker's, and there
spent the evening by my desire in seeing his Lordship open to pieces and
make up again his watch, thereby being taught what I never knew before;
and it is a thing very well worth my having seen, and am mightily pleased
and satisfied with it.  So I sat talking with him till late at night,
somewhat vexed at a snappish answer Madam Williams did give me to herself,
upon my speaking a free word to her in mirthe, calling her a mad jade.
She answered, we were not so well acquainted yet.  But I was more at a
letter from my Lord Duke of Albemarle to-day, pressing us to continue our
meetings for all Christmas, which, though every body intended not to have
done, yet I am concluded in it, who intended nothing else.  But I see it
is necessary that I do make often visits to my Lord Duke, which nothing
shall hinder after I have evened my accounts, and now the river is frozen
I know not how to get to him.  Thence to my lodging, making up my Journall
for 8 or 9 days, and so my mind being eased of it, I to supper and to bed.
The weather hath been frosty these eight or nine days, and so we hope for
an abatement of the plague the next weeke, or else God have mercy upon us!
for the plague will certainly continue the next year if it do not.

23rd.  At my office all the morning and home to dinner, my head full of
business, and there my wife finds me unexpectedly.  But I not being at
leisure to stay or talk with her, she went down by coach to Woolwich,
thinking to fetch Mrs. Barbary to carry her to London to keep her
Christmas with her, and I to the office.  This day one come to me with
four great turkies, as a present from Mr. Deane, at Harwich, three of
which my wife carried in the evening home with her to London in her coach
(Mrs. Barbary not being to be got so suddenly, but will come to her the
next week), and I at my office late, and then to my lodgings to bed.

24th (Sunday).  Up betimes, to my Lord Duke of Albemarle by water, and
after some talke with him about business of the office with great content,
and so back again and to dinner, my landlady and her daughters with me,
and had mince-pies, and very merry at a mischance her young son had in
tearing of his new coate quite down the outside of his sleeve in the whole
cloth, one of the strangest mishaps that ever I saw in my life. Then to
church, and placed myself in the Parson's pew under the pulpit, to hear
Mrs. Chamberlain in the next pew sing, who is daughter to Sir James Bunch,
of whom I have heard much, and indeed she sings very finely, and from
church met with Sir W. Warren and he and I walked together talking about
his and my businesses, getting of money as fairly as we can, and, having
set him part of his way home, I walked to my Lord Bruncker, whom I heard
was at Alderman Hooker's, hoping to see and salute Mrs. Lethulier, whom I
did see in passing, but no opportunity of beginning acquaintance, but a
very noble lady she is, however the silly alderman got her.  Here we sat
talking a great while, Sir The. Biddulph and Mr. Vaughan, a son-in-law of
Alderman Hooker's.  Hence with my Lord Bruncker home and sat a little with
him and so home to bed.

25th (Christmas-day).  To church in the morning, and there saw a wedding
in the church, which I have not seen many a day; and the young people so
merry one with another, and strange to see what delight we married people
have to see these poor fools decoyed into our condition, every man and
woman gazing and smiling at them.  Here I saw again my beauty Lethulier.
Thence to my Lord Bruncker's by invitation and dined there, and so home to
look over and settle my papers, both of my accounts private, and those of
Tangier, which I have let go so long that it were impossible for any soul,
had I died, to understand them, or ever come to any good end in them.  I
hope God will never suffer me to come to that disorder again.

26th.  Up, and to the office, where Sir J. Minnes and my Lord Bruncker and
I met, to give our directions to the Commanders of all the ships in the
river to bring in lists of their ships' companies, with entries,
discharges, &c., all the last voyage, where young Seymour, among 20 that
stood bare, stood with his hat on, a proud, saucy young man.  Thence with
them to Mr. Cuttle's, being invited, and dined nobly and neatly; with a
very pretty house and a fine turret at top, with winding stairs and the
finest prospect I know about all Greenwich, save the top of the hill, and
yet in some respects better than that.  Here I also saw some fine writing
worke and flourishing of Mr. Hore, he one that I knew long ago, an
acquaintance of Mr. Tomson's at Westminster, that is this man's clerk. It
is the story of the several Archbishops of Canterbury, engrossed in
vellum, to hang up in Canterbury Cathedrall in tables, in lieu of the old
ones, which are almost worn out.  Thence to the office a while, and so to
Captain Cocke's and there talked, and home to look over my papers, and so
to bed.

27th.  Up, and with Cocke, by coach to London, there home to my wife, and
angry about her desiring a mayde yet, before the plague is quite over. It
seems Mercer is troubled that she hath not one under her, but I will not
venture my family by increasing it before it be safe.  Thence about many
businesses, particularly with Sir W. Warren on the 'Change, and he and I
dined together and settled our Tangier matters, wherein I get above L200
presently.  We dined together at the Pope's Head to do this, and thence to
the goldsmiths, I to examine the state of my matters there too, and so
with him to my house, but my wife was gone abroad to Mrs. Mercer's, so we
took boat, and it being darke and the thaw having broke the ice, but not
carried it quite away, the boat did pass through so much of it all along,
and that with the crackling and noise that it made me fearfull indeed.  So
I forced the watermen to land us on Redriffe side, and so walked together
till Sir W. Warren and I parted near his house and thence I walked quite
over the fields home by light of linke, one of my watermen carrying it,
and I reading by the light of it, it being a very fine, clear, dry night.
So to Captain Cocke's, and there sat and talked, especially with his
Counsellor, about his prize goods, that hath done him good turne, being of
the company with Captain Fisher, his name Godderson; here I supped and so
home to bed, with great content that the plague is decreased to 152, the
whole being but 330.

28th.  Up and to the office, and thence with a great deal of business in
my head, dined alone with Cocke.  So home alone strictly about my
accounts, wherein I made a good beginning, and so, after letters wrote by
the post, to bed.

29th.  Up betimes, and all day long within doors upon my accounts,
publique and private, and find the ill effect of letting them go so long
without evening, that no soul could have ever understood them but myself,
and I with much ado.  But, however, my regularity in all I did and spent
do helpe me, and I hope to find them well.  Late at them and to bed.

30th.  Up and to the office, at noon home to dinner, and all the afternoon
to my accounts again, and there find myself, to my great joy, a great deal
worth above L4000, for which the Lord be praised! and is principally
occasioned by my getting L500 of Cocke, for my profit in his bargains of
prize goods, and from Mr. Gawden's making me a present of L500 more, when
I paid him 8000 for Tangier.  So to my office to write letters, then to my
accounts again, and so to bed, being in great ease of mind.

31st (Lord's day).  All the morning in my chamber, writing fair the state
of my Tangier accounts, and so dined at home.  In the afternoon to the
Duke of Albemarle and thence back again by water, and so to my chamber to
finish the entry of my accounts and to think of the business I am next to
do, which is the stating my thoughts and putting in order my collections
about the business of pursers, to see where the fault of our present
constitution relating to them lies and what to propose to mend it, and
upon this late and with my head full of this business to bed.  Thus ends
this year, to my great joy, in this manner.  I have raised my estate from
L1300 in this year to L4400.  I have got myself greater interest, I think,
by my diligence, and my employments encreased by that of Treasurer for
Tangier, and Surveyour of the Victualls.  It is true we have gone through
great melancholy because of the great plague, and I put to great charges
by it, by keeping my family long at Woolwich, and myself and another part
of my family, my clerks, at my charge at Greenwich, and a mayde at London;
but I hope the King will give us some satisfaction for that.  But now the
plague is abated almost to nothing, and I intending to get to London as
fast as I can.  My family, that is my wife and maids, having been there
these two or three weeks.  The Dutch war goes on very ill, by reason of
lack of money; having none to hope for, all being put into disorder by a
new Act that is made as an experiment to bring credit to the Exchequer,
for goods and money to be advanced upon the credit of that Act.  I have
never lived so merrily (besides that I never got so much) as I have done
this plague time, by my Lord Bruncker's and Captain Cocke's good company,
and the acquaintance of Mrs. Knipp, Coleman and her husband, and Mr.
Laneare, and great store of dancings we have had at my cost (which I was
willing to indulge myself and wife) at my lodgings. The great evil of this
year, and the only one indeed, is the fall of my Lord of Sandwich, whose
mistake about the prizes hath undone him, I believe, as to interest at
Court; though sent (for a little palliating it) Embassador into Spayne,
which he is now fitting himself for.  But the Duke of Albemarle goes with
the Prince to sea this next year, and my Lord very meanly spoken of; and,
indeed, his miscarriage about the prize goods is not to be excused, to
suffer a company of rogues to go away with ten times as much as himself,
and the blame of all to be deservedly laid upon him.

     [According to Granville Penn ("Memorials of Sir W. Penn," ii. 488 n.)
     L2000 went to Lord Sandwich and L8000 among eight others.]

My whole family hath been well all this while, and all my friends I know
of, saving my aunt Bell, who is dead, and some children of my cozen
Sarah's, of the plague.  But many of such as I know very well, dead; yet,
to our great joy, the town fills apace, and shops begin to be open again.
Pray God continue the plague's decrease! for that keeps the Court away
from the place of business, and so all goes to rack as to publick matters,
they at this distance not thinking of it.

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     A most conceited fellow and not over much in him
     A pretty man, I would be content to break a commandment with him
     Among  many lazy people that the diligent man becomes necessary
     Delight to see these poor fools decoyed into our condition
     Great many silly stories they tell of their sport
     His enemies have done him as much good as he could wish
     How little merit do prevail in the world, but only favour
     I am a foole to be troubled at it, since I cannot helpe it
     L10,000 to the Prince, and half-a-crowne to my Lord of Sandwich
     Left him with some Commanders at the table taking tobacco
     One whom a great belly becomes as well as ever I saw any
     Pleases them mightily, and me not at all
     See how a good dinner and feasting reconciles everybody
     The boy is well, and offers to be searched

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS, PEPY'S DIARY,1965 N.S.,COMPLETE:

     A fair salute on horseback, in Rochester streets, of the lady
     A most conceited fellow and not over much in him
     A conceited man, but of no Logique in his head at all
     A vineyard, the first that ever I did see
     A pretty man, I would be content to break a commandment with him
     About two o'clock, too late and too soon to go home to bed
     Accounts I never did see, or hope again to see in my days
     All the towne almost going out of towne (Plague panic)
     Among  many lazy people that the diligent man becomes necessary
     And feeling for a chamber-pott, there was none
     And all to dinner and sat down to the King saving myself
     At a loss whether it will be better for me to have him die
     Bagwell's wife waited at the door, and went with me to my office
     Baseness and looseness of the Court
     Because I would not be over sure of any thing
     Being able to do little business (but the less the better)
     Being the first Wednesday of the month
     Best poem that ever was wrote (Siege of Rhodes)
     Bottle of strong water; whereof now and then a sip did me good
     Buy some roll-tobacco to smell to and chaw
     By his many words and no understanding, confound himself
     Castlemayne is sicke again, people think, slipping her filly
     Church, where a most insipid young coxcomb preached
     Clean myself with warm water; my wife will have me
     Consult my pillow upon that and every great thing of my life
     Contracted for her as if he had been buying a horse
     Convenience of periwiggs is so great
     Copper to the value of L5,000
     Costs me 12d. a kiss after the first
     Delight to see these poor fools decoyed into our condition
     Desired me that I would baste his coate
     Did bear with it, and very pleasant all the while
     Did put evil thoughts in me, but proceeded no further
     Discourse of Mr. Evelyn touching all manner of learning
     Disease making us more cruel to one another than if we are doggs
     Doubtfull whether her daughter will like of it or no
     Dying this last week of the plague 112, from 43 the week before
     Endeavouring to strike tallys for money for Tangier
     Every body is at a great losse and nobody can tell
     Every body's looks, and discourse in the street is of death
     Fell to sleep as if angry
     Find that now and then a little difference do no hurte
     First thing of that nature I did ever give her (L10 ring)
     For my quiet would not enquire into it
     For, for her part, she should not be buried in the commons
     France, which is accounted the best place for bread
     French have taken two and sunk one of our merchant-men
     Give the other notice of the future state, if there was any
     Going with her woman to a hot-house to bathe herself
     Good discourse and counsel from him, which I hope I shall take
     Great many silly stories they tell of their sport
     Great thaw it is not for a man to walk the streets
     Had what pleasure almost I would with her
     Hath sent me masters that do observe that I take pains
     Hath a good heart to bear, or a cunning one to conceal his evil
     Hear that the plague is come into the City
     Heard noises over their head upon the leads
     His wife and three children died, all, I think, in a day
     His disease was the pox and that he must be fluxed (Rupert)
     His enemies have done him as much good as he could wish
     Houses marked with a red cross upon the doors
     How sad a sight it is to see the streets empty of people
     How little merit do prevail in the world, but only favour
     How little heed is had to the prisoners and sicke and wounded
     How Povy overdoes every thing in commending it
     How unhppily a man may fall into a necessity of bribing people
     I kissed the bride in bed, and so the curtaines drawne
     I have promised, but know not when I shall perform
     I know not how their fortunes may agree
     I met a dead corps of the plague, in the narrow ally
     I am a foole to be troubled at it, since I cannot helpe it
     If the exportations exceed importations
     In our graves (as Shakespeere resembles it) we could dream
     It is a strange thing how fancy works
     King shall not be able to whip a cat
     King himself minding nothing but his ease
     King is not at present in purse to do
     L10,000 to the Prince, and half-a-crowne to my Lord of Sandwich
     Law against it signifies nothing in the world
     Law and severity were used against drunkennesse
     Lechery will never leave him
     Left him with some Commanders at the table taking tobacco
     Less he finds of difference between them and other men
     Lord! in the dullest insipid manner that ever lover did
     Luxury and looseness of the times
     Money I have not, nor can get
     Mr. Evelyn's translating and sending me as a present
     Must be forced to confess it to my wife, which troubles me
     My wife after her bathing lying alone in another bed
     My old folly and childishnesse hangs upon me still
     Nan at Moreclacke, very much pleased and merry with her
     Never could man say worse himself nor have worse said
     No man is wise at all times
     Not had the confidence to take his lady once by the hand
     Not liking that it should lie long undone, for fear of death
     Not to be censured if their necessities drive them to bad
     Offer to give me a piece to receive of me 20
     One whom a great belly becomes as well as ever I saw any
     Ordered him L2000, and he paid me my quantum out of it
     Ordered in the yarde six or eight bargemen to be whipped
     Out of my purse I dare not for fear of a precedent
     Pest coaches and put her into it to carry her to a pest house
     Plague claimed 68,596 victims (in 1665)
     Plague, forty last night, the bell always going
     Pleases them mightily, and me not at all
     Poor seamen that lie starving in the streets
     Pretends to a resolution of being hereafter very clean
     Pretty to see the young pretty ladies dressed like men
     Pride of some persons and vice of most was but a sad story
     Quakers and others that will not have any bell ring for them
     Resolving not to be bribed to dispatch business
     Sat an hour or two talking and discoursing .  .  .  .
     Saying me to be the fittest man in England
     Searchers with their rods in their hands
     See how a good dinner and feasting reconciles everybody
     Sicke men that are recovered, they lying before our office doors
     So to bed, to be up betimes by the helpe of a larum watch
     So great a trouble is fear
     The coachman that carried [us] cannot know me again
     The boy is well, and offers to be searched
     This absence makes us a little strange instead of more fond
     Those bred in the North among the colliers are good for labour
     Though neither of us care 2d. one for another
     Tied our men back to back, and thrown them all into the sea
     Told us he had not been in a bed in the whole seven years
     Too much of it will make her know her force too much
     Two shops in three, if not more, generally shut up
     Up, leaving my wife in bed, being sick of her months
     Wanton as ever she was, with much I made myself merry and away
     Well enough pleased this morning with their night's lodging
     What silly discourse we had by the way as to love-matters
     When she least shews it hath her wit at work
     Where money is free, there is great plenty
     Which may teach me how I make others wait
     Who is the most, and promises the least, of any man
     Wife that brings me nothing almost (besides a comely person)


                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.

                                1666 N.S.

                            JANUARY & FEBRUARY
                                1665-1666

January 1st (New-Yeare's Day).  Called up by five o'clock, by my order, by
Mr. Tooker, who wrote, while I dictated to him, my business of the
Pursers; and so, without eating or drinking, till three in the afternoon,
and then, to my great content, finished it.  So to dinner, Gibson and he
and I, and then to copying it over, Mr. Gibson reading and I writing, and
went a good way in it till interrupted by Sir W. Warren's coming, of whom
I always learne something or other, his discourse being very good and his
brains also.  He being gone we to our business again, and wrote more of it
fair, and then late to bed.

     [This document is in the British Museum (Harleian MS. 6287), and is
     entitled, "A Letter from Mr. Pepys, dated at Greenwich, 1 Jan.
     1665-6, which he calls his New Year's Gift to his hon. friend, Sir
     Wm. Coventry, wherein he lays down a method for securing his Majesty
     in husbandly execution of the Victualling Part of the Naval
     Expence."  It consists of nineteen closely written folio pages, and
     is a remarkable specimen of Pepys's business habits.--B. There are
     copies of several letters on the victualling of the navy, written by
     Pepys in 1666, among the Rawlinson MSS. in the Bodleian.]

2nd.  Up by candlelight again, and wrote the greatest part of my business
fair, and then to the office, and so home to dinner, and after dinner up
and made an end of my fair writing it, and that being done, set two
entering while to my Lord Bruncker's, and there find Sir J. Minnes and all
his company, and Mr. Boreman and Mrs. Turner, but, above all, my dear Mrs.
Knipp, with whom I sang, and in perfect pleasure I was to hear her sing,
and especially her little Scotch song of "Barbary Allen;"

     [The Scottish ballad is entitled, "Sir John Grehme and Barbara
     Allan," and the English version, "Barbara Allen's Cruelty."  Both
     are printed in Percy's "Reliques," Series III.]

and to make our mirthe the completer, Sir J. Minnes was in the highest
pitch of mirthe, and his mimicall tricks, that ever I saw, and most
excellent pleasant company he is, and the best mimique that ever I saw,
and certainly would have made an excellent actor, and now would be an
excellent teacher of actors.  Thence, it being post night, against my will
took leave, but before I come to my office, longing for more of her
company, I returned and met them coming home in coaches, so I got into the
coach where Mrs. Knipp was and got her upon my knee (the coach being full)
and played with her breasts and sung, and at last set her at her house and
so good night.  So home to my lodgings and there endeavoured to have
finished the examining my papers of Pursers' business to have sent away
to-night, but I was so sleepy with my late early risings and late goings
to bed that I could not do it, but was forced to go to bed and leave it to
send away to-morrow by an Expresse.

3rd.  Up, and all the morning till three in the afternoon examining and
fitting up my Pursers' paper and sent it away by an Expresse.  Then comes
my wife, and I set her to get supper ready against I go to the Duke of
Albemarle and back again; and at the Duke's with great joy I received the
good news of the decrease of the plague this week to 70, and but 253 in
all; which is the least Bill hath been known these twenty years in the
City.  Through the want of people in London is it, that must make it so
low below the ordinary number for Bills.  So home, and find all my good
company I had bespoke, as Coleman and his wife, and Laneare, Knipp and her
surly husband; and good musique we had, and, among other things, Mrs.
Coleman sang my words I set of "Beauty retire," and I think it is a good
song, and they praise it mightily.  Then to dancing and supper, and mighty
merry till Mr. Rolt come in, whose pain of the tooth-ake made him no
company, and spoilt ours; so he away, and then my wife's teeth fell of
akeing, and she to bed.  So forced to break up all with a good song, and
so to bed.

4th.  Up, and to the office, where my Lord Bruncker and I, against Sir W.
Batten and Sir J. Minnes and the whole table, for Sir W. Warren in the
business of his mast contract, and overcome them and got them to do what I
had a mind to, for indeed my Lord being unconcerned in what I aimed at. So
home to dinner, where Mr. Sheldon come by invitation from Woolwich, and as
merry as I could be with all my thoughts about me and my wife still in
pain of her tooth.  He anon took leave and took Mrs. Barbary his niece
home with him, and seems very thankful to me for the L10 I did give him
for my wife's rent of his house, and I am sure I am beholding to him, for
it was a great convenience to me, and then my wife home to London by water
and I to the office till 8 at night, and so to my Lord Bruncker's,
thinking to have been merry, having appointed a meeting for Sir J. Minnes
and his company and Mrs. Knipp again, but whatever hindered I know not,
but no company come, which vexed me because it disappointed me of the glut
of mirthe I hoped for.  However, good discourse with my Lord and merry,
with Mrs. Williams's descants upon Sir J. Minnes's and Mrs. Turner's not
coming.  So home and to bed.

5th.  I with my Lord Bruncker and Mrs. Williams by coach with four horses
to London, to my Lord's house in Covent-Guarden.  But, Lord! what staring
to see a nobleman's coach come to town.  And porters every where bow to
us; and such begging of beggars!  And a delightfull thing it is to see the
towne full of people again as now it is; and shops begin to open, though
in many places seven or eight together, and more, all shut; but yet the
towne is full, compared with what it used to be.  I mean the City end; for
Covent-Guarden and Westminster are yet very empty of people, no Court nor
gentry being there.  Set Mrs. Williams down at my Lord's house and he and
I to Sir G. Carteret, at his chamber at White Hall, he being come to town
last night to stay one day.  So my Lord and he and I much talke about the
Act, what credit we find upon it, but no private talke between him and I.
So I to the 'Change, and there met Mr. Povy, newly come to town, and he
and I to Sir George Smith's and there dined nobly. He tells me how my Lord
Bellases complains for want of money and of him and me therein, but I
value it not, for I know I do all that can be done. We had no time to talk
of particulars, but leave it to another day, and I away to Cornhill to
expect my Lord Bruncker's coming back again, and I staid at my stationer's
house, and by and by comes my Lord, and did take me up and so to
Greenwich, and after sitting with them a while at their house, home,
thinking to get Mrs. Knipp, but could not, she being busy with company,
but sent me a pleasant letter, writing herself "Barbary Allen."  I went
therefore to Mr. Boreman's for pastime, and there staid an houre or two
talking with him, and reading a discourse about the River of Thames, the
reason of its being choked up in several places with shelfes; which is
plain is, by the encroachments made upon the River, and running out of
causeways into the River at every wood-wharfe; which was not heretofore
when Westminster Hall and White Hall were built, and Redriffe Church,
which now are sometimes overflown with water.  I had great satisfaction
herein.  So home and to my papers for lacke of company, but by and by
comes little Mrs. Tooker and sat and supped with me, and I kept her very
late talking and making her comb my head, and did what I will with her.
So late to bed.

6th.  Up betimes and by water to the Cockepitt, there met Sir G. Carteret
and, after discourse with the Duke, all together, and there saw a letter
wherein Sir W. Coventry did take notice to the Duke with a commendation of
my paper about Pursers, I to walke in the Parke with the Vice-Chamberlain,
and received his advice about my deportment about the advancing the credit
of the Act; giving me caution to see that we do not misguide the King by
making them believe greater matters from it than will be found.  But I see
that this arises from his great trouble to see the Act succeede, and to
hear my name so much used and my letters shown at Court about goods served
us in upon the credit of it.  But I do make him believe that I do it with
all respect to him and on his behalfe too, as indeed I do, as well as my
owne, that it may not be said that he or I do not assist therein.  He
tells me that my Lord Sandwich do proceed on his journey with the greatest
kindnesse that can be imagined from the King and Chancellor, which was
joyfull newes to me.  Thence with Lord Bruncker to Greenwich by water to a
great dinner and much company; Mr. Cottle and his lady and others and I
went, hoping to get Mrs. Knipp to us, having wrote a letter to her in the
morning, calling myself "Dapper Dicky," in answer to hers of "Barbary
Allen," but could not, and am told by the boy that carried my letter, that
he found her crying; but I fear she lives a sad life with that ill-natured
fellow her husband: so we had a great, but I a melancholy dinner, having
not her there, as I hoped. After dinner to cards, and then comes notice
that my wife is come unexpectedly to me to towne.  So I to her.  It is
only to see what I do, and why I come not home; and she is in the right
that I would have a little more of Mrs. Knipp's company before I go away.
My wife to fetch away my things from Woolwich, and I back to cards and
after cards to choose King and Queene, and a good cake there was, but no
marks found; but I privately found the clove, the mark of the knave, and
privately put it into Captain Cocke's piece, which made some mirthe,
because of his lately being knowne by his buying of clove and mace of the
East India prizes.  At night home to my lodging, where I find my wife
returned with my things, and there also Captain Ferrers is come upon
business of my Lord's to this town about getting some goods of his put on
board in order to his going to Spain, and Ferrers presumes upon my finding
a bed for him, which I did not like to have done without my invitation
because I had done [it] several times before, during the plague, that he
could not provide himself safely elsewhere.  But it being Twelfth Night,
they had got the fiddler and mighty merry they were; and I above come not
to them, but when I had done my business among my papers went to bed,
leaving them dancing, and choosing King and Queene.

7th (Lord's day).  Up, and being trimmed I was invited by Captain Cocke,
so I left my wife, having a mind to some discourse with him, and dined
with him.  He tells me of new difficulties about his goods which troubles
me and I fear they will be great.  He tells me too what I hear everywhere
how the towne talks of my Lord Craven being to come into Sir G. Carteret's
place; but sure it cannot be true.  But I do fear those two families, his
and my Lord Sandwich's, are quite broken.  And I must now stand upon my
own legs.  Thence to my lodging, and considering how I am hindered by
company there to do any thing among my papers, I did resolve to go away
to-day rather than stay to no purpose till to-morrow and so got all my
things packed up and spent half an hour with W. Howe about his papers of
accounts for contingencies and my Lord's accounts, so took leave of my
landlady and daughters, having paid dear for what time I have spent there,
but yet having been quiett and my health, I am very well contented
therewith.  So with my wife and Mercer took boat and away home; but in the
evening, before I went, comes Mrs. Knipp, just to speake with me
privately, to excuse her not coming to me yesterday, complaining how like
a devil her husband treats her, but will be with us in towne a weeke
hence, and so I kissed her and parted.  Being come home, my wife and I to
look over our house and consider of laying out a little money to hang our
bedchamber better than it is, and so resolved to go and buy something
to-morrow, and so after supper, with great joy in my heart for my coming
once again hither, to bed.

8th.  Up, and my wife and I by coach to Bennett's, in Paternoster Row, few
shops there being yet open, and there bought velvett for a coate, and
camelott for a cloake for myself; and thence to a place to look over some
fine counterfeit damasks to hang my wife's closett, and pitched upon one,
and so by coach home again, I calling at the 'Change, and so home to
dinner and all the afternoon look after my papers at home and my office
against to-morrow, and so after supper and considering the uselessness of
laying out so much money upon my wife's closett, but only the chamber, to
bed.

9th.  Up, and then to the office, where we met first since the plague,
which God preserve us in!  At noon home to dinner, where uncle Thomas with
me, and in comes Pierce lately come from Oxford, and Ferrers.  After
dinner Pierce and I up to my chamber, where he tells me how a great
difference hath been between the Duke and Duchesse, he suspecting her to
be naught with Mr. Sidney.

     ["This Duchess was Chancellor Hyde's daughter, and she was a very
     handsome woman, and had a great deal of wit; therefore it was not
     without reason that Mr. Sydney, the handsomest youth of his time, of
     the Duke's bedchamber, was so much in love with her, as appeared to
     us all, and the Duchess not unkind to him, but very innocently.  He
     was afterwards banished the Court for another reason, as was
     reported" (Sir John Reresby's "Memoirs," August 5th, 1664, ed.
     Cartwright, pp. 64,65). "'How could the Duke of York make my mother
     a Papist?' said the Princess Mary to Dr. Bumet.  'The Duke caught a
     man in bed with her,' said the Doctor, 'and then had power to make
     her do anything.'  The Prince, who sat by the fire, said, 'Pray,
     madam, ask the Doctor a few more questions'" (Spence's "Anecdotes,"
     ed.  Singer, 329).]

But some way or other the matter is made up; but he was banished the
Court, and the Duke for many days did not speak to the Duchesse at all. He
tells me that my Lord Sandwich is lost there at Court, though the King is
particularly his friend.  But people do speak every where slightly of him;
which is a sad story to me, but I hope it may be better again.  And that
Sir G. Carteret is neglected, and hath great enemies at work against him.
That matters must needs go bad, while all the town, and every boy in the
streete, openly cries, "The King cannot go away till my Lady Castlemaine
be ready to come along with him;" she being lately put to bed And that he
visits her and Mrs. Stewart every morning before he eats his breakfast.
All this put together makes me very sad, but yet I hope I shall do pretty
well among them for all this, by my not meddling with either of their
matters.  He and Ferrers gone I paid uncle Thomas his last quarter's
money, and then comes Mr. Gawden and he and I talked above stairs together
a good while about his business, and to my great joy got him to declare
that of the L500 he did give me the other day, none of it was for my
Treasurershipp for Tangier (I first telling him how matters stand between
Povy and I, that he was to have half of whatever was coming to me by that
office), and that he will gratify me at 2 per cent. for that when he next
receives any money.  So there is L80 due to me more than I thought of.  He
gone I with a glad heart to the office to write, my letters and so home to
supper and bed, my wife mighty full of her worke she hath to do in
furnishing her bedchamber.

10th.  Up, and by coach to Sir G. Downing, where Mr. Gawden met me by
agreement to talke upon the Act.  I do find Sir G. Downing to be a mighty
talker, more than is true, which I now know to be so, and suspected it
before, but for all that I have good grounds to think it will succeed for
goods and in time for money too, but not presently.  Having done with him,
I to my Lord Bruncker's house in Covent-Garden, and, among other things,
it was to acquaint him with my paper of Pursers, and read it to him, and
had his good liking of it.  Shewed him Mr. Coventry's sense of it, which
he sent me last post much to my satisfaction.  Thence to the 'Change, and
there hear to our grief how the plague is encreased this week from seventy
to eighty-nine.  We have also great fear of our Hambrough fleete, of their
meeting the Dutch; as also have certain newes, that by storms Sir Jer.
Smith's fleet is scattered, and three of them come without masts back to
Plymouth, which is another very exceeding great disappointment, and if the
victualling ships are miscarried will tend to the losse of the garrison of
Tangier.  Thence home, in my way had the opportunity I longed for, of
seeing and saluting Mrs. Stokes, my little goldsmith's wife in Paternoster
Row, and there bespoke some thing, a silver chafing-dish for warming
plates, and so home to dinner, found my wife busy about making her
hangings for her chamber with the upholster. So I to the office and anon
to the Duke of Albemarle, by coach at night, taking, for saving time, Sir
W. Warren with me, talking of our businesses all the way going and coming,
and there got his reference of my pursers' paper to the Board to consider
of it before he reads it, for he will never understand it I am sure.  Here
I saw Sir W. Coventry's kind letter to him concerning my paper, and among
others of his letters, which I saw all, and that is a strange thing, that
whatever is writ to this Duke of Albemarle, all the world may see; for
this very night he did give me Mr. Coventry's letter to read, soon as it
come to his hand, before he had read it himself, and bid me take out of it
what concerned the Navy, and many things there was in it, which I should
not have thought fit for him to have let any body so suddenly see; but,
among other things, find him profess himself to the Duke a friend into the
inquiring further into the business of Prizes, and advises that it may be
publique, for the righting the King, and satisfying the people and getting
the blame to be rightly laid where it should be, which strikes very hard
upon my Lord Sandwich, and troubles me to read it.  Besides, which vexes
me more, I heard the damned Duchesse again say to twenty gentlemen
publiquely in the room, that she would have Montagu sent once more to sea,
before he goes his Embassy, that we may see whether he will make amends
for his cowardice, and repeated the answer she did give the other day in
my hearing to Sir G. Downing, wishing her Lord had been a coward, for then
perhaps he might have been made an Embassador, and not been sent now to
sea.  But one good thing she said, she cried mightily out against the
having of gentlemen Captains with feathers and ribbands, and wished the
King would send her husband to sea with the old plain sea Captains, that
he served with formerly, that would make their ships swim with blood,
though they could not make legs

     [Make bows, play the courtier.  The reading, "make leagues,"
     appeared in former editions till Mr. Mynors Bright corrected it.]

as Captains nowadays can.  It grieved me to see how slightly the Duke do
every thing in the world, and how the King and every body suffers whatever
he will to be done in the Navy, though never so much against reason, as in
the business of recalling tickets, which will be done notwithstanding all
the arguments against it.  So back again to my office, and there to
business and so to bed.

11th.  Up and to the office.  By and by to the Custome House to the
Farmers, there with a letter of Sir G. Carteret's for L3000, which they
ordered to be paid me.  So away back again to the office, and at noon to
dinner all of us by invitation to Sir W. Pen's, and much other company.
Among others, Lieutenant of the Tower, and Broome, his poet, and Dr.
Whistler, and his (Sir W. Pen's) son-in-law Lowder, servant--[lover]--to
Mrs. Margaret Pen, and Sir Edward Spragg, a merry man, that sang a
pleasant song pleasantly.  Rose from table before half dined, and with Mr.
Mountney of the Custome House to the East India House, and there delivered
to him tallys for L3000 and received a note for the money on Sir R. Viner.
So ended the matter, and back to my company, where staid a little, and
thence away with my Lord Bruncker for discourse sake, and he and I to
Gresham College to have seen Mr. Hooke and a new invented chariott of Dr.
Wilkins, but met with nobody at home!  So to Dr. Wilkins's, where I never
was before, and very kindly received and met with Dr. Merritt, and fine
discourse among them to my great joy, so sober and so ingenious.  He is
now upon finishing his discourse of a universal character.  So away and I
home to my office about my letters, and so home to supper and to bed.

12th.  By coach to the Duke of Albemarle, where Sir W. Batten and I only
met.  Troubled at my heart to see how things are ordered there without
consideration or understanding.  Thence back by coach and called at
Wotton's, my shoemaker, lately come to towne, and bespoke shoes, as also
got him to find me a taylor to make me some clothes, my owne being not yet
in towne, nor Pym, my Lord Sandwich's taylor.  So he helped me to a pretty
man, one Mr. Penny, against St. Dunstan's Church.  Thence to the 'Change
and there met Mr. Moore, newly come to towne, and took him home to dinner
with me and after dinner to talke, and he and I do conclude my Lord's case
to be very bad and may be worse, if he do not get a pardon for his doings
about the prizes and his business at Bergen, and other things done by him
at sea, before he goes for Spayne.  I do use all the art I can to get him
to get my Lord to pay my cozen Pepys, for it is a great burden to my mind
my being bound for my Lord in L1000 to him. Having done discourse with him
and directed him to go with my advice to my Lord expresse to-morrow to get
his pardon perfected before his going, because of what I read the other
night in Sir W. Coventry's letter, I to the office, and there had an
extraordinary meeting of Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Batten, and Sir W. Pen, and
my Lord Bruncker and I to hear my paper read about pursers, which they did
all of them with great good will and great approbation of my method and
pains in all, only Sir W. Pen, who must except against every thing and
remedy nothing, did except against my proposal for some reasons, which I
could not understand, I confess, nor my Lord Bruncker neither, but he did
detect indeed a failure or two of mine in my report about the ill
condition of the present pursers, which I did magnify in one or two little
things, to which, I think, he did with reason except, but at last with all
respect did declare the best thing he ever heard of this kind, but when
Sir W. Batten did say, "Let us that do know the practical part of the
Victualling meet Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Pen and I and see what we can do to
mend all," he was so far from offering or furthering it, that he declined
it and said, he must be out of towne.  So as I ever knew him never did in
his life ever attempt to mend any thing, but suffer all things to go on in
the way they are, though never so bad, rather than improve his experience
to the King's advantage.  So we broke up, however, they promising to meet
to offer some thing in it of their opinions, and so we rose, and I and my
Lord Bruncker by coach a little way for discourse sake, till our coach
broke, and tumbled me over him quite down the side of the coach, falling
on the ground about the Stockes,  but up again, and thinking it fit to
have for my honour some thing reported in writing to the Duke in favour of
my pains in this, lest it should be thought to be rejected as frivolous, I
did move it to my Lord, and he will see it done to-morrow.  So we parted,
and I to the office and thence home to my poor wife, who works all day at
home like a horse, at the making of her hangings for our chamber and the
bed.  So to supper and to bed.

13th.  At the office all the morning, where my Lord Bruncker moved to have
something wrote in my matter as I desired him last night, and it was
ordered and will be done next sitting.  Home with his Lordship to Mrs.
Williams's, in Covent-Garden, to dinner (the first time I ever was there),
and there met Captain Cocke; and pretty merry, though not perfectly so,
because of the fear that there is of a great encrease again of the plague
this week.  And again my Lord Bruncker do tell us, that he hath it from
Sir John Baber; who is related to my Lord Craven, that my Lord Craven do
look after Sir G. Carteret's place, and do reckon himself sure of it.
After dinner Cocke and I together by coach to the Exchange, in our way
talking of our matters, and do conclude that every thing must breake in
pieces, while no better counsels govern matters than there seem to do, and
that it will become him and I and all men to get their reckonings even, as
soon as they can, and expect all to breake.  Besides, if the plague
continues among us another yeare, the Lord knows what will become of us.
I set him down at the 'Change, and I home to my office, where late writing
letters and doing business, and thence home to supper and to bed.  My head
full of cares, but pleased with my wife's minding her worke so well, and
busying herself about her house, and I trust in God if I can but clear
myself of my Lord Sandwich's bond, wherein I am bound with him for L1000
to T. Pepys, I shall do pretty well, come what will come.

14th (Lord's day).  Long in bed, till raised by my new taylor, Mr. Penny,
[who comes and brings me my new velvet coat, very handsome, but plain, and
a day hence will bring me my camelott cloak.]  He gone I close to my
papers and to set all in order and to perform my vow to finish my journall
and other things before I kiss any woman more or drink any wine, which I
must be forced to do to-morrow if I go to Greenwich as I am invited by Mr.
Boreman to hear Mrs. Knipp sing, and I would be glad to go, so as we may
be merry.  At noon eat the second of the two cygnets Mr. Shepley sent us
for a new-year's gift, and presently to my chamber again and so to work
hard all day about my Tangier accounts, which I am going again to make up,
as also upon writing a letter to my father about Pall, whom it is time now
I find to think of disposing of while God Almighty hath given me something
to give with her, and in my letter to my father I do offer to give her
L450 to make her own L50 given her by my uncle up L500.  I do also therein
propose Mr. Harman the upholster for a husband for her, to whom I have a
great love and did heretofore love his former wife, and a civil man he is
and careful in his way, beside, I like his trade and place he lives in,
being Cornhill.  Thus late at work, and so to supper and to bed.  This
afternoon, after sermon, comes my dear fair beauty of the Exchange, Mrs.
Batelier, brought by her sister, an acquaintance of Mercer's, to see my
wife.  I saluted her with as much pleasure as I had done any a great
while.  We sat and talked together an houre, with infinite pleasure to me,
and so the fair creature went away, and proves one of the modestest women,
and pretty, that ever I saw in my life, and my [wife] judges her so too.

15th.  Busy all the morning in my chamber in my old cloth suit, while my
usuall one is to my taylor's to mend, which I had at noon again, and an
answer to a letter I had sent this morning to Mrs. Pierce to go along with
my wife and I down to Greenwich to-night upon an invitation to Mr.
Boreman's to be merry to dance and sing with Mrs. Knipp.  Being dressed,
and having dined, I took coach and to Mrs. Pierce, to her new house in
Covent-Garden, a very fine place and fine house.  Took her thence home to
my house, and so by water to Boreman's by night, where the greatest
disappointment that ever I saw in my life, much company, a good supper
provided, and all come with expectation of excesse of mirthe, but all
blank through the waywardnesse of Mrs. Knipp, who, though she had
appointed the night, could not be got to come.  Not so much as her husband
could get her to come; but, which was a pleasant thing in all my anger, I
asking him, while we were in expectation what answer one of our many
messengers would bring, what he thought, whether she would come or no, he
answered that, for his part, he could not so much as thinke.  By and by we
all to supper, which the silly master of the feast commended, but, what
with my being out of humour, and the badnesse of the meate dressed, I did
never eat a worse supper in my life.  At last, very late, and supper done,
she came undressed, but it brought me no mirthe at all; only, after all
being done, without singing, or very little, and no dancing, Pierce and I
to bed together, and he and I very merry to find how little and thin
clothes they give us to cover us, so that we were fain to lie in our
stockings and drawers, and lay all our coates and clothes upon the bed.
So to sleep.

16th.  Up, and leaving the women in bed together (a pretty black and
white) I to London to the office, and there forgot, through business, to
bespeake any dinner for my wife and Mrs. Pierce.  However, by noon they
come, and a dinner we had, and Kate Joyce comes to see us, with whom very
merry.  After dinner she and I up to my chamber, who told me her business
was chiefly for my advice about her husband's leaving off his trade, which
though I wish enough, yet I did advise against, for he is a man will not
know how to live idle, and employment he is fit for none. Thence anon
carried her and Mrs. Pierce home, and so to the Duke of Albemarle, and
mighty kind he to me still.  So home late at my letters, and so to bed,
being mightily troubled at the newes of the plague's being encreased, and
was much the saddest news that the plague hath brought me from the
beginning of it; because of the lateness of the year, and the fear, we may
with reason have, of its continuing with us the next summer. The total
being now 375, and the plague 158.

17th.  Busy all the morning, settling things against my going out of towne
this night.  After dinner, late took horse, having sent for Lashmore to go
with me, and so he and I rode to Dagenhams in the dark. There find the
whole family well.  It was my Lord Crew's desire that I should come, and
chiefly to discourse with me of Lord Sandwich's matters; and therein to
persuade, what I had done already, that my Lord should sue out a pardon
for his business of the prizes, as also for Bergen, and all he hath done
this year past, before he begins his Embassy to Spayne.  For it is to be
feared that the Parliament will fly out against him and particular men,
the next Session.  He is glad also that my Lord is clear of his
sea-imployment, though sorry as I am, only in the manner of its bringing
about.  By and by to supper, my Lady Wright very kind.  After supper up to
wait on my Lady Crew, who is the same weake silly lady as ever, asking
such saintly questions.  Down to my Lord again and sat talking an houre or
two, and anon to prayers the whole family, and then all to bed, I
handsomely used, lying in the chamber Mr. Carteret formerly did, but sat
up an houre talking sillily with Mr. Carteret and Mr. Marre, and so to
bed.

18th.  Up before day and thence rode to London before office time, where I
met a note at the doore to invite me to supper to Mrs. Pierces because of
Mrs. Knipp, who is in towne and at her house: To the office, where, among
other things, vexed with Major Norwood's coming, who takes it ill my not
paying a bill of Exchange of his, but I have good reason for it, and so
the less troubled, but yet troubled, so as at noon being carried by my
Lord Bruncker to Captain Cocke's to dinner, where Mrs. Williams was, and
Mrs. Knipp, I was not heartily merry, though a glasse of wine did a little
cheer me.  After dinner to the office.  Anon comes to me thither my Lord
Bruncker, Mrs. Williams, and Knipp.  I brought down my wife in her
night-gowne, she not being indeed very well, to the office to them and
there by and by they parted all and my wife and I anon and Mercer, by
coach, to Pierces; where mighty merry, and sing and dance with great
pleasure; and I danced, who never did in company in my life, and Captain
Cocke come for a little while and danced, but went away, but we staid and
had a pretty supper, and spent till two in the morning, but got home well
by coach, though as dark as pitch, and so to bed.

19th.  Up and ready, called on by Mr. Moone, my Lord Bellases' secretary,
who and I good friends though I have failed him in some payments.  Thence
with Sir J. Minnes to the Duke of Albemarle's, and carried all well, and
met Norwood but prevented him in desiring a meeting of the Commissioners
for Tangier.  Thence to look for Sir H. [Cholmly], but he not within, he
coming to town last night.  It is a remarkable thing how infinitely naked
all that end of the towne, Covent-Garden, is at this day of people; while
the City is almost as full again of people as ever it was.  To the 'Change
and so home to dinner and the office, whither anon comes Sir H. Cholmley
to me, and he and I to my house, there to settle his accounts with me, and
so with great pleasure we agreed and great friends become, I think, and he
presented me upon the foot of our accounts for this year's service for him
L100, whereof Povy must have half.  Thence to the office and wrote a
letter to Norwood to satisfy him about my nonpayment of his bill, for that
do still stick in my mind.  So at night home to supper and to bed.

20th.  To the office, where upon Mr. Kinaston's coming to me about some
business of Colonell Norwood's, I sent my boy home for some papers, where,
he staying longer than I would have him, and being vexed at the business
and to be kept from my fellows in the office longer than was fit, I become
angry, and boxed my boy when he came, that I do hurt my thumb so much,
that I was not able to stir all the day after, and in great pain.  At noon
to dinner, and then to the office again, late, and so to supper and to
bed.

21st (Lord's day).  Lay almost till noon merrily and with pleasure talking
with my wife in bed.  Then up looking about my house, and the roome which
my wife is dressing up, having new hung our bedchamber with blue, very
handsome.  After dinner to my Tangier accounts and there stated them
against to-morrow very distinctly for the Lords to see who meet tomorrow,
and so to supper and to bed.

22nd.  Up, and set my people to work in copying Tangier accounts, and I
down the river to Greenwich to the office to fetch away some papers and
thence to Deptford, where by agreement my Lord Bruncker was to come, but
staid almost till noon, after I had spent an houre with W. Howe talking of
my Lord Sandwich's matters and his folly in minding his pleasures too much
now-a-days, and permitting himself to be governed by Cuttance to the
displeasing of all the Commanders almost of the fleete, and thence we may
conceive indeed the rise of all my Lord's misfortunes of late.  At noon my
Lord Bruncker did come, but left the keys of the chests we should open, at
Sir G. Carteret's lodgings, of my Lord Sandwich's, wherein Howe's supposed
jewells are; so we could not, according to my Lord Arlington's order, see
them today; but we parted, resolving to meet here at night: my Lord
Bruncker being going with Dr. Wilkins, Mr. Hooke, and others, to Colonell
Blunts, to consider again of the business of charriots, and to try their
new invention.  Which I saw here my Lord Bruncker ride in; where the
coachman sits astride upon a pole over the horse, but do not touch the
horse, which is a pretty odde thing; but it seems it is most easy for the
horse, and, as they say, for the man also. Thence I with speede by water
home and eat a bit, and took my accounts and to the Duke of Albemarle,
where for all I feared of Norwood he was very civill, and Sir Thomas
Ingram beyond expectation, I giving them all content and I thereby settled
mightily in my mind, for I was weary of the employment, and had had
thoughts of giving it over.  I did also give a good step in a business of
Mr. Hubland's, about getting a ship of his to go to Tangier, which during
this strict embargo is a great matter, and I shall have a good reward for
it, I hope.  Thence by water in the darke down to Deptford, and there find
my Lord Bruncker come and gone, having staid long for me.  I back
presently to the Crowne taverne behind the Exchange by appointment, and
there met the first meeting of Gresham College since the plague.  Dr.
Goddard did fill us with talke, in defence of his and his fellow
physicians going out of towne in the plague-time; saying that their
particular patients were most gone out of towne, and they left at liberty;
and a great deal more, &c.  But what, among other fine discourse pleased
me most, was Sir G. Ent about Respiration; that it is not to this day
known, or concluded on among physicians, nor to be done either, how the
action is managed by nature, or for what use it is. Here late till poor
Dr. Merriot was drunk, and so all home, and I to bed.

23rd.  Up and to the office and then to dinner.  After dinner to the
office again all the afternoon, and much business with me.  Good newes
beyond all expectation of the decrease of the plague, being now but 79,
and the whole but 272.  So home with comfort to bed.  A most furious
storme all night and morning.

24th.  By agreement my Lord Bruncker called me up, and though it was a
very foule, windy, and rainy morning, yet down to the waterside we went,
but no boat could go, the storme continued so.  So my Lord to stay till
fairer weather carried me into the Tower to Mr. Hore's and there we staid
talking an houre, but at last we found no boats yet could go, so we to the
office, where we met upon an occasion extraordinary of examining abuses of
our clerkes in taking money for examining of tickets, but nothing done in
it.  Thence my Lord and I, the weather being a little fairer, by water to
Deptford to Sir G. Carteret's house, where W. Howe met us, and there we
opened the chests, and saw the poor sorry rubys which have caused all this
ado to the undoing of W. Howe; though I am not much sorry for it, because
of his pride and ill nature.  About 200 of these very small stones, and a
cod of muske (which it is strange I was not able to smell) is all we could
find; so locked them up again, and my Lord and I, the wind being again
very furious, so as we durst not go by water, walked to London quite round
the bridge, no boat being able to stirre; and, Lord! what a dirty walk we
had, and so strong the wind, that in the fields we many times could not
carry our bodies against it, but were driven backwards.  We went through
Horsydowne, where I never was since a little boy, that I went to enquire
after my father, whom we did give over for lost coming from Holland.  It
was dangerous to walk the streets, the bricks and tiles falling from the
houses that the whole streets were covered with them; and whole chimneys,
nay, whole houses in two or three places, blowed down.  But, above all,
the pales on London-bridge on both sides were blown away, so that we were
fain to stoop very low for fear of blowing off of the bridge.  We could
see no boats in the Thames afloat, but what were broke loose, and carried
through the bridge, it being ebbing water.  And the greatest sight of all
was, among other parcels of ships driven here and there in clusters
together, one was quite overset and lay with her masts all along in the
water, and keel above water.  So walked home, my Lord away to his house
and I to dinner, Mr. Creed being come to towne and to dine with me, though
now it was three o'clock.  After dinner he and I to our accounts and very
troublesome he is and with tricks which I found plainly and was vexed at;
while we were together comes Sir G. Downing with Colonell Norwood,
Rumball, and Warrupp to visit me.  I made them drink good wine and
discoursed above alone a good while with Sir G. Downing, who is very
troublesome, and then with Colonell Norwood, who hath a great mind to have
me concerned with him in everything; which I like, but am shy of
adventuring too much, but will thinke of it.  They gone, Creed and I to
finish the settling his accounts.  Thence to the office, where the
Houblans and we discoursed upon a rubb which we have for one of the ships
I hoped to have got to go out to Tangier for them.  They being gone, I to
my office-business late, and then home to supper and even sacke for lacke
of a little wine, which I was forced to drink against my oathe, but
without pleasure.

25th.  Up and to the office, at noon home to dinner.  So abroad to the
Duke of Albemarle and Kate Joyce's and her husband, with whom I talked a
great deale about Pall's business, and told them what portion I would give
her, and they do mightily like of it and will proceed further in speaking
with Harman, who hath already been spoke to about it, as from them only,
and he is mighty glad of it, but doubts it may be an offence to me, if I
should know of it, so thinks that it do come only from Joyce, which I like
the better.  So I do believe the business will go on, and I desire it were
over.  I to the office then, where I did much business, and set my people
to work against furnishing me to go to Hampton Court, where the King and
Duke will be on Sunday next.  It is now certain that the King of France
hath publickly declared war against us, and God knows how little fit we
are for it.  At night comes Sir W. Warren, and he and I into the garden,
and talked over all our businesses.  He gives me good advice not to
embarke into trade (as I have had it in my thoughts about Colonell
Norwood) so as to be seen to mind it, for it will do me hurte, and draw my
mind off from my business and embroile my estate too soon.  So to the
office business, and I find him as cunning a man in all points as ever I
met with in my life and mighty merry we were in the discourse of our owne
trickes.  So about to o'clock at night I home and staid with him there
settling my Tangier-Boates business and talking and laughing at the folly
of some of our neighbours of this office till two in the morning and so to
bed.

26th.  Up, and pleased mightily with what my poor wife hath been doing
these eight or ten days with her owne hands, like a drudge in fitting the
new hangings of our bed-chamber of blue, and putting the old red ones into
my dressing-room, and so by coach to White Hall, where I had just now
notice that Sir G. Carteret is come to towne.  He seems pleased, but I
perceive he is heartily troubled at this Act, and the report of his losing
his place, and more at my not writing to him to the prejudice of the Act.
But I carry all fair to him and he to me.  He bemoans the Kingdom as in a
sad state, and with too much reason I doubt, having so many enemys about
us and no friends abroad, nor money nor love at home. Thence to the Duke
of Albemarle, and there a meeting with all the officers of the Navy,
where, Lord!  to see how the Duke of Albemarle flatters himself with false
hopes of money and victuals and all without reason.  Then comes the
Committee of Tangier to sit, and I there carry all before me very well.
Thence with Sir J. Bankes and Mr. Gawden to the 'Change, they both very
wise men.  After 'Change and agreeing with Houblon about our ships, D.
Gawden and I to the Pope's Head and there dined and little Chaplin (who a
rich man grown).  He gone after dinner, D. Gawden and I to talke of the
Victualling business of the Navy in what posture it is, which is very sad
also for want of money.  Thence home to my chamber by oathe to finish my
Journall.  Here W. Hewer came to me with L320 from Sir W. Warren, whereof
L220 is got clearly by a late business of insurance of the Gottenburg
ships, and the other L100 which was due and he had promised me before to
give me to my very extraordinary joy, for which I ought and do bless God
and so to my office, where late providing a letter to send to Mr. Gawden
in a manner we concluded on to-day, and so to bed.

27th.  Up very betimes to finish my letter and writ it fair to Mr. Gawden,
it being to demand several arrears in the present state of the
victualling, partly to the King's and partly to give him occasion to say
something relating to the want of money on his own behalf.  This done I to
the office, where all the morning.  At noon after a bit of dinner back to
the office and there fitting myself in all points to give an account to
the Duke and Mr. Coventry in all things, and in my Tangier business, till
three o'clock in the morning, and so to bed,

28th.  And up again about six (Lord's day), and being dressed in my
velvett coate and plain cravatte took a hackney coach provided ready for
me by eight o'clock, and so to my Lord Bruncker's with all my papers, and
there took his coach with four horses and away toward Hampton Court,
having a great deale of good discourse with him, particularly about his
coming to lie at the office, when I went further in inviting him to than I
intended, having not yet considered whether it will be convenient for me
or no to have him here so near us, and then of getting Mr. Evelyn or Sir
Robert Murray into the Navy in the room of Sir Thomas Harvey.  At
Brainford I 'light, having need to shit, and went into an Inne doore that
stood open, found the house of office and used it, but saw no people, only
after I was in the house, heard a great dogg barke, and so was afeard how
I should get safe back again, and therefore drew my sword and scabbard out
of my belt to have ready in my hand, but did not need to use it, but got
safe into the coach again, but lost my belt by the shift, not missing it
till I come to Hampton Court.  At the Wicke found Sir J. Minnes and Sir W.
Batten at a lodging provided for us by our messenger, and there a good
dinner ready.  After dinner took coach and to Court, where we find the
King, and Duke, and Lords, all in council; so we walked up and down: there
being none of the ladies come, and so much the more business I hope will
be done.  The Council being up, out comes the King, and I kissed his hand,
and he grasped me very kindly by the hand.  The Duke also, I kissed his,
and he mighty kind, and Sir W. Coventry.  I found my Lord Sandwich there,
poor man!  I see with a melancholy face, and suffers his beard to grow on
his upper lip more than usual.  I took him a little aside to know when I
should wait on him, and where: he told me, and that it would be best to
meet at his lodgings, without being seen to walk together.  Which I liked
very well; and, Lord! to see in what difficulty I stand, that I dare not
walk with Sir W. Coventry, for fear my Lord or Sir G. Carteret should see
me; nor with either of them, for fear Sir W. Coventry should.  After
changing a few words with Sir W. Coventry, who assures me of his respect
and love to me, and his concernment for my health in all this sickness, I
went down into one of the Courts, and there met the King and Duke; and the
Duke called me to him.  And the King come to me of himself, and told me,
"Mr. Pepys," says he, "I do give you thanks for your good service all this
year, and I assure you I am very sensible of it."  And the Duke of Yorke
did tell me with pleasure, that he had read over my discourse about
pursers, and would have it ordered in my way, and so fell from one
discourse to another.  I walked with them quite out of the Court into the
fields, and then back to my Lord Sandwich's chamber, where I find him
very melancholy and not well satisfied, I perceive, with my carriage to
Sir G. Carteret, but I did satisfy him and made him confess to me, that I
have a very hard game to play; and told me he was sorry to see it, and the
inconveniences which likely may fall upon me with him; but, for all that,
I am not much afeard, if I can but keepe out of harm's way in not being
found too much concerned in my Lord's or Sir G. Carteret's matters, and
that I will not be if I can helpe it.  He hath got over his business of
the prizes, so far as to have a privy seale passed for all that was in his
distribution to the officers, which I am heartily glad of; and, for the
rest, he must be answerable for what he is proved to have.  But for his
pardon for anything else, he thinks it not seasonable to aske it, and not
usefull to him; because that will not stop a Parliament's mouth, and for
the King, he is sure enough of him.  I did aske him whether he was sure of
the interest and friendship of any great Ministers of State and he told
me, yes.  As we were going further, in comes my Lord Mandeville, so we
were forced to breake off and I away, and to Sir W. Coventry's chamber,
where he not come in but I find Sir W. Pen, and he and I to discourse.  I
find him very much out of humour, so that I do not think matters go very
well with him, and I am glad of it.  He and I staying till late, and Sir
W. Coventry not coming in (being shut up close all the afternoon with the
Duke of Albemarle), we took boat, and by water to Kingston, and so to our
lodgings, where a good supper and merry, only I sleepy, and therefore
after supper I slunk away from the rest to bed, and lay very well and
slept soundly, my mind being in a great delirium between joy for what the
King and Duke have said to me and Sir W. Coventry, and trouble for my Lord
Sandwich's concernments, and how hard it will be for me to preserve myself
from feeling thereof.

29th.  Up, and to Court by coach, where to Council before the Duke of
Yorke, the Duke of Albemarle with us, and after Sir W. Coventry had gone
over his notes that he had provided with the Duke of Albemarle, I went
over all mine with good successe, only I fear I did once offend the Duke
of Albemarle, but I was much joyed to find the Duke of Yorke so much
contending for my discourse about the pursers against Sir W. Pen, who
opposes it like a foole; my Lord Sandwich come in in the middle of the
business, and, poor man, very melancholy, methought, and said little at
all, or to the business, and sat at the lower end, just as he come, no
roome being made for him, only I did give him my stoole, and another was
reached me.  After council done, I walked to and again up and down the
house, discoursing with this and that man.  Among others tooke occasion to
thanke the Duke of Yorke for his good opinion in general of my service,
and particularly his favour in conferring on me the Victualling business.
He told me that he knew nobody so fit as I for it, and next, he was very
glad to find that to give me for my encouragement, speaking very kindly of
me.  So to Sir W. Coventry's to dinner with him, whom I took occasion to
thanke for his favour and good thoughts of what little service I did,
desiring he would do the last act of friendship in telling me of my faults
also.  He told me he would be sure he would do that also, if there were
any occasion for it.  So that as much as it is possible under so great a
fall of my Lord Sandwich's, and difference between them, I may conclude
that I am thoroughly right with Sir W. Coventry.  I dined with him with a
great deale of company, and much merry discourse.  I was called away
before dinner ended to go to my company who dined at our lodgings.
Thither I went with Mr. Evelyn (whom I met) in his coach going that way,
but finding my company gone, but my Lord Bruncker left his coach for me;
so Mr. Evelyn and I into my Lord's coach, and rode together with excellent
discourse till we come to Clapham, talking of the vanity and vices of the
Court, which makes it a most contemptible thing; and indeed in all his
discourse I find him a most worthy person. Particularly he entertained me
with discourse of an Infirmary, which he hath projected for the sick and
wounded seamen against the next year, which I mightily approve of; and
will endeavour to promote it, being a worthy thing, and of use, and will
save money.  He set me down at Mr. Gawden's, where nobody yet come home, I
having left him and his sons and Creed at Court, so I took a book and into
the gardens, and there walked and read till darke with great pleasure, and
then in and in comes Osborne, and he and I to talk of Mr. Jaggard, who
comes from London, and great hopes there is of a decrease this week also
of the plague.  Anon comes in Creed, and after that Mr. Gawden and his
sons, and then they bringing in three ladies, who were in the house, but I
do not know them, his daughter and two nieces, daughters of Dr.
Whistler's, with whom and Creed mighty sport at supper, the ladies very
pretty and mirthfull.  I perceive they know Creed's gut and stomach as
well as I, and made as much mirthe as I with it at supper.  After supper I
made the ladies sing, and they have been taught, but, Lord! though I was
forced to commend them, yet it was the saddest stuff I ever heard.
However, we sat up late, and then I, in the best chamber like a prince, to
bed, and Creed with me, and being sleepy talked but little.

30th.  Lay long till Mr. Gawden was gone out being to take a little
journey.  Up, and Creed and I some good discourse, but with some trouble
for the state of my Lord's matters.  After walking a turne or two in the
garden, and bid good morrow to Mr. Gawden's sons, and sent my service to
the ladies, I took coach after Mr. Gawden's, and home, finding the towne
keeping the day solemnly, it being the day of the King's murther, and they
being at church, I presently into the church, thinking to see Mrs.
Lethulier or Batelier, but did not, and a dull sermon of our young
Lecturer, too bad.  This is the first time I have been in this church
since I left London for the plague, and it frighted me indeed to go
through the church more than I thought it could have done, to see so
[many] graves lie so high upon the churchyards where people have been
buried of the plague.  I was much troubled at it, and do not think to go
through it again a good while.  So home to my wife, whom I find not well,
in bed, and it seems hath not been well these two days.  She rose and we
to dinner, after dinner up to my chamber, where she entertained me with
what she hath lately bought of clothes for herself, and Damask linnen, and
other things for the house.  I did give her a serious account how matters
stand with me, of favour with the King and Duke, and of danger in
reference to my Lord's and Sir G. Carteret's falls, and the
dissatisfaction I have heard the Duke of Albemarle hath acknowledged to
somebody, among other things, against my Lord Sandwich, that he did bring
me into the Navy against his desire and endeavour for another, which was
our doting foole Turner.  Thence from one discourse to another, and
looking over my house, and other things I spent the day at home, and at
night betimes to bed.  After dinner this day I went down by water to
Deptford, and fetched up what money there was of W. Howe's contingencies
in the chest there, being L516 13s. 3d. and brought it home to dispose of.

31st.  Lay pretty long in bed, and then up and to the office, where we met
on extraordinary occasion about the business of tickets.  By and by to the
'Change, and there did several businesses, among others brought home my
cozen Pepys, whom I appointed to be here to-day, and Mr. Moore met us upon
the business of my Lord's bond.  Seeing my neighbour Mr. Knightly walk
alone from the 'Change, his family being not yet come to town, I did
invite him home with me, and he dined with me, a very sober, pretty man he
is.  He is mighty solicitous, as I find many about the City that live near
the churchyards, to have the churchyards covered with lime, and I think it
is needfull, and ours I hope will be done.  Good pleasant discourse at
dinner of the practices of merchants to cheate the "Customers," occasioned
by Mr. Moore's being with much trouble freed of his prize goods, which he
bought, which fell into the Customers' hands, and with much ado hath
cleared them.  Mr. Knightly being gone, my cozen Pepys and Moore and I to
our business, being the clearing of my Lord Sandwich's bond wherein I am
bound with him to my cozen for L1000 I have at last by my dexterity got my
Lord's consent to have it paid out of the money raised by his prizes.  So
the bond is cancelled, and he paid by having a note upon Sir Robert Viner,
in whose hands I had lodged my Lord's money, by which I am to my
extraordinary comfort eased of a liablenesse to pay the sum in case of my
Lord's death, or troubles in estate, or my Lord's greater fall, which God
defend!  Having settled this matter at Sir R. Viner's, I took up Mr. Moore
(my cozen going home) and to my Lord Chancellor's new house which he is
building, only to view it, hearing so much from Mr. Evelyn of it; and,
indeed, it is the finest pile I ever did see in my life, and will be a
glorious house.  Thence to the Duke of Albemarle, who tells me Mr.
Coventry is come to town and directs me to go to him about some business
in hand, whether out of displeasure or desire of ease I know not; but I
asked him not the reason of it but went to White Hall, but could not find
him there, though to my great joy people begin to bustle up and down
there, the King holding his resolution to be in towne to-morrow, and hath
good encouragement, blessed be God! to do so, the plague being decreased
this week to 56, and the total to 227.  So after going to the Swan in the
Palace, and sent for Spicer to discourse about my last Tangier tallys that
have some of the words washed out with the rain, to have them new writ, I
home, and there did some business and at the office, and so home to
supper, and to bed.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                FEBRUARY
                                1665-1666

February 1st.  Up and to the office, where all the morning till late, and
Mr. Coventry with us, the first time since before the plague, then hearing
my wife was gone abroad to buy things and see her mother and father, whom
she hath not seen since before the plague, and no dinner provided for me
ready, I walked to Captain Cocke's, knowing my Lord Bruncker dined there,
and there very merry, and a good dinner.  Thence my Lord and his
mistresse, Madam Williams, set me down at the Exchange, and I to Alderman
Backewell's to set all my reckonings straight there, which I did, and took
up all my notes.  So evened to this day, and thence to Sir Robert Viner's,
where I did the like, leaving clear in his hands just L2000 of my owne
money, to be called for when I pleased.  Having done all this I home, and
there to the office, did my business there by the post and so home, and
spent till one in the morning in my chamber to set right all my money
matters, and so to bed.

2nd.  Up betimes, and knowing that my Lord Sandwich is come to towne with
the King and Duke, I to wait upon him, which I did, and find him in very
good humour, which I am glad to see with all my heart.  Having received
his commands, and discoursed with some of his people about my Lord's
going, and with Sir Roger Cuttance, who was there, and finds himself
slighted by Sir W. Coventry, I advised him however to look after
employment lest it should be said that my Lord's friends do forsake the
service after he hath made them rich with the prizes.  I to London, and
there among other things did look over some pictures at Cade's for my
house, and did carry home a silver drudger

     [The dredger was probably the drageoir of France; in low Latin,
     dragerium, or drageria, in which comfits (dragdes) were kept.
     Roquefort says, "The ladies wore a little spice-box, in shape like a
     watch, to carry dragles, and it was called a drageoir."  The custom
     continued certainly till the middle of the last century.  Old
     Palsgrave, in his "Eclaircissement de la Langue Francaise," gives
     "dradge" as spice, rendering it by the French word dragde.  Chaucer
     says, of his Doctor of Physic, "Full ready hadde he his Apothecaries
     To send him dragges, and his lattuaries."  The word sometimes may
     have signified the pounded condiments in which our forefathers
     delighted.  It is worth notice, that "dragge" was applied to a grain
     in the eastern counties, though not exclusively there, appearing to
     denote mixed grain.  Bishop Kennett tells us that "dredge mault is
     mault made up of oats, mixed with barley, of which they make an
     excellent, freshe, quiete sort of drinke, in Staffordshire."  The
     dredger is still commonly used in our kitchen.--B.]

for my cupboard of plate, and did call for my silver chafing dishes, but
they are sent home, and the man would not be paid for them, saying that he
was paid for them already, and with much ado got him to tell me by Mr.
Wayth, but I would not accept of that, but will send him his money, not
knowing any courtesy I have yet done him to deserve it.  So home, and with
my wife looked over our plate, and picked out L40 worth, I believe, to
change for more usefull plate, to our great content, and then we shall
have a very handsome cupboard of plate.  So to dinner, and then to the
office, where we had a meeting extraordinary, about stating to the Duke
the present debts of the Navy, for which ready money must be had, and that
being done, I to my business, where late, and then home to supper, and to
bed.

3rd.  Up, and to the office very busy till 3 o'clock, and then home, all
of us, for half an hour to dinner, and to it again till eight at night,
stating our wants of money for the Duke, but could not finish it.  So
broke up, and I to my office, then about letters and other businesses very
late, and so home to supper, weary with business, and to bed.

4th.  Lord's day; and my wife and I the first time together at church
since the plague, and now only because of Mr. Mills his coming home to
preach his first sermon; expecting a great excuse for his leaving the
parish before any body went, and now staying till all are come home; but
he made but a very poor and short excuse, and a bad sermon.  It was a
frost, and had snowed last night, which covered the graves in the
churchyard, so as I was the less afeard for going through.  Here I had the
content to see my noble Mrs. Lethulier, and so home to dinner, and all the
afternoon at my Journall till supper, it being a long while behindhand.
At supper my wife tells me that W. Joyce has been with her this evening,
the first time since the plague, and tells her my aunt James is lately
dead of the stone, and what she had hath given to his and his brother's
wife and my cozen Sarah.  So after supper to work again, and late to bed.

5th.  Up, and with Sir W. Batten (at whose lodgings calling for him, I saw
his Lady the first time since her coming to towne since the plague, having
absented myself designedly to shew some discontent, and that I am not at
all the more suppliant because of my Lord Sandwich's fall), to my Lord
Bruncker's, to see whether he goes to the Duke's this morning or no. But
it is put off, and so we parted.  My Lord invited me to dinner to-day to
dine with Sir W. Batten and his Lady there, who were invited before, but
lest he should thinke so little an invitation would serve my turne I
refused and parted, and to Westminster about business, and so back to the
'Change, and there met Mr. Hill, newly come to town, and with him the
Houblands, preparing for their ship's and his going to Tangier, and agreed
that I must sup with them to-night.  So home and eat a bit, and then to
White Hall to a Committee for Tangier, but it did not meet but was put off
to to-morrow, so I did some little business and visited my Lord Sandwich,
and so, it raining, went directly to the Sun, behind the Exchange, about
seven o'clock, where I find all the five brothers Houblons, and mighty
fine gentlemen they are all, and used me mighty respectfully.  We were
mighty civilly merry, and their discourses, having been all abroad, very
fine.  Here late and at last accompanied home with Mr. J. Houblon and
Hill, whom I invited to sup with me on Friday, and so parted and I home to
bed.

6th.  Up, and to the office, where very busy all the morning.  We met upon
a report to the Duke of Yorke of the debts of the Navy, which we finished
by three o'clock, and having eat one little bit of meate, I by water
before the rest to White Hall (and they to come after me) because of a
Committee for Tangier, where I did my business of stating my accounts
perfectly well, and to good liking, and do not discern, but the Duke of
Albemarle is my friend in his intentions notwithstanding my general fears.
After that to our Navy business, where my fellow officers were called in,
and did that also very well, and then broke up, and I home by coach,
Tooker with me, and staid in Lumbard Streete at Viner's, and sent home for
the plate which my wife and I had a mind to change, and there changed it,
about L50 worth, into things more usefull, whereby we shall now have a
very handsome cupboard of plate.  So home to the office, wrote my letters
by the post, and to bed.

7th.  It being fast day I staid at home all day long to set things to
rights in my chamber by taking out all my books, and putting my chamber in
the same condition it was before the plague.  But in the morning doing of
it, and knocking up a nail I did bruise my left thumb so as broke a great
deal of my flesh off, that it hung by a little.  It was a sight frighted
my wife, but I put some balsam of Mrs. Turner's to it, and though in great
pain, yet went on with my business, and did it to my full content, setting
every thing in order, in hopes now that the worst of our fears are over as
to the plague for the next year.  Interrupted I was by two or three
occasions this day to my great vexation, having this the only day I have
been able to set apart for this work since my coming to town.  At night to
supper, weary, and to bed, having had the plasterers and joiners also to
do some jobbs.

8th.  Up, and all the morning at the office.  At noon to the 'Change,
expecting to have received from Mr. Houbland, as he promised me, an
assignment upon Viner, for my reward for my getting them the going of
their two ships to Tangier, but I find myself much disappointed therein,
for I spoke with him and he said nothing of it, but looked coldly, through
some disturbance he meets with in our business through Colonell Norwood's
pressing them to carry more goods than will leave room for some of their
own.  But I shall ease them.  Thence to Captain Cocke's, where Mr.
Williamson, Wren, Boldell and Madam Williams, and by and by Lord Bruncker,
he having been with the King and Duke upon the water to-day, to see
Greenwich house, and the yacht Castle is building of, and much good
discourse.  So to White Hall to see my Lord Sandwich, and then home to my
business till night, and then to bed.

9th.  Up, and betimes to Sir Philip Warwicke, who was glad to see me, and
very kind.  Thence to Colonell Norwood's lodgings, and there set about
Houblons' business about their ships.  Thence to Westminster, to the
Exchequer, about my Tangier business to get orders for tallys, and so to
the Hall, where the first day of the Terme, and the Hall very full of
people, and much more than was expected, considering the plague that hath
been.  Thence to the 'Change, and to the Sun behind it to dinner with the
Lieutenant of the Tower, Colonell Norwood and others, where strange
pleasure they seem to take in their wine and meate, and discourse of it
with the curiosity and joy that methinks was below men of worthe.  Thence
home, and there very much angry with my people till I had put all things
in good forwardnesse about my supper for the Houblons, but that being done
I was in good humour again, and all things in good order.  Anon the five
brothers Houblons come and Mr. Hill, and a very good supper we had, and
good company and discourse, with great pleasure.  My new plate sets off my
cupboard very nobly.  Here they were till about eleven at night with great
pleasure, and a fine sight it is to see these five brothers thus loving
one to another, and all industrious merchants.  Our subject was
principally Mr. Hill's going for them to Portugall, which was the occasion
of this entertainment.  They gone, we to bed.

10th.  Up, and to the office.  At noon, full of business, to dinner. This
day comes first Sir Thomas Harvy after the plague, having been out of
towne all this while.  He was coldly received by us, and he went away
before we rose also, to make himself appear yet a man less necessary.
After dinner, being full of care and multitude of business, I took coach
and my wife with me.  I set her down at her mother's (having first called
at my Lord Treasurer's and there spoke with Sir Ph. Warwicke), and I to
the Exchequer about Tangier orders, and so to the Swan and there staid a
little, and so by coach took up my wife, and at the old Exchange bought a
muffe, and so home and late at my letters, and so to supper and to bed,
being now-a-days, for these four or five months, mightily troubled with my
snoring in my sleep, and know not how to remedy it.

11th (Lord's day).  Up, and put on a new black cloth suit to an old coate
that I make to be in mourning at Court, where they are all, for the King
of Spayne.--[Philip IV., who died September 17th, 1665.]--To church I, and
at noon dined well, and then by water to White Hall, carrying a captain of
the Tower (who desired his freight thither); there I to the Parke, and
walked two or three turns of the Pell Mell with the company about the King
and Duke; the Duke speaking to me a good deal.  There met Lord Bruncker
and Mr. Coventry, and discoursed about the Navy business; and all of us
much at a loss that we yet can hear nothing of Sir Jeremy Smith's fleete,
that went away to the Streights the middle of December, through all the
storms that we have had since, that have driven back three or four of them
with their masts by the board.  Yesterday come out the King's Declaration
of War against the French, but with such mild invitations of both them and
the Dutch to come over hither with promise of their protection, that every
body wonders at it.  Thence home with my Lord Bruncker for discourse sake,
and thence by hackney coach home, and so my wife and I mighty pleasant
discourse, supped and to bed.  The great wound I had Wednesday last in my
thumb having with once dressing by Mrs. Turner's balsam been perfectly
cured, whereas I did not hope to save my nail, whatever else ill it did
give me.  My wife and I are much thoughtfull now-a-days about Pall's
coming up in order to a husband.

12th.  Up, and very busy to perform an oathe in finishing my Journall this
morning for 7 or 8 days past.  Then to several people attending upon
business, among others Mr. Grant and the executors of Barlow for the L25
due for the quarter before he died, which I scrupled to pay, being obliged
but to pay every half year.  Then comes Mr. Caesar, my boy's lute-master,
whom I have not seen since the plague before, but he hath been in
Westminster all this while very well; and tells me in the height of it,
how bold people there were, to go in sport to one another's burials; and
in spite too, ill people would breathe in the faces (out of their windows)
of well people going by.  Then to dinner before the 'Change, and so to the
'Change, and then to the taverne to talk with Sir William Warren, and so
by coach to several places, among others to my Lord Treasurer's, there to
meet my Lord Sandwich, but missed, and met him at [my] Lord Chancellor's,
and there talked with him about his accounts, and then about Sir G.
Carteret, and I find by him that Sir G. Carteret has a worse game to play
than my Lord Sandwich, for people are jeering at him, and he cries out of
the business of Sir W. Coventry, who strikes at all and do all.  Then to
my bookseller's, and then received some books I have new bought, and here
late choosing some more to new bind, having resolved to give myself L10 in
books, and so home to the office and then home to supper, where Mr. Hill
was and supped with us, and good discourse; an excellent person he still
appears to me.  After supper, and he gone, we to bed.

13th.  Up, and all the morning at the office.  At noon to the 'Change, and
thence after business dined at the Sheriffe's [Hooker], being carried by
Mr. Lethulier, where to my heart's content I met with his wife, a most
beautifull fat woman.  But all the house melancholy upon the sickness of a
daughter of the house in childbed, Mr. Vaughan's lady.  So all of them
undressed, but however this lady a very fine woman.  I had a salute of
her, and after dinner some discourse the Sheriffe and I about a parcel of
tallow I am buying for the office of him.  I away home, and there at the
office all the afternoon till late at night, and then away home to supper
and to bed.  Ill newes this night that the plague is encreased this week,
and in many places else about the towne, and at Chatham and elsewhere.
This day my wife wanting a chambermaid with much ado got our old little
Jane to be found out, who come to see her and hath lived all this while in
one place, but is so well that we will not desire her removal, but are
mighty glad to see the poor wench, who is very well and do well.

14th (St. Valentine's day).  This morning called up by Mr. Hill, who, my
wife thought, had been come to be her Valentine; she, it seems, having
drawne him last night, but it proved not.  However, calling him up to our
bed-side, my wife challenged him.  I up, and made myself ready, and so
with him by coach to my Lord Sandwich's by appointment to deliver Mr.
Howe's accounts to my Lord.  Which done, my Lord did give me hearty and
large studied thanks for all my kindnesse to him and care of him and his
business.  I after profession of all duty to his Lordship took occasion to
bemoane myself that I should fall into such a difficulty about Sir G.
Carteret, as not to be for him, but I must be against Sir W. Coventry, and
therefore desired to be neutrall, which my Lord approved and confessed
reasonable, but desired me to befriend him privately.  Having done in
private with my Lord I brought Mr. Hill to kisse his hands, to whom my
Lord professed great respect upon my score.  My Lord being gone, I took
Mr. Hill to my Lord Chancellor's new house that is building, and went with
trouble up to the top of it, and there is there the noblest prospect that
ever I saw in my life, Greenwich being nothing to it; and in every thing
is a beautiful house, and most strongly built in every respect; and as if,
as it hath, it had the Chancellor for its master. Thence with him to his
paynter, Mr. Hales, who is drawing his picture, which will be mighty like
him, and pleased me so, that I am resolved presently to have my wife's and
mine done by him, he having a very masterly hand.  So with mighty
satisfaction to the 'Change and thence home, and after dinner abroad,
taking Mrs. Mary Batelier with us, who was just come to see my wife, and
they set me down at my Lord Treasurer's, and themselves went with the
coach into the fields to take the ayre.  I staid a meeting of the Duke of
Yorke's, and the officers of the Navy and Ordnance.  My Lord Treasurer
lying in bed of the gowte.  Our business was discourse of the straits of
the Navy for want of money, but after long discourse as much out of order
as ordinary people's, we come to no issue, nor any money promised, or like
to be had, and yet the worke must be done.  Here I perceive Sir G.
Carteret had prepared himself to answer a choque of Sir W. Coventry, by
offering of himself to shew all he had paid, and what is unpaid, and what
moneys and assignments he hath in his hands, which, if he makes good, was
the best thing he ever did say in his life, and the best timed, for else
it must have fallen very foule on him. The meeting done I away, my wife
and they being come back and staying for me at the gate.  But, Lord!  to
see how afeard I was that Sir W. Coventry should have spyed me once
whispering with Sir G. Carteret, though not intended by me, but only Sir
G. Carteret come to me and I could not avoyde it.  So home, they set me
down at the 'Change, and I to the Crowne, where my Lord Bruncker was come
and several of the Virtuosi, and after a small supper and but little good
discourse I with Sir W. Batten (who was brought thither with my Lord
Bruncker) home, where I find my wife gone to Mrs. Mercer's to be merry,
but presently come in with Mrs. Knipp, who, it seems, is in towne, and was
gone thither with my wife and Mercer to dance, and after eating a little
supper went thither again to spend the whole night there, being W. Howe
there, at whose chamber they are, and Lawd Crisp by chance.  I to bed.

15th.  Up, and my wife not come home all night.  To the office, where sat
all the morning.  At noon to Starky's, a great cooke in Austin Friars,
invited by Colonell Atkins, and a good dinner for Colonell Norwood and his
friends, among others Sir Edward Spragg and others, but ill attendance.
Before dined, called on by my wife in a coach, and so I took leave, and
then with her and Knipp and Mercer (Mr. Hunt newly come out of the country
being there also come to see us) to Mr. Hales, the paynter's, having set
down Mr. Hunt by the way.  Here Mr. Hales' begun my wife in the posture we
saw one of my Lady Peters, like a St. Katharine.

     [It was the fashion at this time to be painted as St. Catherine, in
     compliment to the queen.]

While he painted, Knipp, and Mercer, and I, sang; and by and by comes Mrs.
Pierce, with my name in her bosom for her Valentine, which will cost me
money.  But strange how like his very first dead colouring is, that it did
me good to see it, and pleases me mightily, and I believe will be a noble
picture.  Thence with them all as far as Fleete Streete, and there set
Mercer and Knipp down, and we home.  I to the office, whither the Houblons
come telling me of a little new trouble from Norwood about their ship,
which troubles me, though without reason.  So late home to supper and to
bed.  We hear this night of Sir Jeremy Smith, that he and his fleete have
been seen at Malaga; which is good newes.

16th.  Up betimes, and by appointment to the Exchange, where I met Messrs.
Houblons, and took them up in my coach and carried them to Charing Crosse,
where they to Colonell Norwood to see how they can settle matters with
him, I having informed them by the way with advice to be easy with him,
for he may hereafter do us service, and they and I are like to understand
one another to very good purpose.  I to my Lord Sandwich, and there alone
with him to talke of his affairs, and particularly of his prize goods,
wherein I find he is wearied with being troubled, and gives over the care
of it to let it come to what it will, having the King's release for the
dividend made, and for the rest he thinks himself safe from being proved
to have anything more.  Thence to the Exchequer, and so by coach to the
'Change, Mr. Moore with me, who tells me very odde passages of the
indiscretion of my Lord in the management of his family, of his
carelessnesse, &c., which troubles me, but makes me rejoice with all my
heart of my being rid of the bond of L1000, for that would have been a
cruel blow to me.  With Moore to the Coffee-House, the first time I have
been there, where very full, and company it seems hath been there all the
plague time.  So to the 'Change, and then home to dinner, and after dinner
to settle accounts with him for my Lord, and so evened with him to this
day.  Then to the office, and out with Sir W. Warren for discourse by
coach to White Hall, thinking to have spoke with Sir W. Coventry, but did
not, and to see the Queene, but she comes but to Hampton Court to-night.
Back to my office and there late, and so home to supper and bed.  I walked
a good while to-night with Mr. Hater in the garden, talking about a
husband for my sister, and reckoning up all our clerks about us, none of
which he thinks fit for her and her portion.  At last I thought of young
Gawden, and will thinke of it again.

17th.  Up, and to the office, where busy all the morning.  Late to dinner,
and then to the office again, and there busy till past twelve at night,
and so home to supper and to bed.  We have newes of Sir Jeremy Smith's
being very well with his fleete at Cales.--[Cadiz]

18th (Lord's day).  Lay long in bed discoursing with pleasure with my
wife, among other things about Pall's coming up, for she must be here a
little to be fashioned, and my wife hath a mind to go down for her, which
I am not much against, and so I rose and to my chamber to settle several
things.  At noon comes my uncle Wight to dinner, and brings with him Mrs.
Wight, sad company to me, nor was I much pleased with it, only I must shew
respect to my uncle.  After dinner they gone, and it being a brave day, I
walked to White Hall, where the Queene and ladies are all come: I saw some
few of them, but not the Queene, nor any of the great beauties. I
endeavoured to have seen my Lord Hinchingbrooke, who come to town
yesterday, but I could not.  Met with Creed and walked with him a turne or
two in the Parke, but without much content, having now designs of getting
money in my head, which allow me not the leisure I used to have with him,
besides an odde story lately told of him for a great truth, of his
endeavouring to lie with a woman at Oxford, and her crying out saved her;
and this being publickly known, do a little make me hate him. Thence took
coach, and calling by the way at my bookseller's for a booke I writ about
twenty years ago in prophecy of this year coming on, 1666, explaining it
to be the marke of the beast, I home, and there fell to reading, and then
to supper, and to bed.

19th.  Up, and by coach to my Lord Sandwich's, but he was gone out.  So I
to White Hall, and there waited on the Duke of Yorke with some of the rest
of our brethren, and thence back again to my Lord's, to see my Lord
Hinchingbroke, which I did, and I am mightily out of countenance in my
great expectation of him by others' report, though he is indeed a pretty
gentleman, yet nothing what I took him for, methinks, either as to person
or discourse discovered to me, but I must try him more before I go too far
in censuring.  Hence to the Exchequer from office to office, to set my
business of my tallys in doing, and there all the morning.  So at noon by
coach to St. Paul's Church-yarde to my Bookseller's, and there bespoke a
few more books to bring all I have lately bought to L10.  Here I am told
for certain, what I have heard once or twice already, of a Jew in town,
that in the name of the rest do offer to give any man L10 to be paid L100,
if a certain person now at Smyrna be within these two years owned by all
the Princes of the East, and particularly the grand Signor as the King of
the world, in the same manner we do the King of England here, and that
this man is the true Messiah.  One named a friend of his that had received
ten pieces in gold upon this score, and says that the Jew hath disposed of
L1100 in this manner, which is very strange; and certainly this year of
1666 will be a year of great action; but what the consequences of it will
be, God knows!  Thence to the 'Change, and from my stationer's thereabouts
carried home by coach two books of Ogilby's, his AEsop and Coronation,
which fell to my lot at his lottery.  Cost me L4 besides the binding.  So
home.  I find my wife gone out to Hales, her paynter's, and I after a
little dinner do follow her, and there do find him at worke, and with
great content I do see it will be a very brave picture.  Left her there,
and I to my Lord Treasurer's, where Sir G. Carteret and Sir J. Minnes met
me, and before my Lord Treasurer and Duke of Albemarle the state of our
Navy debts were laid open, being very great, and their want of money to
answer them openly professed, there being but L1,500,000 to answer a
certaine expense and debt of L2,300,000. Thence walked with Fenn down to
White Hall, and there saw the Queene at cards with many ladies, but none
of our beauties were there.  But glad I was to see the Queene so well, who
looks prettily; and methinks hath more life than before, since it is
confessed of all that she miscarryed lately; Dr. Clerke telling me
yesterday at White Hall that he had the membranes and other vessels in his
hands which she voided, and were perfect as ever woman's was that bore a
child.  Thence hoping to find my Lord Sandwich, away by coach to my Lord
Chancellor's, but missed him, and so home and to office, and then to
supper and my Journall, and to bed.

20th.  Up, and to the office; where, among other businesses, Mr. Evelyn's
proposition about publique Infirmarys was read and agreed on, he being
there: and at noon I took him home to dinner, being desirous of keeping my
acquaintance with him; and a most excellent humoured man I still find him,
and mighty knowing.  After dinner I took him by coach to White Hall, and
there he and I parted, and I to my Lord Sandwich's, where coming and
bolting into the dining-room, I there found Captain Ferrers going to
christen a child of his born yesterday, and I come just pat to be a
godfather, along with my Lord Hinchingbrooke, and Madam Pierce, my
Valentine, which for that reason I was pretty well contented with, though
a little vexed to see myself so beset with people to spend me money, as
she of a Valentine and little Mrs. Tooker, who is come to my house this
day from Greenwich, and will cost me 20s., my wife going out with her this
afternoon, and now this christening.  Well, by and by the child is brought
and christened Katharine, and I this day on this occasion drank a glasse
of wine, which I have not professedly done these two years, I think, but a
little in the time of the sicknesse.  After that done, and gone and kissed
the mother in bed, I away to Westminster Hall, and there hear that Mrs.
Lane is come to town.  So I staid loitering up and down till anon she
comes and agreed to meet at Swayn's, and there I went anon, and she come,
but staid but little, the place not being private.  I have not seen her
since before the plague.  So thence parted and 'rencontrais a' her last
'logis', and in the place did what I 'tenais a mind pour ferais con her'.
At last she desired to borrow money of me, L5, and would pawn gold with me
for it, which I accepted and promised in a day or two to supply her.  So
away home to the office, and thence home, where little Mrs. Tooker staid
all night with us, and a pretty child she is, and happens to be niece to
my beauty that is dead, that lived at the Jackanapes, in Cheapside.  So to
bed, a little troubled that I have been at two houses this afternoon with
Mrs. Lane that were formerly shut up of the plague.

21st.  Up, and with Sir J. Minnes to White Hall by his coach, by the way
talking of my brother John to get a spiritual promotion for him, which I
am now to looke after, for as much as he is shortly to be Master in Arts,
and writes me this weeke a Latin letter that he is to go into orders this
Lent.  There to the Duke's chamber, and find our fellows discoursing there
on our business, so I was sorry to come late, but no hurte was done
thereby.  Here the Duke, among other things, did bring out a book of great
antiquity of some of the customs of the Navy, about 100 years since, which
he did lend us to read and deliver him back again.  Thence I to the
Exchequer, and there did strike my tallys for a quarter for Tangier and
carried them home with me, and thence to Trinity-house, being invited to
an Elder Brother's feast; and there met and sat by Mr. Prin, and had good
discourse about the privileges of Parliament, which, he says, are few to
the Commons' House, and those not examinable by them, but only by the
House of Lords.  Thence with my Lord Bruncker to Gresham College, the
first time after the sicknesse that I was there, and the second time any
met.  And here a good lecture of Mr. Hooke's about the trade of
felt-making, very pretty.  And anon alone with me about the art of drawing
pictures by Prince Rupert's rule and machine, and another of Dr. Wren's;

     [Afterwards the famous Sir Christopher Wren.  He was one of the
     mainstays of the Royal Society.]

but he says nothing do like squares, or, which is the best in the world,
like a darke roome,--[The camera obscura.]--which pleased me mightily.
Thence with Povy home to my house, and there late settling accounts with
him, which was very troublesome to me, and he gone, found Mr. Hill below,
who sat with me till late talking, and so away, and we to bed.

22nd.  Up, and to the office, where sat all the morning.  At noon home to
dinner and thence by coach with my wife for ayre principally for her. I
alone stopped at Hales's and there mightily am pleased with my wife's
picture that is begun there, and with Mr. Hill's, though I must [owne] I
am not more pleased with it now the face is finished than I was when I saw
it the second time of sitting.  Thence to my Lord Sandwich's, but he not
within, but goes to-morrow.  My wife to Mrs. Hunt's, who is lately come to
towne and grown mighty fat.  I called her there, and so home and late at
the office, and so home to supper and to bed.  We are much troubled that
the sicknesse in general (the town being so full of people) should be but
three, and yet of the particular disease of the plague there should be ten
encrease.

23rd.  Up betimes, and out of doors by 6 of the clock, and walked (W. Howe
with me) to my Lord Sandwich's, who did lie the last night at his house in
Lincoln's Inne Fields.  It being fine walking in the morning, and the
streets full of people again.  There I staid, and the house full of people
come to take leave of my Lord, who this day goes out of towne upon his
embassy towards Spayne.  And I was glad to find Sir W. Coventry to come,
though I know it is only a piece of courtshipp.  I had much discourse with
my Lord, he telling me how fully he leaves the King his friend and the
large discourse he had with him the other day, and how he desired to have
the business of the prizes examined before he went, and that he yielded to
it, and it is done as far as it concerns himself to the full, and the
Lords Commissioners for prizes did reprehend all the informers in what
related to his Lordship, which I am glad of in many respects.  But we
could not make an end of discourse, so I promised to waite upon [him] on
Sunday at Cranborne, and took leave and away hence to Mr. Hales's with Mr.
Hill and two of the Houblons, who come thither to speak with me, and saw
my wife's picture, which pleases me well, but Mr. Hill's picture never a
whit so well as it did before it was finished, which troubled me, and I
begin to doubt the picture of my Lady Peters my wife takes her posture
from, and which is an excellent picture, is not of his making, it is so
master-like.  I set them down at the 'Change and I home to the office, and
at noon dined at home and to the office again. Anon comes Mrs. Knipp to
see my wife, who is gone out, so I fain to entertain her, and took her out
by coach to look my wife at Mrs. Pierce's and Unthanke's, but find her
not.  So back again, and then my wife comes home, having been buying of
things, and at home I spent all the night talking with this baggage, and
teaching her my song of "Beauty retire," which she sings and makes go most
rarely, and a very fine song it seems to be.  She also entertained me with
repeating many of her own and others' parts of the play-house, which she
do most excellently; and tells me the whole practices of the play-house
and players, and is in every respect most excellent company.  So I supped,
and was merry at home all the evening, and the rather it being my
birthday, 33 years, for which God be praised that I am in so good a
condition of healthe and estate, and every thing else as I am, beyond
expectation, in all.  So she to Mrs. Turner's to lie, and we to bed.
Mightily pleased to find myself in condition to have these people come
about me and to be able to entertain them, and have the pleasure of their
qualities, than which no man can have more in the world.

24th.  All the morning at the office till past three o'clock.  At that
houre home and eat a bit alone, my wife being gone out.  So abroad by
coach with Mr. Hill, who staid for me to speake about business, and he and
I to Hales's, where I find my wife and her woman, and Pierce and Knipp,
and there sung and was mighty merry, and I joyed myself in it; but vexed
at first to find my wife's picture not so like as I expected; but it was
only his having finished one part, and not another, of the face; but,
before I went, I was satisfied it will be an excellent picture. Here we
had ale and cakes and mighty merry, and sung my song, which she [Knipp]
now sings bravely, and makes me proud of myself.  Thence left my wife to
go home with Mrs. Pierce, while I home to the office, and there pretty
late, and to bed, after fitting myself for to-morrow's journey.

25th (Lord's day).  My wife up between three and four of the clock in the
morning to dress herself, and I about five, and were all ready to take
coach, she and I and Mercer, a little past five, but, to our trouble,
the coach did not come till six.  Then with our coach of four horses I
hire on purpose, and Leshmore to ride by, we through the City to Branford
and so to Windsor, Captain Ferrers overtaking us at Kensington, being to
go with us, and here drank, and so through, making no stay, to Cranborne,
about eleven o'clock, and found my Lord and the ladies at a sermon in the
house; which being ended we to them, and all the company glad to see us,
and mighty merry to dinner.  Here was my Lord, and Lord Hinchingbroke, and
Mr. Sidney, Sir Charles Herbert, and Mr. Carteret, my Lady Carteret, my
Lady Jemimah, and Lady Slaning.  After dinner to talk to and again, and
then to walke in the Parke, my Lord and I alone, talking upon these heads;
first, he has left his business of the prizes as well as is possible for
him, having cleared himself before the Commissioners by the King's
commands, so that nothing or little is to be feared from that point, he
goes fully assured, he tells me, of the King's favour.  That upon occasion
I may know, I desired to know, his friends I may trust to, he tells me,
but that he is not yet in England, but continues this summer in Ireland,
my Lord Orrery is his father almost in affection.  He tells me my Lord of
Suffolke, Lord Arlington, Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord Treasurer, Mr.
Atturny Montagu, Sir Thomas Clifford in the House of Commons, Sir G.
Carteret, and some others I cannot presently remember, are friends that I
may rely on for him.  He tells me my Lord Chancellor seems his very good
friend, but doubts that he may not think him so much a servant of the Duke
of Yorke's as he would have him, and indeed my Lord tells me he hath
lately made it his business to be seen studious of the King's favour, and
not of the Duke's, and by the King will stand or fall, for factions there
are, as he tells me, and God knows how high they may come.  The Duke of
Albemarle's post is so great, having had the name of bringing in the King,
that he is like to stand, or, if it were not for him, God knows in what
troubles we might be from some private faction, if an army could be got
into another hand, which God forbid!  It is believed that though Mr.
Coventry be in appearance so great against the Chancellor, yet that there
is a good understanding between the Duke and him.  He dreads the issue of
this year, and fears there will be some very great revolutions before his
coming back again.  He doubts it is needful for him to have a pardon for
his last year's actions, all which he did without commission, and at most
but the King's private single word for that of Bergen; but he dares not
ask it at this time, lest it should make them think that there is
something more in it than yet they know; and if it should be denied, it
would be of very ill consequence.  He says also, if it should in
Parliament be enquired into the selling of Dunkirke (though the Chancellor
was the man that would have it sold to France, saying the King of Spayne
had no money to give for it); yet he will be found to have been the
greatest adviser of it; which he is a little apprehensive may be called
upon this Parliament.  He told me it would not be necessary for him to
tell me his debts, because he thinks I know them so well.  He tells me,
that for the match propounded of Mrs. Mallett for my Lord Hinchingbroke,
it hath been lately off, and now her friends bring it on again, and an
overture hath been made to him by a servant of hers, to compass the thing
without consent of friends, she herself having a respect to my Lord's
family, but my Lord will not listen to it but in a way of honour.  The
Duke hath for this weeke or two been very kind to him, more than lately;
and so others, which he thinks is a good sign of faire weather again.  He
says the Archbishopp of Canterbury hath been very kind to him, and hath
plainly said to him that he and all the world knows the difference between
his judgment and brains and the Duke of Albemarle's, and then calls my
Lady Duchesse the veryest slut and drudge and the foulest worde that can
be spoke of a woman almost.  My Lord having walked an houre with me
talking thus and going in, and my Lady Carteret not suffering me to go
back again to-night, my Lord to walke again with me about some of this and
other discourse, and then in a-doors and to talke with all and with my
Lady Carteret, and I with the young ladies and gentle men, who played on
the guittar, and mighty merry, and anon to supper, and then my Lord going
away to write, the young gentlemen to flinging of cushions, and other mad
sports; at this late till towards twelve at night, and then being sleepy,
I and my wife in a passage-room to bed, and slept not very well because of
noise.

26th.  Called up about five in the morning, and my Lord up, and took
leave, a little after six, very kindly of me and the whole company.  Then
I in, and my wife up and to visit my Lady Slaving in her bed, and there
sat three hours, with Lady Jemimah with us, talking and laughing, and by
and by my Lady Carteret comes, and she and I to talke, I glad to please
her in discourse of Sir G. Carteret, that all will do well with him, and
she is much pleased, he having had great annoyance and fears about his
well doing, and I fear hath doubted that I have not been a friend to him,
but cries out against my Lady Castlemaine, that makes the King neglect his
business and seems much to fear that all will go to wracke, and I fear
with great reason; exclaims against the Duke of Albemarle, and more the
Duchesse for a filthy woman, as indeed she is.  Here staid till 9 o'clock
almost, and then took coach with so much love and kindnesse from my Lady
Carteret, Lady Jemimah, and Lady Slaving, that it joys my heart, and when
I consider the manner of my going hither, with a coach and four horses and
servants and a woman with us, and coming hither being so much made of, and
used with that state, and then going to Windsor and being shewn all that
we were there, and had wherewith to give every body something for their
pains, and then going home, and all in fine weather and no fears nor cares
upon me, I do thinke myself obliged to thinke myself happy, and do look
upon myself at this time in the happiest occasion a man can be, and
whereas we take pains in expectation of future comfort and ease, I have
taught myself to reflect upon myself at present as happy, and enjoy myself
in that consideration, and not only please myself with thoughts of future
wealth and forget the pleasure we at present enjoy.  So took coach and to
Windsor, to the Garter, and thither sent for Dr. Childe;  who come to us,
and carried us to St. George's Chappell; and there placed us among the
Knights' stalls (and pretty the observation, that no man, but a woman may
sit in a Knight's place, where any brass-plates are set); and hither come
cushions to us, and a young singing-boy to bring us a copy of the anthem
to be sung.  And here, for our sakes, had this anthem and the great
service sung extraordinary, only to entertain us.  It is a noble place
indeed, and a good Quire of voices. Great bowing by all the people, the
poor Knights particularly, to the Alter.  After prayers, we to see the
plate of the chappell, and the robes of Knights, and a man to shew us the
banners of the several Knights in being, which hang up over the stalls.
And so to other discourse very pretty, about the Order.  Was shewn where
the late [King] is buried, and King Henry the Eighth, and my Lady [Jane]
Seymour.  This being done, to the King's house, and to observe the
neatness and contrivance of the house and gates: it is the most romantique
castle that is in the world. But, Lord!  the prospect that is in the
balcone in the Queene's lodgings, and the terrace and walk, are strange
things to consider, being the best in the world, sure.  Infinitely
satisfied I and my wife with all this, she being in all points mightily
pleased too, which added to my pleasure; and so giving a great deal of
money to this and that man and woman, we to our taverne, and there dined,
the Doctor with us; and so took coach and away to Eton, the Doctor with
me.  Before we went to Chappell this morning, Kate Joyce, in a stage-coach
going toward London, called to me. I went to her and saluted her, but
could not get her to stay with us, having company.  At Eton I left my wife
in the coach, and he and I to the College, and there find all mighty fine.
The school good, and the custom pretty of boys cutting their names in the
struts of the window when they go to Cambridge, by which many a one hath
lived to see himself Provost and Fellow, that had his name in the window
standing.  To the Hall, and there find the boys' verses, "De Peste;" it
being their custom to make verses at Shrove-tide.  I read several, and
very good ones they were, and better, I think, than ever I made when I was
a boy, and in rolls as long and longer than the whole Hall, by much.  Here
is a picture of Venice hung up given, and a monument made of Sir H.
Wotton's giving it to the College.  Thence to the porter's, in the absence
of the butler, and did drink of the College beer, which is very good; and
went into the back fields to see the scholars play.  And so to the
chappell, and there saw, among other things, Sir H. Wotton's stone with
this Epitaph

          Hic facet primus hujus sententiae Author:--
          Disputandi pruritus fit ecclesiae scabies.

But unfortunately the word "Author" was wrong writ, and now so basely
altered that it disgraces the stone.  Thence took leave of the Doctor, and
so took coach, and finely, but sleepy, away home, and got thither about
eight at night, and after a little at my office, I to bed; and an houre
after, was waked with my wife's quarrelling with Mercer, at which I was
angry, and my wife and I fell out.  But with much ado to sleep again, I
beginning to practise more temper, and to give her her way.

27th.  Up, and after a harsh word or two my wife and I good friends, and
so up and to the office, where all the morning.  At noon late to dinner,
my wife gone out to Hales's about her picture, and, after dinner, I after
her, and do mightily like her picture, and think it will be as good as my
Lady Peters's.  So home mightily pleased, and there late at business and
set down my three last days' journalls, and so to bed, overjoyed to thinke
of the pleasure of the last Sunday and yesterday, and my ability to bear
the charge of these pleasures, and with profit too, by obliging my Lord,
and reconciling Sir George Carteret's family.

28th (Ash Wednesday).  Up, and after doing a little business at my office
I walked, it being a most curious dry and cold morning, to White Hall, and
there I went into the Parke, and meeting Sir Ph. Warwicke took a turne
with him in the Pell Mall, talking of the melancholy posture of affairs,
where every body is snarling one at another, and all things put together
looke ominously.  This new Act too putting us out of a power of raising
money.  So that he fears as I do, but is fearfull of enlarging in that
discourse of an ill condition in every thing, and the State and all. We
appointed another time to meet to talke of the business of the Navy alone
seriously, and so parted, and I to White Hall, and there we did our
business with the Duke of Yorke, and so parted, and walked to Westminster
Hall, where I staid talking with Mrs. Michell and Howlett long and her
daughter, which is become a mighty pretty woman, and thence going out of
the Hall was called to by Mrs. Martin, so I went to her and bought two
bands, and so parted, and by and by met at her chamber, and there did what
I would, and so away home and there find Mrs. Knipp, and we dined
together, she the pleasantest company in the world.  After dinner I did
give my wife money to lay out on Knipp, 20s., and I abroad to White Hall
to visit Colonell Norwood, and then Sir G. Carteret, with whom I have
brought myself right again, and he very open to me; is very melancholy,
and matters, I fear, go down with him, but he seems most afeard of a
general catastrophe to the whole kingdom, and thinks, as I fear, that all
things will come to nothing.  Thence to the Palace Yard, to the Swan, and
there staid till it was dark, and then to Mrs. Lane's, and there lent her
L5 upon L4 01s. in gold.  And then did what I would with her, and I
perceive she is come to be very bad, and offers any thing, that it is
dangerous to have to do with her, nor will I see [her] any more a good
while.  Thence by coach home and to the office, where a while, and then
betimes to bed by ten o'clock, sooner than I have done many a day.  And
thus ends this month, with my mind full of resolution to apply myself
better from this time forward to my business than I have done these six or
eight days, visibly to my prejudice both in quiett of mind and setting
backward of my business, that I cannot give a good account of it as I
ought to do.

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     After a harsh word or two my wife and I good friends
     By and by met at her chamber, and there did what I would
     Did drink of the College beer, which is very good
     Got her upon my knee (the coach being full) and played with her
     Lady Duchesse the veryest slut and drudge
     Last act of friendship in telling me of my faults also
     Scotch song of "Barbary Allen"
     Tooth-ake made him no company, and spoilt ours
     Wherewith to give every body something for their pains
     Who must except against every thing and remedy nothing


                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

   TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                              MARCH & APRIL
                                1665-1666

March 1st.  Up, and to the office and there all the morning sitting and at
noon to dinner with my Lord Bruncker, Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen at the
White Horse in Lumbard Streete, where, God forgive us!  good sport with
Captain Cocke's having his mayde sicke of the plague a day or two ago and
sent to the pest house, where she now is, but he will not say anything but
that she is well.  But blessed be God!  a good Bill this week we have;
being but 237 in all, and 42 of the plague, and of them but six in the
City: though my Lord Bruneker says, that these six are most of them in new
parishes where they were not the last week.  Here was with us also Mr.
Williamson, who the more I know, the more I honour.  Hence I slipt after
dinner without notice home and there close to my business at my office
till twelve at night, having with great comfort returned to my business by
some fresh vowes in addition to my former, and-more severe, and a great
joy it is to me to see myself in a good disposition to business.  So home
to supper and to my Journall and to bed.

2nd.  Up, as I have of late resolved before 7 in the morning and to the
office, where all the morning, among other things setting my wife and
Mercer with much pleasure to worke upon the ruling of some paper for the
making of books for pursers, which will require a great deale of worke and
they will earn a good deale of money by it, the hopes of which makes them
worke mighty hard.  At noon dined and to the office again, and about 4
o'clock took coach and to my Lord Treasurer's and thence to Sir Philip
Warwicke's new house by appointment, there to spend an houre in talking
and we were together above an hour, and very good discourse about the
state of the King as to money, and particularly in the point of the Navy.
He endeavours hard to come to a good understanding of Sir G. Carteret's
accounts, and by his discourse I find Sir G. Carteret must be brought to
it, and what a madman he is that he do not do it of himself, for the King
expects the Parliament will call upon him for his promise of giving an
account of the money, and he will be ready for it, which cannot be, I am
sure, without Sir G. Carteret's accounts be better understood than they
are.  He seems to have a great esteem of me and my opinion and thoughts of
things.  After we had spent an houre thus discoursing and vexed that we do
but grope so in the darke as we do, because the people, that should
enlighten us, do not helpe us, we resolved fitting some things for another
meeting, and so broke up.  He shewed me his house, which is yet all
unhung, but will be a very noble house indeed.  Thence by coach calling at
my bookseller's and carried home L10 worth of books, all, I hope, I shall
buy a great while.  There by appointment find Mr. Hill come to sup and
take his last leave of me, and by and by in comes Mr. James Houbland to
bear us company, a man I love mightily, and will not lose his
acquaintance.  He told me in my eare this night what he and his brothers
have resolved to give me, which is L200, for helping them out with two or
three ships.  A good sum and that which I did believe they would give me,
and I did expect little less.  Here we talked and very good company till
late, and then took leave of one another, and indeed I am heartily sorry
for Mr. Hill's leaving us, for he is a very worthy gentleman, as most I
know.  God give him a good voyage and successe in his business.  Thus we
parted and my wife and I to bed, heavy for the losse of our friend.

3rd.  All the morning at the office, at noon to the Old James, being sent
for, and there dined with Sir William Rider, Cutler, and others, to make
an end with two Scots Maisters about the freight of two ships of my Lord
Rutherford's.  After a small dinner and a little discourse I away to the
Crowne behind the Exchange to Sir W. Pen, Captain Cocke and Fen, about
getting a bill of Cocke's paid to Pen, in part for the East India goods he
sold us.  Here Sir W. Pen did give me the reason in my eare of his
importunity for money, for that he is now to marry his daughter.  God send
her better fortune than her father deserves I should wish him for a false
rogue.  Thence by coach to Hales's, and there saw my wife sit; and I do
like her picture mightily, and very like it will be, and a brave piece of
work.  But he do complain that her nose hath cost him as much work as
another's face, and he hath done it finely indeed.  Thence home and late
at the office, and then to bed.

4th (Lord's day).  And all day at my Tangier and private accounts, having
neglected them since Christmas, which I hope I shall never do again; for I
find the inconvenience of it, it being ten times the labour to remember
and settle things.  But I thank God I did it at last, and brought them all
fine and right; and I am, I thinke, by all appears to me (and I am sure I
cannot be L10 wrong), worth above L4600, for which the Lord be praised!
being the biggest sum I ever was worth yet.

5th.  I was at it till past two o'clock on Monday morning, and then read
my vowes, and to bed with great joy and content that I have brought my
things to so good a settlement, and now having my mind fixed to follow my
business again and sensible of Sir W. Coventry's jealousies, I doubt,
concerning me, partly my siding with Sir G. Carteret, and partly that
indeed I have been silent in my business of the office a great while, and
given but little account of myself and least of all to him, having not
made him one visitt since he came to towne from Oxford, I am resolved to
fall hard to it again, and fetch up the time and interest I have lost or
am in a fair way of doing it.  Up about eight o'clock, being called up by
several people, among others by Mr. Moone, with whom I went to Lumbard
Streete to Colvill, and so back again and in my chamber he and I did end
all our businesses together of accounts for money upon bills of Exchange,
and am pleased to find myself reputed a man of business and method, as he
do give me out to be.  To the 'Change at noon and so home to dinner. Newes
for certain of the King of Denmarke's declaring for the Dutch, and
resolution to assist them.  To the office, and there all the afternoon. In
the evening come Mr. James and brother Houblons to agree upon share
parties for their ships, and did acquaint me that they had paid my
messenger, whom I sent this afternoon for it, L200 for my friendship in
the business, which pleases me mightily.  They being gone I forth late to
Sir H. Viner's to take a receipt of them for the L200 lodged for me there
with them, and so back home, and after supper to bed.

6th.  Up betimes and did much business before office time.  Then to the
office and there till noon and so home to dinner and to the office again
till night.  In the evening being at Sir W. Batten's, stepped in (for I
have not used to go thither a good while), I find my Lord Bruncker and
Mrs. Williams, and they would of their own accord, though I had never
obliged them (nor my wife neither) with one visit for many of theirs, go
see my house and my wife; which I showed them and made them welcome with
wine and China oranges (now a great rarity since the war, none to be had).
There being also Captain Cocke and Mrs. Turner, who had never been in my
house since I come to the office before, and Mrs. Carcasse, wife of Mr.
Carcasses.  My house happened to be mighty clean, and did me great honour,
and they mightily pleased with it.  They gone I to the office and did some
business, and then home to supper and to bed.  My mind troubled through a
doubtfulness of my having incurred Sir W. Coventry's displeasure by not
having waited on him since his coming to towne, which is a mighty faulte
and that I can bear the fear of the bad effects of till I have been with
him, which shall be to-morrow, God willing.  So to bed.

7th.  Up betimes, and to St. James's, thinking Mr. Coventry had lain
there; but he do not, but at White Hall; so thither I went and had as good
a time as heart could wish, and after an houre in his chamber about
publique business he and I walked up, and the Duke being gone abroad we
walked an houre in the Matted Gallery: he of himself begun to discourse of
the unhappy differences between him and my Lord of Sandwich, and from the
beginning to the end did run through all passages wherein my Lord hath, at
any time, gathered any dissatisfaction, and cleared himself to me most
honourably; and in truth, I do believe he do as he says.  I did afterwards
purge myself of all partiality in the business of Sir G. Carteret, (whose
story Sir W. Coventry did also run over,) that I do mind the King's
interest, notwithstanding my relation to him; all which he declares he
firmly believes, and assures me he hath the same kindnesse and opinion of
me as ever.  And when I said I was jealous of myself, that having now come
to such an income as I am, by his favour, I should not be found to do as
much service as might deserve it; he did assure me, he thinks it not too
much for me, but thinks I deserve it as much as any man in England.  All
this discourse did cheer my heart, and sets me right again, after a good
deal of melancholy, out of fears of his disinclination to me, upon the
differences with my Lord Sandwich and Sir G. Carteret; but I am satisfied
throughly, and so went away quite another man, and by the grace of God
will never lose it again by my folly in not visiting and writing to him,
as I used heretofore to do.  Thence by coach to the Temple, and it being a
holyday, a fast-day, there 'light, and took water, being invited, and down
to Greenwich, to Captain Cocke's, where dined, he and Lord Bruncker, and
Matt. Wren, Boltele, and Major Cooper, who is also a very pretty
companion; but they all drink hard, and, after dinner, to gaming at cards.
So I provoked my Lord to be gone, and he and I to Mr. Cottle's and met
Mrs. Williams (without whom he cannot stir out of doors) and there took
coach and away home.  They carry me to London and set me down at the
Temple, where my mind changed and I home, and to writing and heare my boy
play on the lute, and a turne with my wife pleasantly in the garden by
moonshine, my heart being in great peace, and so home to supper and to
bed.  The King and Duke are to go to-morrow to Audly End, in order to the
seeing and buying of it of my Lord Suffolke.

8th.  Up betimes and to the office, where all the morning sitting and did
discover three or four fresh instances of Sir W. Pen's old cheating
dissembling tricks, he being as false a fellow as ever was born.  Thence
with Sir.  W. Batten and Lord Bruncker to the White Horse in Lumbard
Streete to dine with Captain Cocke, upon particular business of canvas to
buy for the King, and here by chance I saw the mistresse of the house I
have heard much of, and a very pretty woman she is indeed and her husband
the simplest looked fellow and old that ever I saw.  After dinner I took
coach and away to Hales's, where my wife is sitting; and, indeed, her face
and necke, which are now finished, do so please me that I am not myself
almost, nor was not all the night after in writing of my letters, in
consideration of the fine picture that I shall be master of.  Thence home
and to the office, where very late, and so home to supper and to bed.

9th.  Up, and being ready, to the Cockpitt to make a visit to the Duke of
Albemarle, and to my great joy find him the same man to me that [he has
been] heretofore, which I was in great doubt of, through my negligence in
not visiting of him a great while; and having now set all to rights there,
I am in mighty ease in my mind and I think shall never suffer matters to
run so far backward again as I have done of late, with reference to my
neglecting him and Sir W. Coventry.  Thence by water down to Deptford,
where I met my Lord Bruncker and Sir W. Batten by agreement, and to
measuring Mr. Castle's new third-rate ship, which is to be called the
Defyance.

     [William Castell wrote to the Navy Commissioners on February 17th,
     1665-66, to inform them that the "Defiance" had gone to Longreach,
     and again, on February 22nd, to say that Mr. Grey had no masts large
     enough for the new ship.  Sir William Batten on March 29th asked for
     the consent of the Board to bring the "Defiance" into dock ("
     Calendar of State Papers," Domestic, 1665-66, pp.  252, 262, 324).]

And here I had my end in saving the King some money and getting myself
some experience in knowing how they do measure ships.  Thence I left them
and walked to Redriffe, and there taking water was overtaken by them in
their boat, and so they would have me in with them to Castle's house,
where my Lady Batten and Madam Williams were, and there dined and a deale
of doings.  I had a good dinner and counterfeit mirthe and pleasure with
them, but had but little, thinking how I neglected my business.  Anon, all
home to Sir W. Batten's and there Mrs. Knipp coming we did spend the
evening together very merry.  She and I singing, and, God forgive me!  I
do still see that my nature is not to be quite conquered, but will esteem
pleasure above all things, though yet in the middle of it, it has
reluctances after my business, which is neglected by my following my
pleasure.  However musique and women I cannot but give way to, whatever my
business is.  They being gone I to the office a while and so home to
supper and to bed.

10th.  Up, and to the office, and there busy sitting till noon.  I find at
home Mrs. Pierce and Knipp come to dine with me.  We were mighty merry;
and, after dinner, I carried them and my wife out by coach to the New
Exchange, and there I did give my valentine, Mrs. Pierce, a dozen payre of
gloves, and a payre of silke stockings, and Knipp for company's sake,
though my wife had, by my consent, laid out 20s. upon her the other day,
six payre of gloves.  Thence to Hales's to have seen our pictures, but
could not get in, he being abroad, and so to the Cakehouse hard by, and
there sat in the coach with great pleasure, and eat some fine cakes and so
carried them to Pierces and away home.  It is a mighty fine witty boy,
Mrs. Pierces little boy.  Thence home and to the office, where late
writing letters and leaving a great deale to do on Monday, I home to
supper and to bed.  The truth is, I do indulge myself a little the more in
pleasure, knowing that this is the proper age of my life to do it; and out
of my observation that most men that do thrive in the world, do forget to
take pleasure during the time that they are getting their estate, but
reserve that till they have got one, and then it is too late for them to
enjoy it with any pleasure.

11th (Lord's day).  Up, and by water to White Hall, there met Mr. Coventry
coming out, going along with the Commissioners of the Ordnance to the
water side to take barge, they being to go down to the Hope.  I returned
with them as far as the Tower in their barge speaking with Sir W. Coventry
and so home and to church, and at noon dined and then to my chamber, where
with great pleasure about one business or other till late, and so to
supper and to bed.

12th.  Up betimes, and called on by abundance of people about business,
and then away by water to Westminster, and there to the Exchequer about
some business, and thence by coach calling at several places, to the Old
Exchange, and there did much business, and so homeward and bought a silver
salt for my ordinary table to use, and so home to dinner, and after dinner
comes my uncle and aunt Wight, the latter I have not seen since the
plague; a silly, froward, ugly woman she is.  We made mighty much of them,
and she talks mightily of her fear of the sicknesse, and so a deale of
tittle tattle and I left them and to my office where late, and so home to
supper and to bed.  This day I hear my Uncle Talbot Pepys died the last
week, and was buried.  All the news now is, that Sir Jeremy Smith is at
Cales--[Cadiz]--with his fleete, and Mings in the Elve.--[Elbe]--The King
is come this noon to towne from Audly End, with the Duke of Yorke and a
fine train of gentlemen.

13th.  Up betimes, and to the office, where busy sitting all the morning,
and I begin to find a little convenience by holding up my head to Sir W.
Pen, for he is come to be more supple.  At noon to dinner, and then to the
office again, where mighty business, doing a great deale till midnight and
then home to supper and to bed.  The plague encreased this week 29 from
28, though the total fallen from 238 to 207, which do never a whit please
me.

14th.  Up, and met by 6 o'clock in my chamber Mr. Povy (from White Hall)
about evening reckonings between him and me, on our Tangier business, and
at it hard till toward eight o'clock, and he then carried me in his
chariot to White Hall, where by and by my fellow officers met me, and we
had a meeting before the Duke.  Thence with my Lord Bruncker towards
London, and in our way called in Covent Garden, and took in Sir John
(formerly Dr.) Baber; who hath this humour that he will not enter into
discourse while any stranger is in company, till he be told who he is that
seems a stranger to him.  This he did declare openly to me, and asked my
Lord who I was, giving this reason, that he has been inconvenienced by
being too free in discourse till he knew who all the company were.  Thence
to Guildhall (in our way taking in Dr. Wilkins), and there my Lord and I
had full and large discourse with Sir Thomas Player, the Chamberlain of
the City (a man I have much heard of for his credit and punctuality in the
City, and on that score I had a desire to be made known to him), about the
credit of our tallys, which are lodged there for security to such as
should lend money thereon to the use of the Navy.  And I had great
satisfaction therein: and the truth is, I find all our matters of credit
to be in an ill condition.  Thence, I being in a little haste walked
before and to the 'Change a little and then home, and presently to Trinity
house to dinner, where Captain Cox made his Elder Brother's dinner.  But
it seemed to me a very poor sorry dinner.  I having many things in my head
rose, when my belly was full, though the dinner not half done, and home
and there to do some business, and by and by out of doors and met Mr. Povy
coming to me by appointment, but it being a little too late, I took a
little pride in the streete not to go back with him, but prayed him to
come another time, and I away to Kate Joyce's, thinking to have spoke to
her husband about Pall's business, but a stranger, the Welsh Dr. Powell,
being there I forebore and went away and so to Hales's, to see my wife's
picture, which I like mighty well, and there had the pleasure to see how
suddenly he draws the Heavens, laying a darke ground and then lightening
it when and where he will. Thence to walk all alone in the fields behind
Grayes Inne, making an end of reading over my dear "Faber fortunae," of my
Lord Bacon's, and thence, it growing dark, took two or three wanton turns
about the idle places and lanes about Drury Lane, but to no satisfaction,
but a great fear of the plague among them, and so anon I walked by
invitation to Mrs. Pierces, where I find much good company, that is to
say, Mrs. Pierce, my wife, Mrs. Worshipp and her daughter, and Harris the
player, and Knipp, and Mercer, and Mrs. Barbary Sheldon, who is come this
day to spend a weeke with my wife; and here with musique we danced, and
sung and supped, and then to sing and dance till past one in the morning;
and much mirthe with Sir Anthony Apsley and one Colonell Sidney, who lodge
in the house; and above all, they are mightily taken with Mrs. Knipp.
Hence weary and sleepy we broke up, and I and my company homeward by coach
and to bed.

15th.  Lay till it was full time to rise, it being eight o'clock, and so
to the office and there sat till almost three o'clock and then to dinner,
and after dinner (my wife and Mercer and Mrs. Barbary being gone to
Hales's before), I and my cozen Anthony Joyce, who come on purpose to
dinner with me, and he and I to discourse of our proposition of marriage
between Pall and Harman, and upon discourse he and I to Harman's house and
took him to a taverne hard by, and we to discourse of our business, and I
offered L500, and he declares most ingenuously that his trade is not to be
trusted on, that he however needs no money, but would have her money
bestowed on her, which I like well, he saying that he would adventure 2 or
L300 with her.  I like him as a most good-natured, and discreet man, and,
I believe, very cunning.  We come to this conclusion for us to meete one
another the next weeke, and then we hope to come to some end, for I did
declare myself well satisfied with the match.  Thence to Hales's, where I
met my wife and people; and do find the picture, above all things, a most
pretty picture, and mighty like my wife; and I asked him his price: he
says L14, and the truth is, I think he do deserve it.  Thence toward
London and home, and I to the office, where I did much, and betimes to
bed, having had of late so little sleep, and there slept

16th.  Till 7 this morning.  Up and all the morning about the Victualler's
business, passing his account.  At noon to the 'Change, and did several
businesses, and thence to the Crowne behind the 'Change and dined with my
Lord Bruncker and Captain Cocke and Fenn, and Madam Williams, who without
question must be my Lord's wife, and else she could not follow him
wherever he goes and kisse and use him publiquely as she do.  Thence to
the office, where Sir W. Pen and I made an end of the Victualler's
business, and thence abroad about several businesses, and so in the
evening back again, and anon called on by Mr. Povy, and he and I staid
together in my chamber till 12 at night ending our reckonings and giving
him tallys for all I was to pay him and so parted, and I to make good my
Journall for two or three days, and begun it till I come to the other
side, where I have scratched so much, for, for want of sleep, I begun to
write idle and from the purpose.  So forced to breake off, and to
bed.--[There are several erasures in the original MS.]

17th.  Up, and to finish my Journall, which I had not sense enough the
last night to make an end of, and thence to the office, where very busy
all the morning.  At noon home to dinner and presently with my wife out to
Hales's, where I am still infinitely pleased with my wife's picture. I
paid him L14 for it, and 25s. for the frame, and I think it is not a whit
too deare for so good a picture.  It is not yet quite finished and dry, so
as to be fit to bring home yet.  This day I begun to sit, and he will make
me, I think, a very fine picture.  He promises it shall be as good as my
wife's, and I sit to have it full of shadows, and do almost break my neck
looking over my shoulder to make the posture for him to work by.  Thence
home and to the office, and so home having a great cold, and so my wife
and Mrs. Barbary have very great ones, we are at a loss how we all come by
it together, so to bed, drinking butter-ale.  This day my W. Hewer comes
from Portsmouth and gives me an instance of another piece of knavery of
Sir W. Pen, who wrote to Commissioner Middleton, that it was my negligence
the other day he was not acquainted, as the board directed, with our
clerks coming down to the pay.  But I need no new arguments to teach me
that he is a false rogue to me and all the world besides.

18th (Lord's day).  Up and my cold better, so to church, and then home to
dinner, and so walked out to St. James's Church, thinking to have seen
faire Mrs. Butler, but could not, she not being there, nor, I believe,
lives thereabouts now.  So walked to Westminster, very fine fair dry
weather, but all cry out for lack of rain.  To Herbert's and drank, and
thence to Mrs. Martin's, and did what I would with her; her husband going
for some wine for us.  The poor man I do think would take pains if I can
get him a purser's place, which I will endeavour.  She tells me as a
secret that Betty Howlet of the Hall, my little sweetheart, that I used to
call my second wife, is married to a younger son of Mr. Michell's (his
elder brother, who should have had her, being dead this plague), at which
I am glad, and that they are to live nearer me in Thames Streete, by the
Old Swan.  Thence by coach home and to my chamber about some accounts, and
so to bed.  Sir Christopher Mings is come home from Hambro without
anything done, saving bringing home some pipestaves for us.

19th.  Up betimes and upon a meeting extraordinary at the office most of
the morning with Lord Bruncker, Sir W. Coventry, and Sir W. Pen, upon the
business of the accounts.  Where now we have got almost as much as we
would have we begin to lay all on the Controller, and I fear he will be
run down with it, for he is every day less and less capable of doing
business.  Thence with my Lord Bruncker, Sir W. Coventry to the ticket
office, to see in what little order things are there, and there it is a
shame to see how the King is served.  Thence to the Chamberlain of London,
and satisfy ourselves more particularly how much credit we have there,
which proves very little.  Thence to Sir Robert Long's, absent. About much
the same business, but have not the satisfaction we would have there
neither.  So Sir W. Coventry parted, and my Lord and I to Mrs. Williams's,
and there I saw her closett, where indeed a great many fine things there
are, but the woman I hate.  Here we dined, and Sir J. Minnes come to us,
and after dinner we walked to the King's play-house, all in dirt, they
being altering of the stage to make it wider.  But God knows when they
will begin to act again; but my business here was to see the inside of the
stage and all the tiring-rooms and machines; and, indeed, it was a sight
worthy seeing.  But to see their clothes, and the various sorts, and what
a mixture of things there was; here a wooden-leg, there a ruff, here a
hobbyhorse, there a crown, would make a man split himself to see with
laughing; and particularly Lacy's wardrobe, and Shotrell's. But then
again, to think how fine they show on the stage by candle-light, and how
poor things they are to look now too near hand, is not pleasant at all.
The machines are fine, and the paintings very pretty.  Thence mightily
satisfied in my curiosity I away with my Lord to see him at her house
again, and so take leave and by coach home and to the office, and thence
sent for to Sir G. Carteret by and by to the Broad Streete, where he and I
walked two or three hours till it was quite darke in his gallery talking
of his affairs, wherein I assure him all will do well, and did give him
(with great liberty, which he accepted kindly) my advice to deny the Board
nothing they would aske about his accounts, but rather call upon them to
know whether there was anything more they desired, or was wanting.  But
our great discourse and serious reflections was upon the bad state of the
kingdom in general, through want of money and good conduct, which we fear
will undo all.  Thence mightily satisfied with this good fortune of this
discourse with him I home, and there walked in the darke till 10 o'clock
at night in the garden with Sir W. Warren, talking of many things
belonging to us particularly, and I hope to get something considerably by
him before the year be over.  He gives me good advice of circumspection in
my place, which I am now in great mind to improve; for I think our office
stands on very ticklish terms, the Parliament likely to sit shortly and
likely to be asked more money, and we able to give a very bad account of
the expence of what we have done with what they did give before.  Besides,
the turning out the prize officers may be an example for the King giving
us up to the Parliament's pleasure as easily, for we deserve it as much.
Besides, Sir G. Carteret did tell me tonight how my Lord Bruncker himself,
whose good-will I could have depended as much on as any, did himself to
him take notice of the many places I have; and though I was a painful man,
yet the Navy was enough for any man to go through with in his owne single
place there, which much troubles me, and shall yet provoke me to more and
more care and diligence than ever.  Thence home to supper, where I find my
wife and Mrs. Barbary with great colds, as I also at this time have.  This
day by letter from my father he propounds a match in the country for Pall,
which pleased me well, of one that hath seven score and odd pounds land
per annum in possession, and expects L1000 in money by the death of an old
aunt.  He hath neither father, mother, sister, nor brother, but demands
L600 down, and L100 on the birth of first child, which I had some
inclination to stretch to.  He is kinsman to, and lives with, Mr.
Phillips, but my wife tells me he is a drunken, ill-favoured, ill-bred
country fellow, which sets me off of it again, and I will go on with
Harman.  So after supper to bed.

20th.  Up and to the office, where busy all the morning.  At noon dined in
haste, and so my wife, Mrs. Barbary, Mercer, and I by coach to Hales's,
where I find my wife's picture now perfectly finished in all respects, and
a beautiful picture it is, as almost I ever saw.  I sat again, and had a
great deale done, but, whatever the matter is, I do not fancy that it has
the ayre of my face, though it will be a very fine picture.  Thence home
and to my business, being post night, and so home to supper and to, bed.

21st.  Up betimes, and first by coach to my Lord Generall to visitt him,
and then to the Duke of Yorke, where we all met and did our usual business
with him; but, Lord! how everything is yielded to presently, even by Sir
W. Coventry, that is propounded by the Duke, as now to have Troutbecke,
his old surgeon, and intended to go Surgeon-General of the fleete, to go
Physician-General of the fleete, of which there never was any precedent in
the world, and he for that to have L20 per month. Thence with Lord
Bruncker to Sir Robert Long, whom we found in his closett, and after some
discourse of business he fell to discourse at large and pleasant, and
among other things told us of the plenty of partridges in France, where he
says the King of France and his company killed with their guns, in the
plain de Versailles, 300 and odd partridges at one bout.  Thence I to the
Excise Office behind the 'Change, and there find our business of our
tallys in great disorder as to payment, and thereupon do take a resolution
of thinking how to remedy it, as soon as I can.  Thence home, and there
met Sir W. Warren, and after I had eat a bit of victuals (he staying in
the office) he and I to White Hall.  He to look after the business of the
prize ships which we are endeavouring to buy, and hope to get money by
them.  So I to London by coach and to Gresham College, where I staid half
an houre, and so away home to my office, and there walking late alone in
the darke in the garden with Sir W. Warren, who tells me that at the
Committee of the Lords for the prizes to-day, there passed very high words
between my Lord Ashly and Sir W. Coventry, about our business of the prize
ships.  And that my Lord Ashly did snuff and talk as high to him, as he
used to do to any ordinary seaman.  And that Sir W. Coventry did take it
very quietly, but yet for all did speak his mind soberly and with reason,
and went away, saying, he had done his duty therein, and so left it to
them, whether they would let so many ships go for masts or not: Here he
and I talked of 1,000 businesses, all profitable discourse, and late
parted, and I home to supper and to bed, troubled a little at a letter
from my father, telling me how [he] is like to be sued for a debt of
Tom's, by Smith, the mercer.

22nd.  Up, and to the office all the morning.  At noon my wife being gone
to her father's I dined with Sir W. Batten, he inviting me.  After dinner
to my office close, and did very much business, and so late home to supper
and to bed.  The plague increased four this week, which troubles me,
though but one in the whole.

23rd.  Up, and going out of my dressing-room, when ready to go down
stairs, I spied little Mrs. Tooker, my pretty little girle, which, it
seems, did come yesterday to our house to stay a little while with us, but
I did not know of it till now.  I was glad of her coming, she being a very
pretty child, and now grown almost a woman.  I out by six o'clock by
appointment to Hales's, where we fell to my picture presently very hard,
and it comes on a very fine picture, and very merry, pleasant discourse we
had all the morning while he was painting.  Anon comes my wife and Mercer
and little Tooker, and having done with me we all to a picture drawer's
hard by, Hales carrying me to see some landskipps of a man's doing.  But I
do not [like] any of them, save only a piece of fruit, which indeed was
very fine.  Thence I to Westminster, to the Chequer, about a little
business, and then to the Swan, and there sent for a bit of meat and
dined; and after dinner had opportunity of being pleased with Sarah; and
so away to Westminster Hall, and there Mrs. Michell tells me with great
joy how little Betty Howlett is married to her young son Michell, which is
a pretty odd thing, that he should so soon succeed in the match to his
elder brother that died of the plague, and to the house and trade intended
for him, and more they say that the girle has heretofore said that she did
love this little one more than the other brother that was intended her all
along.  I am mighty glad of this match, and more that they are likely to
live near me in Thames Streete, where I may see Betty now and then, whom I
from a girle did use to call my second wife, and mighty pretty she is.
Thence by coach to Anthony Joyce to receive Harman's answer, which did
trouble me to receive, for he now demands L800, whereas he never made
exception at the portion, but accepted of L500.  This I do not like; but,
however, I cannot much blame the man, if he thinks he can get more of
another than of me.  So home and hard to my business at the office, where
much business, and so home to supper and to bed.

24th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning.  At noon home to
dinner, where Anthony Joyce, and I did give my final answer, I would give
but L500 with my sister, and did show him the good offer made us in the
country, to which I did now more and more incline, and intend to pursue
that.  After dinner I to White Hall to a Committee for Tangier, where the
Duke of Yorke was, and I acquitted myself well in what I had to do. After
the Committee up, I had occasion to follow the Duke into his lodgings,
into a chamber where the Duchesse was sitting to have her picture drawn by
Lilly, who was there at work.  But I was well pleased to see that there
was nothing near so much resemblance of her face in his work, which is now
the second, if not the third time, as there was of my wife's at the very
first time.  Nor do I think at last it can be like, the lines not being in
proportion to those of her face.  So home, and to the office, where late,
and so to bed.

25th (Lady day and Sunday).  Up, and to my chamber in my gowne all the
morning about settling my papers there.  At noon to dinner, where my
wife's brother, whom I sent for to offer making him a Muster-Master and
send to sea, which the poore man likes well of and will go, and it will be
a good preferment to him, only hazardous.  I hope he will prove a good
discreet man.  After dinner to my papers and Tangier accounts again till
supper, and after supper again to them, but by my mixing them, I know not
how, my private and publique accounts, it makes me mad to see how hard it
is to bring them to be understood, and my head is confounded, that though
I did sweare to sit up till one o'clock upon them, yet, I fear, it will be
to no purpose, for I cannot understand what I do or have been doing of
them to-day.

26th.  Up, and a meeting extraordinary there was of Sir W. Coventry, Lord
Bruncker, and myself, about the business of settling the ticket office,
where infinite room is left for abusing the King in the wages of seamen.
Our [meeting] being done, my Lord Bruncker and I to the Tower, to see the
famous engraver, to get him to grave a seale for the office.  And did see
some of the finest pieces of work in embossed work, that ever I did see in
my life, for fineness and smallness of the images thereon, and I will
carry my wife thither to shew them her.  Here I also did see bars of gold
melting, which was a fine sight.  So with my Lord to the Pope's Head
Taverne in Lumbard Streete to dine by appointment with Captain Taylor,
whither Sir W. Coventry come to us, and were mighty merry, and I find
reason to honour him every day more and more.  Thence alone to Broade
Street to Sir G. Carteret by his desire to confer with him, who is I find
in great pain about the business of the office, and not a little, I
believe, in fear of falling there, Sir W. Coventry having so great a pique
against him, and herein I first learn an eminent instance how great a man
this day, that nobody would think could be shaken, is the next overthrown,
dashed out of countenance, and every small thing of irregularity in his
business taken notice of, where nobody the other day durst cast an eye
upon them, and next I see that he that the other day nobody durst come
near is now as supple as a spaniel, and sends and speaks to me with great
submission, and readily hears to advice.  Thence home to the office, where
busy late, and so home a little to my accounts publique and private, but
could not get myself rightly to know how to dispose of them in order to
passing.

27th.  All the morning at the office busy.  At noon dined at home, Mr.
Cooke, our old acquaintance at my Lord Sandwich's, come to see and dine
with me, but I quite out of humour, having many other and better things to
thinke of.  Thence to the office to settle my people's worke and then home
to my publique accounts of Tangier, which it is strange by meddling with
evening reckonings with Mr. Povy lately how I myself am become intangled
therein, so that after all I could do, ready to breake my head and brains,
I thought of another way, though not so perfect, yet the only one which
this account is capable of.  Upon this latter I sat up till past two in
the morning and then to bed.

28th.  Up, and with Creed, who come hither betimes to speake with me about
his accounts, to White Hall by water, mighty merry in discourse, though I
had been very little troubled with him, or did countenance it, having now,
blessed be God!  a great deale of good business to mind to better purpose
than chatting with him.  Waited on the Duke, after that walked with Sir W.
Clerke into St. James's Parke, and by and by met with Mr. Hayes, Prince
Rupert's Secretary, who are mighty, both, briske blades, but I fear they
promise themselves more than they expect.  Thence to the Cockpitt, and
dined with a great deal of company at the Duke of Albemarle's, and a bad
and dirty, nasty dinner.  So by coach to Hales's, and there sat again, and
it is become mighty like.  Hither come my wife and Mercer brought by Mrs.
Pierce and Knipp, we were mighty merry and the picture goes on the better
for it.  Thence set them down at Pierces, and we home, where busy and at
my chamber till 12 at night, and so to bed. This night, I am told, the
Queene of Portugall, the mother to our Queene, is lately dead, and newes
brought of it hither this day.

     [Donna Luiza, the Queen Regent of Portugal.  She was daughter of the
     Duke de Medina Sidonia and widow of Juan IV. The Court wore the
     deepest mourning on this occasion.  The ladies were directed to wear
     their hair plain, and to appear without spots on their faces, the
     disfiguring fashion of patching having just been introduced.--
     Strickland s Queens of England, vol. viii., p. 362.]

29th.  All the morning hard at the office.  At noon dined and then out to
Lumbard Streete, to look after the getting of some money that is lodged
there of mine in Viner's hands, I having no mind to have it lie there
longer.  So back again and to the office, where and at home about publique
and private business and accounts till past 12 at night, and so to bed.
This day, poor Jane, my old, little Jane, came to us again, to my wife's
and my great content, and we hope to take mighty pleasure in her, she
having all the marks and qualities of a good and loving and honest
servant, she coming by force away from the other place, where she hath
lived ever since she went from us, and at our desire, her late mistresse
having used all the stratagems she could to keepe her.

30th.  My wife and I mighty pleased with Jane's coming to us again.  Up,
and away goes Alce, our cooke-mayde, a good servant, whom we loved and did
well by her, and she an excellent servant, but would not bear being told
of any faulte in the fewest and kindest words and would go away of her
owne accord, after having given her mistresse warning fickly for a quarter
of a yeare together.  So we shall take another girle and make little Jane
our cook, at least, make a trial of it.  Up, and after much business I out
to Lumbard Streete, and there received L2200 and brought it home; and,
contrary to expectation, received L35 for the use of L2000 of it [for] a
quarter of a year, where it hath produced me this profit, and hath been a
convenience to me as to care and security of my house, and demandable at
two days' warning, as this hath been.  This morning Sir W. Warren come to
me a second time about having L2000 of me upon his bills on the Act to
enable him to pay for the ships he is buying, wherein I shall have
considerable profit.  I am loth to do it, but yet speaking with Colvill I
do not see but I shall be able to do it and get money by it too.  Thence
home and eat one mouthful, and so to Hales's, and there sat till almost
quite darke upon working my gowne, which I hired to be drawn in; an Indian
gowne, and I do see all the reason to expect a most excellent picture of
it.  So home and to my private accounts in my chamber till past one in the
morning, and so to bed, with my head full of thoughts for my evening of
all my accounts tomorrow, the latter end of the month, in which God give
me good issue, for I never was in such a confusion in my life and that in
great sums.

31st All the morning at the office busy.  At noon to dinner, and thence to
the office and did my business there as soon as I could, and then home and
to my accounts, where very late at them, but, Lord!  what a deale of do I
have to understand any part of them, and in short do what I could, I could
not come to any understanding of them, but after I had throughly wearied
myself, I was forced to go to bed and leave them much against my will and
vowe too, but I hope God will forgive me, for I have sat up these four
nights till past twelve at night to master them, but cannot. Thus ends
this month, with my head and mind mighty full and disquiett because of my
accounts, which I have let go too long, and confounded my publique with my
private that I cannot come to any liquidating of them. However, I do see
that I must be grown richer than I was by a good deale last month.  Busy
also I am in thoughts for a husband for my sister, and to that end my wife
and I have determined that she shall presently go into the country to my
father and mother, and consider of a proffer made them for her in the
country, which, if she likes, shall go forward.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                  APRIL
                                  1666

April 1st (Lord's day).  Up and abroad, and by coach to Charing Cross, to
wait on Sir Philip Howard; whom I found in bed: and he do receive me very
civilly.  My request was about suffering my wife's brother to go to sea,
and to save his pay in the Duke's guards; which after a little difficulty
he did with great respect agree to.  I find him a very fine-spoken
gentleman, and one of great parts, and very courteous.  Much pleased with
this visit I to White Hall, where I met Sir G. Downing, and to discourse
with him an houre about the Exchequer payments upon the late Act, and
informed myself of him thoroughly in my safety in lending L2000 to Sir W.
Warren, upon an order of his upon the Exchequer for L2602 and I do purpose
to do it.  Thence meeting Dr. Allen, the physician, he and I and another
walked in the Parke, a most pleasant warm day, and to the Queene's
chappell; where I do not so dislike the musique.  Here I saw on a post an
invitation to all good Catholiques to pray for the soul of such a one
departed this life.  The Queene, I hear, do not yet hear of the death of
her mother, she being in a course of physique, that they dare not tell it
her.  At noon by coach home, and there by invitation met my uncle and aunt
Wight and their cozen Mary, and dined with me and very merry.  After
dinner my uncle and I abroad by coach to White Hall, up and down the
house, and I did some business and thence with him and a gentleman he met
with to my Lord Chancellor's new house, and there viewed it again and
again and up to the top and I like it as well as ever and think it a most
noble house.  So all up and down my Lord St. Albans his new building and
market-house, and the taverne under the market-house, looking to and again
into every place of building, and so away and took coach and home, where
to my accounts, and was at them till I could not hold open my eyes, and so
to bed.  I this afternoon made a visit to my Lady Carteret, whom I
understood newly come to towne; and she took it mighty kindly, but I see
her face and heart are dejected from the condition her husband's matters
stand in.  But I hope they will do all well enough.  And I do comfort her
as much as I can, for she is a noble lady.

2nd.  Up, and to the office and thence with Mr. Gawden to Guildhall to see
the bills and tallys there in the chamber (and by the way in the streete
his new coach broke and we fain to take an old hackney).  Thence to the
Exchequer again to inform myself of some other points in the new Act in
order to my lending Sir W. Warren L2000 upon an order of his upon the Act,
which they all encourage me to.  There walking with Mr. Gawden in
Westminster Hall, he and I to talke from one business to another and at
last to the marriage of his daughter.  He told me the story of Creed's
pretences to his daughter, and how he would not believe but she loved him,
while his daughter was in great passion on the other hand against him.
Thence to talke of his son Benjamin; and I propounded a match for him, and
at last named my sister, which he embraces heartily, and speaking of the
lowness of her portion, that it would be less than L1000, he tells me if
every thing else agrees, he will out of what he means to give me yearly,
make a portion for her shall cost me nothing more than I intend freely.
This did mightily rejoice me and full of it did go with him to London to
the 'Change; and there did much business and at the Coffee-house with Sir
W. Warren, who very wisely did shew me that my matching my sister with Mr.
Gawden would undo me in all my places, everybody suspecting me in all I
do; and I shall neither be able to serve him, nor free myself from
imputation of being of his faction, while I am placed for his severest
check.  I was convinced that it would be for neither of our interests to
make this alliance, and so am quite off of it again, but with great
satisfaction in the motion.  Thence to the Crowne tavern behind the
Exchange to meet with Cocke and Fenn and did so, and dined with them, and
after dinner had the intent of our meeting, which was some private
discourse with Fenn, telling him what I hear and think of his business,
which he takes very kindly and says he will look about him.  It was about
his giving of ill language and answers to people that come to him about
money and some other particulars.  This morning Mrs. Barbary and little
Mrs. Tooker went away homeward.  Thence my wife by coach calling me at
White Hall to visit my Lady Carteret, and she was not within.  So to
Westminster Hall, where I purposely tooke my wife well dressed into the
Hall to see and be seen; and, among others, [met] Howlet's daughter, who
is newly married, and is she I call wife, and one I love mightily.  So to
Broad Streete and there met my Lady and Sir G. Carteret, and sat and
talked with them a good while and so home, and to my accounts which I
cannot get through with.  But at it till I grew drowsy, and so to bed
mightily vexed that I can come to no better issue in my accounts.

3rd.  Up, and Sir W. Warren with me betimes and signed a bond, and
assigned his order on the Exchequer to a blank for me to fill and I did
deliver him L1900.  The truth is, it is a great venture to venture so much
on the Act, but thereby I hedge in L300 gift for my service about some
ships that he hath bought, prizes, and good interest besides, and his bond
to repay me the money at six weeks' warning.  So to the office, where busy
all the morning.  At noon home to dinner, and there my brother Balty dined
with me and my wife, who is become a good serious man, and I hope to do
him good being sending him a Muster-Master on one of the squadrons of the
fleete.  After dinner and he gone I to my accounts hard all the afternoon
till it was quite darke, and I thank God I do come to bring them very
fairly to make me worth L5,000 stocke in the world, which is a great mercy
to me.  Though I am a little troubled to find L50 difference between the
particular account I make to myself of my profits and loss in each month
and the account which I raise from my acquittances and money which I have
at the end of every month in my chest and other men's hands.  However I do
well believe that I am effectually L5,000, the greatest sum I ever was in
my life yet, and this day I have as I have said before agreed with Sir W.
Warren and got of him L300 gift.  At night a while to the office and then
home and supped and to my accounts again till I was ready to sleepe, there
being no pleasure to handle them, if they are not kept in good order.  So
to bed.

4th.  Up, and with Sir W. Pen in his coach to White Hall, in his way
talking simply and fondly as he used to do, but I find myself to slight
him and his simple talke, I thank God, and that my condition will enable
me to do it.  Thence, after doing our business with the Duke of Yorke,
with Captain Cocke home to the 'Change in his coach.  He promises me
presently a dozen of silver salts, and proposes a business for which he
hath promised Mrs. Williams for my Lord Bruncker a set of plate shall cost
him L500 and me the like, which will be a good business indeed. After done
several businesses at the 'Change I home, and being washing day dined upon
cold meate, and so abroad by coach to Hales's, and there sat till night,
mightily pleased with my picture, which is now almost finished.  So by
coach home, it being the fast day and to my chamber and so after supper to
bed, consulting how to send my wife into the country to advise about
Pall's marriage, which I much desire, and my father too, and two or three
offers are now in hand.

5th.  Up, and before office time to Lumbard Streete, and there at Viner's
was shewn the silver plates, made for Captain Cocke to present my Lord
Bruncker; and I chose a dozen of the same weight to be bespoke for myself,
which he told me yesterday he would give me on the same occasion. To the
office, where the falsenesse and impertinencies of Sir W. Pen would make a
man mad to think of.  At noon would have avoided, but could not, dining
with my Lord Bruncker and his mistresse with Captain Cocke at the Sun
Taverne in Fish Streete, where a good dinner, but the woman do tire me,
and indeed how simply my Lord Bruncker, who is otherwise a wise man, do
proceed at the table in serving of Cocke, without any means of
understanding in his proposal, or defence when proposed, would make a man
think him a foole.  After dinner home, where I find my wife hath on a
sudden, upon notice of a coach going away to-morrow, taken a resolution of
going in it to Brampton, we having lately thought it fit for her to go to
satisfy herself and me in the nature of the fellow that is there proposed
to my sister.  So she to fit herself for her journey and I to the office
all the afternoon till late, and so home and late putting notes to "It is
decreed, nor shall thy fate, &c." and then to bed.  The plague is, to our
great grief, encreased nine this week, though decreased a few in the
total.  And this encrease runs through many parishes, which makes us much
fear the next year.

6th.  Up mighty betimes upon my wife's going this day toward Brampton.  I
could not go to the coach with her, but W. Hewer did and hath leave from
me to go the whole day's journey with her.  All the morning upon business
at the office, and at noon dined, and Mrs. Hunt coming lent her L5 on her
occasions and so carried her to Axe Yard end at Westminster and there left
her, a good and understanding woman, and her husband I perceive thrives
mightily in his business of the Excise.  Thence to Mr. Hales and there
sat, and my picture almost finished, which by the word of Mr. and Mrs.
Pierce (who come in accidently) is mighty like, and I am sure I am
mightily pleased both in the thing and the posture.  Thence with them home
a little, and so to White Hall and there met by agreement with Sir Stephen
Fox and Mr. Ashburnham, and discoursed the business of our Excise tallys;
the former being Treasurer of the guards, and the other Cofferer of the
King's household.  I benefitted much by their discourse.  We come to no
great conclusion upon our discourse, but parted, and I home, where all
things, methinks, melancholy in the absence of my wife.  This day great
newes of the Swedes declaring for us against the Dutch, and, so far as
that, I believe it.  After a little supper to bed.

7th.  Lay pretty long to-day, lying alone and thinking of several
businesses.  So up to the office and there till noon.  Thence with my Lord
Bruncker home by coach to Mrs. Williams's, where Bab. Allen and Dr.
Charleton dined.  Bab and I sang and were mighty merry as we could be
there, where the rest of the company did not overplease.  Thence took her
by coach to Hales's, and there find Mrs. Pierce and her boy and Mary. She
had done sitting the first time, and indeed her face is mighty like at
first dash.  Thence took them to the cakehouse, and there called in the
coach for cakes and drank, and thence I carried them to my Lord
Chancellor's new house to shew them that, and all mightily pleased, thence
set each down at home, and so I home to the office, where about ten of the
clock W. Hewer comes to me to tell me that he has left my wife well this
morning at Bugden, which was great riding, and brings me a letter from
her.  She is very well got thither, of which I am heartily glad.  After
writing several letters, I home to supper and to bed.  The Parliament of
which I was afraid of their calling us of the Navy to an account of the
expense of money and stores and wherein we were so little ready to give
them a good answer [will soon meet].  The Bishop of Munster, every body
says, is coming to peace with the Dutch, we having not supplied him with
the money promised him.

8th (Lord's day).  Up, and was in great trouble how to get a passage to
White Hall, it raining, and no coach to be had.  So I walked to the Old
Swan, and there got a scull.  To the Duke of Yorke, where we all met to
hear the debate between Sir Thomas Allen and Mr. Wayth; the former
complaining of the latter's ill usage of him at the late pay of his ship.
But a very sorry poor occasion he had for it.  The Duke did determine it
with great judgement, chiding both, but encouraging Wayth to continue to
be a check to all captains in any thing to the King's right.  And, indeed,
I never did see the Duke do any thing more in order, nor with more
judgement than he did pass the verdict in this business.  The Court full
this morning of the newes of Tom Cheffin's death, the King's
closett-keeper.  He was well last night as ever, flaying at tables in the
house, and not very ill this morning at six o'clock, yet dead before
seven: they think, of an imposthume in his breast.  But it looks fearfully
among people nowadays, the plague, as we hear, encreasing every where
again.  To the Chappell, but could not get in to hear well.  But I had the
pleasure once in my life to see an Archbishop (this was of Yorke) in a
pulpit.  Then at a loss how to get home to dinner, having promised to
carry Mrs. Hunt thither.  At last got my Lord Hinchingbroke's coach, he
staying at Court; and so took her up in Axe-yard, and home and dined. And
good discourse of the old matters of the Protector and his family, she
having a relation to them.  The Protector

     [Richard Cromwell subsequently returned to England, and resided in
     strict privacy at Cheshunt for some years before his death in 1712]

lives in France: spends about L500 per annum.  Thence carried her home
again and then to Court and walked over to St. James's Chappell, thinking
to have heard a Jesuite preach, but come too late.  So got a hackney and
home, and there to business.  At night had Mercer comb my head and so to
supper, sing a psalm, and to bed.

9th.  Up betimes, and with my Joyner begun the making of the window in my
boy's chamber bigger, purposing it shall be a roome to eat and for having
musique in.  To the office, where a meeting upon extraordinary business,
at noon to the 'Change about more, and then home with Creed and dined, and
then with him to the Committee of Tangier, where I got two or three things
done I had a mind to of convenience to me.  Thence by coach to Mrs.
Pierce's, and with her and Knipp and Mrs. Pierce's boy and girle abroad,
thinking to have been merry at Chelsey; but being come almost to the house
by coach near the waterside, a house alone, I think the Swan, a gentleman
walking by called to us to tell us that the house was shut up of the
sicknesse.  So we with great affright turned back, being holden to the
gentleman; and went away (I for my part in great disorder) for Kensington,
and there I spent about 30s. upon the jades with great pleasure, and we
sang finely and staid till about eight at night, the night coming on apace
and so set them down at Pierce's, and so away home, where awhile with Sir
W. Warren about business, and then to bed,

10th.  Up betimes, and many people to me about business.  To the office
and there sat till noon, and then home and dined, and to the office again
all the afternoon, where we sat all, the first time of our resolution to
sit both forenoons and afternoons.  Much business at night and then home,
and though late did see some work done by the plasterer to my new window
in the boy's chamber plastered.  Then to supper, and after having my head
combed by the little girle to bed.  Bad news that the plague is decreased
in the general again and two increased in the sickness.

11th.  To White Hall, having first set my people to worke about setting me
rails upon the leads of my wife's closett, a thing I have long designed,
but never had a fit opportunity till now.  After having done with the Duke
of Yorke, I to Hales's, where there was nothing found to be done more to
my picture, but the musique, which now pleases me mightily, it being
painted true.  Thence home, and after dinner to Gresham College, where a
great deal of do and formality in choosing of the Council and Officers.  I
had three votes to be of the Council, who am but a stranger, nor expected
any.  So my Lord Bruncker being confirmed President I home, where I find
to my great content my rails up upon my leads.  To the office and did a
little business, and then home and did a great jobb at my Tangier
accounts, which I find are mighty apt to run into confusion, my head also
being too full of other businesses and pleasures.  This noon Bagwell's
wife come to me to the office, after her being long at Portsmouth.  After
supper, and past 12 at night to bed.

12th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning.  At noon dined at home
and so to my office again, and taking a turne in the garden my Lady Pen
comes to me and takes me into her house, where I find her daughter and a
pretty lady of her acquaintance, one Mrs. Lowder, sister, I suppose, of
her servant Lowder's, with whom I, notwithstanding all my resolution to
follow business close this afternoon, did stay talking and playing the
foole almost all the afternoon, and there saw two or three foolish sorry
pictures of her doing, but very ridiculous compared to what my wife do.
She grows mighty homely and looks old.  Thence ashamed at myself for this
losse of time, yet not able to leave it, I to the office, where my Lord
Bruncker come; and he and I had a little fray, he being, I find, a very
peevish man, if he be denied what he expects, and very simple in his
argument in this business (about signing a warrant for paying Sir Thos.
Allen L1000 out of the groats); but we were pretty good friends before we
parted, and so we broke up and I to the writing my letters by the post,
and so home to supper and to bed.

13th.  Up, being called up by my wife's brother, for whom I have got a
commission from the Duke of Yorke for Muster-Master of one of the
divisions, of which Harman is Rere-Admirall, of which I am glad as well as
he.  After I had acquainted him with it, and discoursed a little of it, I
went forth and took him with me by coach to the Duke of Albemarle, who
being not up, I took a walk with Balty into the Parke, and to the Queene's
Chappell, it being Good Friday, where people were all upon their knees
very silent; but, it seems, no masse this day.  So back and waited on the
Duke and received some commands of his, and so by coach to Mr. Hales's,
where it is pretty strange to see that his second doing, I mean the second
time of her sitting, is less like Mrs. Pierce than the first, and yet I am
confident will be most like her, for he is so curious that I do not see
how it is possible for him to mistake.  Here he and I presently resolved
of going to White Hall, to spend an houre in the galleries there among the
pictures, and we did so to my great satisfaction, he shewing me the
difference in the payntings, and when I come more and more to distinguish
and observe the workmanship, I do not find so many good things as I
thought there was, but yet great difference between the works of some and
others; and, while my head and judgment was full of these, I would go back
again to his house to see his pictures, and indeed, though, I think, at
first sight some difference do open, yet very inconsiderably but that I
may judge his to be very good pictures. Here we fell into discourse of my
picture, and I am for his putting out the Landskipp, though he says it is
very well done, yet I do judge it will be best without it, and so it shall
be put out, and be made a plain sky like my wife's picture, which will be
very noble.  Thence called upon an old woman in Pannier Ally to agree for
ruling of some paper for me and she will do it pretty cheap.  Here I found
her have a very comely black mayde to her servant, which I liked very
well.  So home to dinner and to see my joiner do the bench upon my leads
to my great content.  After dinner I abroad to carry paper to my old
woman, and so to Westminster Hall, and there beyond my intention or design
did see and speak with Betty Howlett, at her father's still, and it seems
they carry her to her own house to begin the world with her young husband
on Monday next, Easter Monday.  I please myself with the thoughts of her
neighbourhood, for I love the girl mightily.  Thence home, and thither
comes Mr. Houblon and a brother, with whom I evened for the charter
parties of their ships for Tangier, and paid them the third advance on
their freight to full satisfaction, and so, they being gone, comes Creed
and with him till past one in the morning, evening his accounts till my
head aked and I was fit for nothing, however, coming at last luckily to
see through and settle all to my mind, it did please me mightily, and so
with my mind at rest to bed, and he with me and hard to sleep.

14th.  Up about seven and finished our papers, he and I, and I delivered
him tallys and some money and so away I to the office, where we sat all
the morning.  At noon dined at home and Creed with me, then parted, and I
to the office, and anon called thence by Sir H. Cholmley and he and I to
my chamber, and there settled our matters of accounts, and did give him
tallys and money to clear him, and so he being gone and all these accounts
cleared I shall be even with the King, so as to make a very clear and
short account in a very few days, which pleases me very well. Here he and
I discoursed a great while about Tangier, and he do convince me, as things
are now ordered by my Lord Bellasses and will be by Norwood (men that do
only mind themselves), the garrison will never come to any thing, and he
proposes his owne being governor, which in truth I do think will do very
well, and that he will bring it to something.  He gone I to my office,
where to write letters late, and then home and looked over a little more
my papers of accounts lately passed, and so to bed.

15th (Easter Day).  Up and by water to Westminster to the Swan to lay down
my cloak, and there found Sarah alone, with whom after I had staid awhile
I to White Hall Chapel, and there coming late could hear nothing of the
Bishop of London's sermon.  So walked into the Park to the Queene's
chappell, and there heard a good deal of their mass, and some of their
musique, which is not so contemptible, I think, as our people would make
it, it pleasing me very well; and, indeed, better than the anthem I heard
afterwards at White Hall, at my coming back.  I staid till the King went
down to receive the Sacrament, and stood in his closett with a great many
others, and there saw him receive it, which I did never see the manner of
before.  But I do see very little difference between the degree of the
ceremonies used by our people in the administration thereof, and that in
the Roman church, saving that methought our Chappell was not so fine, nor
the manner of doing it so glorious, as it was in the Queene's chappell.
Thence walked to Mr. Pierces, and there dined, I alone with him and her
and their children: very good company and good discourse, they being able
to tell me all the businesses of the Court; the amours and the mad doings
that are there; how for certain Mrs. Stewart do do everything with the
King that a mistress should do; and that the King hath many bastard
children that are known and owned, besides the Duke of Monmouth.  After a
great deale of this discourse I walked thence into the Parke with her
little boy James with me, who is the wittiest boy and the best company in
the world, and so back again through White Hall both coming and going, and
people did generally take him to be my boy and some would aske me.  Thence
home to Mr. Pierce again; and he being gone forth, she and I and the
children out by coach to Kensington, to where we were the other day, and
with great pleasure stayed till night; and were mighty late getting home,
the horses tiring and stopping at every twenty steps. By the way we
discoursed of Mrs. Clerke, who, she says, is grown mighty high, fine, and
proud, but tells me an odd story how Captain Rolt did see her the other
day accost a gentleman in Westminster Hall and went with him, and he
dogged them to Moorefields to a little blind bawdy house, and there staid
watching three hours and they come not out, so could stay no longer but
left them there, and he is sure it was she, he knowing her well and
describing her very clothes to Mrs. Pierce, which she knows are what she
wears.  Seeing them well at home I homeward, but the horses at Ludgate
Hill made a final stop; so there I 'lighted, and with a linke, it being
about 10 o'clock, walked home, and after singing a Psalm or two and supped
to bed.

16th.  Up, and set my people, Mercer, W. Hewer, Tom and the girle at work
at ruling and stitching my ruled book for the Muster-Masters, and I hard
toward the settling of my Tangier accounts.  At noon dined alone, the girl
Mercer taking physique can eat nothing, and W. Hewer went forth to dinner.
So up to my accounts again, and then comes Mrs. Mercer and fair Mrs.
Turner, a neighbour of hers that my wife knows by their means, to visit
me.  I staid a great while with them, being taken with this pretty woman,
though a mighty silly, affected citizen woman she is.  Then I left them to
come to me at supper anon, and myself out by coach to the old woman in
Pannyer Alley for my ruled papers, and they are done, and I am much more
taken with her black maid Nan.  Thence further to Westminster, thinking to
have met Mrs. Martin, but could not find her, so back and called at
Kirton's to borrow 10s. to pay for my ruled papers, I having not money in
my pocket enough to pay for them.  But it was a pretty consideration that
on this occasion I was considering where I could with most confidence in a
time of need borrow 10s., and I protest I could not tell where to do it
and with some trouble and fear did aske it here.  So that God keepe me
from want, for I shall be in a very bad condition to helpe myself if ever
I should come to want or borrow.  Thence called for my papers and so home,
and there comes Mrs. Turner and Mercer and supped with me, and well
pleased I was with their company, but especially Mrs. Turner's, she being
a very pretty woman of person and her face pretty good, the colour of her
haire very fine and light.  They staid with me talking till about eleven
o'clock and so home, W. Hewer, who supped with me, leading them home.  So
I to bed.

17th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning.  At noon dined at
home, my brother Balty with me, who is fitting himself to go to sea.  So
after dinner to my accounts and did proceed a good way in settling them,
and thence to the office, where all the afternoon late, writing my letters
and doing business, but, Lord! what a conflict I had with myself, my heart
tempting me 1000 times to go abroad about some pleasure or other,
notwithstanding the weather foule.  However I reproached myself with my
weaknesse in yielding so much my judgment to my sense, and prevailed with
difficulty and did not budge, but stayed within, and, to my great content,
did a great deale of business, and so home to supper and to bed.  This day
I am told that Moll Davis, the pretty girle, that sang and danced so well
at the Duke's house, is dead.

18th.  [Up] and by coach with Sir W. Batten and Sir Thos. Allen to White
Hall, and there after attending the Duke as usual and there concluding of
many things preparatory to the Prince and Generall's going to sea on
Monday next, Sir W. Batten and Sir T. Allen and I to Mr. Lilly's, the
painter's; and there saw the heads, some finished, and all begun, of the
Flaggmen in the late great fight with the Duke of Yorke against the Dutch.
The Duke of Yorke hath them done to hang in his chamber, and very finely
they are done indeed.  Here is the Prince's, Sir G. Askue's, Sir Thomas
Teddiman's, Sir Christopher Mings, Sir Joseph Jordan, Sir William
Barkeley, Sir Thomas Allen, and Captain Harman's, as also the Duke of
Albemarle's; and will be my Lord Sandwich's, Sir W. Pen's, and Sir Jeremy
Smith's.  Being very well satisfied with this sight, and other good
pictures hanging in the house, we parted, and I left them, and [to] pass
away a little time went to the printed picture seller's in the way thence
to the Exchange, and there did see great plenty of fine prints; but did
not buy any, only a print of an old pillar in Rome made for a Navall
Triumph,

     [The columna rostrata erected in the Forum to C. Duilius, who
     obtained a triumph for the first naval victory over the
     Carthaginians, B.C. 261.  Part of the column was discovered in the
     ruins of the Forum near the Arch of Septimius, and transferred to
     the Capitol.--B.]

which for the antiquity of the shape of ships, I buy and keepe.  Thence to
the Exchange, that is, the New Exchange, and looked over some play books
and intend to get all the late new plays.  So to Westminster, and there at
the Swan got a bit of meat and dined alone; and so away toward King's
Street, and spying out of my coach Jane that lived heretofore at Jevons,
my barber's, I went a little further and stopped, and went on foot back,
and overtook her, taking water at Westminster Bridge, and spoke to her,
and she telling me whither she was going I over the water and met her at
Lambeth, and there drank with her; she telling me how he that was so long
her servant, did prove to be a married man, though her master told me
(which she denies) that he had lain with her several times in his house.
There left her 'sans essayer alcune cose con elle', and so away by boat to
the 'Change, and took coach and to Mr. Hales, where he would have
persuaded me to have had the landskipp stand in my picture, but I like it
not and will have it otherwise, which I perceive he do not like so well,
however is so civil as to say it shall be altered.  Thence away to Mrs.
Pierces, who was not at home, but gone to my house to visit me with Mrs.
Knipp.  I therefore took up the little girle Betty and my mayde Mary that
now lives there and to my house, where they had been but were gone, so in
our way back again met them coming back again to my house in Cornehill,
and there stopped laughing at our pretty misfortunes, and so I carried
them to Fish Streete, and there treated them with prawns and lobsters, and
it beginning to grow darke we away, but the jest is our horses would not
draw us up the Hill, but we were fain to 'light and stay till the coachman
had made them draw down to the bottom of the Hill, thereby warming their
legs, and then they came up cheerfully enough, and we got up and I carried
them home, and coming home called at my paper ruler's and there found
black Nan, which pleases me mightily, and having saluted her again and
again away home and to bed .  .  .  .  .  In all my ridings in the coach
and intervals my mind hath been full these three weeks of setting in
musique "It is decreed, &c."

19th.  Lay long in bed, so to the office, where all the morning.  At noon
dined with Sir W. Warren at the Pope's Head.  So back to the office, and
there met with the Commissioners of the Ordnance, where Sir W. Pen being
almost drunk vexed me, and the more because Mr. Chichly observed it with
me, and it was a disparagement to the office.  They gone I to my office.
Anon comes home my wife from Brampton, not looked for till Saturday, which
will hinder me of a little pleasure, but I am glad of her coming. She
tells me Pall's business with Ensum is like to go on, but I must give, and
she consents to it, another 100. She says she doubts my father is in want
of money, for rents come in mighty slowly.  My mother grows very
unpleasant and troublesome and my father mighty infirm through his old
distemper, which altogether makes me mighty thoughtfull.  Having heard all
this and bid her welcome I to the office, where late, and so home, and
after a little more talk with my wife, she to bed and I after her.

20th.  Up, and after an houre or two's talke with my poor wife, who gives
me more and more content every day than other, I abroad by coach to
Westminster, and there met with Mrs. Martin, and she and I over the water
to Stangold, and after a walke in the fields to the King's Head, and there
spent an houre or two with pleasure with her, and eat a tansy and so
parted, and I to the New Exchange, there to get a list of all the modern
plays which I intend to collect and to have them bound up together.
Thence to Mr. Hales's, and there, though against his particular mind, I
had my landskipp done out, and only a heaven made in the roome of it,
which though it do not please me thoroughly now it is done, yet it will do
better than as it was before.  Thence to Paul's Churchyarde, and there
bespoke some new books, and so to my ruling woman's and there did see my
work a doing, and so home and to my office a little, but was hindered of
business I intended by being sent for to Mrs. Turner, who desired some
discourse with me and lay her condition before me, which is bad and poor.
Sir Thomas Harvey intends again to have lodgings in her house, which she
prays me to prevent if I can, which I promised.  Thence to talke generally
of our neighbours.  I find she tells me the faults of all of them, and
their bad words of me and my wife, and indeed do discover more than I
thought.  So I told her, and so will practise that I will have nothing to
do with any of them.  She ended all with a promise of shells to my wife,
very fine ones indeed, and seems to have great respect and honour for my
wife.  So home and to bed.

21st. Up betimes and to the office, there to prepare some things against
the afternoon for discourse about the business of the pursers and settling
the pursers' matters of the fleete according to my proposition. By and by
the office sat, and they being up I continued at the office to finish my
matters against the meeting before the Duke this afternoon, so home about
three to clap a bit of meate in my mouth, and so away with Sir W. Batten
to White Hall, and there to the Duke, but he being to go abroad to take
the ayre, he dismissed us presently without doing any thing till to-morrow
morning.  So my Lord Bruncker and I down to walk in the garden [at White
Hall], it being a mighty hot and pleasant day; and there was the King,
who, among others, talked to us a little; and among other pretty things,
he swore merrily that he believed the ketch that Sir W. Batten bought the
last year at Colchester was of his own getting, it was so thick to its
length.  Another pleasant thing he said of Christopher Pett, commending
him that he will not alter his moulds of his ships upon any man's advice;
"as," says he, "Commissioner Taylor I fear do of his New London, that he
makes it differ, in hopes of mending the Old London, built by him."
"For," says he, "he finds that God hath put him into the right, and so
will keep in it while he is in."  "And," says the King, "I am sure it must
be God put him in, for no art of his owne ever could have done it;" for it
seems he cannot give a good account of what he do as an artist.  Thence
with my Lord Bruncker in his coach to Hide Parke, the first time I have
been there this year.  There the King was; but I was sorry to see my Lady
Castlemaine, for the mourning forceing all the ladies to go in black, with
their hair plain and without any spots, I find her to be a much more
ordinary woman than ever I durst have thought she was; and, indeed, is not
so pretty as Mrs. Stewart, whom I saw there also.  Having done at the Park
he set me down at the Exchange, and I by coach home and there to my
letters, and they being done, to writing a large letter about the business
of the pursers to Sir W. Batten against to-morrow's discourse, and so home
and to bed.

22nd (Lord's day).  Up, and put on my new black coate, long down to my
knees, and with Sir W. Batten to White Hall, where all in deep mourning
for the Queene's mother.  There had great discourse, before the Duke and
Sir W. Coventry begun the discourse of the day about the purser's
business, which I seconded, and with great liking to the Duke, whom
however afterward my Lord Bruncker and Sir W. Pen did stop by some thing
they said, though not much to the purpose, yet because our proposition had
some appearance of certain charge to the King it was ruled that for this
year we should try another the same in every respect with ours, leaving
out one circumstance of allowing the pursers the victuals of all men short
of the complement.  I was very well satisfied with it and am contented to
try it, wishing it may prove effectual.  Thence away with Sir W. Batten in
his coach home, in our way he telling me the certaine newes, which was
afterward confirmed to me this day by several, that the Bishopp of Munster
has made a league [with] the Hollanders, and that our King and Court are
displeased much at it: moreover we are not sure of Sweden.  I home to my
house, and there dined mighty well, my poor wife and Mercer and I.  So
back again walked to White Hall, and there to and again in the Parke, till
being in the shoemaker's stockes.--[A cant expression for tight shoes.]--I
was heartily weary, yet walked however to the Queene's Chappell at St.
James's, and there saw a little mayde baptized; many parts and words
whereof are the same with that of our Liturgy, and little that is more
ceremonious than ours.  Thence walked to Westminster and eat a bit of
bread and drank, and so to Worster House, and there staid, and saw the
Council up, and then back, walked to the Cockepitt, and there took my
leave of the Duke of Albemarle, who is going to-morrow to sea.  He seems
mightily pleased with me, which I am glad of; but I do find infinitely my
concernment in being careful to appear to the King and Duke to continue my
care of his business, and to be found diligent as I used to be.  Thence
walked wearily as far as Fleet Streete and so there met a coach and home
to supper and to bed, having sat a great while with Will Joyce, who come
to see me, and it is the first time I have seen him at my house since the
plague, and find him the same impertinent, prating coxcombe that ever he
was.

23rd.  Being mighty weary last night, lay long this morning, then up and
to the office, where Sir W. Batten, Lord Bruncker and I met, and toward
noon took coach and to White Hall, where I had the opportunity to take
leave of the Prince, and again of the Duke of Albemarle; and saw them kiss
the King's hands and the Duke's; and much content, indeed, there seems to
be in all people at their going to sea, and [they] promise themselves much
good from them.  This morning the House of Parliament do meet, only to
adjourne again till winter.  The plague, I hear, encreases in the towne
much, and exceedingly in the country everywhere.  Thence walked to
Westminster Hall, and after a little stay, there being nothing now left to
keep me there, Betty Howlett being gone, I took coach and away home, in my
way asking in two or three places the worth of pearles, I being now come
to the time that I have long ago promised my wife a necklace.  Dined at
home and took Balty with me to Hales's to show him his sister's picture,
and thence to Westminster, and there I to the Swan and drank, and so back
again alone to Hales's and there met my wife and Mercer, Mrs. Pierce being
sitting, and two or three idle people of her acquaintance more standing
by.  Her picture do come on well.  So staid until she had done and then
set her down at home, and my wife and I and the girle by coach to
Islington, and there eat and drank in the coach and so home, and there
find a girle sent at my desire by Mrs. Michell of Westminster Hall, to be
my girle under the cooke-mayde, Susan.  But I am a little dissatisfied
that the girle, though young, is taller and bigger than Su, and will not,
I fear, be under her command, which will trouble me, and the more because
she is recommended by a friend that I would not have any unkindness with,
but my wife do like very well of her.  So to my accounts and journall at
my chamber, there being bonfires in the streete, for being St. George's
day, and the King's Coronation, and the day of the Prince and Duke's going
to sea.  So having done my business, to bed.

24th.  Up, and presently am told that the girle that came yesterday hath
packed up her things to be gone home again to Enfield, whence she come,
which I was glad of, that we might be at first rid of her altogether
rather than be liable to her going away hereafter.  The reason was that
London do not agree with her.  So I did give her something, and away she
went.  By and by comes Mr. Bland to me, the first time since his coming
from Tangier, and tells me, in short, how all things are out of order
there, and like to be; and the place never likely to come to anything
while the soldiers govern all, and do not encourage trade.  He gone I to
the office, where all the morning, and so to dinner, and there in the
afternoon very busy all day till late, and so home to supper and to bed.

25th.  Up, and to White Hall to the Duke as usual, and did our business
there.  So I away to Westminster (Batty with me, whom I had presented to
Sir W. Coventry) and there told Mrs. Michell of her kinswoman's running
away, which troubled her.  So home, and there find another little girle
come from my wife's mother, likely to do well.  After dinner I to the
office, where Mr. Prin come to meet about the Chest business; and till
company come, did discourse with me a good while alone in the garden about
the laws of England, telling me the many faults in them; and among others,
their obscurity through multitude of long statutes, which he is about to
abstract out of all of a sort; and as he lives, and Parliaments come, get
them put into laws, and the other statutes repealed, and then it will be a
short work to know the law, which appears a very noble good thing.  By and
by Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Rider met with us, and we did something to
purpose about the Chest, and hope we shall go on to do so. They up, I to
present Batty to Sir W. Pen, who at my entreaty did write a most obliging
letter to Harman to use him civilly, but the dissembling of the rogue is
such, that it do not oblige me at all.  So abroad to my ruler's of my
books, having, God forgive me! a mind to see Nan there, which I did, and
so back again, and then out again to see Mrs. Bettons, who were looking
out of the window as I come through Fenchurch Streete. So that indeed I am
not, as I ought to be, able to command myself in the pleasures of my eye.
So home, and with my wife and Mercer spent our evening upon our new leads
by our bedchamber singing, while Mrs. Mary Batelier looked out of the
window to us, and we talked together, and at last bid good night.
However, my wife and I staid there talking of several things with great
pleasure till eleven o'clock at night, and it is a convenience I would not
want for any thing in the world, it being, methinks, better than almost
any roome in my house.  So having, supped upon the leads, to bed.  The
plague, blessed be God! is decreased sixteen this week.

26th.  To the office, where all the morning.  At noon home to dinner, and
in the afternoon to my office again, where very busy all the afternoon and
particularly about fitting of Mr. Yeabsly's accounts for the view of the
Lords Commissioners for Tangier.  At night home to supper and to bed.

27th.  Up (taking Balty with me, who lay at my house last [night] in order
to his going away to-day to sea with the pursers of the Henery, whom I
appointed to call him), abroad to many several places about several
businesses, to my Lord Treasurer's, Westminster, and I know not where.  At
noon to the 'Change a little, and there bespoke some maps to hang in my
new roome (my boy's roome) which will be very-pretty.  Home to dinner, and
after dinner to the hanging up of maps, and other things for the fitting
of the roome, and now it will certainly be one of the handsomest and most
usefull roomes in my house.  So that what with this room and the room on
my leads my house is half as good again as it was. All this afternoon
about this till I was so weary and it was late I could do no more but
finished the room.  So I did not get out to the office all the day long.
At night spent a good deale of time with my wife and Mercer teaching them
a song, and so after supper to bed.

28th.  Up and to the office.  At noon dined at home.  After dinner abroad
with my wife to Hales's to see only our pictures and Mrs. Pierce's, which
I do not think so fine as I might have expected it.  My wife to her
father's, to carry him some ruling work, which I have advised her to let
him do.  It will get him some money.  She also is to look out again for
another little girle, the last we had being also gone home the very same
day she came.  She was also to look after a necklace of pearle, which she
is mighty busy about, I being contented to lay out L80 in one for her. I
home to my business.  By and by comes my wife and presently after, the
tide serving, Balty took leave of us, going to sea, and upon very good
terms, to be Muster-Master of a squadron, which will be worth L100 this
yeare to him, besides keeping him the benefit of his pay in the Guards. He
gone, I very busy all the afternoon till night, among other things,
writing a letter to my brother John, the first I have done since my being
angry with him, and that so sharpe a one too that I was sorry almost to
send it when I had wrote it, but it is preparatory to my being kind to
him, and sending for him up hither when he hath passed his degree of
Master of Arts.  So home to supper and to bed.

29th (Lord's day).  Up, and to church, where Mr. Mills, a lazy, simple
sermon upon the Devil's having no right to any thing in this world.  So
home to dinner, and after dinner I and my boy down by water to Redriffe
and thence walked to Mr. Evelyn's, where I walked in his garden till he
come from Church, with great pleasure reading Ridly's discourse, all my
way going and coming, upon the Civill and Ecclesiastical Law.  He being
come home, he and I walked together in the garden with mighty pleasure, he
being a very ingenious man; and the more I know him, the more I love him.
His chief business with me was to propose having my cozen Thomas Pepys in
Commission of the Peace, which I do not know what to say to till I speake
with him, but should be glad of it and will put him upon it. Thence walked
back again reading and so took water and home, where I find my uncle and
aunt Wight, and supped with them upon my leads with mighty pleasure and
mirthe, and they being gone I mighty weary to bed, after having my haire
of my head cut shorter, even close to my skull, for coolnesse, it being
mighty hot weather.

30th.  Up and, being ready, to finish my journall for four days past.  To
the office, where busy all the morning.  At noon dined alone, my wife gone
abroad to conclude about her necklace of pearle.  I after dinner to even
all my accounts of this month; and, bless God!  I find myself,
notwithstanding great expences of late; viz. L80 now to pay for a
necklace; near L40 for a set of chairs and couch; near L40 for my three
pictures: yet I do gather, and am now worth L5200.  My wife comes home by
and by, and hath pitched upon a necklace with three rows, which is a very
good one, and L80 is the price.  In the evening, having finished my
accounts to my full content and joyed that I have evened them so plainly,
remembering the trouble my last accounts did give me by being let alone a
little longer than ordinary, by which I am to this day at a loss for L50,
I hope I shall never commit such an error again, for I cannot devise where
the L50 should be, but it is plain I ought to be worth L50 more than I am,
and blessed be God the error was no greater.  In the evening with my
[wife] and Mercer by coach to take the ayre as far as Bow, and eat and
drank in the coach by the way and with much pleasure and pleased with my
company.  At night home and up to the leads, but were contrary to
expectation driven down again with a stinke by Sir W. Pen's shying of a
shitten pot in their house of office close by, which do trouble me for
fear it do hereafter annoy me.  So down to sing a little and then to bed.
So ends this month with great layings-out.  Good health and gettings, and
advanced well in the whole of my estate, for which God make me thankful.

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     Ashamed at myself for this losse of time
     Begun to write idle and from the purpose
     Counterfeit mirthe and pleasure with them, but had but little
     Driven down again with a stinke by Sir W. Pen's shying of a pot
     Great newes of the Swedes declaring for us against the Dutch
     He has been inconvenienced by being too free in discourse
     Mass, and some of their musique, which is not so contemptible
     Reading over my dear "Faber fortunae," of my Lord Bacon's
     Thence to Mrs. Martin's, and did what I would with her
     Through want of money and good conduct
     Too late for them to enjoy it with any pleasure
     Tooke my wife well dressed into the Hall to see and be seen


                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                MAY & JUNE
                                  1666

May 1st.  Up, and all the morning at the office.  At noon, my cozen Thomas
Pepys did come to me, to consult about the business of his being a justice
of the Peace, which he is much against; and among other reasons, tells me,
as a confidant, that he is not free to exercise punishment according to
the Act against Quakers and other people, for religion.  Nor do he
understand Latin, and so is not capable of the place as formerly, now all
warrants do run in Latin.  Nor is he in Kent, though he be of Deptford
parish, his house standing in Surry.  However, I did bring him to incline
towards it, if he be pressed to take it.  I do think it may be some repute
to me to have my kinsman in Commission there, specially if he behave
himself to content in the country.  He gone and my wife gone abroad, I out
also to and fro, to see and be seen, among others to find out in Thames
Streete where Betty Howlett is come to live, being married to Mrs.
Michell's son; which I did about the Old Swan, but did not think fit to go
thither or see them.  Thence by water to Redriffe, reading a new French
book my Lord Bruncker did give me to-day, "L'Histoire Amoureuse des
Gaules,"

     [This book, which has frequently been reprinted, was written by
     Roger de Rabutin, Comte de Bussy, for the amusement of his mistress,
     Madame de Montglas, and consists of sketches of the chief ladies of
     the court, in which he libelled friends and foes alike.  These
     circulated in manuscript, and were printed at Liege in 1665.  Louis
     XIV. was so much annoyed with the book that he sent the author to
     the Bastille for over a year.]

being a pretty libel against the amours of the Court of France.  I walked
up and down Deptford yarde, where I had not been since I come from living
at Greenwich, which is some months.  There I met with Mr. Castle, and was
forced against my will to have his company back with me.  So we walked and
drank at Halfway house and so to his house, where I drank a cupp of syder,
and so home, where I find Mr. Norbury newly come to town to see us.  After
he gone my wife tells me the ill newes that our Susan is sicke and gone to
bed, with great pain in her head and back, which troubles us all.  However
we to bed expecting what to-morrow would produce.  She hath we conceive
wrought a little too much, having neither maid nor girle to help her.

2nd.  Up and find the girle better, which we are glad of, and with Sir W.
Batten to White Hall by coach.  There attended the Duke as usual.  Thence
with Captain Cocke, whom I met there, to London, to my office, to consult
about serving him in getting him some money, he being already tired of his
slavery to my Lord Bruncker, and the charge it costs him, and gets no
manner of courtesy from him for it.  He gone I home to dinner, find the
girle yet better, so no fear of being forced to send her out of doors as
we intended.  After dinner.  I by water to White Hall to a Committee for
Tangier upon Mr. Yeabsly's business, which I got referred to a Committee
to examine.  Thence among other stops went to my ruler's house, and there
staid a great while with Nan idling away the afternoon with pleasure.  By
and by home, so to my office a little, and then home to supper with my
wife, the girle being pretty well again, and then to bed.

3rd.  Up, and all the morning at the office.  At noon home, and contrary
to my expectation find my little girle Su worse than she was, which
troubled me, and the more to see my wife minding her paynting and not
thinking of her house business, this being the first day of her beginning
the second time to paynt.  This together made me froward that I was angry
with my wife, and would not have Browne to think to dine at my table with
me always, being desirous to have my house to myself without a stranger
and a mechanique to be privy to all my concernments.  Upon this my wife
and I had a little disagreement, but it ended by and by, and then to send
up and down for a nurse to take the girle home and would have given
anything.  I offered to the only one that we could get 20s. per weeke, and
we to find clothes, and bedding and physique, and would have given 30s.,
as demanded, but desired an houre or two's time.  So I away by water to
Westminster, and there sent for the girle's mother to Westminster Hall to
me; she came and undertakes to get her daughter a lodging and nurse at
next doore to her, though she dare not, for the parish's sake, whose
sexton her husband is, to [have] her into her owne house.  Thence home,
calling at my bookseller's and other trifling places, and in the evening
the mother come and with a nurse she has got, who demanded and I did agree
at 10s. per weeke to take her, and so she away, and my house mighty
uncouth, having so few in it, and we shall want a servant or two by it,
and the truth is my heart was a little sad all the afternoon and jealous
of myself.  But she went, and we all glad of it, and so a little to the
office, and so home to supper and to bed.

4th.  Up and by water to Westminster to Charing Cross (Mr. Gregory for
company with me) to Sir Ph. Warwicke's, who was not within.  So I took
Gregory to White Hall, and there spoke with Joseph Williamson to have
leave in the next Gazette to have a general pay for the Chest at Chatham
declared upon such a day in June.  Here I left Gregory, and I by coach
back again to Sir Philip Warwicke's, and in the Park met him walking, so
discoursed about the business of striking a quarter's tallys for Tangier,
due this day, which he hath promised to get my Lord Treasurer's warrant
for, and so away hence, and to Mr. Hales, to see what he had done to Mrs.
Pierces picture, and whatever he pretends, I do not think it will ever be
so good a picture as my wife's.  Thence home to the office a little and
then to dinner, and had a great fray with my wife again about Browne's
coming to teach her to paynt, and sitting with me at table, which I will
not yield to.  I do thoroughly believe she means no hurte in it; but very
angry we were, and I resolved all into my having my will done, without
disputing, be the reason what it will; and so I will have it.  After
dinner abroad again and to the New Exchange about play books, and to White
Hall, thinking to have met Sir G. Carteret, but failed.  So to the Swan at
Westminster, and there spent a quarter of an hour with Jane, and thence
away home, and my wife coming home by and by (having been at her mother's
to pray her to look out for a mayde for her) by coach into the fields to
Bow, and so home back in the evening, late home, and after supper to bed,
being much out of order for lack of somebody in the room of Su.  This
evening, being weary of my late idle courses, and the little good I shall
do the King or myself in the office, I bound myself to very strict rules
till Whitsunday next.

5th.  At the office all the morning.  After dinner upon a letter from the
fleete from Sir W. Coventry I did do a great deale of worke for the
sending away of the victuallers that are in the river, &c., too much to
remember.  Till 10 at night busy about letters and other necessary matter
of the office.  About 11 home, it being a fine moonshine and so my wife
and Mercer come into the garden, and, my business being done, we sang till
about twelve at night, with mighty pleasure to ourselves and neighbours,
by their casements opening, and so home to supper and to bed.

6th (Lord's day).  To church.  Home, and after dinner walked to White
Hall, thinking to have seen Mr. Coventry, but failed, and therefore walked
clear on foot back again.  Busy till night in fitting my Victualling
papers in order, which I through my multitude of business and pleasure
have not examined these several months.  Walked back again home, and so to
the Victualling Office, where I met Mr. Gawden, and have received some
satisfaction, though it be short of what I expected, and what might be
expected from me.  So after evened I have gone, and so to supper and to
bed.

7th.  Up betimes to set my Victualling papers in order against Sir W.
Coventry comes, which indeed makes me very melancholy, being conscious
that I am much to seeke in giving a good answer to his queries about the
Victualling business.  At the office mighty busy, and brought myself into
a pretty plausible condition before Sir W. Coventry come, and did give him
a pretty tolerable account of every thing and went with him into the
Victualling office, where we sat and examined his businesses and state of
the victualling of the fleete, which made me in my heart blushe that I
could say no more to it than I did or could.  But I trust in God I shall
never be in that condition again.  We parted, and I with pretty good
grace, and so home to dinner, where my wife troubled more and more with
her swollen cheek.  So to dinner, my sister-in-law with us, who I find
more and more a witty woman; and then I to my Lord Treasurer's and the
Exchequer about my Tangier businesses, and with my content passed by all
things and persons without so much as desiring any stay or loss of time
with them, being by strong vowe obliged on no occasion to stay abroad but
my publique offices.  So home again, where I find Mrs. Pierce and Mrs.
Ferrers come to see my wife.  I staid a little with them, being full of
business, and so to the office, where busy till late at night and so weary
and a little conscious of my failures to-day, yet proud that the day is
over without more observation on Sir W. Coventry's part, and so to bed and
to sleepe soundly.

8th.  Up, and to the office all the morning.  At noon dined at home, my
wife's cheek bad still.  After dinner to the office again and thither
comes Mr. Downing, the anchor-smith, who had given me 50 pieces in gold
the last month to speake for him to Sir W. Coventry, for his being smith
at Deptford; but after I had got it granted to him, he finds himself not
fit to go on with it, so lets it fall.  So has no benefit of my motion. I
therefore in honour and conscience took him home the money, and, though
much to my grief, did yet willingly and forcibly force him to take it
again, the poor man having no mind to have it.  However, I made him take
it, and away he went, and I glad to have given him so much cause to speake
well of me.  So to my office again late, and then home to supper to a good
lobster with my wife, and then a little to my office again, and so to bed.

9th.  Up by five o'clock, which I have not a long time done, and down the
river by water to Deptford, among other things to examine the state of
Ironworke, in order to the doing something with reference to Downing that
may induce him to returne me the 50 pieces.  Walked back again reading of
my Civill Law Book, and so home and by coach to White Hall, where we did
our usual business before the Duke, and heard the Duke commend Deane's
ship "The Rupert" before "The Defyance," built lately by Castle, in
hearing of Sir W. Batten, which pleased me mightily.  Thence by water to
Westminster, and there looked after my Tangier order, and so by coach to
Mrs. Pierces, thinking to have gone to Hales's, but she was not ready, so
away home and to dinner, and after dinner out by coach to Lovett's to have
forwarded what I have doing there, but find him and his pretty wife gone
to my house to show me something.  So away to my Lord Treasurer's, and
thence to Pierces, where I find Knipp, and I took them to Hales's to see
our pictures finished, which are very pretty, but I like not hers half so
well as I thought at first, it being not so like, nor so well painted as I
expected, or as mine and my wife's are.  Thence with them to Cornhill to
call and choose a chimney-piece for Pierces closett, and so home, where my
wife in mighty pain and mightily vexed at my being abroad with these
women; and when they were gone called them whores and I know not what,
which vexed me, having been so innocent with them.  So I with them to Mrs.
Turner's and there sat with them a while, anon my wife sends for me, I
come, and what was it but to scold at me and she would go abroad to take
the ayre presently, that she would.  So I left my company and went with
her to Bow, but was vexed and spoke not one word to her all the way going
nor coming, or being come home, but went up straight to bed.  Half an hour
after (she in the coach leaning on me as being desirous to be friends) she
comes up mighty sicke with a fit of the cholique and in mighty pain and
calls for me out of the bed; I rose and held her, she prays me to forgive
her, and in mighty pain we put her to bed, where the pain ceased by and
by, and so had some asparagus to our bed side for supper and very kindly
afterward to sleepe and good friends in the morning.

10th.  So up, and to the office, where all the morning.  At noon home to
dinner and there busy all the afternoon till past six o'clock, and then
abroad with my wife by coach, who is now at great ease, her cheeke being
broke inward.  We took with us Mrs. Turner, who was come to visit my wife
just as we were going out.  A great deale of tittle tattle discourse to
little purpose, I finding her, though in other things a very discreete
woman, as very a gossip speaking of her neighbours as any body.  Going out
towards Hackney by coach for the ayre, the silly coachman carries us to
Shoreditch, which was so pleasant a piece of simplicity in him and us,
that made us mighty merry.  So back again late, it being wondrous hot all
the day and night and it lightning exceeding all the way we went and came,
but without thunder.  Coming home we called at a little ale-house, and had
an eele pye, of which my wife eat part and brought home the rest. So being
come home we to supper and to bed.  This day come our new cook maid Mary,
commended by Mrs. Batters.

11th.  Up betimes, and then away with Mr. Yeabsly to my Lord Ashly's,
whither by and by comes Sir H. Cholmly and Creed, and then to my Lord, and
there entered into examination of Mr. Yeabsly's accounts, wherein as in
all other things I find him one of the most distinct men that ever I did
see in my life.  He raised many scruples which were to be answered another
day and so parted, giving me an alarme how to provide myself against the
day of my passing my accounts.  Thence I to Westminster to look after the
striking of my tallys, but nothing done or to be done therein.  So to the
'Change, to speake with Captain Cocke, among other things about getting of
the silver plates of him, which he promises to do; but in discourse he
tells me that I should beware of my fellow-officers; and by name told me
that my Lord Bruncker should say in his hearing, before Sir W. Batten, of
me, that he could undo the man, if he would; wherein I think he is a
foole; but, however, it is requisite I be prepared against the man's
friendship.  Thence home to dinner alone, my wife being abroad.  After
dinner to the setting some things in order in my dining-room; and by and
by comes my wife home and Mrs. Pierce with her, so I lost most of this
afternoon with them, and in the evening abroad with them, our long tour by
coach, to Hackney, so to Kingsland, and then to Islington, there
entertaining them by candlelight very well, and so home with her, set her
down, and so home and to bed.

12th.  Up to the office very betimes to draw up a letter for the Duke of
Yorke relating to him the badness of our condition in this office for want
of money.  That being in good time done we met at the office and there sat
all the morning.  At noon home, where I find my wife troubled still at my
checking her last night in the coach in her long stories out of Grand
Cyrus, which she would tell, though nothing to the purpose, nor in any
good manner.

     [Sir Walter Scott observes, in his "Life of Dryden," that the
     romances of Calprenede and Scuderi, those ponderous and unmerciful
     folios, now consigned to oblivion, were, in their day, not only
     universally read and admired, but supposed to furnish the most
     perfect models of gallantry and heroism.  Dr. Johnson read them all.
     "I have," says Mrs. Chapone, "and yet I am still alive, dragged
     through 'Le Grand Cyrus,' in twelve huge volumes; 'Cleopatra,' in
     eight or ten; 'Ibrahim,' 'Clelie,' and some others, whose names, as
     well as all the rest of them, I have forgotten" ("Letters to Mrs.
     Carter").  No wonder that Pepys sat on thorns, when his wife began
     to recite "Le Grand Cyrus" in the coach, "and trembled at the
     impending tale."--B.]

This she took unkindly, and I think I was to blame indeed; but she do find
with reason, that in the company of Pierce, Knipp, or other women that I
love, I do not value her, or mind her as I ought.  However very good
friends by and by, and to dinner, and after dinner up to the putting our
dining room in order, which will be clean again anon, but not as it is to
be because of the pictures which are not come home.  To the office and did
much business, in the evening to Westminster and White Hall about business
and among other things met Sir G. Downing on White Hall bridge, and there
walked half an hour, talking of the success of the late new Act; and
indeed it is very much, that that hath stood really in the room of
L800,000 now since Christmas, being itself but L1,250,000.  And so I do
really take it to be a very considerable thing done by him; for the
beginning, end, and every part of it, is to be imputed to him.  So home by
water, and there hard till 12 at night at work finishing the great letter
to the Duke of Yorke against to-morrow morning, and so home to bed.  This
day come home again my little girle Susan, her sicknesse proving an ague,
and she had a fit soon almost as she come home.  The fleete is not yet
gone from the Nore.  The plague encreases in many places, and is 53 this
week with us.

13th (Lord's day).  Up, and walked to White Hall, where we all met to
present a letter to the Duke of Yorke, complaining solemnly of the want of
money, and that being done, I to and again up and down Westminster,
thinking to have spent a little time with Sarah at the Swan, or Mrs.
Martin, but was disappointed in both, so walked the greatest part of the
way home, where comes Mr. Symons, my old acquaintance, to dine with me,
and I made myself as good company as I could to him, but he was mighty
impertinent methought too yet, and thereby I see the difference between
myself now and what it was heretofore, when I reckoned him a very brave
fellow.  After dinner he and I walked together as far as Cheapside, and I
quite through to Westminster again, and fell by chance into St. Margett's'
Church, where I heard a young man play the foole upon the doctrine of
purgatory.  At this church I spied Betty Howlett, who indeed is mighty
pretty, and struck me mightily.  After church time, standing in the Church
yarde, she spied me, so I went to her, her father and mother and husband
being with her.  They desired and I agreed to go home with Mr. Michell,
and there had the opportunity to have saluted two or three times Betty and
make an acquaintance which they are pleased with, though not so much as I
am or they think I am.  I staid here an houre or more chatting with them
in a little sorry garden of theirs by the Bowling Alley, and so left them
and I by water home, and there was in great pain in mind lest Sir W. Pen,
who is going down to the Fleete, should come to me or send for me to be
informed in the state of things, and particularly the Victualling, that by
my pains he might seem wise.  So after spending an houre with my wife
pleasantly in her closett, I to bed even by daylight.

14th.  Comes betimes a letter from Sir W. Coventry, that he and Sir G.
Carteret are ordered presently down to the Fleete.  I up and saw Sir W.
Pen gone also after them, and so I finding it a leisure day fell to making
cleane my closett in my office, which I did to my content and set up my
Platts again, being much taken also with Griffin's mayde, that did cleane
it, being a pretty mayde.  I left her at it, and toward Westminster myself
with my wife by coach and meeting took up Mr. Lovett the varnisher with
us, who is a pleasant speaking and humoured man, so my wife much taken
with him, and a good deale of worke I believe I shall procure him.  I left
my wife at the New Exchange and myself to the Exchequer, to looke after my
Tangier tallys, and there met Sir G. Downing, who shewed me his present
practise now begun this day to paste up upon the Exchequer door a note of
what orders upon the new Act are paid and now in paying, and my Lord of
Oxford coming by, also took him, and shewed him his whole method of
keeping his books, and everything of it, which indeed is very pretty, and
at this day there is assigned upon the Act L804,000.  Thence at the New
Exchange took up my wife again, and so home to dinner, and after dinner to
my office again to set things in order.  In the evening out with my wife
and my aunt Wight, to take the ayre, and happened to have a pleasant race
between our hackney-coach and a gentleman's.  At Bow we eat and drank and
so back again, it being very cool in the evening.  Having set home my aunt
and come home, I fell to examine my wife's kitchen book, and find 20s.
mistake, which made me mighty angry and great difference between us, and
so in the difference to bed.

15th.  Up and to the office, where we met and sat all the morning.  At
noon home to dinner, and after dinner by coach to Sir Philip Warwicke's,
he having sent for me, but was not within, so I to my Lord Crew's, who is
very lately come to towne, and with him talking half an houre of the
business of the warr, wherein he is very doubtful, from our want of money,
that we shall fail.  And I do concur with him therein.  After some little
discourse of ordinary matters, I away to Sir Philip Warwicke's again, and
was come in, and gone out to my Lord Treasurer's; whither I followed him,
and there my business was, to be told that my Lord Treasurer hath got
L10,000 for us in the Navy, to answer our great necessities, which I did
thank him for; but the sum is not considerable. So home, and there busy
all the afternoon till night, and then home to supper and to bed.

16th.  Up very betimes, and so down the river to Deptford to look after
some business, being by and by to attend the Duke and Mr. Coventry, and so
I was wiling to carry something fresh that I may look as a man minding
business, which I have done too much for a great while to forfeit, and is
now so great a burden upon my mind night and day that I do not enjoy
myself in the world almost.  I walked thither, and come back again by
water, and so to White Hall, and did our usual business before the Duke,
and so to the Exchequer, where the lazy rogues have not yet done my
tallys, which vexes me.  Thence to Mr. Hales, and paid him for my picture,
and Mr. Hill's, for the first L14 for the picture, and 25s. for the frame,
and for the other L7 for the picture, it being a copy of his only, and 5s.
for the frame; in all, L22 10s.  I am very well satisfied in my pictures,
and so took them in another coach home along with me, and there with great
pleasure my wife and I hung them up, and, that being done, to dinner,
where Mrs. Barbara Sheldon come to see us and dined with us, and we kept
her all the day with us, I going down to Deptford, and, Lord! to see with
what itching desire I did endeavour to see Bagwell's wife, but failed, for
which I am glad, only I observe the folly of my mind that cannot refrain
from pleasure at a season above all others in my life requisite for me to
shew my utmost care in.  I walked both going and coming, spending my time
reading of my Civill and Ecclesiastical Law book.  Being returned home, I
took my wife and Mrs. Barbary and Mercer out by coach and went our Grand
Tour, and baited at Islington, and so late home about 11 at night, and so
with much pleasure to bed.

17th.  Up, lying long, being wearied yesterday with long walking.  So to
the office, where all the morning with fresh occasion of vexing at myself
for my late neglect of business, by which I cannot appear half so usefull
as I used to do.  Home at noon to dinner, and then to my office again,
where I could not hold my eyes open for an houre, but I drowsed (so little
sensible I apprehend my soul is of the necessity of minding business), but
I anon wakened and minded my business, and did a great deale with very
great pleasure, and so home at night to supper and to bed, mightily
pleased with myself for the business that I have done, and convinced that
if I would but keepe constantly to do the same I might have leisure enough
and yet do all my business, and by the grace of God so I will.  So to bed.

18th.  Up by 5 o'clock, and so down by water to Deptford and Blackewall to
dispatch some business.  So walked to Dickeshoare, and there took boat
again and home, and thence to Westminster, and attended all the morning on
the Exchequer for a quarter's tallys for Tangier.  But, Lord! to see what
a dull, heavy sort of people they are there would make a man mad. At noon
had them and carried them home, and there dined with great content with my
people, and within and at the office all the afternoon and night, and so
home to settle some papers there, and so to bed, being not very well,
having eaten too much lobster at noon at dinner with Mr. Hollyard, he
coming in and commending it so much.

19th.  Up, and to the office all the morning.  At noon took Mr. Deane
(lately come to towne) home with me to dinner, and there after giving him
some reprimands and good advice about his deportment in the place where by
my interest he is at Harwich, and then declaring my resolution of being
his friend still, we did then fall to discourse about his ship "Rupert,"
built by him there, which succeeds so well as he hath got great honour by
it, and I some by recommending him; the King, Duke, and every body saying
it is the best ship that was ever built.  And then he fell to explain to
me his manner of casting the draught of water which a ship will draw
before-hand: which is a secret the King and all admire in him; and he is
the first that hath come to any certainty before-hand, of foretelling the
draught of water of a ship before she be launched.  I must confess I am
much pleased in his successe in this business, and do admire at the
confidence of Castle who did undervalue the draught Deane sent up to me,
that I was ashamed to owne it or him, Castle asking of me upon the first
sight of it whether he that laid it down had ever built a ship or no,
which made me the more doubtfull of him.  He being gone, I to the office,
where much business and many persons to speake with me.  Late home and to
bed, glad to be at a little quiett.

20th (Lord's day).  With my wife to church in the morning.  At noon dined
mighty nobly, ourselves alone.  After dinner my wife and Mercer by coach
to Greenwich, to be gossip to Mrs. Daniel's child.  I out to Westminster,
and straight to Mrs. Martin's, and there did what I would with her, she
staying at home all the day for me; and not being well pleased with her
over free and loose company, I away to Westminster Abbey, and there fell
in discourse with Mr. Blagrave, whom I find a sober politique man, that
gets money and increase of places, and thence by coach home, and thence by
water after I had discoursed awhile with Mr. Yeabsly, whom I met and took
up in my coach with me, and who hath this day presented my Lord Ashly with
L100 to bespeak his friendship to him in his accounts now before us; and
my Lord hath received it, and so I believe is as bad, as to bribes, as
what the world says of him.  Calling on all the Victualling ships to know
what they had of their complements, and so to Deptford, to enquire after a
little business there, and thence by water back again, all the way coming
and going reading my Lord Bacon's "Faber Fortunae," which I can never read
too often, and so back home, and there find my wife come home, much
pleased with the reception she had there, and she was godmother, and did
hold the child at the Font, and it is called John. So back again home, and
after setting my papers in order and supping, to bed, desirous to rise
betimes in the morning.

21st.  Up between 4 and 5 o'clock and to set several papers to rights, and
so to the office, where we had an extraordinary meeting.  But, Lord! how
it torments me to find myself so unable to give an account of my
Victualling business, which puts me out of heart in every thing else, so
that I never had a greater shame upon me in my owne mind, nor more trouble
as to publique business than I have now, but I will get out of it as soon
as possibly I can.  At noon dined at home, and after dinner comes in my
wife's brother Balty and his wife, he being stepped ashore from the fleete
for a day or two.  I away in some haste to my Lord Ashly, where it is
stupendous to see how favourably, and yet closely, my Lord Ashly carries
himself to Mr. Yeabsly, in his business, so as I think we shall do his
business for him in very good manner.  But it is a most extraordinary
thing to observe, and that which I would not but have had the observation
of for a great deal of money.  Being done there, and much forwarded
Yeabsly's business, I with Sir H. Cholmly to my Lord Bellassis, who is
lately come from Tangier to visit him, but is not within.  So to
Westminster Hall a little about business and so home by water, and then
out with my wife, her brother, sister, and Mercer to Islington, our grand
tour, and there eat and drank.  But in discourse I am infinitely pleased
with Balty, his deportment in his business of Muster-Master, and hope
mighty well from him, and am glad with all my heart I put him into this
business.  Late home and to bed, they also lying at my house, he intending
to go away to-morrow back again to sea.

22nd.  Up betimes and to my business of entering some Tangier payments in
my book in order, and then to the office, where very busy all the morning.
At noon home to dinner, Balty being gone back to sea and his wife dining
with us, whom afterward my wife carried home.  I after dinner to the
office, and anon out on several occasions, among others to Lovett's, and
there staid by him and her and saw them (in their poor conditioned manner)
lay on their varnish, which however pleased me mightily to see.  Thence
home to my business writing letters, and so at night home to supper and to
bed.

23rd.  Up by 5 o'clock and to my chamber settling several matters in
order.  So out toward White Hall, calling in my way on my Lord Bellassis,
where I come to his bedside, and did give me a full and long account of
his matters, how he left them at Tangier.  Declares himself fully
satisfied with my care: seems cunningly to argue for encreasing the number
of men there.  Told me the whole story of his gains by the Turky prizes,
which he owns he hath got about L5000 by.  Promised me the same profits
Povy was to have had; and in fine, I find him a pretty subtle man; and so
I left him, and to White Hall before the Duke and did our usual business,
and eased my mind of two or three things of weight that lay upon me about
Lanyon's salary, which I have got to be L150 per annum. Thence to
Westminster to look after getting some little for some great tallys, but
shall find trouble in it.  Thence homeward and met with Sir Philip
Warwicke, and spoke about this, in which he is scrupulous.  After that to
talk of the wants of the Navy.  He lays all the fault now upon the new
Act, and owns his owne folly in thinking once so well of it as to give way
to others' endeavours about it, and is grieved at heart to see what passe
things are like to come to.  Thence to the Excise Office to the
Commissioners to get a meeting between them and myself and others about
our concernments in the Excise for Tangier, and so to the 'Change awhile,
and thence home with Creed, and find my wife at dinner with Mr. Cooke, who
is going down to Hinchinbrooke.  After dinner Creed and I and wife and
Mercer out by coach, leaving them at the New Exchange, while I to White
Hall, and there staid at Sir G. Carteret's chamber till the Council rose,
and then he and I, by agreement this morning, went forth in his coach by
Tiburne, to the Parke; discoursing of the state of the Navy as to money,
and the state of the Kingdom too, how ill able to raise more: and of our
office as to the condition of the officers; he giving me caution as to
myself, that there are those that are my enemies as well as his, and by
name my Lord Bruncker, who hath said some odd speeches against me.  So
that he advises me to stand on my guard; which I shall do, and unless my
too-much addiction to pleasure undo me, will be acute enough for any of
them.  We rode to and again in the Parke a good while, and at last home
and set me down at Charing Crosse, and thence I to Mrs. Pierces to take up
my wife and Mercer, where I find her new picture by Hales do not please
her, nor me indeed, it making no show, nor is very like, nor no good
painting.  Home to supper and to bed, having my right eye sore and full of
humour of late, I think, by my late change of my brewer, and having of 8s.
beer.

24th.  Up very betimes, and did much business in my chamber.  Then to the
office, where busy all the morning.  At noon rose in the pleasantest
humour I have seen Sir W. Coventry and the whole board in this twelvemonth
from a pleasant crossing humour Sir W. Batten was in, he being hungry, and
desirous to be gone.  Home, and Mr. Hunt come to dine with me, but I was
prevented dining till 4 o'clock by Sir H. Cholmly and Sir J. Bankes's
coming in about some Tangier business.  They gone I to dinner, the others
having dined.  Mr. Sheply is also newly come out of the country and come
to see us, whom I am glad to see.  He left all well there; but I perceive
under some discontent in my Lord's behalfe, thinking that he is under
disgrace with the King; but he is not so at all, as Sir G. Carteret
assures me.  They gone I to the office and did business, and so in the
evening abroad alone with my wife to Kingsland, and so back again and to
bed, my right eye continuing very ill of the rheum, which hath troubled it
four or five days.

25th.  Up betimes and to my chamber to do business, where the greatest
part of the morning.  Then out to the 'Change to speake with Captain
[Cocke], who tells me my silver plates are ready for me, and shall be sent
me speedily; and proposes another proposition of serving us with a
thousand tons of hempe, and tells me it shall bring me 6500, if the
bargain go forward, which is a good word.  Thence to Sir G. Carteret, who
is at the pay of the tickets with Sir J. Minnes this day, and here I sat
with them a while, the first time I ever was there, and thence to dinner
with him, a good dinner.  Here come a gentleman over from France arrived
here this day, Mr. Browne of St. Mellos, who, among other things, tells me
the meaning of the setting out of doggs every night out of the towne
walls, which are said to secure the city; but it is not so, but only to
secure the anchors, cables, and ships that lie dry, which might otherwise
in the night be liable to be robbed.  And these doggs are set out every
night, and called together in every morning by a man with a home, and they
go in very orderly.  Thence home, and there find Knipp at dinner with my
wife, now very big, and within a fortnight of lying down.  But my head was
full of business and so could have no sport.  So I left them, promising to
return and take them out at night, and so to the Excise Office, where a
meeting was appointed of Sir Stephen Fox, the Cofferer, and myself, to
settle the business of our tallys, and it was so pretty well against
another meeting.  Thence away home to the office and out again to Captain
Cocke (Mr. Moore for company walking with me and discoursing and admiring
of the learning of Dr. Spencer), and there he and I discoursed a little
more of our matters, and so home, and (Knipp being gone) took out my wife
and Mercer to take the ayre a little, and so as far as Hackney and back
again, and then to bed.

26th.  Up betimes and to the office, where all the morning.  At noon dined
at home.  So to the office again, and a while at the Victualling Office to
understand matters there a little, and thence to the office and despatched
much business, to my great content, and so home to supper and to bed.

27th (Lord's day).  Rose betimes, and to my office till church time to
write two copies of my Will fair, bearing date this day, wherein I have
given my sister Pall L500, my father for his owne and my mother's support
L2,000, to my wife the rest of my estate, but to have L2500 secured to
her, though by deducting out of what I have given my father and my sister.
I dispatched all before church time and then to church, my wife with me.
Thence home to dinner, whither come my uncle Wight, and aunt and uncle
Norbury, and Mr. Shepley.  A good dinner and very merry.  After dinner we
broke up and I by water to Westminster to Mrs. Martin's, and there sat
with her and her husband and Mrs. Burrows, the pretty, an hour or two,
then to the Swan a while, and so home by water, and with my wife by and by
by water as low as Greenwich, for ayre only, and so back again home to
supper and to bed with great pleasure.

28th.  Up and to my chamber to do some business there, and then to the
office, where a while, and then by agreement to the Excise Office, where I
waited all the morning for the Cofferer and Sir St. Foxe's coming, but
they did not, so I and the Commissioners lost their labour and expectation
of doing the business we intended.  Thence home, where I find Mr. Lovett
and his wife came to see us.  They are a pretty couple, and she a fine
bred woman.  They dined with us, and Browne, the paynter, and she plays
finely on the lute.  My wife and I were well pleased with her company.
After dinner broke up, I to the office and they abroad.  All the afternoon
I busy at the office, and down by water to Deptford. Walked back to
Redriffe, and so home to the office again, being thoughtfull how to answer
Sir W. Coventry against to-morrow in the business of the Victualling, but
that I do trust to Tom Wilson, that he will be ready with a book for me
to-morrow morning.  So to bed, my wife telling me where she hath been
to-day with my aunt Wight, and seen Mrs. Margaret Wight, and says that she
is one of the beautifullest women that ever she saw in her life, the most
excellent nose and mouth.  They have been also to see pretty Mrs.
Batelier, and conclude her to be a prettier woman than Mrs. Pierce, whom
my wife led my aunt to see also this day.

29th (King's birth-day and Restauration day).  Waked with the ringing of
the bells all over the towne; so up before five o'clock, and to the
office, where we met, and I all the morning with great trouble upon my
spirit to think how I should come off in the afternoon when Sir W.
Coventry did go to the Victualling office to see the state of matters
there, and methinks by his doing of it without speaking to me, and only
with Sir W. Pen, it must be of design to find my negligence.  However, at
noon I did, upon a small invitation of Sir W. Pen's, go and dine with Sir
W. Coventry at his office, where great good cheer and many pleasant
stories of Sir W. Coventry; but I had no pleasure in them.  However, I had
last night and this morning made myself a little able to report how
matters were, and did readily go with them after dinner to the Victualling
office; and there, beyond belief, did acquit myself very well to full
content; so that, beyond expectation, I got over this second rub in this
business; and if ever I fall on it again, I deserve to be undone. Being
broke up there, I with a merry heart home to my office, and thither my
wife comes to me, to tell me, that if I would see the handsomest woman in
England, I shall come home presently; and who should it be but the pretty
lady of our parish, that did heretofore sit on the other side of our
church, over against our gallery, that is since married; she with Mrs.
Anne Jones, one of this parish, that dances finely, and Mrs. sister did
come to see her this afternoon, and so I home and there find Creed also
come to me.  So there I spent most of the afternoon with them, and indeed
she is a pretty black woman, her name Mrs. Horsely.  But, Lord! to see how
my nature could not refrain from the temptation; but I must invite them to
Foxhall, to Spring Gardens, though I had freshly received minutes of a
great deale of extraordinary business.  However I could not helpe it, but
sent them before with Creed, and I did some of my business; and so after
them, and find them there, in an arbour, and had met with Mrs. Pierce, and
some company with her.  So here I spent 20s. upon them, and were pretty
merry.  Among other things, had a fellow that imitated all manner of
birds, and doggs, and hogs, with his voice, which was mighty pleasant.
Staid here till night: then set Mrs. Pierce in at the New Exchange; and
ourselves took coach, and so set Mrs. Horsely home, and then home
ourselves, but with great trouble in the streets by bonefires, it being
the King's birth-day and day of Restauration; but, Lord! to see the
difference how many there were on the other side, and so few ours, the
City side of the Temple, would make one wonder the difference between the
temper of one sort of people and the other: and the difference among all
between what they do now, and what it was the night when Monk come into
the City.  Such a night as that I never think to see again, nor think it
can be.  After I come home I was till one in the morning with Captain
Cocke drawing up a contract with him intended to be offered to the Duke
to-morrow, which, if it proceeds, he promises me L500.

30th.  Up and to my office, there to settle some business in order .to our
waiting on the Duke to-day.  That done to White Hall to Sir W. Coventry's
chamber, where I find the Duke gone out with the King to-day on hunting.
So after some discourse with him, I by water to Westminster, and there
drew a draught of an order for my Lord Treasurer to sign for my having
some little tallys made me in lieu of two great ones, of L2000 each, to
enable me to pay small sums therewith.  I shewed it to Sir R. Long and had
his approbation, and so to Sir Ph. Warwicke's, and did give it him to get
signed.  So home to my office, and there did business.  By and by toward
noon word is brought me that my father and my sister are come.  I expected
them to-day, but not so soon.  I to them, and am heartily glad to see
them, especially my father, who, poor man, looks very well, and hath rode
up this journey on horseback very well, only his eyesight and hearing is
very bad.  I staid and dined with them, my wife being gone by coach to
Barnet, with W. Hewer and Mercer, to meet them, and they did come Ware
way.  After dinner I left them to dress themselves and I abroad by
appointment to my Lord Ashly, who, it is strange to see, how prettily he
dissembles his favour to Yeabsly's business, which none in the world could
mistrust only I, that am privy to his being bribed. Thence to White Hall,
and there staid till the Council was up, with Creed expecting a meeting of
Tangier to end Yeabsly's business, but we could not procure it.  So I to
my Lord Treasurer's and got my warrant, and then to Lovett's, but find
nothing done there.  So home and did a little business at the office, and
so down by water to Deptford and back again home late, and having signed
some papers and given order in business, home, where my wife is come home,
and so to supper with my father, and mighty pleasant we were, and my wife
mighty kind to him and Pall, and so after supper to bed, myself being
sleepy, and my right eye still very sore, as it has been now about five
days or six, which puts me out of tune.  To-night my wife tells me newes
has been brought her that Balty's wife is brought to bed, by some fall or
fit, before her time, of a great child but dead.  If the woman do well we
have no reason to be sorry, because his staying a little longer without a
child will be better for him and her.

31st.  Waked very betimes in the morning by extraordinary thunder and
rain, which did keep me sleeping and waking till very late, and it being a
holiday and my eye very sore, and myself having had very little sleep for
a good while till nine o'clock, and so up, and so saw all my family up,
and my father and sister, who is a pretty good-bodied woman, and not over
thicke, as I thought she would have been, but full of freckles, and not
handsome in face.  And so I out by water among the ships, and to Deptford
and Blackewall about business, and so home and to dinner with my father
and sister and family, mighty pleasant all of us; and, among other things,
with a sparrow that our Mercer hath brought up now for three weeks, which
is so tame that it flies up and down, and upon the table, and eats and
pecks, and do everything so pleasantly, that we are mightily pleased with
it.  After dinner I to my papers and accounts of this month to sett all
straight, it being a publique Fast-day appointed to pray for the good
successe of the fleete.  But it is a pretty thing to consider how little a
matter they make of this keeping of a Fast, that it was not so much as
declared time enough to be read in the churches the last Sunday; but
ordered by proclamation since: I suppose upon some sudden newes of the
Dutch being come out.  To my accounts and settled them clear; but to my
grief find myself poorer than I was the last by near L20, by reason of my
being forced to return L50 to Downing, the smith, which he had presented
me with.  However, I am well contented, finding myself yet to be worth
L5,200.  Having done, to supper with my wife, and then to finish the
writing fair of my accounts, and so to bed.  This day come to town Mr.
Homewood, and I took him home in the evening to my chamber, and discoursed
with him about my business of the Victualling, which I have a mind to
employ him in, and he is desirous of also, but do very ingenuously declare
he understands it not so well as other things, and desires to be informed
in the nature of it before he attempts it, which I like well, and so I
carried him to Mr. Gibson to discourse with him about it, and so home
again to my accounts.  Thus ends this month, with my mind oppressed by my
defect in my duty of the Victualling, which lies upon me as a burden, till
I get myself into a better posture therein, and hinders me and casts down
my courage in every thing else that belongs to me, and the jealousy I have
of Sir W. Coventry's being displeased with me about it; but I hope in a
little time to remedy all. As to publique business; by late tidings of the
French fleete being come to Rochelle (how true, though, I know not) our
fleete is divided; Prince Rupert being gone with about thirty ships to the
Westward as is conceived to meet the French, to hinder their coming to
join with the Dutch.  My Lord Duke of Albemarle lies in the Downes with
the rest, and intends presently to sail to the Gunfleete.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                  JUNE
                                  1666

June 1st.  Being prevented yesterday in meeting by reason of the fast day,
we met to-day all the morning.  At noon I and my father, wife and sister,
dined at Aunt Wight's here hard by at Mr. Woolly's, upon sudden warning,
they being to go out of town to-morrow.  Here dined the faire Mrs.
Margaret Wight, who is a very fine lady, but the cast of her eye, got only
by an ill habit, do her much wrong and her hands are bad; but she hath the
face of a noble Roman lady.  After dinner my uncle and Woolly and I out
into their yarde, to talke about what may be done hereafter to all our
profits by prizegoods, which did give us reason to lament the losse of the
opportunity of the last yeare, which, if we were as wise as we are now,
and at the peaceable end of all those troubles that we met with, all might
have been such a hit as will never come again in this age, and so I do
really believe it.  Thence home to my office and there did much business,
and at night home to my father to supper and to bed.

2nd.  Up, and to the office, where certain newes is brought us of a letter
come to the King this morning from the Duke of Albemarle, dated yesterday
at eleven o'clock, as they were sailing to the Gunfleete, that they were
in sight of the Dutch fleete, and were fitting themselves to fight them;
so that they are, ere this, certainly engaged; besides, several do averr
they heard the guns all yesterday in the afternoon. This put us at the
Board into a tosse.  Presently come orders for our sending away to the
fleete a recruite of 200 soldiers.  So I rose from the table, and to the
Victualling office, and thence upon the River among several vessels, to
consider of the sending them away; and lastly, down to Greenwich, and
there appointed two yachts to be ready for them; and did order the
soldiers to march to Blackewall.  Having set all things in order against
the next flood, I went on shore with Captain Erwin at Greenwich, and into
the Parke, and there we could hear the guns from the fleete most plainly.
Thence he and I to the King's Head and there bespoke a dish of steaks for
our dinner about four o'clock.  While that was doing, we walked to the
water-side, and there seeing the King and Duke come down in their barge to
Greenwich-house, I to them, and did give them an account [of] what I was
doing.  They went up to the Parke to hear the guns of the fleete go off.
All our hopes now are that Prince Rupert with his fleete is coming back
and will be with the fleete this even: a message being sent to him to that
purpose on Wednesday last; and a return is come from him this morning,
that he did intend to sail from St. Ellen's point about four in the
afternoon on Wednesday [Friday], which was yesterday; which gives us great
hopes, the wind being very fair, that he is with them this even, and the
fresh going off of the guns makes us believe the same.  After dinner,
having nothing else to do till flood, I went and saw Mrs. Daniel, to whom
I did not tell that the fleets were engaged, because of her husband, who
is in the R. Charles.  Very pleasant with her half an hour, and so away
and down to Blackewall, and there saw the soldiers (who were by this time
gotten most of them drunk) shipped off.  But, Lord! to see how the poor
fellows kissed their wives and sweethearts in that simple manner at their
going off, and shouted, and let off their guns, was strange sport.  In the
evening come up the River the Katharine yacht, Captain Fazeby, who hath
brought over my Lord of Alesbury and Sir Thomas Liddall (with a very
pretty daughter, and in a pretty travelling-dress) from Flanders, who saw
the Dutch fleete on Thursday, and ran from them; but from that houre to
this hath not heard one gun, nor any newes of any fight.  Having put the
soldiers on board, I home and wrote what I had to write by the post, and
so home to supper and to bed, it being late.

3rd (Lord's-day; Whit-sunday).  Up, and by water to White Hall, and there
met with Mr. Coventry, who tells me the only news from the fleete is
brought by Captain Elliott, of The Portland, which, by being run on board
by The Guernsey, was disabled from staying abroad; so is come in to
Aldbrough.  That he saw one of the Dutch great ships blown up, and three
on fire.  That they begun to fight on Friday; and at his coming into port,
he could make another ship of the King's coming in, which he judged to be
the Rupert: that he knows of no other hurt to our ships.  With this good
newes I home by water again, and to church in the sermon-time, and with
great joy told it my fellows in the pew.  So home after church time to
dinner, and after dinner my father, wife, sister, and Mercer by water to
Woolwich, while I walked by land, and saw the Exchange as full of people,
and hath been all this noon as of any other day, only for newes. I to St.
Margaret's, Westminster, and there saw at church my pretty Betty Michell,
and thence to the Abbey, and so to Mrs. Martin, and there did what 'je
voudrais avec her .  .  .  .  So by and by he come in, and after some
discourse with him I away to White Hall, and there met with this bad newes
farther, that the Prince come to Dover but at ten o'clock last night, and
there heard nothing of a fight; so that we are defeated of all our hopes
of his helpe to the fleete.  It is also reported by some Victuallers that
the Duke of Albemarle and Holmes their flags were shot down, and both fain
to come to anchor to renew their rigging and sails. A letter is also come
this afternoon, from Harman in the Henery; which is she [that] was taken
by Elliott for the Rupert; that being fallen into the body of the Dutch
fleete, he made his way through them, was set on by three fire-ships one
after another, got two of them off, and disabled the third; was set on
fire himself; upon which many of his men leapt into the sea and perished;
among others, the parson first.  Have lost above 100 men, and a good many
women (God knows what is become of Balty), and at last quenched his own
fire and got to Aldbrough; being, as all say, the greatest hazard that
ever any ship escaped, and as bravely managed by him.  The mast of the
third fire-ship fell into their ship on fire, and hurt Harman's leg, which
makes him lame now, but not dangerous.  I to Sir G. Carteret, who told me
there hath been great bad management in all this; that the King's orders
that went on Friday for calling back the Prince, were sent but by the
ordinary post on Wednesday; and come to the Prince his hands but on
Friday; and then, instead of sailing presently, he stays till four in the
evening.  And that which is worst of all, the Hampshire, laden with
merchants' money, come from the Straights, set out with or but just before
the fleete, and was in the Downes by five in the clock yesterday morning;
and the Prince with his fleete come to Dover but at ten of the clock at
night.  This is hard to answer, if it be true. This puts great
astonishment into the King, and Duke, and Court, every body being out of
countenance.  So meeting Creed, he and I by coach to Hide Parke alone to
talke of these things, and do blesse God that my Lord Sandwich was not
here at this time to be concerned in a business like to be so
misfortunate.  It was a pleasant thing to consider how fearfull I was of
being seen with Creed all this afternoon, for fear of people's thinking
that by our relation to my Lord Sandwich we should be making ill
construction of the Prince's failure.  But, God knows, I am heartily sorry
for the sake of the whole nation, though, if it were not for that, it
would not be amisse to have these high blades find some checke to their
presumption and their disparaging of as good men.  Thence set him down in
Covent Guarden and so home by the 'Change, which is full of people still,
and all talk highly of the failure of the Prince in not making more haste
after his instructions did come, and of our managements here in not giving
it sooner and with more care and oftener.  Thence. After supper to bed.

4th.  Up, and with Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Pen to White Hall in the
latter's coach, where, when we come, we find the Duke at St. James's,
whither he is lately gone to lodge.  So walking through the Parke we saw
hundreds of people listening at the Gravel-pits,--[Kensington]--and to and
again in the Parke to hear the guns, and I saw a letter, dated last night,
from Strowd, Governor of Dover Castle, which says that the Prince come
thither the night before with his fleete, but that for the guns which we
writ that we heard, it is only a mistake for thunder;

     [Evelyn was in his garden when he heard the guns, and be at once set
     off to Rochester and the coast, but he found that nothing had been
     heard at Deal (see his "Diary," June 1st, 1666).]

and so far as to yesterday it is a miraculous thing that we all Friday,
and Saturday and yesterday, did hear every where most plainly the guns go
off, and yet at Deale and Dover to last night they did not hear one word
of a fight, nor think they heard one gun.  This, added to what I have set
down before the other day about the Katharine, makes room for a great
dispute in philosophy, how we should hear it and they not, the same wind
that brought it to us being the same that should bring it to them: but so
it is.  Major Halsey, however (he was sent down on purpose to hear newes),
did bring newes this morning that he did see the Prince and his fleete at
nine of the clock yesterday morning, four or five leagues to sea behind
the Goodwin, so that by the hearing of the guns this morning we conclude
he is come to the fleete.  After wayting upon the Duke, Sir W. Pen (who
was commanded to go to-night by water down to Harwich, to dispatch away
all the ships he can) and I home, drinking two bottles of Cocke ale in the
streete in his new fine coach, where no sooner come, but newes is brought
me of a couple of men come to speak with me from the fleete; so I down,
and who should it be but Mr. Daniel, all muffled up, and his face as black
as the chimney, and covered with dirt, pitch, and tarr, and powder, and
muffled with dirty clouts, and his right eye stopped with okum.  He is
come last night at five o'clock from the fleete, with a comrade of his
that hath endangered another eye.  They were set on shore at Harwich this
morning, and at two o'clock, in a catch with about twenty more wounded men
from the Royall Charles.  They being able to ride, took post about three
this morning, and were here between eleven and twelve.  I went presently
into the coach with them, and carried them to Somerset-House-stairs, and
there took water (all the world gazing upon us, and concluding it to be
newes from the fleete, and every body's face appeared expecting of newes)
to the Privy-stairs, and left them at Mr. Coventry's lodging (he, though,
not being there); and so I into the Parke to the King, and told him my
Lord Generall was well the last night at five o'clock, and the Prince come
with his fleete and joyned with his about seven.  The King was mightily
pleased with this newes, and so took me by the hand and talked a little of
it.  Giving him the best account I could; and then he bid me to fetch the
two seamen to him, he walking into the house.  So I went and fetched the
seamen into the Vane room to him, and there he heard the whole account.

                                THE FIGHT.

How we found the Dutch fleete at anchor on Friday half seas over, between
Dunkirke and Ostend, and made them let slip their anchors.  They about
ninety, and we less than sixty.  We fought them, and put them to the run,
till they met with about sixteen sail of fresh ships, and so bore up
again.  The fight continued till night, and then again the next morning
from five till seven at night.  And so, too, yesterday morning they begun
again, and continued till about four o'clock, they chasing us for the most
part of Saturday and yesterday, we flying from them.  The Duke himself,
then those people were put into the catch, and by and by spied the
Prince's fleete coming, upon which De Ruyter called a little council
(being in chase at this time of us), and thereupon their fleete divided
into two squadrons; forty in one, and about thirty in the other (the
fleete being at first about ninety, but by one accident or other, supposed
to be lessened to about seventy); the bigger to follow the Duke, the less
to meet the Prince.  But the Prince come up with the Generall's fleete,
and the Dutch come together again and bore towards their own coast, and we
with them; and now what the consequence of this day will be, at that time
fighting, we know not.  The Duke was forced to come to anchor on Friday,
having lost his sails and rigging.  No particular person spoken of to be
hurt but Sir W. Clerke, who hath lost his leg, and bore it bravely.  The
Duke himself had a little hurt in his thigh, but signified little.  The
King did pull out of his pocket about twenty pieces in gold, and did give
it Daniel for himself and his companion; and so parted, mightily pleased
with the account he did give him of the fight, and the successe it ended
with, of the Prince's coming, though it seems the Duke did give way again
and again.  The King did give order for care to be had of Mr. Daniel and
his companion; and so we parted from him, and then met the Duke [of York],
and gave him the same account: and so broke up, and I left them going to
the surgeon's and I myself by water to the 'Change, and to several people
did give account of the business. So home about four o'clock to dinner,
and was followed by several people to be told the newes, and good newes it
is.  God send we may hear a good issue of this day's business!  After I
had eat something I walked to Gresham College, where I heard my Lord
Bruncker was, and there got a promise of the receipt of the fine varnish,
which I shall be glad to have.  Thence back with Mr. Hooke to my house and
there lent some of my tables of naval matters, the names of rigging and
the timbers about a ship, in order to Dr. Wilkins' book coming out about
the Universal Language.  Thence, he being gone, to the Crown, behind the
'Change, and there supped at the club with my Lord Bruncker, Sir G. Ent,
and others of Gresham College; and all our discourse is of this fight at
sea, and all are doubtful of the successe, and conclude all had been lost
if the Prince had not come in, they having chased us the greatest part of
Saturday and Sunday.  Thence with my Lord Bruncker and Creed by coach to
White Hall, where fresh letters are come from Harwich, where the
Gloucester, Captain Clerke, is come in, and says that on Sunday night upon
coming in of the Prince, the Duke did fly; but all this day they have been
fighting; therefore they did face again, to be sure.  Captain Bacon of The
Bristoll is killed.  They cry up Jenings of The Ruby, and Saunders of The
Sweepstakes.  They condemn mightily Sir Thomas Teddiman for a coward, but
with what reason time must shew.  Having heard all this Creed and I walked
into the Parke till 9 or 10 at night, it being fine moonshine, discoursing
of the unhappinesse of our fleete, what it would have been if the Prince
had not come in, how much the Duke hath failed of what he was so
presumptuous of, how little we deserve of God Almighty to give us better
fortune, how much this excuses all that was imputed to my Lord Sandwich,
and how much more he is a man fit to be trusted with all those matters
than those that now command, who act by nor with any advice, but rashly
and without any order.  How bad we are at intelligence that should give
the Prince no sooner notice of any thing but let him come to Dover without
notice of any fight, or where the fleete were, or any thing else, nor give
the Duke any notice that he might depend upon the Prince's reserve; and
lastly, of how good use all may be to checke our pride and presumption in
adventuring upon hazards upon unequal force against a people that can
fight, it seems now, as well as we, and that will not be discouraged by
any losses, but that they will rise again. Thence by water home, and to
supper (my father, wife, and sister having been at Islington today at
Pitt's) and to bed.

5th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning, expecting every houre
more newes of the fleete and the issue of yesterday's fight, but nothing
come.  At noon, though I should have dined with my Lord Mayor and Aldermen
at an entertainment of Commissioner Taylor's, yet it being a time of
expectation of the successe of the fleete, I did not go, but dined at
home, and after dinner by water down to Deptford (and Woolwich, where I
had not been since I lodged there, and methinks the place has grown
natural to me), and thence down to Longreach, calling on all the ships in
the way, seeing their condition for sayling, and what they want. Home
about 11 of the clock, and so eat a bit and to bed, having received no
manner of newes this day, but of The Rainbow's being put in from the
fleete, maimed as the other ships are, and some say that Sir W. Clerke is
dead of his leg being cut off.

6th.  Up betimes, and vexed with my people for having a key taken out of
the chamber doors and nobody knew where it was, as also with my boy for
not being ready as soon as I, though I called him, whereupon I boxed him
soundly, and  then to my business at the office and on the Victualling
Office, and thence by water to St. James's, whither he [the Duke of York]
is now gone, it being a monthly fast-day for the plague.  There we all
met, and did our business as usual with the Duke, and among other things
had Captain Cocke's proposal of East country goods read, brought by my
Lord Bruncker, which I make use of as a monkey do the cat's foot.  Sir W.
Coventry did much oppose it, and it's likely it will not do; so away goes
my hopes of L500.  Thence after the Duke into the Parke, walking through
to White Hall, and there every body listening for guns, but none heard,
and every creature is now overjoyed and concludes upon very good grounds
that the Dutch are beaten because we have heard no guns nor no newes of
our fleete.  By and by walking a little further, Sir Philip Frowde did
meet the Duke with an expresse to Sir W. Coventry (who was by) from
Captain Taylor, the Storekeeper at Harwich, being the narration of Captain
Hayward of The Dunkirke; who gives a very serious account, how upon Monday
the two fleetes fought all day till seven at night, and then the whole
fleete of Dutch did betake themselves to a very plain flight, and never
looked back again.  That Sir Christopher Mings is wounded in the leg; that
the Generall is well.  That it is conceived reasonably, that of all the
Dutch fleete, which, with what recruits they had, come to one hundred
sayle, there is not above fifty got home; and of them, few if any of their
flags.  And that little Captain Bell, in one of the fire-ships, did at the
end of the day fire a ship of 70 guns.  We were all so overtaken with this
good newes, that the Duke ran with it to the King, who was gone to
chappell, and there all the Court was in a hubbub, being rejoiced over
head and ears in this good newes.  Away go I by coach to the New Exchange,
and there did spread this good newes a little, though I find it had broke
out before.  And so home to our own church, it being the common Fast-day,
and it was just before sermon; but, Lord!  how all the people in the
church stared upon me to see me whisper to Sir John Minnes and my Lady
Pen.  Anon I saw people stirring and whispering below, and by and by comes
up the sexton from my Lady Ford to tell me the newes (which I had
brought), being now sent into the church by Sir W. Batten in writing, and
handed from pew to pew.  But that which pleased me as much as the newes,
was, to have the fair Mrs. Middleton at our church, who indeed is a very
beautiful lady.  Here after sermon comes to our office 40 people almost of
all sorts and qualities to hear the newes, which I took great delight to
tell them.  Then home and found my wife at dinner, not knowing of my being
at church, and after dinner my father and she out to Hales's, where my
father is to begin to sit to-day for his picture, which I have a desire to
have.  I all the afternoon at home doing some business, drawing up my
vowes for the rest of the yeare to Christmas; but, Lord! to see in what a
condition of happiness I am, if I would but keepe myself so; but my love
of pleasure is such, that my very soul is angry with itself for my vanity
in so doing.  Anon took coach and to Hales's, but he was gone out, and my
father and wife gone.  So I to Lovett's, and there to my trouble saw
plainly that my project of varnished books will not take, it not keeping
colour, not being able to take polishing upon a single paper.  Thence
home, and my father and wife not coming in, I proceeded with my coach to
take a little ayre as far as Bow all alone, and there turned back and
home; but before I got home, the bonefires were lighted all the towne
over, and I going through Crouched Friars, seeing Mercer at her mother's
gate, stopped, and 'light, and into her mother's, the first time I ever
was there, and find all my people, father and all, at a very fine supper
at W. Hewer's lodging, very neatly, and to my great pleasure.  After
supper, into his chamber, which is mighty fine with pictures and every
thing else, very curious, which pleased me exceedingly.  Thence to the
gate, with the women all about me, and Mrs. Mercer's son had provided a
great many serpents, and so I made the women all fire some serpents.  By
and by comes in our faire neighbour, Mrs. Turner, and two neighbour's
daughters, Mrs. Tite, the elder of whom, a long red-nosed silly jade; the
younger, a pretty black girle, and the merriest sprightly jade that ever I
saw.  With them idled away the whole night till twelve at night at the
bonefire in the streets. Some of the people thereabouts going about with
musquets, and did give me two or three vollies of their musquets, I giving
them a crowne to drink; and so home.  Mightily pleased with this happy
day's newes, and the more, because confirmed by Sir Daniel Harvy,  who was
in the whole fight with the Generall, and tells me that there appear but
thirty-six in all of the Dutch fleete left at the end of the voyage when
they run home.  The joy of the City was this night exceeding great.

7th.  Up betimes, and to my office about business (Sir W. Coventry having
sent me word that he is gone down to the fleete to see how matters stand,
and to be back again speedily); and with the same expectation of
congratulating ourselves with the victory that I had yesterday.  But my
Lord Bruncker and Sir T. H. that come from Court, tell me quite contrary
newes, which astonishes me: that is to say, that we are beaten, lost many
ships and good commanders; have not taken one ship of the enemy's; and so
can only report ourselves a victory; nor is it certain that we were left
masters of the field.  But, above all, that The Prince run on shore upon
the Galloper, and there stuck; was endeavoured to be fetched off by the
Dutch, but could not; and so they burned her; and Sir G. Ascue is taken
prisoner, and carried into Holland.  This newes do much trouble me, and
the thoughts of the ill consequences of it, and the pride and presumption
that brought us to it.  At noon to the 'Change, and there find the
discourse of towne, and their countenances much changed; but yet not very
plain.  So home to dinner all alone, my father and people being gone all
to Woolwich to see the launching of the new ship The Greenwich, built by
Chr. Pett.  I left alone with little Mrs. Tooker, whom I kept with me in
my chamber all the afternoon, and did what I would with her.  By and by
comes Mr. Wayth to me; and discoursing of our ill successe, he tells me
plainly from Captain Page's own mouth (who hath lost his arm in the
fight), that the Dutch did pursue us two hours before they left us, and
then they suffered us to go on homewards, and they retreated towards their
coast: which is very sad newes.  Then to my office and anon to White Hall,
late, to the Duke of York to see what commands he hath and to pray a
meeting to-morrow for Tangier in behalf of Mr. Yeabsly, which I did do and
do find the Duke much damped in his discourse, touching the late fight,
and all the Court talk sadly of it.  The Duke did give me several letters
he had received from the fleete, and Sir W. Coventry and Sir W. Pen, who
are gone down thither, for me to pick out some works to be done for the
setting out the fleete again; and so I took them home with me, and was
drawing out an abstract of them till midnight.  And as to newes, I do find
great reason to think that we are beaten in every respect, and that we are
the losers.  The Prince upon the Galloper, where both the Royall Charles
and Royall Katharine had come twice aground, but got off.  The Essex
carried into Holland; the Swiftsure missing (Sir William Barkeley) ever
since the beginning of the fight.  Captains Bacon, Tearne, Wood, Mootham,
Whitty, and Coppin, slayne.  The Duke of Albemarle writes, that he never
fought with worse officers in his life, not above twenty of them behaving
themselves like men.  Sir William Clerke lost his leg; and in two days
died.  The Loyall George, Seven Oakes, and Swiftsure, are still missing,
having never, as the Generall writes himself, engaged with them.  It was
as great an alteration to find myself required to write a sad letter
instead of a triumphant one to my Lady Sandwich this night, as ever on any
occasion I had in my life.  So late home and to bed.

8th.  Up very betimes and to attend the Duke of York by order, all of us
to report to him what the works are that are required of us and to divide
among us, wherein I have taken a very good share, and more than I can
perform, I doubt.  Thence to the Exchequer about some Tangier businesses,
and then home, where to my very great joy I find Balty come home without
any hurt, after the utmost imaginable danger he hath gone through in the
Henery, being upon the quarterdeck with Harman all the time; and for which
service Harman I heard this day commended most seriously and most
eminently by the Duke of Yorke.  As also the Duke did do most utmost right
to Sir Thomas Teddiman, of whom a scandal was raised, but without cause,
he having behaved himself most eminently brave all the whole fight, and to
extraordinary great service and purpose, having given Trump himself such a
broadside as was hardly ever given to any ship.  Mings is shot through the
face, and into the shoulder, where the bullet is lodged. Young Holmes' is
also ill wounded, and Atber in The Rupert.  Balty tells me the case of The
Henery; and it was, indeed, most extraordinary sad and desperate.  After
dinner Balty and I to my office, and there talked a great deal of this
fight; and I am mightily pleased in him and have great content in, and
hopes of his doing well.  Thence out to White Hall to a Committee for
Tangier, but it met not.  But, Lord! to see how melancholy the Court is,
under the thoughts of this last overthrow (for so it is), instead of a
victory, so much and so unreasonably expected.  Thence, the Committee not
meeting, Creed and I down the river as low as Sir W. Warren's, with whom I
did motion a business that may be of profit to me, about buying some
lighters to send down to the fleete, wherein he will assist me.  So back
again, he and I talking of the late ill management of this fight, and of
the ill management of fighting at all against so great a force bigger than
ours, and so to the office, where we parted, but with this satisfaction
that we hear the Swiftsure, Sir W. Barkeley, is come in safe to the Nore,
after her being absent ever since the beginning of the fight, wherein she
did not appear at all from beginning to end.  But wherever she has been,
they say she is arrived there well, which I pray God however may be true.
At the office late, doing business, and so home to supper and to bed.

9th.  Up, and to St. James's, there to wait on the Duke of Yorke, and had
discourse with him about several businesses of the fleete.  But, Lord! to
see how the Court is divided about The Swiftsure and The Essex's being
safe.  And wagers and odds laid on both sides.  I did tell the Duke how
Sir W. Batten did tell me this morning that he was sure the Swiftsure is
safe.  This put them all in a great joy and certainty of it, but this I
doubt will prove nothing.  Thence to White Ball in expectation of a
meeting of Tangier, and we did industriously labour to have it this
morning; but we could not get a fifth person there, so after much pains
and thoughts on my side on behalfe of Yeabsly, we were fain to breake up.
But, Lord! to see with what patience Lord Ashly did stay all the morning
to get a Committee, little thinking that I know the reason of his
willingnesse.  So I home to dinner and back again to White Hall, and,
being come thither a little too soon, went to Westminster Hall, and bought
a payre of gloves, and to see how people do take this late fight at sea,
and I find all give over the thoughts of it as a victory and to reckon it
a great overthrow.  So to White Hall, and there when we were come all
together in certain expectation of doing our business to Yeabsly's full
content, and us that were his friends, my Lord Peterborough (whether
through some difference between him and my Lord Ashly, or him and me or
Povy, or through the falsenesse of Creed, I know not) do bring word that
the Duke of Yorke (who did expressly bid me wait at the Committee for the
dispatch of the business) would not have us go forward in this business of
allowing the losse of the ships till Sir G. Carteret and Sir W. Coventry
were come to towne, which was the very thing indeed which we would have
avoided.  This being told us, we broke up doing nothing, to my great
discontent, though I said nothing, and afterwards I find by my Lord
Ashly's discourse to me that he is troubled mightily at it, and indeed it
is a great abuse of him and of the whole Commissioners that nothing of
that nature can be done without Sir G. Carteret or Sir W. Coventry.  No
sooner was the Committee up, and I going [through] the Court homeward, but
I am told Sir W. Coventry is come to town; so I to his chamber, and there
did give him an account how matters go in our office, and with some
content I parted from him, after we had discoursed several things of the
haste requisite to be made in getting the fleete out again and the manner
of doing it.  But I do not hear that he is at all pleased or satisfied
with the late fight; but he tells me more newes of our suffering, by the
death of one or two captains more than I knew before.  But he do give over
the thoughts of the safety of The Swiftsure or Essex.  Thence homewards,
landed at the Old Swan, and there find my pretty Betty Michell and her
husband at their doore in Thames Streete, which I was glad to find, and
went into their shop, and they made me drink some of their strong water,
the first time I was ever with them there.  I do exceedingly love her.
After sitting a little and talking with them about several things at great
distance I parted and home to my business late.  But I am to observe how
the drinking of some strong water did immediately put my eyes into a fit
of sorenesse again as they were the other day.  I mean my right eye only.
Late at night I had an account brought me by Sir W. Warren that he has
gone through four lighters for me, which pleases me very well.  So home to
bed, much troubled with our disappointment at the Tangier Committee.

10th (Lord's day).  Up very betimes, and down the river to Deptford, and
did a good deale of business in sending away and directing several things
to the Fleete.  That being done, back to London to my office, and there at
my office till after Church time fitting some notes to carry to Sir W.
Coventry in the afternoon.  At noon home to dinner, where my cozen Joyces,
both of them, they and their wives and little Will, come by invitation to
dinner to me, and I had a good dinner for them; but, Lord! how sicke was I
of W. Joyce's company, both the impertinencies of it and his ill manners
before me at my table to his wife, which I could hardly forbear taking
notice of; but being at my table and for his wife's sake, I did, though I
will prevent his giving me the like occasion again at my house I will
warrant him.  After dinner I took leave and by water to White Hall, and
there spent all the afternoon in the Gallery, till the Council was up, to
speake with Sir W. Coventry.  Walking here I met with Pierce the surgeon,
who is lately come from the fleete, and tells me that all the commanders,
officers, and even the common seamen do condemn every part of the late
conduct of the Duke of Albemarle: both in his fighting at all, in his
manner of fighting, running among them in his retreat, and running the
ships on ground; so as nothing can be worse spoken of.  That Holmes,
Spragg, and Smith do all the business, and the old and wiser commanders
nothing.  So as Sir Thomas Teddiman (whom the King and all the world speak
well of) is mightily discontented, as being wholly slighted. He says we
lost more after the Prince come, than before too.  The Prince was so
maimed, as to be forced to be towed home.  He says all the fleete confess
their being chased home by the Dutch; and yet the body of the Dutch that
did it, was not above forty sayle at most.  And yet this put us into the
fright, as to bring all our ships on ground.  He says, however, that the
Duke of Albemarle is as high almost as ever, and pleases himself to think
that he hath given the Dutch their bellies full, without sense of what he
hath lost us; and talks how he knows now the way to beat them.  But he
says, that even Smith himself, one of his creatures, did himself condemn
the late conduct from the beginning to the end.  He tells me further, how
the Duke of Yorke is wholly given up to his new mistresse, my Lady Denham,
going at noon-day with all his gentlemen with him to visit her in Scotland
Yard; she declaring she will not be his mistresse, as Mrs. Price, to go up
and down the Privy-stairs, but will be owned publicly; and so she is.  Mr.
Bruncker, it seems, was the pimp to bring it about, and my Lady
Castlemaine, who designs thereby to fortify herself by the Duke; there
being a falling-out the other day between the King and her: on this
occasion, the Queene, in ordinary talke before the ladies in her
drawing-room, did say to my Lady Castlemaine that she feared the King did
take cold, by staying so late abroad at her house.  She answered before
them all, that he did not stay so late abroad with her, for he went
betimes thence (though he do not before one, two, or three in the
morning), but must stay somewhere else.  The King then coming in and
overhearing, did whisper in the eare aside, and told her she was a bold
impertinent woman, and bid her to be gone out of the Court, and not come
again till he sent for, her; which she did presently, and went to a
lodging in the Pell Mell, and kept there two or three days, and then sent
to the King to know whether she might send for her things away out of her
house.  The King sent to her, she must first come and view them: and so
she come, and the King went to her, and all friends again.  He tells me
she did, in her anger, say she would be even with the King, and print his
letters to her.  So putting all together, we are and are like to be in a
sad condition.  We are endeavouring to raise money by borrowing it of the
City; but I do not think the City will lend a farthing.  By and by the
Council broke up, and I spoke with Sir W. Coventry about business, with
whom I doubt not in a little time to be mighty well, when I shall appear
to mind my business again as I used to do, which by the grace of God I
will do.  Gone from him I endeavoured to find out Sir G. Carteret, and at
last did at Mr. Ashburnham's, in the Old Palace Yarde, and thence he and I
stepped out and walked an houre in the church-yarde, under Henry the
Seventh's Chappell, he being lately come from the fleete; and tells me, as
I hear from every body else, that the management in the late fight was bad
from top to bottom.  That several said this would not have been if my Lord
Sandwich had had the ordering of it.  Nay, he tells me that certainly had
my Lord Sandwich had the misfortune to have done as they have done, the
King could not have saved him.  There is, too, nothing but discontent
among the officers; and all the old experienced men are slighted.  He
tells me to my question (but as a great secret), that the dividing of the
fleete did proceed first from a proposition from the fleete, though agreed
to hence.  But he confesses it arose from want of due intelligence, which
he confesses we do want.  He do, however, call the fleete's retreat on
Sunday a very honourable retreat, and that the Duke of Albemarle did do
well in it, and would have been well if he had done it sooner, rather than
venture the loss of the fleete and crown, as he must have done if the
Prince had not come.  He was surprised when I told him I heard that the
King did intend to borrow some money of the City, and would know who had
spoke of it to me; I told him Sir Ellis Layton this afternoon.  He says it
is a dangerous discourse; for that the City certainly will not be invited
to do it, and then for the King to ask it and be denied, will be the
beginning of our sorrow.  He seems to fear we shall all fall to pieces
among ourselves. This evening we hear that Sir Christopher Mings is dead
of his late wounds; and Sir W. Coventry did commend him to me in a most
extraordinary manner.  But this day, after three days' trial in vain, and
the hazard of the spoiling of the ship in lying till next spring, besides
the disgrace of it, newes is brought that the Loyall London is launched at
Deptford. Having talked thus much with Sir G. Carteret we parted there,
and I home by water, taking in my boat with me young Michell and my Betty
his wife, meeting them accidentally going to look a boat.  I set them down
at the Old Swan and myself, went through bridge to the Tower, and so home,
and after supper to bed.

11th.  Up, and down by water to Sir W. Warren's (the first time I was in
his new house on the other side the water since he enlarged it) to
discourse about our lighters that he hath bought for me, and I hope to get
L100 by this jobb.  Having done with him I took boat again (being mightily
struck with a woman in a hat, a seaman's mother,--[Mother or mauther, a
wench.]--that stood on the key) and home, where at the office all the
morning with Sir W. Coventry and some others of our board hiring of
fireships, and Sir W. Coventry begins to see my pains again, which I do
begin to take, and I am proud of it, and I hope shall continue it.  He
gone, at noon I home to dinner, and after dinner my father and wife out to
the painter's to sit again, and I, with my Lady Pen and her daughter, to
see Harman; whom we find lame in bed.  His bones of his anckle are broke,
but he hopes to do well soon; and a fine person by his discourse he seems
to be and my hearty [friend]; and he did plainly tell me that at the
Council of War before the fight, it was against his reason to begin the
fight then, and the reasons of most sober men there, the wind being such,
and we to windward, that they could not use their lower tier of guns,
which was a very sad thing for us to have the honour and weal of the
nation ventured so foolishly.  I left them there, and walked to Deptford,
reading in Walsingham's Manual, a very good book, and there met with Sir
W. Batten and my Lady at Uthwayt's.  Here I did much business and yet had
some little mirthe with my Lady, and anon we all come up together to our
office, where I was very late doing much business.  Late comes Sir J.
Bankes to see me, and tells me that coming up from Rochester he overtook
three or four hundred seamen, and he believes every day they come flocking
from the fleete in like numbers; which is a sad neglect there, when it
will be impossible to get others, and we have little reason to think that
these will return presently again.  He gone, I to end my letters to-night,
and then home to supper and to bed.

12th.  Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning.  At noon to
dinner, and then to White Hall in hopes of a meeting of Tangier about
Yeabsly's business, but it could not be obtained, Sir G. Carteret nor Sir
W. Coventry being able to be there, which still vexes [me] to see the poor
man forced still to attend, as also being desirous to see what my profit
is, and get it.  Walking here in the galleries I find the Ladies of Honour
dressed in their riding garbs, with coats and doublets with deep skirts,
just for all the world like mine, and buttoned their doublets up the
breast, with perriwigs and with hats; so that, only for a long petticoat
dragging under their men's coats, nobody could take them for women in any
point whatever; which was an odde sight, and a sight did not please me.
It was Mrs. Wells and another fine lady that I saw thus. Thence down by
water to Deptford, and there late seeing some things dispatched down to
the fleete, and so home (thinking indeed to have met with Bagwell, but I
did not) to write my letters very late, and so to supper and to bed.

13th.  Up, and by coach to St. James's, and there did our business before
the Duke as usual, having, before the Duke come out of his bed, walked in
an ante-chamber with Sir H. Cholmly, who tells me there are great jarrs
between the Duke of Yorke and the Duke of Albemarle, about the later's
turning out one or two of the commanders put in by the Duke of Yorke.
Among others, Captain Du Tell, a Frenchman, put in by the Duke of Yorke,
and mightily defended by him; and is therein led by Monsieur Blancford,
that it seems hath the same command over the Duke of Yorke as Sir W.
Coventry hath; which raises ill blood between them.  And I do in several
little things observe that Sir W. Coventry hath of late, by the by,
reflected on the Duke of Albemarle and his captains, particularly in that
of old Teddiman, who did deserve to be turned out this fight, and was so;
but I heard Sir W. Coventry say that the Duke of Albemarle put in one as
bad as he is in his room, and one that did as little.  After we had done
with the Duke of Yorke, I with others to White Hall, there to attend again
a Committee of Tangier, but there was none, which vexed me to the heart,
and makes me mighty doubtfull that when we have one, it will be prejudiced
against poor Yeabsly and to my great disadvantage thereby, my Lord
Peterborough making it his business, I perceive (whether in spite to me,
whom he cannot but smell to be a friend to it, or to my Lord Ashly, I know
not), to obstruct it, and seems to take delight in disappointing of us;
but I shall be revenged of him.  Here I staid a very great while, almost
till noon, and then meeting Balty I took him with me, and to Westminster
to the Exchequer about breaking of two tallys of L2000 each into smaller
tallys, which I have been endeavouring a good while, but to my trouble it
will not, I fear, be done, though there be no reason against it, but only
a little trouble to the clerks; but it is nothing to me of real profit at
all.  Thence with Balty to Hales's by coach, it being the seventh day from
my making my late oathes, and by them I am at liberty to dispense with any
of my oathes every seventh day after I had for the six days before going
performed all my vowes.  Here I find my father's picture begun, and so
much to my content, that it joys my very heart to thinke that I should
have his picture so well done; who, besides that he is my father, and a
man that loves me, and hath ever done so, is also, at this day, one of the
most carefull and innocent men, in the world.  Thence with mighty content
homeward, and in my way at the Stockes did buy a couple of lobsters, and
so home to dinner, where I find my wife and father had dined, and were
going out to Hales's to sit there, so Balty and I alone to dinner, and in
the middle of my grace, praying for a blessing upon (these his good
creatures), my mind fell upon my lobsters: upon which I cried, Odd zooks!
and Balty looked upon me like a man at a losse what I meant, thinking at
first that I meant only that I had said the grace after meat instead of
that before meat.  But then I cried, what is become of my lobsters?
Whereupon he run out of doors to overtake the coach, but could not, so
came back again, and mighty merry at dinner to thinke of my surprize.
After dinner to the Excise Office by appointment, and there find my Lord
Bellasses and the Commissioners, and by and by the whole company come to
dispute the business of our running so far behindhand there, and did come
to a good issue in it, that is to say, to resolve upon having the debt due
to us, and the Household and the Guards from the Excise stated, and so we
shall come to know the worst of our condition and endeavour for some helpe
from my Lord Treasurer.  Thence home, and put off Balty, and so, being
invited, to Sir Christopher Mings's funeral, but find them gone to church.
However I into the church (which is a fair, large church, and a great
chappell) and there heard the service, and staid till they buried him, and
then out.  And there met with Sir W. Coventry (who was there out of great
generosity, and no person of quality there but he) and went with him into
his coach, and being in it with him there happened this extraordinary
case, one of the most romantique that ever I heard of in my life, and
could not have believed, but that I did see it; which was this:--About a
dozen able, lusty, proper men come to the coach-side with tears in their
eyes, and one of them that spoke for the rest begun and says to Sir W.
Coventry, "We are here a dozen of us that have long known and loved, and
served our dead commander, Sir Christopher Mings, and have now done the
last office of laying him in the ground.  We would be glad we had any
other to offer after him, and in revenge of him.  All we have is our
lives; if you will please to get His Royal Highness to give us a fireship
among us all, here is a dozen of us, out of all which choose you one to be
commander, and the rest of us, whoever he is, will serve him; and, if
possible, do that that shall show our memory of our dead commander, and
our revenge."  Sir W. Coventry was herewith much moved (as well as I, who
could hardly abstain from weeping), and took their names, and so parted;
telling me that he would move His Royal Highness as in a thing very
extraordinary, which was done.  Thereon see the next day in this book.  So
we parted. The truth is, Sir Christopher Mings was a very stout man, and a
man of great parts, and most excellent tongue among ordinary men; and as
Sir W. Coventry says, could have been the most useful man at such a pinch
of time as this.  He was come into great renowne here at home, and more
abroad in the West Indys.  He had brought his family into a way of being
great; but dying at this time, his memory and name (his father being
always and at this day a shoemaker, and his mother a Hoyman's daughter; of
which he was used frequently to boast) will be quite forgot in a few
months as if he had never been, nor any of his name be the better by it;
he having not had time to will any estate, but is dead poor rather than
rich.  So we left the church and crowd, and I home (being set down on
Tower Hill), and there did a little business and then in the evening went
down by water to Deptford, it being very late, and there I staid out as
much time as I could, and then took boat again homeward, but the officers
being gone in, returned and walked to Mrs. Bagwell's house, and there (it
being by this time pretty dark and past ten o'clock) went into her house
and did what I would.  But I was not a little fearfull of what she told me
but now, which is, that her servant was dead of the plague, that her
coming to me yesterday was the first day of her coming forth, and that she
had new whitened the house all below stairs, but that above stairs they
are not so fit for me to go up to, they being not so.  So I parted thence,
with a very good will, but very civil, and away to the waterside, and sent
for a pint of sacke and so home, drank what I would and gave the waterman
the rest; and so adieu.  Home about twelve at night, and so to bed,
finding most of my people gone to bed.  In my way home I called on a
fisherman and bought three eeles, which cost me three shillings.

14th.  Up, and to the office, and there sat all the morning.  At noon
dined at home, and thence with my wife and father to Hales's, and there
looked only on my father's picture (which is mighty like); and so away to
White Hall to a committee for Tangier, where the Duke of York was, and Sir
W. Coventry, and a very full committee; and instead of having a very
prejudiced meeting, they did, though indeed inclined against Yeabsly,
yield to the greatest part of his account, so as to allow of his demands
to the value of L7,000 and more, and only give time for him to make good
his pretence to the rest; which was mighty joy to me: and so we rose up.
But I must observe the force of money, which did make my Lord Ashly to
argue and behave himself in the business with the greatest friendship, and
yet with all the discretion imaginable; and [it] will be a business of
admonition and instruction to me concerning him (and other men, too, for
aught I know) as long as I live.  Thence took Creed with some kind of
violence and some hard words between us to St. James's, to have found out
Sir W. Coventry to have signed the order for his payment among others that
did stay on purpose to do it (and which is strange among the rest my Lord
Ashly, who did cause Creed to write it presently and kept two or three of
them with him by cunning to stay and sign it), but Creed's ill nature
(though never so well bribed, as it hath lately in this case by twenty
pieces) will not be overcome from his usual delays.  Thence failing of
meeting Sir W. Coventry I took leave of Creed (very good friends) and away
home, and there took out my father, wife, sister, and Mercer our grand
Tour in the evening, and made it ten at night before we got home, only
drink at the doore at Islington at the Katherine Wheel, and so home and to
the office a little, and then to bed.

15th.  Up betimes, and to my Journall entries, but disturbed by many
businesses, among others by Mr. Houblon's coming to me about evening their
freight for Tangier, which I did, and then Mr. Bland, who presented me
yesterday with a very fine African mat, to lay upon the ground under a bed
of state, being the first fruits of our peace with Guyland.  So to the
office, and thither come my pretty widow Mrs. Burrows, poor woman, to get
her ticket paid for her husband's service, which I did her myself, and did
'baisser her moucher', and I do hope may thereafter have some day 'sa'
company.  Thence to Westminster to the Exchequer, but could not persuade
the blockheaded fellows to do what I desire, of breaking my great tallys
into less, notwithstanding my Lord Treasurer's order, which vexed [me] so
much that I would not bestow more time and trouble among a company of
dunces, and so back again home, and to dinner, whither Creed come and
dined with me and after dinner Mr. Moore, and he and I abroad, thinking to
go down the river together, but the tide being against me would not, but
returned and walked an houre in the garden, but, Lord! to hear how he
pleases himself in behalf of my Lord Sandwich, in the miscarriage of the
Duke of Albemarle, and do inveigh against Sir W. Coventry as a cunning
knave, but I thinke that without any manner of reason at all, but only his
passion.  He being gone I to my chamber at home to set my Journall right
and so to settle my Tangier accounts, which I did in very good order, and
then in the evening comes Mr. Yeabsly to reckon with me, which I did also,
and have above L200 profit therein to myself, which is a great blessing,
the God of heaven make me thankfull for it.  That being done, and my eyes
beginning to be sore with overmuch writing, I to supper and to bed.

16th.  Up betimes and to my office, and there we sat all the morning and
dispatched much business, the King, Duke of Yorke, and Sir W. Coventry
being gone down to the fleete.  At noon home to dinner and then down to
Woolwich and Deptford to look after things, my head akeing from the
multitude of businesses I had in my head yesterday in settling my
accounts.  All the way down and up, reading of "The Mayor of Quinborough,"
a simple play.  At Deptford, while I am there, comes Mr. Williamson, Sir
Arthur Ingram and Jacke Fen, to see the new ships, which they had done,
and then I with them home in their boat, and a very fine gentleman Mr.
Williamson is.  It seems the Dutch do mightily insult of their victory,
and they have great reason.

     [This treatment seems to have been that of the Dutch populace alone,
     and there does not appear to have been cause of complaint against
     the government.  Respecting Sir W. Berkeley's body the following
     notice was published in the "London Gazette" of July 15th, 1666 (No.
     69) "Whitehall, July 15.  This day arrived a trumpet from the States
     of Holland, who came over from Calais in the Dover packet-boat, with
     a letter to his Majesty, that the States have taken order for the
     embalming the body of Sir William Berkeley, which they have placed
     in the chapel of the great church at the Hague, a civility they
     profess to owe to his corpse, in respect to the quality of his
     person, the greatness of his command, and of the high courage and
     valour he showed in the late engagement; desiring his Majesty to
     signify his pleasure about the further disposal of it."  "Frederick
     Ruysch, the celebrated Dutch anatomist, undertook, by order of the
     States-General, to inject the body of the English Admiral Berkeley,
     killed in the sea-fight of 1666; and the body, already somewhat
     decomposed, was sent over to England as well prepared as if it had
     been the fresh corpse of a child.  This produced to Ruysch, on the
     part of the States-General, a recompense worthy of their liberality,
     and the merit of the anatomist," "James's Medical Dictionary."]

Sir William Barkeley was killed before his ship taken; and there he lies
dead in a sugar-chest, for every body to see, with his flag standing up by
him.  And Sir George Ascue is carried up and down the Hague for people to
see.  Home to my office, where late, and then to bed.

17th (Lord's day).  Being invited to Anthony Joyce's to dinner, my wife
and sister and Mercer and I walked out in the morning, it being fine
weather, to Christ Church, and there heard a silly sermon, but sat where
we saw one of the prettiest little boys with the prettiest mouth that ever
I saw in [my] life.  Thence to Joyce's, where William Joyce and his wife
were, and had a good dinner; but, Lord! how sicke was I of the company,
only hope I shall have no more of it a good while; but am invited to
Will's this week; and his wife, poor unhappy woman, cried to hear me say
that I could not be there, she thinking that I slight her: so they got me
to promise to come.  Thence my father and I walked to Gray's Inne Fields,
and there spent an houre or two walking and talking of several businesses;
first, as to his estate, he told me it produced about L80 per ann., but
then there goes L30 per. ann. taxes and other things, certain charge,
which I do promise to make good as far as this L30, at which the poor man
was overjoyed and wept.  As to Pall he tells me he is mightily satisfied
with Ensum, and so I promised to give her L500 presently, and to oblige
myself to 100 more on the birth of her first child, he insuring her in L10
per ann. for every L100, and in the meantime till she do marry I promise
to allow her L10 per ann.  Then as to John I tell him I will promise him
nothing, but will supply him as so much lent him, I declaring that I am
not pleased with him yet, and that when his degree is over I will send for
him up hither, and if he be good for any thing doubt not to get him
preferment.  This discourse ended to the joy of my father and no less to
me to see that I am able to do this, we return to Joyce's and there
wanting a coach to carry us home I walked out as far as the New Exchange
to find one, but could not.  So down to the Milke-house, and drank three
glasses of whay, and then up into the Strand again, and there met with a
coach, and so to Joyce's and took up my father, wife, sister, and Mercer,
and to Islington, where we drank, and then our tour by Hackney home,
where, after a little, business at my office and then talke with my Lady
and Pegg Pen in the garden, I home and to bed, being very weary.

18th.  Up betimes and in my chamber most of the morning setting things to
rights there, my Journall and accounts with my father and brother, then to
the office a little, and so to Lumbard Streete, to borrow a little money
upon a tally, but cannot.  Thence to the Exchequer, and there after much
wrangling got consent that I should have a great tally broken into little
ones.  Thence to Hales's to see how my father's picture goes on, which
pleases me mighty well, though I find again, as I did in Mrs. Pierce's,
that a picture may have more of a likeness in the first or second working
than it shall have when finished, though this is very well and to my full
content, but so it is, and certainly mine was not so like at the first,
second, or third sitting as it was afterward.  Thence to my Lord
Bellasses, by invitation, and there dined with him, and his lady and
daughter; and at dinner there played to us a young boy, lately come from
France, where he had been learning a yeare or two on the viallin, and
plays finely.  But impartially I do not find any goodnesse in their ayres
(though very good) beyond ours when played by the same hand, I observed in
several of Baptiste's'

     [Jean Baptiste Lulli, son of a Tuscan peasant, born 1633, died 1687.
     He invented the dramatic overture.  "But during the first years of
     Charles II. all musick affected by the beau mond run in the french
     way; and the rather because at that time the master of the court
     musick in France, whose name was Baptista (an Italian frenchifyed)
     had influenced the french style by infusing a great portion of the
     Italian harmony into it, whereby the ayre was exceedingly improved"
     (North's "Memoires of Musick," ed. Rimbault, 1846, p, 102).]

(the present great composer) and our Bannister's.  But it was pretty to
see how passionately my Lord's daughter loves musique, the most that ever
I saw creature in my life.  Thence after dinner home and to the office and
anon to Lumbard Streete again, where much talke at Colvill's, he censuring
the times, and how matters are ordered, and with reason enough; but, above
all, the thinking to borrow money of the City, which will not be done, but
be denied, they being little pleased with the King's affairs, and that
must breed differences between the King and the City. Thence down by water
to Deptford, to order things away to the fleete and back again, and after
some business at my office late home to supper and to bed.  Sir W.
Coventry is returned this night from the fleete, he being the activest man
in the world, and we all (myself particularly) more afeard of him than of
the King or his service, for aught I see; God forgive us!  This day the
great newes is come of the French, their taking the island of St.
Christopher's' from us; and it is to be feared they have done the like of
all those islands thereabouts this makes the city mad.

19th.  Up, and to my office, there to fit business against the rest meet,
which they did by and by, and sat late.  After the office rose (with Creed
with me) to Wm. Joyce's to dinner, being invited, and there find my father
and sister, my wife and Mercer, with them, almost dined.  I made myself as
complaisant as I could till I had dined, but yet much against my will, and
so away after dinner with Creed to Penny's, my Tailor, where I bespoke a
thin stuff suit, and did spend a little time evening some little accounts
with Creed and so parted, and I to Sir. G. Carteret's by appointment;
where I perceive by him the King is going to borrow some money of the
City; but I fear it will do no good, but hurt.  He tells me how the
Generall--[The Duke of Albemarle.]--is displeased, and there have been
some high words between the Generall and Sir W. Coventry.  And it may be
so; for I do not find Sir W. Coventry so highly commending the Duke as he
used to be, but letting fall now and then some little jerkes: as this day,
speaking of newes from Holland, he says, "I find their victory begins to
shrinke there, as well as ours here."  Here I met with Captain Cocke, and
he tells me that the first thing the Prince said to the King upon his
coming, was complaining of the Commissioners of the Navy; that they could
have been abroad in three or four days but for us; that we do not take
care of them which I am troubled at, and do fear may in violence break out
upon this office some time or other; for we shall not be able to carry on
the business.  Thence home, and at my business till late at night, then
with my wife into the garden and there sang with Mercer, whom I feel
myself begin to love too much by handling of her breasts in a' morning
when she dresses me, they being the finest that ever I saw in my life,
that is the truth of it.  So home and to supper with beans and bacon and
to bed.

20th.  Up, but in some pain of the collique.  I have of late taken too
much cold by washing my feet and going in a thin silke waistcoate, without
any other coate over it, and open-breasted, but I hope it will go over.  I
did this morning (my father being to go away to-morrow) give my father
some money to buy him a horse, and for other things to himself and my
mother and sister, among them L20, besides undertaking to pay for other
things for them to about L3, which the poor man takes with infinite
kindnesse, and I do not thinke I can bestow it better.  Thence by coach to
St. James's as usual to wait on the Duke of York, after having discoursed
with Collonell Fitzgerald, whom I met in my way and he returned with me to
Westminster, about paying him a sum of 700 and odd pounds, and he bids me
defalk L25 for myself,--[Abate from an amount.]--which is a very good
thing; having done with the Duke I to the Exchequer and there after much
ado do get my business quite over of the difficulty of breaking a great
tally into little ones and so shall have it done tomorrow.  Thence to the
Hall and with Mrs. Martin home and staid with her a while, and then away
to the Swan and sent for a bit of meat and dined there, and thence to
Faythorne, the picture-seller's, and there chose two or three good Cutts
to try to vernish, and so to Hales's to see my father's picture, which is
now near finished and is very good, and here I staid and took a nap of an
hour, thinking my father and wife would have come, but they did not; so I
away home as fast as I could, fearing lest my father this day going abroad
to see Mr. Honiwood at Major Russell's might meet with any trouble, and so
in great pain home; but to spite me, in Cheapside I met Mrs. Williams in a
coach, and she called me, so I must needs 'light and go along with her and
poor Knipp (who is so big as she can tumble and looks-every day to lie
down) as far as Paternoster Row, which I did do and there staid in
Bennett's shop with them, and was fearfull lest the people of the shop,
knowing me, should aske after my father and give Mrs. Williams any
knowledge of me to my disgrace.  Having seen them done there and
accompanied them to Ludgate I 'light and into my owne coach and home,
where I find my father and wife had had no intent of coming at all to
Hales's.  So I at home all the evening doing business, and at night in the
garden (it having been these three or four days mighty hot weather)
singing in the evening, and then home to supper and to bed.

21st.  Up, and at the office all the morning; whereby several
circumstances I find Sir W. Coventry and the Duke of Albemarle do not
agree as they used to do; Sir W. Coventry commending Aylett (in some
reproach to the Duke), whom the Duke hath put out for want of courage; and
found fault with Steward, whom the Duke keeps in, though as much in fault
as any commander in the fleete.  At noon home to dinner, my father,
sister, and wife dining at Sarah Giles's, poor woman, where I should have
been, but my pride would not suffer me.  After dinner to Mr. Debasty's to
speake with Sir Robert Viner, a fine house and a great many fine ladies.
He used me mighty civilly.  My business was to set the matter right about
the letter of credit he did give my Lord Belassis, that I may take up the
tallys lodged with Viner for his security in the answering of my Lord's
bills, which we did set right very well, and Sir Robert Viner went home
with me and did give me the L5000 tallys presently.  Here at Mr. Debasty's
I saw, in a gold frame, a picture of a Outer playing on his flute which,
for a good while, I took for paynting, but at last observed it a piece of
tapestry, and is the finest that ever I saw in my life for figures, and
good natural colours, and a very fine thing it is indeed. So home and met
Sir George Smith by the way, who tells me that this day my Lord Chancellor
and some of the Court have been with the City, and the City have voted to
lend the King L100,000; which, if soon paid (as he says he believes it
will), will be a greater service than I did ever expect at this time from
the City.  So home to my letters and then with my wife in the garden, and
then upon our leades singing in the evening and so to supper (while at
supper comes young Michell, whose wife I love, little Betty Howlet, to get
my favour about a ticket, and I am glad of this occasion of obliging him
and give occasion of his coming to me, for I must be better acquainted
with him and her), and after supper to bed.

22nd.  Up, and before I went out Mr. Peter Barr sent me a tierce of
claret, which is very welcome.  And so abroad down the river to Deptford
and there did some business, and then to Westminster, and there did with
much ado get my tallys (my small ones instead of one great one of L2,000),
and so away home and there all day upon my Tangier accounts with Creed,
and, he being gone, with myself, in settling other accounts till past
twelve at night, and then every body being in bed, I to bed, my father,
wife, and sister late abroad upon the water, and Mercer being gone to her
mother's and staid so long she could not get into the office, which vexed
me.

23rd.  My father and sister very betimes took their leave; and my wife,
with all possible kindnesse, went with them to the coach, I being mightily
pleased with their company thus long, and my father with his being here,
and it rejoices my heart that I am in condition to do any thing to comfort
him, and could, were it not for my mother, have been contented he should
have stayed always here with me, he is such innocent company.  They being
gone, I to my papers, but vexed at what I heard but a little of this
morning, before my wife went out, that Mercer and she fell out last night,
and that the girle is gone home to her mother's for all-together: This
troubles me, though perhaps it may be an ease to me of so much charge.
But I love the girle, and another we must be forced to keepe I do foresee
and then shall be sorry to part with her.  At the office all the morning,
much disquiett in my mind in the middle of my business about this girle.
Home at noon to dinner, and what with the going away of my father today
and the losse of Mercer, I after dinner went up to my chamber and there
could have cried to myself, had not people come to me about business.  In
the evening down to Tower Wharfe thinking to go by water, but could not
get watermen; they being now so scarce, by reason of the great presse; so
to the Custome House, and there, with great threats, got a couple to carry
me down to Deptford, all the way reading Pompey the Great (a play
translated from the French by several noble persons; among others, my Lord
Buckhurst), that to me is but a mean play, and the words and sense not
very extraordinary.  From Deptford I walked to Redriffe, and in my way was
overtaken by Bagwell, lately come from sea in the Providence, who did give
me an account of several particulars in the late fight, and how his ship
was deserted basely by the York, Captain Swanly, commander.  So I home and
there after writing my letters home to supper and to bed, fully resolved
to rise betimes, and go down the river to-morrow morning, being vexed this
night to find none of the officers in the yarde at 7 at night, nor any
body concerned as if it were a Dutch warr.  It seems Mercer's mother was
here in the morning to speak with my wife, but my wife would not.  In the
afternoon I and my wife in writing did instruct W. Hewer in some discourse
to her, and she in the evening did come and satisfy my wife, and by and by
Mercer did come, which I was mighty glad of and eased of much pain about
her.

24th.  Sunday.  Midsummer Day.  Up, but, being weary the last night, not
so soon as I intended.  Then being dressed, down by water to Deptford, and
there did a great deale of business, being in a mighty hurry, Sir W.
Coventry writing to me that there was some thoughts that the Dutch fleete
were out or coming out.  Business being done in providing for the carrying
down of some provisions to the fleete, I away back home and after dinner
by water to White Hall, and there waited till the councill rose, in the
boarded gallery, and there among other things I hear that Sir Francis
Prujean is dead, after being married to a widow about a yeare or
thereabouts.  He died very rich, and had, for the last yeare, lived very
handsomely, his lady bringing him to it.  He was no great painstaker in
person, yet died very rich; and, as Dr. Clerke says, was of a very great
judgment, but hath writ nothing to leave his name to posterity.  In the
gallery among others met with Major Halsey, a great creature of the Duke
of Albemarle's; who tells me that the Duke, by name, hath said that he
expected to have the worke here up in the River done, having left Sir W.
Batten and Mr. Phipps there.  He says that the Duke of Albemarle do say
that this is a victory we have had, having, as he was sure, killed them
8000 men, and sunk about fourteen of their ships; but nothing like this
appears true.  He lays much of the little success we had, however, upon
the fleete's being divided by order from above, and the want of spirit in
the commanders; and that he was commanded by order to go out of the Downes
to the Gun-fleete, and in the way meeting the Dutch fleete, what should he
do?  should he not fight them?  especially having beat them heretofore at
as great disadvantage.  He tells me further, that having been downe with
the Duke of Albemarle, he finds that Holmes and Spragge do govern most
business of the Navy; and by others I understand that Sir Thomas Allen is
offended thereat; that he is not so much advised with as he ought to be.
He tells me also, as he says, of his own knowledge, that several people
before the Duke went out did offer to supply the King with L100,000
provided he would be treasurer of it, to see it laid out for the Navy;
which he refused, and so it died.  But I believe none of this.  This day I
saw my Lady Falmouth, with whom I remember now I have dined at my Lord
Barkeley's heretofore, a pretty woman: she was now in her second or third
mourning, and pretty pleasant in her looks.  By and by the Council rises,
and Sir W. Coventry comes out; and he and I went aside, and discoursed of
much business of the Navy; and afterwards took his coach, and to
Hide-Parke, he and I alone: there we had much talke.  First, he started a
discourse of a talke he hears about the towne, which, says he, is a very
bad one, and fit to be suppressed, if we knew how which is, the comparing
of the successe of the last year with that of this; saying that that was
good, and that bad. I was as sparing in speaking as I could, being jealous
of him and myself also, but wished it could be stopped; but said I doubted
it could not otherwise than by the fleete's being abroad again, and so
finding other worke for men's minds and discourse.  Then to discourse of
himself, saying, that he heard that he was under the lash of people's
discourse about the Prince's not having notice of the Dutch being out, and
for him to comeback again, nor the Duke of Albemarle notice that the
Prince was sent for back again: to which he told me very particularly how
careful he was the very same night that it was resolved to send for the
Prince back, to cause orders to be writ, and waked the Duke, who was then
in bed, to sign them; and that they went by expresse that very night,
being the Wednesday night before the fight, which begun on the Friday; and
that for sending them by the post expresse, and not by gentlemen on
purpose, he made a sport of it, and said, I knew of none to send it with,
but would at least have lost more time in fitting themselves out, than any
diligence of theirs beyond that of the ordinary post would have recovered.
I told him that this was not so much the towne talke as the reason of
dividing the fleete.  To this he told me he ought not to say much; but did
assure me in general that the proposition did first come from the fleete,
and the resolution not being prosecuted with orders so soon as the
Generall thought fit, the Generall did send Sir Edward Spragge up on
purpose for them; and that there was nothing in the whole business which
was not done with the full consent and advice of the Duke of Albemarle.

But he did adde (as the Catholiques call 'le secret de la Masse'), that
Sir Edward Spragge--who had even in Sir Christopher Mings's time put in to
be the great favourite of the Prince, but much more now had a mind to be
the great man with him, and to that end had a mind to have the Prince at a
distance from the Duke of Albemarle, that they might be doing something
alone--did, as he believed, put on this business of dividing the fleete,
and that thence it came.

     [This division of the fleet was the original cause of the disaster,
     and at a later period the enemies of Clarendon charged him with
     having advised this action, but Coventry's communication to Pepys in
     the text completely exonerates Clarendon.]

He tells me as to the business of intelligence, the want whereof the world
did complain much of, that for that it was not his business, and as he was
therefore to have no share in the blame, so he would not meddle to lay it
any where else.  That de Ruyter was ordered by the States not to make it
his business to come into much danger, but to preserve himself as much as
was fit out of harm's way, to be able to direct the fleete.  He do, I
perceive, with some violence, forbear saying any thing to the reproach of
the Duke of Albemarle; but, contrarily, speaks much of his courage; but I
do as plainly see that he do not like the Duke of Albemarle's proceedings,
but, contrarily, is displeased therewith.  And he do plainly diminish the
commanders put in by the Duke, and do lessen the miscarriages of any that
have been removed by him.  He concurs with me, that the next bout will be
a fatal one to one side or other, because, if we be beaten, we shall not
be able to set out our fleete again.  He do confess with me that the
hearts of our seamen are much saddened; and for that reason, among others,
wishes Sir Christopher Mings was alive, who might inspire courage and
spirit into them.  Speaking of Holmes, how great a man he is, and that he
do for the present, and hath done all the voyage, kept himself in good
order and within bounds; but, says he, a cat will be a cat still, and some
time or other out his humour must break again.  He do not disowne but that
the dividing of the fleete upon the presumptions that were then had
(which, I suppose, was the French fleete being come this way), was a good
resolution.  Having had all this discourse, he and I back to White Hall;
and there I left him, being [in] a little doubt whether I had behaved
myself in my discourse with the policy and circumspection which ought to
be used to so great a courtier as he is, and so wise and factious a man,
and by water home, and so, after supper, to bed.

25th.  Up, and all the morning at my Tangier accounts, which the chopping
and changing of my tallys make mighty troublesome; but, however, I did end
them with great satisfaction to myself.  At noon, without staying to eat
my dinner, I down by water to Deptford, and there coming find Sir W.
Batten and Sir Jeremy Smith (whom the dispatch of the Loyall London
detained) at dinner at Greenwich at the Beare Taverne, and thither I to
them and there dined with them.  Very good company of strangers there was,
but I took no great pleasure among them, being desirous to be back again.
So got them to rise as soon as I could, having told them the newes Sir W.
Coventry just now wrote me to tell them, which is, that the Dutch are
certainly come out.  I did much business at Deptford, and so home, by an
old poor man, a sculler, having no oares to be got, and all this day on
the water entertained myself with the play of Commenius, and being come
home did go out to Aldgate, there to be overtaken by Mrs. Margot Pen in
her father's coach, and my wife and Mercer with her, and Mrs. Pen carried
us to two gardens at Hackny, (which I every day grow more and more in love
with,) Mr. Drake's one, where the garden is good, and house and the
prospect admirable; the other my Lord Brooke's, where the gardens are much
better, but the house not so good, nor the prospect good at all.  But the
gardens are excellent; and here I first saw oranges grow: some green, some
half, some a quarter, and some full ripe, on the same tree, and one fruit
of the same tree do come a year or two after the other.  I pulled off a
little one by stealth (the man being mighty curious of them) and eat it,
and it was just as other little green small oranges are; as big as half
the end of my little finger.  Here were also great variety of other
exotique plants, and several labarinths, and a pretty aviary.  Having done
there with very great pleasure we away back again, and called at the
Taverne in Hackny by the church, and there drank and eate, and so in the
Goole of the evening home.  This being the first day of my putting on my
black stuff bombazin suit, and I hope to feel no inconvenience by it, the
weather being extremely hot.  So home and to bed, and this night the first
night of my lying without a waistcoat, which I hope I shall very well
endure.  So to bed.  This morning I did with great pleasure hear Mr.
Caesar play some good things on his lute, while he come to teach my boy
Tom, and I did give him 40s. for his encouragement.

26th.  Up and to my office betimes, and there all the morning, very busy
to get out the fleete, the Dutch being now for certain out, and we shall
not, we thinke, be much behindhand with them.  At noon to the 'Change
about business, and so home to dinner, and after dinner to the setting my
Journall to rights, and so to the office again, where all the afternoon
full of business, and there till night, that my eyes were sore, that I
could not write no longer.  Then into the garden, then my wife and Mercer
and my Lady Yen and her daughter with us, and here we sung in the darke
very finely half an houre, and so home to supper and to bed.  This
afternoon, after a long drowth, we had a good shower of rain, but it will
not signify much if no more come.  This day in the morning come Mr.
Chichly to Sir W. Coventry, to tell him the ill successe of the guns made
for the Loyall London; which is, that in the trial every one of the great
guns, the whole cannon of seven (as I take it), broke in pieces, which is
a strange mishap, and that which will give more occasion to people's
discourse of the King's business being done ill.  This night Mary my
cookemayde, that hath been with us about three months, but find herself
not able to do my worke, so is gone with great kindnesse away, and another
(Luce) come, very ugly and plaine, but may be a good servant for all that.

27th.  Up, and to my office awhile, and then down the river a little way
to see vessels ready for the carrying down of 400 land soldiers to the
fleete.  Then back to the office for my papers, and so to St. James's,
where we did our usual attendance on the Duke.  Having done with him, we
all of us down to Sir W. Coventry's chamber (where I saw his father my
Lord Coventry's picture hung up, done by Stone, who then brought it home.
It is a good picture, drawn in his judge's robes, and the great seale by
him.  And while it was hanging up, "This," says Sir W. Coventry, merrily,
"is the use we make of our fathers,") to discourse about the proposition
of serving us with hempe, delivered in by my Lord Brouncker as from an
unknown person, though I know it to be Captain Cocke's.  My Lord and Sir
William Coventry had some earnest words about it, the one promoting it for
his private ends, being, as Cocke tells me himself, to have L500 if the
bargain goes on, and I am to have as much, and the other opposing it for
the unseasonableness of it, not knowing at all whose the proposition is,
which seems the more ingenious of the two.  I sat by and said nothing,
being no great friend to the proposition, though Cocke intends me a
convenience by it.  But what I observed most from the discourse was this
of Sir W. Coventry, that he do look upon ourselves in a desperate
condition.  The issue of all standing upon this one point, that by the
next fight, if we beat, the Dutch will certainly be content to take eggs
for their money (that was his expression); or if we be beaten, we must be
contented to make peace, and glad if we can have it without paying too
dear for it.  And withall we do rely wholly upon the Parliament's giving
us more money the next sitting, or else we are undone.  Being gone hence,
I took coach to the Old Exchange, but did not go into it, but to Mr.
Cade's, the stationer, stood till the shower was over, it being a great
and welcome one after so much dry weather.  Here I understand that Ogleby
is putting out some new fables of his owne, which will be very fine and
very satyricall.  Thence home to dinner, and after dinner carried my wife
to her sister's and I to Mr. Hales's, to pay for my father's picture,
which cost me L10 the head and 25s. the frame.  Thence to Lovett's, who
has now done something towards the varnishing of single paper for the
making of books, which will do, I think, very well.  He did also carry me
to a Knight's chamber in Graye's Inne, where there is a frame of his
making, of counterfeite tortoise shell, which indeed is most excellently
done.  Then I took him with me to a picture shop to choose a print for him
to vernish, but did not agree for one then.  Thence to my wife to take her
up and so carried her home, and I at the office till late, and so to
supper with my wife and to bed.  I did this afternoon visit my Lord
Bellasses, who professes all imaginable satisfaction in me.  He spoke
dissatisfiedly with Creed, which I was pleased well enough with.  My Lord
is going down to his garrison to Hull, by the King's command, to put it in
order for fear of an invasion which course I perceive is taken upon the
sea-coasts round; for we have a real apprehension of the King of France's
invading us.

28th.  Up, and at the office all the morning.  At noon home to dinner, and
after dinner abroad to Lumbard Streete, there to reckon with Sir Robert
Viner for some money, and did sett all straight to my great content, and
so home, and all the afternoon and evening at the office, my mind full at
this time of getting my accounts over, and as much money in my hands as I
can, for a great turne is to be feared in the times, the French having
some great design (whatever it is) in hand, and our necessities on every
side very great.  The Dutch are now known to be out, and we may expect
them every houre upon our coast.  But our fleete is in pretty good
readinesse for them.

29th.  Up, and within doors most of the morning, sending a porter
(Sanders) up and down to several people to pay them money to clear my
month's debts every where, being mighty desirous to have all clear so soon
as I can, and to that end did so much in settling my Tangier accounts
clear.  At noon dined, having first been down at Deptford and did a little
business there and back again.  After dinner to White Hall to a Committee
of Tangier, but I come a little too late, they were up, so I to several
places about business, among others to Westminster Hall, and there did
meet with Betty Michell at her own mother's shop.  I would fain have
carried her home by water, but she was to sup at that end of the town.  So
I away to White Hall, and thence, the Council being up, walked to St.
James's, and there had much discourse with Sir W. Coventry at his chamber,
who I find quite weary of the warr, decries our having any warr at all, or
himself to have been any occasion of it, that he hopes this will make us
shy of any warr hereafter, or to prepare better for it, believes that one
overthrow on the Dutch side would make them desire peace, and that one on
ours will make us willing to accept of one: tells me that Commissioner
Pett is fallen infinitely under the displeasure of the Prince and Duke of
Albemarle, not giving them satisfaction in the getting out of the fleete,
and that the complaint he believes is come to the King, and by Sir W.
Coventry's discourse I find he do concur in it, and speaks of his having
of no authority in the place where he is, and I do believe at least it
will end in his being removed to some other yarde, and I am not sorry for
it, but do fear that though he deserves as bad, yet at this time the blame
may not be so well deserved.  Thence home and to the office; where I met
with a letter from Dover, which tells me (and it did come by expresse)
that newes is brought over by a gentleman from Callice that the Dutch
fleete, 130 sail, are come upon the French coast; and that the country is
bringing in picke-axes, and shovells, and wheel-barrows into Callice; that
there are 6,000 men armed with head, back, and breast (Frenchmen) ready to
go on board the Dutch fleete, and will be followed by 12,000 more.  That
they pretend they are to come to Dover; and that thereupon the Governor of
Dover Castle is getting the victuallers' provision out of the towne into
the Castle to secure it. But I do think this is a ridiculous conceit; but
a little time will show. At night home to supper and to bed,

30th.  Up, and to the office, and mightily troubled all this morning with
going to my Lord Mayor (Sir Thomas Bludworth,

     [As his conduct during the Great Fire fully proved, when he is said
     to have boasted that he would extinguish the flames by the same
     means to which Swift tells us Gulliver had recourse at Lilliput.--B.]

a silly man, I think), and other places, about getting shipped some men
that they have these two last nights pressed in the City out of houses:
the persons wholly unfit for sea, and many of them people of very good
fashion, which is a shame to think of, and carried to Bridewell they are,
yet without being impressed with money legally as they ought to be.  But
to see how the King's business is done; my Lord Mayor himself did scruple
at this time of extremity to do this thing, because he had not money to
pay the pressed-money to the men, he told me so himself; nor to take up
boats to carry them down through bridge to the ships I had prepared to
carry them down in; insomuch that I was forced to promise to be his
paymaster, and he did send his City Remembrancer afterwards to the office,
and at the table, in the face of the officers, I did there out of my owne
purse disburse L15 to pay for their pressing and diet last night and this
morning; which is a thing worth record of my Lord Mayor.  Busy about this
all the morning, at noon dined and then to the office again, and all the
afternoon till twelve at night full of this business and others, and among
these others about the getting off men pressed by our officers of the
fleete into the service; even our owne men that are at the office, and the
boats that carry us.  So that it is now become impossible to have so much
as a letter carried from place to place, or any message done for us: nay,
out of Victualling ships full loaden to go down to the fleete, and out of
the vessels of the officers of the Ordnance, they press men, so that for
want of discipline in this respect I do fear all will be undone.  Vexed
with these things, but eased in mind by my ridding of a great deale of
business from the office, I late home to supper and to bed.  But before I
was in bed, while I was undressing myself, our new ugly mayde, Luce, had
like to have broke her necke in the darke, going down our upper stairs;
but, which I was glad of, the poor girle did only bruise her head, but at
first did lie on the ground groaning and drawing her breath, like one
a-dying.  This month I end in much hurry of business, but in much more
trouble in mind to thinke what will become of publique businesses, having
so many enemys abroad, and neither force nor money at all, and but little
courage for ourselves, it being really true that the spirits of our seamen
and commanders too are really broke by the last defeate with the Dutch,
and this is not my conjecture only, but the real and serious thoughts of
Sir G. Carteret and Sir W. Coventry, whom I have at distinct times heard
the same thing come from with a great deale of grief and trouble.  But,
lastly, I am providing against a foule day to get as much money into my
hands as I can, at least out of the publique hands, that so, if a turne,
which I fear, do come, I may have a little to trust to.  I pray God give
me good successe in my choice how to dispose of what little I have, that I
may not take it out of publique hands, and put it into worse.

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     A cat will be a cat still
     And if ever I fall on it again, I deserve to be undone
     Apprehension of the King of France's invading us
     As very a gossip speaking of her neighbours as any body
     Baited at Islington, and so late home about 11 at night
     Called at a little ale-house, and had an eele pye
     Checking her last night in the coach in her long stories
     Foretelling the draught of water of a ship before she be launche
     Great deale of tittle tattle discourse to little purpose
     He is such innocent company
     Here I first saw oranges grow
     I do not value her, or mind her as I ought
     I to bed even by daylight
     Long petticoat dragging under their men's coats
     Mightily pleased with myself for the business that I have done
     Mightily vexed at my being abroad with these women
     Never fought with worse officers in his life
     Not being well pleased with her over free and loose company
     Now very big, and within a fortnight of lying down
     Out also to and fro, to see and be seen
     Providing against a foule day to get as much money into my hands
     Rejoiced over head and ears in this good newes
     Requisite I be prepared against the man's friendship
     Sang till about twelve at night, with mighty pleasure
     Send up and down for a nurse to take the girle home
     Shy of any warr hereafter, or to prepare better for it
     So back again home to supper and to bed with great pleasure
     So home and to supper with beans and bacon and to bed
     That I may look as a man minding business
     There did what I would with her
     There did what 'je voudrais avec' her .  .  .  .
     Think that we are beaten in every respect
     This is the use we make of our fathers
     Took him home the money, and, though much to my grief
     Unless my too-much addiction to pleasure undo me
     What itching desire I did endeavour to see Bagwell's wife
     Young man play the foole upon the doctrine of purgatory


                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A. F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                  JULY
                                  1666

July 1st (Sunday).  Up betimes, and to the office receiving letters, two
or three one after another from Sir W. Coventry, and sent as many to him,
being full of variety of business and hurry, but among the chiefest is the
getting of these pressed men out of the City down the river to the fleete.
While I was hard at it comes Sir W. Pen to towne, which I little expected,
having invited my Lady and her daughter Pegg to dine with me to-day; which
at noon they did, and Sir W. Pen with them: and pretty merry we were.  And
though I do not love him, yet I find it necessary to keep in with him; his
good service at Shearnesse in getting out the fleete being much taken
notice of, and reported to the King and Duke [of York], even from the
Prince and Duke of Albemarle themselves, and made the most of to me and
them by Sir W. Coventry: therefore I think it discretion, great and
necessary discretion, to keep in with him.  After dinner to the office
again, where busy, and then down to Deptford to the yard, thinking to have
seen Bagwell's wife, whose husband is gone yesterday back to the fleete,
but I did not see her, so missed what I went for, and so back to the Tower
several times, about the business of the pressed men, and late at it till
twelve at night, shipping of them. But, Lord!  how some poor women did
cry; and in my life I never did see such natural expression of passion as
I did here in some women's bewailing themselves, and running to every
parcel of men that were brought, one after another, to look for their
husbands, and wept over every vessel that went off, thinking they might be
there, and looking after the ship as far as ever they could by
moone-light, that it grieved me to the heart to hear them.  Besides, to
see poor patient labouring men and housekeepers, leaving poor wives and
families, taking up on a sudden by strangers, was very hard, and that
without press-money, but forced against all law to be gone.  It is a great
tyranny.  Having done this I to the Lieutenant of the Tower and bade him
good night, and so away home and to bed.

2nd.  Up betimes, and forced to go to my Lord Mayor's, about the business
of the pressed men; and indeed I find him a mean man of understanding and
dispatch of any publique business.  Thence out of curiosity to Bridewell
to see the pressed men, where there are about 300; but so unruly that I
durst not go among them: and they have reason to be so, having been kept
these three days prisoners, with little or no victuals, and pressed out,
and, contrary to all course of law, without press-money, and men that are
not liable to it.  Here I met with prating Colonel Cox, one of the City
collonells heretofore a great presbyter: but to hear how the fellow did
commend himself, and the service he do the King; and, like an asse, at
Paul's did take me out of my way on purpose to show me the gate (the
little north gate) where he had two men shot close by him on each hand,
and his own hair burnt by a bullet-shot in the insurrection of Venner, and
himself escaped.  Thence home and to the Tower to see the men from
Bridewell shipped.  Being rid of him I home to dinner, and thence to the
Excise office by appointment to meet my Lord Bellasses and the
Commissioners, which we did and soon dispatched, and so I home, and there
was called by Pegg Pen to her house, where her father and mother, and Mrs.
Norton, the second Roxalana, a fine woman, indifferent handsome, good body
and hand, and good mine, and pretends to sing, but do it not excellently.
However I took pleasure there, and my wife was sent for, and Creed come in
to us, and so there we spent the most of the afternoon. Thence weary of
losing so much time I to the office, and thence presently down to
Deptford; but to see what a consternation there is upon the water by
reason of this great press, that nothing is able to get a waterman to
appear almost.  Here I meant to have spoke with Bagwell's mother, but her
face was sore, and so I did not, but returned and upon the water found one
of the vessels loaden with the Bridewell birds in a great mutiny, and they
would not sail, not they; but with good words, and cajoling the ringleader
into the Tower (where, when he was come, he was clapped up in the hole),
they were got very quietly; but I think it is much if they do not run the
vessel on ground.  But away they went, and I to the Lieutenant of the
Tower, and having talked with him a little, then home to supper very late
and to bed weary.

3rd.  Being very weary, lay long in bed, then to the office and there sat
all the day.  At noon dined at home, Balty's wife with us, and in very
good humour I was and merry at dinner, and after dinner a song or two, and
so I abroad to my Lord Treasurer's (sending my sister home by the coach),
while I staid there by appointment to have met my Lord Bellasses and
Commissioners of Excise, but they did not meet me, he being abroad.
However Mr. Finch, one of the Commissioners, I met there, and he and I
walked two houres together in the garden, talking of many things;
sometimes of Mr. Povy, whose vanity, prodigality, neglect of his business,
and committing it to unfit hands hath undone him and outed him of all his
publique employments, and the thing set on foot by an accidental revivall
of a business, wherein he had three or fours years ago, by surprize, got
the Duke of Yorke to sign to the having a sum of money paid out of the
Excise, before some that was due to him, and now the money is fallen
short, and the Duke never likely to be paid.  This being revived hath
undone Povy.  Then we fell to discourse of the Parliament, and the great
men there: and among others, Mr. Vaughan, whom he reports as a man of
excellent judgement and learning, but most passionate and 'opiniastre'.
He had done himself the most wrong (though he values it not), that is, the
displeasure of the King in his standing so long against the breaking of
the Act for a trienniall parliament; but yet do believe him to be a most
loyall gentleman.  He told me Mr. Prin's character; that he is a man of
mighty labour and reading and memory, but the worst judge of matters, or
layer together of what he hath read, in the world; which I do not,
however, believe him in; that he believes him very true to the King in his
heart, but can never be reconciled to episcopacy; that the House do not
lay much weight upon him, or any thing he says.  He told me many fine
things, and so we parted, and I home and hard to work a while at the
office and then home and till midnight about settling my last month's
accounts wherein I have been interrupted by public business, that I did
not state them two or three days ago, but I do now to my great joy find
myself worth above L5600, for which the Lord's name be praised!  So with
my heart full of content to bed.  Newes come yesterday from Harwich, that
the Dutch had appeared upon our coast with their fleete, and we believe
did go to the Gun-fleete, and they are supposed to be there now; but I
have heard nothing of them to-day. Yesterday Dr. Whistler, at Sir W.
Pen's, told me that Alexander Broome, a the great song-maker, is lately
dead.

4th.  Up, and visited very betimes by Mr. Sheply, who is come to town upon
business from Hinchingbrooke, where he left all well.  I out and walked
along with him as far as Fleet Streete, it being a fast day, the usual
fast day for the plague, and few coaches to be had.  Thanks be to God, the
plague is, as I hear, encreased but two this week; but in the country in
several places it rages mightily, and particularly in Colchester, where it
hath long been, and is believed will quite depopulate the place.  To St.
James's, and there did our usual business with the Duke, all of us, among
other things, discoursing about the places where to build ten great ships;
the King and Council have resolved on none to be under third-rates; but it
is impossible to do it, unless we have more money towards the doing it
than yet we have in any view.  But, however, the shew must be made to the
world.  Thence to my Lord Bellasses to take my leave of him, he being
going down to the North to look after the Militia there, for fear of an
invasion.  Thence home and dined, and then to the office, where busy all
day, and in the evening Sir W. Pen come to me, and we walked together, and
talked of the late fight.  I find him very plain, that the whole conduct
of the late fight was ill, and that that of truth's all, and he tells me
that it is not he, but two-thirds of the commanders of the whole fleete
have told him so: they all saying, that they durst not oppose it at the
Council of War, for fear of being called cowards, though it was wholly
against their judgement to fight that day with the disproportion of force,
and then we not being able to use one gun of our lower tier, which was a
greater disproportion than the other.  Besides, we might very well have
staid in the Downs without fighting, or any where else, till the Prince
could have come up to them; or at least till the weather was fair, that we
might have the benefit of our whole force in the ships that we had.  He
says three things must [be] remedied, or else we shall be undone by this
fleete. 1. That we must fight in a line, whereas we fight promiscuously,
to our utter and demonstrable ruine; the Dutch fighting otherwise; and we,
whenever we beat them.   2.  We must not desert ships of our own in
distress, as we did, for that makes a captain desperate, and he will fling
away his ship, when there is no hopes left him of succour. 3.  That ships,
when they are a little shattered, must not take the liberty to come in of
themselves, but refit themselves the best they can, and stay out--many of
our ships coming in with very small disablenesses. He told me that our
very commanders, nay, our very flag-officers, do stand in need of
exercising among themselves, and discoursing the business of commanding a
fleete; he telling me that even one of our flag-men in the fleete did not
know which tacke lost the wind, or which kept it, in the last engagement.
He says it was pure dismaying and fear that made them all run upon the
Galloper, not having their wits about them; and that it was a miracle they
were not all lost.  He much inveighs upon my discoursing of Sir John
Lawson's saying heretofore, that sixty sail would do as much as one
hundred; and says that he was a man of no counsel at all, but had got the
confidence to say as the gallants did, and did propose to himself to make
himself great by them, and saying as they did; but was no man of judgement
in his business, but hath been out in the greatest points that have come
before them.  And then in the business of fore-castles, which he did
oppose, all the world sees now the use of them for shelter of men.  He did
talk very rationally to me, insomuch that I took more pleasure this night
in hearing him discourse, than I ever did in my life in any thing that he
said.  He gone I to the office again, and so after some business home to
supper and to bed.

5th.  Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning busy, then at
noon dined and Mr. Sheply with me, who come to towne the other day.  I
lent him 630 in silver upon 30 pieces in gold.  But to see how apt every
body is to neglect old kindnesses!  I must charge myself with the
ingratitude of being unwilling to lend him so much money without some
pawne, if he should have asked it, but he did not aske it, poor man, and
so no harm done.  After dinner, he gone, I to my office and Lumbard
Streete about money, and then to my office again, very busy, and so till
late, and then a song with my wife and Mercer in the garden, and so with
great content to bed.

6th.  Up, and after doing some business at my office abroad to Lumbard
Street, about the getting of a good sum of money, thence home, in
preparation for my having some good sum in my hands, for fear of a trouble
in the State, that I may not have all I have in the world out of my hands
and so be left a beggar.  Having put that in a way, I home to the office,
and so to the Tower; about shipping of some more pressed men, and that
done, away to Broad Streete, to Sir G. Carteret, who is at a pay of
tickets all alone, and I believe not less than one thousand people in the
streets.  But it is a pretty thing to observe that both there and every
where else, a man shall see many women now-a-days of mean sort in the
streets, but no men; men being so afeard of the press.  I dined with Sir
G. Carteret, and after dinner had much discourse about our publique
business; and he do seem to fear every day more and more what I do; which
is, a general confusion in the State; plainly answering me to the
question, who is it that the weight of the warr depends [upon]? that it is
only Sir W. Coventry.  He tells me, too, the Duke of Albemarle is
dissatisfied, and that the Duchesse do curse Coventry as the man that
betrayed her husband to the sea: though I believe that it is not so.
Thence to Lumbard Streete, and received L2000, and carried it home:
whereof L1000 in gold.  The greatest quantity not only that I ever had of
gold, but that ever I saw together, and is not much above half a 100 lb.
bag full, but is much weightier.  This I do for security sake, and
convenience of carriage; though it costs me above L70 the change of it, at
18 1/2d. per piece.  Being at home, I there met with a letter from Bab
Allen,--[Mrs. Knipp]--to invite me to be god-father to her boy, with Mrs.
Williams, which I consented to, but know not the time when it is to be.
Thence down to the Old Swan, calling at Michell's, he not being within,
and there I did steal a kiss or two of her, and staying a little longer,
he come in, and her father, whom I carried to Westminster, my business
being thither, and so back again home, and very busy all the evening.  At
night a song in the garden and to bed.

7th.  At the office all the morning, at noon dined at home and Creed with
me, and after dinner he and I two or three hours in my chamber discoursing
of the fittest way for a man to do that hath money, and find all he offers
of turning some into gold and leaving some in a friend's hand is nothing
more than what I thought of myself, but is doubtful, as well as I, what is
best to be done of all these or other ways to be thought on.  He tells me
he finds all things mighty dull at Court; and that they now begin to lie
long in bed; it being, as we suppose, not seemly for them to be found
playing and gaming as they used to be; nor that their minds are at ease
enough to follow those sports, and yet not knowing how to employ
themselves (though there be work enough for their thoughts and councils
and pains), they keep long in bed.  But he thinks with me, that there is
nothing in the world can helpe us but the King's personal looking after
his business and his officers, and that with that we may yet do well; but
otherwise must be undone: nobody at this day taking care of any thing, nor
hath any body to call him to account for it.  Thence left him and to my
office all the afternoon busy, and in some pain in my back by some bruise
or other I have given myself in my right testicle this morning, and the
pain lies there and hath done, and in my back thereupon all this day.  At
night into the garden to my wife and Lady Pen and Pegg, and Creed, who
staid with them till to at night.  My Lady Pen did give us a tarte and
other things, and so broke up late and I to bed.  It proved the hottest
night that ever I was in in my life, and thundered and lightened all night
long and rained hard.  But, Lord!  to see in what fears I lay a good
while, hearing of a little noise of somebody walking in the house: so rung
the bell, and it was my mayds going to bed about one o'clock in the
morning.  But the fear of being robbed, having so much money in the house,
was very great, and is still so, and do much disquiet me.

8th (Lord's day).  Up, and pretty well of my pain, so that it did not
trouble me at all, and I do clearly find that my pain in my back was
nothing but only accompanied my bruise in my stones.  To church, wife and
Mercer and I, in expectation of hearing some mighty preacher to-day, Mrs.
Mary Batelier sending us word so; but it proved our ordinary silly
lecturer, which made me merry, and she laughed upon us to see her mistake.
At noon W. Hewer dined with us, and a good dinner, and I expected to have
had newes sent me of Knipp's christening to-day; but, hearing nothing of
it, I did not go, though I fear it is but their forgetfulness and so I may
disappoint them.  To church, after dinner, again, a thing I have not done
a good while before, go twice in one day. After church with my wife and
Mercer and Tom by water through bridge to the Spring Garden at Fox Hall,
and thence down to Deptford and there did a little business, and so back
home and to bed.

9th.  Up betimes, and with Sir W. Pen in his coach to Westminster to Sir
G. Downing's, but missed of him, and so we parted, I by water home, where
busy all the morning, at noon dined at home, and after dinner to my
office, where busy till come to by Lovett and his wife, who have brought
me some sheets of paper varnished on one side, which lies very white and
smooth and, I think, will do our business most exactly, and will come up
to the use that I intended them for, and I am apt to believe will be an
invention that will take in the world.  I have made up a little book of it
to give Sir W. Coventry to-morrow, and am very well pleased with it.  Home
with them, and there find my aunt Wight with my wife come to take her
leave of her, being going for the summer into the country; and there was
also Mrs. Mary Batelier and her sister, newly come out of France, a black,
very black woman, but mighty good-natured people both, as ever I saw.
Here I made the black one sing a French song, which she did mighty
innocently; and then Mrs. Lovett play on the lute, which she do very well;
and then Mercer and I sang; and so, with great pleasure, I left them,
having shewed them my chamber, and L1000 in gold, which they wondered at,
and given them sweetmeats, and shewn my aunt Wight my father's picture,
which she admires.  So I left them and to the office, where Mr. Moore come
to me and talking of my Lord's family business tells me that Mr. Sheply is
ignorantly, we all believe, mistaken in his accounts above L700 more than
he can discharge himself of, which is a mighty misfortune, poor man, and
may undo him, and yet every body believes that he do it most honestly.  I
am troubled for him very much. He gone, I hard at the office till night,
then home to supper and to bed.

10th.  Up, and to the office, where busy all the morning, sitting, and
there presented Sir W. Coventry with my little book made up of Lovett's
varnished paper, which he and the whole board liked very well.  At noon
home to dinner and then to the office; the yarde being very full of women
(I believe above three hundred) coming to get money for their husbands and
friends that are prisoners in Holland; and they lay clamouring and
swearing and cursing us, that my wife and I were afeard to send a
venison-pasty that we have for supper to-night to the cook's to be baked,
for fear of their offering violence to it: but it went, and no hurt done.
Then I took an opportunity, when they were all gone into the foreyarde,
and slipt into the office and there busy all the afternoon, but by and by
the women got into the garden, and come all to my closett window, and
there tormented me, and I confess their cries were so sad for money, and
laying down the condition of their families and their husbands, and what
they have done and suffered for the King, and how ill they are used by us,
and how well the Dutch are used here by the allowance of their masters,
and what their husbands are offered to serve the Dutch abroad, that I do
most heartily pity them, and was ready to cry to hear them, but cannot
helpe them.  However, when the rest were gone, I did call one to me that I
heard complaine only and pity her husband and did give her some money, and
she blessed me and went away.  Anon my business at the office being done I
to the Tower to speak with Sir John Robinson about business, principally
the bad condition of the pressed men for want of clothes, so it is
represented from the fleete, and so to provide them shirts and stockings
and drawers.  Having done with him about that, I home and there find my
wife and the two Mrs. Bateliers walking in the garden.  I with them till
almost 9 at night, and then they and we and Mrs. Mercer, the mother, and
her daughter Anne, and our Mercer, to supper to a good venison-pasty and
other good things, and had a good supper, and very merry, Mistresses
Bateliers being both very good-humoured.  We sang and talked, and then led
them home, and there they made us drink; and, among other things, did show
us, in cages, some birds brought from about Bourdeaux, that are all fat,
and, examining one of them, they are so, almost all fat.  Their name is
[Ortolans], which are brought over to the King for him to eat, and indeed
are excellent things.  We parted from them and so home to bed, it being
very late, and to bed.

11th.  Up, and by water to Sir G. Downing's, there to discourse with him
about the reliefe of the prisoners in Holland; which I did, and we do
resolve of the manner of sending them some.  So I away by coach to St.
James's, and there hear that the Duchesse is lately brought to bed of a
boy.  By and by called to wait on the Duke, the King being present; and
there agreed, among other things, of the places to build the ten new great
ships ordered to be built, and as to the relief of prisoners in Holland.
And then about several stories of the basenesse of the King of Spayne's
being served with officers: they in Flanders having as good common men as
any Prince in the world, but the veriest cowards for the officers, nay for
the generall officers, as the Generall and Lieutenant-generall, in the
whole world.  But, above all things, the King did speake most in contempt
of the ceremoniousnesse of the King of Spayne, that he do nothing but
under some ridiculous form or other, and will not piss but another must
hold the chamber-pot.  Thence to Westminster Hall and there staid a while,
and then to the Swan and kissed Sarah, and so home to dinner, and after
dinner out again to Sir Robert Viner, and there did agree with him to
accommodate some business of tallys so as I shall get in near L2000 into
my own hands, which is in the King's, upon tallys; which will be a
pleasure to me, and satisfaction to have a good sum in my own hands,
whatever evil disturbances should be in the State; though it troubles me
to lose so great a profit as the King's interest of ten per cent. for that
money.  Thence to Westminster, doing several things by the way, and there
failed of meeting Mrs. Lane, and so by coach took up my wife at her
sister's, and so away to Islington, she and I alone, and so through
Hackney, and home late, our discourse being about laying up of some money
safe in prevention to the troubles I am afeard we may have in the state,
and so sleepy (for want of sleep the last night, going to bed late and
rising betimes in the morning) home, but when I come to the office, I
there met with a command from my Lord Arlington, to go down to a galliott
at Greenwich, by the King's particular command, that is going to carry the
Savoy Envoye over, and we fear there may be many Frenchmen there on board;
and so I have a power and command to search for and seize all that have
not passes from one of the Secretarys of State, and to bring them and
their papers and everything else in custody some whither. So I to the
Tower, and got a couple of musquetiers with me, and Griffen and my boy Tom
and so down; and, being come, found none on board but two or three
servants, looking to horses and doggs, there on board, and, seeing no
more, I staid not long there, but away and on shore at Greenwich, the
night being late and the tide against us; so, having sent before, to Mrs.
Clerke's and there I had a good bed, and well received, the whole people
rising to see me, and among the rest young Mrs. Daniel, whom I kissed
again and again alone, and so by and by to bed and slept pretty well,

12th.  But was up again by five o'clock, and was forced to rise, having
much business, and so up and dressed myself (enquiring, was told that Mrs.
Tooker was gone hence to live at London) and away with Poundy to the
Tower, and thence, having shifted myself, but being mighty drowsy for want
of sleep, I by coach to St. James's, to Goring House, there to wait on my
Lord Arlington to give him an account of my night's worke, but he was not
up, being not long since married: so, after walking up and down the house
below,--being the house I was once at Hartlib's sister's wedding, and is a
very fine house and finely furnished,--and then thinking it too much for
me to lose time to wait my Lord's rising, I away to St. James's, and there
to Sir W. Coventry, and wrote a letter to my Lord Arlington giving him an
account of what I have done, and so with Sir W. Coventry into London, to
the office.  And all the way I observed him mightily to make mirth of the
Duke of Albemarle and his people about him, saying, that he was the
happiest man in the world for doing of great things by sorry instruments.
And so particularized in Sir W. Clerke, and Riggs, and Halsey, and others.
And then again said that the only quality eminent in him was, that he did
persevere; and indeed he is a very drudge, and stands by the King's
business.  And this he said, that one thing he was good at, that he never
would receive an excuse if the thing was not done; listening to no
reasoning for it, be it good or bad.  But then I told him, what he
confessed, that he would however give the man, that he employs, orders for
removing of any obstruction that he thinks he shall meet with in the
world, and instanced in several warrants that he issued for breaking open
of houses and other outrages about the business of prizes, which people
bore with either for affection or fear, which he believes would not have
been borne with from the King, nor Duke, nor any man else in England, and
I thinke he is in the right, but it is not from their love of him, but
from something else I cannot presently say.  Sir W. Coventry did further
say concerning Warcupp, his kinsman, that had the simplicity to tell Sir
W. Coventry, that the Duke did intend to go to sea and to leave him his
agent on shore for all things that related to the sea.  But, says Sir W.
Coventry, I did believe but the Duke of Yorke would expect to be his agent
on shore for all sea matters.  And then he begun to say what a great man
Warcupp was, and something else, and what was that but a great lyer; and
told me a story, how at table he did, they speaking about antipathys, say,
that a rose touching his skin any where, would make it rise and pimple;
and, by and by, the dessert coming, with roses upon it, the Duchesse bid
him try, and they did; but they rubbed and rubbed, but nothing would do in
the world, by which his lie was found at then.  He spoke contemptibly of
Holmes and his mermidons, that come to take down the ships from hence, and
have carried them without any necessaries, or any thing almost, that they
will certainly be longer getting ready than if they had staid here.  In
fine, I do observe, he hath no esteem nor kindnesse for the Duke's
matters, but, contrarily, do slight him and them; and I pray God the
Kingdom do not pay too dear by this jarring; though this blockheaded Duke
I did never expect better from.  At the office all the morning, at noon
home and thought to have slept, my head all day being full of business and
yet sleepy and out of order, and so I lay down on my bed in my gowne to
sleep, but I could not, therefore about three o'clock up and to dinner and
thence to the office, where.  Mrs. Burroughs, my pretty widow, was and so
I did her business and sent her away by agreement, and presently I by
coach after and took her up in Fenchurch Streete and away through the
City, hiding my face as much as I could, but she being mighty pretty and
well enough clad, I was not afeard, but only lest somebody should see me
and think me idle.  I quite through with her, and so into the fields
Uxbridge way, a mile or two beyond Tyburne, and then back and then to
Paddington, and then back to Lyssen green, a place the coachman led me to
(I never knew in my life) and there we eat and drank and so back to
Chasing Crosse, and there I set her down.  All the way most excellent
pretty company.  I had her lips as much as I would, and a mighty pretty
woman she is and very modest and yet kinde in all fair ways.  All this
time I passed with mighty pleasure, it being what I have for a long time
wished for, and did pay this day 5s. forfeite for her company.  She being
gone, I to White Hall and there to Lord Arlington's, and met Mr.
Williamson, and find there is no more need of my trouble about the
Galliott, so with content departed, and went straight home, where at the
office did the most at the office in that wearied and sleepy state I
could, and so home to supper, and after supper falling to singing with
Mercer did however sit up with her, she pleasing me with her singing of
"Helpe, helpe," 'till past midnight and I not a whit drowsy, and so to
bed.

13th.  Lay sleepy in bed till 8 in the morning, then up and to the office,
where till about noon, then out to the 'Change and several places, and so
home to dinner.  Then out again to Sir R. Vines, and there to my content
settled the business of two tallys, so as I shall have L2000 almost more
of my owne money in my hand, which pleases me mightily, and so home and
there to the office, where mighty busy, and then home to supper and to
even my Journall and to bed.  Our fleete being now in all points ready to
sayle, but for the carrying of the two or three new ships, which will
keepe them a day or two or three more.  It is said the Dutch is gone off
our coast, but I have no good reason to believe it, Sir W. Coventry not
thinking any such thing.

14th.  Up betimes to the office, to write fair a laborious letter I wrote
as from the Board to the Duke of Yorke, laying out our want of money
again; and particularly the business of Captain Cocke's tenders of hemp,
which my Lord Bruncker brought in under an unknown hand without name.
Wherein his Lordship will have no great successe, I doubt.  That being
done, I down to Thames-streete, and there agreed for four or five tons of
corke, to send this day to the fleete, being a new device to make
barricados with, instead of junke.  By this means I come to see and kiss
Mr. Hill's young wife, and a blithe young woman she is.  So to the office
and at noon home to dinner, and then sent for young Michell and employed
him all the afternoon about weighing and shipping off of the corke, having
by this means an opportunity of getting him 30 or 40s.  Having set him a
doing, I home and to the office very late, very busy, and did indeed
dispatch much business, and so to supper and to bed.  After a song in the
garden, which, and after dinner, is now the greatest pleasure I take, and
indeed do please me mightily, to bed, after washing my legs and feet with
warm water in my kitchen.  This evening I had Davila

     [Enrico Caterino Davila (1576-1631) was one of the chief historical
     writers of Italy, and his "Storia delle guerre civili di Francia"
     covers a period of forty years, from the death of Henri II. to the
     Peace of Vervins in 1598.]

brought home to me, and find it a most excellent history as ever I read.

15th (Lord's day).  Up, and to church, where our lecturer made a sorry
silly sermon, upon the great point of proving the truth of the Christian
religion.  Home and had a good dinner, expecting Mr. Hunt, but there comes
only young Michell and his wife, whom my wife concurs with me to be a
pretty woman, and with her husband is a pretty innocent couple. Mightily
pleasant we were, and I mightily pleased in her company and to find my
wife so well pleased with them also.  After dinner he and I walked to
White Hall, not being able to get a coach.  He to the Abbey, and I to
White Hall, but met with nobody to discourse with, having no great mind to
be found idling there, and be asked questions of the fleete, so walked
only through to the Parke, and there, it being mighty hot and I weary, lay
down by the canaille, upon the grasse, and slept awhile, and was thinking
of a lampoone which hath run in my head this weeke, to make upon the late
fight at sea, and the miscarriages there; but other businesses put it out
of my head.  Having lain there a while, I then to the Abbey and there
called Michell, and so walked in great pain, having new shoes on, as far
as Fleete Streete and there got a coach, and so in some little ease home
and there drank a great deale of small beer; and so took up my wife and
Betty Michell and her husband, and away into the fields, to take the ayre,
as far as beyond Hackny, and so back again, in our way drinking a great
deale of milke, which I drank to take away, my heartburne, wherewith I
have of late been mightily troubled, but all the way home I did break
abundance of wind behind, which did presage no good but a great deal of
cold gotten.  So home and supped and away went Michell and his wife, of
whom I stole two or three salutes, and so to bed in some pain and in fear
of more, which accordingly I met with, for I was in mighty pain all night
long of the winde griping of my belly and making of me shit often and
vomit too, which is a thing not usual with me, but this I impute to the
milke that I drank after so much beer, but the cold, to my washing my feet
the night before.

16th.  Lay in great pain in bed all the morning and most of the afternoon,
being in much pain, making little or no water, and indeed having little
within to make any with.  And had great twinges with the wind all the day
in my belly with wind.  And a looseness with it, which however made it not
so great as I have heretofore had it.  A wonderful dark sky, and shower of
rain this morning, which at Harwich proved so too with a shower of hail as
big as walnuts.  I had some broth made me to drink, which I love, only to
fill up room.  Up in the afternoon, and passed the day with Balty, who is
come from sea for a day or two before the fight, and I perceive could be
willing fairly to be out of the next fight, and I cannot much blame him,
he having no reason by his place to be there; however, would not have him
to be absent, manifestly to avoid being there.  At night grew a little
better and took a glyster of sacke, but taking it by halves it did me not
much good, I taking but a little of it.  However, to bed, and had a pretty
good night of it,

17th.  So as to be able to rise to go to the office and there sat, but now
and then in pain, and without making much water, or freely.  However, it
grew better and better, so as after dinner believing the jogging in a
coach would do me good, I did take my wife out to the New Exchange to buy
things.  She there while I with Balty went and bought a common
riding-cloake for myself, to save my best.  It cost me but 30s., and will
do my turne mighty well.  Thence home and walked in the garden with Sir W.
Pen a while, and saying how the riding in the coach do me good (though I
do not yet much find it), he ordered his to be got ready while I did some
little business at the office, and so abroad he and I after 8 o'clock at
night, as far almost as Bow, and so back again, and so home to supper and
to bed.  This day I did bid Balty to agree with the Dutch paynter, which
he once led me to, to see landskipps, for a winter piece of snow, which
indeed is a good piece, and costs me but 40s., which I would not take the
money again for, it being, I think, very good.  After a little supper to
bed, being in less pain still, and had very good rest.

18th.  Up in good case, and so by coach to St. James's after my fellows,
and there did our business, which is mostly every day to complain of want
of money, and that only will undo us in a little time.  Here, among other
things, before us all, the Duke of Yorke did say, that now at length he is
come to a sure knowledge that the Dutch did lose in the late engagements
twenty-nine captains and thirteen ships.  Upon which Sir W. Coventry did
publickly move, that if his Royal Highness had this of a certainty, it
would be of use to send this down to the fleete, and to cause it to be
spread about the fleete, for the recovering of the spirits of the officers
and seamen; who are under great dejectedness for want of knowing that they
did do any thing against the enemy, notwithstanding all that they did to
us.  Which, though it be true, yet methought was one of the most
dishonourable motions to our countrymen that ever was made; and is worth
remembering.  Thence with Sir W. Pen home, calling at Lilly's, to have a
time appointed when to be drawn among the other Commanders of Flags the
last year's fight.  And so full of work Lilly is, that he was faro to take
his table-book out to see how his time is appointed, and appointed six
days hence for him to come between seven and eight in the morning.  Thence
with him home; and there by appointment I find Dr. Fuller, now Bishop of
Limericke, in Ireland; whom I knew in his low condition at Twittenham.  I
had also by his desire Sir W. Pen, and with him his lady and daughter, and
had a good dinner, and find the Bishop the same good man as ever; and in a
word, kind to us, and, methinks, one of the comeliest and most becoming
prelates in all respects that ever I saw in my life.  During dinner comes
an acquaintance of his, Sir Thomas Littleton; whom I knew not while he was
in my house, but liked his discourse; and afterwards, by Sir W. Pen, do
come to know that he is one of the greatest speakers in the House of
Commons, and the usual second to the great Vaughan.  So was sorry I did
observe him no more, and gain more of his acquaintance.  After dinner,
they being gone, and I mightily pleased with my guests, I down the river
to Greenwich, about business, and thence walked to Woolwich, reading "The
Rivall Ladys" all the way, and find it a most pleasant and fine writ play.
At Woolwich saw Mr. Shelden, it being late, and there eat and drank, being
kindly used by him and Bab, and so by water to Deptford, it being 10
o'clock before I got to Deptford, and dark, and there to Bagwell's, and,
having staid there a while, away home, and after supper to bed.  The Duke
of Yorke said this day that by the letters from the Generals they would
sail with the Fleete this day or to-morrow.

19th.  Up in very good health in every respect, only my late fever got by
my pain do break out about my mouth.  So to the office, where all the
morning sitting.  Full of wants of money, and much stores to buy, for to
replenish the stores, and no money to do it with, nor anybody to trust us
without it.  So at noon home to dinner, Balty and his wife with us.  By
and by Balty takes his leave of us, he going away just now towards the
fleete, where he will pass through one great engagement more before he be
two days older, I believe.  I to the office, where busy all the afternoon,
late, and then home, and, after some pleasant discourse to my wife, to
bed.  After I was in bed I had a letter from Sir W. Coventry that tells me
that the fleete is sailed this morning; God send us good newes of them!

20th.  Up, and finding by a letter late last night that the fleete is
gone, and that Sir W. Pen is ordered to go down to Sheernesse, and finding
him ready to go to St. James's this morning, I was willing to go with him
to see how things go,

     [Sir William Penn's instructions from the Duke of York directing him
     to embark on his Majesty's yacht "Henrietta," and to see to the
     manning of such ships has had been left behind by the fleet, dated
     on this day, 20th July, is printed in Penn's "Memorials of Sir W.
     Penn," vol. ii., p. 406.]

and so with him thither (but no discourse with the Duke), but to White
Hall, and there the Duke of York did bid Sir W. Pen to stay to discourse
with him and the King about business of the fleete, which troubled me a
little, but it was only out of envy, for which I blame myself, having no
reason to expect to be called to advise in a matter I understand not.  So
I away to Lovett's, there to see how my picture goes on to be varnished (a
fine Crucifix),

     [This picture occasioned Pepys trouble long afterwards, having been
     brought as evidence that he was a Papist (see "Life," vol. i., p.
     xxxiii).]

which will be very fine; and here I saw some fine prints, brought from
France by Sir Thomas Crew, who is lately returned.  So home, calling at
the stationer's for some paper fit to varnish, and in my way home met with
Lovett, to whom I gave it, and he did present me with a varnished staffe,
very fine and light to walk with.  So home and to dinner, there coming
young Mrs. Daniel and her sister Sarah, and dined with us; and old Mr.
Hawly, whose condition pities me, he being forced to turne under
parish-clerke at St. Gyles's, I think at the other end of the towne.
Thence I to the office, where busy all the afternoon, and in the evening
with Sir W. Pen, walking with whom in the garden I am of late mighty
great, and it is wisdom to continue myself so, for he is of all the men of
the office at present most manifestly usefull and best thought of. He and
I supped together upon the seat in the garden, and thence, he gone, my
wife and Mercer come and walked and sang late, and then home to bed.

21st. Up and to the office, where all the morning sitting.  At noon walked
in the garden with Commissioner Pett (newly come to towne), who tells me
how infinite the disorders are among the commanders and all officers of
the fleete.  No discipline: nothing but swearing and cursing, and every
body doing what they please; and the Generalls, understanding no better,
suffer it, to the reproaching of this Board, or whoever it will be.  He
himself hath been challenged twice to the field, or something as good, by
Sir Edward Spragge and Captain Seymour.  He tells me that captains carry,
for all the late orders, what men they please; demand and consume what
provisions they please.  So that he fears, and I do no less, that God
Almighty cannot bless us while we keep in this disorder that we are in: he
observing to me too, that there is no man of counsel or advice in the
fleete; and the truth is, the gentlemen captains will undo us, for they
are not to be kept in order, their friends about the King and Duke, and
their own house, is so free, that it is not for any person but the Duke
himself to have any command over them.  He gone I to dinner, and then to
the office, where busy all the afternoon.  At night walked in the garden
with my wife, and so I home to supper and to bed.  Sir W. Pen is gone down
to Sheernesse to-day to see things made ready against the fleete shall
come in again, which makes Pett mad, and calls him dissembling knave, and
that himself takes all the pains and is blamed, while he do nothing but
hinder business and takes all the honour of it to himself, and tells me
plainly he will fling, up his commission rather than bear it.

22nd (Lord's day).  Up, and to my chamber, and there till noon mighty
busy, setting money matters and other things of mighty moment to rights to
the great content of my mind, I finding that accounts but a little let go
can never be put in order by strangers, for I cannot without much
difficulty do it myself.  After dinner to them again till about four
o'clock and then walked to White Hall, where saw nobody almost but walked
up and down with Hugh May, who is a very ingenious man.  Among other
things, discoursing of the present fashion of gardens to make them plain,
that we have the best walks of gravell in the world, France having no nor
Italy; and our green of our bowling allies is better than any they have.
So our business here being ayre, this is the best way, only with a little
mixture of statues, or pots, which may be handsome, and so filled with
another pot of such and such a flower or greene as the season of the year
will bear.  And then for flowers, they are best seen in a little plat by
themselves; besides, their borders spoil the walks of another garden: and
then for fruit, the best way is to have walls built circularly one within
another, to the South, on purpose for fruit, and leave the walking garden
only for that use.  Thence walked through the House, where most people
mighty hush and, methinks, melancholy.  I see not a smiling face through
the whole Court; and, in my conscience, they are doubtfull of the conduct
again of the Generalls, and I pray God they may not make their fears
reasonable.  Sir Richard Fanshaw is lately dead at Madrid.  Guyland is
lately overthrowne wholly in Barbary by the King of Tafiletta.  The fleete
cannot yet get clear of the River, but expect the first wind to be out,
and then to be sure they fight.  The Queene and Maids of Honour are at
Tunbridge.

23rd.  Up, and to my chamber doing several things there of moment, and
then comes Sympson, the Joyner; and he and I with great pains contriving
presses to put my books up in: they now growing numerous, and lying one
upon another on my chairs, I lose the use to avoyde the trouble of
removing them, when I would open a book.  Thence out to the Excise office
about business, and then homewards met Colvill, who tells me he hath L1000
ready for me upon a tally; which pleases me, and yet I know not now what
to do with it, having already as much money as is fit for me to have in
the house, but I will have it.  I did also meet Alderman Backewell, who
tells me of the hard usage he now finds from Mr. Fen, in not getting him a
bill or two paid, now that he can be no more usefull to him; telling me
that what by his being abroad and Shaw's death he hath lost the ball, but
that he doubts not to come to give a kicke at it still, and then he shall
be wiser and keepe it while he hath it.  But he says he hath a good
master, the King, who will not suffer him to be undone, as otherwise he
must have been, and I believe him.  So home and to dinner, where I
confess, reflecting upon the ease and plenty that I live in, of money,
goods, servants, honour, every thing, I could not but with hearty thanks
to Almighty God ejaculate my thanks to Him while I was at dinner, to
myself.  After dinner to the office and there till five or six o'clock,
and then by coach to St. James's and there with Sir W. Coventry and Sir G.
Downing to take the gyre in the Parke.  All full of expectation of the
fleete's engagement, but it is not yet.  Sir W. Coventry says they are
eighty-nine men-of-warr, but one fifth-rate, and that, the Sweepstakes,
which carries forty guns.  They are most infinitely manned.  He tells me
the Loyall London, Sir J. Smith (which, by the way, he commends to be
the-best ship in the world, large and small), hath above eight hundred
men; and moreover takes notice, which is worth notice, that the fleete
hath lane now near fourteen days without any demand for a farthingworth of
any thing of any kind, but only to get men.  He also observes, that with
this excesse of men, nevertheless, they have thought fit to leave behind
them sixteen ships, which they have robbed of their men, which certainly
might have been manned, and they been serviceable in the fight, and yet
the fleete well-manned, according to the excesse of supernumeraries, which
we hear they have.  At least two or three of them might have been left
manned, and sent away with the Gottenburgh ships.  They conclude this to
be much the best fleete, for force of guns, greatnesse and number of ships
and men, that ever England did see; being, as Sir W. Coventry reckons,
besides those left behind, eighty-nine men of warr and twenty fire-ships,
though we cannot hear that they have with them above eighteen.  The French
are not yet joined with the Dutch, which do dissatisfy the Hollanders, and
if they should have a defeat, will undo De Witt; the people generally of
Holland do hate this league with France.  We cannot think of any business,
but lie big with expectation of the issue of this fight, but do conclude
that, this fight being over, we shall be able to see the whole issue of
the warr, good or bad.  So homeward, and walked over the Parke (St.
James's) with Sir G. Downing, and at White Hall took a coach; and there to
supper with much pleasure and to bed.

24th.  Up, and to the office, where little business done, our heads being
full of expectation of the fleete's being engaged, but no certain notice
of it, only Sheppeard in the Duke's yacht left them yesterday morning
within a league of the Dutch fleete, and making after them, they standing
into the sea.  At noon to dinner, and after dinner with Mercer (as of late
my practice is) a song and so to the office, there to set up again my
frames about my Platts, which I have got to be all gilded, and look very
fine, and then to my business, and busy very late, till midnight, drawing
up a representation of the state of my victualling business to the Duke, I
having never appeared to him doing anything yet and therefore I now do it
in writing, I now having the advantage of having had two fleetes
dispatched in better condition than ever any fleetes were yet, I believe;
at least, with least complaint, and by this means I shall with the better
confidence get my bills out for my salary.  So home to bed.

25th.  Up betimes to write fair my last night's paper for the Duke, and so
along with Sir W. Batten by hackney coach to St. James's, where the Duke
is gone abroad with the King to the Parke, but anon come back to White
Hall, and we, after an houre's waiting, walked thither (I having desired
Sir W. Coventry in his chamber to read over my paper about the
victualling, which he approves of, and I am glad I showed it him first, it
makes it the less necessary to show it the Duke at all, if I find it best
to let it alone).  At White Hall we find [the Court] gone to Chappell, it
being St. James's-day.  And by and by, while they are at chappell, and we
waiting chappell being done, come people out of the Parke, telling us that
the guns are heard plain.  And so every body to the Parke, and by and by
the chappell done, and the King and Duke into the bowling-green, and upon
the leads, whither I went, and there the guns were plain to be heard;
though it was pretty to hear how confident some would be in the loudnesse
of the guns, which it was as much as ever I could do to hear them.  By and
by the King to dinner, and I waited there his dining; but, Lord! how
little I should be pleased, I think, to have so many people crowding about
me; and among other things it astonished me to see my Lord Barkeshire
waiting at table, and serving the King drink, in that dirty pickle as I
never saw man in my life.  Here I met Mr. Williams, who in serious
discourse told me he did hope well of this fight because of the equality
of force or rather our having the advantage in number, and also because we
did not go about it with the presumption that we did heretofore, when, he
told me, he did before the last fight look upon us by our pride fated to
be overcome.  He would have me to dine where he was invited to dine, at
the Backe-stayres.  So after the King's meat was taken away, we thither;
but he could not stay, but left me there among two or three of the King's
servants, where we dined with the meat that come from his table; which was
most excellent, with most brave drink cooled in ice (which at this hot
time was welcome), and I drinking no wine, had metheglin for the King's
owne drinking, which did please me mightily.  Thence, having dined mighty
nobly, I away to Mrs. Martin's new lodgings, where I find her, and was
with her close, but, Lord! how big she is already.  She is, at least
seems, in mighty trouble for her husband at sea, when I am sure she cares
not for him, and I would not undeceive her, though I know his ship is one
of those that is not gone, but left behind without men.  Thence to White
Hall again to hear news, but found none; so back toward Westminster, and
there met Mrs. Burroughs, whom I had a mind to meet, but being undressed
did appear a mighty ordinary woman.  Thence by water home, and out again
by coach to Lovett's to see my Crucifix, which is not done.  So to White
Hall again to have met Sir G. Carteret, but he is gone, abroad, so back
homewards, and seeing Mr. Spong took him up, and he and I to Reeves, the
glass maker's, and did set several glasses and had pretty discourse with
him, and so away, and set down Mr. Spong in London, and so home and with
my wife, late, twatling at my Lady Pen's, and so home to supper and to
bed.  I did this afternoon call at my woman that ruled my paper to bespeak
a musique card, and there did kiss Nan.  No news to-night from the fleete
how matters go yet.

26th.  Up, and to the office, where all the morning.  At noon dined at
home: Mr. Hunt and his wife, who is very gallant, and newly come from
Cambridge, because of the sicknesse, with us.  Very merry at table, and
the people I do love mightily, but being in haste to go to White Hall I
rose, and Mr. Hunt with me, and by coach thither, where I left him in the
boarded gallery, and I by appointment to attend the Duke of Yorke at his
closett, but being not come, Sir G. Carteret and I did talke together, and
[he] advises me, that, if I could, I would get the papers of examination
touching the business of the last year's prizes, which concern my Lord
Sandwich, out of Warcupp's hands, who being now under disgrace and poor,
he believes may be brought easily to part with them. My Lord Crew, it
seems, is fearfull yet that maters may be enquired into. This I will
endeavour to do, though I do not thinke it signifies much. By and by the
Duke of Yorke comes and we had a meeting and, among other things, I did
read my declaration of the proceedings of the Victualling hired this
yeare, and desired his Royall Highnesse to give me the satisfaction of
knowing whether his Royall Highnesse were pleased therewith.  He told me
he was, and that it was a good account, and that the business of the
Victualling was much in a better condition than it was the last yeare;
which did much joy me, being said in the company of my fellows, by which I
shall be able with confidence to demand my salary and the rest of the
subsurveyors.  Thence away mightily satisfied to Mrs. Pierces, there to
find my wife.  Mrs. Pierce hath lain in of a boy about a month.  The boy
is dead this day.  She lies in good state, and very pretty she is, but
methinks do every day grow more and more great, and a little too much,
unless they get more money than I fear they do.  Thence with my wife and
Mercer to my Lord Chancellor's new house, and there carried them up to the
leads, where I find my Lord Chamberlain, Lauderdale, Sir Robert Murray,
and others, and do find it the most delightfull place for prospect that
ever was in the world, and even ravishing me, and that is all, in short, I
can say of it.  Thence to Islington to our old house and eat and drank,
and so round by Kingsland home, and there to the office a little and Sir
W. Batten's, but no newes at all from the fleete, and so home to bed.

27th.  Up and to the office, where all the morning busy.  At noon dined at
home and then to the office again, and there walking in the garden with
Captain Cocke till 5 o'clock.  No newes yet of the fleete.  His great
bargaine of Hempe with us by his unknown proposition is disliked by the
King, and so is quite off; of which he is glad, by this means being rid of
his obligation to my Lord Bruncker, which he was tired with, and
especially his mistresse, Mrs. Williams, and so will fall into another way
about it, wherein he will advise only with myself, which do not displease
me, and will be better for him and the King too.  Much common talke of
publique business, the want of money, the uneasinesse that Parliament will
find in raising any, and the ill condition we shall be in if they do not,
and his confidence that the Swede is true to us, but poor, but would be
glad to do us all manner of service in the world. He gone, I away by water
from the Old Swan to White Hall.  The waterman tells me that newes is come
that our ship Resolution is burnt, and that we had sunke four or five of
the enemy's ships.  When I come to White Hall I met with Creed, and he
tells me the same news, and walking with him to the Park I to Sir W.
Coventry's lodging, and there he showed me Captain Talbot's letter,
wherein he says that the fight begun on the 25th; that our White squadron
begun with one of the Dutch squadrons, and then the Red with another so
hot that we put them both to giving way, and so they continued in pursuit
all the day, and as long as he stayed with them: that the Blue fell to the
Zealand squadron; and after a long dispute, he against two or three great
ships, he received eight or nine dangerous shots, and so come away; and
says, he saw the Resolution burned by one of their fire-ships, and four or
five of the enemy's.  But says that two or three of our great ships were
in danger of being fired by our owne fire-ships, which Sir W. Coventry,
nor I, cannot understand.  But upon the whole, he and I walked two or
three turns in the Parke under the great trees, and do doubt that this
gallant is come away a little too soon, having lost never a mast nor
sayle.  And then we did begin to discourse of the young gentlemen
captains, which he was very free with me in speaking his mind of the
unruliness of them; and what a losse the King hath of his old men, and now
of this Hannam, of the Resolution, if he be dead, and that there is but
few old sober men in the fleete, and if these few of the Flags that are so
should die, he fears some other gentlemen captains will get in, and then
what a council we shall have, God knows. He told me how he is disturbed to
hear the commanders at sea called cowards here on shore, and that he was
yesterday concerned publiquely at a dinner to defend them, against
somebody that said that not above twenty of them fought as they should do,
and indeed it is derived from the Duke of Albemarle himself, who wrote so
to the King and Duke, and that he told them how they fought four days, two
of them with great disadvantage.  The Count de Guiche, who was on board De
Ruyter, writing his narrative home in French of the fight, do lay all the
honour that may be upon the English courage above the Dutch, and that he
himself [Sir W. Coventry] was sent down from the King and Duke of Yorke
after the fight, to pray them to spare none that they thought had not done
their parts, and that they had removed but four, whereof Du Tell is one,
of whom he would say nothing; but, it seems, the Duke of Yorke hath been
much displeased at his removal, and hath now taken him into his service,
which is a plain affront to the Duke of Albemarle; and two of the others,
Sir W. Coventry did speake very slenderly of their faults.  Only the last,
which was old Teddiman, he says, is in fault, and hath little to excuse
himself with; and that, therefore, we should not be forward in condemning
men of want of courage, when the Generalls, who are both men of metal, and
hate cowards, and had the sense of our ill successe upon them (and by the
way must either let the world thinke it was the miscarriage of the
Captains or their owne conduct), have thought fit to remove no more of
them, when desired by the King and Duke of Yorke to do it, without respect
to any favour any of them can pretend to in either of them.  At last we
concluded that we never can hope to beat the Dutch with such advantage as
now in number and force and a fleete in want of nothing, and he hath often
repeated now and at other times industriously that many of the Captains
have: declared that they want nothing, and again, that they did lie ten
days together at the Nore without demanding of any thing in the world but
men, and of them they afterward, when they went away, the generalls
themselves acknowledge that they have permitted several ships to carry
supernumeraries, but that if we do not speede well, we must then play
small games and spoile their trade in small parties.  And so we parted,
and I, meeting Creed in the Parke again, did take him by coach and to
Islington, thinking to have met my Lady Pen and wife, but they were gone,
so we eat and drank and away back, setting him down in Cheapside and I
home, and there after a little while making of my tune to "It is decreed,"
to bed.

28th.  Up, and to the office, where no more newes of the fleete than was
yesterday.  Here we sat and at noon to dinner to the Pope's Head, where my
Lord Bruncker and his mistresse dined and Commissioner Pett, Dr.
Charleton, and myself, entertained with a venison pasty by Sir W. Warren.
Here very pretty discourse of Dr. Charleton's, concerning Nature's
fashioning every creature's teeth according to the food she intends them;
and that men's, it is plain, was not for flesh, but for fruit, and that he
can at any time tell the food of a beast unknown by the teeth.  My Lord
Bruncker made one or two objections to it that creatures find their food
proper for their teeth rather than that the teeth were fitted for the
food, but the Doctor, I think, did well observe that creatures do
naturally and from the first, before they have had experience to try, do
love such a food rather than another, and that all children love fruit,
and none brought to flesh, but against their wills at first.  Thence with
my Lord Bruncker to White Hall, where no news.  So to St. James's to Sir
W. Coventry, and there hear only of the Bredah's being come in and gives
the same small account that the other did yesterday, so that we know not
what is done by the body of the fleete at all, but conceive great reason
to hope well.  Thence with my Lord to his coach-house, and there put in
his six horses into his coach, and he and I alone to Highgate.  All the
way going and coming I learning of him the principles of Optickes, and
what it is that makes an object seem less or bigger and how much distance
do lessen an object, and that it is not the eye at all, or any rule in
optiques, that can tell distance, but it is only an act of reason
comparing of one mark with another, which did both please and inform me
mightily.  Being come thither we went to my Lord Lauderdale's house to
speake with him, about getting a man at Leith to joyne with one we employ
to buy some prize goods for the King; we find [him] and his lady and some
Scotch people at supper.  Pretty odd company; though my Lord Bruncker
tells me, my Lord Lauderdale is a man of mighty good reason and judgement.
But at supper there played one of their servants upon the viallin some
Scotch tunes only; several, and the best of their country, as they seemed
to esteem them, by their praising and admiring them: but, Lord! the
strangest ayre that ever I heard in my life, and all of one cast.  But
strange to hear my Lord Lauderdale say himself that he had rather hear a
cat mew, than the best musique in the world; and the better the musique,
the more sicke it makes him; and that of all instruments, he hates the
lute most, and next to that, the baggpipe.  Thence back with my Lord to
his house, all the way good discourse, informing of myself about optiques
still, and there left him and by a hackney home, and after writing three
or four letters, home to supper and to bed.

29th (Lord's day).  Up and all the morning in my chamber making up my
accounts in my book with my father and brother and stating them.  Towards
noon before sermon was done at church comes newes by a letter to Sir W.
Batten, to my hand, of the late fight, which I sent to his house, he at
church.  But, Lord! with what impatience I staid till sermon was done, to
know the issue of the fight, with a thousand hopes and fears and thoughts
about the consequences of either.  At last sermon is done and he come
home, and the bells immediately rung soon as the church was done. But
coming; to Sir W. Batten to know the newes, his letter said nothing of it;
but all the towne is full of a victory.  By and by a letter from Sir W.
Coventry tells me that we have the victory.  Beat them into the Weelings;

     [In a letter from Richard Browne to Williamson, dated Yarmouth, July
     30th, we read, "The Zealanders were engaged with the Blue squadron
     Wednesday and most of Thursday, but at length the Zealanders ran;
     the Dutch fleet escaped to the Weelings and Goree" ("Calendar of
     State Papers," 1665-66, p  591).]

had taken two of their great ships; but by the orders of the Generalls
they are burned.  This being, methought, but a poor result after the
fighting of two so great fleetes, and four days having no tidings of them,
I was still impatient; but could know no more.  So away home to dinner,
where Mr. Spong and Reeves dined with me by invitation.  And after dinner
to our business of my microscope to be shown some of the observables of
that, and then down to my office to looke in a darke room with my glasses
and tube, and most excellently things appeared indeed beyond imagination.
This was our worke all the afternoon trying the several glasses and
several objects, among others, one of my plates, where the lines appeared
so very plain that it is not possible to thinke how plain it was done.
Thence satisfied exceedingly with all this we home and to discourse many
pretty things, and so staid out the afternoon till it began to be dark,
and then they away and I to Sir W. Batten, where the Lieutenant of the
Tower was, and Sir John Minnes, and the newes I find is no more or less
than what I had heard before; only that our Blue squadron, it seems, was
pursued the most of the time, having more ships, a great many, than its
number allotted to her share.  Young Seamour is killed, the only captain
slain.  The Resolution burned; but, as they say, most of her [crew] and
commander saved.  This is all, only we keep the sea, which denotes a
victory, or at least that we are not beaten; but no great matters to brag
of, God knows.  So home to supper and to bed.

30th.  Up, and did some business in my chamber, then by and by comes my
boy's Lute-Master, and I did direct him hereafter to begin to teach him to
play his part on the Theorbo, which he will do, and that in a little time
I believe.  So to the office, and there with Sir W. Warren, with whom I
have spent no time a good while.  We set right our business of the
Lighters, wherein I thinke I shall get L100. At noon home to dinner and
there did practise with Mercer one of my new tunes that I have got Dr.
Childe to set me a base to and it goes prettily.  Thence abroad to pay
several debts at the end of the month, and so to Sir W. Coventry, at St.
James's, where I find him in his new closett, which is very fine, and well
supplied with handsome books.  I find him speak very slightly of the late
victory: dislikes their staying with the fleete up their coast, believing
that the Dutch will come out in fourteen days, and then we with our
unready fleete, by reason of some of the ships being maymed, shall be in
bad condition to fight them upon their owne coast: is much dissatisfied
with the great number of men, and their fresh demands of twenty-four
victualling ships, they going out but the other day as full as they could
stow.  I asked him whether he did never desire an account of the number of
supernumeraries, as I have done several ways, without which we shall be in
great errour about the victuals; he says he has done it again and again,
and if any mistake should happen they must thanke themselves.  He spoke
slightly of the Duke of Albemarle, saying, when De Ruyter come to give him
a broadside--"Now," says he, chewing of tobacco the while, "will this
fellow come and give, me two broadsides, and then he will run;" but it
seems he held him to it two hours, till the Duke himself was forced to
retreat to refit, and was towed off, and De Ruyter staid for him till he
come back again to fight.  One in the ship saying to the Duke, "Sir,
methinks De Ruyter hath given us more: than two broadsides;"--"Well," says
the Duke, "but you shall find him run by and by," and so he did, says Sir
W. Coventry; but after the Duke himself had been first made to fall off.
The Resolution had all brass guns, being the same that Sir J. Lawson had
in her in the Straights.  It is observed that the two fleetes were even in
number to one ship.  Thence home; and to sing with my wife and Mercer in
the garden; and coming in I find my wife plainly dissatisfied with me,
that I can spend so much time with Mercer, teaching her to sing and could
never take the pains with her. Which I acknowledge; but it is because that
the girl do take musique mighty readily, and she do not, and musique is
the thing of the world that I love most, and all the pleasure almost that
I can now take.  So to bed in some little discontent, but no words from
me.

31st.  Good friends in the morning and up to the office, where sitting all
the morning, and while at table we were mightily joyed with newes brought
by Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten of the death of De Ruyter, but when Sir
W. Coventry come, he told us there was no such thing, which quite dashed
me again, though, God forgive me!  I was a little sorry in my heart before
lest it might give occasion of too much glory to the Duke of Albemarle.
Great bandying this day between Sir W. Coventry and my Lord Bruncker about
Captain Cocke, which I am well pleased with, while I keepe from any open
relyance on either side, but rather on Sir W. Coventry's.  At noon had a
haunch of venison boiled and a very good dinner besides, there dining with
me on a sudden invitation the two mayden sisters, Bateliers, and their
elder brother, a pretty man, understanding and well discoursed, much
pleased with his company.  Having dined myself I rose to go to a Committee
of Tangier, and did come thither time enough to meet Povy and Creed and
none else.  The Court being empty, the King being gone to Tunbridge, and
the Duke of Yorke a-hunting.  I had some discourse with Povy, who is
mightily discontented, I find, about his disappointments at Court; and
says, of all places, if there be hell, it is here.  No faith, no truth, no
love, nor any agreement between man and wife, nor friends.  He would have
spoke broader, but I put it off to another time; and so parted.  Then with
Creed and read over with him the narrative of the late [fight], which he
makes a very poor thing of, as it is indeed, and speaks most slightingly
of the whole matter.  Povy discoursed with me about my Lord Peterborough's
L50 which his man did give me from him, the last year's salary I paid him,
which he would have Povy pay him again; but I have not taken it to myself
yet, and therefore will most heartily return him, and mark him out for a
coxcomb.  Povy went down to Mr. Williamson's, and brought me up this
extract out of the Flanders' letters to-day come: That Admiral Everson,
and the Admiral and Vice-Admiral of Freezeland, with many captains and
men, are slain; that De Ruyter is safe, but lost 250 men out of his own
ship; but that he is in great disgrace, and Trump in better favour; that
Bankert's ship is burned, himself hardly escaping with a few men on board
De Haes; that fifteen captains are to be tried the seventh of August; and
that the hangman was sent from Flushing to assist the Council of Warr.
How much of this is true, time will shew.  Thence to Westminster Hall and
walked an hour with Creed talking of the late fight, and observing the
ridiculous management thereof and success of the Duke of Albemarle. Thence
parted and to Mrs. Martin's lodgings, and sat with her a while, and then
by water home, all the way reading the Narrative of the late fight in
order, it may be, to the making some marginal notes upon it. At the Old
Swan found my Betty Michell at the doore, where I staid talking with her a
pretty while, it being dusky, and kissed her and so away home and writ my
letters, and then home to supper, where the, brother and Mary Batelier are
still and Mercer's two sisters.  They have spent the time dancing this
afternoon, and we were very merry, and then after supper into the garden
and there walked, and then home with them and then back again, my wife and
I and the girle, and sang in the garden and then to bed.  Colville was
with me this morning, and to my great joy I could now have all my money
in, that I have in the world.  But the times being open again, I thinke it
is best to keepe some of it abroad. Mighty well, and end this month in
content of mind and body.  The publique matters looking more safe for the
present than they did, and we having a victory over the Dutch just such as
I could have wished, and as the kingdom was fit to bear, enough to give us
the name of conquerors, and leave us masters of the sea, but without any
such great matters done as should give the Duke of Albemarle any honour at
all, or give him cause to rise to his former insolence.

     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

