He spoke with an excitement his physical state no longer allowed him to
conceal. At last--he was defeating this woman who had once defeated him;
he was denying and scorning her, as she had once denied and scorned him.
That her cause was an impersonal and an unselfish one made no difference.
He knew the strength of her character and her sympathies. It was sweet to
him to refuse her something she desired. She had never yet given him the
opportunity! In the twenty years since they had last faced each other, he
was perfectly conscious that he had lost mentally, morally, physically;
whereas she--his enemy--bore about with her, even in her changed beauty,
the signs of a life lived fruitfully--a life that had been worth while.
His bitter perception of it, his hidden consciousness that he had
probably but a short time, a couple of years at most, to live, only
increased his satisfaction in the "No"--the contemptuous and final "No!"
that he had opposed, and would oppose, to her impertinent interference
with his affairs.

Victoria sat regarding him silently, as he walked to the
mantelpiece, rearranged a few silver objects standing upon it, and
then turned--confronting her again.

"You have made Mr. Faversham your heir?" she asked him after a pause.

"I have. And I shall take good care that he does nothing with my property
when he inherits it so as to undo my wishes with regard to it."

"That is to say--you will not even allow him to make--himself--provision
for your wife and daughter?"

"Beyond what was indicated in the letter to your son? No! certainly not.
I shall take measures against anything of the sort."

Victoria rose.

"And he accepts your condition--your bequest to him, on these terms?"

Melrose smiled.

"Certainly. Why not?"

"I am sorry for Mr. Faversham!" said Victoria, in a different voice, the
colour sparkling on her cheek.

"Because you think there will be a public opinion against him--that he
will be boycotted in this precious county? Make yourself easy, Lady
Tatham. A fortune such as he will inherit provides an easy cure for such
wounds."

Victoria's self-control began to break down.

"I venture to think he will not find it so," she said, with quickened
breath. "In these days it is not so simple to defy the common
conscience--as it once was. I fear indeed that Mr. Faversham has already
lost the respect of decent men!"

"By becoming my agent?"

"Your tool--for actions--cruel, inhuman things--degrading to both you and
him."

She had failed. She knew it! And all that remained was to speak the truth
to him, to defy and denounce him.

Melrose surveyed her.

"The ejectment order has been served at Mainstairs to-day, I believe; and
the police have at last plucked up their courage to turn those shiftless
people out. There, too, I understand, Lady Tatham, you have been
meddling."

"I have been trying to undo some of your wrong-doing," she said, with
emotion. "And now--before I go--you shall not prevent me from saying that
I regard it perhaps as your last and worst crime to have perverted the
conscience of this young man! He has been well thought of till now: a
decent fellow sprung from decent people. You are making an outcast--a
pariah of him. And you think _money_ will compensate him! When you and I
knew each other, Edmund"--the name slipped out--"you had a _mind_--one of
the shrewdest I ever knew. I appeal to that. It is not so much now that
you are wicked or cruel--you are playing the _fool_! And you are teaching
this young man to do the same."

She stood confronting him, holding herself tensely erect--a pale,
imperious figure--the embodiment of all the higher ideals and traditions
of the class to which they both belonged.

In her agitation she had dropped her glove. Melrose picked it up.

"On that I think, Lady Tatham, we will say farewell. I regret I have not
been able to oblige you. My wife comes from a needy class--accustomed to
manage on a little. My daughter has not been brought up to luxury. Had
she remained with me, of course, the case would have been different. But
you will find they will do very well on what I have provided for them. I
advise you not to waste your pity. And as for Mr. Faversham, he will take
good care of himself. He frames excellently. And I hope before long to
see him married--to a very suitable young lady."

They remained looking at each other, for a few seconds, in silence. Then
Victoria said quietly, with a forward step:

"I bid you good evening."

He stood at the door, his fingers on the handle, his eyes glittering and
malicious.

"I should have liked to have shown you some of my little collections,"
he said, smiling. "That _verre églomisée_, for instance"--he pointed to
it--"it's magnificent, though rather decadent. They have nothing like it
in London or Paris. Really--you must go?"

He threw the door open, bowing profoundly.

"Dixon!"

A voice responded from the farther end of the corridor.

"Tell her ladyship's car to come round. Excuse my coming to the door,
Lady Tatham. I am an old man."

The car sped once more through the gloom of the park. Victoria sat with
hands locked on her knee, possessed by the after tremors of battle.

In Melrose's inhuman will there was something demonic, which appalled.
The impotence of justice, of compassion, in the presence of certain
shameless and insolent forces of the human spirit--the lesson goes deep!
Victoria quivered under it.

But there were other elements besides in her tumult of feeling. The tone,
the taunting look, with which Melrose had spoken of Faversham's possible
marriage--did he, did all the world know, that Harry had been played with
and jilted? For that, in plain English, was what it came to. Her heart
burnt with anger--with a desire to punish.

The car passed out of the lodge gates. Its brilliant lamps under the
trees seemed to strike into the very heart of night. And suddenly, in the
midst of the light they made, two figures emerged, an old man carrying a
sack, a youth beside him, with a gun over his shoulder.

They were the Brands--father, and younger son. Victoria bent forward with
a hasty gesture of greeting. But they never turned to look at the motor.
They passed out of the darkness, and into the darkness again, their
frowning, unlovely faces, their ragged clothes and stooping gait,
illuminated for an instant.

Victoria had tried that very week, at her son's instance, to try and
persuade the father to take a small farm on the Duddon estate, Tatham
offering to lend him capital. And Brand had refused. Independence,
responsibility, could no longer be faced by a spirit so crushed. "I
darena' my lady," he had said to her. "I'm worth nobbut my weekly wage. I
canna' tak' risks--no more. Thank yo' kindly; but yo' mun let us be!"


XVII


On the morning following her vain interview with Melrose, Victoria,
sorely conscious of defeat, conveyed the news of it to the depressed and
disprited Netta.

They were in Victoria's sitting-room. Netta sat, a lamentable figure, on
the edge of the sofa, twisting her disfigured hands, her black eyes
glancing restlessly about her. Ever since she had read Faversham's letter
to Tatham she had been an altered being. The threats as to her father,
which it contained, seemed to have withered her afresh. All that small
and desperate flicker of hope in which she had arrived had died away, and
her determination with it. Her consent to Victoria's interview with
Melrose had been only obtained from her with difficulty. And now she was
all for retreat--precipitate retreat.

"It's no use. I was a fool to come. We must go back. I always told
Felicia it would be no use. We'd better not have come. I'll not have papa
tormented!"

While she was speaking a footman entered, bringing a telegram for
Victoria. It was from Tatham in London.

"Have just seen lawyers. They are of opinion we could not fail in
application for proper allowance and provision for both mother and
daughter. Hope you will persuade Mrs. Melrose to let us begin proceedings
at once. Very sorry for your telegram this morning, but only what I
expected."

Victoria read the message to her guest, and then did her best to urge
boldness--an immediate stroke. But Netta shook her head despairingly. She
could not and would not have her father harassed. Mr. Melrose would do
anything--bribe anybody--to get his way. They would have the police
coming, and dragging her father to prison. It was not to be thought of.

Victoria tried gently to investigate what skeleton might be lying in the
Smeath closet, whereof Mr. Melrose possessed such very useful
information. But Netta held her tongue. "Papa had been very unfortunate,
and the Government would like to put him in prison if they could. Edmund
had been always so cruel to him." Beyond this Victoria could not get.

But the determination of the frail, faded woman was unshakable, although
she glanced nervously at her daughter from time to time, as if much more
in dread of her opinion than of Victoria's.

Felicia, who had listened in silence to the conversation between her
mother and Victoria, turned round from the window in which she was
staring, as soon as Lady Tatham seemed to be finally worsted.

"Mother, you promised to stay here till Christmas!"

The voice was imperious. Felicia's manner to her mother indeed was often
of an unfilial sharpness, and Victoria was already meditating some gentle
discipline on the point.

"Oh, no, Felicia!" said Netta, helplessly, "not till Christmas." Then,
remembering herself, she turned toward her hostess: "It's so kind of you,
I'm sure."

"Yes, till Christmas!" repeated Felicia. "You know grandpapa's no worse.
You know," the girl flushed suddenly a bright crimson, "Lord Tatham sent
him money--and he's quite comfortable. _I_ am not going home just yet! I
am not going back to Italy--till--I have seen my father!"

She faced round upon Victoria and her mother, her hands on her hips, her
breath fluttering.

"Felicia!" cried her mother, "you can't. I tell you--you can't! I should
never allow it!"

"Yes, you would, mother! What are you afraid of? He can't kill me. It's
ridiculous. I must see my father. I will! He is getting old--he may die.
I will see him before I leave England. I don't care whether he gives us
the money or not!"

Victoria's bright eyes showed her sympathy; though she did not interfere.
But Netta shrank into herself.

"You are always such a wilful child, Felicia! You mustn't do anything
without my leave. You'll kill me if you do."

And ashen-pale, she got up and left the room. Victoria glanced at
Felicia.

"Don't do anything against your mother's will," she said gently. "You are
too young to decide these things for yourself. But, if you can, persuade
her to follow Lord Tatham's advice. He is most anxious to help you in the
best way. And he does not believe that Mr. Melrose could hurt your
grandfather."

Felicia shook her curly head, frowning.

"One cannot persuade mother--one cannot. She is obstinate--oh, so
obstinate! If it were me, I would do anything Lord Tatham asked
me!--anything in the world."

She stood with her hands behind her back, her slight figure drawn up, her
look glowing.

Victoria bent over her embroidery, smiling a little, unseen, and, in
truth, not ill pleased. Yet there was something disturbing in these
occasional outbursts. For the little Southerner's own sake, one must take
care they led to nothing serious. For really--quite apart from any other
consideration--Harry never took the smallest notice of her. And who could
know better than his mother that his thoughts were still held, still
tormented by the vision of Lydia?

Felicia slipped out of a glass door that led to the columned veranda
outside. Victoria, mindful of the girl's delicate look, hurried after her
with a fur wrap. Felicia gratefully but absently kissed her hand, and
Victoria left her to her own thoughts.

It was a sunny day, and although November was well in, there was almost
an Italian warmth in this southern loggia where roses were still
blooming. Felicia walked up and down, her gaze wandering over the
mountain landscape to the south--the spreading flanks and slopes of
the high fells, scarlet with withered fern, and capped with new-fallen
snow. Through the distant landscape she perceived the line of the stream
which ran under Flitterdale Common with its high cliff-banks, and hanging
woods, now dressed in the last richness of autumn. That distant wall of
trees--behind it, she knew, was Threlfall Tower. Her father--her unkind,
miserly father, who hated both her and her mother--lived there.

How far was it? A long way! But she would get there somehow.

"It is my right to see my father!" she said to herself passionately;
adding with a laugh which swept away heroics, "After all, he might take a
fancy to me in these clothes!"

And she looked down complacently on the pretty tailor-made skirt and
the new shoes that showed beneath Victoria's fur cloak. In less than
a fortnight her own ambition and the devotion of Victoria's maid,
Hesketh, only too delighted to dress somebody so eager to be dressed, for
whom the mere operations of the toilette possessed a kind of religious
joy, on whom, moreover, "clothes" in the proper and civilized sense of
the word, sat so amazingly well--had turned the forlorn little drudge
into a figure more than creditable to the pains lavished upon her.
Felicia aimed high. The thought and trouble which the young lady had
spent, since her arrival, on her hair, her hands, and the minor points of
English manners, not to mention the padding and plumping of her small
person--which in spite of all her efforts, however, remained of a most
sylphlike slimness--by a generous diet of cream and butter, only she and
Hesketh knew. Victoria guessed, and felt a new and most womanish pleasure
in the details of her transformation. She realized, poignantly, how
pleasant it would have been to dress and spoil a daughter.

All the more, as Felicia, after a first eager grasping at pretty things,
as a child holds out covetous hands for toys and sweets, had shown sudden
scruples, an unexpected and pretty recoil.

"Don't give me so many things!" she had said, almost with a stamp, the
sudden, astonishing tears in her great eyes; when, after the first week,
the new clothes began to shower upon her. "I can't help wanting them! I
adore them! But I won't be a beggar--no! You will think we only came here
for this--to get things out of you. We didn't--we _didn't_.'"

"My dear, won't you give me the pleasure?" Victoria had said,
shamefacedly, putting out a hand to stroke the girl's hair. Whereupon
Felicia had thrown herself impulsively on her knees, with her arms round
the speaker, and there had been a mingled moment of laughter and emotion
which had left Victoria very much astonished at herself, and given
Hesketh a free hand. Victoria's solitary pursuits, the awkward or stately
reserve of her ordinary manner, were deplorably interfered with, indeed,
by the advent of this lovely, neglected child, who on her side had fallen
passionately in love with Victoria at first sight and seemed to be now
rarely happy out of her company.

After which digression we may return for a moment to Felicia on the
loggia, admiring her new shoes.

From that passing ecstasy, she emerged resolved.

"We will stay here till Christmas--and--"

But on the rest of her purpose she shut her small lips firmly. Before
she turned indoors, however, she gave some attention to the course of a
white road in the middle distance, on which she had travelled with Lord
Tatham the day he had taken her to Green Cottage. The cottage where the
yellow-haired girl lived lay beyond that nearer hill. Ah! but nobody
spoke of that yellow-haired girl now. Nobody sent flowers or books.
Nobody so much as mentioned her name. It was strange--but singularly
pleasing. Felicia raised herself triumphantly on tiptoe, as though she
would peer over the hill into the cottage; and so see for herself how the
Signorina Penfold took this sudden and complete neglect.

Tatham returned from London the following day, bringing Cyril Boden--who
was again on the sick list--with him.

He arrived full of plans for the discomfiture of Melrose, only to be
brought up irrevocably against the stubborn resolve which Netta, wrapped
in an irritable and tearful melancholy, opposed to them all. She would
not hear of the legal proceedings he urged upon her; and it was only on
an assurance that nothing could or would be done without her consent,
coupled with a good report of her father, that she at last consented to
stay at Duddon till the New Year, so that further ways of helping her
might be discussed.

Felicia, when the thing was settled, danced about Victoria's room, kissed
her mother and ran off at once, with Victoria's permission, to ask the
old coachman who ruled the Duddon stables to give her riding-lessons.
Victoria noticed that she carefully avoided consulting Tatham in any way
about her lessons. Indeed the earlier, half-childish, half-audacious
efforts she had made to attract his attention entirely ceased about this
time.

And he, as soon as it was evident that Mrs. Melrose would not take
his advice, and that legal proceedings must be renounced, felt a
natural slackening of interest in his mother's guests. He was perfectly
kind and polite to them but Netta's cowardice disgusted him; and it was a
personal disappointment to be thus balked of that public campaign against
Melrose's enormities which would have satisfied the just and long-baffled
feelings of a whole county; and--incidentally--would surely have unmasked
a greedy and unscrupulous adventurer.

Meanwhile the whole story of Mrs. Melrose and her daughter had spread
rapidly through the neighbourhood. The local papers, now teeming with
attacks on Melrose, and the management of the Melrose property, had
fastened with avidity on the news of their arrival. "Mrs. Edmund Melrose
and her daughter, after an absence of twenty years have arrived in
Cumbria. They are now staying at Duddon Castle with Countess Tatham. Mr.
Claude Faversham is at Threlfall Tower." These few sentences served as
symbols of a dramatic situation which was being discussed in every house
of the district, in the farms and cottages no less eagerly than by the
Andovers and the Bartons. The heiress of Threlfall was not dead! After
twenty years she and her mother had returned to claim their rights from
the Ogre; and Duddon Castle, the headquarters of all that was powerful
and respected in the county, had taken up their cause. Meanwhile the
little heiress had been, it seemed, supplanted. Claude Faversham was in
possession at Threlfall, and was being treated as the heir. Mr. Melrose
had flatly refused even to see his wife and daughter whom he had left in
poverty and starvation for twenty years.

Upon these facts the twin spirit of romance and hatred swooped
vulturelike. Any story of inheritance, especially when charm and youth
are mixed up with it, kindles the popular mind. It was soon known that
Miss Melrose was pretty, and small; though, said report, worn to a
skeleton by paternal ill-usage. Romance likes its heroines small. The
countryside adopted the unconscious Felicia, and promptly married her to
Harry Tatham. What could be more appropriate? Duddon could afford to risk
a dowry; and what maiden in distress could wish for a better Perseus than
the splendid young man who was the general favourite of the
neighbourhood?

As to the hatred of Melrose which gave zest to the tale of his daughter,
it was becoming a fury. The whole Mainstairs village had now been
ejected, by the help of a large body of police requisitioned from
Carlisle for the purpose. Of the able-bodied, some had migrated to the
neighbouring towns, some were camped on Duddon land, in some wood and
iron huts hastily run up for their accommodation. And thus a village
which might be traced in Doomsday Book had been wiped out. For the sick
Tatham had offered a vacant farmhouse as a hospital; and Victoria, Mrs.
Andover, and other ladies had furnished and equipped it. Some twenty
cases of enteric and diphtheria, were housed there, a few of them doomed
beyond hope. Melrose had been peremptorily asked for a subscription to
the fund raised, and had replied in his own handwriting that owing to the
heavy expenses he had been put to by the behaviour of his Mainstairs
tenants, as reported to him by his agent, Mr. Faversham, he must
respectfully decline. The letter was published in the two local papers
with appropriate comments, and a week later an indignation meeting to
protest against the state of the Threlfall property, and to petition the
Local Government Board to hold an inquiry on the spot, was held in
Carlisle, with Tatham in the chair. And everywhere the public indignation
which could not get at Melrose, who now, except for railway journeys,
never showed himself outside the wall of his park, was beginning to fall
upon the "adventurer" who was his tool and accomplice, and had become the
supplanter of his young and helpless daughter. Men who four months before
had been eager to welcome Faversham to his new office now passed him in
the street without recognition. At the County Club to which he had been
easily elected, Colonel Barton proposing him, he was conspicuously cut by
Barton himself, Squire Andover and many others following suit. "An
impostor, and a cad!" said Barton fiercely to Undershaw. "He took me
in--and I can't forgive him. He is doing all Melrose's dirty work for
him, better than Melrose could do it himself. His letters, for instance,
to our Council Committee about the allotments we are trying to get out of
the old villain have been devilish clever, and devilish impudent! Melrose
couldn't have written them. And now this business of the girl!--and the
fortune!--sickening!"

"He is a queer chap," said Undershaw thoughtfully. "I've been as mad with
him as anybody--but somehow--don't know. Suppose we wait a bit. Melrose's
life is a bad one."

But Barton refused to wait, and went off storming.
The facts, he vowed, were more than enough.

The weeks passed on. Duddon knew no longer what Green Cottage was
doing. Victoria, at any rate, was ignorant, and forbore to ask--by
word of mouth; though her thoughts were one long interrogation on the
subject of Lydia, both as to the present and the past. Was she still in
correspondence with Faversham, as Victoria now understood from Tatham she
had been all the summer? Was she still defending him? Perhaps engaged to
him? For a fair-minded and sensible woman, Victoria fell into strange
bogs of prejudice and injustice in the course of these ponderings.

In her drives and walks at this time, Victoria generally avoided the
neighbourhood of the cottage. But one afternoon at the very end of
October, she overtook--walking--a slight, muffled figure in the Whitebeck
road, and recognized Susy Penfold. A constrained greeting passed between
them, and Lady Tatham learnt that Lydia was away--had been away, indeed,
since the day following her last interview with Harry. The very next
morning she and her mother had been summoned to London by the grave
illness of Mrs. Penfold's elder sister. And there they were still; though
Lydia was expected home shortly.

Victoria walked on, with relieved feelings, she scarcely knew why. At any
rate there had been no personal contact between Faversham and a charming
though foolish girl, during these weeks of popular indignation.

By what shabby arts had the mean and grasping fellow now installed at
Threlfall ever succeeded in obtaining a hold over a being so refined, so
fastidious and--to all appearances--so high-minded, as Lydia Penfold?
To refuse Harry and decline on Claude Faversham! Victoria acknowledged
indeed a certain pseudo-Byronic charm in the man. She could not forget
the handsome head as she had seen it last at the door of Melrose's
library; or the melodramatic black and white of the face, of the small,
peaked beard, the dark brows, pale lantern cheeks, and heavy-lidded eyes.
All the picturesque adventurers of the world betray something, she
thought, of a common stamp.

At last one evening, when Tatham was away on county business, and Felicia
had gone to bed, Victoria suddenly unburdened herself to Cyril Boden, as
they sat one on either side of a November fire, while a southwesterly
gale from the high fells blustered and raged outside.

Boden was the confessor of a good many people. Not that he was by any
means an orthodox Christian; his ascetic ways had very little to do with
any accepted form of doctrine. But there was in him the natural priestly
power, which the priest by ordination may have or miss. It was because
men and women realized in himself the presence of a travailing,
questioning, suffering soul, together with an iron self-repression, that
those who suffered and questioned came to him, and threw themselves upon
him; often getting more buffeting than balm for their pains; but always
conscious of some mysterious attractions in him, as of one who, like Sir
Boris, had seen the Grail, but might never tell of the vision.

Victoria was truly attached to him. He had been with her during the days
of her husband's sudden illness and death; he had advised her with regard
to the passing difficulties of Tatham's school and college days and
pointed a way for her through many perplexities of her own. Duddon was as
much of a home to him, as he probably possessed in the world. When he had
worn himself out with some one or other of the many causes he pursued in
South London, working with a sombre passion which had in it very little
of the mystical joy or hope which sustain others in similar efforts; when
he had scarcely a coat to his back, or a shoe to his feet; when his
doctor began to talk of tuberculin tests and the high Alps; then he would
wire to Duddon, and come and vegetate under Victoria's wing, for just as
many weeks as were necessary to send him back to London restored to a
certain physical standard. To watch Harry Tatham's wholesome, kindly,
prosperous life, untroubled by any of the nightmares that weighed upon
his own, was an unfailing pleasure to a weary man. He loved both Harry
and his mother. Nevertheless, as soon as he arrived, both felt him the
gadfly in the house. His mind was nothing if not critical. And
undoubtedly the sight of easy wealth was an irritation to him. He
struggled against it; but sometimes it would out.

As he sat this evening crouched over the fire, his hands spread to
the blaze, he looked more frail than usual; a fact which perhaps,
half-consciously, affected Victoria and drew out her confidence. His
dress suit, primevally old, would scarcely, she reflected, hold together
another winter. But how it was to be replaced had already cost her and
Harry much thought. There was nobody more personally, fanatically proud
than Boden toward his well-to-do friends. His clothes indeed were a
matter of tender anxiety in the Duddon household, and Tatham's valet
and Victoria's maids did him many small services, some of which he repaid
with a smile and a word--priceless to the recipient; and some he was
never aware of. When his visits to Duddon first began, the contents of
his Gladstone bag used to provide merriment in the servants' hall, and
legend said that a young footman had once dared to be insolent to him.
Had any one ventured the same conduct now he would have been sent to
Coventry by every servant in the house.

It was to this austere, incalculable, yet always attractive listener,
that Victoria told the story of Harry and Lydia, of the Faversham
adventure, and the Melrose inheritance. If she wanted advice, a little
moral guidance for herself--and indeed she did want it--she did not get
any; but of comment there was plenty.

"That's the girl I saw here last time," mused Boden, nursing his
knee--"lovely creature--with some mind in her face. So she's refused
Harry--and Duddon?"

"Which no doubt will commend her to you!" said Victoria, not without a
certain bristling of her feathers.

"It does," said Boden quietly. "Upon my word, it was a fine thing to do."

"Just because we happen to be rich?" Victoria's eyelids fluttered a
little.

"No! but because it throws a little light on what we choose to call the
soul. It brings one back to a faint belief in the existence of the thing.
Here is one of the great fortunes, and one of the splendid houses of the
world, and a little painting girl who makes a few pounds by her drawings
says 'No, thank you!' when they are laid at her feet--because--of a
little trifle called love which she can't bring to the bargain. I confess
that bucks one up. 'The day-star doth his beams restore.'"

He took up the tongs, and began absently to rebuild the fire. Victoria
waited on his remarks with heightened colour.

"Of course I'm sorry for Harry," he said, after a moment, with his queer
smile. "I saw there was something wrong when I arrived. But it's
salutary--very salutary! Hasn't he had everything in the world he wanted
from his cradle? And isn't it as certain as anything can be that he'll
find some other charming girl, who'll faint with joy, when he asks her,
and give you all the grandchildren you want? And meanwhile we have this
bit of the heroic--this defiance of a miry world, cropping up--to help us
out of our mud-holes. I'm awfully sorry for Harry--but I take off my hat
to the girl."

Victoria's expression became sarcastic.

"Who will ultimately marry," she said, "according to _my_ interpretation
of the business, a first-class adventurer--possessed of a million of
money--stolen from its proper owners."

"I don't believe it. I've seen her! But, upon my word, what a queer
parable it all is! Shall I tell you how it shapes itself to me?" He
looked, tongs in hand, at Victoria, his greenish eyes all alive. "I see
you all--you, Harry, Faversham, and Melrose, Miss Lydia--grouped round a
central point. The point is wealth. You are all in different relations to
wealth. You and Harry are indifferent to wealth, because you have always
had it. It has come to you without toiling and spinning--can you imagine
being without it?--but it has not spoilt you. You sit loose to it;
because you have never _struggled_ for it. But I doubt whether the
Recording Angel, when it comes to reckoning up, will give you very high
marks for your indifference! Dear friend!"--he put out a sudden hand
and touched Victoria's--"bear with me! There's one thing you'll hear, if
any one does, at the last day--'I was a stranger and ye took me in.'" His
eyes shone upon her.

After which, he resumed in his former tone: "Then take Melrose. He too is
determined by his relation to wealth. Wealth has just ruined him--burnt
him up--made out of him so much refuse for the nether fires. Faversham
again! Wealth, the crucial, deciding factor! The testing with him is
still going on. He seems, from your account, to be coming out badly. And
lastly, the girl--who, like you, is indifferent to wealth, but for
different reasons; who probably hates and shrinks from it; like a wild
bird that fears the cage. You, my dear lady--you and Harry--have got so
used to wealth, its trammels no longer gall you. You carry the weight of
it, as the horse of the Middle Ages carried his trappings; it's second
nature. And you can enjoy, you can move, you can feel, in spite of it.
You have risked your soul, without knowing it; but you have kept your
soul! This girl, I take it, is afraid to risk her soul. She is not in
love with Harry--worse luck for Harry!--she is in love--remember I have
talked to her a little!--with something she calls beauty, with liberty,
with an unfettered course for the spirit, with all the lovely,
intangible, priceless _best_, which the world holds for its true lovers.
Wealth grasping at that best has a way of killing it--as the child kills
the butterfly. _That's_ what she's afraid of. As to Faversham"--he got up
from his seat, and with his thumbs in his waistcoat began to pace the
room--"Faversham no doubt is in a bad way. He's on the road to damnation.
Melrose of course is damned and done with. But Faversham? I reserve
judgment. If he's in love with that girl, and she with him--I can't make
out, however, that you have much reason to think it--but suppose he is,
she'll have the handling of him. Shan't we back her?"

He turned with vivacity to his hostess.

Victoria laughed indignantly.

"You may if you like. The odds are too doubtful for me."

"That's because you're Harry's mother!" he said with his sly, but most
winning, smile. "Well--there's the parable--writ large. _Mammon!_--how
you get it--how you use it--whether you dominate it--or it dominates
you. Whether it is the greater curse, or the greater blessing to men--it
was the question in Christ's day--it's the question now. But it has never
been put with such intensity, as to this generation! As to your
particular version of the parable--I wait to see! The tale's not through
yet."


XVIII


A few days later, Lady Tatham received a letter, which she opened with
some agitation. It was from Lydia in London:

"DEAR LADY TATHAM:

"I have waited some weeks before writing to you, partly because, as Susy
I hear has told you, I have been busy nursing my mother's sister, but
still more because my heart failed me--again and again.

"And yet I feel I ought to write--partly in justice to myself--partly to
ask you to forgive the pain I fear I may have caused you. I know--for he
has told me--that Lord Tatham never concealed from you all that has
passed between us; and so I feel sure that you know what happened about a
month ago, when we agreed that it would be wiser not to meet again for
the present.

"I don't exactly want to defend myself. It still seems to me true that,
in the future, men and women will find it much more possible to be
comrades and friends, without any thought of falling in love or marrying,
than they do now; and that it will be a good thing for both. And if it
is true, are not some of us justified in making experiments now? Lord
Tatham I know will have told you I was quite frank from the beginning. I
did not wish to marry; but I meant to be a very true friend; and I wanted
to be allowed to love you both, as one loves one's friends, and to share
your life a little. And the thing I most wished was that Lord Tatham
should marry--some one quite different from myself.

"So we agreed that we would write, and share each other's feelings and
thoughts as far as we could. And I hoped that any other idea with regard
to me would soon pass out of Lord Tatham's mind. I did--most sincerely;
and I think he believes that I did. How good and dear he always was to
me!--how much I have learnt from him! And yet I am afraid it was all very
blind, and ill-considered--perhaps very selfish--on my part. I did not
understand what harm I _might_ do; though I hope with all my heart--and
believe--that I have not done anything irreparable. It is very hard
for me to regret it; because all my life I shall be the richer and the
wiser for having known so good a man; one so true, so unselfish, so
high-minded. Women so rarely come to know men, except in marriage, or
through books; and your son's character has sweetened and ennobled whole
sides of life for me--forever.

"But if--in return--I have given him pain--and you, who love him! I was
always afraid of you--but I would have done anything in the world to
serve you. Will you let me have a little word--just to tell me that you
forgive, and understand. I ask it with a very sore heart--full, full of
gratitude to him and to you, for all your goodness."

       *       *       *       *       *

Victoria was oddly affected by this letter. It both touched and angered
her. She was touched by what it said, deeply touched; and angered by what
it omitted. And yet how could the writer have said anything more!--or
anything else! Victoria admitted that her thoughts had run far beyond
what she knew--in any true sense--or had any right to conjecture.
Nevertheless the fact in her belief remained a fact, that but for
Faversham and some disastrous influence he had gained over her almost at
once, Harry would have had his chance with Lydia Penfold. As it was, she
had been allowing Harry to offer her his most intimate thoughts and
feelings, while she was actually falling in love with his inferior. This
was what enraged Victoria. Whatever Cyril Boden might say, it seemed to
her maternal jealousy something equivalent to the betrayal of a sacred
confidence.

Yet clearly she could not say so to Lydia Penfold--nor could Lydia
confess it! She wrote as follows:

"MY DEAR MISS PENFOLD:

"It was very kind of you to write to me, I am sure you meant no harm,
and I do not pretend to judge another person's conduct by what I might
myself have thought wisest or best. But I think we all have to learn
that the deepest feelings in life are very sensitive, and very
incalculable things; and that the old traditions and conventions
respecting them have probably much more to say for themselves than we
like to admit--especially in our youth. Men and women in middle life may
have true and intimate friendships without any thought of marriage. I
doubt whether this is possible for young people, though I know it is the
fashion nowadays to behave as though it were. And especially is it
difficult--or impossible--where there has been any thought of love--on
either side. For love is the great, unmanageable, explosive thing, which
cannot be tamed down, at a word, into friendship--not in youth at any
rate. The attempt to treat it as a negligible quantity can only bring
suffering and misunderstanding.

"But I must not preach to you like this. I am sure you know--now--that
what I say has truth in it. Thank you again for the feeling that dictated
your letter. Harry is very well and very busy. We hoped to go to London
before Christmas, but this most difficult and unhappy affair of Mrs.
Melrose and her daughter detains us. Whether we shall obtain justice for
them in the end I do not know. At present the adverse influences are very
strong--and the indignation of all decent people seems to make no
difference. Mr. Faversham's position is indeed difficult to understand.

"Please remember me kindly to your mother and sister. Next year I hope we
shall be able to meet as usual. But for the present, as you and Harry
have agreed, it is better not."

       *       *       *       *       *

Victoria was extremely dissatisfied with this letter when she had done
it. But she knew very well that Harry would have resented a single harsh
word from her toward the misguided Lydia; and she did not know how better
to convey the warning that burnt on her lips with regard to Faversham.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lydia received Victoria's letter on the day of her return to the cottage.
Her mother remained in London.

Susy welcomed her sister affectionately, but with the sidelong looks of
the observer. Ever since the evening of Lady Tatham's visit when Lydia
had come back with white face and red eyes from her walk with Harry
Tatham, and when the following night had been broken for Susy by the
sound of her sister's weeping in the room next to her, it had been
recognized by the family that the Tatham affair had ended in disaster,
and that Duddon was henceforth closed to them. Lydia told her mother
enough to plunge that poor lady into even greater wonder than before at
the hopeless divergence of young people to-day from the ways and customs
of their grandmothers; and then begged piteously that nothing more might
be said to her. Mrs. Penfold cried and kissed her; and for many days
tears fell on the maternal knitting needles, as the fading vision of
Lydia, in a countess' coronet, curtesying to her sovereign, floated
mockingly through the maternal mind. To Susy Lydia was a little more
explicit; but she showed herself so sunk in grief and self-abasement,
that Susy had not the heart for either probing or sarcasm. It was not a
broken heart, but a sore conscience--a warm, natural penitence, that she
beheld. Lydia was not yet "splendid," and Susy could not make anything
tragic out of her.

At least, on what appeared. And not even Susy's impatience could
penetrate beyond appearance. She longed to say, "Enough of the Tatham
affair--now let us come to business. How do you stand with Claude
Faversham?" A number of small indications pointed her subtly,
irresistibly in that direction. But the strength of Lydia's personality
stood guard over her secret--if she had one.

All Susy could do was to give Lydia the gossip of the neighbourhood,
which she did--copiously, including the "cutting" of Faversham at the
County Club, by Colonel Barton and others. Lydia said nothing.

In the course of the evening, however, a letter arrived for Lydia,
brought by messenger from Threlfall Tower. Lydia was alone in the
sitting-room; Susy was writing upstairs. The letter ran:

"I hear you have returned to-day. May I come and see you to-morrow
afternoon--late?"

To which Lydia replied in her firmest handwriting, "Come by all means. I
shall be here between five and six to-morrow." After which she went about
with head erect and shining eyes, like one who has secretly received and
accepted a challenge. She was going to sift this matter for herself.
Since a hurried note reporting the latest news of the Mainstairs victims,
which had reached her from Faversham on the morning of her departure for
London, she had heard nothing from him; and during her weeks of nursing
in a darkened room, she had sounded the dim and perilous ways of her own
heart as best she could.

She spent the following day in sketching the Helvellyn range, still
radiant under its first snow-cap; sitting warmly sheltered on a southern
side of a wall, within sound of the same stream beside which she and
Faversham had met for the first time in the spring, amid the splendid
light and colour of the May sunset.

And now it was already winter. The fell-sides were red with withered
fern; their round or craggy tops showed white against a steely sky; down
the withered copses by the stream, the north wind swept; a golden oak
showered its dead leaf upon her. Gray walls, purple fells, the brown and
silver of the stream, all the mountain detail that she loved--she drew it
passionately into her soul. Nature and art--why had she been so faithless
to them--she "the earth's unwearied lover?" She was miserably, ironically
conscious of her weakness; of the gap between her spring and her autumn.

On her return, she told Susy quietly of her expected visitor. Susy raised
her eyebrows.

"I shall give him tea," said Susan, "just to save the proprieties with
Sarah." Sarah was the house parlour-maid. "But _then_ you won't need to
give me hints."

Susy had departed. Lydia and Faversham sat opposite each other in the
little drawing-room.

Lydia's first impression on seeing him had been one of dismay. He looked
much older; and a certain remoteness, a cold and nervous manner seemed to
have taken the place of the responsive ease she remembered. It began to
cost her an effort to remember the emotion of their last meeting in the
Mainstairs lane.

But when they were alone together, he drew a long breath, and leaning
forward over the table before them, his face propped on his hand, he
looked at her earnestly.

"I wonder what you have been hearing about me?"

Lydia made a brave effort, and told him. She repeated to him
the gist of what Susan had reported the night before, putting it
lightly--apologetically--as though statements so extravagant had only
to be made to be disproved. His mind meanwhile was divided between
strained attention, and irrepressible delight in the spectacle of Lydia
enthroned in her mother's chair, of the pale golden hair rippling back
from the broad forehead, and the clear eyes beneath the thin dark arch of
the brows, so delicately traced on the white skin; of all the play of
gesture and expression that made up her beauty. Existence for him during
these weeks of her absence had largely meant expectation of this moment.
He had discounted all that she would probably say to him; his replies
were ready.

And she no sooner paused than he began an eager and considered defence of
himself. A defence which, as he explained, he had intended to make weeks
before. He had called the very day after their hurried departure for
London; and having missed them, had then decided to wait till they could
talk face to face. _Le papier est bête!_ "I had too much to say!"

Well, when he had said it, to what did it amount? He claimed the right to
tell the whole story; and began therefore by tracing the steps by which
he had become necessary to Melrose; by describing his astonishment when
the offer of the agency was made to him; and the sudden rush of plans and
hopes for the future. Then, by a swift and effective digression he
sketched the character of Melrose, as he had come to know it; the
ferocity of the old man's will; his mad obstinacy, in which there was
always a touch of fantastic imagination; and those alternations of
solitude and excitement, with the inevitable, accompanying defiance of
all laws of health, physical and moral, which for years had made up his
life.

"Let us remember that he is undoubtedly a sick man. He will tell me
nothing of what his doctors say to him. But I put two and two together. I
don't believe he can possibly live long. A year or two at most; perhaps
much less. When I accepted the agency, I confess I thought his physical
weakness would oblige him to put the whole management of the estate into
my hands. It has not been so. The mind, the will are iron, whatever the
physical weakness may be. He conceives himself as a rock in the Socialist
torrent, bound to oppose reforms, and concessions, and innovations, just
because they are asked of him by a revolutionary society. He reckons that
his life will last out his resistance--his successful resistance--and
that he will go down with the flag flying. So that he takes an insane
pleasure in disappointing and thwarting the public opinion about him. For
it _is_ insane--remember that! The moral state, the moral judgments, are
all abnormal; the will and the brain are, so far as his main pursuits are
concerned, still superb."

He paused. Her gaze--half-shrinking--was fixed on the face so near to
her; on the profound and resolute changes which had passed over the
features which when she first saw them had still the flexibility of
youth. The very curls and black hair lying piled above the forehead
in which there were already two distinct transverse lines, seemed to have
grown harsher and stronger.

"This, of course, is what I discovered as soon as I had taken the agency.
I did not know my man when I accepted. I began to know him, as soon as we
really came to business. I found him opposed to all reform--incapable
even of decent humanity. Very well! Was I to throw up?"

His eyes pierced into hers. Lydia could only murmur: "Go on."

"Suppose I had thrown up!--what would have happened? The estate would
have sunk, more and more lamentably, into the power of a certain low
attorney who has been Melrose's instrument in all his worst doings for
years--and of a pair of corrupt clerks in the local office. Who would
have gained? Not a soul! On the contrary, much would have been lost.
Heaven knows I have been able to do little enough. But I have done
something!--I have done _something_!--that is what people forget."

He looked at her passionately; a distress rising in his eyes, which he
could not hide. Was it her silence--the absence of any cheering,
approving sound from her?

She lifted her hand, and let it drop.

"Mainstairs!" she said. It was just breathed--a cry of pain.

"Yes--Mainstairs! I know--let us tackle Mainstairs. Mainstairs is a
horror--a tragedy. If I had been allowed, I should have set the whole
thing right a couple of months ago; I should have re-housed some of the
people, closed some of the cottages, repaired others. Mr. Melrose stopped
everything. There again--what good could I do by throwing up? I had
plenty of humdrum work elsewhere that was not being interfered with--work
that will tell in the long run. I left Mainstairs to Melrose; the
responsibility was his, not mine. I went on with what I was doing. He and
the police--thank heaven!--cleared the place."

"And in the clearing, Mr. Melrose, they say, never lifted a finger to
help--did not even give money," said Lydia in the same low, restrained
voice, as she looked away from her guest into the fire. "And one sits
thinking--of all the _dead_--that might have been saved!"

His frowning distress was evident.

"Do I not feel it as much as any one?" he said, with emotion. "I was
helpless!"

There was silence. Then Lydia turned sharply toward him.

"Mr. Faversham! Is it true that Mr. Melrose has made you his heir?"

His face changed.

"Yes--it is true."

"And he has refused to make any provision for his wife and daughter?"

"He has. And more than that"--he looked at her with a defiant
candour--"he has tried to bind me in his will to do nothing for them."

"And you have allowed it?"

"I shall soon get round that," he said, scornfully. "There are a thousand
ways. Such restrictions are not worth the paper they are written on."

"And meanwhile they are living on charity? And Mr. Melrose, as you say,
may last some years. I saw Mrs. Melrose pass this morning in a carriage.
She looked like a dying woman."

"I have done my best," he said doggedly. "I have argued--and entreated.
To no avail!"

"But you are taking the money"--the quiet intensity of the tone affected
him strangely--"the money, that should be theirs--the money which has
been wrung--partly--from this wretched estate. You are accepting gifts
and benefits from a man you must loathe and despise!"

She was trembling all over. Her eyes avoided his as she sat downcast; her
head bent under the weight of her own words.

There was silence. But a silence that spoke. For what was in truth the
meaning of this interview--of his pleading--and her agonized, reluctant
judgment? No ordinary acquaintance, no ordinary friendship could have
brought it about. Things unspoken, feelings sprung from the flying seeds
of love, falling invisible on yielding soil, and growing up a man knoweth
not how--at once troubled and united them. The fear of separation had
grown, step by step, with the sense of attraction and of yearning. It was
because their hearts reached out to each other that they dreaded so to
find some impassable gulf between them.

He mastered himself with difficulty.

"That is one way of putting it. Now let me put it my way. I am a man who
has had few chances in life--and great ambitions--which I have never had
the smallest means of satisfying. I may be the mere intriguer that Tatham
and his mother evidently think me. But I am inclined to believe in
myself. Most men are. I feel that I have never had my opportunity. What
is this wealth that is offered me, but an opportunity? There never was so
much to be done with wealth--so much sheer _living_ to be got out of it,
as there is to-day. Luxury and self-indulgence are the mere abuse of
wealth. Wealth means everything nowadays that a man is most justified
in desiring!--supposing he has the brains to use it. That at any rate is
my belief. It always has been my belief. Trust me--that is all I ask of
my friends. Give me time. If Mr. Melrose were to die soon--immediately--I
should be able all the quicker to put everything to rights. But if his
death is delayed a year or two--my life indeed will be a dog's life"--he
spoke with sudden emotion--"but the people on the estate will not be the
worse, but the better, for my being there; and in the end the power will
come to me--and I shall use it. So long as Melrose lives his wife and
daughter can get nothing out of him, whether I am there or not. His
obstinacy is immovable, as Lady Tatham has found, and when he dies, their
interests will be safe with me."

Lydia had grown very pale. The man before her seemed to her Faversham,
yet not Faversham. Some other personality, compounded of all those ugly,
sophistic things that lurk in every human character, seemed to be
wrestling with, obscuring the real man.

"And the years till this stage comes to an end?" she asked
him. "When every day you have to do what you feel to be
wrong?--to obey--to be at the beck and call of such a man as Mr.
Melrose?--hateful--cruel--tyrannical!--when you must silence all
that is generous and noble--"

Her voice failed her.

Faversham's lips tightened. They remained looking at each other. Then
Faversham rose suddenly. He stooped over her. She heard his voice, hoarse
and broken in her ears:

"Lydia--I love you!--I _love you_--with all my heart!--and all my
strength! Don't, for God's sake, let us make believe with each other!
And--I believe," he added, after a moment, in a lower tone, "I
believe--that you love me!"

His attitude, his manner were masterful--violent. She trembled under it.
He tried to take her hand.

"Speak to me!" he said, peremptorily. "Oh, my darling--speak to me! I
only ask you to trust to me--to be guided by me--"

She withdrew her hand. He could see her heart fluttering under the soft
curves of the breast.

"I can't--I can't!"

The words were said with anguish. She covered her face with her hands.

"Because I won't do what you wish? What is it you wish?"

They had come to the deciding moment.

She looked up, recovering self-control, her heart rushing to her lips.

"Give it up!" she said, stretching out her hands to him, her head thrown
back, all her delicate beauty one prayer. "Don't touch this money! It is
stained--it is corrupt. You lose your honour in taking it--and honour--is
life. What does money matter? The great things that make one happy have
nothing to do with money. They can be had for so little! And if one loses
them--honour and self-respect--and a clear conscience--how can _money_
make up! If I were to marry you--and we had to live on Mr. Melrose's
money--everything in life would be poisoned for me. I should always see
the faces--of those dead people--whom I loved. I should hear their
voices--accusing. We should be in slavery--slavery to a bad man--and our
souls would die--"

Her voice dropped--drowned in the passion of its own entreaty.

Faversham pressed her hands, released them, and slowly straightened
himself to his full height, as he stood beside her on the hearthrug.
A vision rose and spread through the mind. In place of the little
sitting-room, the modest home of refined women living on a slender
income, he saw the great gallery at Threlfall with its wonderful
contents, and the series of marvellous rooms he had now examined and set
in order. Vividly, impressively the great house presented itself to him
in memory, in all its recovered grace and splendour; a treasury of art,
destined to be a place of pilgrimage for all who adore that lovely record
of itself in things subtle and exquisite which the human spirit has
written on time. Often lately he had wrung permission from Melrose to
take an English or foreign visitor through some of the rooms. He had
watched their enthusiasm and their ardour. And mingled with such
experience, there had been now for months the intoxicating sense that
everything in that marvellous house was potentially his--Claude
Faversham's, and would all some day come into his hands, the hands of a
man specially prepared by education and early circumstance to enjoy, to
appreciate.

And the estate. As in a map, he saw its green spreading acres, its
multitude of farms, its possessions of all kind, spoilt and neglected by
one man's caprice, but easily to be restored by the prudent care of his
successor. He realized himself in the future as its owner; the inevitable
place that it would give him in the political and social affairs of the
north. And the estate was not all. Behind the estate lay the great
untrammelled fortune drawn from quite other sources of wealth; how great
he was only now beginning to know.

A great sigh shook him--a sigh of decision. What he had been listening to
had been the quixotism of a tender heart, ignorant of life and affairs,
and all the wider possibilities open to man's will. He could not yield.
In time she must be the one to yield. And she would yield. Let him wait,
and be patient. There were many ways in which to propitiate, to work upon
her.

He looked down upon her gravely, his dark pointed face quivering a
little. Instinctively she drew back. Her expression changed.

"I can't do that." His voice was low but firm. "I feel the call to me.
And after all, Melrose has claims on me. To me, personally, his
generosity--has been incredible. He is old--and ill. I must stay by him."

Her mind cried out, "Yes--but on your own terms, not his!"

But she did not say it. Her pride came to her aid. She sprang up, a
glittering animation flashing back into her face, transforming its
softness, its tenderness.

"I understand--I quite understand. Thank you for being so plain--and
bearing with my--strange ideas. Now--I don't think we can be of any
further use to each other--though--" she clasped her hands
involuntarily--"I shall always hope and pray--"

She did not finish. He broke into a cry.

"Lydia! you send me away?"

"I don't accept your conditions--nor you mine. There is no more to be
said."

He looked at her sombrely, remorse struggling with his will. But also
anger--the anger of a naturally arrogant temperament--that he should find
her so resistant.

"If you loved me--"

"Ah--no," she shook her head fiercely, the bright tears in her eyes;
"don't let's talk of love! That has nothing to say to it."

She turned, and took up a piece of embroidery lying on a table near. He
accepted the indication, turning very white. But still he lingered.

"Is there nothing I could say that would alter your mind?"

"I am afraid--nothing."

She gave him her hand. He scarcely dared to press it; she had become
suddenly so strong, so hostile. Her light beauty had turned as it were to
fire; one saw the flame of the spirit.

A tumult of thoughts and regrets rushed through him. But things
inexorable held him. With a long, lingering look at her, he turned and
went.

A little later, Susy entering timidly found Lydia sitting alone in a room
that was nearly dark. Some instinct guided her. She came in, took a stool
beside her sister, and leant her head against Lydia's knee. Lydia said
nothing, but their hands joined, and for long they sat in the firelight,
the only sounds, Lydia's stifled sobbing, and the soft crackling of a
dying flame.


BOOK IV


XIX


Tatham was returning alone from a run with the West Cumbrian hounds. The
December day was nearly done, and he saw the pageant of its going from a
point on the outskirts of his own park. The park, a great space of wild
land extending some miles to the north through a sparsely peopled county,
was bounded and intersected throughout its northerly section by various
high moorland roads. At a cross-road, leading to Duddon on the left, and
to a remote valley running up the eastern side of Blencathra on the
right, he reined up his horse to look for a moment at the sombre glow
which held the western heaven; amid which the fells of Thirlmere and
Derwentwater stood superbly ranged in threatening blacks and purples. To
the east and over the waste of Flitterdale, that great flat "moss" in
which the mountains die away, there was the prophecy of moonrise; a
pearly radiance in the air, a peculiar whiteness in the mists that had
gathered along the river, a silver message in the sky. But the wind was
rising, and the westerly clouds rushing up. The top of Blencathra was
already hidden; it might be a wild night.

Only one luminous point was to be seen, at first, in all the wide and
splendid landscape. It shone from Threlfall Tower, a dark and
indistinguishable mass amid its hanging woods.

"Old Melrose--counting out his money!"

But as the scornful fancy crossed his mind, a few other dim and scattered
lights began to prick the gloom of the fast-darkening valley. That
twinkle far away, in the direction of St. John's Vale, might it not be
the light of Green Cottage--of Lydia's lamp?

He sat his horse, motionless, consumed with longing and grief. Yet, hard
exercise in the open air, always seemed to bring him a kind of physical
comfort. "It _was_ a jolly _run_!" he thought, yet half ashamed. His
young blood was in love with life, through all heartache.

Suddenly, a whirring sound from the road on his right, and the flash of
moving lamps. He saw that a small motor was approaching, and his mare
began to fidget.

"Gently, old girl!"

The motor approached and slowed at the corner.

"Hallo Undershaw! is that you?"

The motor stopped and Undershaw jumped out, and turned off his engine.
Tatham's horse was pirouetting.

"All right," said Undershaw; "I'll walk by you a bit. Turn her up your
road."

The beautiful mare quieted down, and presently the two were in close
talk, while the motor left to itself blazed on the lonely moorland road.

Undershaw was describing a visit he had paid that morning to old Brand,
the bailiff, who was now quietly and uncomplainingly losing hold on life.

"He may go any time--perhaps to-night. The elder son's departure has
finished him. I told the lad that if he cared to stay till his father's
death, you would see that he got work meanwhile on the estate; but he was
wild to go--not a scrap of filial affection that I could make out!--and
the poor old fellow has scarcely spoken since he left the house. So there
he is, left with the feeble old wife, and the half-witted son, who grows
queerer and madder than ever. I needn't say the woman was very
grateful--"

"Don't!" said Tatham; "it's a beastly world."

They moved on in silence, till Undershaw resumed:

"Dixon came to the surgery this afternoon, and I understood from him that
he thinks Melrose is breaking up fast. He tries to live as usual; and his
temper is appalling. But Dixon sees a great change."

"Well, it'll scarcely be possible to say that his decease 'cast a gloom
over the countryside.' Will it?" laughed Tatham.

"What'll Faversham do? That's what I keep asking myself."

"Do? Why, go off with the shekels, and be damned to us! I understand that
just at present he's paying rather high for them, which is some
satisfaction. That creature Nash told one of our men the other day that
Melrose now treats him like dirt, and finds his chief amusement in
stopping anything he wants to do."

"Then he'd better look sharp after the will," said Undershaw, with a
smile. "Melrose is game for any number of tricks yet. But I don't judge
Faversham quite as you do. I believe he has all sorts of grand ideas in
his head about what he'll do when he comes in."

"I daresay! You need 'em when you begin with taking soiled money. Mrs.
Melrose got the quarterly payment of her allowance yesterday, from an
Italian bank--twenty-five pounds minus ten pounds, which seems to be
mortgaged in some way. Melrose's solicitors gracefully let her know
that the allowance was raised by twenty pounds! On fifteen pounds
therefore she and the girl are expected to exist for the quarter--_and_
support the old father. And yesterday just after my mother had shown me
the check, I saw Faversham in Pengarth, driving a Rolls-Royce car,
brand-new, with a dark fellow beside him whom I know quite well as a
Bond Street dealer. I conclude Faversham was taking him to see the
collections--_his_ collections!"

"It looks ugly I grant. But I believe he'll provide for the girl as soon
as he can."

"And I hope she'll refuse it!" cried Tatham. "And I believe she will.
She's a girl of spirit. She talks of going on the stage. My mother has
found out that she's got a voice, and she dances divinely. My mother's
actually got a teacher for her from London, whom we put up in the
village."

"A lovely little girl!" said Undershaw. "And she's getting over her
hardships. But the mother--" He shook his head.

"You think she's in a bad way?"

"Send her back to Italy as soon as you can. She's pining for her own
people. Life's been a bit too hard for her, and she never was but a poor
thing. Well, I must go."

Tatham stayed his horse. Undershaw, added as though by an afterthought:

"I was at Green Cottage this morning. Mrs. Penfold's rather knocked up
with nursing her sister. She chattered to me about Faversham. He used to
be a good deal there but they've broken with him too; apparently, because
of Mainstairs. Miss Lydia couldn't stand it. She was _so_ devoted to the
people."

The man on horseback made some inaudible reply, and they began to talk of
a couple of sworn inquiries about to be held on the Threlfall estate by
the officials of the Local Government Board, into the housing and
sanitation of three of the chief villages on Melrose's property. The
department had been induced to move by a committee of local gentlemen, in
which Tatham had taken a leading part. The whole affair had reduced
itself indeed so far to a correspondence duel between Tatham, as
representing a scandalized neighbourhood, and Faversham, as representing
Melrose.

Tatham's letters, in which a man, with no natural gift for the pen, had
developed a surprising amount of effective sarcasm, had all appeared in
the local press; with Faversham's ingenious and sophistical replies.
Tatham discussed them now with Undershaw in a tone of passionate
bitterness. The doctor said little. He had his own shrewd ideas on the
situation.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Undershaw left him, Tatham rode on, up the forest lane, till again
the trees fell away, the wide valley with its boundary fells opened
before him, and again his eye sought through the windy dusk for the
far-gleaming light that spoke to him of Lydia. His mind was full of fresh
agitation, stirred by Undershaw's remark about her. The idea of a breach
between Lydia and Faversham was indeed most welcome, since it seemed to
restore Lydia to that pedestal from which it had been so hard and strange
to see her descend. It gave him back the right to worship her! And yet,
the notion did nothing--now--to revive any hope for himself. He kept the
distant light in view for long, his heart full of a tenderness which,
though he did not know it, had already parted with much of the bitterness
of unsatisfied passion. Unconsciously, the healing process was on its
way; the healing of the normal man, on whom a wound is no sooner
inflicted than all the reparative powers of life rush together for its
cure.

      *       *       *       *

But while Tatham, wrapped in thoughts of Lydia, was thus drawing
homeward, across the higher ground of the estate, down through the Duddon
woods, as they fell gently to the river, a little figure was hurrying,
with the step of a fugitive, and half-nervous, half-exultant looks
from side to side. The moon had risen. It was not dark in the woods, and
Felicia, amid the _boschi_ of the Apuan Alps, had never been frightened
of the night or of any ill befalling her. In Lucca itself she might be
insulted; on the hills, never. She had the independence, and--generally
speaking--the strength of the working girl. So that the enterprise on
which she was launched--the quest of her father--presented itself to her
as nothing particularly difficult. She had indeed to keep it from her
mother and Lady Tatham, and to find means of escaping them. That she
calmly took steps to do, not bothering her head much about it.

As to the rest of the business, there was a station on the Keswick line
close to the gate of the park, and she had looked out a train which would
take her conveniently to Whitebeck, which was only half a mile from
Threlfall. From Duddon to Whitebeck took eight minutes in the train. She
would be at Whitebeck a little after five; allowing an hour for her
adventure at the Tower, and some little margin, she would catch a train
back between six and seven, which would allow of her slipping into Duddon
a little after seven, unnoticed, and in good time to dress for dinner.
Her Italian blood betrayed itself throughout, alike in the keen pleasure
she took in the various devices of her small plot; in the entire absence
of any hampering scruples as to the disobedience and deceit which it
involved; and in the practical intelligence with which she was ready to
carry it out. She had brooded over it for days; and this afternoon a
convenient opportunity had arisen. Her mother was in her room with a
headache; Lady Tatham had had to go to Carlisle on business.

As she hastened, almost running, through the park, she was planning, by
fits and starts, what she would say to her father. But still more was the
thinking of Tatham--asking herself questions about him, with little
thrills of excitement, and little throbbings of delicious fear.

Here she was, at the gate of the park. Just ten minutes to her train! She
hurried on. A few labourers were in the road coming home tired from their
work; a few cottage doors were ajar, showing the bright fire, and the
sprawling children within. Some of the men as they passed looked with
curiosity at the slim stranger; but she was well muffled up in her new
furs--Victoria's gift--and her large felt hat; they saw little more than
the tips of her small nose and chin.

The train came in just as she reached the station. She took her ticket
for Whitebeck, and as the train jogged along, she looked out of the
window at the valley in the dim moonrise, her mind working tumultuously.
Lady Tatham had told her much; Hesketh, Lady Tatham's maid, and the old
coachman who had been teaching her to ride, had told her more. She knew
that before she reached Whitebeck she would have passed the boundary
between the Duddon and Threlfall estates. She was now indeed on her
father's land, the land which in justice ought to be hers some day; which
in Italy would be hers by law, or part of it anyway, whatever pranks her
father might play. But here in England a man might rob his child of every
penny if he pleased. That was strange when England was such a great
country--such a splendid country. "I _love_ England!" she thought
passionately, as she leant back with folded arms and closed eyes.

And straightway on the dusk rose the image of Tatham--Tatham on
horseback, as she had seen him set out for the hunt that morning; and she
felt her eyes grow a little wet. Why? Oh! because he was so tall and
splendid--and he sat his horse like a king--and everybody loved him--and
she was living in his house--and so, whether he would or no, he must take
notice of her sometimes. One evening had he not let her mend his glove?
And another evening, when she was practising her dancing for Lady Tatham,
had he not come in to look? Ah, well, wait till she could sing and dance
properly, till--perhaps--he saw her on the stage! Her newly discovered
singing voice, which was the excitement of the moment for Lady Tatham and
Netta, was to Felicia like some fairy force within her, struggling to be
at large, which would some day carve out her fortunes, and bring her to
Tatham--on equal terms.

For her pride had flourished and fed upon her love. She no longer talked
of Tatham to her mother or any one else. But deep in her heart lay the
tenacious, pursuing instinct.

And besides--suppose--she made an impression on her father--on his cruel
old heart? Such things do happen. It's silly to say they don't. "I _am_
pretty--and now my clothes are all right--and my hands have come nearly
white. He'll see I'm not a girl to be ashamed of. And if my father did
give me a _dot_--why then I'd send my mother to _his_ mother! That's how
we'd do it in Italy. I'm as well-born as he--nearly--and if I had a
_dot_--"

The yellow-haired girl at any rate was quite out of the way. No one spoke
of her; no one mentioned her. That was all right.

And as to Threlfall and her father, if she was able to soften him at all
it would not be in the least necessary to drive that bad young man, Mr.
Faversham, to despair. Compromise--bargaining--settle most things. She
fell to imagining--with a Latin clearness and realism--how it might be
handled. Only it would have to be done before her father died. For if Mr.
Faversham once took all the money and all the land, there would be no
_dot_ for her, even if he were willing to give it her. For Lord Tatham
would never take a farthing from Mr. Faversham, not even through his
wife. "And so it would be no use to me," thought Felicia, quietly, but
regretfully.

Whitebeck station. Out she tripped, asked her way to Threlfall,
and hurried off into the dark, followed by the curious looks of the
station-master.

She was soon at the park gate, and passed through it with a beating
heart. She had heard of the bloodhounds; and the sound of a bark in the
distance--though it was only the collie at the farm--gave her a start of
terror.

The Whitebeck gate was but a short distance from the house, and as
she turned a corner, the Tower rose suddenly before her. She held her
breath; it looked so big, so darkly magnificent. She thought of all the
tales that had been told her, the rooms full of silver and gold--the
_arazzi_--the _stucchi_--the cabinets and sculpture. She had grown up in
an atmosphere of perpetual bric-a-brac; she had seen the big Florentine
shops; she could imagine what it was like.

There were lights in two of the windows; and the smoke from several
chimneys rose wind-beaten against the woods behind. The moon stood
immediately over the roof, and the shadow of the house stretched beyond
the forecourt almost to her feet.

She lingered a few minutes, fascinated, gazing at this huge place where
her father lived--her father whom she had never seen since she was a
baby. The moon lit up her tiny figure, and her small white face, as she
stood in the open, alone in the wintry silence.

Then, swiftly, and instead of going up to the front door, she turned to
the right along a narrow flagged path that skirted the forecourt and led
to the back of the house.

She knew exactly what to do. She had planned it all with Hesketh,
Hesketh, who was the daughter of a farmer on the Duddon estate, fifty
years old, a born gossip, and acquainted with every man, woman and
child in the neighbourhood. Did not Hesketh go to the same chapel with
Thomas Dixon and his wife? And had she not a romantic soul, far above
furbelows--a soul which had flung itself into the cause of the "heiress,"
to the point of keeping the child's secret, even from her ladyship?
Hesketh indeed had suffered sharply from qualms of conscience in this
respect. But Felicia had spared her as much as possible, by keeping the
precise moment of her escapade to herself.

She groped her way round, till she came to a side path leading to an
entrance. The path indeed was that by which Faversham had been originally
carried into the Tower, across the foot-bridge. Peering over a low wall
that bounded the path, she looked startled into an abyss of leafless
trees, with a bright gleam of moonlit water far below. In front of her
was a door and steps, and some rays of light penetrating through the
shuttered windows beside the door, showed that there was life within.

Felicia mounted the steps and knocked. No one came. At last she found a
bell and rang it--cautiously. Steps approached. The door was opened, and
a gray-haired woman stood on the threshold.

"Well, what's your business?" she said sharply. It was evident that she
was short-sighted, and did not clearly see the person outside.

"Please, I want to speak to Mr. Melrose."

The clear, low voice arrested the old woman.

"Eh?" she said testily. "And who may you be? You cawn't see Mr. Melrose,
anyways."

"I want to see him particularly. Are you Mrs. Dixon?"

"Aye--a'am Mrs. Dixon. But aa've no time to goa chatterin' at doors wi'
yoong women; soa if yo'll juist gie me yor business, I'll tell Muster
Faversham, when he's got time to see to 't."

"It's not Mr. Faversham I want to see--it's Mr. Melrose. Mrs. Dixon,
don't you remember me?"

Mrs. Dixon stepped back in puzzled annoyance, so as to let a light from
the passage shine upon the stranger's face. She stood motionless.

Felicia stepped within.

"I am Miss Melrose," she said, with composure, "Felicia Melrose. You knew
me when I was a child. And I wish to see my father."

Mrs. Dixon's face seemed to have fallen into chaos under the shock. She
stood staring at the visitor, her mouth working.

"Muster Melrose's däater!" she said, at last. "T' baby--as was! Aye--yo'
feature him! An' yo're stayin' ower ta Duddon--wi' her ladyship. I know.
Dixon towd me. Bit yo' shouldna' coom here, Missie! Yo' canno' see your
feyther."

"Why not?" said Felicia imperiously. "I mean to see him. Here I am in the
house. Take me to him at once!"

And suddenly closing the entrance door behind her, she moved on toward an
inner passage dimly lit, of which she had caught sight.

Mrs. Dixon clung to her arm.

"Noa, noa! Coom in here, Missie--coom in _here_! Dixon!--where are yo'?
Dixon!"

She raised her voice. A chair was pushed back in the kitchen, on the
other side of the passage. An old man who, to judge from his aspect, had
been roused by his wife's call from a nap after his tea, appeared in a
doorway.

Mrs. Dixon drew Felicia toward him, and into the kitchen, as he retreated
thither. Then she shut and bolted the door.

"This is t' yoong lady!" she said in a breathless whisper to her husband.
"Muster-Melrose's däater! She's coom fra Duddon. An' she's fer seein' her
feyther."

Old Dixon had grown very pale. But otherwise he showed no surprise. He
looked frowning at Felicia.

"Yo' canno' do that, Miss Melrose. Yo'r feyther wunna see yo'. He's an
owd man noo, and we darena disturb him."

Felicia argued with the pair, first quietly, then with a heaving breast,
and some angry tears. Dixon soon dropped the struggle, so far as words
went. He left that to his wife. But he stood firmly against the door,
looking on.

"You shan't keep me here!" said Felicia at last with a stamp. "I'll call
some one! I'll make a noise!"

A queer, humorous look twinkled over Dixon's face. Then--suddenly--he
moved from the door. His expression had grown hesitating--soft.

"Varra well, then. Yo' shall goa--if you mun goa."

His wife protested. He turned upon her.

"She shall goa!" he repeated, striking the dresser beside him. "Her
feyther's an old man--an' sick. Mebbe he'll be meetin' his Mäaker face to
face, before the year's oot; yo' canno' tell. He's weakenin' fasst. An'
he's ben a hard mon to his awn flesh and blood. There'll be a reckonin'!
An' the Lord's sent him this yan chance o' repentance. I'll not stan' i'
the Lord's way--whativer. Coom along, Missie!"

And entirely regardless of his wife's entreaties, the old Methodist
resolutely opened the kitchen door, and beckoned to Felicia. He was lame
now and walked with a stick, his shoulders bent. But he neither paused,
nor spoke to her again. Murmuring to himself, he led her along the inner
passage, and opened the door into the great gallery.

A blaze of light and colour, a rush of heated air. Felicia was dazzled by
the splendour of the great show within--the tapestries, the pictures, the
gleaming reflections on lacquer and intarsia, on ebony or Sèvres. But the
atmosphere was stifling. Melrose now could only live in the temperature
of a hothouse.

Dixon threw open a door, and without a word beckoned to Felicia to enter.
He hesitated a moment, evidently as to whether he should announce her;
and then, stepping forward, he cleared his throat.

"Muster Melrose, theer's soom one as wants to speak to you!"

"What do you mean, you old fool!" said a deep, angry voice on the other
side of a great lacquer screen; "didn't I tell you I wasn't to be
disturbed?"

Felicia walked round the screen. Dixon, with an excited look at her,
retired through the door which he closed behind him.

"Father!" said Felicia, in a low, trembling voice.

An old man who was writing at a large inlaid table, in the midst of a
confusion of objects which the girl's eyes had no time to take in, turned
sharply at the sound.

The two stared at each other. Melrose slowly revolved on his chair, pen
in hand. Felicia stood, with eyes downcast, her cheeks burning, her hands
lightly clasped.

Melrose spoke first.

"H'm--so they've sent _you_ here?"

She looked up.

"No one sent me. I--I wished to see you--before we went away; because you
are my father--and I mightn't ever see you--if I didn't now. And I wanted
to ask you"--her voice quivered--"not to be angry any more with mother
and me. We never meant to vex you--by coming. But we were so poor--and
mother is ill. Yes, she _is_ ill!--she is--it's no shamming. Won't you
forgive us?--won't you give mother a little more money?--and won't
you"--she clasped her hands entreatingly--"won't you give me a _dot_? I
may want to be married--and you are so rich? And I wouldn't ever trouble
you again--I--"

She broke off, intimidated, paralyzed by the strange fixed look of the
old wizard before her--his flowing hair, his skullcap, his white and
sunken features. And yet mysteriously she recognized herself in him. She
realized through every fibre that he was indeed her father.

"You would have done better not to trouble me again!" said Melrose, with
slow emphasis. "Your mother seems to pay no attention whatever to what I
say. We shall see. So you want a _dot_? And, pray, what do you want a
_dot_ for? Who's going to marry you? Tatham?"

The tone was more mocking than fierce; but Felicia shrank under it.

"Oh, no, _no_! But I _might_ want to marry," she added piteously. "And in
Italy--one can't marry--without a _dot_!"

"Your mother should have thought of these things when she ran away."

Felicia was silent a moment. Then, without invitation, she seated herself
on the edge of a chair that stood near him.

"That was so long ago," she said timidly--yet confidingly. "And I was a
baby. Couldn't you--couldn't you forget it now?"

Melrose surveyed her.

"I suppose you like being at Duddon?" he asked her abruptly, without
answering her question.

She clasped her hands fervently.

"It's like heaven! They're so good to us."

"No doubt!"--the tone was sarcastic. "Well, let them provide for you. Who
gave you those clothes? Lady Tatham?"

She nodded. Her lip trembled. Her startled eyes looked at him piteously.

"You've been living at Lucca?"

"Near Lucca--on the mountains."

"H'm. Is that all true--about your grandfather?"

"That he's ill? Of course, it's true!" she said indignantly. "We don't
tell lies. He's had a stroke--he's dying. And we could hardly give him
any food he could eat. You see--"

She edged a little closer, and began a voluble, confidential account of
their life in the mountains. Her voice was thin and childish, but sweet;
and every now and then she gave a half-frightened, half-excited laugh.
Melrose watched her frowning; but he did not stop her. Her bright eyes
and brows, with their touches of velvet black, the quick movement of her
pink lips, the rose-leaf delicacy of her colour, seemed to hold him.
Among the pretty things with which the room was crowded she was the
prettiest; and he probably was conscious of it. Propped up against the
French bureau stood a Watteau drawing in red chalk--a _sanguine_--he had
bought in Paris on a recent visit. The eyes of the old connoisseur went
from the living face to the drawing, comparing them.

At last Felicia paused. Her smiles died away. She looked at him
wistfully.

"Mother's awfully sorry she--she offended you so. Won't you forgive her
now--and poor Babbo--about the little statue?"

She hardly dared breathe the last words, as she timidly dropped her eyes.

There were tears in her voice, and yet she was not very far from
hysterical laughter. The whole scene was so fantastic--ridiculous! The
room with its lumber; its confusion of glittering things; this old man
frowning at her--for no reason! For after all--what had she done? Even
the _contadini_--they were rough often--they couldn't read or write--but
they loved their grandchildren.

As he caught her reference to the bronze Hermes, Melrose's face changed.
He rose, stretching out a hand toward a bell on the table.

"You must go!" he said, sharply. "You ought never to have come. You'll
get nothing by it. Tell your mother so. This is the second attack she has
made on me--through her tools. If she attempts another, she may take the
consequences!"

Felicia too stood up. A rush of anger and despair choked her.

"And you won't--you won't even say a kind word to me!" she said, panting.
"You won't kiss me?"

For answer, he seized her by the hands, and drew her toward the light.
There, for a few intolerable seconds he looked closely, with a kind of
savage curiosity, into her face, studying her features, her hair, her
light form. Then pushing her from him, he opened that same drawer in the
French cabinet that Undershaw had once seen him open, fumbled a little,
and took out something that glittered.

"Take that. But if you come here again it will be the worse for you, and
for your mother. When I say a thing I mean it. Now, go! Dixon shall take
you to the train."

Felicia glanced at the Renaissance jewel in her hand--delicate Venus in
gold and pearl, set in a hoop of diamonds. "I won't have it!" she said,
dashing it from her with a sob of passion. "And we won't take your money
either--not a farthing! We've got friends who'll help us. And I'll keep
my mother myself. You shan't give her anything--nor my grandfather. So
you needn't threaten us! You can't do us any harm!"

She looked him scornfully over from head to foot, a little fury, with
blazing eyes.

Melrose laughed.

"I thought you came to get a _dot_ out of me," he said, with lifted
brows, admiring her in spite of himself. "You seem to have a good spice
of the Melrose temper in you. I'm sorry I can't treat you as you seem to
wish. Your mother settled that. Well--that'll do--that'll do! We can't
bandy words any more. Dixon!"

He touched the hand-bell beside him.

Felicia hurried to the door, sobbing with excitement. As she reached it
Dixon entered. Melrose spoke a few peremptory words to him, and she found
herself walking through the gallery, Dixon's hand on her arm, while he
muttered and lamented beside her.

"'And the Lord hardened Pharaoh's heart.' Aye, it's the Lord--it's the
Lord. Oh! Missie, Missie--I was a fool to let yo' in. Yo've been nowt but
a new stone o' stumblin'; an' the Lord knows there's offences enoof
already!"

Meanwhile, in the room from which his daughter had been driven, Melrose
had risen from his seat, and was moving hither and thither, every now and
then taking up some object in the crowded tables, pretending to look at
it, and putting it down again. He was pursued, tormented all the while by
swarming thoughts--visualizations. That child would outlive him--her
father--perhaps by a half century. The flesh and blood sprung from his
own life, would go on enjoying and adventuring, for fifty years, perhaps,
after he had been laid in his resented grave. And the mind which would
have had no existence had he not lived, would hold till death the
remembrance of what he had just said and done--a child's only remembrance
of her father.

He stood, looking back upon his life, and quite conscious of some fatal
element in the moment which had just gone by. It struck him as a kind of
moral tale. Some men would say that God had once more, and finally,
offered him "a place of repentance"--through this strange and tardy
apparition of his daughter. A ghostly smile flickered. The man of the
world knew best. "Let no man break with his own character." That was the
real text which applied. And he had followed it. Circumstance and his own
will had determined, twenty years earlier, that he had had enough of
women-kind. His dealings with them had been many and various! But at a
given moment he had put an end to them forever. And no false
sentimentalism should be allowed to tamper with the thing done.

At this point he found himself sinking into his chair; and must needs
confess himself somewhat shaken by what had happened. He was angry with
his physical weakness, and haunted in spite of himself by the hue and
fragrance of that youth he had just been watching--there--at the corner
of the table--beside the Watteau sketch. He sat staring at the
drawing....

Till the threatened vitality within again asserted itself; beat off the
besieging thoughts; and clutched fiercely at some new proof of its own
strength. Only the image of Hilda remained, and seemed to drown in light
the gloomy forebodings that had so much distressed him.

As for Hilda's own warning, it had been nothing but the result of her
sorrow at parting. And since parting there must be, he would enjoy to
the full what was left of this happy student life, with its changing hours
of study and feasting, of poetry, and fighting, and song that almost mingled
with the clash of steel.

'Are you ready?' asked the students in chorus.

Greif set his yellow cap upon his close-cut golden hair.

'Yes--come on! Vivat, floreat, crescat Suabia! The last semester shall
be a merry one!'
And away they went, crowding down the narrow staircase, laughing, jesting,
and humming snatches of tunes as they burst out into the quiet shadowy
street below.

CHAPTER VII

Greif was not able to throw off the memories of his vacation so
easily as he had at first imagined.

The busy week that followed his return to Schwarzburg furnished
enough excitement to divert his thoughts for a time into a more
cheerful channel, and he was further reassured by the fact that his
father's letter contained nothing that could alarm him.

Everything was going on at Greifenstein as usual. Hilda and her mother
had returned to Sigmundskron.

       The shooting was particularly good.

A postscript informed Greif that nothing had been heard from a certain
person, who was not named. The young man thought his father's handwriting
was growing larger and more angular than ever, and that instead
of becoming less steady with advancing years, the letters looked
as though they were cut into the paper with the point of a sharp
knife.

Some days passed quickly by, and he began to think that he had
disturbed himself foolishly, and had suffered his judgment to be
unbalanced by the impulsive speeches of Hilda and of his own mother.

Then, all at once, as he sat one morning at his accustomed place
in one of the lecture-rooms, noting in a blank book the wisdom that
fell from the lips of a shrivelled professor, his thoughts wandered
and the vision of Hilda rose before his eyes, with the expression
she had worn when she had spoken of that terrible catastrophe which
was in store for him.

He could not imagine why he should have thought of the matter so suddenly,
nor why it seemed so much more important than before.

It required a strong effort to concentrate his mind once more upon what
he was doing, and when he succeeded, he was aware that the point of the
professor's argument had escaped him.

Mechanically he looked at his neighbour to see whether he had been making
notes. The latter was a man much older than himself, and was busily writing
upon loose sheets. He did not look up, but he seemed to understand what
Greif wanted, for he handed him, or tossed him, the piece of paper
on which he was scribbling, numbered the blank page beneath it, and
went on quickly without even turning his eyes. Greif thanked him, and
in the next pause of the lecture copied the notes into his own book. At
the end of the hour Greif returned the sheet and repeated his
thanks.

He did not know the man, even by sight, a fact which surprised him, as
the stranger was rather a striking personage.

'I am very much obliged,' he said.

'I was absent-minded--thinking of something else.'
'That is always rash,' replied the other. 'I am very glad to have
been of service to you.'
Although Greif was not fond of making acquaintances among students
who wore no colours, he could not refrain from continuing the
conversation.

The two were the last to leave the hall and went down the broad staircase
together.

'You have not been long in the University,' he observed.

'I have only just arrived. I have migrated from Heidelberg. Permit me
to introduce myself,' he added according to German custom.

'My name is Rex.'

'My name is von Greifenstein. Most happy.'
'Most happy.'

Both bowed, stopping for the purpose upon the landing, and then looking
into each other's eyes. Rex was a man of rather more than medium height,
thin, but broad-shouldered and gracefully built. He might have been of
any age, but he looked as though he were about thirty years old. It
would not have surprised any one to hear that he was much older,
or much younger.

Thick brown hair was carefully brushed and smoothed all over his head,
and he wore his beard, which was of the same colour, carefully trimmed,
full and square. A soft and clear complexion, a little less than
fair but very far from dark, showed at first sight that Rex rejoiced
in perfect health.

The straight nose was very classic in outline, the brow and forehead
evenly developed, the modelling about the eyes and temples very
smooth and delicate.

But the eyes themselves destroyed at once the harmony of the whole
face and gave it a very uncommon expression.

This was due entirely to their colour and not at all to their shape.

The iris was very large, so that little of the surrounding white was
visible, and its hue was that of the palest blue china, while the
pupil was so extremely small as to be scarcely noticeable.

The apparent absence of that shining black aperture in the centre,
made the eyes look like glass marbles, and rendered their glance
indescribably stony.

Greif almost started when he saw them. 'You preferred Schwarzburg to
Heidelberg, then,' he remarked, by way of continuing the
conversation.

'For my especial branch I think it is superior.'

'Philosophy?' asked Greif, thinking of the lecture they had just
attended.

'No. That is a pastime with me. I am interested in astronomy and in some
branches connected with that science. You have a celebrated specialist
here.'

'Yes, old Uncle Sternkitzler,' answered Greif irreverently.

'Exactly,' assented Rex. 'He is a shining light, a star of the first
magnitude. If there is anything to discover, he will discover it. If not,
he will explain the reason why there is nothing.

He is a great man.

He knows what nothing is, for there is nothing he does not know. I am
delighted with him. You do not care for astronomy, Herr von Greifenstein?'

'I do not know anything about it, and I have no talent for mathematics,'
answered Greif.

'You intend to make it a profession, I presume.'
'Yes, as far as it can be called a profession.'

'How far is that, if I may ask?'
'Just as far as it goes after it ceases to be an amusement,' answered
Rex.

'That may be very far,' said Greif who was struck by the definition.

'Yes.

If you call it a profession, it is one for which a lifetime of study
is only an insignificant preparation.

If you call it a study and not a profession, you make of it a mere
amusement, like philosophy.'

'I do not find that very amusing,' said Greif, with a laugh.

'Nothing is amusing when you are obliged to do it,' answered the other.
'Duty is the hair shirt of the nineteenth century. A man who does his
duty is just as uncomfortable while he is doing it as any Trappist who
ever buckled on a spiked belt under his gown.'
'But afterwards?'
'Afterwards? What is afterwards? It is nothing to you or me. Afterwards
means the time when you and I are buried, and the next generation
are writhing in hair shirts of their own making, and prickly girdles
which they put on themselves.'

Rex laughed oddly.

'I differ from you,' answered Greif.

'You are a Korps student, sir. Does that mean that you wish to quarrel
with me?' 'Not unless you choose. I am not in search of a row this
morning. I differed from you as to your view of duty. It seems to me
contrary to German ideas.'

'Facts are generally contrary to all ideas,' answered Rex.

'Not in Germany--at least so far as duty is concerned. Besides, if science
is true, facts must agree with it. Political ethics are a science,
and duty is necessary to the system that science has created.
What would become of our military supremacy if the belief in duty were
suddenly destroyed?'
'I do not know.

But I know that it will not make the smallest difference to us, what
becomes of it, when we are dead and buried.'
'It would change the condition of our children for the worse.'
'You need not marry. No one obliges you or me to become the fathers of
new specimens of our species.'
'And what becomes of love in your system?' inquired Greif, more and more
surprised at his acquaintance's extraordinary conversation.

'What becomes of any thing when it has ceased to exist?' asked Rex.

'I do not know.'
'There is nothing to know in the case. The motion--you would call it
force--the motion continues, but the particular thing in which it was
manifested is no longer, and that particular thing never will exist
again. Motion is imperishable, because it is immaterial. The innumerable
milliards of vortices in which the material of your body moves at such
an amazing rate will not stand still when you are dead, nor even when
every visible atom of your body has vanished from sight in the course
of ages. Every vortex is imperishable, eternal, of infinite duration.
The vortex was the cause before the beginning and it will remain itself
after the end of all things.'
'The prime cause,' mused Greif. 'And who made the vortex?'
'God,' answered Rex laconically.

'But then,' objected the younger student in some surprise, 'you
believe in a future life, in the importance of this life, in duty,
in all the rest of it.'
'I believe in the vortex,' replied the other, 'in its unity, individuality
and eternity. Life is a matter of convenience, its importance is a
question of opinion, its duties are ultimately considerations of
taste.

What are opinions, conveniences and tastes, compared with realities? The
vortex is a fact, and it seems to me that it furnishes enough material
for reflexion to satisfy a mind of ordinary activity.' 'You hold strange
views,' said Greif thoughtfully.

'Oh no!' exclaimed Rex, with sudden animation. 'I am not at all
different from any other peaceful student of astronomy, I can assure you.
Neither the vortex nor any other fact ever prevents any man from
doing what is individually agreeable to him, nor from enjoying
everything that comes in his way, or calling it sinful, according
to his convictions.'

'And are you a happy man, if the question is not indiscreet?'
'Ah, that is your favourite question among philosophers,' laughed
Rex, 'and it shows what you really think of all your beliefs about
duty and the rest of the virtues. You really care for nothing but happiness,
if the truth be told. All your religions, your moralities, your laws,
your customs, you regard as a means of obtaining ultimate enjoyment.
There is little merit in being happy with so much artificial
assistance.

Real originality should show itself in surpassing your felicity without
making use of your laborious methods in attaining to it. The trouble is
that your political ethics, your recipes for making bliss in
wholesale quantities, take no account of exceptional people.

But why should we discuss the matter? What is happiness? Millions of
volumes have been written about it, and no man has ever had the courage
to own exactly what he believes would make him happy.

You may add your name to the list, Herr von Greifenstein, if you please,
and write the next ponderous work upon the subject. You would not be any
happier afterwards and you would be very much older. If you really
desire to be happy, I will tell you how it is possible. In the first
place, are you happy now?'

Rex fixed his stony stare, that contrasted so strangely with his beautiful
face, upon Greif's eyes. He saw there an uncertainty, a vague uneasiness,
that answered his question well enough.

'Yes,' answered the younger man in a doubtful tone, 'I suppose I
am.'

'I think your happiness is not complete,' said Rex, turning away.
'Perhaps my simple plan may help you. Interrogate yourself. What is it
that you want? Find out what that something is--that is all.'
'And then?'
'And then? Why, take it, and be happy,' answered Rex with a careless
smile, as though the rule were simple enough.

'That is soon said,' replied Greif in a grave tone. 'I want what no man
can give me.'

'Nor woman either?'

'Nor woman either.' 'And something you could not take if it were before
you, within reach?'

'No. I want nothing material.

I want to know the future.'

'Surely that is not a very hard thing,' answered Rex, looking at his
watch.

'It must be dinner-time,' said Greif politely, as he noticed the action.
He had no wish to detain his new acquaintance.

'Indeed, it is just noon. I fear I have kept you from some
engagement.'
'I assure you, it has given me the greatest pleasure to meet you,'
answered Greif, holding out his hand.

'The pleasure has been quite upon my side,' returned Rex, bowing
with alacrity.

And so they parted, Rex plunging into a shady side street, while
Greif continued his walk towards the dining-place of his Korps,
thinking as he went, of the queer person he had just seen for the
first time.

His name was strange, his conversation was unusual, his eyes were most
disagreeable, and yet oddly fascinating. Greif thought about him and was
not satisfied with his short interview. The man's remark about the future
was either that of a visionary, or of an absent-minded person who did
not always know what he was saying. Greif himself could hardly understand
how he had been led, in a first meeting with one who was altogether a
stranger, to speak so plainly of what disturbed him. It was not his
custom to make acquaintances at a venture, or to refer to his own affairs
with people he did not know. He reflected, however, that he had not
committed himself in any way, while admitting that he might easily
have been drawn on to do so if the interview had been prolonged.

At dinner he asked his friends whether any of them knew a student whose
name was Rex. No one had heard of him, and on learning that he was a man
older than the average, they murmured, and said one to another
that Greif was beginning to cross the borders of Philistia.

After the meal was over, Greif went to his lodgings and tried to work.
The sudden anxiety that had seized him in the morning during the
lecture grew stronger in solitude, until it was almost unbearable. He
pushed aside his books and wrote to his father, inquiring whether anything
had happened, in a way which would certainly have surprised old
Greifenstein if he himself had been less nervous about the future
than he actually was.

It was a relief to have written, and Greif returned to his labours
more quietly afterwards.

He did not see Rex again in the lecture-room, though his eye wandered
along the rows of heads bent down over busy hands that wrote without
ceasing. Rex was not among them. He had said that he considered philosophy
an amusement, and he probably came to the hall where it was taught
when the fancy seized him to divert himself.

But the desire to talk with him again became stronger, until Greif actually
determined to go in search of the man.

The sun had gone down, and he stood at his open window as he had done
on the evening of his arrival, watching almost unconsciously for the
first stars to shine out above the cathedral spire.

The air was very quiet, disturbed by no sound but the swirl of the deep
river against the stone piers of the bridge far down below the student's
window.
There was something melancholy in the ceaseless rush of the strong
water, which reminded him of the sighing of the trees at home,
on that last morning when he had sat with Hilda at the foot of the
Hunger- Thurm. At such a time anything which recalled the circumstances
of the vacation necessarily brought with it an increase in his
anxiety.

Greif thought of the evening that was before him if he joined his comrades
at their usual place of meeting, and the prospect was distasteful. He
would be glad to escape from the lights and the noise and the
drinking and singing, even from his position of importance among his
fellows, who made him their oracle upon all University matters. He would
prefer to pass an hour or two in quiet conversation, in a quiet room,
with Rex the student of astronomy and mathematics.

He did not know where he lived, nor whether he would be at home at
that hour, but it was easy to satisfy his curiosity upon both
points.

He found the address he wanted at the Beadle's office.

Rex lived in a dark street near the cathedral.

Greif climbed many flights of steps, finding his way by striking
one match after another.

At the top there was but one door. He knocked twice and waited. There
was no answer, and he knocked again. He was sure that he could hear some
one moving inside the apartment, but the door remained closed. Annoyed
at being kept waiting he pounded loudly with the piece of iron and
called on Rex by name.

He was rewarded at last by hearing footsteps within.

'Who are you?' asked an angry voice. 'And why are you making such
a hideous noise?'

'My name is von Greifenstein,' replied Greif, 'and I want to see Herr
Rex.'

He was preparing for a disagreeable encounter with some unknown
person, when the door opened quickly and he found himself face to
face with Rex himself.

His expression was bland in the extreme as he held up the light he
carried and greeted his guest.

'I beg your pardon,' he said in tones very unlike those Greif had
just heard.

'I had no idea that it was you. Pray come in.'
'I am afraid I am disturbing you,' answered Greif, hesitating as though
he had forgotten the tremendous energy he had put into his
knocking.

'Not at all, not at all,' repeated Rex, carefully fastening the door when
Greif had entered.

'You see I am a newcomer and have no friends here,' he continued
apologetically, 'and I did not imagine that you knew my address.'

After passing through a narrow passage, Greif found himself in a large
room with three windows. It was evident that Herr Rex lived more luxuriously
than most students, for there was no bed in the place, and an open
door showed that there was at least one other apartment beyond.

A couple of bookcases were well filled with volumes, and there was
a great heap of others upon the floor in the corner.

Two large easy- chairs stood on opposite sides of the porcelain stove, which
at that season was of course not in use.

A broad table in the centre was covered with books, many of them new,
and papers covered with notes or figures were strewn amongst them in the
greatest disorder.

Near one of the windows Greif noticed a writing-desk, upon which lay a few
drawing and writing materials and a large sheet of paper.

It was clear that Rex had been at work here, for a bright lamp stood
upon the desk and its strong light fell from beneath the green shade
upon the mathematical figure that had absorbed the student's
attention.

'It is a very quiet lodging,' remarked Rex, drawing forward one of the
arm-chairs and then seating himself in the other. 'It is just what I
wanted. I do not like noise when I am reading.'
Greif did not exactly know what to say.

To visit a student in his rooms when he had only met him once, was
a new experience, and Rex's stony blue eyes seemed to ask the object
of his coming.

It was evident that Rex only spoke of his habitation in order to break
a silence which might have been awkward.

'The fact is,' said Greif, as though answering a direct question,
'I have been thinking of what you said the other day.'
'You do my remarks an honour which I believe they have never received
before,' replied Rex, bending his handsome head and smiling in his
brown beard.

'Do you remember? I said that I needed only one thing to make me happy.

I wanted to know the future.

You answered that it must be easy to get my wish.

Were you in earnest, or did you speak thoughtlessly? That is what I
came to ask you.'
'Indeed?' Rex laughed.

'You said to yourself that your acquaintance was either a fool or an
absent-minded person, did you not?'

'Well--' Greif hesitated and smiled. 'Either visionary or absent-
minded,' he admitted. 'Yes, I could not explain your remark in any other
way.'
'Of course you could not, unless you suspected that I might be a
charlatan.'

'That did not occur to me--'
'It might have occurred to you, considering what I had said. It might
occur to you now, if I answered your question. But on the other
hand it is of no importance whether it does or not. My reply will contribute
to your peace of mind by helping you to catalogue a man you do not
know among the fools and charlatans of whom you have heard.

Would you like to know the future?

I can tell it to you, if you please.'

'The vortex, I suppose,' answered Greif rather scornfully.

Faversham walked down the gallery to his own door. He had to pass on the
way a splendid Nattier portrait of Marie Leczinska which had arrived only
that morning from Paris, and was standing on the floor, leaning sideways
against a chair, as Melrose had placed it himself, so as to get a good
light on it. The picture was large. Faversham picked his way round it. If
his thoughts had not been so entirely preoccupied, he would probably have
noticed a slight movement of something behind the portrait as he passed.
But exultation held him; he walked on air.

He returned to his own room, where the window was still wide open. As he
entered, he mechanically turned on the central light, not noticing that
the reading lamp upon his table was not in its place. But he saw that
some papers which had been on his desk when he left the room were now on
the floor. He supposed the wind which was rising had dislodged them.
Stooping to lift them up, he was surprised to see a large mud-stain on
the topmost sheet. It looked like a footprint, as though some one had
first knocked the papers off the table, and then trodden on them. He
turned on a fresh switch. There was another mark on the floor just beyond
the table--and another--nearer the door. They were certainly footprints!
But who could have entered the room during his absence? And where was the
invader? At the same time he perceived that his reading lamp had been
overturned and was lying on the floor, broken.

Filled with a vague anxiety, he returned to the door he had just closed.
As he laid his hand upon it, a shot rang through the house--a cry--the
sound of a fierce voice--a fall.

And the next minute the door he held was violently burst open in his
face, he himself was knocked backward over a chair, and a man carrying a
gun, whose face was muffled in some dark material, rushed across the
room, leapt through the window, and disappeared into the night.

       *       *       *       *       *

Faversham ran into the gallery. The first thing he saw was the Nattier
portrait lying on its face beside a chair overturned. Beyond it, a dark
object on the floor. At the same moment, he perceived Dixon standing
horror-struck, at the farther end of the gallery, with the handle of the
door leading to the servants' quarters still in his grasp. Then the old
man too ran.

The two men were brought up by the same obstacle. The body of Edmund
Melrose lay between them.

Melrose had fallen on his face. As Faversham and Dixon lifted him, they
saw that he was still breathing, though _in extremis_. He had been shot
through the breast, and a pool of blood lay beneath him, blotting out the
faded blues and yellow greens of a Persian carpet.

At the command of her husband, Mrs. Dixon, who had hurried after him, ran
for brandy, crying also for help. Faversham snatched a cushion, put it
under the dying man's head, and loosened his clothing. Melrose's eyelids
fluttered once or twice, then sank. With a low groan, a gush of blood
from the mouth, he passed away while Dixon prayed.

"May the Lord have mercy--mercy!"

The old man rocked to and fro beside the corpse in an anguish. Mrs. Dixon
coming with the brandy in her hand was stopped by a gesture from
Faversham.

"No use!" He touched Dixon on the shoulder. "Dixon--this is murder! You
must go at once for Doctor Undershaw and the police. Take the motor. Mrs.
Dixon and I will stay here. But first--tell me--after I spoke to you
here--did you go in to Mr. Melrose?"

"I knocked, sir. But he shouted to me--angry like--to go away--till he
rang. I went back to t' kitchen, and I had nobbut closed yon door behind
me--when I heard t' firin'. I brast it open again--an' saw a man--wi'
summat roun' his head--fleein' doon t' gallery. My God!--my God!--"

"The man who did it was in the gallery while you and I were speaking to
each other," said Faversham, calmly, as he rose; "and he got in through
my window, while I was with Mr. Melrose." He described briefly the
passage of the murderer through his own room. "Tell the police to have
the main line stations watched without a moment's delay. The man's game
would be to get to one or other of them across country. There'll be no
marks on him--he fired from a distance--but his boots are muddy. About
five foot ten I should think--a weedy kind of fellow. Go and wake Tonson,
and be back as quick as you possibly can. And listen!--on your way to the
stables call the gardener. Send him for the farm men, and tell them to
search the garden, and the woods by the river. They'll find me there. Or
stay--one of them can come here, and remain with Mrs. Dixon, while I'm
gone. Let them bring lanterns--quick!"

In less than fifteen minutes the motor, with Dixon and the new chauffeur,
Tonson, had left the Tower, and was rushing at forty miles an hour along
the Pengarth road.

Meanwhile, Faversham and the farm-labourers were searching the garden,
the hanging woods, and the river banks. Footprints were found all along
the terrace, and it was plain that the murderer had climbed the low
enclosing wall. But beyond, and all in the darkness, nothing could be
traced.

Faversham returned to the house, and began to examine the gallery. The
hiding-place of Melrose's assailant was soon discovered. Behind the
Nattier portrait, and the carved and gilt chair which Melrose had himself
moved from its place in the morning, there were muddy marks on the floor
and the wainscotting, which showed that a man had been crouching there.
The picture, a large and imposing canvas--Marie Leczinska, sitting on
a blue sofa, in a gala dress of rose-pink velvet with trimming of black
fur--had been more than sufficient to conceal him. Then--had he knocked
to attract Melrose's attention, having ascertained from Dixon's short
colloquy at the library door, after Faversham had left the room, that the
master of the Tower was still within?--or had Melrose suddenly come out
into the gallery, perhaps to give some order to Dixon?

Faversham thought the latter more probable. As Melrose appeared, the
murderer had risen hastily from his hiding-place, upsetting the picture
and the chair. Melrose had received a charge of duck shot full in the
breast, with fatal effect. The range was so short that the shot had
scattered but little. A few pellets, however, could be traced in the
wooden frames of the tapestries; and one had broken a majolica dish
standing on a cabinet.

A man of the people then--using probably some old muzzle-loader, begged
or borrowed? Faversham's thought ran to the young fellow who had
denounced Melrose with such fervour at Mainstairs the day of Lydia
Penfold's visit to the stricken village. But, good heavens!--there were a
score of men on Melrose's estate, with at least as good reason--or
better--for shooting, as that man. Take the Brands! But old Brand was
gone to his rest, the elder son had sailed for Canada, and the younger
seemed to be a harmless, half-witted chap, of no account.

Yet, clearly the motive had been revenge, not burglary. There were plenty
of costly trifles on the tables and cabinets of the gallery. Not one of
them had been touched.

Faversham moved to and fro in the silence, while Mrs. Dixon sat moaning
to herself beside the dead man, whose face she had covered. The lavish
electric light in the gallery, which had been Melrose's latest whim,
shone upon its splendid contents; on the nymphs and cupids, the wreaths
and temples of the Boucher tapestries, on the gleaming surfaces of the
china, the dull gold of the _ormolu_. The show represented the desires,
the huntings, the bargains of a lifetime; and in its midst lay Melrose,
tripped at last, silenced at last, the stain of his life-blood spreading
round him.

Faversham looked down upon him, shuddering. Then perceiving that the door
into the library stood ajar, he entered the room. There stood the chair
on which he had leant, when the chains of his slavery fell from him.
There--on the table--was the jewel--the little Venus with fluttering
enamel drapery, standing tiptoe within her hoop of diamonds, which he had
seen Melrose take up and handle during their dispute. Why was it there?
Faversham had no idea.

And there on the writing-desk lay a large sheet of paper with a single
line written upon it in Melrose's big and sprawling handwriting. That was
new. It had not been there, when Faversham last stood beside the table.
The pen was thrown down upon it, and a cigar lay in the ashtray, as
though the writer had been disturbed either by a sudden sound, or by the
irruption of some thought which had led him into the gallery to call
Dixon.

Faversham stooped to look at it:

"I hereby revoke all the provisions of the will executed by me on ..."

No more. The paper was worthless. The will would stand. Faversham stood
motionless, the silence booming in his ears.

"A fool would put that in his pocket," he said to himself,
contemptuously. Then conscious of a new swarm of ideas assailing him,
of new dangers, and a new wariness, he returned to the gallery, pacing
it till the police appeared. They came in force, within the hour,
accompanied by Undershaw.

       *       *       *       *       *

The old chiming clock set in the garden-front of Duddon had not long
struck ten. Cyril Boden had just gone to bed. Victoria sat with her feet
on the fender in Tatham's study still discussing with him Felicia's
astonishing performance of the afternoon. She found him eagerly
interested in it, to a degree which surprised her; and they passed from
it only to go zealously together into various plans for the future of
mother and daughter--plans as intelligent as they were generous. The buzz
of a motor coming up the drive surprised them. There were no visitors in
the house, and none expected. Victoria rose in amazement as Undershaw
walked into the room.

"A horrible thing has happened. I felt that you must know before
anybody--with those two poor things in your house. Dixon has told me that
Miss Melrose saw her father this afternoon. I have come to bring you the
sequel."

He told his story. Mother and son turned pale looks upon each other.
Within a couple of hours of the moment when he had turned his daughter
from his doors! Seldom indeed do the strokes of the gods fall so fitly.
There was an awful satisfaction in the grim story to some of the deepest
instincts of the soul.

"Some poor devil he has ruined, I suppose!" said Tatham, his grave young
face lifted to the tragic height of the event. "Any clue?"

"None--except that, as I have told you, Faversham himself saw the
murderer, except his face, and Dixon saw his back. A slight man in
corduroys--that's all Dixon can say. Faversham and the Dixons were alone
in the house, except for a couple of maids. Perhaps"--he hesitated--"I
had better tell you some other facts that Faversham told me--and the
Superintendent of Police. They will of course come out at the inquest.
He and Melrose had had a violent quarrel immediately before the murder.
Melrose threatened to revoke his will, and Faversham left him,
understanding that all dispositions in his favour would be cancelled. He
came out of the room, spoke to Dixon in the gallery and walked to
his own sitting-room. Melrose apparently sat down at once to write a
codicil revoking the will. He was disturbed, came out into the gallery,
and was shot dead. The few lines he wrote are of course of no validity.
The will holds, and Faversham is the heir--to everything. You see"--he
paused again--"some awkward suggestions might be made."

"But," cried Tatham, "you say Dixon saw the man? And the muddy
footmarks--in the house--and on the terrace!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Don't mistake me, for heaven's sake," said Undershaw, quickly. "It is
impossible that Faversham should have fired the shot! But in the present
state of public opinion you will easily imagine what else may be said.
There is a whole tribe of Melrose's hangers-on who hate Faversham like
poison; who have been plotting to pull him down, and will be furious to
find him after all in secure possession of the estate and the money. I
feel tolerably certain they will put up some charge or other."

"What--of procuring the thing?"

Undershaw nodded.

Tatham considered a moment. Then he rang, and when Hurst appeared, all
white and disorganized under the stress of the news just communicated to
him by Undershaw's chauffeur, he ordered his horse for eight o'clock in
the morning. Victoria looked at him puzzled; then it seemed she
understood.

But every other thought was soon swallowed up in the remembrance of the
widow and daughter.

"Not to-night--not to-night," pleaded Undershaw who had seen Netta
Melrose professionally, only that morning. "I dread the mere shock for
Mrs. Melrose. Let them have their sleep! I will be over early to-morrow."


XXI


By the first dawn of the new day Tatham was in the saddle. Just as he was
starting from the house, there arrived a messenger, and a letter was
put into his hand. It was from Undershaw, who, on leaving Duddon the
night before, had motored back to the Tower, and taken Faversham in
charge. The act bore testimony to the little doctor's buffeted but still
surviving regard for this man, whom he had pulled from the jaws of death.
He reported in his morning letter that he had passed some of the night in
conversation with Faversham, and wished immediately to pass on certain
facts learnt from it, first of all to Tatham, and then to any friend of
Faversham's they might concern.

He told, accordingly, the full story of the gems, leading up to the
quarrel between the two men, as Faversham had told it to him.

"Faversham," he wrote, "left the old man, convinced that all was at an
end as to the will and the inheritance. And now he is as much the heir as
ever! I find him bewildered; for his _mind_, in that tragic half-hour,
had absolutely renounced. What he will do, no one can say. As to the
murderer, we have discussed all possible clues--with little light. But
the morning will doubtless bring some new facts. That Faversham has not
the smallest fraction of responsibility for the murder is clear to any
sane man who talks with him. But that there will be a buzz of slanderous
tongues as soon as ever the story is public property, I am convinced. So
I send you these fresh particulars as quickly as possible--for your
guidance."

Tatham thrust the letter into his pocket, and rode away through the
December dawn. His mother would soon be in the thick of her own task with
the two unconscious ones at Duddon. _His_ duty lay--with Lydia! The
"friend" was all alive in him, reaching out to her in a manly and
generous emotion.

The winter sunrise was a thing of beauty. It chimed with the intensity of
feeling in the young man's breast. The sky was a light saffron over the
eastern fells, and the mountains rose into it indistinguishably blue, the
light mists wrapped about their feet. Among the mists, plane behind
plane, the hedgerow trees, still faintly afire with their last leaf,
stood patterned on the azure of the fells. And as he rode on, the first
rays of the light mounting a gap in the Helvellyn range struck upon the
valleys below. The shadows ran blue along the frosty grass; here and
there the withered leaf began to blaze; the streams rejoiced. Under their
sycamores and yews, the white-walled farms sent up their morning smoke;
the cocks were crowing; and as he mounted the upland on which the cottage
stood, from a height in front of him, a tiny church--one of the smallest
and loneliest in the fells--sent forth a summoning bell. The sound, with
all its weight of association, sank and echoed through the morning
stillness; the fells repeated it, a voice of worship toward God, of
appeal toward man.

In Tatham, fashioned to the appeal by all the accidents of blood and
nurture, the sound made for a deepened spirit and a steadied mood. He
pressed on toward the little house and garden that now began to show
through the trees.

Lydia had not long come downstairs when she heard the horse at the gate.
The cottage breakfast was nominally at half-past eight. But Mrs. Penfold
never appeared, and Susy was always professionally late, it being
understood that inspiration--when it alights--is a midnight visitant, and
must be wooed at suitable hours.

Lydia was generally down to the minute, and read prayers to their two
maids. Mrs. Penfold made a great point of family prayers, but rarely or
never attended them. Susy did not like to be read to by anybody. Lydia
therefore had the little function to herself. She chose her favourite
psalms, and prayers from the most various sources. The maids liked it
because they loved Lydia; and Lydia, having once begun, would not
willingly have given it up.

But the ceremony was over; and she had just opened the casement to see
who their visitor might be, when Tatham rode up to the porch.

"May I speak to you for ten minutes?"

His aspect warned her of things unusual. He tied up his horse, and she
took him into their little sitting-room, and closed the door.

"You haven't seen a newspaper?"

She assured him their post would not arrive from Keswick for another
hour, and stood expectant.

"I wanted to tell you before any one else, because there are things to
explain. We're friends--Lydia?"

He approached her eagerly. His colour had leapt; but his eyes reassured.

"Always," she said simply, and she put her hand in his.

Then he told her. He saw her waver, and sink, ghost-like, on a chair. It
was clear enough that the news had for her no ordinary significance. His
heart knew pain--the reflex of a past anguish; only to be lost at once in
the desire to soothe and shield her.

"Mr. Faversham was there?" she asked him, trembling.

"He did not see the shot fired. The murderer rushing from the gallery
brushed past him as he was coming out of his room, and escaped."

"There had been a quarrel?"

He gave her in outline the contents of Undershaw's letter.

"He still inherits?" Her eyes, shone as he came to the climax of the
story--Faversham's refusal of the gems--Melrose's threat. The trembling
of her delicate mouth urged him for more--and yet more--light.

"Everything--land, money, collections--under the will made in August. You
see"--he added, sorely against his will, yet compelled, by the need of
protecting her from shock--"the opportuneness of the murder. Their
relations had been very bad for some time."

"Opportuneness?" She just breathed it. He put out his hand again, and
took hers.

"You know--Faversham has enemies?"

She nodded.

"I've been one myself," he said frankly. "I believe you knew it. But this
thing's brought me up sharp. One may think as one likes of Faversham's
conduct--but you knew--and I know--that he's not the man to pay another
man to commit murder!"

"And that's what they'll say?" The colour had rushed back into her
cheeks.

"That's what some fool _might_ say, because of the grudge against him.
Well, now, we've got to find the murderer!" He rose, speaking in his most
cheerful and practical voice, "I'm going on to see what the police have
been doing. The inquest will probably begin to-morrow. But I wanted to
prevent your being startled by this horrible news. Trust me to let you
know--and to help--all I can."

Then for a moment, he seemed to lose his self-possession. He stood before
her awkwardly conscious--a moral trespasser--who might have been passing
bounds. But it was her turn to be frank. She came and put both her hands
on his arm--looking up--drawing her breath with difficulty.

"Harry, I'm going to tell you. I ought to have told you more that
night--but how could I? It was only just then I knew--that I cared.
A little later Mr. Faversham asked me to marry him, and I refused,
because--because of this money. I couldn't take it--I begged him not
to. Never mind!" She threw her head back, gulping down tears. "He
thought me unreasonable. But--"

"He refused--and left you!" cried Tatham, drinking in the sweetness of
her pale beauty, as Orpheus might have watched the vanishing Eurydice.

"He had such great ambitions--as to what he'd do--with this money," she
said, lightly brushing her wet eyes, and trying to smile. "It wasn't the
mere fortune! Oh, I knew that!"

Tatham was silent. But he gently touched her hand with his own.

"You'll stand by him?--if he needs it?" she asked piteously.

He assured her. Then, suddenly, raising herself on tiptoe, she
kissed him on the cheek. The blood flew into his face, and bending
forward--timidly--he laid his lips on her soft brow. There was a
pledge in it--and a farewell. She drew herself away.

"The first--and the last," she said, smiling, and sighing. "Now we're
comrades. I await your news. Tell me if I can help--throw light? I know
the people--the neighbourhood, well. And when you see Mr. Faversham,
greet him from me. Tell him his friends here feel with him--and for him.
And as to what you say--ah, no!--I'm not going to believe--I can't
believe--that any one can have such--such vile thoughts! The truth
will soon come out!"

She held herself steadily.

"We must find the-murderer," Tatham repeated, and took up his cap.

      *       *       *       *       *

Lydia was left alone in the little breakfast-room. Susy could be heard
moving about overhead; she would be down directly. Meanwhile the winter
sunshine came broadly in; the singing of the tea-kettle, the crackle of
the fire made domestic music. But Lydia's soul was far away. It stood
beside Faversham, exulting.

"Free!"--she said to herself, passionately--"free!" and then with the
hyperbole of love--"I talked and moralized--he _did it_!"

A splendid pride in him possessed her; so that for long she
scarcely realized the tragedy of the murder, or the horror of the
slanderous suspicion now starting through the dales. But yet, long
before the day was over, she was conquered by grief and fear--a very
miserable and restless Lydia. No word came from him; and she could not
write. These were men's affairs, and women must hold their peace. Yet,
in spirit, as the hours passed, she gave herself wholly to the man she
loved; she glorified him; she trampled on her own past doubts; she
protected him against a world in arms. The plant of love grew fast and
furiously--watered by pity--by indignation.

Meanwhile Susy treated her sister very kindly. She specially insisted on
ordering dinner, and writing various business letters; though Lydia would
have been thankful to do both. And when the evening came on, Mrs. Penfold
trembling with excitement and horror, chattered endlessly about the
murder, as each visitor to the cottage brought some fresh detail. Lydia
seldom answered her. She sat on the floor, with her face against her
mother's knee, while the soft, silly voice above her head rambled and
rambled on.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tatham rode back to Pengarth. As he approached one of the lodge gates of
Duddon, a man came toward him on a bicycle. Boden, hot and dishevelled,
dismounted as he saw Tatham.

"I thought I should just meet you. Lady Tatham has had a telephone
message from the Chief Constable, Colonel Marvell. There is a man
missing--and a gun. Brand's younger son has not been seen for thirty-six
hours. He has been helping Andover's head keeper for part of the year, as
a watcher; and this man, Simpson, had let him have an old gun of his--a
muzzle-loader--some months ago. That gun can't be found."

Tatham sat thunderstruck, lights breaking on his face.

"Well--there was cause enough."

Boden's eyes shone.

"Cause? It smelled to heaven! Wild justice--if you like! I was in the
house yesterday afternoon," he added quietly, "just before the old man
died."

"You were?" cried Tatham, amazed. Yet he knew well that whenever Boden
came to recruit at Duddon, he spent half of his time among the fell-farms
and cottages. His mind was invincibly human, greedy of common life and
incident, whether in London or among the dales. He said little of his
experiences at Duddon; not a word, for instance, to Tatham or Victoria,
the night before, had revealed his own share in the old farmer's death
scene; but, casually, often, some story would drop out, some unsuspected
facts about their next-door neighbours, their very own people, which
would set Victoria and Tatham looking at each other, and wondering.

He turned now to walk beside Tatham's horse. His plain face with its
beautiful eyes, and lanky straying hair, spoke of a ruminating mind.

Tatham asked if there was any news from the railway.

"No trace so far, anywhere. All the main line stations have been closely
watched. But Marvell is of opinion that if young Brand had anything to do
with it he would certainly give the railway a wide berth. He is much more
likely to take to the fells. They tell the most extraordinary tales of
his knowledge of the mountains--especially in snow and wild weather. They
say that shepherds who have lost sheep constantly go to him for help!"

"--You know him?"

"I have talked to him sometimes. A queer sulky fellow with one or two
fixed ideas. He certainly hated Melrose. Whether he hated him enough to
murder him is another question. When I visited them, the mother told me
that Will had rushed out of the house the night before, because he could
not endure the sight of his father's sufferings. The jury I suppose will
have to know that. Well!--You were going on to Pengarth?"

Tatham assented. Boden paused, leaning on his bicycle.

"Take Threlfall on your way. I think Faversham would like to see you.
There are some strange things being said. Preposterous things! The hatred
is extraordinary."

The two men eyed each other gravely. Boden added:

"I have been telling your mother that I think I shall go over to
Threlfall for a bit, if Faversham will have me."

Tatham wondered again. Faversham, prosperous, had been, it seemed to him,
a special target for Boden's scorn, expressed with a fine range of
revolutionary epithet.

But calamity of any kind--for this queer saint--was apt to change all the
values of things.

They were just separating when Tatham, with sudden compunction, asked for
news of Mrs. Melrose, and Felicia.

"I had almost forgotten them!"

"Your mother did not tell me much. They were troubled about Mrs. Melrose,
I think, and Undershaw was coming. The poor little girl turned very
white--no tears--but she was clinging to your mother."

Tatham's face softened, but he said nothing. The road to Threlfall
presented itself, and he turned his horse toward it.

"And Miss Penfold?" said Boden, quietly. "You arrived before the
newspapers? Good. I think, before I return, I shall go and have a talk
with Miss Penfold."

And mounting his bicycle he rode off. Tatham looking after him, felt
uncomfortably certain that Boden knew pretty well all there was to know
about Lydia--Faversham--and himself. But he did not resent it.

Tatham found Threlfall a beleaguered place, police at the gates and in
the house; the chief constable and the Superintendent of police
established in the dining-room, as the only room tolerably free from the
all encumbering collections, and interviewing one person after another.

Tatham asked to see the chief constable. He made his way into the
gallery, which was guarded by police, for although the body of Melrose
had been removed to an upper room, the blood-stain on the Persian carpet,
the overturned chair and picture, the mud-marks on the wall remained
untouched, awaiting the coroner's jury, which was to meet in the house
that evening.

As Tatham approached the room which was now the headquarters of the
police, he met coming out of it a couple of men; one small and sinewy,
with the air of a disreputable athlete, the other a tall pasty-faced man
in a shabby frock coat, with furtive eyes. The first was Nash, Melrose's
legal factotum through many years; the other was one of the clerks in the
Pengarth office, who was popularly supposed to have made much money out
of the Threlfall estate, through a long series of small peculations never
discovered by his miserly master. They passed Tatham with downcast eyes
and an air of suppressed excitement which did not escape him. He found
the chief constable pacing up and down, talking in subdued tones, and
with a furrowed brow, to the Superintendent of police.

"Come in, come in," said Marvell heartily, at sight of the young man, who
was the chief landowner of the district, and likely within a couple of
years to be its lord lieutenant. "We want your help. Everything points to
young Brand, and there is much reason to think he is still in the
neighbourhood. What assistance can you give us?"

Tatham promised a band of searchers from the estate. The Duddon estate
itself included a great deal of mountain ground, some of the loneliest
and remotest in the district, where a man who knew the fells might very
well take hiding. Marvell brought out a map, and they pored over it.

The superintendent of police departed.

Then Marvell, with a glance at the door to see that it was safely shut,
said abruptly:

"You know, Faversham has done some unlucky things!"

Tatham eyed him interrogatively.

"It has come out that he was in the Brands' cottage about a week ago,
and that he left money with the family. He says he never saw the younger
son, and did not in fact know him by sight. He offered the elder one
some money in order to help him with his Canadian start. The lad refused,
not being willing, so his mother says--I have seen her myself this
morning--to accept anything from Melrose's agent. But she, not knowing
where to look for the expenses of her husband's illness, took five pounds
from Faversham, and never dared tell either of her sons."

"All perfectly straightforward and natural," said Tatham.

Marvell looked worried.

"Yes. But you see how the thing may be twisted by men like those
two--curs!--who have just been here. You saw them? They came, ostensibly,
to answer my questions as to whether they could point us to any one
with a particular grudge against Mr. Melrose."

"They could have named you a hundred!" interrupted Tatham.

"No doubt. But what their information in the end amounted to"--the chief
constable came to stand immediately in front of Tatham, lowering his
voice--"was that the only person with a really serious motive for
destroying Melrose, was"--he jerked his thumb in the direction of
Faversham's sitting-room--"our friend! They claim--both of them--to have
been spectators of the growing friction between the two men. Nash says
that Melrose had spoken to him once or twice of revoking, or altering
his will; and both of them declare that Faversham was quite aware of the
possibility. Of course these things were brought out apologetically--you
understand!--with a view of 'giving Mr. Faversham the opportunity
of meeting the reports in circulation,' and so on--'calming public
opinion'--and the rest of it. But I see how they will work it up! Then,
of course, that the man got access to the house through Faversham's
room--Faversham's window left open, and the light left burning--by his
own story--is unfortunate."

"But what absurdity," cried Tatham, indignantly, as he rose. "As if the
man to profit by the plot would have left that codicil on the table!"

Marvell shrugged his shoulders.

"That too might be twisted. Why not a supremely clever stroke? Well, of
course the thing is absurd--but disagreeable--considering the
circumstances. The moral is--find the man! Good-day, Lord Tatham. I
understand you will have fifty men out by this evening, assisting the
police in their search?"

"At least," said Tatham, and departed.

Outside, after a moment's hesitation, he inquired of the police in charge
whether Faversham was in his room. Being told that he was, he asked leave
to pass along the gallery. An officer took him in charge, and he stepped,
not without a shudder, past the blood-stained spot, where a cruel spirit
had paid its debt. The man who led him pointed out the picture, the
chair, the marks of the muddy soles on the wainscotting, and along the
gallery--reconstructing the murder, in low tones, as though the dead man
still lay there. A hideous oppression indeed hung over the house.
Melrose's ghost held it.

The police officer knocked at Faversham's door. "Would Mr. Faversham
receive Lord Tatham?"

Faversham, risen from his writing-table, looked at his visitor in a dull
astonishment.

"I have come to bring you a message," said Tatham advancing, neither man
offering to shake hands. "I saw Miss Penfold early this morning--before
she got the newspapers. She wished me to bring you her--her sympathy. She
was very much shocked." He spoke with a certain boyish embarrassment. But
his blue eyes looked very straight at Faversham.

Faversham changed colour a little, and thanked him. But his aspect was
that of a man worn out, incapable for the time of the normal responses of
feeling. He showed no sense of strangeness, with regard to Tatham's
visit, though for weeks they had not been on speaking terms. Absently
offering his visitor a chair, he talked a little--disjointedly--of
the events of the preceding evening, with frequent pauses for
recollection.

Tatham eyed him askance.

"I say! I suppose you had no sleep?"

Faversham smiled.

"Look here--hadn't you better come to us to-night?--get out of this
horrible place?" exclaimed Tatham, on a sudden but imperative impulse.

"To Duddon?" Faversham shook his head. "Thank you--impossible." Then he
looked up. "Undershaw told you what I told him?"

Tatham assented. There was an awkward pause--broken at last by Faversham.

"How did Miss Melrose get home?"

"Luckily I came across her at the foot of the Duddon hill, and I helped
her home. She's all right--though of course it's a ghastly shock for
them."

"I never knew she was here--till she had gone," exclaimed Faversham, with
sudden animation, "Otherwise--I should have helped her."

He stood erect, his pale look fixed threateningly on Tatham.

"I'm sure you would," said Tatham, heartily. "Well now, I must be off. I
have promised Marvell to put as many men as possible to work in with the
police. You have no idea at all as to the identity of the man who ran
past you?"

"None!" Faversham repeated the word, as though groping in his memory.
"None. I never saw Will Brand that I can recollect. But the description
of him seems to tally with the man who knocked me over."

"Well, we'll find him," said Tatham briskly. "Any message for Green
Cottage?"

"My best thanks. I am very grateful to them."

The words were formal. He sank heavily into his chair, as though wishing
to end the interview. Tatham departed.

       *       *       *       *       *

The inquest opened in the evening. Faversham and the Dixons gave their
evidence. So did Undershaw and the police. The jury viewed the body, and
leave to bury was granted. Then the inquiry adjourned.

For some ten days afterward, the whole of the Lake district hung upon the
search for Brand. From the Scawfell and Buttermere group on its western
verge, to the Ullswater mountains on the east; from Skiddaw and
Blencathra on the north, southward through all the shoulders and edges,
the tarns and ghylls of the Helvellyn range; through the craggy fells of
Thirlmere, Watendlath, Easedale; over the high plateaus that run up to
the Pikes, and fall in precipice to Stickle Tarn; through the wild clefts
and corries of Bowfell, the Crinkles, Wetherlam and the Old Man; over the
desolate backs and ridges that stretch from Kirkstone to Kentmere and
Long Sleddale, the great man-hunt passed, enlisting ever fresh feet, and
fresh eyes in its service. Every shepherd on the high fells became a
detective, speeding news, or urging suggestions, by the old freemasonry
of their tribe; while every farmhouse in certain dales, within reach of
the scene of the murder, sent out its watchers by day and night, eagerly
contributing its men and its wits to the chase.

For in this chase there was a hidden motive which found no expression
in the local papers; of which men spoke to each other under their
breaths, when they spoke at all; but which none the less became in a
very short time, by the lightning spread of a few evil reports, through
the stubble of popular resentment, the animating passion at the heart of
it. The police and Faversham's few friends were searching for the
murderer of Melrose; the public in general were soon hunting Faversham's
accomplice. The discovery of Will Brand meant, in the one case, the
arrest of a poor crazy fellow who had avenged by murder his father's
persecution and ruin; in the other case, it meant the unmasking of an
educated and smooth-spoken villain, who, finding a vast fortune in
danger, had taken ingenious means to secure it. In this black suspicion
there spoke the accumulated hatred of years, stored up originally, in the
mind of a whole countryside, against a man who had flouted every law of
good citizenship, and strained every legal right of property to breaking
point; and discharging itself now, with pent-up force, upon the tyrant's
tool, conceived as the murderous plotter for his millions. To realize the
strength of the popular feeling, as it presently revealed itself, was to
look shuddering into things elemental.

It was first made plain on the day of Melrose's funeral. In order to
avoid the concourse which might attend a burial in Whitebeck parish
church, lying near the main road, and accessible from many sides, it
was determined to bury him in the graveyard of the little mountain
chapel on the fell above the Penfolds' cottage. The hour was sunrise; and
all the preparations had been as secretly made as possible. But when the
dark December morning arrived, with sleet showers whitening all the
slopes of Helvellyn and the gashed breast of Blencathra, a dense crowd
thronged all the exits of the Tower, and lined the steep lanes leading to
the chapel. Faversham, Cyril Boden, and a Carlisle solicitor occupied the
only carriage which followed the hearse. Tatham and his mother met the
doleful procession at the chapel. Lady Tatham, very pale and queenly,
walked hand in hand with a slight girl in mourning. As the multitude
outside the churchyard caught sight of the pair, a thrill ran through its
ranks. Melrose's daughter, and rightful heiress--disinherited, and
supplanted--by the black-haired man standing bareheaded behind the
coffin. The crowd endured the mockery of the burial service in a sullen
silence. Not a head uncovered. Not a voice joined in the responses.

Felicia threw back her veil, and the onlookers pressed to the churchyard
railings to see the delicate face, with its strong likeness to her
father. She meanwhile saw only Tatham. Her eyes were fixed on him from
first to last.

But there were two other ladies in the churchyard. After the hurried
ceremony was over, one of them approached Faversham. He took her hand in
silence, looking down into the eyes--the soul--of Lydia. With what
angelic courage and cheer that look was charged, only its recipient knew.

"Come and see us," she said, softly.

He shook his head, with a look of pain. Then he pressed her hand and they
separated. As he appeared at the churchyard gate, about to enter the
carriage which was waiting, a grim low groan ran through the throng
which filled the lane. There was something in the sound to strike a
shiver through the strongest. Faversham grew perhaps a little paler, but
as he seated himself in the carriage he examined the scowling faces near
him with a quiet indifference, which scarcely altered when Tatham came
conspicuously to the carriage-door to bid him farewell.

The days that followed reminded some of the older dalesmen of the stories
told by their fathers of the great and famous hunt, a century ago, after
the sheep-slaying "dog of Ennerdale," who for five months held a whole
district at bay; appearing and disappearing phantom-like among the crags
and mists of the high fells, keeping shepherds and farming-folk in
perpetual excitement, watched for by night and day, hunted by hounds and
by men, yet never to be captured; frightening lovers from their trysts,
and the children from school; a presence and a terror prevading men's
minds, and suspending the ordinary operations of life. So in some sort
was it with the hunt for Will Brand. It was firmly believed that in the
course of it he was twice seen; once in the loneliness of Skiddaw Forest,
not far from the gamekeeper's hut, the only habitation in that moorland
waste; and once in a storm on the slopes of Great Dodd, when a shepherd,
"latin" his sheep, had suddenly perceived a wild-looking fellow, with a
gun between his knees, watching him from the shelter of a rock. So far
from making any effort to capture the man, the shepherd had fled in
terror; but both neighbours and police firmly believed that he had seen
the murderer. There were also various mysterious thefts of food reported
from mountain farms, indications hotly followed up but to no purpose.
Would the culprit, starved out, be forced in time to surrender; or would
he die of privation and exposure among the high fells, in the snowdrifts,
and leave the spring, when it came, to uncover his bones?

RIMBAULT, LL.D., F.S.A., &c. &c. Quarto; with a Portrait; handsomely
printed in 4to.; half-bound in morocco, 15s.

This interesting MS., so frequently alluded to by Dr.

Burney in the course of his "History of Music," has been kindly placed
at the disposal of the Council of the Musical Antiquarian Society, by
George Townshend Smith, Esq., Organist of Hereford Cathedral. But
the Council, not feeling authorised to commence a series of literary
publications, yet impressed with the value of the work, have suggested
its independent publication to their Secretary, Dr. Rimbault, under
whose editorial care it accordingly appears.

It abounds with interesting Musical Anecdotes; the Greek Fables
respecting the origin of Music; the rise and progress of Musical
Instruments; the early Musical Drama; the origin of our present
fashionable Concerts; the first performance of the Beggar's Opera,
&c.

A limited number have been printed, few copies remain for sale: unsold
copies will shortly be raised in price to 1l. 11s. 6d.

Now ready, Part XII., completing the Work, containing Fifteen Plates
and Letter-press, price 7s. 6d.

(folio, 12s., India paper, 20s., in a few days), royal 8vo.

THE MONUMENTAL BRASSES of ENGLAND: a Series of Engravings on Wood,
with Descriptive Notices. By the Rev. CHARLES BOUTELL, M.A., Rector of
Downham Market, Norfolk.

The volume, containing 149 Plates, will be ready on the 11th inst.

Price, royal 8vo., cloth 1l. 8s. (The folio edition, cloth, 2l. 5s., India
paper, 4l. 4s., in a few days.) Subscribers are requested to complete
their sets at once, as the numbers will shortly be raised in price.

Also, by the same Author, royal 8vo. 15s.; large paper, 21s.

MONUMENTAL BRASSES and SLABS: an Historical and Descriptive Notice
of the Incised Monumental Memorials of the Middle Ages.

 With upwards of 200 Engravings.

"A handsome large octavo volume, abundantly supplied with well-engraved
woodcuts and lithographic plates; a sort of Encyclopaedia for ready
reference.... The whole work has a look of painstaking completeness
highly commendable."--_Athenaeum._
"One of the most beautifully got up and interesting volumes we have
seen for a long time. It gives in the compass of one volume an
account of the History of those beautiful monuments of former
days.... The illustrations are extremely well chosen."--_English
Churchman._
A few copies only of this work remain for sale; and, as it will not
be reprinted in the same form and at the same price, the remaining
copies are raised in price.He mounted a stone foot-bridge to look at it, when, of a
sudden, the curtain of cloud shrouding Blencathra was torn aside, and
its high ridge, razor-sharp, appeared spectrally white, a seat of the
storm-god, in a far heaven. The livid lines of just-fallen snow,
outlining the cliffs and ravines of the great mountain, stamped its
majesty, visionlike, on the senses. Below it, some scattered woods, inky
black, bent under the storm, and the crash and darkness of the lower air
threw into clear relief the pallid splendour of the mountain-top.

Boden stood enthralled, when a voice said at his elbow:

"Yo're oot on a clashy night, Muster Boden!"

He turned. Beside him stood the fugitive!--grinning weakly. Boden beheld
a tottering and ghastly figure. Distress--mortal fatigue--breathed from
the haggard emaciation of face and limbs. Round the shoulders was folded
a sack, from which the dregs of some red dipping mixture it had once
contained had dripped over the youth's chest and legs, his tattered
clothes and broken boots, in streams of what, to Boden's startled sense,
looked like blood. And under the slouched hat, a pair of sunken eyes
looked out, expressing the very uttermost of human despair.

"Brand!--where have you been?"

"Don't touch me, sir! I'll go--don't touch me! There ha' been hunnerds
after me--latin me on t' fells. They've not catcht me--an' they'd not ha'
catcht me noo--but I'm wore oot. I ha' been followin yo' this half-hour,
Muster Boden. I could ha' put yo' i' the river fasst enoof."

A ghastly chuckle in the darkness. Boden considered.

"Well, now--are you going to give yourself up? You see--I can do nothing
to force you! But if you take my advice, you'll go quietly with me, to
the police--you'll make a clean breast of it."

"Will they hang me, Muster Boden?"

"I don't think so," said Boden slowly. "What made you do it?"

"I'd planned it for months--I've follered owd Melrose many times--I've
been close oop to 'im--when he had noa noshun whativver. I might ha'
killt him--a doosen times over. He wor a devil--an' I paid him oot! I was
creepin' round t' hoose that night--and ov a suddent, there was a door
openin', an' a light. It seemed to be God sayin', 'Theer's a way, mon!
go in, and do't! So I went in. An' I saw Muster Faversham coom oot--an'
Dixon. An' I knew that he wor there--alone--the owd fox!--an' I
waited--an' oot he came. I shot 'un straight, Muster Boden! I shot 'un
straight!"

"You never told any one what you were going to do, Brand? Nobody helped
you?"

"Not a soul! I'm not yo'r blabbin' sort! But now I'm done--I'm clemmed!"

And he tottered against the bridge as he spoke. Baden caught him.

"Can you walk with my help? I have some brandy."

And taking from his pocket the tiny flask that a man with a weak heart is
apt to carry, he put it into a shaking hand. Brand drank it greedily.

They stumbled on together, down the narrow road, through the
streaming rain. It was a mile to the Whitebeck police station. Brand
gave a gasping, incoherent account of his doings during his ten days
of hiding--the various barns and outhouses he had sheltered in--the
food he had been able to steal--the narrow escapes he had run. And every
now and then, the frenzy of his hatred for the murdered man would break
in, and he would throw out hints of the various mad schemes he had
entertained at different times for the destruction of his enemy.

But presently he ceased to talk. It was evident that his weakness was
great; he clung heavily to Boden's arm.

They reached a point where a road branched to the left. A roar of furious
water greeted their ears.

"That's t' beck unner Wanthwaite Bridge," said Brand feebly. "Wait a bit,
sir."

He sank down on a stone by the roadside. Through the trees on the left
the foaming river glimmered in the departing light. Boden bent over him,
encouraging him with the promise of shelter and food, murmuring also of
God, the help of the sinner. Suddenly the lad leapt up.

"Aye! that'll end it!--an' a good job!"

He began to run up the left-hand road. Boden pursued him, struggled with
him, but in vain. Brand threw him off, reached the bridge, mounted the
parapet, and from there flung himself headlong into the spate rushing
furiously below.

At the same moment a dog-cart driven by two young farmers appeared on the
main road of the valley. Boden's shouts reached them, and they came to
his aid. But Brand had disappeared. The river swept him down like a
withered branch; and it was many hours before the body was recovered,
half a mile from the spot where he sank.


XXII


Boden was just coming to the end of his evidence. The adjourned
inquest on Melrose, held in the large parlour of the old Whitebeck
inn, was densely crowded, and the tension of a charged moment might be
felt. A century ago, the interior of Africa was a sealed book to the
civilized world. Candace, Queen of the Ethiopians, had been noticed in
Holy Writ; the Nile with Thebes and Memphis on its banks, and a ship-canal
to the Red Sea with triremes on its surface, had not escaped the eye
of Herodotus: but the countries which gave birth to Queen and River
were alike unknown. The sunny fountains, the golden sands, the palmy plains
of Africa were to be traced in the verses of the poet; but he dealt neither
in latitude nor longitude. The maps presented a _terra incognita_, or
sterile mountains, where modern travellers have found rivers,
lakes, and alluvial basins,--or exhibited barren wastes, where
recent discoveries find rich meadows annually flowed, studded with
walled towns and cities, enlivened by herds of cattle, or cultivated
in plantations of maize and cotton.

Although the northern coast of Africa had once been the granary of Carthage
and Rome, cultivation had receded, and the corn-ship of antiquity had
given place to the felucca of the corsair, preying upon the commerce
of Europe. A few caravans, laden with a little ivory and gold-dust
or a few packages of drugs and spices, crept across the Desert, and the
slave-trade principally, if not alone, drew to Africa the attention of
civilized nations. Egypt, Tripoli and Tunis, Turkey and the Spanish
Provinces, the West India Isles and the Southern States, knew it as
the mart where human beings were bought and sold; and Christians were
reconciled to the traffic by the hope that it might contribute to
the moral, if not physical, welfare of the captive, by his removal
to a more civilized region.

During the last three centuries, millions of Africans have perished
either on their way to slavery or in exhausting toil under a tropical
sun; and the flag of England has been the most prominent in this
demoralizing traffic. But it is due to England to say, that, since she
withdrew from it, she has aimed to atone for the past by a noble and
persevering devotion to the improvement of Africa. By repeated expeditions,
by missions, treaties, colonies, and incentives to commerce, she has
spread her light over the interior, and is now recognized both by the
tribes of the Desert and by civilized nations as the great protector of
Africa, and both geography and commerce owe to her most of their
advances on the African continent.

Andover, the old Cumbrian
squire, whose personal friction with Faversham had been sharpest, left
the inn with a much puzzled mind, but not prepared as yet to surrender
his main opinion of a young man, who after all had feathered his nest so
uncommonly well. "They may say what they d--n please," said the furious
and disappointed Nash, as he departed in company with his shabby
accomplice, the sallow-faced clerk, "but he's walked off with the dibs,
an' I suppose he thinks he'll jolly well keep 'em. The 'cutest young
scoundrel I ever came across!" which, considering the range of the
speaker's experience, was testimony indeed.

Regret, on the one hand, for a monstrous and exposed surmise; on the
other, instinctive resentment of the man's huge, unearned luck under the
will that Melrose would have revoked had he lived a few more hours, as
contrasted with the plight of Felicia Melrose; between these poles men's
minds went wavering. Colonel Barton stood at the door of the inn before
Faversham emerged for a few undecided moments, and finally walked away,
like Andover, with the irritable reflection that the grounds on which he
had originally cut the young man still largely stood; and he was not
going to kow-tow to mere money. He would go and have tea with Lady
Tatham; she was a sensible woman. Harry's behaviour seemed to him
sentimental.

Faversham, Boden, and Harry Tatham left the inn together and were joined
by Undershaw outside. They walked silently through the irregular village
street where groups stood at the cottage doors to see them pass. As they
emerged upon the high road the three others perceived that they were
alone. Faversham had disappeared.

"Where is he?" said Tatham, standing amazed and looking back. They had
gained the crest of a hill whence, beyond the roofs of Whitebeck in the
hollow, a section of the main road could be dimly seen, running west a
white streak piercing the wintry dusk. Along the white streak moved
something black--the figure of a man. Boden pointed to it.

"Where's he going?" The question fell involuntarily from Undershaw.

Boden did not reply. But as Undershaw spoke there flashed out a distant
light on the rising ground beyond the streak of road. Above it, huddled
shapes of mountains, dying fast into the darkness. They all knew it for a
light in Green Cottage; the same that Tatham had watched from the Duddon
moorland on the evening of the murder. They turned and walked on silently
toward the lower gate of Duddon.

"What's he going to do about the money?" said Undershaw abruptly.

Boden turned upon him, almost with rage.

"For heaven's sake, give him time!--it's positively indecent to rush a
man who's gone through what that man's gone through!"

Faversham pursued his way toward the swelling upland which looks south
over St. John's Vale, and north toward Skiddaw. He went, led by a
passionate impulse, sternly restrained till this moment. Led also by the
vision of her face as it had been lifted to him beside the grave of
Melrose. Since then he had never seen her. But that Boden had written to
her that morning, early, after the recovery of Brand's body, he knew.

The moon shone suddenly behind him, across the waste of Flitterdale, and
the lower meadows of St. John's Vale. It struck upon the low white house
amid its trees.

"Is Miss Penfold at home?"

The maid recognized him at once, and in her agitation almost lost her
head. As she led him in, a little figure in a white cap with streamers
fluttered across the hall.

"_Oh_, Mr. Faversham!" said a soft, breathless voice.

But Mrs. Penfold did not stop to speak to him. Gathering up her
voluminous black skirts, and her shawls that were falling off her
shoulders, she hurried upstairs. There followed a thin girl with dark
hair piled above dark eyes.

"Lydia is in the drawing-room," said Susy, with dramatic depth of voice;
and the two disappeared.

When he entered, Lydia was standing by the fire. The light of some
blazing wood, and of one small lamp, filled the pretty room with colour
and soft shadows. Among them, the slender form in its black dress, the
fair head thrown back, the outstretched hands were of a loveliness that
arrested him--almost unmanned him.

She came forward.

"You've been so long coming!"

The intonation of the words expressed the yearning of many days and
nights. They were not a reproach; rather, an exquisite revelation.

He took her hands, and slowly, irresistibly he drew her; and she came
to him. He bowed his face upon hers, and the world stood still! Through
the emotion of that supreme moment, with its mingled cup of joy and
remembered bitterness there ran for him a touch of triumph natural to
his temperament. She had asked no promise from him; reminded him of no
condition; made no reservation. There she was upon his breast. The male
pride in him was appeased. Self-respect seemed once more possible.

Hand in hand, they sat down together by the fire. He gave her an account
of the double inquest, and the result.

"When we came out," he added, calmly, "there were not quite so many ready
to lynch me as before."

Her hand trembled in his. The horror of his experience, the anguished
sympathy of hers, spoke in the slight movement, and the pressure that
answered it. Some day, but not yet, it would be possible to put it into
words.

"And I might do nothing!" she breathed.

"Nothing!" He smiled upon her, but his tone brought a shudder--the
shudder of the traveller who looks back upon the inch which has held him
from the abyss. But for Cyril Boden's adventure of the night before,
would she ever have seen him again?

"I was a long time with my solicitors this morning," he said abruptly.

"Yes?" She turned her face to his; but his morbid sense could detect in
it no sign of any special interest.

"The will was opened on the day of the funeral. It was a great surprise.
I had reason to suppose that it contained a distinct provision
invalidating all bequests to me should I propose to hand over any of the
property, or money derived from the property, to Felicia Melrose, or
her mother. But it contained nothing of the kind. The first draft of the
will was sent to his solicitors at the end of July. They put it into
form, and it was signed the day after he communicated his intentions to
me. There is no doubt whatever that he meant to insert such a clause. He
spoke of it to me and to others. I thought it was done But as a matter of
fact he never either drafted it himself, or gave final instructions for
it. His Carlisle man--Hanson--thought it was because of his horror of
death. He had put off making his will as long as possible--got it
done--and then could not bring himself to touch it again! To send for it
back--to finger and fuss with it--seemed to bring death nearer and he did
not mean to die."

He paused, shading his eyes with his hand. The visualising sense,
stimulated by the nerve strain of the preceding weeks, beheld with
ghastly clearness the face of Melrose in death, with the blood-stain on
the lips.

"And so," he resumed, "there was no short way out. By merely writing to
Miss Melrose, to offer her a fortune, it was not possible to void the
will."

He paused. The intensity of his look held her motionless.

"You remember--how I refused--when you asked me--to take any steps toward
voiding it?"

Her lips made a dumb movement of assent.

"But--at last--I took them. In the final interview I had with Melrose, he
threatened me with the cancelling of his will, unless I consented--Tatham
has told you--to sell him my uncle's gems. I refused. And so far as words
could, he there and then stripped me of his property. It is by the mere
accident of his murder at that precise moment that it has come to me. Now
then--what is to be done?"

Her hand slipped further into his. For a few minutes he seemed to be
absorbed in the silent reconstruction of past trains of thought, emerging
with a cry--though it was under his breath:

"If I took his money now--against his will--I should feel his yoke--his
hateful yoke--again, on my neck! I should be his slave still."

"You shall not take it!" she said with passion.

He smiled at her suddenly.

"It is nothing to Lydia, to be poor?"

"And free--and happy--and alive!--no, nothing!"

At that he could only draw her to him again. She herself must needs bring
him back to the point.

"You have decided?"

"I could of course refuse the succession. That would throw the whole
property into Chancery; the personalty would go to the mother and
daughter, the real estate to whatever legal heirs could be discovered.
There are same distant cousins of Lady Tatham, I believe. However--that
did not attract me at all."

He rose from his seat beside her, and stood looking down upon her.

"You'll realize?--you'll understand?--that it seems to me just--and
desirable--that I should have some voice in the distribution of this
money, this and land, rather than leave it all to the action of a court.
Everything--as things are--is legally mine. The personalty is immense;
there are about thirty thousand acres of land, here and elsewhere; and
the collections can't be worth much less than half a million. I decline
to own them; but I intend to settle what becomes of them! Nash and others
say they will dispute the will. They won't. There is no case. As to the
personalty and the land--well, well, you'll see! As to the collections--I
mean to make them, if I can, of some use to the community. And in that
effort"--he spoke slowly--"I want you to help me!"

Their eyes met; hers full of tears. She tried to speak, and could not. He
came to kneel down by her and took her in his arms.

"Did you think I had sold myself to the devil last time I was here?"

"I was so harsh!--forgive ..." she said brokenly.

"No. You called things by their right names."

There was silence till he murmured:

"Isn't it strange? I had quite given up prayer--till these last weeks. To
pray for any definite physical or material thing would seem to me now--as
it always has done--absurd. But to reach out--to the Power beyond our
weakness!"

He paused a moment and resumed:

"Boden did that for me. He came to me--at the worst. He never preached to
me. He has his black times--like the rest of us. But something upholds
him--and--oh! so strangely--I don't think he knew--through him--I too
laid hold. But for that--I might have put an end to myself--more than
once--these last weeks."

She clung to him--whispering:

"Neither of us--can ever suffer--again--without the other--to help."

They kissed once more, love and youth welling up in them, and drowning
out of sight, for the moment at least, the shapes and images of pain.
Then recovering his composure, hand fast in hand, Faversham began to talk
more calmly, drawing out for her as best he could, so that it need not be
done again--and up to the very evening of the murder--the history of the
nine months which had, so to speak, thrown his whole being into the
melting-pot, and through the fusing and bruising of an extraordinary
experience, had remade a man. NINE LIVES OF A CAT
by
CHARLES BENNETT

[Illustration: FRONTISPIECE]

THE NINE LIVES of A CAT

A TALE OF WONDER by CHARLES BENNETT.
Author of "Shadows"
London Griffith and Farran.
Corner of St Pauls' Churchyard. 1860.

PREFACE
This tale of wonder is told for children; with which view, it has
been carefully designed and very nicely printed.
For some time past, it has arrived at the dignity of a popular
Nursery Tale in the Author's family; and it is hoped it will merit
the same good fortune elsewhere.
It will be worth while explaining, that the circle in each page is
made to represent some object in connection with the story; and,
that as some of them have proved rather puzzling, to Juvenile
admirers has been left the task of "finding them out."But "Life at her grindstone" had been busy with Faversham, and in the
sifted and sharpened soul laid bare to her, the woman recognized her
mate indeed. Face to face with cruelty and falsehood, in others, and with
the potentialities of them in his own nature; dazzled by money and power;
and at last, delivered from the tyranny of the as though by some fierce
gaol-delivering angel, Faversham had found himself; and such a self as
could never have been reasonably prophesied for the discontented idler
who in the May meadows had first set eyes on Lydia Penfold.

He sketched for her his dream of what might be done with the treasures of
the Tower.

Through all his ugly wrestle with Melrose, with its disappointments and
humiliations, his excavator's joy in the rescue and the setting in order
of Melrose's amazing possessions had steadily grown of late, the only
pleasure of his day had come from handling, cleaning and cataloguing the
lovely forgotten things of which the house was full. These surfaces of
ivory and silver, of stucco or marble, of wood or canvas, pottery or
porcelain, on which the human mind, in love with some fraction of the
beauty interwoven with the world, had stamped an impress of itself,
sometimes exquisite, sometimes whimsical, sometimes riotous--above all,
_living_, life reaching to life, through the centuries: these, from a
refuge or an amusement, had become an abiding delight, something,
moreover, that seemed to point to a definite lifework--paid honourably by
cash as well as pleasure.

What would she think, he asked her, of a great Museum for the north--a
centre for students--none of your brick and iron monstrosities, rising
amid slums, but a beautiful house showing its beautiful possessions to
all who came; and set amid the streams and hills? And in one wing of it,
perhaps, curator's rooms--where Lydia, the dear lover of nature and art,
might reign and work--fitly housed?...

But his brow contracted before she could smile.

"Some time perhaps--some time--not now! Let's forget--for a little.
Lydia--come away with me--let's be alone. Oh, my dear!--let's be alone!"

She was in his arms again, calming the anguish that would recur--of those
nights in the Tower after the murder, when it had seemed to him that not
Brand, but himself, was the prey that a whole world was hunting, with
Hate for the huntsman.

But presently, as they clung to each other in the firelight, he roused
himself to say:

"Now, let me see your mother; and then I must go. There is much to do.
You will get a note from Lady Tatham to-night."

She looked up startled. And then it came over her, that he had never
really told her what he meant to do with Melrose's money. She had no
precise idea. Their minds jumped together, and she saw the first laugh in
his dark eyes.

"I shan't tell you! Beloved--be good and wait! But you guess already. We
meet to-morrow--at Duddon."

She asked no question. The thin mystery--for her thoughts did indeed
drive through it--pleased her; especially because it seemed to please
him.

Then Mrs. Penfold and Susy were brought down, and Mrs. Penfold sat amid
explanations and embraces, more feather-headed and inconsequent even than
usual, but happy, because Lydia caressed her, and this handsome though
pale young man on the hearthrug kissed her hand and even, at command, her
still pink cheek; and it seemed there was to be a marriage--only not the
marriage there should have been--a substitution, clearly, of Threlfall
for Duddon? Lydia would live at Threlfall; would be immensely rich; and
there would be no more bloodhounds in the park.

But when Faversham was gone, and realities began to sink into the little
lady's mind, as Lydia sitting at her feet, and holding her hand, tried to
infuse them, dejection followed. No coronet!--and now, no fortune! She
did not understand these high-stepping morals, and she went sadly to bed;
though never had Lydia been so sweet to her, so ready to brush her hair
by the fire as long as ever she chose, so full of daughterly promises.

Susy kissed her sister when they were alone, tenderly but absently.

"You're a rare case, Lydia--unique, I think. The Greeks would call you
something--I forget! I should really like to understand the psychology of
it. It might be useful."

Lydia bantered her a little--rather sorely. But the emotions of her
family would always be so much "copy" to Susy; and the fact did not in
the least prevent her being a warm-hearted, and, in her own way,
admirable little person.

Finally, Lydia turned the tables on her, by throwing an arm round her
neck, and inquiring whether Mr. Weston had not paid her a very long
call the day before. Susy quietly admitted it, and added: "But I told
him not to call again. I'm afraid--I'm bored with him. There are no
mysteries in his character--no lights and shades at all. He is too
virtuous--monotonously so. It would be of no technical advantage to me
whatever, to fall in love with him."

That evening came a note from Lady Tatham:

"MY DEAR LYDIA:

"We expect you to-morrow at 11:30. Mr. Faversham has asked that we--and
you--Cyril Boden, Doctor Undershaw, old Dixon, and Felicia (her poor
mother is _very_ ill, and we hear news to-day of the sudden death of the
old grandfather)--should meet him at that hour in Harry's library. And
afterward, you will stay to lunch? My dear, you have in this house two
warm friends who love you and long to see you. Each hour that passes
grows more thrilling than the last....

"I have been spending some time with old Mrs. Brand--and I told her I
knew you would go to her to-morrow. They have given her her dead son--and
she sits with his feet against her breast. She loved him best of all. One
thinks of Rizpah gathering the bones."

       *       *       *       *       *

Next morning Tatham was in his library before eleven, making a pretence
of attending to some County Council business, but in truth restless with
expectation, and thinking of nothing but the events immediately ahead.

What was going to happen?

Faversham no doubt was going to propose some division of the Melrose
inheritance with Felicia, and some adequate provision for the mother.
Only a few weeks before this date Tatham had been in a mood to loathe the
notion that Felicia should owe a fortune, small or great, to the charity
of a greedy intruder. To-day he awaited Faversham's visit as a friend,
prepared to welcome his proposals in the spirit of a friend, to put, that
is, the best and not the worst interpretation upon them. After all, the
fortune was legally his; and if Melrose had died intestate, Felicia and
her mother would only have shared with some remote heirs with far less
claim than Faversham.

He owed this change of temper--he knew--simply to the story which
Undershaw had brought him of the last scene between Faversham and
Melrose. That final though tardy revolt had fired the young man's
feelings and drowned his wraths. In his secret mind, he left Brand's shot
uncondemned; and the knowledge that before that final _coup_ was given,
the man whom Melrose had alternately bribed and bullied had at last found
strength to turn upon him in defiance, flinging his money in his face,
had given infinite satisfaction to Harry's own hatred of a tyrant.
Faversham, even more than Brand, had avenged them all. The generous,
pugnacious youth was ready to take Faversham to his heart.

And yet, not without uneasiness, some dread of reaction in himself,
if--by chance--they were all mistaken in their man! Neither Boden, nor
Undershaw, nor he had any definite idea of the conclusions to which
Faversham had come. .

(513) And not even men of rank escaped his sarcasms; for, before he
became noticed, happening to be examined as a witness in a crowded
court, Varro, the advocate on the other side, put the question to
him, "What he did and by what profession he gained his livelihood?"

He replied, "That he lived by removing hunchbacks from the sunshine
into the shade," alluding to Muraena's deformity.

He lived till he was near a hundred years old; but he had long lost his
memory, as the verse of Bibaculus informs us:

Orbilius ubinam est, literarum oblivio?
Where is Orbilius now, that wreck of learning lost?

His statue is shown in the Capitol at Beneventum. It stands on the left
hand, and is sculptured in marble [868], representing him in a
sitting posture, wearing the pallium, with two writing-cases in his
hand.

He left a son, named also Orbilius, who, like his father, was a professor
of grammar.

X. ATTEIUS, THE PHILOLOGIST, a freedman, was born at Athens. Of him, Capito
Atteius [869], the well-known jurisconsult, says that he was a rhetorician
among the grammarians, and a grammarian among the rhetoricians. Asinius
Pollio [870], in the book in which he finds fault with the writings
of Sallust for his great affectation of obsolete words, speaks thus:
"In this work his chief assistant was a certain Atteius, a man of
rank, a splendid Latin grammarian, the aider and preceptor of those
who studied the practice of declamation; in short, one who claimed
for himself the cognomen of Philologus."

Writing to Lucius Hermas, he says, "that he had made great proficiency
in Greek literature, and some in Latin; that he had been a hearer of
Antonius Gnipho, and his Hermas [871], and afterwards began to teach
others. Moreover, that he had for pupils many illustrious youths, among
whom were the two (514) brothers, Appius and Pulcher Claudius; and
that he even accompanied them to their province." He appears to have
assumed the name of Philologus, because, like Eratosthenes [872], who
first adopted that cognomen, he was in high repute for his rich and varied
stores of learning; which, indeed, is evident from his commentaries,
though but few of them are extant.
Another letter, however, to the same Hermas, shews that they were
very numerous: "Remember," it says, "to recommend generally our
Extracts, which we have collected, as you know, of all kinds, into
eight hundred books."

He afterwards formed an intimate acquaintance with Caius Sallustius, and,
on his death, with Asinius Pollio; and when they undertook to write a
history, he supplied the one with short annals of all Roman affairs,
from which he could select at pleasure; and the other, with rules on the
art of composition. I am, therefore, surprised that Asinius Pollio
should have supposed that he was in the habit of collecting old words and
figures of speech for Sallust, when he must have known that his own
advice was, that none but well known, and common and appropriate
expressions should be made use of; and that, above all things, the
obscurity of the style of Sallust, and his bold freedom in translations,
should be avoided.

She fretted perpetually that she had left her father to
strangers, and that she could not help to lay him in his grave. Felicia
too had cried a little, but had soon consoled herself with the sensible
reflection--so it seemed to Tatham--that at least her poor old Babbo was
now out of his troubles.

His thoughts strayed on to the coming hour and Felicia's future. It
amused the young man's mere love of "eventful living" to imagine her
surprise, if what he shrewdly supposed was going to happen, did happen.
But no one could say--little incalculable thing!--how she would take it.

The handle of the door was turned, and some one entered. He looked round,
and saw Felicia. Her black dress emphasized the fairylike delicacy of her
face and hands; and something in her look--some sign of smothered misery
or revolt--touched Tatham sharply. He hurried to her, biding her good
morning, for she had not appeared at breakfast.

"And I wanted to see you before they all come. How is your mother?"

"Just the same." She allowed him but the slightest touch of her small
fingers before she turned abruptly to the row of water-colours. "Who
painted those?"

"Miss Penfold. Don't you know what a charming artist she is?"

"They are not at all well done!" said Felicia. "Amateurs have no business
to paint."

"She is not an amateur!" cried Tatham. "She--"

Then again he noticed that she was hollowed-eyed, and her lip
was twitching. Poor little girl!--in her black dress--soon to be
motherless--and with this critical moment in front of her!

He came nearer to her in the shy, courteous way that made a dissonance so
attractive with his great height and strength.

"Dear Felicia! I may, mayn't I? We're cousins. Don't be nervous--or
afraid. I think it's all coming right."

She looked at him angrily.

"I'm not nervous--not the least bit! I don't care what happens."

And holding her curly head absurdly high, she went back into the library,
which Victoria, Undershaw, and Cyril Boden had just entered. Tatham
regretted that he had not made more time to talk with her; to prepare her
mind for alternatives. It might have been wiser. But Faversham's summons
had been sudden; and his own expectations were so vague!

However, there was no time now. Lydia arrived, and she and Tatham
withdrew into the inner room for a few minutes, deep in consultation.
Felicia watched them with furious eyes. And when they came out again, a
soft flush on Lydia's cheeks, it was all that Felicia could do to prevent
herself from rushing upstairs again, leaving them to have their horrid
meeting to themselves.

But flight was barred. Faversham entered, accompanied by the senior
solicitor to the Threlfall estate and by old Dixon, shaking with
nervousness, in a black Sunday suit. Chairs had been provided. They took
their seats. Tatham cleared his own table.

"No need!" said the solicitor, a gentleman with a broad, benevolent face
slightly girdled by whiskers. "It's very short!"

And smiling, he took out of his pocket a document consisting apparently
of two sheets of square letter paper, and amid the sudden silence, he
began to read.

The first and longer sheet was done. Felicia, sitting on the edge of a
stiff chair, her small feet dangling, was staring at the lawyer. Victoria
was looking at her son bewildered. Boden wore an odd sort of smile.
Undershaw, impassive, was playing with his watch-chain. Lydia radiant and
erect, in a dress of gray-blue tweed, a veil of the same tint falling
back from the harmonious fairness of her face, had her eyes on Felicia.
There was a melting kindness in the eyes--as though the maternity deep in
the girl's nature spoke.

A deed of gift, _inter vivos_, conveying the whole personality and real
estate, recently bequeathed to Claude Faversham by Edmund Melrose,
consisting of so-and-so, and so-and-so,--a long catalogue of shares and
land which had taken some time to read--to Felicia Melrose, daughter of
the late Edmund Melrose, subject only to an annuity to her mother,
Antonetta Melrose, of £2,000 a year, to a pension for Thomas Dixon and
his wife, and various other pensions and small annuities; Henry, Earl
Tatham, and Victoria, Countess Tatham, appointed trustees, and to act as
guardians, till the said Felicia Melrose should attain the age of
twenty-four; no mention of any other person at all; the whole vast
property, precisely as it had passed from Melrose to Faversham, just
taken up and dropped in the lap of this little creature with the dangling
feet without reservation, or deduction--now that it was done, and not
merely guessed at, it showed plain for what in truth it was--one of those
acts wherein the energies of the human spirit, working behind the
material veil, swing for a moment into view, arresting and stunning the
spectator.

"But the collections!" said Tatham, remembering them almost with relief,
speaking in his mother's ear; "what about the collections?"

"We come now to the second part of the deed of gift," said the silvery
voice of the lawyer. And again the astounded circle set itself to listen.

"The collections of works of art now contained in Threlfall Tower, I
also convey in full property and immediate possession to the said Felicia
Melrose, but on the following conditions:

"Threlfall Tower, or such portions of it as may be necessary, to be
maintained permanently as a museum in which to house the said collection:
a proper museum staff to be appointed; a sum of money, to be agreed upon
between Claude Faversham and Felicia Melrose, to be set aside for the
maintenance of the building, the expenses of installation, and the
endowment of the staff; and a set of rooms in the west wing to be
appropriated to the private residence of a curator, who is to be
appointed, after the first curatorship, by--"

Certain public officials were named, and a few other stipulations made.
Then with a couple of legal phrases and a witnessed signature, the second
sheet came to an end.

There was a silence that could be heard. In the midst of it Faversham
rose. He was agitated and a little incoherent.

"The rest of what has to be said is not a formal matter. If Miss
Melrose, or her guardians, choose to make me the first Curator of the
Threlfall Tower Museum, I am willing to accept that office at their
hands, and--after, perhaps, a year--I should like to occupy the rooms
I have mentioned in the west wing--with the lady who has now promised to
be my wife. I know perhaps better than any one else what the house
contains; and I could spend, if not my life, at any rate a term of years,
in making the Tower a palace of art, a centre of design, of training, of
suggestion--a House Beautiful, indeed, for the whole north of England.
And my promised wife says she will help me."

He looked at Lydia. She put her hand in his. The sight of most people in
the room had grown dim.

But Felicia had jumped up.

"I don't want it all! I won't have it all!" she said in a passionate
excitement. "My father hated me. I told him I would never take his money.
Why didn't you tell me--why didn't you warn me?" She turned to Tatham,
her little body shaking, and her face threatening tears.

"Why should Mr. Faversham do such a thing? Don't let him!--don't let him!
And I ought--I ought--to have been told!"

Faversham and Lydia approached her. But suddenly; putting her hands to
her face, she ran to the French window of the library, opened it, and
rushed into the garden.

Tatham and his mother looked at each other aghast.

"Run after her!" said Victoria in his ear. "Take this shawl!" She handed
him a wrap she had brought in upon her arm.

"Yes--it's December," said Boden, smiling, to Lady Tatham; "but
perhaps"--the accent was ironical--"when she comes back the seasons
will have changed!"

The session broke up in excited conversation, of which Faversham was the
centre.

"This is final?" said Undershaw, eying him keenly. "You intend to stand
by it?"

"'Fierce work it were to do again!'" said Faversham, in a quotation
recognized by Undershaw, who generally went to bed with a scientific book
on one side of him, and a volume of modern poets on the other. Faversham
was now radiant. He stood with his arm round Lydia. Victoria had her
hand.

       *       *       *       *       *

Meanwhile in the Italian garden and through the yew hedges, Daphne fled,
and Apollo pursued. At last he caught her, and she sank upon a garden
seat. He put the shawl round her, and stood with his hands in his pockets
surveying her.

"What was the matter, Felicia?" he asked her, gently.

"It is ridiculous!" she said, sobbing. "Why wasn't I asked? I don't want
a guardian! I won't have you for a guardian!" And she beat her foot
angrily on the paved path.

Tatham laughed.

"You'll have to go back and behave nicely, Felicia. Haven't you any
thanks for Faversham?"

"I never asked him to do it! How can I look after all that! It'll kill
me. I want to sing! I want to go on the stage!"

He sat down beside her. Her dark head covered with its silky curls, her
very black eyes and arched brows in her small pink face, the pointed
chin, and tiny mouth, made a very winning figure of her, as she sat
there, under a garden vase, and an overhanging yew. And that, although
the shawl was huddled round her shoulders, and the eyes were red with
tears.

"You will be able to do anything you like, Felicia. You will be terribly
rich."

She gazed at him, the storm in her breast subsiding a little.

"How rich?" she asked him, pouting.

He tried to give her some idea. She sighed. "It's dreadful! What shall I
do with it all!"

Then as her eyes still searched him, he saw them change--first to
soft--then wild. Her colour flamed. She moved farther from him, and tried
to put on a businesslike air.

"I want to ask a question."

"Ask it."

"Am I--am I as rich as any girl you would be likely to marry?"

"What an odd question! Do you think I want money?"

"I know you don't!" she said, with a wail. "That's what's so horrid! Why
can't you all leave me alone?"

Then recovering herself fiercely, she began again:

"In my country--in Italy--when two people are about equally rich--a man
and a girl--their relations go and talk to each other. They say, 'Will it
suit you?'--the man has so much--the girl has so much--they like each
other--and--wouldn't it do very well!"

She sprang up. Tatham had flushed. He looked at her in speechless
amazement. She stood opposite him, making herself as tall as she could,
her hands behind her.

"Lord Tatham--my mother is ill--my father is dead. You're not my guardian
yet--and I don't think I'll ever let you be! So there's nobody but me to
do it. I'm sorry--I know it's not quite right, quite--quite English.
Well, any way! Lord Tatham, you say I have a _dot_! So that's all right.
There's my hand. Will you marry me?"

She held it out. All her excitement had gone, and her colour. She was
very pale, and quite calm.

"My dear Felicia!" cried Tatham, in agitation, taking the hand, "what a
position to put your guardian in! You are a great heiress. I can't run
off with you like this--before you've had any other chances--before
you've seen anybody else."

"If you don't, I won't take a farthing! What good would it be to me!"

She came closer, and put her little hands on his shoulders as he sat--the
centre of one of those sudden tumults of sense and spirit that sweep a
strong man from his feet.

"Oh, won't you take care of me? I love you so!"

It was a cry of Nature. Tatham gave a great gulp, put out his arms, and
caught her. There she was on the bench beside him, laughing and sobbing,
gathered against his heart.

The cheerful December day shone upon them: a robin sang in the yew tree
overhead....

Meanwhile the library was still full. Nobody had yet left it; and
instinctively everybody was watching the French window.

Two figures appeared there, Felicia in front. She came in, her eyes cast
down, a bright spot on either cheek. And while every one in the room held
their breath she crossed the floor and paused in front of Faversham.

"Mr. Faversham, I ask your pardon, that I was so rude. I--" A sob rose
in her throat, and she stopped a moment to control it. "Till the other
day--I was just a poor girl--who never had a _lira_ to spend. All that we
ate--my mother and I--we had to work for. And now--you have made me rich.
They explored the country to the ninth degree of north latitude, found
large Negro and Mahometan states in the interior, and visited Saccatoo,
Kano, Murfeia, Tangalra, and other large towns, some of which
contained twenty or thirty thousand people.

Faversham smiled at her.

"That doesn't lie with you! One of your trustees has already signed the
deed--here comes the other." He pointed to Tatham.

"But he isn't my trustee!" insisted Felicia, the tears brimming over;
"he's--"

Tatham came up to her, and gravely took her hand.

Felicia looked at him, then at Victoria, then at the circle of amazed
faces. With a low cry of "Mother" she turned and fled from the room,
drawing Lady Tatham with her.

A little while later, Lydia, the lawyers and Faversham having departed,
found herself alone a moment in the library. In the tumult of happy
excitement which possessed her, she could not sit still. Without any
clear notion of where she was going, she wandered through the open door
into the farther room. There, with a start, and a flush, she recognized
her own drawings--five of them--in a row. So here, all the time, was her
unknown friend; and she had never guessed!

At a sound in the room behind, she turned, hoping it was Lady Tatham who
had come back to her. But she saw that it was Tatham himself. He came
into the little room, and stood silently beside her, as though wanting
her to speak first. With deep emotion she held out her hand, and wished
him joy; her gesture, her eyes, all tenderness.

"She is so lovely--so touching! She will win everybody's heart!"

He looked down upon her oddly, like some one oppressed by feelings and
thoughts beyond his own unravelling.

"She has been very unhappy," he said simply. "I think I can take care of
her."

Lydia looked at him anxiously. A sudden slight darkening seemed to
come into the day; and for one terrified moment she seemed to see
Tatham--dear, generous youth!--as the truly tragic figure in their
high mingled comedy.

Not Melrose--but Tatham! Then, swiftly, the cloud passed, and she laughed
at herself.

"Take care of her! You will be the happiest people in the world--save
two!"

He let her talk to him, the inner agitation whatever it was,
disappearing. She soothed, she steadied him. Now, at last, they were to
be true friends--comrades in the tasks and difficulties of life. Without
words, her heart promised it--to him and Felicia.

As they left the room, she pointed, smiling, to the drawings.

"So you were the elderly solicitor, with a taste for art, I used to see
in my dreams!"

His eyes lit up boyishly.

"I had to keep them here, for fear you'd find out. Now, we'll hang them
properly."

It was Victoria who broke the news to Netta Melrose. Park was from the west
coast, near Sierra Leone, to the upper branches of the Niger.
On his second expedition he took with him a detachment of British
soldiers, and a number of civilians, fresh from England, none of whom
survived him. It appears from his journal that his men followed the
foot-paths of the natives, slept in the open air, were exposed to
the dews at night, and were overtaken by the rainy season before they
embarked upon the Niger.Her father had loved them, and she had
loved her father; all the more passionately the more the world disowned
him. She sat in spirit beside his crushed and miserable old age, finding
her only comfort in the memory of how his feeble hands had clung to her,
how she had worked and starved for him.

Yet, when Felicia came to her, she cried and blessed her. And Felicia,
softened by happiness, knelt down beside her, and begged and prayed her
to get well. To please them all, Netta made her nurse do her hair, and
put on a white jacket which Victoria had embroidered for her. And when
Tatham came in to see her, she would have timidly kissed his hand had he
not been so quick to see and prevent her.

Meanwhile Victoria, still conscious of the clinging of Felicia's arms
about her, was comparing--secretly and inevitably--the daughter-in-law
that might have been, with the daughter-in-law that was to be. Now
that Fate's throw was irrevocably made, she found herself appreciating
Lydia as she had never done while the chances were still open. Lydia
had refused her Harry; Felicia had captured him. Perhaps she resented
both actions; and would always--secretly--resent them. But yet, in
Lydia--Lydia with her early maturity, her sweet poise and strength of
nature, she foresaw the companion; in Felicia, the child and darling of
her old age. And looking round on this crooked world, she acknowledged,
now as always, that she had got more than she deserved, more--much
more--than her share.

A conviction that Cyril Boden did his best to sharpen in her. With the
invincible optimism of his kind, he scoffed at the misgivings which she
confided to him, and to him only, on the score of Felicia's lack of
training, her touchy and passionate temper, and the little unscrupulous
ways that offended a fastidious observer.

"What does it matter?" he said to her--"she is in love--head over ears.
You and he can make of her what you like. She will beat him if he looks
at anybody else; but she will have ten children, and never have a thought
or an interest that isn't his. At Boussa, they obtained the first authentic information of the
death of Park, and recovered his gun, robe, and other relics.

Here, embarking in canoes, they ascended the river through its rapids to
Yaouri, and thence traced it to the sea in the Bight of Benin.

How long will this England leave the land to you landowners, unless you
bring some mind to it--aye, and the best of your _souls_! you--the
nation's servants! Here is a great tract left desolate by one man's
wickedness. Restore the waste places--build--people--teach! Heavens,
what a chance!" His eyes kindled. "And when Faversham and Lydia come
back--yoke them in too. Curator!--stuff! If he won't own that estate,
make him govern it, and play the man. Disinterested power!--with such a
wife--and such a friend! Could a man ask better of the gods! Now is your
moment. Rural England turns to you, its natural leaders, to shape it
afresh. Shirk--refuse--at your peril!"