Produced by Lenna Knox, Juliet Sutherland, Sankar
Viswanathan, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
at http://www.pgdp.net


                          A Little Mother to
                              the Others


                                  BY

                            MRS. L.T. MEADE

                               AUTHOR OF
                "POLLY: A NEW-FASHIONED GIRL," "A SWEET
                         GIRL GRADUATE," ETC.


                               NEW YORK

                           GROSSET & DUNLAP

                              PUBLISHERS


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER

I. THE POOR INNOCENT,

II. A LITTLE MOTHER TO THE OTHERS,

III. THE ARRIVAL OF THE AUNT,

IV. RUB-A-DUB,

V. AUNT IS HER NAME,

VI. THE POOR DEAD UN'S,

VII. BUT ANN COULD NOT HELP LETTING OUT NOW AND THEN,

VIII. THE STRAW TOO MUCH,

IX. THE PUNISHMENT CHAMBER,

X. BOW AND ARROW,

XI. JOG'APHY,

XII. A BABY'S HONOR,

XIII. BIRCH ROD,

XIV. DIANA'S REVENGE,

XV. MOTHER RODESIA,

XVI. UNCLE BEN,

XVII. GREASED LIGHTNING,

XVIII. THE HEART OF THE LITTLE MOTHER,

XIX. "A PIGMY I CALL HIM",

XX. "LET'S PERTEND," SAID DIANA,

XXI. POLE STAR,

XXII. THE MILKMAN,

XXIII. FORTUNE,

XXIV. ON THE TRAIL,

XXV. FOUND,

XXVI. THE LITTLE MOTHER TO THE RESCUE,


A LITTLE MOTHER TO THE OTHERS


CHAPTER I.

THE POOR INNOCENT.


The four children had rather peculiar names. The eldest girl was
called Iris, which, as everybody ought to know, means rainbow--indeed,
there was an Iris spoken of in the old Greek legends, who was supposed
to be Hera's chief messenger, and whenever a rainbow appeared in the
sky it was said that Iris was bringing down a message from Hera. The
Iris of this story was a very pretty, thoughtful little girl, aged ten
years. Her mother often talked to her about her name, and told her the
story which was associated with it. The eldest boy was called Apollo,
which also is a Greek name, and was supposed at one time to belong to
the most beautiful boy in the world. The next girl was called Diana,
and the youngest boy's name was Orion.

When this story opens, Iris was ten years old, Apollo nine, Diana six,
and little Orion five. They were like ordinary children in appearance,
being neither particularly handsome nor particularly the reverse; but
in their minds and ways, in their habits and tastes, they seemed to
have inherited a savor of those far-off beings after whom their mother
had called them. They were, in short, very unworldly children--that
does not mean that they were specially religious--but they did not
care for fine clothes, nor the ordinary amusements which ordinary
children delight in. I need not have taken the trouble, as this distinguished
writer had already, in a work which I overlooked, formally withdrawn,
as regards Africa, his theory of 'loan-gods.' Miss Kingsley, too, is
no believer in the borrowing hypothesis for West Africa, in regard,
that is, to the highest divine conception.

I was, when I wrote, unaware that, especially as concerns America
and Australia, Mr. Tylor had recently advocated the theory of borrowing
('Journal of Anthrop.
Institute,' vol. xxi.). To Mr. Tylor's arguments, when I read them, I
replied in the 'Nineteenth Century,' January 1899: 'Are Savage Gods
Borrowed from Missionaries?' I do not here repeat my arguments, but
await the publication of Mr. Tylor's 'Gifford Lectures,' in which
his hypothesis may be reinforced, and may win my adhesion.

It may here be said, however, that if the Australian higher religious
ideas are of recent and missionary origin, they would necessarily be
known to the native women, from whom, in fact, they are absolutely
concealed by the men, under penalty of death. Again, if the Son, or
Sons, of Australian chief Beings resemble part of the Christian
dogma, they much more closely resemble the Apollo and Hermes of Greece.[4]
But nobody will say that the Australians borrowed them from Greek
mythology!

In chapter xiv., owing to a bibliographical error of my own, I have
done injustice to Mr. Tylor, by supposing him to have overlooked
Strachey's account of the Virginian god Ahone. He did not overlook
Ahone, but mistrusted Strachey.

In an excursus on Ahone, in the new edition of 'Myth, Ritual, and
Religion,' I have tried my best to elucidate the bibliography and
other aspects of Strachey's account, which I cannot regard as baseless.
Mr. Tylor's opinion is, doubtless, different, and may prove more
persuasive. As to Australia, Mr. Howitt, our best authority, continues
to disbelieve in the theory of borrowing.

I have to withdraw in chapters x. xi. the statement that 'Darumulun
never died at all.' Mr. Hartland has corrected me, and pointed out
that, among the Wiraijuri, a myth represents him as having been
destroyed, for his offences, by Baiame. In that tribe, however,
Darumulun is not the highest, but a subordinate Being. Mr. Hartland has
also collected a few myths in which Australian Supreme Beings _do_
(contrary to my statement) 'set the example of sinning.' Nothing can
surprise me less, and I only wonder that, in so savage a race, the
examples, hitherto collected, are so rare, and so easily to be accounted
for on the theory of processes of crystallisation of myths already
suggested.

As to a remark in Appendix B, Mr. Podmore takes a distinction.

I quote his remark, 'the phenomena described are quite inexplicable by
ordinary mechanical means,' and I contrast this, as illogical, with
his opinion that a girl 'may have been directly responsible for
all that took place.' Mr. Podmore replies that what was 'described'
is not necessarily identical with what _occurred_. Strictly speaking,
he is right; but the evidence was copious, was given by many
witnesses, and (as offered by me) was in part _contemporary_ (being
derived from the local newspapers), so that here Mr.

Podmore's theory of illusions of memory on a large scale, developed
in the five weeks which elapsed before he examined the spectators, is
out of court. The evidence was of contemporary published record.

The handling of fire by Home is accounted for by Mr. Podmore, in the
same chapter, as the result of Home's use of a 'non-conducting
substance.' Asked, 'what substance?' he answered, 'asbestos.' Sir
William Crookes, again repeating his account of the performance which
he witnessed, says, 'Home took up a lump of red-hot charcoal about
twice the size of an egg into his hand, on which certainly no asbestos
was visible. He blew into his hands, and the flames could be
seen coming out between his fingers, and he carried the charcoal
round the room.'[5] Sir W. Crookes stood close beside Home. The
light was that of the fire and of two candles. Probably Sir William
could see a piece of asbestos, if it was covering Home's hands,
which he was watching.
What I had to say, by way of withdrawal, qualification, explanation,
or otherwise, I inserted (in order to seize the earliest opportunity)
in the Introduction to the recent edition of my 'Myth, Ritual, and
Religion' (1899).Whenever the children were not in the house they were to be found in
the garden, for, in addition to the abundance of fruit and vegetables,
it also possessed some stately trees, which gave plenty of shade even
when the sun was at its hottest. Here Iris would lie full length on
her face and hands, and dream dreams to any extent. Now and then also
she would wake up with a start and tell marvelous stories to her
brothers and sister. She told stories very well, and the others always
listened solemnly and begged her to tell more, and questioned and
argued, and tried to make the adventures she described come really
into their own lives.

Iris was undoubtedly the most imaginative of all the little party.
She was also the most gentle and the most thoughtful. She took most
after her beautiful mother, and thought more than any of the others of
the peculiar names after which they were all called.

On a certain day in the first week of a particularly hot and lovely
June, Iris, who had been in the house for some time, came slowly out,
swinging her large muslin hat on her arm. Her face looked paler than
usual, and somewhat thoughtful.

"Here you are at last, Iris," called out Diana, in her brisk voice,
"and not a moment too soon. I have just found a poor innocent dead on
the walk; you must come and look at it at once."

On hearing these words, the gloom left Iris' face as if by magic.

"Where is it?" she asked. "I hope you did not tread on it, Diana."

"No; but Puff-Ball did," answered Diana. "Don't blame him, please,
Iris; he is only a puppy and always up to mischief. He took the poor
innocent in his mouth and shook it; but I think it was quite deaded
before that."

"Then, if it is dead, it must be buried," said Iris solemnly. "Bring
it into the arbor, and let us think what kind of funeral we will give
it."

"Why not into the dead-house at once?" queried Diana.

"No; the arbor will do for the present."

Iris quickened her footsteps and walked down the straight path through
the midst of the Scotch roses. Having reached the pretty little
summer-house, she seated herself on her rustic chair and waited until
Diana arrived with the poor innocent. This was a somewhat unsightly
object, being nothing more nor less than a dead earthworm which had
been found on the walk, and which Diana respected, as she did all live
creatures, great or small.

"Put it down there," said Iris; "we can have a funeral when the sun is
not quite so hot."

"I suppose it will have a private funeral," said Apollo, who came into
the summer-house at that moment. "It is nothing but a poor innocent,
and not worth a great deal of trouble; and I do hope, Iris," he added
eagerly, "that you will not expect me to be present, for I have got
some most important chemical experiments which I am anxious to go on
with. I quite hope to succeed with my thermometer to-day, and, after
all, as it is only a worm----"

Iris looked up at him with very solemn eyes.

"_Only_ a worm," she repeated. "Is _that_ its fault, poor thing?"
Apollo seemed to feel the indignant glance of Iris' brown eyes. He sat
down submissively on his own chair. Orion and Diana dropped on their
knees by Iris' side. "I think," said Iris slowly, "that we will give
this poor innocent a simple funeral. The coffin must be made of dock
leaves, and----"

Here she was suddenly interrupted--a shadow fell across the entrance
door of the pretty summer-house. An elderly woman, with a thin face
and lank, figure, looked in.

"Miss Iris," she said, "Mrs. Delaney is awake and would be glad to see
you."

"Mother!" cried Iris eagerly. She turned at once to her sister and
brothers. "The innocent must wait," she said. "Put it in the
dead-house with the other creatures. I will attend to the funeral in
the evening or to-morrow. Don't keep me now, children."

"But I thought you had just come from mother," said Apollo.

"No. When I went to her she was asleep. Don't keep me, please." The
woman who had brought the message had already disappeared down the
long straight walk. Iris took to her heels and ran after her.
"Fortune," she said, looking into her face, "is mother any better?"

"As to that, Miss Iris, it is more than I can tell you. Please don't
hold on to my hand, miss. In hot weather I hate children to cling to
me."

Iris said nothing more, but she withdrew a little from Fortune's side.

Fortune hurried her steps, and Iris kept time with her. When they
reached the house, the woman stopped and looked intently at the child.

"You can go straight upstairs at once, miss, and into the room," she
said. "You need not knock; my mistress is waiting for you."

"Don't you think, Fortune, that mother is just a little _wee_ bit
better?" asked Iris again. There was an imploring note in her question
this time.

"She will tell you herself, my dear. Now, be quick; don't keep her
waiting. It is bad for people, when they are ill, to be kept waiting."

"I won't keep her; I'll go to her this very instant," said Iris.

The old house was as beautiful as the garden to which it belonged. It
had been built, a great part of it, centuries ago, and had, like many
other houses of its date, been added to from time to time. Queerly
shaped rooms jutted out in many quarters; odd stairs climbed up in
several directions; towers and turrets were added to the roof;
passages, some narrow, some broad, connected the new buildings with
the old. The whole made an incongruous and yet beautiful effect, the
new rooms possessing the advantages and comforts which modern builders
put into their houses, and the older part of the house the quaint
devices and thick, wainscoted walls and deep, mullioned windows of the
times which are gone by.

Iris ran quickly through the wide entrance hall and up the broad,
white, stone stairs. These stairs were a special feature of Delaney
Manor. They had been brought all the way from Italy by a Delaney
nearly a hundred years ago, and were made of pure marble, and were
very lovely to look at. When Iris reached the first landing, she
turned aside from the spacious modern apartments and, opening a green
baize door, ran down a narrow passage. At the end of the passage she
turned to the left and went down another passage, and then wended her
way up some narrow stairs, which curled round and round as if they
were going up a tower. This, as a matter of fact, was the case.
Presently Iris pushed aside a curtain, and found herself in an octagon
room nearly at the top of a somewhat high, but squarely built, tower.
This room, which was large and airy, was wainscoted with oak; there
was a thick Turkey carpet on the floor, and the many windows were
flung wide open, so that the summer breeze, coming in fresh and sweet
from this great height, made the whole lovely room as fresh and cheery
and full of sweet perfume as if its solitary inmate were really in the
open air.

Iris, however, had often been in the room before, and had no time or
thought now to give to its appearance. Her eyes darted to the sofa on
which her young mother lay. Mrs. Delaney was half-sitting up, and
looked almost too young to be the mother of a child as big as Iris.
She had one of the most beautiful faces God ever gave to anybody. It
was not so much that her features were perfect, but they were full of
light, full of soul, and such a very loving expression beamed in her
eyes that no man, woman, or child ever looked at her without feeling
the best in their natures coming immediately to the surface.

As to little Iris, her feelings for her mother were quite beyond any
words to express. She ran up to her now and knelt by her side.

"Kiss me, Iris," said Mrs. Delaney.

Iris put up her soft, rosebud lips; they met the equally soft lips of
the mother.

"You are much better, mummy; are you not?" said the child, in an
eager, half-passionate whisper.

"I have had a long sleep, darling, and I am rested," said Mrs.
Delaney. "I told Fortune to call you. Father is away for the day. I
thought we could have half an hour uninterrupted."

"How beautiful, mother! It is the most delightful thing in all the
world to be alone with you, mummy."

"Well, bring your little chair and sit near me, Iris. Fortune will
bring in tea in a moment, and you can pour it out. You shall have tea
with me, if you wish it, darling."

Iris gave a sigh of rapture; she was too happy almost for words. This
was almost invariably the case when she found herself in her mother's
presence. When with her mother she was quiet and seldom spoke a great
deal. In the garden with the other children Iris was the one who
chattered most, but with her mother her words were always few. She
felt herself then to be more or less in a listening attitude. She
listened for the words which dropped from those gentle lips; she was
always on the lookout for the love-light which filled the soft brown
eyes.

At that moment the old servant, Fortune, brought in the tea on a
pretty tray and laid it on a small table near Mrs. Delaney. Then Iris
got up, and with an important air poured it out and brought a cup,
nicely prepared, to her mother.

Mrs. Delaney sipped her tea and looked from time to time at her little
daughter. When she did so, Iris devoured her with her anxious eyes.

"No," she said to herself, "mother does not look ill--not even _very_
tired. She is not like anybody else, and that is why--why she wears
that wonderful, almost holy expression. Sometimes I wish she did not,
but I would not change her, not for all the world."

Iris' heart grew quiet. Her cup of bliss was quite full. She scarcely
touched her tea; she was too happy even to eat.

"Have you had enough tea, mother?" she asked presently.

"Yes, darling. Please push the tea-table a little aside, and then come
up very near to me. I want to hold your dear little hand in mine; I
can't talk much."

"But you are better--you are surely better, mother?"

"In one sense, yes, Iris."

Iris moved the tea-table very deftly aside, and then, drawing up her
small chair, slipped her hand inside her mother's.

"I have made up my mind to tell you, Iris," said the mother. She
looked at the little girl for a full minute, and then began to talk in
a low, clear voice. "I am the mother of four children. I don't think
there are any other children like you four in the wide world. I have
thought a great deal about you, and while I have been ill have prayed
to God to keep you and to help me, and now, Iris, now that I have got
to go away--"

"To go away, mother?" interrupted Iris, turning very pale.

"Yes, dearest. Don't be troubled, darling; I can make it all seem
quite happy to you. But now, when I see it must be done, that I must
undertake this very long journey, I want to put things perfectly
straight between you and me, my little daughter."

"Things have been always straight between us, mother," said Iris. "I
don't quite understand."

"Do you remember the time when I went to Australia?"

"Are you going to Australia again?" asked Iris. "You were a whole year
away then. It was a very long time, and sometimes, mother, sometimes
Fortune was a little cross, and Miss Stevenson never seemed to suit
Apollo. I thought I would tell you about that."

"But Fortune means well, dearest. She has your true interest at heart,
and I think matters will be differently arranged, as far as Miss
Stevenson is concerned, in the future. It is not about her or Fortune
I want to speak now."

"And you are going back to Australia again?"

"I am going quite as far as Australia; but we need not talk of the
distance just now. I have not time for many words, nor very much
strength to speak. You know, Iris, the meaning of your names, don't
you?"

"Of course," answered Iris; "and, mother, I have often talked to the
others about our names. I have told Apollo how beautiful he must try
to be, not only in his face, but in his mind, mother, and how brave
and how clever. I have told him that he must try to have a beautiful
soul; and Orion must be very brave and strong, and Diana must be
bright and sparkling and noble. Yes, mother; we all know about our
names."

"I am glad of that," said Mrs. Delaney. "I gave you the names for a
purpose. I wanted you to have names with meaning to them. I wanted you
to try to live up to them. Now, Iris, that I am really going away, I
am afraid you children will find a great many things altered. You have
hitherto lived a very sheltered life; you have just had the dear old
garden and the run of the house, and you have seen your father or me
every day. But afterwards, when I have gone, you will doubtless have
to go into the world; and, my darling, my darling, the cold world does
not always understand the meaning of names like yours, the meaning of
strength and beauty and nobleness, and of bright, sparkling, and high
ideas. In short, my little girl, if you four children are to be worthy
of your names and to fulfill the dreams, the longings, the _hopes_ I
have centered round you, there is nothing whatever for you to do but
to begin to fight your battles."

Iris was silent. She had very earnest eyes, something like her
mother's in expression. They were fixed now on Mrs. Delaney's face.

"I will not explain exactly what I mean," said the mother, giving the
little hand a loving squeeze, "only to assure you, Iris, that, as the
trial comes, strength will be given to you to meet it. Please
understand, my darling, that from first to last, to the end of life,
it is all a fight. 'The road winds uphill all the way.' If you will
remember that you will not think things half as hard, and you will be
brave and strong, and, like the rainbow, you will cheer people even in
the darkest hours. But, Iris, I want you to promise me one thing--I
want you, my little girl, to be a mother to the others."

"A mother to the others?" said Iris, half aloud. She paused and did
not speak at all for a moment, her imagination was very busy. She
thought of all the creatures to whom she was already a mother, not
only her own dear pets--the mice in their cages, the silk-worms, the
three dogs, the stray cat, the pet Persian cat, the green frogs, the
poor innocents, as the children called worms--but in addition to
these, all creatures that suffered in the animal kingdom, all flowers
that were about to fade, all sad things that seemed to need care and
comfort. But up to the present she had never thought of the other
children except as her equals. Apollo was only a year younger than
herself, and in some ways braver and stouter and more fearless; and
Orion and Diana were something like their names--very bright and even
fierce at times. She, after all, was the gentlest of the party, and
she was very young--not more than ten years of age. How could she
possibly be a mother to the others?

She looked at Mrs. Delaney, and her mother gazed solemnly at her,
waiting for her to speak.

"After all," thought Iris, "to satisfy the longing in mother's eyes is
the first thing of all. I will promise, cost what it may."

"Yes," she said; then softly, "I will, mother; I will be a mother to
the others."

"Kiss me, Iris."

The little girl threw her arms round her mother's neck; their lips met
in a long embrace.

"Darling, you understand? I am satisfied with your promise, and I am
tired."

"Must I go away, mother? May not I stay very quietly with you? Can you
not sleep if I am in the room?"

"I would rather you left me now. I can sleep better when no one is by.
Ring the bell for Fortune as you go. She will come and make me
comfortable. Yes; I am very tired."

"One moment first, mummy--you have not told me yet when you are going
on the journey."

"The day is not quite fixed, Iris, although it is--yes, it is nearly
so."

"And you have not said _where_ you are going, mother. I should like to
tell the others."

But Mrs. Delaney had closed her eyes, and did not make any reply.


CHAPTER II.

A LITTLE MOTHER TO THE OTHERS.


That night the children's young mother went on her journey. The
summons for her to go came unexpectedly, as it often does in the end.
She had not even time to say good-by to the children, nor to her
husband, only just a brief moment to look, with startled eyes, at the
wonderful face of the angel who had come to fetch her, and then with a
smile of bliss to let him clasp her in his arms and feel his strong
wings round her, and then she was away, beyond the lovely house and
the beautiful garden, and the children sleeping quietly in their beds,
and the husband who was slumbering by her side--beyond the tall trees
and the peaks of the highest mountains, beyond the stars themselves,
until finally she entered the portals of a home that is everlasting,
and found herself in a land where the flowers do not fade.

In the morning the children were told that their mother was dead. They
all cried, and everyone thought it dreadfully sad, except Iris, who
knew better. It was Fortune who brought in the news to the
children--they had just gone into the day-nursery at the time.

Fortune was a stern woman, somewhat over fifty years of age. She was
American by birth, and had lived with Mrs. Delaney since Iris was
born. Mrs. Delaney was also American, which may have accounted for
some of her bright fancies, and quiet, yet sweet and quick ways.
Fortune was very fond of the children after her fashion, which was,
however, as a rule, somewhat severe and exacting. But to-day, in her
bitter grief, she sank down on the nearest chair, and allowed them all
to crowd round her, and cried bitterly, and took little Orion in her
arms and kissed him and petted him, and begged of each child to
forgive her for ever having been cross or disagreeable, and promised,
as well and as heartily as she could, never to transgress again in
that manner as long as she lived.

While the others were sobbing and crying round Fortune, Iris stood
silent.

"Where is father?" she said at last, in a very quiet but determined
voice.

Fortune glanced round at the grave little girl in some wonder.

"Miss Iris," she said, "you are not even crying."

"What do tears matter?" answered Iris. "Please, Fortune, where is
father? I should like to go to him."

"He is locked up in his study, darling, and could not possibly see you
nor anyone else. He is quite stunned, master is, and no wonder. You
cannot go to him at present, Miss Iris."

Iris did not say another word, but she looked more grave and more
thoughtful than ever. After a long pause she sat down in her own
little chair near the open window. It was a very lovely day, just as
beautiful as the one which had preceded it. As the child sat by the
window, and the soft, sweet breeze fanned her pale cheeks, an
indescribable longing came over her. No one was particularly noticing
her. She crept softly out of the room, ran down some passages, and at
last found herself once more mounting the turret stairs to the tower.
A moment later she had entered the octagon room where she and her
mother had talked together on the previous day. The windows were wide
open, the pretty room looked just as usual, but mother's sofa was
vacant. Iris went straight over to one of the open windows, knelt
down, and put her little elbows on the ledge.

"Yes, mother," she said, speaking aloud and looking full up at the
bright blue sky, "I promise you. I promised you yesterday, but I make
a fresh, very, _very_ solemn promise to-day. Yes, I will be a mother
to the others; I will try never to think of myself; I will remember,
mother darling, exactly what you want me to do. I will try to be
beautiful, to be a little messenger of the gods, as you sometimes said
I might be, and to be like the rainbow, full of hope. And I will try
to help Apollo to be the most beautiful and the bravest boy in the
world; and, mother, I will do my best to help Diana to be strong and
bright and full of courage; and I will do what I can for Orion--he
must be grand like a giant, so that he may live up to the wonderful
name you have given him. Mother, it will be very hard, but I promise,
I promise with all my might, to do everything you want me to do. I
will act just as if you were there and could see, mother, and I will
_always_ remember that it is beautiful for you to have gone away, for
while you were here you had so much pain and so much illness. I won't
fret, mother; no, I won't fret--I promise to be a mother to the
others, and there won't be any time to fret."

No tears came to Iris' bright eyes, but her little thin face grew
paler and paler. Presently she left the window and went slowly
downstairs again.

Fortune had now left the other children to themselves. They were
scattered about the bright day nursery, looking miserable, though they
could scarcely tell why.

"I don't believe a bit that mother is never coming back," said Orion,
in a stout, determined voice.

He was a very handsome little fellow, strongly made--he had great big
black eyes like his father's. He was standing now with his Noah's ark
in his hand.

"It is unfeeling of you to want to play with your Noah's ark to-day,
Orion," said Apollo. "Now, do you think I would go into my laboratory
and try to make a thermometer?"

"Well, at least," said Diana, speaking with a sort of jerk, and her
small face turning crimson, "whatever happens, the animals must be
fed."

"Of course they must, Diana," said Iris, coming forward, "and, Apollo,
there is not the least harm in our going into the garden, and I don't
think there is any harm in Orion playing with his Noah's ark. Come,
children; come with me. We will feed all the pets and then go into the
arbor, and, if you like, I will tell you stories."

"What sort of stories?" asked Diana, in quite a cheerful voice. She
trotted up to her sister, and gave her her hand as she spoke. She also
was a finely made child, not unlike her name.

"I 'gree with Orion," she said. "I'm quite certain sure that mother is
coming back 'fore long. Fortune did talk nonsense. She said, Iris--do
you know what she said?--she said that in the middle of the night,
just when it was black dark, you know, a white angel came into the
room and took mother in his arms and flew up to the sky with her. You
don't believe that; do you, Iris?"

"Yes, I do, Diana," answered Iris. "But I will tell you more about it
in the arbor. Come, Apollo; mother would not like us to stay in the
house just because she has gone away to the angels. Mother never was
the least little bit selfish. Come into the garden."

The three forlorn-looking little children were much comforted by Iris'
brave words. They dried their eyes, and Diana ran into the night
nursery to fetch their hats. They then ran downstairs without anyone
specially noticing them, passed through the great entrance hall, and
out on to the wide gravel sweep, which led by a side walk into the
lovely garden.

Iris held Diana by one hand and Orion by the other, and Apollo ran on
in front.

BELFORD, TO RICHARD MOWBRAY, ESQ.
SUNDAY, SEPT. 10. FOUR IN THE AFTERNOON.

I have your's, with our unhappy friend's enclosed. I am glad my Lord
is with him. As I presume that his phrensy will be but of short
continuance, I most earnestly wish, that on his recovery he could
be prevailed upon to go abroad.

Mr.

Morden, who is inconsolable, has seen by the will, (as indeed he
suspected before he read it,) that the case was more than a common
seduction; and has dropt hints already, that he looks on himself,
on that account, as freed from his promises made to the dying lady,
which were, that he would not seek to avenge her death.

You must make the recovery of his health the motive for urging him
on this head; for, if you hint at his own safety, he will not stir,
but rather seek the Colonel.

As to the lock of hair, you may easily pacify him, (as you once saw
the angel,) with hair near the colour, if he be intent upon it.

At my Lord's desire I will write on, and in my common hand; that you
may judge what is, and what is not, fit to be read to Mr. Lovelace
at present. But as I shall not forbear reflections as I go along,
in hopes to reach his heart on his recovery, I think it best to
direct myself to him still, and that as if he were not disordered.

As I shall not have leisure to take copies, and yet am willing to
have the whole subject before me, for my own future contemplation,
I must insist upon a return of my letters some time hence.

Mr. Lovelace knows that this is one of my conditions; and has hitherto
complied with it.

Thy letter, Mowbray, is an inimitable performance.

Thou art a strange impenetrable creature. But let me most earnestly
conjure thee, and the idle flutterer, Tourville, from what you have
seen of poor Belton's exit; from our friend Lovelace's phrensy,
and the occasion of it; and from the terrible condition in which
the wretched Sinclair lies; to set about an immediate change of
life and manners.

For my own part, I am determined, be your resolutions what they
may, to take the advice I give.

As witness, J. BELFORD.

LETTER XXV
MR.

BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.

O Lovelace! I have a scene to paint in relation to the wretched
Sinclair, that, if I do it justice, will make thee seriously ponder
and reflect, or nothing can.

I will lead thee to it in order; and that in my usual hand, that thy
compeers may be able to read it as well as thyself.

When I had written the preceding letter, not knowing what to do with
myself, recollecting, and in vain wishing for that delightful and
improving conversation, which I had now for ever lost; I thought I
had as good begin the task, which I had for some time past resolved
to begin; that is to say, to go to church; and see if I could not
reap some benefit from what I should hear there.

Accordingly I determined to go to hear the celebrated preacher at
St. James's church. But, as if the devil (for so I was then ready
to conclude) thought himself concerned to prevent my intention, a
visit was made me, just as I was dressed, which took me off from my
purpose.

From whom should this visit be, but from Sally Martin, accompanied
by Mrs.

Carter, the sister of the infamous Sinclair!

the same, I suppose I need not tell you, who keeps the bagnio near
Bloomsbury.

These told me that the surgeon, apothecary, and physician, had
all given the wretched woman over; but that she said, she should
not die, nor be at rest, till she saw me; and they besought me to
accompany them in the coach they came in, if I had one spark of
charity, of christian charity, as they called it, left.

I was very loth to be diverted from my purpose by a request
so unwelcome, and from people so abhorred; but at last went, and
we got thither by ten; where a scene so shocking presented itself to
me, that the death of poor desponding Belton is not, I think,
to be compared with it.

The old wretch had once put her leg out by her rage and violence,
and had been crying, scolding, cursing, ever since the preceding
evening, that the surgeon had told her it was impossible to save
her; and that a mortification had begun to show itself; insomuch
that, purely in compassion to their own ears, they had been forced
to send for another surgeon, purposely to tell her, though against
his judgment, and (being a friend of the other) to seem to convince
him, that he mistook the case; and that if she would be patient,
she might recover.

But, nevertheless, her apprehensions of death, and her antipathy to the
thoughts of dying, were so strong, that their imposture had not
the intended effect, and she was raving, crying, cursing, and even
howling, more like a wolf than a human creature, when I came; so
that as I went up stairs, I said, Surely this noise, this howling,
cannot be from the unhappy woman!

Sally said it was; and assured me, that it was noting to the
noise she had made all night; and stepping into her room before me,
dear Madam Sinclair, said she, forbear this noise! It is more like that
of a bull than a woman!

-- Here comes Mr.

Belford; and you'll fright him away if you bellow at this rate.

There were no less than eight of her cursed daughters surrounding her
bed when I entered; one of her partners, Polly Horton, at their head;
and now Sally, her other partner, and Madam Carter, as they called
her, (for they are all Madams with one another,) made the number
ten; all in shocking dishabille, and without stays, except Sally,
Carter, and Polly; who, not daring to leave her, had not been in
bed all night.

The other seven seemed to have been but just up, risen perhaps from
their customers in the fore-house, and their nocturnal orgies, with
faces, three or four of them, that had run, the paint lying in streaky
seams not half blowzed off, discovering coarse wrinkled skins: the
hair of some of them of divers colours, obliged to the black-lead
comb where black was affected; the artificial jet, however, yielding
apace to the natural brindle: that of others plastered with oil and
powder; the oil predominating: but every one's hanging about her
ears and neck in broken curls, or ragged ends; and each at my
entrance taken with one motion, stroking their matted locks with
both hands under their coifs, mobs, or pinners, every one of which
was awry.

They were all slip-shoed; stockingless some; only under-petticoated
all; their gowns, made to cover straddling hoops, hanging trollopy,
and tangling about their heels; but hastily wrapt round them, as
soon as I came up stairs.

And half of them (unpadded, shoulder-bent, pallid-lips, limber-jointed
wretches) appearing, from a blooming nineteen or twenty perhaps
over-night, haggard well-worn strumpets of thirty-eight or forty.

I am the more particular in describing to thee the appearance these
creatures made in my eyes when I came into the room, because I
believe thou never sawest any of them, much less a group of them,
thus unprepared for being seen.* I, for my part, never did before;
nor had I now, but upon this occasion, being thus favoured.

If thou hadst, I believe thou wouldst hate a profligate woman, as one
of Swift's yahoos, or Virgil's obscene harpies, squirting their
ordure upon the Trojan trenches; since the persons of such in their
retirements are as filthy as their minds.-- Hate them as much as I
do; and as much as I admire, and next to adore, a truly virtuous
and elegant woman: for to me it is evident, that as a neat and clean
woman must be an angel of a creature, so a sluttish one is the
impurest animal in nature.

But these were the veterans, the chosen band; for now-and-then flitted
in to the number of half a dozen or more, by turns, subordinate
sinners, under-graduates, younger than some of the chosen phalanx,
but not less obscene in their appearance, though indeed not so much
beholden to the plastering focus; yet unpropt by stays, squalid,
loose in attire, sluggish-haired, uner-petticoated only as the
former, eyes half-opened, winking and pinking, mispatched, yawning,
stretching, as if from the unworn-off effects of the midnight revel;
all armed in succession with supplies of cordials (of which every
one present was either taster or partaker) under the direction of
the busier Dorcas, who frequently popt in, to see her slops duly
given and taken

.

* Whoever has seen Dean Swift's Lady's Dressing room, will think this
description of Mr. Belford's not only more natural, but more decent
painting, as well as better justified by the design, and by the
use that may be made of it.

But when I approached the old wretch, what a spectacle presented itself
to my eyes!

Her misfortune has not at all sunk, but rather, as I thought,
increased her flesh; rage and violence perhaps swelling her muscular
features.
Behold her, then, spreading the whole troubled bed with her huge
quaggy carcase: her mill-post arms held up; her broad hands clenched
with violence; her big eyes, goggling and flaming ready as we may
suppose those of a salamander; her matted griesly hair, made irreverend
by her wickedness (her clouted head-dress being half off, spread about
her fat ears and brawny neck;) her livid lips parched, and working
violently; her broad chin in convulsive motion; her wide mouth,
by reason of the contraction of her forehead (which seemed to be
half-lost in its own frightful furrows) splitting her face, as it
were, into two parts; and her huge tongue hideously rolling in it;
heaving, puffing as if four breath; her bellows-shaped and
various-coloured breasts ascending by turns to her chin, and
descending out of sight, with the violence of her gaspings.

This was the spectacle, as recollection has enabled me to describe it,
that this wretch made to my eye, by her suffragans and daughters, who
surveyed her with scouling frighted attention, which one might easily
see had more in it of horror and self-concern (and self-condemnation
too) than of love or pity; as who should say, See! what we ourselves
must one day be!

As soon as she saw me, her naturally-big voice, more hoarsened by her
ravings, broke upon me: O Mr.

Belford! O Sir! see what I am come to!-- See what I am brought to!

--To have such a cursed crew about me, and not one of them to take
care of me!

But to let me tumble down stairs so distant from the room I went from!
so distant from the room I meant to go to!--Cursed, cursed be every
careless devil!--May this or worse be their fate every one of them!

And then she cursed and swore most vehemently, and the more, as two or
three of them were excusing themselves on the score of their being
at that time as unable to help themselves as she.

As soon as she had cleared the passage of her throat by the oaths and
curses which her wild impatience made her utter, she began in a more
hollow and whining strain to bemoan herself. And here, said she--Heaven
grant me patience!
[clenching and unclenching her hands] am I to die thus miserably!--of
a broken leg in my old age!

--snatched away by means of my own intemperance!
Self-do! Self-undone!--No time for my affairs! No time to repent!--And
in a few hours (Oh!--Oh!--with another long howling O--h!--U--gh--o!
a kind of screaming key terminating it) who knows, who can tell
where I shall be?

--Oh! that indeed I never, never, had had a being!

What could one say to such a wretch as this, whose whole life had
been spent in the most diffusive wickedness, and who no doubt has
numbers of souls to answer for?

Yet I told her, she must be patient: that her violence made her
worse: and that, if she would compose herself, she might get into
a frame more proper for her present circumstances.

Who, I? interrupted she: I get into a better frame!

I, who can neither cry, nor pray!

Yet already feel the torments of the d----d! What mercy can I expect?
What hope is left for me?--Then, that sweet creature! that
incomparable Miss Harlowe! she, it seems, is dead and gone! O that
cursed man!

Had it not been for him! I had never had this, the most crying of all
my sins, to answer for!

And then she set up another howl.

And is she dead?--Indeed dead? proceeded she, when her howl was over--O
what an angel have I been the means of destroying!

For though it was that it was mine, and your's, and your's, and your's,
devils as we all were [turning to Sally, to Polly, and to one or two
more] that he did not do her justice! And that, that is my curse, and
will one day be yours!

And then again she howled.

I still advised patience.

I said, that if her time were to be so short as she apprehended, the
more ought she to endeavour to compose herself:
and then she would at least die with more ease to herself--and
satisfaction to her friends, I was going to say--But the word die put
her into a violent raving, and thus she broke in upon me. Die, did
you say, Sir?

--Die!--I will not, I cannot die!

--I know not how to die!--Die, Sir!
--And must I then die?

--Leave this world?--I cannot bear it!--And who brought you hither,
Sir?

--[her eyes striking fire at me] Who brought you hither to tell me
I must die, Sir?

--I cannot, I will not leave this world. Let others die, who wish
for another!

who expect a better!--I have had my plagues in this; but would compound
for all future hopes, so as I may be nothing after this!

And then she howled and bellowed by turns.

By my faith, Lovelace, I trembled in every joint; and looking upon
her who spoke this, and roared thus, and upon the company round me,
I more than once thought myself to be in one of the infernal
mansions.

Yet will I proceed, and try, for thy good, if I can shock thee but half
as much with my descriptions, as I was shocked with what I saw and
heard.

Sally!--Polly!--Sister Carter! said she, did you not tell me I might
recover? Did not the surgeon tell me I might?

And so you may, cried Sally; Monsieur Garon says you may, if you'll
be patient.

But, as I have often told you this blessed morning, you are reader to
take despair from your own fears, than comfort from all the hope we
can give you.

Yet, cried the wretch, interrupting, does not Mr.

Belford (and to him you have told the truth, though you won't to
me; does not he) tell me that I shall die?

--I cannot bear it! I cannot bear the thoughts of dying!

And then, but that half a dozen at once endeavoured to keep down her
violent hands, would she have beaten herself; as it seems she
had often attempted to do from the time the surgeon popt out the word
mortification to her.

Well, but to what purpose, said I (turning aside to her sister, and
to Sally and Polly), are these hopes given her, if the gentlemen of
the faculty give her over? You should let her know the worst, and then
she must submit; for there is no running away from death. If she
had any matters to settle, put her upon settling them; and do
not, by telling her she will live, when there is no room to
expect it, take from her the opportunity of doing needful things. Do
the surgeons actually give her over?

They do, whispered they. Her gross habit, they say, gives no hopes.
We have sent for both surgeons, whom we expect every minute.

Both the surgeons (who are French; for Mrs. Sinclair has heard Tourville
launch out in the praise of French surgeons) came in while we were
thus talking. I retired to the farther end of the room, and threw
up a window for a little air, being half-poisoned by the effluvia
arising from so many contaminated carcases; which gave me no
imperfect idea of the stench of gaols, which, corrupting the ambient
air, gives what is called the prison distemper.

I came back to the bed-side when the surgeons had inspected the fracture;
and asked them, If there were any expectation of her life?

One of them whispered me, there was none: that she had a strong fever
upon her, which alone, in such a habit, would probably do the
business; and that the mortification had visibly gained upon her
since they were there six hours ago.

Will amputation save her? Her affairs and her mind want settling. A
few days added to her life may be of service to her in both respects.

They told me the fracture was high in her leg; that the knee was
greatly bruised; that the mortification, in all probability, had
spread half-way of the femur: and then, getting me between them,
(three or four of the women joining us, and listening with their
mouths open, and all the signs of ignorant wonder in their faces,
as there appeared of self-sufficiency in those of the artists,) did
they by turns fill my ears with an anatomical description of the
leg and thigh; running over with terms of art, of the tarsus, the
metatarsus, the tibia, the fibula, the patella, the os tali, the
os tibæ, the tibialis posticus and tibialis anticus, up to the os
femoris, to the acetabulum of the os ischion, the great trochanter,
glutæus, triceps, lividus, and little rotators; in short, of all
the muscles, cartilages, and bones, that constitute the leg and
thigh from the great toe to the hip; as if they would show me, that
all their science had penetrated their heads no farther than their
mouths; while Sally lifted up her hands with a Laud bless me!

Are all surgeons so learned!--But at last both the gentlemen declared,
that if she and her friends would consent to amputation, they would
whip off her leg in a moment.

Mrs. Carter asked, To what purpose, if the operation would not save
her?

Very true, they said; but it might be a satisfaction to the patient's
friends, that all was done that could be done.

And so the poor wretch was to be lanced and quartered, as I may say,
for an experiment only! And, without any hope of benefit from the
operation, was to pay the surgeons for tormenting her!

I cannot but say I have a mean opinion of both these gentlemen, who,
though they make a figure, it seems, in their way of living, and boast
not only French extraction, but a Paris education, never will make
any in their practice.

How unlike my honest English friend Tomkins, a plain serious,
intelligent man, whose art lies deeper than in words; who always
avoids parade and jargon; and endeavours to make every one as much
a judge of what he is about as himself!

All the time that the surgeons ran on with their anatomical
process, the wretched woman most frightfully roared and bellowed;
which the gentlemen (who showed themselves to be of the class of those
who are not affected with the evils they do not feel,) took no
other notice of, than by raising their voices to be heard, as she
raised her's--being evidently more solicitous to increase their
acquaintance, and to propagate the notion of their skill, than to
attend to the clamours of the poor wretch whom they were called in
to relieve; though by this very means, like the dog and the shadow
in the fable, they lost both aims with me; for I never was deceived
in one rule, which I made early; to wit, that the stillest water
is the deepest, while the bubbling stream only betrays shallowness;
and that stones and pebbles lie there so near the surface, to point
out the best place to ford a river dry shod.

As nobody cared to tell the unhappy wretch what every one apprehended
must follow, and what the surgeons convinced me soon would, I
undertook to be the denouncer of her doom.

Accordingly, the operators being withdrawn, I sat down by the
bed-side, and said, Come, Mrs.

Sinclair, let me advise you to forbear these ravings at the carelessness
of those, who, I find, at the time, could take no care of themselves;
and since the accident has happened, and cannot be remedied, to
resolve to make the best of the matter: for all this violence but
enrages the malady, and you will probably fall into a delirium, if
you give way to it, which will deprive you of that reason which you
ought to make the best of for the time it may be lent you.

"Of course, I know you mean well, Jane," he said, "and I ought to be
obliged to you for taking all this trouble. Now that you have come,
you are welcome; but I must ask you to understand immediately that I
will not have the subject of my"--he hesitated, and his under lip
shook for a moment--"the subject of my trouble alluded to. And I will
also add that I should have preferred your writing to me beforehand.
This taking a man by storm is, you know of old, my dear Jane--not
agreeable to me."

"Precisely, David. I did not write, for the simple reason that I
thought it likely you would have asked me not to come; and as it was
necessary for me to appear on the scene, I determined, on this
occasion, to take, as you express it, Delaney Manor by storm."

"Very well, Jane; as you have done it you have done it, and there is
no more to be said."

Mr. Delaney rose from his seat as he spoke.

"Would you not like to go to your room, and wash and change your
dress?" he asked.

"I cannot change my dress, for I have only brought one. I will go to
my room presently. What hour do you dine?"

"At half-past eight."

"I have a few minutes still to talk to you, and I will not lose the
opportunity. It will be necessary for me to return home the day after
to-morrow."

An expression of relief swept over Mr. Delaney's countenance.

"I shall, therefore," continued Mrs. Dolman, taking no notice of this
look, which she plainly saw, "have but little time at my disposal, and
there is a great deal to be done. But before I proceed to anything
else, may I ask you a question? How could you allow all that splendid
land to lie waste?"

"What land, Jane? What do you mean?"

"Those acres of grass outside the house."

"Are you alluding to the lawns?"

"I don't know what name you choose to call all that grass, but I think
it is a positive tempting of Providence to allow so much land to lie
fallow. Why, you might grow potatoes or barley or oats, and make
pounds and pounds a year. I know of old what the land round Delaney
Manor can produce."

"As the land happens to belong to me, perhaps I may be allowed to
arrange it as pleases myself," said Mr. Delaney, in a haughty tone.

His sister favored him with a long, reflective gaze.

"He is just as obstinate as ever," she muttered to herself. "With that
cleft in his chin, what else can be expected? There is no use
bothering him on that point at present, and, as he won't allow me to
talk of poor Evangeline,--who had, poor soul, as many faults as I ever
saw packed into a human being,--there is nothing whatever for me to do
but to look up those children."

Mrs. Dolman rose from her seat as this thought came to her.

"I am tired," she said. "From Yorkshire to Delaney Manor is a long
journey, as perhaps you do _not_ remember, David; so I will seek my
room after first having informed you what the object of my visit is."

"I should be interested to know that, Jane," he answered, in a
somewhat softened tone.

"Well, seeing I am the only sister you have--"

"But we never did pull well together," interrupted he.

"We used to play in the same garden," she answered, and for the first
time a really soft and affectionate look came into her face. "I hope
to goodness, David, that the garden is not altered."

"It is much the same as always, Jane. The children occupy it a good
deal."

"I am coming to the subject of the children. Of course, now that
things are so much changed--"

"I would rather not go into that," said Mr. Delaney.

"Dear me, David, how touchy you are! Why will you not accept a patent
fact? I have no wish to hurt your feelings, but I really must speak
out plain common sense. I always was noted for my common sense, was I
not? I don't believe, in the length and breadth of England, you will
find better behaved children than my five. I have brought them up on a
plan of my own, and now that I come here at great trouble, and I may
also add expense, to try and help you in your--oh, of course, I must
not say it--to try and help you when you want help, you fight shy of
my slightest word. Well, the fact is this: I want you to take my
advice, and to shut up Delaney Manor, or, better still, to let it well
for the next two or three years, and go abroad yourself, letting me
have the children!"

"My dear Jane!"

"Oh, I am your dear Jane now--now that you think I can help you. Well,
David, I mean it, and what is more, the matter must be arranged. I
must take the children back with me the day after to-morrow. Now I
will go to my bedroom, as I am dead tired. Perhaps you will ring the
bell and ask a servant to take me there."

Mr. Delaney moved slowly across the room. He rang the electric bell,
and a moment later the footman appeared in answer to his summons. He
gave certain directions, and Mrs. Dolman left the room.

The moment he found himself alone, the father of the children sank
down on the nearest chair, put his hands on the table, pressed his
face down on them, and uttered a bitter groan.


CHAPTER IV.

RUB-A-DUB.


"What am I to do, Evangeline?" said Mr. Delaney, a few moments later.
He stood up as he spoke, shook himself, and gazed straight before him.
It was exactly as if he were really speaking to the children's mother.
Then again he buried his face in his big hands, and his strong frame
shook. After a moment's pause he took up a photograph which stood
near, and looked earnestly at the beautiful pictured face. The eyes,
so full of truth and tenderness, seemed to answer him back. He started
abruptly to his feet. "You always directed me, Evangeline," he said.
"God only knows what I am to do now that you have left me. I am in
some matters as weak as a reed, great, blustering fellow though I
appear. And now that Jane has come--she always did bully me--now that
she has come and wants to take matters into her own hands, oh,
Evangeline! what is to be done? The fact is, I am not fit to manage
this great house, nor the children, without you. The children are not
like others; they will not stand the treatment which ordinary children
receive. Oh, why has Jane, of all people, come? What am I to do?"

He paced rapidly up and down his big study; clenching his hands at
times, at times making use of a strong exclamation.

The butler knocked at the door. "Dinner will be served in half an
hour, sir," he said. "Am I to lay for two?"

"Yes, Johnson. Mrs. Dolman, my sister, has arrived, and will dine with
me. Have places laid for two."

The man withdrew, and Mr. Delaney, stepping out through the open
window, looked across the lawns which his sister had so strongly
disapproved of.

"Jane was always the one to poke her finger into every pie," he said
half aloud. "Certainly this place is distasteful to me now, and there
is--upon my word, there is something in her suggestion. But to deliver
over those four children to her, and to take them away from the
garden, and the house, and the memory of their mother--oh! it cannot
be thought of for a moment; and yet, to shift the responsibility while
my heart is so sore would be an untold relief."

A little voice in the distance was heard shouting eagerly, and a small
child, very dirty about the hands and face, came trotting up to Mr.
Delaney. It was Diana. She was sobbing as well as shouting, and was
holding something tenderly wrapped up in her pocket handkerchief.

"What is the matter with you, Di?" said her father. He lifted her into
his arms. "Why, little woman, what can be the matter? and what have
you got in your handkerchief?"

"It's Rub-a-Dub, and he is deaded," answered Diana. She unfolded the
handkerchief carefully and slowly, and showed her father a small
piebald mouse, quite dead, and with a shriveled appearance. "He is as
dead as he can be," repeated Diana. "Look at him. His little claws are
blue, and oh! his little nose, and he cannot see; he is stone dead,
father."

"Well, you shall go into Beaminster to-morrow and buy another mouse,"
said Mr. Delaney.

Diana gazed at him with grave, wondering black eyes.

"That would not be Rub-a-Dub," she said; then she buried her little,
fat face on his shoulder and sobs shook her frame.

"Evangeline would have known exactly what to say to the child,"
muttered the father, in a fit of despair. "Come along, little one," he
said. "What can't be cured must be endured, you know. Now, take my
hand and I'll race you into the house."

The child gave a wan little smile; but the thought of the mouse lay
heavy against her heart.

"May I go back to the garden first?" she said. "I want to put
Rub-a-Dub into the dead-house."

"The dead-house, Diana? What do you mean?"

"It is the house where we keep the poor innocents, and all the other
creatures what get deaded," said Diana. "We keep them there until Iris
has settled whether they are to have a pwivate or a public funeral.
Iris does not know yet about Rub-a-Dub. He was quite well this
morning. I don't know what he could have died of. Perhaps, father, if
you look at him you will be able to tell me."

"Well, let me have a peep," said the man, his mustache twitching as he
spoke.

Diana once again unfolded her small handkerchief, in the center of
which lay the much shriveled-up mouse.

"The _darling_!" said the little girl tenderly. "I loved Rub-a-Dub so
much; I love him still. I do hope Iris will think him 'portant enough
for a public funeral."

"Look here," said Mr. Delaney, interested in spite of himself, and
forgetting all about the dinner which would be ready in a few minutes;
"I'll come right along with you to the dead-house; but I did not know,
Di, that you kept an awful place of that sort in the garden."

"Tisn't awful," said Diana. "We has to keep a dead-house when we find
dead things. We keep all the dead 'uns we find there. There aren't as
many as usual to-day--only a couple of butterflies and two or three
beetles, and a poor crushed spider. And oh! I forgot the toad that we
found this morning. It was awful hurt and Apollo had to kill it; he
had to stamp on it and kill it; and he did not like it a bit. Iris
can't kill things, nor can I, nor can Orion, so we always get Apollo
to kill the things that are half dead--to put them out of their
misery, you know, father."

"You seem to be a very wise little girl; but I am sure this cannot be
at all wholesome work," said the father, looking more bewildered and
puzzled than ever.

Diana gazed gravely up at him. She did not know anything about the
work being wholesome or the reverse. The dead creatures had to be
properly treated, and had to be buried either privately or
publicly--that was essential--nothing else mattered at all to her.

"As Rub-a-Dub is such a dear darlin', I should not be s'prised if Iris
did have a public funeral," she commented.

"But what is the difference, Di? Tell me," said her father.

"Oh, father! you are ig'rant. At a pwivate funeral the poor dead 'un
is just sewn up in dock leaves and stuck into a hole in the cemetery."

"The cemetery! Good Heavens, child! do you keep a cemetery in the
garden?"

"Indeed we does, father. We have a very large one now, and heaps and
heaps of gravestones. Apollo writes the insipcron. He is quite
bothered sometimes. He says the horrid work is give to him,--carving
the names on the stones and killing the half-dead 'uns,--but course he
has to do it 'cos Iris says so. Course we all obey Iris. When it is a
pwivate funeral, the dead 'un is put into the ground and covered up,
and it don't have a gravestone; then of course, by and by, it is
forgot. You underland; don't you, father?"

"Bless me if I do," said Mr. Delaney, in a puzzled tone.

"But if it is a public funeral," continued Diana, strutting boldly
forward now, and throwing back her head in quite a martial attitude,
"why, then it's grand. There is a box just like a coffin, and cotton
wool--we steal the cotton wool most times. We know where Fortune has
got a lot of it put away. Iris does not think it quite right to steal,
but the rest of us don't mind. And we have banners, and Orion plays
the Jew's harp, and I beat the drum, and Iris sings, and Apollo digs
the grave, and the dead 'un is put into the ground, and we all cry, or
pretend to cry. Sometimes I do squeeze out a tiny tear, but I'm so
incited I can't always manage it, although I'm sure I'll cry when
Rub-a-Dub is put into the ground. Then afterwards there is a
tombstone, and Iris thinks of the insipcron. I spects we'll have a
beautiful insipcron for poor Rub-a-Dub, 'cos we all loved him so
much."

"Well, all this is very interesting, of course," said Mr. Delaney.
"But now we must be quick, because your Aunt Jane has come."

"Who's her?" asked Diana.

"A very good lady indeed--your aunt."

"What's an aunt?"

"A lady whom you ought to love very much."

"Ought I? I never love people I ought to love," said Diana firmly.
"Please, father, this is the dead-house. You can come right in if you
like, father, and see the dead 'uns; they are all lying on this shelf.
Most of them is to be buried pwivate, 'cos they are not our own pets,
you know; but Rub-a-Dub is sure to have a public funeral, and an
insipcron, and all the rest."

Mr. Delaney followed Diana into the small shed which the children
called the dead-house. He gazed solemnly at the shelf which she
indicated, and on which lay the several dead 'uns.

"Put your mouse down now," he said, "and come along back with me to
the house at once. You ought to have been in bed long ago."

Diana laid the mouse sorrowfully down in the midst of its dead
brethren, shut the door of the dead-house, and followed her father up
the garden path.

"It's a most beautiful night," she said, after a pause. "It's going to
be a starful night; isn't it, father?"

"Starful?" said Mr. Delaney.

"Yes; and when it is a starful night Orion can't sleep well, 'cos he
is a star hisself; isn't he, father?"

"Good gracious, child, no! He is a little boy!"

"No, no, father! You are awfu' mistook. Mother called him a star. I'll
show you him up in the sky if it really comes to be a starful night.
May I, father?"

"Some time, my darling; but now you must hurry in, for I have to get
ready for dinner. Kiss me, Di. Good-night. God bless you, little one!"

"B'ess you too, father," said Diana. "I love 'oo awfu' well."

She raised her rosebud lips, fixed her black eyes on her parent's
face, kissed him solemnly, and trotted away into the house. When she
got close to it, a great sob came up from her little chest. She
thought again of the dead Rub-a-Dub, but then the chance of his having
a public funeral consoled her. She longed to find Iris.

Full of this thought, her little heart beating more quickly than
usual, she rushed up the front stairs, and was turning down the
passage which led to the nursery, when she was confronted by a short,
stout woman dressed in black.

"Now, who is this little girl, I wonder?" said a high-pitched, cheery
voice.

"It is not your little girl; and I am in a hurry, please," said Diana,
who could be very rude when she liked. She did not wish to be
interrupted now; she wanted to find Iris to tell her of the sad fate
of Rub-a-Dub.

"Highty-tighty!" exclaimed the little lady, "that is no way to speak
to grown-up people. I expect, too, you are one of my little nieces.
Come here at once and say, 'How do you do?'"

"Are you the aunt?" asked Diana solemnly.

"The aunt!" replied Mrs. Dolman. "I am your aunt, my dear. What is
your name?"

"Diana. Please, aunt, don't clutch hold of my hand; I want to find
Iris."

"Of all the ridiculous names," muttered Mrs. Dolman under her breath.
"Well, child, I am inclined to keep you for a moment, as I want to
talk to you. Do you know, you rude little girl, that I have come a
long way to see you. Of course, my little girl, I know you are sad at
present; but you must try to get over your great sorrow."

"Do you know, then, about Rub-a-Dub?" said Diana, her whole face
changing, and a look of keen interest coming into it.

If Aunt--whatever her other name was--should turn out to be interested
in Rub-a-Dub, and sorry for his untimely end, why, then, Diana felt
there was a possibility of her squeezing a little corner for her in
her hearts of hearts. But Mrs. Dolman's next words disturbed the
pleasant illusion.

"You are a poor little orphan, my child," she said. "Your poor, dear
mother's death must be a terrible sorrow to you; but, believe me, you
will get over it after a time."

"I has quite got over it awready," answered Diana, in a cheerful
voice. "It would be awfu' selfish to be sorry 'bout mother, 'cos
mother is not suffering any more pain, you know. I am very _glad_
'bout mother. I am going to her some day. Please don't squeeze my hand
like that. Good-by, aunt; I weally can't stay another moment."

She trotted off, and Mrs. Dolman gazed after her with a petrified
expression of horror on her round face.

"Well," she said to herself, "if ever! And the poor mother was devoted
to them all, and she is scarcely a week in her grave, and yet that
mite dares to say she has got over it. What nonsense she talked, and
what a queer name she has. Now, our family names are sensible and
suited for the rising generation. We have had our Elizabeths and our
Anns, and our Lucys and our Marys, and, of course, there is Jane, my
name. All these are what I call good old respectable Delaney names;
but Diana and Iris make me sick. And I believe, if report tells true,
that there are some still more extraordinary names in the family. What
a rude, dirty little child! I did not like her manners at all, and how
neglected she looked. I shall follow her; it is my manifest duty to
see to these children at once. Oh! I shall have difficulty in breaking
them in, but broken in they must be!"

Accordingly Mrs. Dolman turned down the passage where Diana's fat legs
disappeared. The eager but gentle flow of voices directed her steps,
and presently she opened the door of a large room and looked in.

She found herself unexpectedly on the threshold of the day-nursery. It
was a beautiful room, facing due west; the last rays of the evening
sun were shining in at the open windows; some children were collected
in a corner of the room. Diana had gone on her knees beside a girl a
little older and slighter than herself. Her plump elbows were resting
on the girl's knee, her round hands were pressed to her rounder
cheeks, and her black eyes were fixed upon the girl's face.

The elder girl, very quiet and calm, had one hand on Diana's shoulder,
her other arm was thrown round a handsome little boy, not unlike Diana
in appearance, while an older boy sat on a hassock at her feet.

"I will listen to you presently, Diana," said Iris. "Now, I must
finish my story."

"Yes, please go on, Iris," said Orion; "it's all about me, and I'm
'mensely inte'sted."

"Very well, Orion. The King of Chios did not want his daughter to
marry you."

"Good gracious!" muttered Mrs. Dolman in the doorway.

"So he let you fall sound asleep," continued Iris, in her calm voice.
None of the children had yet seen the stout personage on the threshold
of the room. "He let you fall very sound asleep, having given you some
strong wine."

"What next?" thought Mrs. Dolman.

"And when you were very sound asleep indeed, he put out both your
eyes. When you awoke you found yourself quite blind, and did not know
what to do or where to go. Suddenly, in the midst of your misery, you
heard the sound of a blacksmith's forge. Guided by the noise, you
reached the place and begged the blacksmith to climb on your
shoulders, and so lend you his eyes to guide you. The blacksmith was
willing to do it, and seated himself on your shoulders. Then you said,
'Guide me to the place where I can see the first sunbeam that rises in
the east over the sea,' and--"

"Yes," said Orion, whose breath was coming quickly, "yes; and what
happened to me then?"

"Nonsense, little boy! Don't you listen to another word of that
folly," said a very strong, determined voice.

All the children turned abruptly.

"Oh, _she_ has come bothering!" said Diana.

But the other three had started to their feet, and a flush rose into
Iris' pale face.


CHAPTER V.

AUNT IS HER NAME.


"Aunt is her name," said Diana, "and I don't think much of her."

Mrs. Dolman strode rapidly into the nursery.

"Yes, children," she said, "I am your aunt--your Aunt Jane Dolman,
your father's only sister. Circumstances prevented my coming to see
your father and mother for several years; but now that God has seen
fit to give you this terrible affliction, and has taken your dear
mother to Himself, I have arrived, determined to act a mother's part
to you. I do not take the least notice of what that rude little girl
says. When I have had her for a short time under my own control, she
will know better. Now, one of you children, please have the politeness
to offer me a chair, and then you can come up one by one and kiss me."

Iris was so much petrified that she could not stir. Diana and Orion
came close together, and Diana flung her stout little arm round
Orion's fat neck. Apollo, however, sprang forward and placed a chair
for his aunt.

"Will you sit here, please, Aunt Jane Dolman?" he said.

"You need not say Aunt Jane Dolman," replied the lady; "that is a very
stiff way of speaking. Say Aunt Jane. You can kiss me, little boy."

Apollo raised his lips and bestowed a very chaste salute upon Aunt
Jane's fat cheek.

"What is your name?" said Aunt Jane, taking one of his small, hard
hands in hers.

The electric origin of the Aurora Borealis (whether absolutely
certain or not) was an example; another was the efficacy of
'suggestion,' especially for curative purposes.

It was, therefore, hinted that, if savages blundered (if you please)
into a belief in God and the Soul, however obscurely envisaged, these
beliefs were not therefore necessarily and essentially false. We then
stated our purpose of examining the alleged supernormal phenomena,
savage or civilised, which, on Mr.

Tylor's hypothesis, help to originate the conception of 'spirits.'

We defended the nature of our evidence, as before anthropologists, by
showing that, for the savage belief in the supernormal phenomena, we
have exactly the kind of evidence on which all anthropological
science reposes.

The relative weakness of that evidence, our need of more and better
evidence, we would be the very last to deny, indeed it is part of our
case. Our existing evidence will hardly support any theory of
religion.
Anyone who is in doubt on that head has only to read M. Réville's 'Les
Religions des Peuples Non-Civilisés,' under the heads 'Mélanésiens,'
'Mincopies,' 'Les Australiens' (ii. 116-143), when he will observe
that this eminent French authority is ignorant of the facts about
these races here produced.

In 1883 they had not come within his ken. Such minute and careful
inquiries by men closely intimate with the peoples concerned, as Dr.
Codrington's, Mr. Hewitt's, Mr. Man's, and the authorities compiled
by Mr. Brough Smyth, were unfamiliar to M. Réville, Thus, in turn, new
facts, or facts unknown to us, may upset my theory.

This peril is of the essence of scientific theorising on the history
of religion.

Having thus justified our evidence for the savage _belief_ in supernormal
phenomena, as before anthropologists, we turned to a court of psychologists
in defence of our evidence for the _fact_ of exactly the same supernormal
phenomena in civilised experience. We pointed out that for subjective
psychological experiences, say of telepathy, we had precisely the same
evidence as all non-experimental psychology must and does rest upon.
Nay, we have even experimental evidence, in experiments in
thought-transference.

We have chiefly, however, statements of subjective experience. For the
coincidence of such experience with unknown events we have such
evidence as, in practical life, is admitted by courts of law.

Experimental psychology, of course, relies on experiments conducted under
the eyes of the expert, for example, by hypnotism or otherwise,
under Dr.

Hack Tuke, Professor James, M. Richet, M. Janet. The evidence is the
conduct rather than the statements of the subject. There is also
physiological experiment, by vivisection (I regret to say) and
post-mortem dissection. But non-experimental psychology reposes on
the self-examination of the student, and on the statements of
psychological experiences made to him by persons whom he thinks
he can trust.

The psychologist, however, if he be, as Mr. Galton says, 'unimaginative
in the strict but unusual sense of that ambiguous word,' needs Mr.

Galton's 'word of warning.' He is asked 'to resist a too frequent
tendency to assume that the minds of every other sane and healthy
person must be like his own.

The psychologist should inquire into the minds of others as he should
into those of animals of different races, and be prepared to find much
to which his own experience can afford little if any clue

.'[5] Mr.

Galton had to warn the unimaginative psychologist in this way,
because he was about to unfold his discovery of the faculty which
presents numbers to some minds as visualised coloured numerals, 'so
vivid as to be undistinguishable from reality, except by the aid
of accidental circumstances.'

Mr. Galton also found in his inquiries that occasional hallucinations
of the sane are much more prevalent than he had supposed, or than
science had ever taken into account.

All this was entirely new to psychologists, many of whom still (at
least many popular psychologists of the press) appear to be
unacquainted with the circumstances.

One of them informed me, quite gravely, that '_he_ never had an
hallucination,' therefore--_his_ mind being sane and healthy--the
inference seemed to be that no sane and healthy mind was ever
hallucinated.

Mr.

Galton has replied to _that_ argument! His reply covers, logically,
the whole field of psychological faculties little regarded, for
example, by Mr.

Sully, who is not exactly an imaginative psychologist.

It covers the whole field of automatism (as in automatic writing)
perhaps of the divining rod, certainly of crystal visions and
of occasional hallucinations, as Mr.

Galton, in this last case, expressly declares.
Psychologists at least need not be told that such faculties cannot, any
more than other human faculties, be always evoked for study and
experiment.

Our evidence for these faculties and experiences, then, is usually
of the class on which the psychologist relies.

But, when the psychologist, following Leibnitz, Sir William Hamilton,
and Kant, discusses the Subconscious (for example, knowledge,
often complex and abundant, unconsciously acquired) we demonstrated
by examples that the psychologist will contentedly repose on evidence
which is not evidence at all. He will swallow an undated, unlocalised
legend of Coleridge, reaching Coleridge on the testimony of rumour,
and told at least twenty years after the unverified occurrences.

Nay, the psychologist will never dream of procuring contemporary
evidence for such a monstrous statement as that an ignorant German
wench unconsciously acquired and afterwards subconsciously reproduced
huge cantles of dead languages, by virtue of having casually heard
a former master recite or read aloud from Hebrew and Greek books.

This legend do psychologists accept on no evidence at all, because it
illustrates a theory which is, doubtless, a very good theory, though,
in this case, carried to an extent 'imagination boggles at.'

Here the psychologist may reply that much less evidence will content him
for a fact to which he possesses, at least, analogies in accredited
experience, than for a fact (say telepathic crystal-gazing) to which
_he_ knows, in experience, nothing analogous.

Thus, for the mythical German handmaid, he has the analogy of languages
learned in childhood, or passages got up by rote, being forgotten
and brought back to ordinary conscious memory, or delirious memory,
during an illness, or shortly before death.

Strong in these analogies, the psychologist will venture to accept
a case of language _not_ learned, but reproduced in delirious memory,
on no evidence at all.

But, not possessing analogies for telepathic crystal-gazing, he will
probably decline to examine ours.

I would first draw his attention to the difference between revived
memory of a language once known (Breton and Welsh in known examples),
or learned by rote (as Greek, in an anecdote of Goethe's), and
verbal reproduction of a language _not_ known or learned by rote
but overheard--each passage probably but once--as somebody recited
fragments.

In this instance (that of the mythical maid) 'the difficulty ... is
that the original impressions had not the strength--that is, the
distinctness--of the reproduction.

An unknown language overheard is a mere sound....'[6]
The distinction here drawn is so great and obvious that for proof
of the German girl's case we need better evidence than Coleridge's
rumour of a rumour, cited, as it is, by Hamilton, Maudsley, Carpenter,
Du Prel, and the common run of manuals.

Not that I deny, _a priori_, the possibility of Coleridge's story.
As Mr.

Huxley says, 'strictly speaking, I am unaware of anything that
has a right to the title of an "impossibility," except a contradiction
in terms

.'[7] To the horror of some of his admirers, Mr. Huxley would not
call the existence of demons and demoniacal possession 'impossible

.'[8] Mr. Huxley was no blind follower of Hume.

I, too, do not call Coleridge's tale 'impossible,' but, unlike the
psychologists, I refuse to accept it on 'Bardolph's security.'

And I contrast their conduct, in swallowing Coleridge's legend, with
their refusal (if they do refuse) to accept the evidence for the
automatic writing of not-consciously-known languages (as of eleventh-century
French poetry and prose by Mr. Schiller), or their refusal (if
they do refuse) to look at the evidence for telepathic crystal-gazing,
or any other supernormal exhibitions of faculty, attested by living
and honourable persons.

I wish I saw a way for orthodox unimaginative psychology out of its
dilemma.

After offering to anthropologists and psychologists these considerations,
which I purposely reiterate, we examined historically the relations
of science to 'the marvellous,' showing for example how Hume,
following his _a priori_ theory of the impossible, would have
declined to investigate, because they were 'miraculous,' certain
occurrences which, to Charcot, were ordinary incidents in medical
experience.

We next took up and criticised the anthropological theory of religion
as expounded by Mr. Tylor. We then collected from his work a series
of alleged supernormal phenomena in savage belief, all making for the
foundation of animistic religion. Through several chapters we pursued
the study of these phenomena, choosing savage instances, and setting
beside them civilised testimony to facts of experience.

Our conclusion was that such civilised experiences, if they occurred,
as they are universally said to do, among savages, would help to
originate, and would very strongly support the savage doctrine of
souls, the base of religion in the theory of English anthropologists.

But apart from the savage doctrine of 'spirits' (whether they exist
or not), the evidence points to the existence of human faculties
not allowed for in the current systems of materialism.

We next turned from the subject of supernormal experiences to the
admitted facts about early religion.

Granting the belief in souls and ghosts and spirits, however attained,
how was the idea of a Supreme Being to be evolved out of that belief?
We showed that, taking the creed as found in the lowest races, the
processes put forward by anthropologists could not account for its
evolution.

The facts would not fit into, but contradicted, the anthropological
theory. The necessary social conditions postulated were not found in
places where the belief is found.

Nay, the necessary social conditions for the evolution even of
ancestor-worship were confessedly not found where the supposed
ultimate result of ancestor-worship, the belief in a Supreme Being,
flourished abundantly.

Again, the belief in a Supreme Being, _ex hypothesi_ the latest in
evolution, therefore the most potent, was often shelved and half
forgotten, or neglected, or ridiculed, where the belief in Animism
(_ex hypothesi_ the earlier) was in full vigour.

We demonstrated by facts that Anthropology had simplified her task by
ignoring that essential feature, _the prevalent alliance of ethics
with religion_, in the creed of the lowest and least developed races.
Here, happily, we have not only the evidence of an earnest animist,
Mr. Im Thurn, on our side, but that of a distinguished Semitic scholar,
the late Mr. Robertson Smith. 'We see that even in its rudest forms
Religion was a moral force, the powers that man reveres were on
the side of social order and moral law; and the fear of the gods
was a motive to enforce the laws of society, which were also the
laws of morality

.'[9] Wellhausen has already been cited to the same effect.

However, the facts proving that truth, and unselfishness, surely a large
element of Christian ethics, are divinely sanctioned in savage religion
are more potent than the most learned opinion on that side.

Our next step was to examine in detail several religions of the most
remote and backward races, of races least contaminated with Christian
or Islamite teaching.

Our evidence, when possible, was derived from ancient and secret tribal
mysteries, and sacred native hymns.

We found a relatively Supreme Being, a Maker, sanctioning morality,
and unpropitiated by sacrifice, among peoples who go in dread of
ghosts and wizards, but do not always worship ancestors.

We showed that the anthropological theory of the evolution of God
out of ghosts in no way explains the facts in the savage conception
of a Supreme Being.

We then argued that the notion of 'spirit,' derived from ghost-belief,
was not logically needed for the conception of a Supreme Being in
its earliest form, was detrimental to the conception, and, by much
evidence, was denied to be part of the conception.

The Supreme Being, thus regarded, may be (though he cannot historically
be shown to be) prior to the first notion of ghost and separable
souls.

We then traced the idea of such a Supreme Being through the creeds
of races rising in the scale of material culture, demonstrating
that he was thrust aside by the competition of ravenous but serviceable
ghosts, ghost-gods, and shades of kingly ancestors, with their magic
and their bloody rites.

These rites and the animistic conception behind them were next, in
rare cases, reflected or refracted back on the Supreme Eternal.

Aristocratic institutions fostered polytheism with the old Supreme
Being obscured, or superseded, or enthroned as Emperor-God, or
King-God.

We saw how, and in what sense, the old degeneration theory could
be defined and defended.

We observed traces of degeneration in certain archaic aspects
of the faith in Jehovah; and we proved that (given a tolerably pure
low savage belief in a Supreme Being) that belief _must_ degenerate,
under social conditions, as civilisation advanced.

Next, studying what we may call the restoration of Jehovah, under
the great Prophets of Israel, we noted that they, and Israel
generally, were strangely indifferent to that priceless aspect of
Animism, the care for the future happiness, as conditioned by the
conduct of the individual soul. That aspect had been neglected neither
by the popular instinct nor the priestly and philosophic reflection
of Egypt, Greece, and Rome.

Christianity, last, combined what was good in Animism, the care for the
individual soul as an immortal spirit under eternal responsibilities,
with the One righteous Eternal of prophetic Israel, and so ended
the long, intricate, and mysterious theological education of humanity.

Such is our theory, which does not, to us, appear to lack evidence,
nor to be inconsistent (as the anthropological theory is apparently
inconsistent) with the hypothesis of evolution.

All this, it must be emphatically insisted on, is propounded 'under
all reserves.'

While these four stages, say (1) the Australian unpropitiated Moral
Being, (2) the African neglected Being, still somewhat moral, (3) the
relatively Supreme Being involved in human sacrifice, as in Polynesia,
and (4) the Moral Being reinstated philosophically, as in Israel, do
suggest steps in evolution, we desire to base no hard-and-fast system
of ascending and descending degrees upon our present evidence.
The real object is to show that facts may be regarded in this light,
as well as in the light thrown by the anthropological theory, in the
hands whether of Mr. Tylor, Mr. Spencer, M. Réville, or Mr.

Jevons, whose interesting work comes nearest to our provisional
hypothesis.

We only ask for suspense of judgment, and for hesitation in accepting
the dogmas of modern manual makers. An exception to them certainly
appears to be Mr. Clodd, if we may safely attribute to him a review
(signed C.) of Mr. Grant Allen's 'Evolution of the Idea of God.'
'We fear that all our speculations will remain summaries of
probabilities.
No documents are extant to enlighten us; we have only mobile, complex
and confused ideas, incarnate in eccentric, often contradictory
theories.

That this character attaches to such ideas should keep us on guard
against framing theories whose symmetry is sometimes their condemnation'
('Daily Chronicle,' December 10, 1897).

Nothing excites my own suspicion of my provisional hypothesis more
than its symmetry. It really seems to fit the facts, as they appear
to me, too neatly. I would suggest, however, that ancient savage
sacred hymns, and practices in the mysteries, are really rather of
the nature of 'documents;' more so, at least, than the casual
observations of some travellers, or the gossip extracted from natives
much in contact with Europeans.

Supposing that the arguments in this essay met with some acceptance,
what effect would they have, if any, on our thoughts about religion?

What is their practical tendency? The least dubious effect would be,
I hope, to prevent us from accepting the anthropological theory
of religion, or any other theory, as a foregone conclusion, I have
tried to show how dim is our knowledge, how weak, often, is our
evidence, and that, finding among the lowest savages all the
elements of all religions already developed in different degrees,
we cannot, historically, say that one is earlier than another.

This point of priority we can never historically settle.

If we met savages with ghosts and no gods, we could not be sure but
that they once possessed a God, and forgot him. If we met savages
with a God and no ghosts, we could not be historically certain
that a higher had not obliterated a lower creed.

For these reasons dogmatic decisions about the _origin_ of religion
seem unworthy of science.

They will appear yet more futile to any student who goes so far
with me as to doubt whether the highest gods of the lowest races
could be developed, or can be shown to have been developed, by way
of the ghost-theory.

To him who reaches this point the whole animistic doctrine of ghosts
as the one germ of religion will appear to be imperilled.

The main practical result, then, will be hesitation about accepting
the latest scientific opinion, even when backed by great names,
and published in little primers.

On the hypothesis here offered to criticism there are two chief
sources of Religion, (1) the belief, how attained we know not,[10]
in a powerful, moral, eternal, omniscient Father and Judge of men;
(2) the belief (probably developed out of experiences normal and
supernormal) in somewhat of man which may survive the grave.

This second belief is not, logically, needed as given material for the
first, in its apparently earliest form. It may, for all we know, be the
later of the two beliefs, chronologically. But this belief, too, was
necessary to religion; first, as finally supplying a formula by which
advancing intellects could conceive of the Mighty Being involved in
the former creed; next, as elevating man's conception of his own
nature.

By the second belief he becomes the child of the God in whom, perhaps,
he already trusted, and in whom he has his being, a being not destined
to perish with the death of the body. Man is thus not only the child
but the heir of God, a 'nurseling of immortality,' capable of
entering into eternal life.

On the moral influence of this belief it is superfluous to dwell.

From the most backward races historically known to us, to those of
our own status, all have been more or less washed by the waters of
this double stream of religion.

The Hebrews, as far as our information goes, were chiefly influenced
by the first belief, the faith in the Eternal, and had comparatively
slight interest in whatever posthumous fortunes might await individual
souls.

Other civilised peoples, say the Greeks, extended the second, or
animistic theory, into forms of beautiful fantasy, the material of
art.

Yet both in Greece and Rome, as we learn from the 'Republic' (Books
i. iii.) of Plato, and from the whole scope of the poem of Lucretius,
and from the Painted Porch at Delphi, answering to the frescoes of
the Pisan Campo Santo, there existed, among the people, what was
unknown to the Hebrews, an extreme anxiety about the posthumous
fortunes and possible punishment of the individual soul.

A kind of pardoners and indulgence-sellers made a living out of
that anxiety in Greece.

For the Greek pardoners, who testify to an interest in the future happiness
of the soul not found in Israel, Mr. Jevons may be cited:

'The _agyrtes_ professed by means of his rites to purify men from the
sins they had themselves committed ... and so to secure to those whom
he purified an exemption from the evil lot in the next world which
awaited those who were not initiated.' 'A magic mirror' (crystal-gazing)
'was among his properties.'[11]
In Egypt a moral life did not suffice to secure immortal reward. There
was also required knowledge of the spells that baffle the demons
who, in Amenti, as in the Red Indian and Polynesian Hades, lie in
wait for souls.
That knowledge was contained in copies of the Book of the Dead--the
_gagne-pain_ of priests and scribes.

Early Israel, having, as far as we know, a singular lack of interest
in the future of the soul, was born to give himself up to developing,
undisturbed, the theistic conception, the belief in a righteous
Eternal.

Polytheism everywhere--in Greece especially--held of the animistic
conception, with its freakish, corruptible deities.

Greek philosophy could hardly restore that Eternal for whom the
Prophets battled in Israel; whom some of the lowest savages know
and fear; whom the animistic theory or cult everywhere obscures
with its crowd of hungry, cruel, interested, food-propitiated
ghost-gods.

In the religion of our Lord and the Apostles the two currents of
faith in one righteous God and care for the individual soul were
purified and combined.

'God is a Spirit, and they who worship Him must worship Him in
spirit and in truth.' Man also is a spirit, and, as such, is in the
hands of a God not to be propitiated by man's sacrifice or monk's
ritual. We know how this doctrine was again disturbed by the Animism,
in effect, and by the sacrifice and ritual of the Mediaeval Church.

Too eager 'to be all things to all men,' the august and beneficent Mother
of Christendom readmitted the earlier Animism in new forms of
saint-worship, pilgrimage, and popular ceremonial--things apart
from, but commonly supposed to be substitutes for, righteousness
of life and the selflessness enjoined in savage mysteries.

For the softness, no less than for the hardness of men's hearts,
these things were ordained:

such as masses for the beloved dead.

Modern thought has deanthropomorphised what was left of anthropomorphic
in religion, and, in the end, has left us for God, at most, 'a
stream of tendency making for righteousness,' or an energy unknown
and unknowable--the ghost of a ghost.

For the soul, by virtue of his belief in which man raised himself in his
own esteem, and, more or less, in ethical standing, is left to us a
negation or a wistful doubt.

To this part of modern scientific teaching the earlier position of
this essay suggests a demurrer.

By aid of the tradition of and belief in supernormal phenomena among
the low races, by attested phenomena of the same kinds of experience
among the higher races, I have ventured to try to suggest that 'we
are not merely brain;' that man has his part, we know not how, in
we know not what--has faculties and vision scarcely conditioned by
the limits of his normal purview.

Come 'long now,
sildrens. It's a gweat nuisance getting up so early, particular when
father can't help hisself. Can you, father? Go to s'eep now, father.
Come 'long this minute, back to bed, sildrens."

Diana looked really worthy of her distinguished name as she strode
down the passage and returned to the night-nursery. She and Orion
slipped into their respective little cots and lay down without waking
either Fortune or Susan, who slept in beds at the opposite side of the
room. Iris and Apollo also returned to their beds, and presently
Apollo dropped asleep, for, though he had an alarming temper, his fits
of passion never lasted long. But Iris did not close her bright brown
eyes again that morning. She lay awake, full of troubled
thoughts--thoughts far too old for her tender years.

It was one of Fortune's fads never on any occasion to awaken a
sleeping child, and as the other children slept rather longer than
usual after their early waking, breakfast was in consequence full half
an hour late in the day-nursery that morning. At last, however, it was
finished. No special lessons had been attended to since mother had
gone away to the angels, and the children, snatching up their hats,
rushed off as fast as possible to the garden. When they got there they
all four breathed freely. This at least was their own domain--their
fairyland, their country of adventure. From here they could travel to
goodness only knew where--sometimes to the stars with bright Apollo
and brave Orion--sometimes to happy hunting fields with Diana, the
goddess of the chase, and sometimes they might even visit the rainbow,
with sweet Iris as their companion.

There never were happier children than these four in that lovely,
lovely beyond words, garden. When the children went into it, it seemed
as if an additional ray of sunshine had come out to fill all the happy
world with light and love and beauty. The bees hummed more
industriously than ever, the flowers opened their sweet eyes and gazed
at the children, the animals came round them in a group.

On this special morning, however, Diana's dear little face looked very
grave and full of business.

"It's most 'citing," she said. "'Fore we does anything else we must
'tend to the funerals--there is such a lot of dead 'uns to bury this
morning. Come 'long to the dead-house at once, Iris."

"I must smell the Scotch roses first," answered Iris.

"You can do that afterwards, can't you? There's poor Rub-a-Dub. We has
to 'cide whether he is to have a public or a pwivate funeral, or
whether he is just to be sewn up in dock leaves, and put into the
gwound p'omisc's."

Diana had a great facility for taking up long words, which she always
used in the most matter-of-fact style, not in the least caring how she
pronounced them.

The other children could not help laughing at her now, and the four
hurried off as fast as they possibly could to the dead-house.

This unpleasantly named abode was in reality a pretty little shed in
one corner of the old garden. It contained a door with lock and key, a
nice little window, and everything fitted up for the keeping of tools
and carpenters' implements. Long ago, however, the children decided
that here the dead animals of all sorts and species were to be kept
until the solemn moment of interment.

Iris looked just as grave as the others when she unlocked the door of
the dead-house now, and they all entered. The dead 'uns were decently
laid out on a shelf, just in front of the public view. There was a
dead bee, and two butterflies; there were two dead worms and a dead
toad; also three or four beetles in different stages of decomposition,
and a terribly crushed spider--and solemnly lying in the midst of his
dead brethren lay Rub-a-Dub, the precious and dearly loved piebald
mouse.

"They look beautiful, poor darlin's," said Diana; "they will most fill
up the cemetery. Now please, Iris, which is to have a public funeral?"

"Of course Rub-a-Dub must," answered Iris. "As to the others--"

"Don't you think that poor toad, Iris?" said Diana, wrinkling up her
brows, and gazing anxiously at her sister. "The toad seems to me to be
rather big to have only a pwivate funeral. We could scarcely get dock
leaves enough."

"We must try," answered Iris; "the toad must be buried privately with
the others. We always make it a rule--don't you remember, Di--only to
give public funerals to our own special pets."

"All wight," answered Diana. She was very easily brought round to
accept Iris' view. In her heart of hearts she considered Iris' verdict
like the laws of the Medes and Persians--something which could not
possibly be disputed.

"Run, Orion!" she said; "be quick, and fetch as many dock leaves as
possible. I will thread a needle so as to sew up the poor dead 'uns in
their coffins. We must get through the pwivate funerals as quick as
possible this morning, and then we'll be weady for poor Rub-a-Dub."

"Rub-a-Dub is to be buried exactly at eleven o'clock," said Iris.

"We'll all wear mourning, course?" asked Diana.

"Yes; black bows."

"And are the dogs and the other animals to wear mourning?"

"Black bows," repeated Iris.

"That is most lovely and 'citing," said Diana.

Orion left the dead-house, and presently returned with a great pile of
dock leaves. Then the children sat down on the floor and began to sew
coffins for the different dead 'uns. They were accustomed to the work
and did it expeditiously and well. When all the poor dead 'uns were
supplied with coffins they were carried in a tray across the garden
to the far-famed cemetery. Here they were laid in that part of the
ground apportioned to private funerals. Apollo made small holes with
his spade, and each dead 'un in his small coffin was returned to
mother earth. The ground was immediately covered over, and Apollo
trampled on it with his feet. He did this on the present occasion with
right good will. "I'll be rather glad when the funerals are over," he
said, looking at Iris as he spoke, "for I want to get on with my ship.
I have got hold of some canvas the gardener brought me from town, and
I really believe I may be able to make a funnel and a place for
boiling water. You would like to see my ship when it is afloat; would
you not, Iris?"

"Yes; very much indeed," answered Iris.

"I call ships stupid," said Diana. "I don't see no use in 'em. Now, do
let us hurry back. Poor Rub-a-Dub will be so lonely."

"It's you who is silly now," said Orion. "You know Rub-a-Dub can't
feel; don't you, Di?"

"I know nothing 'bout it," said Diana. "I want to hurry back to get
his beautiful public funeral weady. Now, look here, 'Rion; will you go
into the house to steal the cotton wool, or shall I?"

"What is that I hear?" said a voice which seemed to come from right
over the children's heads.

They all looked up in alarm, to see Aunt Jane Dolman and their father
standing close by. Mr. Delaney wore an amused, and Aunt Jane a scared
expression.

"What were you saying, little girl?" she continued, taking Diana by
her arm and giving her a slight shake; "that you wished to _steal_
something?"

"Yes; some cotton wool," said Diana; "it's most 'portant; it's for a
public funeral."

Mrs. Dolman turned her round black eyes on her brother. Horror was
expressed in each movement of her face.

"My dear Jane," he said, _sotto voce_, "there are several things which
these children do which will astonish you very much. Don't you think
you had better give up the scheme?"

"Not I, David," she replied. "The more I see of the poor neglected
mites the more I long to rescue them from evident destruction."

He shook his head and looked with some pity at Iris.

"Shall Orion go to steal the cotton wool?" repeated Diana, who looked
as if it was impossible for anyone in this world to terrify her in the
very least.

"If it must be stolen, and if you ask me," said Mr. Delaney, "perhaps
Orion may as well be the thief as anyone else. In the old times of the
heathen deities I believe they did now and then stoop to that small
crime."

"David, it is appalling to hear you speak," said Mrs. Dolman. "Orion,
I hate to pronounce your name, but listen to me, little boy. I forbid
you to go if you are bent on theft."

"But I must go," said Orion. "Poor Rub-a-Dub must be buried, and I
must have a box for his coffin and cotton wool to lay him in."

"See here, Orion," said the father; "where do you get the cotton
wool?"

"We gen'ly get it from Fortune's box in the night-nursery," replied
Orion.

"And you steal it?"

"Oh, yes; she would make _such_ a fuss if we asked her for some. We
always steal it for public funerals."

"Well, on this occasion, and to spare your aunt's feelings, tell
Fortune that I desire her to give you some.

"Now, Jane," continued Mr. Delaney, "as you are here, and as I am
here, we may both of us as well witness this ceremony. The children
are fond of doing all honor to their pets, even after the supreme
moment of dissolution. Shall we witness this public funeral?"

Mrs. Dolman looked wonderfully inclined to say "No," but as her object
now was to humor her brother as far as possible, she agreed very
unwillingly to wait.

Accordingly he and she began to pace up and down the lovely garden,
and soon, in the interest which the sight of the unforgotten
playground of her youth excited within her, her brow cleared, and she
became pleasant and even talkative. The two were in the midst of a
very interesting conversation, and were pacing up and down not far
from the summer-house, when Orion's clear voice was heard. "The public
funeral is going to begin," he shouted, "so you had best come along if
you want to see it. If you don't, Diana and me, and Apollo and
Iris--why, we don't care."

"Oh, we'll come, you rude little body," said his father, laughing and
chuckling as he spoke. "You mark my words, Jane," he continued, "you
will have a handful with those children."

"Oh, I'll manage them," said Mrs. Dolman. "I have not lived my
thirty-five years for nothing; they certainly need managing, poor
little spoilt creatures."

They both hurried to the cemetery, where Apollo was standing, having
dug a grave nearly a foot deep, and large enough to hold a square
cardboard box. He stood leaning on his spade now, his hat pushed off,
his handsome little face slightly flushed with the exercise, his eyes
full of a sort of gloomy defiance. But now the funeral procession was
coming on apace. Orion's mouth was much puffed out because he was
blowing vigorously on his Jew's harp, Diana followed him beating a
little drum, and Iris, with long black ribbons fastened to her flowing
chestnut locks, was walking behind, carrying the tiny coffin. Iris, as
she walked, rang an old dinner bell in a very impressive manner, and
also sang a little dirge to the accompaniment of the bell and the two
other children's music. These were the words Iris sang:

    "Ding-a-dong, Rub-a-Dub's dead;
        Good-by, Rub-a-Dub.
    Sleep well in your little bed;
        Good-by, Rub-a-Dub.

    "We'll put a stone at your head and your feet;
        Good-by, Rub-a-Dub.
    And you shall sleep very sound and sweet;
        Good-by, Rub-a-Dub.
    And you'll never know fear any more;
        Little dear;
    Good-by, Rub-a-Dub."

Iris was a poet on occasions, and she had made up these impressive
lines in great haste while the other children were arranging minor
details of the funeral.

As the mourning party approached the open grave, Apollo came forward
and dropped on his knees. The coffin was supplied with strings of
white satin ribbon, and was lowered with great solemnity into the
grave. Then the four mourners stood over it and each of them sang the
last words of Iris' poem:

    "And you'll never know fear any more,
        Little dear;
    Good-by, Rub-a-Dub."

The moment this was over flowers were strewn upon the box, and Apollo
with great vigor began to shovel in the earth.

"Make a nice high mound," said Diana; "let it look as like a weal
gwave as possible." Then she turned eagerly to her sister. "When are
we to see about making the tombstone for the head and the feet?" she
asked.

"We'll talk it over this evening," answered Iris.

It may here be noted that none of the four mourners took the slightest
notice of Mr. Delaney or of Mrs. Dolman. To them it was as if these
two grown-up spectators did not exist--they were all lost in their own
intensely important world.

"Well," said Mrs. Dolman, as she turned away with her brother, "of all
the heathenish and wicked nonsense that I was ever permitted to
witness, this beats everything. It is a right good thing--yes, I will
say it frankly, David--that you are going abroad, and that your
benighted children are handed over to me. When you come back in a year
or two--I assure you, my dear brother, I do not wish to hurry you--but
when you come back in a few years you will see, please Providence,
very different children waiting to welcome you."

"Well, Jane," said David Delaney, "I have arranged to give the
children to you, and I hope to Heaven I am doing right; but do not
spoil them whatever you do, for to me and to their sainted mother
they were ever the sweetest little quartette that breathed the breath
of life." Mr. Delaney's eyes filled with sudden tears as he said these
words. "Good-by, Rub-a-Dub," he whispered as he left the garden. "Yes,
there are many good-bys in the air just now."


CHAPTER VII.

BUT ANN COULD NOT HELP LETTING OUT NOW AND THEN.


The Rectory at Super-Ashton was a large, sunny, cheerful house. It was
filled with every modern convenience, and possessed plenty of rooms
papered with light, bright-looking papers, and painted also in
cheerful colors. The windows were large and let in every scrap of
sunshine; the passages and hall and stairs were broad and roomy; the
nurseries and the children's rooms were models of comfort; the
servants were all well behaved and thoroughly accustomed to their
duties; the meals were punctual to a moment; in fact, nothing was left
to chance at Super-Ashton Rectory.

Mrs. Dolman was the life and soul of this extremely orderly English
home. She was one of the most active little women in the world. She
invariably got up, summer and winter, soon after six o'clock, and
might be seen bustling about the house, and bustling about the garden,
and bustling about the parish from that moment until she retired to
rest again, somewhere between ten and eleven at night. She was never
exactly cross, but she was very determined. She had strict ideas, and
made everyone in the parish not only respect her and look up to her,
but live up to her rule of life. She was, as a matter of fact, thought
a great deal more of by the parishioners than her husband, the
Reverend William Dolman, and the real Rector of Super-Ashton.

Mr. Dolman was a very large man, tall in stature and broad. He was
also fat and loosely built. He had a kindly face and a good-humored
way of talking. He preached very fair sermons on Sundays, and attended
to his duties, but without any of the enthusiasm which his wife
displayed.

When Mrs. Dolman wrote to her husband to say that she was returning
home with the four little Delaneys, it caused considerable excitement
at the breakfast table. Five little hearts beat considerably faster
than usual; but so great were the order and regularity of the
household that the five little faces to which the hearts belonged
remained apparently impassive.

Miss Ramsay, the governess, was presiding at the head of the table.
The Dolman girls were neatly dressed in print frocks with white
pinafores; the boys wore holland blouses and knickerbockers. The boys
happened to be the two youngest of the family, and none of the
children had yet gone to school. The name and ages of the five were as
follows: First came Lucy, aged twelve; then Mary, aged ten; then Ann,
aged nine; then Philip and Conrad, aged respectively seven and a half
and six. The faces of the whole five bore a curious resemblance to
both father and mother, the eldest girl having the round, black eyes
of her mother, and the large, somewhat irregular features of the
father. Mary resembled Lucy in being fat and largely built, but her
eyes were blue instead of black; while little Ann had a small face,
with gray eyes and rather sensitive lips. The complexions of the three
were fair, and their good looks were rather above the average. They
were proper, neat-looking little girls, and, notwithstanding their
inward excitement, they ate their breakfast tidily, and took good care
not to express any emotion before Miss Ramsay or their good-natured
father.

"Yes," said Mr. Dolman, looking at them, and pushing his spectacles up
on his forehead, "yes, that is the news. Your mother returns to-night,
and the four Delaneys with her. Let me see what else she says." He
replaced his spectacles on his nose and looked over his wife's letter
again. "These are the very words," he said; "Observe, Miss Ramsay,
that I read from the letter. 'I return by the train which reaches
Super-Ashton at six o'clock, and will bring the four Delaneys with
me.' Four, you see, Lucy; that is the number. But mamma does not
mention the sex of the children. How many boys or how many girls? I
really am quite out of date with regard to your cousins, my love."

"But I know all about them, papa," burst from Ann's eager lips.

"You forget your French, Ann," said Miss Ramsay, laying her hand on
the little girl's arm. "You will be punished if you speak English
again at meals."

Ann colored and dropped her eyes. She began to eat her bread and
butter hastily; she longed beyond words to tell the others the
knowledge she had secretly acquired about her cousins the Delaneys.

"'Please send the wagonette to the station,'" continued Mr. Dolman,
reading his wife's letter, and holding it close to his eyes,
"'and--yes, the cart for the luggage, as the children'--um, um, um,
that part is private, my dears."

Mr. Dolman dropped his spectacles and nodded at the eager little group
round the table.

"Well," he continued, "I am glad mamma is coming home. I have really
been quite bothered by the parishioners since she went away. There is
always a vast deal of work left undone when mamma is absent, eh,
children? eh, Miss Ramsay?"

"I agree with you, Mr. Dolman," said Miss Ramsay. "Mrs. Dolman does
not spare herself; she will have her reward some day."

"God grant it!" said Mr. Dolman, with a heavy sigh. "She certainly
will need rest whenever she does leave this world, for I never did
come across such an active woman."

He left the room, hitching up his huge shoulders as he did so, and
slammed the door noisily behind him.

"Papa would not do that if mamma were here," whispered Philip to Ann.

Ann said "Hush!" in a frightened tone, and then Miss Ramsay folded her
hands as an intimation to the children that the meal was at an end,
and that one of them was to say grace.

Immediately after breakfast they went upstairs to the schoolroom, and
lessons began, just as if no four little Delaneys were to arrive to
turn everything topsy-turvy that evening.

Lessons proceeded without any interruption until twelve o'clock. Then
the three little girls retired to the neat bedroom which they shared
together, and put on their sun-bonnets, their white capes, and their
washing-gloves, and came back again to Miss Ramsay, equipped for their
walk. The boys, with straw hats sticking very far back on their heads,
were also waiting Miss Ramsay's pleasure in the hall downstairs. The
children and the governess went out walking solemnly two and two, Miss
Ramsay and Conrad in front, Lucy and Mary following, with Ann and
Philip behind.

It was a hot day; but Miss Ramsay never excused the morning walk on
the dusty highroads. The children came in very much flushed and tired
at one o'clock for dinner. They assembled again in the big, cool
dining room and ate their roast mutton and peas and new potatoes, and
rice pudding and stewed fruit with the propriety of children who have
been thoroughly well brought up.

At dinner French was again the only language allowed to be spoken. In
consequence there was a sad dearth of any conversation at that dinner
table.

After dinner Mr. Dolman told Miss Ramsay that he had given orders
about the wagonette, and he supposed Simpson knew about the sleeping
arrangements, as he was given to understand that she had received a
letter from Mrs. Dolman.

"I have spoken to Simpson," replied Miss Ramsay, dropping her eyes as
she made the remark, "and she fully understands what is expected of
her. The two girls are to have small rooms to themselves, and so is
the eldest boy, but the youngest will sleep in the nursery with Philip
and Conrad. Those are Mrs. Dolman's directions."

"Quite right, quite right," said Mr. Dolman. "Anything Mrs. Dolman
wishes, of course. Miss Ramsay, I shall not be home to tea this
evening. I have to go to visit a sick parishioner at the other end of
the parish. Good-by, Lucy; good-by, the rest of you children. I hope
to see you all before bedtime; if not--"

"But, father," burst from Ann, "the new children will be here about
six."

"They cannot arrive before half-past six, my dear," replied Mr.
Dolman.

"Ann, you have again spoken English," said Miss Ramsay; "I shall be
forced to punish you. You will have to stay in after the others this
afternoon, and learn ten lines of your French poetry."

Poor little Ann colored and her lips trembled. She really felt
dreadfully excited, and it was terrible to have to bottle up all her
thoughts during the long, hot day.

Immediately after dinner the children went up to the schoolroom, where
they lay down on the floor for half an hour to learn their lessons.

At three o'clock the ordinary lessons began again, and went on without
interruption until five, when there was tea. After tea the children
were supposed to have the rest of the day to do what they liked in.
But on this occasion, Ann was kept in the schoolroom to learn her
French poetry as best she could. The ten lines were difficult, and the
little girl felt sleepy, cross, and dissatisfied. Soon her small,
curly head fell upon her plump arms, and sleep took possession of her
little soul.

Miss Ramsay came in and found her in a state of heavy slumber.

"Ann!" she cried; "Ann!"

Little Ann raised herself with a start.

"Oh, please, Miss Ramsay, won't you excuse the French poetry to-day,"
she cried; "I am so--"

"So what, Ann? I am surprised at you. What can be the matter?"

"I am _so_ excited about the little Delaneys," answered Ann. "They are
coming so soon, and they are my own first cousins--I seem to see them
all the day--they come between me and--and my poetry. Please, Miss
Ramsay, if you'll only allow me I'll get up early to-morrow morning
and learn it perfectly. Do say I need not finish it this
afternoon--do, please."

Miss Ramsay was astonished and annoyed at this rebellion on the part
of Ann.

"You surprise me," she said. "You know that lessons have to be done
during lesson hours, and that rules are not to be broken. You know
what your mother would say if she heard you talking English at meals.
Twice to-day you broke through that rule. The first time I pardoned
you--the second time it was unpardonable. Now, my dear, apply yourself
to your task--get it well over, and you will doubtless be ready to
welcome your cousins when they arrive."

Miss Ramsay left the room. Ann shed a few tears, and then, seeing
there was no help for it, applied herself with all her might and main
to learning her appointed task. She got her poetry by heart after a
fashion, and, hastily replacing the book in the bookcase, ran out of
the schoolroom. She saw Lucy and Mary pacing up and down the terrace
in front of the house. They were in clean white frocks, with sashes
round their waists, and their hair was very trimly brushed and curled
over their heads. Their faces shone from soap and water, and even at
that distance Ann could perceive that their hands were painfully,
terribly clean. In her heart of hearts Ann hated clean hands; they
meant so much that was unpleasant--they meant that there must be no
grubbing in the garden, no searching for dear little weeds and small
flowers, and all kinds of delicious, unexpected things in mother
earth. In her heart of hearts Ann had a spark of originality of her
own, but it had little chance of flourishing under the treatment so
carefully pursued at Super-Ashton.

Philip and Conrad might also be seen on the terrace in their clean
linen blouses and fresh knickerbockers; their hands were also
carefully washed, their hair brushed back from their faces, the faces
themselves shining from soap and water.

"Oh, dear! there's no help for it," thought little Ann, "I must go
into the nursery and let Simpson pull me about. How she will scrub me
and tug at my hair, and put on such a horrid starched dress, and it's
so hot to-night! Well, if I hurry I may be in time to tell Philip what
I know about their names. Oh, how delicious it will be! He'll be so
excited. Yes, I'll be as quick as possible."

Ann ran down the long passage which led from the schoolroom to the
nursery, opened the door, and approached a prim old servant with a
somewhat cross face, who was busily engaged mending stockings.

"Please, Simpson, here I am. Will you dress me?" said Ann, panting as
she spoke.

Simpson laid down her work with deliberation.

"Now, I wonder, Miss Ann," she said, "why I am to be put about for
you. I have just finished dressing all the other children. Why didn't
you come with the others? There, miss, you must just dress yourself,
for I can't and won't be worried; these stockings must be finished
before the mistress comes home."

"All right," answered Ann, in a cheerful tone. "I can wash myself
beautifully. May I go into the night-nursery, please, Simpson, and do
my best?"

"Yes, my dear. You'll find a white frock hanging in the wardrobe. I'll
fasten it for you after you have washed yourself and combed out your
hair. Now, do be quick. I would help you willingly, Miss Ann, only I
really have not a minute to spare; Master Philip and Master Conrad are
dreadful with their socks, and when the mistress comes with that fresh
family, goodness knows when I shall have a moment to see to your
clothes again."

Ann dressed herself, and ran back to Simpson.

"Simpson," she said, as that good woman was fastening the hooks and
eyes at the back of her frock, "I know it is wrong to be so much
excited, but I am. My heart beats awfully fast at the thought of their
coming."

"Well, Miss Ann, it's more than my heart does. And now, miss, if
you'll take a word of advice from me, you'll keep your feelin's to
yourself, as far as your ma is concerned. Your ma don't wish any of
you to give way to excitement. She wants you to grow up steady,
well-conducted young ladies."

"I hate being a well-conducted young lady," burst from little Ann.

"Oh, dear me, miss! it's dreadful to hear you talk so unproper. Now
stand still and don't fidget."

The frock was fastened, and Ann ran off to join her brothers and
sisters on the terrace.

Lucy and Mary were little girls after their mother's own heart. They
never questioned her wishes, they never rebelled against her rules,
they were as good and well-behaved as any two little English maids of
the respective ages of twelve and ten could be. Now, as little Ann
approached, they looked at her as if they thought her quite beneath
their notice.

"Oh, do go away, Ann!" said Lucy. "Mary and I are talking secrets, and
we don't want you."

"You are always talking secrets," said Ann. "It's horrid unfair to
me."

"We have got to talk things over. We can't confide in you; you're the
youngest. Please don't be disagreeable now. He is sure of victory:
but will not, if he can help it, out of regard to Clarissa, kill
the Colonel.

LETTER LXII. From the same.-- Interview with Colonel Morden. To-morrow,
says he, is the day that will, in all probability, send either one or
two ghosts to attend the manes of my Clarissa.

He doubts not to give the Colonel his life, or his death; and to be
able, by next morning eleven, to write all the particulars.

LETTER LXIV. THE ISSUE OF THE DUEL.

CONCLUSION
POSTSCRIPT

THE HISTORY

OF
CLARISSA HARLOWE

LETTER I 
MR.

BELFORD [IN CONTINUATION.] SOHO, SIX O'CLOCK, SEPT. 7.

The lady is still alive.

The Colonel having just sent his servant to let me know that she
inquired after me about an hour ago, I am dressing to attend her.

Joel begs of me to dispatch him back, though but with one line to gratify
your present impatience. He expects, he says, to find you at
Knightsbridge, let him make what haste he can back; and, if he has
not a line or two to pacify you, he is afraid you will pistol him;
for he apprehends that you are hardly yourself.

I therefore dispatch this, and will have another ready, as soon as I
can, with particulars.

--But you must have a little patience; for how can I withdraw
myself every half hour to write, if I am admitted to the lady's
presence, or if I am with the Colonel?

SMITH'S, EIGHT IN THE MORNING.

The lady is in a slumber. Mrs. Lovick, who sat up with her, says she
had a better night than was expected; for although she slept little,
she seemed easy; and the easier for the pious frame she was in; all
her waking moments being taken up in devotion, or in an ejaculatory
silence; her hands and eyes often lifted up, and her lips moving
with a fervour worthy of these her last hours.

TEN O'CLOCK.

The Colonel being earnest to see his cousin as soon as she awoke, we
were both admitted. We observed in her, as soon as we entered, strong
symptoms of her approaching dissolution, notwithstanding what the women
had flattered us with from her last night's tranquillity.--The Colonel
and I, each loth to say what we thought, looked upon one another
with melancholy countenances.

The Colonel told her he should send a servant to her uncle Antony's
for some papers he had left there; and asked if she had any commands
that way.

She thought not, she said, speaking more inwardly than she did the
day before.

She had indeed a letter ready to be sent to her good Norton; and there
was a request intimated in it. But it was time enough, if the request
were signified to those whom it concerned when all was over.
--However, it might be sent them by the servant who was going that
way.

And she caused it to be given to the Colonel for that purpose.

Her breath being very short, she desired another pillow. Having two
before, this made her in a manner sit up in her bed; and she spoke
then with more distinctness; and, seeing us greatly concerned, forgot
her own sufferings to comfort us; and a charming lecture she gave
us, though a brief one, upon the happiness of a timely preparation,
and upon the hazards of a late repentance, when the mind, as she
observed, was so much weakened, as well as the body, as to render
a poor soul hardly able to contend with its natural infirmities.

I beseech ye, my good friends, proceeded she, mourn not for one who
mourns not, nor has cause to mourn, for herself.

On the contrary, rejoice with me, that all my worldly troubles are so
near to their end.
Believe me, Sirs, that I would not, if I might, choose to live,
although the pleasantest part of my life were to come over again:
and yet eighteen years of it, out of nineteen, have been very
pleasant.

To be so much exposed to temptation, and to be so liable to fail in
the trial, who would not rejoice that all her dangers are over?

--All I wished was pardon and blessing from my dear parents. Easy as my
departure seems promised to be, it would have been still easier, had
I that pleasure. BUT GOD ALMIGHTY WOULD NOT LET ME DEPEND FOR COMFORT
UPON ANY BUT HIMSELF.

She then repeated her request, in the most earnest manner, to her
cousin, that he would not heighten her fault, by seeking to avenge
her death; to me, that I would endeavour to make up all breaches,
and use the power I had with my friend, to prevent all future
mischiefs from him, as well as that which this trust might give me
to prevent any to him.

She made some excuses to her cousin, for not having been able to alter
her will, to join him in the executorship with me; and to me, for
the trouble she had given, and yet should give me.

She had fatigued herself so much, (growing sensibly weaker) that she
sunk her head upon her pillows, ready to faint; and we withdrew
to the window, looking upon one another; but could not tell what
to say; and yet both seemed inclinable to speak: but the motion
passed over in silence.

Our eyes only spoke; and that in a manner neither's were used to--mine,
at least, not till I knew this admirable creature.

The Colonel withdrew to dismiss his messenger, and send away the
letter to Mrs.

Norton. I took the opportunity to retire likewise; and to write thus
far. And Joel returning to take it, I now close here.

ELEVEN O'CLOCK.

LETTER II 
MR.

BELFORD [IN CONTINUATION.]

The Colonel tells me that he had written to Mr. John Harlowe, by his
servant, 'That they might spare themselves the trouble of debating
about a reconciliation; for that his dear cousin would probably be
no more before they could resolve.'

He asked me after his cousin's means of subsisting; and whether she
had accepted of any favour from me; he was sure, he said, she would
not from you.

I acquainted him with the truth of her parting with some of her
apparel.

This wrung his heart; and bitterly did he exclaim as well against
you as against her implacable relations.

He wished he had not come to England at all, or had come sooner;
and hoped I would apprize him of the whole mournful story, at a
proper season.

He added, that he had thoughts, when he came over, of fixing here
for the remainder of his days; but now, as it was impossible his
cousin could recover, he would go abroad again, and re-settle himself
at Florence or Leghorn.

The lady has been giving orders, with great presence of mind, about
her body! directing her nurse and the maid of the house to put her
in the coffin as soon as she is cold. Mr. Belford, she said, would
know the rest by her will.

***
She has just now given from her bosom, where she always wore it, a
miniature picture, set in gold, of Miss Howe.

She gave it to Mrs.
Lovick, desiring her to fold it up in white paper, and direct it, To
Charles Hickman, Esq. and to give it to me, when she was departed,
for that gentleman.

She looked upon the picture, before she gave it her--Sweet and ever-amiable
friend!--Companion!--Sister!--Lover! said she--and kissed it four
several times, once at each tender appellation.

***

Your other servant is come.--Well may you be impatient!

--Well may you!
--But do you think I can leave off, in the middle of a conversation,
to run and set down what offers, and send it away piece-meal as I
write?

--If I could, must I not lose one half, while I put down the
other?

This event is nearly as interesting to me as it is to you. If you are
more grieved than I, there can be but one reason for it; and that's
at your heart!

--I had rather lose all the friends I have in the world, (yourself
in the number,) than this divine lady; and shall be unhappy whenever
I think of her sufferings, and of her merit; though I have nothing
to reproach myself by reason of the former.

I say not this, just now, so much to reflect upon you as to express my
own grief; though your conscience I suppose, will make you think
otherwise.

Your poor fellow, who says that he begs for his life, in desiring to
be dispatched back with a letter, tears this from me--else,
perhaps, (for I am just sent for down,) a quarter of an hour would
make you--not easy indeed--but certain--and that, in a state like
your's, to a mind like your's, is a relief.

THURSDAY AFTERNOON, FOUR O'CLOCK.

LETTER III
MR. BELFORD, TO RICHARD MOWBRAY, ESQ.
THURSDAY AFTERNOON.

DEAR MOWBRAY,
I am glad to hear you are in town. Throw yourself the moment this
comes to your hand, (if possible with Tourville,) in the way of the
man who least of all men deserves the love of the worthy
heart; but most that of thine and Tourville; else the news I shall
most probably send him within an hour or two, will make annihilation
the greatest blessing he has to wish for.

You will find him between Piccadilly and Kensington, most probably on
horseback, riding backwards and forwards in a crazy way; or put up,
perhaps, at some inn or tavern in the way--a waiter possibly, if
so, watching for his servant's return to him from me.

***
His man Will. is just come to me.

He will carry this to you in his way back, and be your director. Hie
away in a coach, or any how. Your being with him may save either his
or a servant's life. See the blessed effects of triumphant
libertinism! Sooner or later it comes home to us, and all concludes in
gall and bitterness!

Adieu.
J. BELFORD.

LETTER IV
MR.

LOVELACE, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.

Curse upon the Colonel, and curse upon the writer of the last letter
I received, and upon all the world!

Thou to pretend to be as much interested in my Clarissa's fate as
myself!--'Tis well for one of us that this was not said to me,
instead of written.

--Living or dying, she is mine--and only mine. Have I not earned
her dearly?

--Is not d----n----n likely to be the purchase to me, though a happy
eternity will be her's?

An eternal separation!--O God! O God!--How can I bear that thought!--But
yet there is life!--Yet, therefore, hope--enlarge my hope, and thou
shalt be my good genius, and I will forgive thee every thing.

For this last time--but it must not, shall not be the last--Let me
hear, the moment thou receivest this--what I am to be--for, at present,
I am 
The most miserable of Men.

ROSE, AT KNIGHTSBRIDGE, FIVE O'CLOCK.

My fellow tells me that thou art sending Mowbray and Tourville to
me:--I want them not--my soul's sick of them, and of all the
world--but most of myself.

Yet, as they send me word they will come to me immediately, I will
wait for them, and for thy next.

O Belford, let it not be--But hasten it, be what it may!

LETTER V
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
SEVEN O'CLOCK, THURSDAY EVENING, SEPT. 7.

I have only to say at present--Thou wilt do well to take a tour to
Paris; or wherever else thy destiny shall lead thee!----
JOHN BELFORD.

LETTER VI
MR. MOWBRAY, TO JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.

UXBRIDGE, SEPT. 7, BETWEEN ELEVEN AND TWELVE AT NIGHT.

DEAR JACK,

I send by poor Lovelace's desire, for particulars of the fatal
breviate thou sentest him this night.

He cannot bear to set pen to paper; yet wants to know every minute
passage of Miss Harlowe's departure.

Yet why he should, I cannot see: for if she is gone, she is gone;
and who can help it?

I never heard of such a woman in my life. What great matters has she
suffered, that grief should kill her thus?

I wish the poor fellow had never known her.

From first to last, what trouble she has cost him! The charming fellow
had been half lost to us ever since he pursued her.

And what is there in one woman more than another, for matter of that?

It was well we were with him when your note came.

Your showed your true friendship in your foresight.

Why, Jack, the poor fellow was quite beside himself--mad as any man
ever was in Bedlam.

Will. brought him the letter just after we had joined him at the
Bohemia Head; where he had left word at the Rose at Knightsbridge
he should be; for he had been sauntering up and down, backwards and
forwards, expecting us, and his fellow.

Will., as soon as he delivered it, got out of his way; and, when he
opened it, never was such a piece of scenery.

He trembled like a devil at receiving it: fumbled at the seal, his
fingers in a palsy, like Tom. Doleman's; his hand shake, shake, shake,
that he tore the letter in two, before he could come at the contents:
and, when he had read them, off went his hat to one corner of the
room, his wig to the other--D--n--n seize the world!

and a whole volley of such-like excratious wishes; running up and
down the room, and throwing up the sash, and pulling it down, and
smiting his forehead with his double fist, with such force as would
have felled as ox, and stamping and tearing, that the landlord ran
in, and faster out again.

And this was the distraction scene for some time.

In vain was all Jemmy or I could say to him. I offered once to take
hold of his hands, because he was going to do himself a mischief,
as I believed, looking about for his pistols, which he had laid
upon the table, but which Will., unseen, had taken out with him,
[a faithful, honest dog, that Will.!

I shall for ever love the fellow for it,] and he hit me a
d--d dowse of the chops, as made my nose bleed. 'Twas well 'twas he,
for I hardly knew how to take it.

Jemmy raved at him, and told him, how wicked it was in him, to be so
brutish to abuse a friend, and run mad for a woman. And then he
said he was sorry for it; and then Will. ventured in with water and
a towel; and the dog rejoiced, as I could see by his look, that I
had it rather than he.

And so, by degrees, we brought him a little to his reason, and he promised
to behave more like a man. And so I forgave him: and we rode on
in the dark to here at Doleman's. And we all tried to shame him out of
his mad, ungovernable foolishness: for we told him, as how she was
but a woman, and an obstinate perverse woman too; and how could he
help it?

And you know, Jack, (as we told him, moreover,) that it was a shame to
manhood, for a man, who had served twenty and twenty women as bad or
worse, let him have served Miss Harlowe never so bad, should give
himself such obstropulous airs, because she would die: and we advised
him never to attempt a woman proud of her character and virtue, as
they call it, any more: for why?

The conquest did not pay trouble; and what was there in one woman
more than another? Hay, you know, Jack!--And thus we comforted him, and
advised him.

But yet his d--d addled pate runs upon this lady as much now she's dead
as it did when she was living. For, I suppose, Jack, it is no joke:
she is certainly and bonâ fide dead: I'n't she? If not, thou deservest
to be doubly d--d for thy fooling, I tell thee that. So he will have
me write for particulars of her departure.

He won't bear the word dead on any account. A squeamish puppy!
How love unmans and softens!

And such a noble fellow as this too! Rot him for an idiot, and
an oaf! I have no patience with the foolish duncical dog --upon my
soul, I have not!

So send the account, and let him howl over it, as I suppose he will.

But he must and shall go abroad: and in a month or two Jemmy, and you,
and I, will join him, and he'll soon get the better of this
chicken-hearted folly, never fear; and will then be ashamed of
himself:
and then we'll not spare him; though now, poor fellow, it were pity
to lay him on so thick as he deserves.

And do thou, till then, spare all reflections upon him; for, it
seems, thou hast worked him unmercifully.

I was willing to give thee some account of the hand we have had with
the tearing fellow, who had certainly been a lost man, had we not
been with him; or he would have killed somebody or other.

I have no doubt of it.
And now he is but very middling; sits grinning like a man in straw;
curses and swears, and is confounded gloomy; and creeps into holes
and corners, like an old hedge-hog hunted for his grease.

And so, adieu, Jack. Tourville, and all of us, wish for thee; for no
one has the influence upon him that thou hast.

R. MOWBRAY.

As I promised him that I would write for the particulars abovesaid,
I write this after all are gone to bed; and the fellow is set out with
it by day-break.

LETTER VII

MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
THURSDAY NIGHT.

I may as well try to write; since, were I to go to bed, I shall not
sleep.

I never had such a weight of grief upon my mind in my life, as upon
the demise of this admirable woman; whose soul is now rejoicing in
the regions of light.

You may be glad to know the particulars of her happy exit.

I will try to proceed; for all is hush and still; the family retired;
but not one of them, and least of all her poor cousin, I dare say,
to rest.

At four o'clock, as I mentioned in my last, I was sent for down; and,
as thou usedst to like my descriptions, I will give thee the woeful
scene that presented itself to me, as I approached the bed.

The Colonel was the first that took my attention, kneeling on the side
of the bed, the lady's right hand in both his, which his face
covered, bathing it with his tears; although she had been comforting
him, as the women since told me, in elevated strains, but broken
accents.

On the other side of the bed sat the good widow; her face overwhelmed
with tears, leaning her head against the bed's head in a most
disconsolate manner; and turning her face to me, as soon as she saw me,
O Mr. Belford, cried she, with folded hands--the dear lady--A heavy
sob permitted her not to say more.

Mrs. Smith, with clasped fingers, and uplifted eyes, as if imploring
help from the only Power which could give it, was kneeling down
at the bed's feet, tears in large drops trickling down her cheeks.

Her nurse was kneeling between the widow and Mrs. Smith, her arms
extended. In one hand she held an ineffectual cordial, which she had
just been offering to her dying mistress; her face was swoln with
weeping (though used to such scenes as this); and she turned her
eyes towards me, as if she called upon me by them to join in the
helpless sorrow; a fresh stream bursting from them as I approached
the bed.

The maid of the house with her face upon her folded arms, as she stood
leaning against the wainscot, more audibly exprest her grief
than any of the others.

The lady had been silent a few minutes, and speechless, as they
thought, moving her lips without uttering a word; one hand, as I
said, in her cousin's.

But when Mrs. Lovick, on my approach, pronounced my name, O Mr. Belford,
said she, with a faint inward voice, but very distinct nevertheless--Now!--Now!
[in broken periods she spoke]--I bless God for his mercies to his
poor creature--all will soon be over--a few--a very few moments--will
end this strife--and I shall be happy!

Comfort here, Sir--turning her head to the Colonel--comfort my cousin
--see! the blame--able kindness--he would not wish me to be happy --so
soon!

Here she stopt for two or three minutes, earnestly looking upon
him.

Then resuming, My dearest Cousin, said she, be comforted--what is
dying but the common lot?--The mortal frame may seem to labour--but
that is all!

--It is not so hard to die as I believed it to be!--The preparation
is the difficulty--I bless God, I have had time for that--the rest
is worse to beholders, than to me!

--I am all blessed hope--hope itself. She looked what she said, a
sweet smile beaming over her countenance.

After a short silence, Once more, my dear Cousin, said she, but still
in broken accents, commend me most dutifully to my father and
mother--There she stopt.

And then proceeding--To my sister, to my brother, to my uncles--and
tell them, I bless them with my parting breath--for all their
goodness to me--even for their displeasure, I bless them--most happy
has been to me my punishment here!

Happy indeed!

She was silent for a few moments, lifting up her eyes, and the
hand her cousin held not between his.

Then, O Death! said she, where is thy sting! [the words I remember to
have heard in the burial-service read over my uncle and poor Belton.]
And after a pause--It is good for me that I was afflicted!

Words of scripture, I suppose.

Then turning towards us, who were lost in speechless sorrow--O dear,
dear gentlemen, said she, you know not what foretastes--what
assurances--And there she again stopped, and looked up, as if in a
thankful rapture, sweetly smiling.

Then turning her head towards me--Do you, Sir, tell your friend that I
forgive him!--And I pray to God to forgive him!--Again pausing, and
lifting up her eyes as if praying that He would. Let him know how happily
I die:--And that such as my own, I wish to be his last hour.

She was again silent for a few moments: and then resuming--My sight
fails me!--Your voices only--[for we both applauded her christian,
her divine frame, though in accents as broken as her own]; and the
voice of grief is alike in all.

Is not this Mr. Morden's hand? pressing one of his with that he had
just let go. Which is Mr. Belford's? holding out the other. I gave
her mine. God Almighty bless you both, said she, and make you
both--in your last hour--for you must come to this--happy as I am.

She paused again, her breath growing shorter; and, after a few
minutes --And now, my dearest Cousin, give me your hand--nearer--still
nearer --drawing it towards her; and she pressed it with her dying
lips--God protect you, dear, dear Sir--and once more, receive my
best and most grateful thanks--and tell my dear Miss Howe--and
vouchsafe to see, and to tell my worthy Norton--she will be one
day, I fear not, though now lowly in her fortunes, a saint in
Heaven--tell them both, that I remember them with thankful blessings
in my last moments!

--And pray God to give them happiness here for many, many years,
for the sake of their friends and lovers; and an heavenly crown
hereafter; and such assurances of it, as I have, through the
all-satisfying merits of my blessed Redeemer.

Her sweet voice and broken periods methinks still fill my ears, and
never will be out of my memory.

After a short silence, in a more broken and faint accent--And you,
Mr.

Belford, pressing my hand, may God preserve you, and make you sensible
of all your errors--you see, in me, how all ends--may you be--And down
sunk her head upon her pillow, she fainting away, and drawing from
us her hands.

We thought she was then gone; and each gave way to a violent burst
of grief.

But soon showing signs of returning life, our attention was again
engaged; and I besought her, when a little recovered, to complete
in my favour her half-pronounced blessing.

She waved her hand to us both, and bowed her head six several times,
as we have since recollected, as if distinguishing every person
present; not forgetting the nurse and the maid-servant; the latter
having approached the bed, weeping, as if crowding in for the divine
lady's blessing; and she spoke faltering and inwardly--Bless--bless--bless--you
all--and--now--and now--[holding up her almost lifeless hands for the
last time] come--O come--blessed Lord --JESUS!

"What a handsome little spitfire!" he said aloud.

"Spitfire, indeed!" said Diana; "it's you all who is spitfires; it's
not me. I want to say something to you, big man."

"Very well, small girl," answered Mr. Dolman. "I am willing to listen
to you. What is the matter?"

This was really much more diverting than sitting down to his sermon.

"I want you to have that howid old woman upstairs put in pwison. I
want you to get the perlice, and have her hands tied, and have her
took away to pwison. She has done a murder--she has killed my--" But
here little Diana's voice suddenly failed; high as her spirit was, it
could not carry her any further. A sense of absolute loneliness came
over her, and her passion ended in a burst of frantic weeping.

And now all might have been well, for Mr. Dolman was a kind-hearted
man, and the little child, in her black dress, would have appealed to
him, and he would have taken her in his arms and comforted her after a
fashion, and matters might never have been so sore and hard again for
little Diana, if at that moment Mrs. Dolman had not appeared. She was
walking hastily across the hall with her district-visiting hat on.
Mrs. Dolman's district-visiting hat was made in the shape of a very
large mushroom. It was simply adorned with a band of brown ribbon, and
was not either a becoming or fashionable headgear.

Diana, who had a strong sense of the ludicrous, stopped her tears
where her aunt appeared.

"What a poky old thing you is!" she said.

These words enraged Mrs. Dolman.

"William," she remarked, "what are you doing with that child? Why, you
have taken her in your arms; put her down this minute. Diana, you are
a very naughty little girl."

"So is you a very naughty old woman," retorted Diana. "I's not going
away from this nice old man. I don't like you. I'm going to stay with
you, old man, so don't put me down out of your arms. You will send for
the perlice, won't you, and you'll have that howid puson upstairs put
in pwison. Go 'way, aunt. I never did like you, and I never will, and
you is awfu' poky in that bonnet. But I'll go with you, old man." Here
she flung her fat arms round her uncle's neck and gave him a hug.

"You are not pwetty like faver," she said, "you are kite an ugly old
man, but all the same I like you;" and she kissed him, a slobbering,
wet kiss on his cheek.

"Jane," said Mr. Dolman, "this poor little girl is in great trouble. I
cannot in the least make out why, but perhaps you had better let her
come with me into the library for a few minutes."

"I'll allow nothing of the kind," answered Mrs. Dolman. "Diana Delaney
is an extremely naughty little child, and I am quite determined that
her spirit shall be broken. It was all very well for you to go on with
your tantrums at the Manor, miss, but now you are under my control,
and you shall do exactly what I wish. Come, Diana, none of this. What,
you'll kick me, will you? Then I shall have you whipped."

"What's whipped?" questioned Diana.

Mrs. Dolman stooped down and lifted her into her arms. She was a
stout and largely-made child, and the little woman found her somewhat
difficult to carry. She would not let her down, however, but conducted
her across the cool hall and into a room at the further end of the
passage. This room was nearly empty, matting covered the floor and a
round table stood in the center, while two or three high-backed
chairs, with hard seats, were placed at intervals round the walls. It
was a decidedly dreary room, and rendered all the more so because the
morning sun was pouring in through the dusty panes.

This room was well known to all the little Dolmans, for it was called
the punishment chamber. In this room they had all of them shed bitter
tears in their time, and some of the spirit which had been given to
them at their birth was subdued and broken here, and here they learned
to fear mamma, although not to respect her. They were all accustomed
to this chamber, but little Diana Delaney had never in the whole
course of her spirited six years heard of anything in the least
resembling this odious and ugly apartment.

"Here you stay until you beg my pardon," said Mrs. Dolman, "and if I
hear you daring to call me names again, or your uncle names, or doing
anything but just behaving like a proper little Christian child, I
shall have you whipped. I believe in not sparing the rod, and so the
child is not spoiled. What, you'll defy me, miss!"

"I hate you," screamed Diana, "and I want you to go to pwison too, as
well as that awfu' old Simpson upstairs. She has gone and murdered all
my animals--she said they was vermin. Oh, I hate you, aunt!"

"Hate me or not, you'll stay where you are until dinner-time," said
Mrs. Dolman, and she left the room, locking the door after her.

Diana flew to it and kicked it furiously, but although she kicked and
screamed and shouted herself hoarse, no one heard her, and no one came
to the rescue. At last, worn out with her frantic grief, she threw
herself down in the middle of the floor and, babylike, forgot her
sorrows in profound slumber.

The rest of the children were having a fairly happy morning, and Iris,
who was trying to make the best of things, did not miss her little
sister until the preparation gong for dinner sounded. The moment its
sonorous notes were heard pealing over the Rectory garden, little Ann
got up soberly, and Lucy and Mary also rose to their feet.

"That is the first gong, Iris," said Ann; "we must go in to clean our
hands and have our hair brushed. Mamma would be very angry if we were
not all in the dining room when the second gong sounds. There is only
five minutes between the two gongs, so we had better go and get ready
at once."

Iris was quite ready to accompany her cousins into the house. Now, for
the first time, however, she missed Diana.

"Where is Di?" she said. "Apollo, have you seen her?"

Apollo was coming up the lawn; Iris ran down to meet him.

"Oh, there's Orion with Philip and Conrad," said Iris, "but where can
Di be? I thought she was with you, Apollo."

"I have not seen her for the greater part of the morning," replied
Apollo. "Have you, Orion?"

"Not I," answered Orion, giving himself a little shake. "I say,
Phil," he continued, "is it true that you can take me fishing with you
this afternoon?"

"Yes; but pray don't talk so loud. I'll take you, if you won't split
about it."

"What's 'split'?" questioned Orion.

"Hush, you little beggar!" Philip drew Orion to one side and began to
whisper in his ear. Orion's face got very red.

"Oh!" he said. "Well, I won't tell. What are you talking about, Iris?"

"I want to find Diana," said Iris.

"I have not seen her," said Orion. "I wish you would not bother me,
Iris. I am talking to Philip. Phil and I has got some secrets. Very
well, Phil; we'll walk on in front, if you like."

"Yes, come along," said Philip; "you can come too, Conrad. Now, Orion,
if you are not going to be a silly goose and a tell-tale, I'll--" Here
he dropped his voice to a whisper, and Orion bent an attentive ear.

Iris, in some bewilderment, turned to her girl cousins.

"I must find Diana," she said.

"She may be in the house," said Ann. "Perhaps she has gone to the
nurseries--perhaps she is with Simpson."

The whole party entered the house, which was very cool and pleasant in
contrast to the hot outside world. They met Mr. Dolman striding across
the hall.

"You had better be quick, children," he called out. "Mamma won't be
pleased unless you are all waiting and ready to sit down to table when
the second gong sounds."

"Oh, please, Uncle William!" said Iris, "do you happen to know where
Diana is?"

"Little Diana with the spirited black eyes?" questioned Mr. Dolman.

"Yes; do you know anything about her?"

He pushed his spectacles halfway up on his broad, bald forehead.

"I am afraid little Diana has been very naughty," he said; "but, pray
don't say that I mentioned it. You had better question your aunt, my
dear. No, there is no use asking me. I vow, once for all, that I am
not going to interfere with you children--particularly with you little
Delaneys. I only know that Diana has been naughty. Ask your aunt--ask
your aunt, my dear."

"Iris, do pray come upstairs," called out Mary; "we'll get into the
most dreadful scrape if we are late. Mamma is so terribly particular."

"Oh, there is Aunt Jane!" said Iris, with a sigh of relief. "Aunt
Jane, please," she continued, running up to her aunt as she spoke, "I
can't find Diana anywhere. Do you happen to know where she is?"

"I am afraid you won't find Diana, Iris," answered Mrs. Dolman, "for
the simple reason that she has been a very impertinent, naughty little
girl, and I have been obliged to lock her up."

"You were obliged to lock her up?" said Iris, her face turning pale.
She gave Mrs. Dolman a look which reminded that lady of her brother.
Now, the little Delaneys' father could give very piercing glances out
of his dark eyes when he chose, and Mrs. Dolman had been known, in her
early days, to quail before them. For the same inexplicable reason she
quailed now before the look in Iris' brown eyes. "Please take me at
once to my sister," said the little girl, with dignity.

Mrs. Dolman hesitated for a moment.

"Very well, Iris, on this occasion I will take you," she said. "But
please first understand that you four children have got to bend your
wills to mine; and when you are naughty,--although I don't expect you
will ever be naughty, Iris,--I trust you, at least, will be an example
to the others,--but when any of you are naughty you will be most
certainly punished. I have brought you here with the intention of
disciplining you and making you good children."

"Then," said Iris, very slowly, "do you really think, Aunt Jane, that
when mother was alive we were bad children?"

"I have nothing to say on that point," answered Mrs. Dolman. She led
Iris across the cool hall, and, taking a key out of her pocket, opened
the door of the punishment chamber. She threw it wide open, and there,
in the center of the matting, lay Diana, curled up like a little dog,
very sound asleep.

"Much she cares," said Mrs. Dolman.

"Oh, Aunt Jane!" said Iris, tears springing to her eyes, "how could
you be cruel to her, and she is not long without mother, you know--how
could you be cruel to her, Aunt Jane?"

"You are not to dare to speak to me in that tone, Iris," said Aunt
Jane.

But at that moment the noise, or perhaps it was the draught of fresh
air, caused Diana to stir in her sleep. She raised her head and looked
around her. The first person her eyes met was Iris.

"So you has come at last," she said. "I don't think much of you for a
mother. You made a lot of pwomises, and that's all you care. Has that
ugly old woman been sent to pwison? There's my darlin' pets gone and
got deaded, and she deaded 'em. Has she been put in pwison for murder?
Oh, there you is, too, old Aunt Jane! Well, I is not going to obey
you, so there! Now you know the twuf. I is Diana, the gweat Diana. I
isn't going to obey nobody!"

"Iris," said Mrs. Dolman, "will you speak to this extremely naughty
little girl? If she will not repent and beg my pardon she shall have
no dinner. I will send her in some bread and water; and here she shall
stay until her naughty little spirit is broken."

Mrs. Dolman left the room as she spoke, and Iris found herself alone
with her sister.

"You isn't much of a mother," repeated Diana. She went over to the
window, and stood with her back to Iris. Her little bosom was heaving
up and down; she felt very forlorn, but still she hugged her misery to
her as a cloak.

Iris gazed at her in perplexity.

"Di," she said, "I never saw you like this before. What are you
turning away from me for? Come to me, Di; do come to me."

Diana's little breast heaved more than ever, tears came into her eyes,
but she blinked them furiously away.

"You can come to me, if you want; I shan't come to you. You isn't much
of a mother," she repeated.

"But I did not know you were in trouble, darling. Do, do come to your
own Iris. Do tell me what is the matter."

"Oh, Iris!" sobbed Diana.

The first kind note utterly melted her little heart; she rushed to
her sister, flung herself upon her, and sobbed as if she would never
stop crying.

"We can't stay in this howid place, Iris," she said; "all my darlin's
has gone and got deaded. That howid old woman upstairs said they was
wermin. She has killed 'em all. I can't stay here; I won't stay here.
Take me back to the beautiful garden. Do, Iris; do. I'se just so
mis'ble."

Iris sat down on one of the hard-backed chairs.

"Look here, Di," she said, "I have no time now to talk things over
with you. Of course, everything is altered, and our lives are
completely changed. When mother was dying, when I last saw her, she
told me that I must expect this. She said she knew that, when she went
away to the angels, we four children would have to go out into the
world and fight our battles. She said that everybody in the world has
got a battle to fight, and even little children have to fight theirs.
She said, too, that if we were brave and the kind of children she
wants us to be, we would follow the names she gave us and conquer our
enemies. Now, Di, you are called after Diana, the great Diana, who was
supposed to be a sort of goddess. Do you think she would have given
in? I send this by one of my servants, who will attend your dispatch.

LETTER XXXIII
MR. BELFORD, TO MR. JAMES HARLOWE, JUN. ESQ.
SATURDAY, SEPT. 16.

SIR,
You will excuse my plain-dealing in turn: for I must observe, that
if I had not the just opinion I have of the sacred nature of this
office I have undertaken, some passages in the letter you have
favoured me with would convince me that I ought not to excuse myself
from acting in it.

I need only name one of them.

You are pleased to say, that your uncles, if the trust be relinquished
to them, will treat with me, through Colonel Morden, as to the
points they will undertake to perform.

Permit me, Sir, to say, that it is the duty of an executor to see
every point performed, that can be performed.

--Nor will I leave the performance of mine to any other persons,
especially where a qualifying is so directly intimated, and where
all the branches of your family have shown themselves, with respect
to the incomparable lady, to have but one mind.

You are pleased to urge, that she recommends to me the leaving
to the honour of any of your family such of the articles as are
of a domestic nature.

But, admitting this to be so, does it not imply that the other
articles are still to obtain my care?

--But even these, you will find by the will, she gives not up; and
to that I refer you.

I am sorry for the hints you give of an opposition, where, as you
say, there might be none, if I did not interfere.

I see not, Sir, why your animosity against a man who cannot be defended,
should be carried to such a height against one who never gave you
offence; and this only, because he is acquainted with that man.

I will not say all I might say on this occasion.

As to the legacy to myself, I assure you, Sir, that neither my
circumstances nor my temper will put me upon being a gainer by the
executorship.

I shall take pleasure to tread in the steps of the admirable testatrix
in all I may; and rather will increase than diminish her poor's fund.

With regard to the trouble that may attend the execution of the
trust, I shall not, in honour to her memory, value ten times more
than this can give me.

I have, indeed two other executorships on my hands; but they sit light
upon me.

And survivors cannot better or more charitably bestow their time.

I conceive that every article, but that relating to the poor's fund,
(such is the excellence of the disposition of the most excellent
of women,) may be performed in two months' time, at farthest.

Occasions of litigation or offence shall not proceed from me. You
need only apply to Colonel Morden who shall command me in every
thing that the will allows me to oblige your family in.

I do assure you, that I am as unwilling to obtrude myself upon it, as
any of it can wish.

I own that I have not yet proved the will; nor shall I do it till next
week at soonest, that you may have time for amicable objections, if
such you think fit to make through the Colonel's mediation.

But let me observe to you, Sir, 'That an executor's power, in such
instances as I have exercised it, is the same before the probate
as after it.

He can even, without taking that out, commence an action, although he
cannot declare upon it: and these acts of administration make him
liable to actions himself.'

I am therefore very proper in the steps I shall have taken in part
of the execution of this sacred trust; and want not allowance on
the occasion.

Permit me to add, that when you have perused the will, and coolly
considered every thing, it is my hope, that you will yourself be
of opinion that there can be no room for dispute or opposition; and
that if your family will join to expedite the execution, it will
be the most natural and easy way of shutting up the whole affair,
and to have done with a man so causelessly, as to his own particular,
the object of your dislike, as is, Sir,
Your very humble servant, (notwithstanding,) JOHN BELFORD.

THE WILL
To which the following preamble, written on a separate paper, was
Stitched in black silk.

TO MY EXECUTOR
'I hope I may be excused for expatiating, in divers parts of this
solemn last act, upon subjects of importance.

For I have heard of so many instances of confusion and disagreement
in families, and so much doubt and difficulty, for want of absolute
clearness in the testaments of departed persons, that I have often
concluded, (were there to be no other reasons but those which respect
the peace of surviving friends,) that this last act, as to its
designation and operation, ought not to be the last in its composition
or making; but should be the result of cool deliberation, and (as
is more frequently than justly said) of a sound mind and memory;
which too seldom are to be met with but in sound health.

All pretences of insanity of mind are likewise prevented, when a
testator gives reasons for what he wills; all cavils about words
are obviated; the obliged are assured; and they enjoy the benefit
for whom the benefit was intended.

Hence have I, for some time past, employed myself in penning down
heads of such a disposition; which, as reasons offered, I have altered
and added to, so that I was never absolutely destitute of a will, had
I been taken off ever so suddenly.

These minutes and imperfect sketches enabled me, as God has graciously
given me time and sedateness, to digest them into the form in which
they appear.'

I, CLARISSA HARLOWE, now, by strange melancholy accidents, lodging
in the parish of St.

Paul, Covent-garden, being of sound and perfect mind and memory,
as I hope these presents, drawn up by myself, and written with my own
hand, will testify, do, [this second day of September,*] in the
year of our Lord ----,** make and publish this my last will and
testament, in manner and form following:
* A blank, at the writing, was left for this date, and filled up
on this day.

See Vol. VIII. Letter LI.
** The date of the year is left blank for particular reasons.

In the first place, I desire that my body may lie unburied three days
after my decease, or till the pleasure of my father be known concerning
it. But the occasion of my death not admitting of doubt, I will not,
on any account that it be opened; and it is my desire, that it shall
not be touched but by those of my own sex.

I have always earnestly requested, that my body might be deposited
in the family vault with those of my ancestors.

If it might be granted, I could now wish, that it might be placed
at the feet of my dear and honoured grandfather.

But as I have, by one very unhappy step, been thought to disgrace
my whole lineage, and therefore this last honour may be refused to
my corpse; in this case my desire is, that it may be interred in
the churchyard belonging to the parish in which I shall die; and
that in the most private manner, between the hours of eleven and
twelve at night; attended only by Mrs.

Lovick, and Mr. and Mrs. Smith, and their maid servant.

But it is my desire, that the same fees and dues may be paid which are
usually paid for those who are laid in the best ground, as it is
called, or even in the chancel.

--And I bequeath five pounds to be given, at the discretion of the
church-wardens, to twenty poor people, the Sunday after my interment;
and this whether I shall be buried here or elsewhere.

I have already given verbal directions, that, after I am dead, (and
laid out in the manner I have ordered,) I may be put into my coffin
as soon as possible: it is my desire, that I may not be unnecessarily
exposed to the view of any body; except any of my relations should
vouchsafe, for the last time, to look upon me.

And I could wish, if it might be avoided without making ill will
between Mr.

Lovelace and my executor, that the former might not be permitted
to see my corpse.

But if, as he is a man very uncontroulable, and as I am nobody's, he
insist upon viewing her dead, whom he ONCE before saw in a manner
dead, let his gay curiosity be gratified.

Let him behold, and triumph over the wretched remains of one who
has been made a victim to his barbarous perfidy: but let some good
person, as by my desire, give him a paper, whist he is viewing the
ghastly spectacle, containing these few words only,--'Gay, cruel
heart!

behold here the remains of the once ruined, yet now happy, Clarissa
Harlowe!--See what thou thyself must quickly be;--and REPENT!--'
Yet, to show that I die in perfect charity with all the world, I
do most sincerely forgive Mr.

Lovelace the wrongs he has done me.

If my father can pardon the errors of his unworthy child, so far
as to suffer her corpse to be deposited at the feet of her grandfather,
as above requested, I could wish (my misfortunes being so notorious)
that a short discourse be pronounced over my remains, before they
be interred.

The subject of the discourse I shall determine before I conclude
this writing.

So much written about what deserves not the least consideration,
and about what will be nothing when this writing comes to be opened
and read, will be excused, when my present unhappy circumstances
and absence from all my natural friends are considered.

And now, with regard to the worldly matters which I shall die possessed
of, as well as to those which of right appertain to me, either by
the will of my said grandfather, or otherwise; thus do I dispose of
them.

In the first place, I give and bequeath all the real estates in or to
which I have any claim or title by the said will, to my ever-honoured
father, James Harlowe, Esq. and that rather than to my brother and
sister, to whom I had once thoughts of devising them, because, if
they survive my father, those estates will assuredly vest in them, or
one of them, by virtue of his favour and indulgence, as the circumstances
of things with regard to marriage-settlements, or otherwise, may
require; or, as they may respectively merit by the continuance of
their duty.

The house, late my grandfather's, called The Grove, and by him, in honour
of me, and of some of my voluntary employments, my Dairy-house, and the
furniture thereof as it now stands (the pictures and large iron chest
of old plate excepted,) I also bequeath to my said father; only
begging it as a favour that he will be pleased to permit my dear Mrs.
Norton to pass the remainder of her days in that house; and to
have and enjoy the apartments in it known by the name of The
Housekeeper's Apartments, with the furniture in them; and which,
(plain and neat) was bought for me by my grandfather, who delighted
to call me his house-keeper; and which, therefore, in his life-time,
I used as such: the office to go with the apartments.

And as I am the more earnest in this recommendation, as I had once
thought to have been very happy there with the good woman; and because
I think her prudent management will be as beneficial to my father,
as his favour can be convenient to her.

But with regard to what has accrued from that estate, since my
grandfather's death, and to the sum of nine hundred and seventy
pounds, which proved to be the moiety of the money that my said
grandfather had by him at his death, and which moiety he bequeathed
to me for my sole and separate use, [as he did the other moiety in
like manner to my sister;*] and which sum (that I might convince
my brother and sister that I wished not for an independence upon
my father's pleasure) I gave into my father's hands, together with
the management and produce of the whole estate devised to me--these
sums, however considerable when put together, I hope I may be allowed
to dispose of absolutely, as my love and gratitude (not confined
only to my own family, which is very wealthy in all its branches)
may warrant: and which therefore I shall dispose of in the manner
hereafter mentioned.

But it is my will and express direction, that my father's account
of the above-mentioned produce may be taken and established absolutely
(and without contravention or question,) as he shall be pleased to
give it to my cousin Morden, or to whom else he shall choose to give
it; so as that the said account be not subject to litigation, or
to the controul of my executor, or of any other person

.

* See Vol. I. Letter XIII.

My father, of his love and bounty, was pleased to allow me the same
quarterly sums that he allowed my sister for apparel and other
requisites; and (pleased with me then) used to say, that those sums
should not be deducted from the estate and effects bequeathed to
me by my grandfather: but having mortally offended him (as I fear
it may be said) by one unhappy step, it may be expected that he
will reimburse himself those sums--it is therefore my will and
direction, that he shall be allowed to pay and satisfy himself for
all such quarterly or other sums, which he was so good as to advance
me from the time of my grandfather's death; and that his account
of such sums shall likewise be taken without questioning the money,
however, which I left behind me in my escritoire, being to be taken
in part of those disbursements.

My grandfather, who, in his goodness and favour to me, knew no
bounds, was pleased to bequeath to me all the family pictures at
his late house, some of which are very masterly performances; with
command, that if I died unmarried, or if married and had no
descendants, they should then go to that son of his (if more than
one should be then living) whom I should think would set most value
by them.

Now, as I know that my honoured uncle, Mr. John Harlowe, Esq. was
pleased to express some concern that they were not left to him, as
eldest son; and as he has a gallery where they may be placed to
advantage; and as I have reason to believe that he will bequeath them
to my father, if he survive him, who, no doubt, will leave them to
my brother, I therefore bequeath all the said family pictures to my
said uncle, John Harlowe. In these pictures, however, I include not
one of my own, drawn when I was about fourteen years of age; which
I shall hereafter in another article bequeath.

My said honoured grandfather having a great fondness for the old family
plate, which he would never permit to be changed, having lived, as
he used to day, to see a great deal of it come into request again in
the revolution of fashions; and having left the same to me, with a
command to keep it entire; and with power at my death to bequeath
it to whomsoever I pleased that I thought would forward his desire;
which was, as he expresses it, that it should be kept to the end
of time; this family plate, which is deposited in a large iron
chest, in the strong room at his late dwelling-house, I bequeath
entire to my honoured uncle Antony Harlowe, Esq. with the same
injunctions which were laid on me; not doubting but he will confirm
and strengthen them by his own last will.

I bequeath to my ever-valued friend, Mrs. Judith Norton, to whose piety
and care, seconding the piety and care of my ever-honoured and
excellent mother, I owe, morally speaking, the qualifications which,
for eighteen years of my life, made me beloved and respected, the
full sum of six hundred pounds, to be paid her within three months
after my death.

I bequeath also to the same good woman thirty guineas, for
mourning for her and for her son, my foster-brother.

To Mrs. Dorothy Hervey, the only sister of my honoured mother, I bequeath
the sum of fifty guineas for a ring; and I beg of her to accept of
my thankful acknowledgements for all her goodness to me from my
infancy; and particularly for her patience with me, in the several
altercations that happened between my brother and sister and me,
before my unhappy departure from Harlowe-place.

To my kind and much valued cousin, Miss Dolly Hervey, daughter of
my aunt Hervey, I bequeath my watch and equipage, and my best Mechlin
and Brussels head-dresses and ruffles; also my gown and petticoat
of flowered silver of my own work; which having been made up but a
few days before I was confined to my chamber, I never wore.

To the same young lady I bequeath likewise my harpsichord, my
chamber-organ, and all my music-books.

As my sister has a very pretty library; and as my beloved Miss Howe
has also her late father's as well as her own; I bequeath all my
books in general, with the cases they are in, to my said cousin
Dolly Hervey.

The
kind that would pwick deep, you know, that would cut into things and
be like the arrow that the gweat Diana used."

Apollo was finding his afternoon somewhat dull. He had made no friends
as yet with the little Dolman children. Orion had disappeared with
both the boys; Iris was with Ann, Lucy, and Mary; he had been thrown
for the last hour completely on his own resources. The sight,
therefore, of Diana, with her flushed face and bright eyes and
spirited manner, quite cheered the little fellow. He and Diana had
often been chums, and he thought it would be rather nice to be chummy
with his little sister to-day.

"I may as well help you," he said, "but, of course, Di, you can't
expect me to do this sort of thing often. I shall most likely be very
soon going to school, and then I'll be with fellows, you know."

"What's fellows?" asked Diana.

"Oh, boys! Of course, when I get with boys, you can't expect me to be
much with you."

"All wight," answered Diana. "I hope you won't get with no fellows
this afternoon, 'cos you is useful to me. Just sit down where you is,
and help me to make a bow and arrow."

Apollo instantly seated himself on the grass, and Diana threw herself
on her face and hands by his side. She raised herself on her elbows
and fixed her bright black eyes on her brother's face. She stared
very hard at him, and he stared back at her.

"Well," she said, "isn't you going to begin?"

"Yes," he replied; "but what do you want the bow and arrow for?"

"To get my enemies shotted."

"Your enemies? What folly this is, Di. You have not got any enemies."

"Haven't I? I know better. I won't talk to you about it, 'Pollo."

"All right," replied Apollo; "you must tell me, or I won't help you."

"There, now!" said Diana, "you's got a howid fwown between your bwows.
I don't like it; you's going to be obs'nate. I don't like obs'nate
boys."

"I mean what I say," replied Apollo. "I know you of old, you monkey.
You are up to mischief, and I insist upon hearing all about it."

Diana gazed at him solemnly.

"Does you like Aunt Jane?" she said, after a pause.

"I can't say that I do," replied Apollo.

"Does you like that old thing in the nursery--Simpson, they calls
her?"

"I can't say that I do," replied the boy again.

"They is sort of enemies of yours, isn't they?" asked Diana.

"Oh! I don't know that I go as far as that," replied Apollo.

"But if Aunt Jane makes you do howid lessons all day, and if Simpson
is always fussing you and getting you to wash your face and hands, and
if you can't never go with _fellows_, and if you is kept in--and
if--and if--"

"Oh! don't begin all that, Di," said Apollo. "Where is the use of
making the worst of things?"

"Well, I want to make the best of things," said Diana. "I want to have
our enemies shotted wight off."

"Do you mean to tell me," said Apollo, laughing, "that you wish to
shoot Aunt Jane and that old woman in the nursery?"

"I wish to pwick 'em first time, and then, if they is naughty again,
to have 'em shotted down dead. Why not? Mother, who is up in the
heavens, called me after gweat Diana, and Diana always shotted her
enemies."

"Oh, dear me, Di! I think you are the queerest little thing in the
world," said Apollo. "But now, look here," he added, "I am older than
you, and I know that what you are thinking about is very wrong. I
can't make you a bow and arrow to do that sort of thing."

Diana looked bitterly disappointed. She could master, or she fancied
she could master, Aunt Jane, Simpson, and Miss Ramsay, but she knew
well, from past experience, that she could not master Apollo.

"What is to be done?" she said. She thought for a long time. "Would
not you like a bow and arrow just all your own, to shoot at the twees
with?" she asked at last artfully.

"Oh, I have no objection to that!" answered Apollo. "It seems right
that I should have one; does it not, Di? But of course I would never
do any mischief with it. Why, little thing, you have been talking the
most awful rot."

"Well, you can make a bow and arrow for your very own self," said
Diana.

"I don't see why I shouldn't, but you'll have to promise--"

"Oh, I won't make pwomises!" said Diana. "Why should I make pwomises
about your bow and arrows? I'll help you to make 'em. Do let me,
Apollo!"

Apollo seemed suddenly smitten with the idea. After all, it would be
fine to make a bow and arrow, and to try to shoot things in the wood.
How lovely it would be if he succeeded in shooting a rabbit; he would
certainly have a try. Accordingly, he rose and climbed into the lower
branches of an elm tree, and cut down a long, smooth young bough, and,
descending again to the ground, began to peel the bark off. When this
was done, Diana produced some more string out of her pocket, and a
very creditable bow was the result.

"Now, the arrow," said the little girl.

"We must get some strong wood for that," said Apollo, "something that
won't split. I'll just walk about and look around me." He did so, and
soon found a stick suitable for his purpose. He sat down again and
began whittling away. Very soon a fairly sharp arrow was the result.
"Of course it ought to be tipped," said Apollo, "but we have nothing
to tip it with. It is lucky that the wood is hard, and so it is really
sharp. Now, shall I have a few shots with it?"

"Please do, Apollo. Oh, how 'licious it all is! Don't you feel just as
if you was a heathen god?"

"I wish I were," said Apollo, throwing back his head. "Oh, Di, how hot
it is in the wood! What wouldn't I give to be back in the dear old
garden again?"

"Maybe we'll go soon," said Diana; "maybe they won't want to keep us
if--" But here she shut up her little mouth firmly.

Apollo was too much excited about the bow and arrows to think of
Diana's remarks. He stood up and began to practice shooting.

"You is doing it beautiful," said Diana, applauding his extremely poor
efforts. "Now, twy again. Think that you has lived long, long ago, and
that you is shotting things for our dinner."

The arrow went wide of the mark, the arrow went everywhere but where
it ought to. Diana clapped and laughed and shouted, and Apollo thought
himself the finest archer in the world.

"Now, let me have a teeny turn," she said.

"To be sure I will," he replied good-naturedly. He showed her how to
place the arrow, and she made one or two valiant attempts to send it
flying through the wood.

"It is hard," she panted; "the arrow don't seem even to make the least
little pwick. Now, I want to shoot stwaight at that oak twee, or would
you mind awfu', Apollo, if I was to shoot at you?"

"All right," replied Apollo; "you may aim at my hand, if you like." He
walked about a dozen yards away and held up his hand.

Diana made valiant efforts, and grew crimson in the face, but the
arrow still went wide of the mark.


CHAPTER XI.

JOG'APHY.


The next day lessons began with a vengeance. It was one thing for the
four Delaney children to work with Miss Stevenson at the old Manor
House. Lessons in mother's time were rather pleasant than otherwise;
as often as not they were conducted in the garden, and when the day
happened to be very hot, and the little people somewhat impatient of
restraint, Miss Stevenson gave them a certain amount of liberty; but
lessons at the Rectory were an altogether different matter. Miss
Ramsay, when she awoke the next day, had seemed emphatically to have
put on all her armor. During the holiday, neither Orion nor Diana,
neither Apollo nor Iris, thought Miss Ramsay of any special account.
They stared a good deal at Uncle Dolman, and they watched Aunt Jane
with anxious eyes, but Miss Ramsay did not matter, one way or the
other. The next day, however, they came to have a totally different
opinion with regard to her.

At breakfast, on the following morning, whenever Diana opened her
rosebud lips, she was told that she must not speak unless she could do
so in the French tongue. Now, all that Diana could manage to say in
French was 'Oui' and 'Non,' nor was she very certain when to say
either of these very simple words. She hated being silent, for she was
a very talkative, cheery little body, except when she was angry.
Accordingly, the meal was a depressing one, and Diana began to yawn
and to look wearily out on the sunshiny garden before it was
half-finished. But, of course, there was no play in the garden for any
of the children that morning. Immediately after breakfast they all
went up to the schoolroom. Now, the schoolroom was a very pleasant
room, nicely and suitably furnished, but in summer it was hot, and on
very sunshiny days it was painfully hot; its single large bay window
faced due south, and the sun poured in relentlessly all during the
hours of morning school. Miss Ramsay, seated at the head of the
baize-covered table with her spectacles on, looked decidedly
formidable, and each of the children gazed at their governess with
anxious eyes. Mary and Lucy were always good little girls, but Philip
and Conrad were as idle as boys could possibly be, and did their
utmost to evade Miss Ramsay's endeavors to instill learning into their
small heads. Orion sat between his two little boy cousins, but for
some reason or other Orion did not look well that morning. His little
face, not unlike Diana's in appearance, was bloated, his eyes were
heavy, he had scarcely touched his breakfast, and he earnestly, most
earnestly longed to get out of the hot schoolroom.

Miss Ramsay, when all the little people were seated round her, knocked
sharply on the table with her ruler, and proceeded to make a speech.
"My dear old pupils," she said, looking at the five little Dolmans as
she spoke, "on account of your cousins, who, I fear, are ignorant
little children, I mean on this occasion to speak to you in the
English tongue. I have now got nine pupils to instruct, and nine
pupils are a great many for one person to teach. Your mother,
however, has promised that the master from the village shall come up
to instruct you all in arithmetic, and your French master and your
music master will, of course, attend here as usual. I trust,
therefore, that by more attention on the part of my pupils I may be
able to continue the heavy task which I have undertaken. What I want
to impress upon you children"--here she turned abruptly to the little
Delaneys--"is that lessons are lessons, and play is play. During
lesson-time I allow _no_ wandering thoughts, I allow no attempts at
shirking your duties. The tasks I set you will be carefully chosen
according to your different abilities, and I can assure you beforehand
that learned they must be. If I find that they are not carefully
prepared I shall punish you. By being attentive, by making the best of
your time, you can easily get through the lessons appointed you, and
then when they are over I hope you will thoroughly enjoy your time of
play. Now, all of you sit quiet. We will begin with a lesson from
English history."

Miss Ramsay then began to lecture in her usual style. She was really
an excellent teacher, and Iris found what she said very interesting.
She began to tell about the reign of Queen Elizabeth, and she made
that time quite live to the intelligent little girl. But Apollo had
not nearly come to the reign of Elizabeth in his English history. He,
consequently, could not follow the story, and soon began to look out
of the window, and to count the flies which were buzzing in the hot
sunshine on the window-panes. When Miss Ramsay addressed a sudden
question to him he was unable to reply. She passed it on to Ann, who
instantly gave the correct answer. But Apollo felt himself to be in
his governess' black books. As this was the first morning of lessons,
she was not going to be severe, and, telling the little boy to take
his history away to another table, desired him to read it all
carefully through.

"I will question you to-morrow about what I told you to-day," she
said. "Now, remember, you must tell me the whole story of the Spanish
Armada to-morrow."

"But I have not gone farther than the reign of John," said Apollo.

"Don't answer me, Apollo," said Miss Ramsay; "you are to read this
part of your history book. Now, sit with your back to the others and
begin."

Apollo shrugged his shoulders. For a short time he made an effort to
read his dull history, but then once again his eyes sought the
sunshine and the flies on the window panes.

Meanwhile Diana, Orion, and the two little Dolman boys were in a class
by themselves, busily engaged over a geography lesson.

Diana had not the smallest wish to become acquainted with any portion
of the globe where she was not herself residing. Her thoughts were all
full of the bow and arrow which Apollo had carefully hidden in a
little dell at the entrance of the wood, on the previous night. She
was wondering when she could run off to secure the prize, and when she
would have an opportunity of punishing her enemies. She began to think
that it would be really necessary to give Miss Ramsay a prick with the
fatal arrow. Miss Ramsay was turning out to be most disagreeable.

Meanwhile, the heat of the room, and a curious giddy sensation in her
head, caused it to sink lower and lower, until finally it rested on
her book, and little Diana was off in the land of dreams.

A sharp tap on her shoulders roused her with a start. Miss Ramsay was
standing over her, looking very angry.

"Come, Diana! this will never do," she cried. "How dare you go to
sleep! Do you know your geography?"

"P'ease, I doesn't know what jog-aphy is," said Diana.

"What a very naughty little girl you are! Have not I been taking pains
to explain it all to you? You will have to stay in the schoolroom when
lessons are over for quite five minutes. Now, stand up on your chair,
hold your book in your hands, don't look out of the window, keep your
eyes fixed on your book, and then you will soon learn what is required
of you."

Diana obeyed this mandate with a very grave face.

In about ten minutes Miss Ramsay called her to her side.

"Well, do you know your lesson?" she asked.

"Kite perfect," replied Diana.

"Well, let me hear you. What is the capital of England?"

"Dublin Bay," replied Diana, with avidity.

"You are a very naughty child. How can you tell me you know your
lesson? See, I will ask you one more question. What is the capital of
Scotland?"

"Ireland," answered Diana, in an earnest voice.

Miss Ramsay shut the book with a bang. Diana looked calmly at her.

"I thought I knew it," she said. "I's sossy. I don't think I care to
go on learning jog-aphy; it don't suit me." She stretched herself,
gave utterance to a big yawn, and half turned her back on her
teacher. "You is getting in temper," she continued, "and that isn't
wight; I don't care to learn jog-aphy."

What serious consequences might not have arisen at that moment it is
hard to tell, had not Orion caused a sudden diversion. He fell off his
chair in a heap on the floor.

Iris sprang from her seat and ran to the rescue.

"I'm drefful sick," said Orion; "I think it was the lollipops and
ginger-beer. Please let me go to bed."

"Lollipops and ginger-beer!" cried Miss Ramsay in alarm. "What does
the child mean?"


CHAPTER XII.

A BABY'S HONOR.


When Miss Ramsay repeated Orion's words there was a dead silence for a
full half minute in the schoolroom. Had anyone noticed them, they
might have observed Philip and Conrad turn very pale; but all eyes
were directed to little Orion, who was lying on the floor, pressing
his hand to his stomach and moaning bitterly.

"I'm drefful sick," he said; "I wish I had not taken that horrid
ginger-beer."

"But where did you get ginger-beer?" said Miss Ramsay, finding her
voice at last. "Get up this minute, Orion, and come to me.

"Really," continued the good lady to herself, "there must be something
uncanny in those outlandish names; I don't think I can manage these
children. Orion is as bad as Diana, and she is the greatest handful I
ever came across.

"Come here, Orion," continued the governess, "and tell me what is the
matter with your stomach."

"Pain," answered the little boy, "crampy pain. It's the ginger-beer.
I'm drefful sick; I can't do no more lessons."

"Let me put him to bed," said Diana; "let me go nurse him. I'll sit on
his bed and talk to him. He is a very naughty boy, but I know how to
manage him. Come 'long, Orion; come 'long wid sister Di." She grasped
the little boy firmly with one of her own stout little hands, and
pulled him up on to his feet.

"Diana, you are not to interfere," said Miss Ramsay. "Come, Orion;
come and explain what is the matter."

"Lollipops," moaned Orion, "and ginger-beer. Oh, I did like the
lollipops, and I was so thirsty I thought I'd never leave off drinking
ginger-beer."

"But where did you get lollipops and ginger-beer? Mrs. Dolman never
allows the children to take such unwholesome things. What can you
mean? Where did you get them?"

To this question Orion refused to make any reply. Baby as he was, he
had a confused sort of idea of honor. Philip and Conrad had told him
that he was on no account whatever to mention the fact that they had
gone away fishing on the previous afternoon, that they had visited a
little shop and spent some of Orion's own money. Philip and Conrad had
no money of their own, but before he parted with the children, Mr.
Delaney had given the two elder ones five shillings apiece, and the
two younger ones half a crown, and Orion's half-crown had seemed great
wealth to Philip and Conrad, and had accordingly induced them to treat
the little fellow with marked consideration. The whole of the money
was now gone. How, Orion had not the slightest idea. He only knew that
his pockets were empty and that he felt very sick and very miserable.

He shut up his little lips now and raised his eyes, with a sort of
scowl in their expression, to Miss Ramsay's face.

"Where did you get the lollipops and ginger-beer?" repeated the
governess.

"That's my own business," said Orion. "I'm drefful sick; I want to go
to bed."

"You are a very naughty little boy," said Miss Ramsay.

"I think him a brick," whispered Philip to Conrad.

"Hush, for goodness' sake!" whispered back Conrad.

"I want to go to bed," repeated Orion. "I'm drefful sick; I'm quite
tired of telling you. I have got a headache and a pain in my tumtum."
Again he pressed his hand to his stomach and looked imploringly around
him.

"What's all this fuss?" here burst from Diana. "Why can't Orion go to
bed? New teacher, you has a very queer way of managing sildrens. When
we was at home we went to bed when we had pains. I can't underland
you, not one little bit."

"Come with me this moment, Orion," said Miss Ramsay. "Diana, if you
speak a word except in the French tongue, you shall be kept in during
all the afternoon."

Orion and Miss Ramsay left the room, and the other children stared at
one another. The three Dolman girls sat down to their books. Philip
and Conrad thought it best to follow their example. They had agreed
that Isabel should not know what Jenny had seen that night of the
recital.
For Jenny could not bear to think of the letters it would mean.

"Let that be our secret, dear," she said to Theophil; and thus, when
Isabel wrote, she wrote back in her usual way. Theophil and Isabel never
wrote to each other. It was no part of their love to deceive Jenny
in letters.

Their love was vowed to silence and absence, and in Theophil's life it
must be more and more of a starlit background.

So the weeks went by, and the marriage of Theophil and Jenny was now
finally fixed for the 12th of February. On second thoughts, as their
love grew serene once more, they had decided not to anticipate that
date, for old Mrs.

Talbot's sake; and meanwhile Jenny was admonished by that old
mother to make haste and get that flesh on her bones.

The admonition was not without cause, for it presently became noticeable
that Jenny was not merely negatively disobeying her old mother in
this.

Not only was she not growing fatter, but, indeed, she was, for one
reason or another, slowly and almost imperceptibly growing thinner.

It was not those at home who noticed this first, but outside friends,
who, suddenly meeting her, would remark that she wasn't looking half
the girl she used to be.

She had already begun to remark it herself, as with her bare arms
she would coil up her hair, standing before her mirror; and she
thought nothing of it till one day, as she stood there, she noticed
a curious expression flash into her face and go again almost before
she could mark it.

Her face, which had always been round and plump, seemed suddenly to gaze
back at her, very narrow and pinched and white, strangely sunken,
too, and rigid.

It was all a mere flash and gone again, and her real face was presently
back once more.

But the look filled her with solemn thoughts, in which she was surprised
to find a certain comfort, as of a sad wish fulfilling itself.

She spoke to no one of that look, but it must have been the same look
that Theophil saw, a few nights after, as she sat listening to him
reading in her usual chair. Suddenly, as he looked up at her, he
threw down the book, and with concern, almost terror, in his voice,
exclaimed, "Good God, Jenny! are you ill, dear? What is that
terrible white look in your face?"
He sprang across and took her hands. The look had gone again before
he had finished speaking, but it was a look he was never to forget.

One day Jenny put out her arm, and asked him to feel how thin it was
growing.

"It _is_ thin, dear; but you mustn't be anxious. Perhaps you're a trifle
run down. You must see the doctor."
Mrs. Talbot did not believe in doctors, and suggested nourishing soups
and port wine as a substitute. These, however, made those dear arms
no fatter, they put none of that promised flesh on Jenny's bones.

(Why did Theophil rather creep one day as Mrs.

Talbot made use of that expression?)

And Jenny was growing tired too.

She was not so ready on her feet as she used to be. Small exertions
exhausted her. Her breath was not so available for running up and down
stairs as it had been.

Orion still kept his mouth very firmly shut, but he opened his sweet,
dark eyes and looked full at his sister.

"Would mother really like it?" he said at last, in a whisper.

"Of course; it would make her ever so happy."

"And will she know about it, Iris?"

"I think she will. Maybe she is in the room with us just now."

"Oh, lor'! what awful talk to say to the child," murmured Simpson to
herself.

"If I really thought mother could see, and if I really thought--"
began the little boy.

"Yes, yes, she can see!" said Iris, going on her knees and clasping
both the little fellow's hands in one of hers. "She can see, she does
know, and she wants her own brave giant to be a giant to the end. Now,
here is the enemy; open your mouth, conquer it at one gulp."

"Well, to be sure," whispered Simpson.

Orion, however, did not glance at Simpson. He gazed solemnly round the
room as if he really saw someone; then he fixed his brown eyes on his
sister's face, then he opened his mouth very wide. She instantly took
the cup and held it to the little lips. Orion drained off the nauseous
draught and lay back, panting, on his pillow.

"It was a big thing to conquer. I am a fine giant," he said, when he
returned the empty cup to Iris.

"Yes, you are a splendid old chap," she replied.

At that moment Mrs. Dolman and Miss Ramsay entered the room.

"Has Orion taken his medicine?" said Mrs. Dolman. "Iris, my dear, what
are you doing here?"

"I am very sorry, Aunt Jane," replied Iris, "but I had to come. He
would never have taken his medicine but for me. I had to remind him--"

"To remind him of his duty. He certainly wanted to be reminded. So he
has taken the medicine. I am glad of that; but all the same, Iris, you
did very wrong to leave the schoolroom."

"Please forgive me this one time, Aunt Jane."

"I really think Iris does try to be a good child," interrupted Miss
Ramsay.

"And she certainly can manage her little brother, ma'am," said
Simpson, speaking for the first time. "He would not touch his medicine
for me--no, not for anything I could do; but he drank it off when Miss
Iris talked some gibberish, all about giants and belts and swords."

"'Tisn't gibberish," said Orion, starting up from his pillow; "it's
the truest thing in all the world. I am a giant, and I has got a belt
and a sword. You can look up in the sky on starful nights and you can
see me. 'Tisn't gibberish."

"Well, lie down now, child, and go to sleep. I am afraid he is a bit
feverish, ma'am."

"No, that I aren't," said Orion. "Only I'm drefful sick," he added.

"Listen to me, Orion," said Mrs. Dolman, seating herself on the edge
of the bed and gazing very sternly at the little fellow. "I intend to
wring a confession out of you."

"What's to wring?" asked Orion.

"I am going to get you to tell me where you got the lollipops and
ginger-beer."

"I promised not to tell, and I aren't going to," answered Orion.

"But you must. I insist."

"Perhaps, Aunt Jane," said Iris, "I could get him to tell. You see he
is not accustomed to--not accustomed to----" Her little face turned
crimson.

"What do you mean, Iris? Do you object to the way I speak to this
child?"

"Mother never spoke to him like that," said Iris.

"And oh! it is so hot, and he is not well, and I think I can manage
him. I may get him to tell me."

"Yes, I'll tell you," said Orion, "'cos you'll be faithful."

"Well, really," said Mrs. Dolman, "I am absolutely perplexed. I
suppose I must give in on this occasion, or that child will be really
ill, and I by no means wish to have the expense of a doctor. Miss
Ramsay, you and I had better leave that little pair together. You can
remain with Orion until dinner-time, Iris."

"Thank you very much indeed, Aunt Jane," replied Iris.

That day at dinner Iris looked very grave. Orion was better, but was
not present. Mrs. Dolman waited until the meal had come to an end,
then she called the little girl to her side.

"Now, my dear Iris, what is all this mystery?" she asked.

"Orion has told me all about it, Aunt Jane, but I don't think I'll
tell. Please don't ask me."

"My dear. I insist upon knowing."

"It was not his fault, Aunt Jane, and I am almost sure he will never
do it again; he is very sorry indeed. I think he will try to be good
in future."

Mrs. Dolman was about to reply angrily, when a sudden memory came over
her. She recalled words her brother had used.

"I will give you the children," he had said, "but you must try to be
gentle with them."

She looked at Iris now, and did not speak for nearly a minute.

"Very well," she said then; "you are a queer child, but I am inclined
to trust you. Only please understand that if ever there is any
misconduct in the future, I shall insist on knowing everything."

"I am greatly obliged to you, Aunt Jane. I could love you for being so
kind. I will promise that Orion never does anything of that sort
again."

The children all filed out of the dining room. They had now, according
to the rule of the day, to return to the schoolroom and lie down for
an hour. This part of the daily programme was intensely distasteful to
the little Dolmans, and certainly the Delaneys did not appreciate it a
bit better, but at long last the wearisome lessons were over, and the
little people were free.

The moment they got into the garden Philip and Conrad might have been
seen scudding away as fast as their little feet could carry them.
Iris, however, had watched them disappearing.

"I want to speak to the boys," she said to Ann.

"Why?" asked Ann.

"Please ask them to come to me, Ann; I have something most particular
to say to them."

"I know what you mean," answered Ann, turning crimson; "it was Philip
and Conrad who got poor little Orion into mischief. Oh, Iris! it was
brave of you, and it was brave of Orion not to tell. I wondered how
you had the courage to defy mamma."

"I did not defy her," answered Iris. "But please, Ann, I must speak to
the boys. Send them to me at once."

"They are frightened, and are going to hide," said Ann; "but I'll soon
get them," she answered. "I know their ways."

After a minute or two she returned, leading Philip and Conrad by the
hands.

"Iris wants to talk to you," she said to them.

"Yes," said Iris, "I want to say something to you by yourselves."

Ann disappeared.

"I love Iris," whispered little Ann Dolman to herself. "I think she is
beautiful; and how brave she is! I wish I were like her."

"What do you want with us, Iris?" asked Philip, when he found himself
alone with his cousin. He raised defiant eyes, and put on an ugly
little scowl.

"I want to tell you, Phil," said Iris, "that I know everything. Poor
little Orion would not confess, because you got him to promise not to
tell; but, of course, he told me the truth. Don't you think you
behaved very badly indeed?"

"We don't want _you_ to lecture us," said Conrad.

"All right," replied Iris with spirit. "But please remember that I
promised Orion I would not tell, only so long as you make me a promise
that you will not tempt him again. If ever I hear that you have led
Orion into mischief, I will tell everything."

"I thought you looked like a tell-tale," said Conrad.

"No, I am not, nor is Orion; you know better, both of you. Now, please
understand that I will not have Orion made miserable nor tempted to do
naughty things. Aunt Jane thinks you are good boys, and she thinks
Diana and Orion very bad little children; but neither Orion nor Diana
would do the sort of thing you both did yesterday. Neither of them
would think of _that_ sort of naughtiness. I call it mean."

Iris walked away with her head in the air. The boys gazed after her
with a queer sinking of heart.


CHAPTER XIII.

BIRCH ROD.


Orion speedily recovered from his bad fit of indigestion, and matters
began to shake down a little in the schoolroom and nursery. No one
meant to be unkind to the little Delaneys; and although all things
were changed for them, in some ways both Iris and Apollo were all the
better for the strict and vigorous discipline they were now
undergoing. Iris really enjoyed her lessons, and when Apollo found
that he had no chance of going to school, and of being with "fellows,"
as he expressed it, until he had conquered certain difficult tasks
which Miss Ramsay set him, he began, for his own sake, to apply
himself to his lessons. He was a bright, clever little chap, and when
he tried to understand his governess' method of teaching, he did his
work fairly well. But Diana and Orion were much too young for the
somewhat severe transplantation which had taken place in their little
lives. Had Iris been allowed to be with them matters might not have
grown quite so bad, but she was much occupied with her lessons, and
the younger children spent the greater part of their time alone.

Philip and Conrad were afraid to make any further advances to Orion.
In consequence, he had no companion near his own age, except Diana,
and Diana's little heart, day by day, was growing fuller of
insubordinate and angry feelings. She was not at all by nature an
unforgiving little child, but the want of petting and the severe life
which she was obliged to lead began to tell on her high spirits. She
became defiant, and was always looking out for an opportunity to vent
her wrath upon the people whom she termed her enemies. Had Iris only
had a chance of talking to the little girl, she would soon have got to
the bottom of the matter, and things might not have turned out as they
did; but Iris did not even sleep in the room with Diana, and in her
sister's presence the little girl made a valiant effort to appear as
happy as usual. As a matter of fact, however, she and Orion spent most
of their playtime in perfecting their little scheme of revenge, and on
a certain hot day matters came to a crisis.

It had been much more trying than usual in the schoolroom; the sun
seemed to beat in with fiercer rays; there were more flies on the
window-panes, and the air seemed more charged with that terrible
sleepiness which poor little Diana could not quite conquer. At last
she dropped so sound asleep that Miss Ramsay took pity on her, and
told her she might go and have a run in the garden.

"Go into the Filbert walk," said the governess; "don't on any account
play where the sun is shining. You may stay out for half an hour.
There is a clock just by the stables, which you can see when you come
to the end of the walk; you will know then when the half-hour is out.
Run off now and enjoy yourself."

Diana scarcely wasted any time in thanking Miss Ramsay. She flew from
the schoolroom as though she were herself a little arrow shot from a
bow, she tumbled rather than walked downstairs, and with no hat over
her thick, black curls, careered out wildly, shouting as she did so.
The prospect of the walk and the look of the sunshine were making the
little girl very happy, and she might not have thought of any special
revenge had not Mrs. Dolman at that moment caught sight of her.

Mrs. Dolman was coming out of the kitchen garden. She had on her
invariable mushroom hat, her face was much flushed with exercise, and
she was by no means in the best of humors.

"Diana," she said, "what are you doing? Come here this minute."

"No, I won't," answered Diana. She backed before the good lady,
dancing and skipping and flinging her fat arms over her head. "Oh,
it's 'licious out!" she said: "I won't come. I has only got half an
hour; I hasn't any time; I won't come."

Mrs. Dolman began to run after her, which fact excited the little girl
very much. She instantly raced away, and the stout lady had to follow
her, panting and puffing.

"Diana, you are a dreadfully naughty little girl; if I catch you up,
won't I punish you!" panted Mrs. Dolman.

"I don't care," called back Diana. "You can't catch me up; you is fat;
you can't wun. See, let's have a wace--let's find out who'll be at the
end of the walk first. Now then, one, two, three, and away! Go it,
Aunt Jane! Now, then, k'ick, Aunt Jane; k'ick!"

Mrs. Dolman's rage at this great impertinence made her almost
speechless. She flew after Diana, but would have had little or no
chance of catching her, if the child had not suddenly tripped up
against a stone and measured her full length on the ground. Before
she could rise again Mrs. Dolman had caught her by the shoulder, and,
as a preliminary measure, began to shake her violently.

"You are a bad little thing," she said. "Why didn't you come to me
when I called you?"

"'Cos I didn't want to, Aunt Jane."

"But do you know that you have got to obey me, miss? What would your
mother say?"

"You isn't to dare to talk of mother to me," answered Diana.

"Highty-tighty! I'm not to dare. Do you suppose, Diana, that I will
allow a little child like you to defy me in my own house?"

"What's defy?" asked Diana.

"You are defying me now; you are a very naughty little girl, and I
shall punish you."

"I don't care," said Diana, tossing her head. "I was sent out by Miss
Wamsay 'cos I found the schoolroom too hot and I was sleepy. I can't
obey you and Miss Wamsay both at the same time, can I? I did not come
to you 'cos I don't like you."

"That's a pretty thing to say to your own aunt. Come, miss, I shall
punish you immediately."

"Oh, you's going to lock me up in the punishment woom. I don't care
one bit for that," said Diana. "I'll just lie on the floor and curl up
like a puppy and go to s'eep. I dweam beautiful when I s'eep. I dweam
that you is shotted, and that I is back again in the dear old garden
at home with all the pets; and that Rub-a-Dub is alive again. I dweam
that you is shotted down dead, and you can do no more harm, and----"

But Diana could not proceed any further. Mrs. Dolman, in her wild
indignation, had lifted her in her arms, clapped her hand over her
mouth, and carried her bodily into the study, where Mr. Dolman was
preparing his sermon.

"William," said his wife, "I am really very sorry to disturb you, but
I must ask you to come to my assistance."

"In what way, Jane?" he said. He pushed his spectacles, as his
invariable habit was, high up on the middle of his forehead, and
looked from his wife to Diana, and from Diana back again to his wife.

"Hi, Diana! is that you? Why, what is the matter, little one?" he
said.

"You are not to speak to this very naughty little girl," said Mrs.
Dolman. "I am sorry to trouble you, William, but matters have come to
a crisis, and if you don't support your wife on this occasion, I
really do not know what will happen."

"But, my dear Jane, do you mean to say that little Diana----"

"Little Diana!" repeated Mrs. Dolman. "She is quite a monster, I can
tell you--a monster of ingratitude, wickedness, and rudeness, and I
don't see how we can keep her any longer with our own children."

.'[12] Australia escaped polytheistic degeneracy by having no aristocracy,
as in Polynesia, where aristocracy, as in early Greece, had developed
polytheism.

Ghosts and spirits the Australians knew, but not polytheistic gods,
nor departmental deities, as of war, agriculture, art.

The savage had no agriculture, and his social condition was not departmental.
In yet another way, political advance produces religious degeneration,
if polytheism be degeneration from the conception of one relatively
supreme moral being.

To make a nation, several tribes must unite.

Each has its god, and the nation is apt to receive them all, equally,
into its Pantheon.

Thus, if worshippers of Baiame, Pundjel, and Darumulun coalesced into a
nation, we might find all three gods living together in a new polytheism.
In fact, granting a relatively pure starting-point, degeneration
from it must accompany every step of civilisation, to a certain
distance.

Unlike Semitic gods, Darumulun receives no sacrifice. As we have
said, he has no kin with ghosts, and their sacrifices could not
be carried on into his cult, if Waitz-Gerland (vi. 811) are right
in saying that the Australians have no ancestor-worship.

The Kurnai ghosts 'were believed to live upon plants,'[13] which are
not offered to them. Chill ghosts, unfed by men, would come to waning
camp-fires and batten on the broken meats.
The Ngarego and Wolgal held, more handsomely, that Tharamulun (Darumulun)
met the just departed spirit 'and conducted it to its future home
beyond the sky

.'[14] Ghosts might also accompany relics of the body, such as the dead
hand, carried about by the family, who would wave the black fragment
at the dreaded Aurora Borealis, crying, 'Send it away!'

I am unacquainted with any sacrifices to ancestral ghosts among this
people who cannot long remember their ancestors, consequently the
practice has not been refracted on their supreme Master's cult.

In the cult of Darumulun, and of other highest gods of lowest savages,
nothing answers to the Hebrew technical priestly word for sacrifice,
'food of the deity

.'[15] Nobody feeds Puluga, nobody fed Ahone. We hear of no Fuegian
sacrifices. Mr.

Robertson Smith says: 'In all religions in which the gods have been
developed out of totems [worshipped animals and other things
regarded as akin to human stocks] the ritual act of laying food
before the deity is perfectly intelligible.'

Pundjel, an Australian Supreme Being, is mixed up with animals in some
myths, but it is not easy to see how such Supreme Beings as he could
be 'developed out of totems'! I am not aware, again, that any Australian
tribe feeds the animals who are its totems, so Darumulun could not, and
did not inherit sacrifice through them. Mr. Robertson Smith had a
celebrated theory that cereal sacrifice is a tribute to a god, while
sacrifice of a beast or man is an act of communion with the
god.[16] Men and gods dined together.[17] 'The god himself was conceived
of as a being of the same stock as his comrades.' Beasts were also of
the same stock, one beast, say a lobster, was of the same blood as
a lobster kin, and its god.[18] Occasionally the sacred beast of
the kin, usually not to be slain or tasted, is 'eaten as a kind of
mystic sacrament a most dubious fact

.'[19]
Now, there is, I believe, some evidence, lately collected if not published,
which makes in favour of the eating of totems by Australians, at
a certain very rare and solemn mystery. It would not even surprise
me ('from information received') if a very deeply initiated person
were occasionally slain, as the highest degree of initiation, on
certain most unusual occasions. This remains uncertain, but I have
at present no evidence that, either by one road or another, either
from ghost-feeding or totem-feeding, or feeding on totems, any
Australian Supreme Being receives any sacrifice at all. Much less,
as among Pawnees and Semitic peoples (to judge from certain traces),
is the Australian Supreme Being a cause of and partaker in human
sacrifice.[20] The horrible idea of the Man who is the God, and is
eaten in the God's honour, occurs among polytheistic Aztecs, on a
high level of material culture, not among Australians, Andamanese,
Bushmen, or Fuegians.[21]
Thus, in religion, the Darumulun, or other Supreme Being of the
lowest known savages, men roaming wild, when originally met, on a
continent peopled by older kinds of animals than ours, was (as we
regard purity) on a higher plane by far than the gods of Greeks and
Semites in their earliest known myths.

Setting mythology aside and looking only at cult, the God of the Murring
or the Kurnai, whose precepts soften the heart, who knows the heart's
secrets, who inculcates chastity, respect of age, unselfishness,
who is not bound by conditions of space or place, who receives no
blood of slaughtered man or beast, is a conception from which the
ordinary polytheistic gods of infinitely more polite peoples are
frankly degenerate.

The animistic superstitions wildly based on the belief in the soul have
not soiled him, and the social conditions of aristocracy, agriculture,
architecture, have not made him one in a polytheistic crowd of
rapacious gods, nor fettered him as a Baal to his estate, nor
localised him in a temple built with hands.

He cannot appear as a 'God of Battles;' no _Te Deum_ can be sung to him
for victory in a cause perhaps unjust, for he is the Supreme Being of
a certain group of allied local tribes. One of these tribes has
no more interest with him than another, and the whole group do not,
as a body, wage war on another alien group.

The social conditions of his worshippers, then, preserve Darumulun from
the patent blots on the escutcheon of gods among much more advanced
races.

Once more, the idea of Animism admits of endless expansion. A spirit
can be located anywhere, in any stone, stick, bush, person, hill, or
river.

A god made on the animistic model can be assigned to any department
of human activity, down to sports, or lusts, or the province of
Cloacina.

Thus religion becomes a mere haunted and pestilential jungle of beliefs.

But the theistic conception, when not yet envisaged as spiritual,
cannot be subdivided and _éparpillé_.

Thus, from every point of view, and on every side, Animism is full
of the seeds of religious degeneration, which do not and cannot
exist in what I take to be the earliest known form of the theistic
conception: that of a Being about whose metaphysical nature--spirit
or not spirit--no questions were asked, as Dr.

Brinton long ago remarked.

That conception alone could neither supply the moral motive of 'a soul
to be saved,' nor satisfy the metaphysical instinct of advancing mankind.
To meet these wants, to supply 'soul,' with its moral stimulus,
and to provide a phrase or idea under which the Deity could be
envisaged (i.e. as a _spirit_) by advancing thought, Animism was
necessary.

The blending of the theistic and the animistic beliefs was indispensable
to religion.
But, in the process of animistic development under advancing social
conditions, degeneration was necessarily implied.

Degeneration of the theistic conception for a while, therefore,
occurred. The facts are the proofs; and only contradictory facts,
in sufficient quantity, can annihilate the old theory of Degeneration
when it is presented in this form.

It mast be repeated that on this theory an explanation is given of
what the old Degeneration hypothesis does not explain.

Granting a primal religion relatively pure in its beginnings, why
did it degenerate?

Mr. Max Mullet, looking on religion as the development of the
sentiment of the Infinite, regards fetishism as a secondary and
comparatively late form of belief.

We find it, he observes, in various forms of Christianity; Christianity,
therefore, is primary there, relic worship is secondary.
Religion beginning, according to him, in the sense of the infinite,
as awakened in man by tall trees, high hills, and so on, it advances
to the infinite of space and sky, and so to the infinitely divine.

This is primary: fetishism is secondary. Arguing elsewhere against
this idea, I have asked: What was the _modus_ of degeneration which
produced similar results in Christianity, and in African and other
religions?

How did it work? I am not aware that Mr. Max Müller has answered
this question.

But how degeneration worked--namely, by Animism supplanting Theism--is
conspicuously plain on our theory.

Take the early chapters of Genesis, or any savage cosmogonic myth
you please.

Deathless man is face to face with the Creator.

He cannot degenerate in religion. He cannot offer sacrifice, for the
Creator obviously needs nothing, and again, as there is no death,
he cannot slay animals for the Creator.

But, in one way or another, usually by breach of a taboo, Death
enters the world.

Then comes, by process of evolution, belief in hungry spirits, belief
in spirits who may inhabit stones or sticks; again there arise
priests who know how to propitiate spirits and how to tempt them
into sticks and stones.

These arts become lucrative and are backed by the cleverest men,
and by the apparent evidence of prophecies by convulsionaries.

Thus every known kind of degeneration in religion is inevitably
introduced as a result of the theory of Animism.

We do not need an hypothesis of Original Sin as a cause of degeneration,
and, if Mr.

Max Müller's doctrine of the Infinite were _viable_, we have supplied,
in Animism, under advancing social conditions, what he does not
seem to provide, a cause and _modus_ of degeneration.

Fetishism would thus be really 'secondary,' _ex hypothesi_, but as
we nowhere find Fetishism alone, without the other elements of religion,
we cannot say, historically, whether it is secondary or not.

Fetishism logically needs, in some of its aspects, the doctrine of
spirits, and Theism, in what we take to be its earliest known form,
does not logically need the doctrine of spirits as given matter.

So far we can go, but not farther, as to the fact of priority in
evolution.

Nevertheless we meet, among the most backward peoples known to us,
among men just emerged from the palaeolithic stage of culture, men
who are involved in dread of ghosts, a religious Idea which certainly
is not born of ghost-worship, for by these men, ancestral ghosts
are not worshipped.

In their hearts, on their lips, in their moral training we find
(however blended with barbarous absurdities, and obscured by rites
of another origin) the faith in a Being who created or constructed
the world; who was from time beyond memory or conjecture; who is
primal, who makes for righteousness, and who loves mankind.

This Being has not the notes of degeneration; his home is 'among the
stars,' not in a hill or in a house.

To him no altar smokes, and for him no blood is shed.

'God, that made the world and all things therein, seeing that He
is lord of heaven and earth, dwelleth not in temples made with
hands; neither is worshipped with men's hands, as though He needed
any thing ... and hath made of one blood all nations of men ...
that they should seek the Lord, if haply they might feel after Him,
and find Him, though He be not far from every one of us: for in Him
we live, and move, and have our being.'

That the words of St. Paul are literally true, as to the feeling
after a God who needs not anything at man's hands, the study of
anthropology seems to us to demonstrate.

That in this God 'we have our being,' in so far as somewhat of ours
may escape, at moments, from the bonds of Time and the manacles
of Space, the earlier part of this treatise is intended to suggest, as
a thing by no means necessarily beyond a reasonable man's power to
conceive. That these two beliefs, however attained (a point on which
we possess no positive evidence), have commonly been subject to
degeneration in the religions of the world, is only too obvious.

So far, then, the nature of things and of the reasoning faculty
does not seem to give the lie to the old Degeneration theory.

To these conclusions, as far as they are matters of scientific opinion,
we have been led by nothing but the study of anthropology.

[Footnote 1: _Myths of the New World_, p. 44.]
[Footnote 2: _Prim. Cult_. i. 35.]
[Footnote 3: _Introduction_, p. 199; also p. 161.]
[Footnote 4: _Prim.

Cult_. ii. 360,361.]

[Footnote 5: Prof. Menzies, _History of Religion_, p. 23.]
[Footnote 6: [Greek: legomenai theion anagchai.] Porphyry.]

[Footnote 7: Ixtlilochitl. Balboa, _Hist. du Pérou_, p. 62.]
[Footnote 8: Robertson Smith, _Religion of the Semites_, pp. 104,
105.]

[Footnote 9: Op. cit. p. 106.]
[Footnote 10: On the Glenelg some caves and mountain tops are haunted
or holy.

Waitz, vi. 804, No authority cited.]
[Footnote 11: _Religion of Semites_, p. 110.]
[Footnote 12: _Rel. Sem_. p. 71.]
[Footnote 13: Howitt, _J.A.T_. 1884, p. 187.]
[Footnote 14: Op. cit. p. 188.]
[Footnote 15: _Rel. Sem_. p. 207.]
[Footnote 16: _Rel. Sem_. p. 225.]
[Footnote 17: Op. cit. p. 247.]
[Footnote 18: Op. cit. p. 269.]
[Footnote 19: Op. cit. p. 277.]

[Footnote 20: Op. cit. p. 343. Citing Gen. xxii 2 Kings xxi. 6,
Micah vi. 7, 2 Kings iii. 27.]

[Footnote 21: I mean, does not occur to my knowledge. New evidence
is always upsetting anthropological theories.]

XVI

THEORIES OF JEHOVAH

All speculation on the curly history of religion is apt to end
in the endeavour to see how far the conclusions can be made to illustrate
the faith of Israel.

Thus, the theorist who believes in ancestor-worship as the key of all
the creeds will see in Jehovah a developed ancestral ghost, or a
kind of fetish-god, attached to a stone--perhaps an ancient sepulchral
stele of some desert sheikh.

The exclusive admirer of the hypothesis of Totemism will find evidence
for his belief in worship of the golden calf and the bulls.

The partisan of nature-worship will insist on Jehovah's connection
with storm, thunder, and the fire of Sinai. On the other hand,
whoever accepts our suggestions will incline to see, in the early forms
of belief in Jehovah, a shape of the widely diffused conception
of a Moral Supreme Being, at first (or, at least, when our information
begins) envisaged in anthropomorphic form, but gradually purged of
all local traits by the unexampled and unique inspiration of the
great Prophets. They, as far as our knowledge extends, were strangely
indifferent to the animistic element in religion, to the doctrine
of surviving human souls, and so, of course, to that element of
Animism which is priceless--the purification of the soul in the
light of the hope of eternal life.

Just as the hunger after righteousness of the Prophets is intense,
so their hope of finally sating that hunger in an eternity of sinless
bliss and enjoyment of God is confessedly inconspicuous.

In short, they have carried Theism to its austere extreme--'though
He slay me, yet will I trust in Him'--while unconcerned about the
rewards of Animism.

This is certainly a strange result of a religion which, according
to the anthropological theory, has Animism for its basis.

We therefore examine certain forms of the animistic hypothesis as
applied to account for the religion of Israel.

The topic is one in which special knowledge of Hebrew and other
Oriental languages seems absolutely indispensable; but anthropological
speculators have not been Oriental scholars (with rare exceptions),
while some Oriental scholars have borrowed from popular anthropology
without much critical discrimination.

These circumstances must be our excuse for venturing on to this
difficult ground.

It is probably impossible for us to trace with accuracy the rise of the
religion of Jehovah.

'The wise and learned' dispute endlessly over dates of documents,
over the amount of later doctrine interpolated into the earlier
texts, over the nature, source, and quantity of foreign
influence--Chaldaean, Accadian, Egyptian, or Assyrian.

We know that Israel had, in an early age, the conception of the moral
Eternal; we know that, at an early age, that conception was
contaminated and anthropomorphised; and we know that it was rescued,
in a great degree, from this corruption, while always retaining its
original ethical aspect and sanction.

Why matters went thus in Israel and not elsewhere we know not, except
that such was the will of God in the mysterious education of the
world.

How mysterious that education has been is best known to all who have
studied the political and social results of Totemism.

On the face of it a perfectly crazy and degrading belief--on the face
of it meant for nothing but to make the family a hell of internecine
hatred--Totemism rendered possible--nay, inevitable--the union of
hostile groups into large and relatively peaceful tribal societies.
Given the materials as we know them, we never should have educated
the world thus; and we do not see why it should thus have been done.
But we are very anthropomorphic, and totally ignorant of the
conditions of the problem.

An example of anthropological theory concerning Jehovah was put forth
by Mr. Huxley.[1] Mr. Huxley's general idea of religion as it is on
the lowest known level of material culture--through which the
ancestors of Israel must have passed like other people--has already
been criticised.
He denied to the most backward races both cult and religious sanction
of ethics.

He was demonstrably, though unconsciously, in error as to the facts,
and therefore could not start from the idea that Israel, in the
lowest historically known condition of savagery, possessed, or,
like other races, might possess, the belief in an Eternal making
for righteousness.

'For my part,' he says, 'I see no reason to doubt that, like the
rest of the world, the Israelites had passed through a period of
mere ghost-worship, and had advanced through ancestor-worship and
Fetishism and Totemism to the theological level at which we find
them in the Books of Judges and Samuel

.'[2]
But why does he think the Israelites did all this? The Hebrew
ghosts, abiding, according to Mr.

Huxley, in a rather torpid condition in Sheol, would not be of much
practical use to a worshipper.

A reference in Deuteronomy xxvi. 14 (Deuteronomy being, _ex hypothesi_,
a late pious imposture) does not prove much. The Hebrew is there bidden
to remind himself of the stay of his ancestors in Egypt, and to say,
'Of the hallowed things I have not given aught for the dead'--namely,
of the tithes dedicated to the Levites and the poor. A race which
abode for centuries among the Egyptians, as Israel did--among a people
who elaborately fed the _kas_ of the departed--might pick up a trace
of a custom, the giving of food for the dead, still persevered in
by St. Monica till St. Ambrose admonished her. But Mr. Huxley is
hard put to it for evidence of ancestor-worship or ghost-worship
in Israel when he looks for indications of these rites in 'the
singular weight attached to the veneration of parents in the Fourth
Commandment

.'[3] The _Fourth_ Commandment, of course, is a slip of the pen. He adds:
'The Fifth Commandment, as it stands, would be an excellent compromise
between ancestor-worship and Monotheism.' Long may children practise
this excellent compromise! It is really too far-fetched to reason
thus: 'People were bidden to honour their parents, as a compromise
between Monotheism and ghost-worship.'

Hard, hard bestead is he who has to reason in that fashion! This
comes of 'training in the use of the weapons of precision of science.'

Mr. Huxley goes on: 'The Ark of the Covenant may have been a relic
of ancestor-worship;' 'there is a good deal to be said for that
speculation.' Possibly there is, by way of the valuable hypothesis
that Jehovah was a fetish stone which had been a grave-stone, or
perhaps a _lingam_, and was kept in the Ark on the plausible pretext
that it was the two Tables of the Law!

However, Mr.
Berries is wight for wunaway sildrens. Do you 'member what we has come
here for, Orion?"

"To amuse ourselves, I suppose," replied Orion.

Diana gave him an angry flash from her black eyes.

"What a silly little boy you is!" she said. "We has come for most
solemn, 'portant business. I is Diana--the gweat Diana what lived
years and years ago--and you is Orion. I is the gweatest huntwess in
all the world, and I's going to shoot Aunt Jane and Miss Wamsay. Now,
come 'long, Orion, and let's look for the bow and arrow."

The children searched and searched, and after a long time did actually
discover the crooked and badly made bow and the blunt arrow.

"Here they is, the darlin's!" cried Diana. "My own bow, my own
arrow--how I loves 'em! Now, Orion, I is going to shoot you--for
pwactice, you know, and then you shall shoot me for pwactice too. You
stand up there against the twee, and I'll make good shots. You don't
mind if I does hurt you a bit, does you?"

"But I don't want to be shotted down dead," replied Orion.

"No, I won't go as far as that. It's only Aunt Jane and Miss Wamsay
who is to be shotted dead; but you'll have to be shotted, 'cos I must
pwactice how to do it."

"But couldn't you practice against the tree without me standing
there?" said Orion, who had no fancy to have even this very blunt
arrow directed at his face.


CHAPTER XV.

MOTHER RODESIA.


After some very slight persuasion Diana induced Orion to put his back
up against an oak tree and to allow her to shoot at him. He quickly
discovered that he had little or no cause for fear. Diana's arrows,
wielded with all the cunning she possessed, from the crooked bow,
never went anywhere near him. They fell on the grass and startled the
birds, and one little baby rabbit ran quite away, and some squirrels
looked down at the children through the thick trees; but Orion had
very little chance of getting hurt.

"It's awfu' difficult," said Diana, whose face grew redder and redder
with her efforts. "If it don't shoot pwoper, Aunt Jane won't get
shotted to-night. What is to be done? Suppose you was to twy for a
bit, Orion?"

Orion was only too anxious to accede to this proposition. He took the
bow and arrow and made valiant efforts, but in the course of his
endeavors to shoot properly, the badly made bow suddenly snapped in
two, and Diana, in her discomfiture, and the dashing to the ground of
her hopes, burst into tears.

"You is bad boy," she cried. "See what you's done. Back we goes to
slav'ry--to Aunt Jane and Miss Wamsay. You is a bad, howid boy."

"I aren't," said Orion, who had a very easily aroused temper. "It's
you that's a horrid little girl."

"Come, children; what's all this noise about?" said a voice in their
ears.

They turned abruptly, forgetting on the instant their own cause of
quarrel, and saw a tall, swarthy-looking woman coming towards them. By
this time it was beginning to get dark in the wood, but they could see
the figure of the woman quite distinctly. She came close to them, and
then, putting her arms akimbo, surveyed them both with a certain queer
expression on her face.

"Well, my little dears," she said, "and what may you two be doing in
this part of the wood?"

"We is pweparing to have our enemies shotted," answered Diana, in a
calm, but sturdy, voice. "What's your name, gweat big woman?"

"Mother Rodesia Lee," replied the woman, "and I'm fond of little
children. I like to meet them in the wood. I often come into the wood,
and when I see little strange children I love 'em at once. I'm a sort
of mother to all little strangers who get into the woods without
leave." Here she flashed a pair of black eyes full into Diana's face.
But Diana met their gaze without a vestige of shrinking, with eyes as
black.

"We has not come without leave," she said; "you is naughty to talk
that way. We has got a whole holiday to-day from our Uncle William. He
didn't say nothing 'bout not going into the woods, and we has been
here for lots of hours. We is going home now 'cos we is hung'y, and
'cos my bow has got bwoke. We is awfu' unhappy--we is mis'ble, but we
is going home. Good-night, woman; don't keep us talkin' any longer."

"I aint going to keep you," said the woman; "only, p'r'aps, if you
two are so hungry, p'r'aps I could give you a bit of supper."

"Oh, yes, Diana! Do let her," said Orion.

"What sort of supper?" asked Diana, who never allowed herself to be
taken unawares. "Would it be stwawberries and k'eam, or would it be
cake and milk?"

"Strawberries and cream, and milk and cake, plenty and plenty," said
the woman. "And what do you say to delicious soup and honey, p'r'aps?
Oh, come along, my little loves; I'll give you something fine to eat."

"Do let's go," said Orion; "my tumtum's so empty it feels like a big
hole."

"I know," said the woman, in a very sympathetic voice. "I have had it
myself like that at times. It's sort of painful when it's like that;
aint it?"

"Yes," answered Orion. He went up to his sister, and took her hand.
"Come along, Di," he said. "Do let this nice woman give us our
supper."

"You may be sure I won't give it," said the woman, "unless both you
little children ask me in a very perlite voice. You must say, 'Please,
Mother Rodesia.'"

"I can't say that keer sort of name," said Diana.

"Well, then, call me mother without anything else. They often does
that at home--often and often. All the little kids is desp'ate fond of
me. I dote so on little children. My heart runs over with love to
'em."

"You would not let a little girl be beated?" said Diana.

"Be beaten?" replied the woman. "No, that I wouldn't; it would be
downright cruel."

"I was beated to-day," said Diana; "it was an enemy did it, and I'm
going to have her shotted."

"Oh, I wouldn't do that!" said the woman. "You might be hanged up for
that."

"What's being hanged up?" asked Diana.

"It's something very bad--I need not tell you now; but there are laws
in this country, and if you shoot your enemies you are hanged up for
it. You are not allowed to do those sort of things in this country."

"Yes, I are," answered Diana, "'cos I are the gweat Diana. You
underland, don't you?"

"I don't know that I do; but, anyhow, I have no time to stand talking
now. Come along, and you can tell me afterwards. I have got such a
nice supper--plenty of strawberries and cream, plenty of milk and
cake."

"Oh, my tumtum," said Orion, pressing his hand to that part of his
little body with great solemnity.

"How soon will the supper be over? and how soon can we get back home?"
asked Diana.

"That depends on where your home is, my pretty little dear," said
Mother Rodesia.

"It's at Wectory, stoopid woman."

"I don't know that place, miss."

"Don't you know my Uncle William Dolman?"

"What! the rector?" said the woman. "And so you come from the
_Rectory_?" She looked frightened for a moment, and her manner became
hesitating. "Are you one of the rector's children, my little love?"
she asked.

"No; he's only an uncle; he belongs to an aunt. I hate aunts. He's not
a bad sort his own self; but I hate aunts!"

"Then you wouldn't mind if you was to leave her?"

"No. But I can't leave Uncle William, and I can't leave Iris, and I
can't leave Apollo. We would like some supper 'cos we is hung'y, and
it's past our tea hour; but then we must go stwaight home."

"All right, my little love; everything can be managed to your
satisfaction. My son has got a pony and cart, and he'll drive you over
to the Rectory in a twinkling, after your appetites are satisfied. I
can't abear to see little children real hungry. You come along with me
this minute or the supper will be eat up."

Diana hesitated no longer. She carried her broken bow on one arm, and
she slung her arrow, by a string, round her neck; then, taking one of
Mother Rodesia's large brown hands, and Orion taking the other, the
two children trotted deeper into the dark wood. They all three walked
for over a mile, and the wood seemed to get darker and denser, and the
children's little feet more and more tired. Orion also began to
complain that the hole inside him was getting bigger and bigger; but
Mother Rodesia, now that she had got them to go with her, said very
few words, and did not take the least notice of their complaints. At
last, when they suddenly felt that they could not go another step, so
great was their fatigue, they came out on an open clearing in the
wood, in the center of which a great big tent was pitched. Several
smaller tents were also to be seen in the neighborhood of the big one,
and a lot of children, very brown and ugly, and only half-dressed,
were lying about on the grass, squabbling and rolling over one
another. Some dogs also were with the children, and an old woman, a
good deal browner than Mother Rodesia, was sitting at the door of the
big tent.

As soon as ever the children saw the little strangers, they scrambled
to their feet with a cry, and instantly surrounded Mother Rodesia and
Orion and Diana.

"Back, all of you, you little rascallions," said Mother Rodesia;
"back, or I'll cuff you. Where's Mother Bridget? I want to speak to
her?"

When Mother Rodesia said this the old woman at the door of the
principal tent rose slowly and came to meet them.

"Well, Rodesia," she said, "and so you has found these little
strangers in the wood? What purty little dears!"

"Yes, I have found them," said Mother Rodesia, "and I have brought
them home to supper. After supper we are to send them home. They hail
from the Rectory. Is Jack anywhere about?"

"I saw him not half an hour back," said the old woman; "he had just
brought in a fat hare, and I popped it into the pot for supper. You
can smell it from here, little master," she said, stooping suddenly
down and letting her brown, wrinkled, aged face come within an inch or
two of Orion's. He started back, frightened. He had never seen anyone
so old nor so ugly before. Even the thought of the strawberries and
cream, and the milk and cake, could not compensate for the look on
Mother Bridget's face.

Diana, however, was not easily alarmed.

"The stuff in the pot smells vedy good," she said, sniffing. "I could
shoot lots of hares, 'cos I is the gweatest huntwess in all the world.
I is Diana. Did you ever hear of Diana, ugly old woman?"

"You had best not call Mother Bridget names," said Mother Rodesia,
giving Diana a violent shake as she spoke.

But the little girl leaped lightly away from her.

"I always call peoples just what I think them," she said; "I wouldn't
be the gweat Diana if I didn't. I has not got one scwap of fear in me,
so you needn't think to come wound me that way. I do think she is
awfu' ugly. She's uglier than Aunt Jane, what I _used_ to think was
the ugliest person in the world. You had best not twy to fwighten me,
for it can't be done."

"What a spirited little missy it is!" said Mother Bridget, gazing with
admiration at Diana. "Why, now, she is a fine little child. I'm sure,
dearie, I don't mind whether you call me ugly or not; it don't matter
the least bit in the world to me. And how old may you be, my little
love?"

"I is five," answered Diana. "I's a well-grown girl, isn't I?"

"That you are, missy, and hungry, too, I guess. You shall have some
beautiful hare soup."

"I don't want hare soup," answered Diana; "I want what that woman
pwomised--stwawberries and k'eam, and milk and cake--and then,
perhaps, a _little_ soup. I don't want soup to begin."

"Well," said the old woman, "we hasn't got no strawberries, nor no
milk, nor no cake--we are very poor folks here, missy. A little lady
must be content with what she can get, unless, my dear, you would like
to pay 'andsome for it."

"I has nothing to pay with," answered Diana. "I would, if I had the
money, but I hasn't got none. I's sossy," she continued, looking full
at Mother Rodesia as she spoke, "that you big, big woman told such
awfu' lies. But, now that we has come, we'll take a little hare soup.
Orion, you stand near me, and don't any of you dirty peoples come up
too close, 'cos I can't abear dirty peoples. I is the gweatest shot
in all the world, and Orion, he's a giant."

Two or three men had approached at that moment, and they all began to
laugh heartily when poor little pale Orion was called a giant.

"You can see him in the sky sometimes on starful nights," continued
Diana, "and he has got a belt and a sword."

"Well, to be sure, poor little thing," said Mother Rodesia, "she must
be a bit off her head, but she's a fine little spirited thing for all
that. I think she would just about do. You come along here for a
minute, Jack, and let me talk to you."

The man called Jack moved a few steps away, and Mother Rodesia
followed him. They began to talk together in low and earnest voices.
At first the man shook his head as he listened to Mother Rodesia, but
by degrees he began to agree with some suggestion she was making, and
finally he nodded emphatically, and at last was heard to say:

"It shall be done."

Meanwhile Diana, with one arm clasped protectingly round Orion's
waist, was partaking of the soup which old Mother Bridget had ladled
into a little bowl. Orion was provided with a similar bowl of the very
excellent liquid. The soup contained meat and vegetables, pieces of
bread and quantities of good gravy, and, as Diana and Orion were very
hungry indeed, they ate up their portions, while the gypsy children
clustered round them, coming closer and closer each minute. Diana's
eyes, however, were as black as theirs, and her manner twice as
spirited. She would not allow them to approach too close.

"You had best not take lib'ties," she said. "I is a gweat lady; I is
Diana, the biggest shot in all the world."

"Oh, lawk! hark to her," cried one of the boys. "I wonder if you could
shoot me, little miss?"

"Shoot you, boy?" cried Diana. "That I could. You would be shotted
down dead if I was to take up my bow and use my arrow."

At last the children had finished the contents of their bowls, and
rose solemnly to their feet.

"Now," said Diana, going up to Mother Bridget, "I are vedy obliged to
you; you has been kind; you has gived us good supper. We'll 'scuse
'bout the stwawberries and k'eam and the milk and cake, 'cos you
didn't know that the other big woman told lots of lies. And now,
p'ease, we are going home. We isn't glad to go home, but we is going.
P'ease tell the man to put pony to cart, and dwive us home as fast as
he can."

"Yes, indeed, my little dear," said Mother Bridget; "there aint one
moment to be lost. You just come inside the tent, though, first for a
minute."

"I don't want to go inside that dirty tent," said Diana; "I don't like
dirt. You had best not twy to take lib'ties. I is Diana, and this is
Orion, and we is both very big peoples indeed."

At that moment Mother Rodesia came forward.

"They need not go into the tent," she said to the old woman; "I can
manage better than that. Just you help lift 'em into the cart; it's a
dark night, and there'll be no stars, and we can get off as far
as----" Here she dropped her voice, and Diana could not hear the next
words.

"I'm going with them," she continued, "and Jack will drive. They are
exactly the kind of children Ben wants. Now then, little missy, jump
in. Ah, here you are! You'll be glad of the drive, won't you?"

"When will we get back to Wectory?" asked Diana.

"In about an hour, missy."

"Come 'long, Orion," said Diana, "you sit next me. Hold my hand, poor
little boy, case you is fwightened. Diana never was fwightened; that
isn't her."

Orion scrambled also into the cart, and the two children huddled up
close together. Mother Rodesia got in with them, and sat down at the
opposite side, with her knees huddled up close to her chin. The man
called Jack mounted the driver's seat, whacked the pony with two or
three hard touches of his whip and away they bounded.

The night was very dark, and the cart rattled roughly, and jolted and
banged the children about, but Orion felt comforted and contented
after his good supper, and Diana's fat little arm felt warm round his
neck, and soon his head rested on her shoulder and he was sound
asleep. Not so little Diana. She sat wide awake and gazed hard at the
woman, whose dark eyes were seen to flash now and then as the party
jolted over the roads.

"Tell him to go k'icker," said Diana. "I must get home afore Uncle
William goes to bed. Aunt Jane might beat me again, and I don't want
to be beated. Tell him to go k'icker, Mother 'Odesia."


CHAPTER XVI.

UNCLE BEN.


Mother Rodesia was most kind and obliging. The pony was whipped up,
and now it seemed to Diana's excited fancy that they quite flew over
the road. She felt for her broken bow, which she had laid by her side,
then she cuddled up closer to Orion, and whispered to herself:

"Mother 'Odesia's a good woman when all's said, done. She has gived us
supper and soon we'll be home; and Uncle William won't be in bed, and
he won't let c'uel Aunt Jane beat me. It's all wight; I may just as
well go to s'eep, 'cos I is drefful s'eepy, and it's late. I wonder if
the night will be starful, and if I'll see Orion up in the sky.
Anyhow, there's no stars at pwesent, and I had best go to s'eep."

So the little girl cuddled herself up close to her brother, and soon
the big dark eyes were shut, and she was happy in the land of dreams.

When this happened, Mother Rodesia softly and stealthily changed her
position. She stretched out her hand and touched Jack on his arm. This
seemed to have been an arranged signal, for he drew up the pony at
once.

They were still under the shelter of the great woods which extended
for miles over that part of the country.

"We had best begin to change their clothes now," said Mother Rodesia.
"They are both as sound as nails, and I don't want the clothes to be
seen by Ben, for he's safe to pawn 'em, and if he pawns 'em the police
may get 'em, and then the children may be traced, and we may get into
hot water."

"But, mother," said Jack, "do you dare to disturb them now when they
are asleep? That young 'un with the black eyes is such a fury; seemed
to me as if she was never goin' off."

"She's all right now," said Mother Rodesia. "She's just dead tired. Of
course, if I had had my way, I'd have put a little of that syrup into
their soup--Mother Winslow's Syrup--but Mother Bridget wouldn't have
it. She took quite a fancy to the little gal, and all on account of
her firing up and calling her names."

Jack laughed.

"I never seed sech a little 'un," he said, "sech a sparky little
piece. Ben's in rare luck. I'd like to keep her for a sort of little
sister of my own--she'd amuse me fine."

"Well, well, you aint a-goin' to have her," said Mother Rodesia. "I'm
goin' to ask thirty shillin's for her and thirty shillin's for the
boy. That'll be three pund--not a bad night's work; eh, Jack?"

"No," replied Jack; but then he continued after a pause, "You'll tell
him, won't you, mother, to be good to the children. I wouldn't like to
think that little 'un was treated cruel, and her sperit broke--she has
got a fine sperit, bless her; I wouldn't like it to be broke. I don't
care for the little boy. There's nothing in 'im."

"Well, stop talking now," said Mother Rodesia. "They must be missed at
the Rectory by this time, and they'll be sendin' people out to look
for 'em. It's a rare stroke of luck that nobody knows that we are
camping in the Fairy Dell, for if they did they would be sure to come
straight to us, knowin' that poor gypsies is always _supposed_ to
kidnap children. Now, Jack, you just hold the pony as still as you
can, and I'll slip the clothes off the pair of 'em."

Little Diana, in her deep sleep, was not at all disturbed when stout
hands lifted her away from Orion, and when she lay stretched out flat
on a large lap. One by one her clothes were untied and slipped off her
pretty little body, and some very ugly, sack-like garments substituted
in their place. Diana had only a dim feeling in her dreams that mother
was back again, and was undressing her, and that she was very glad to
get into bed. And when the same process of undressing took place on
little Orion, he was still sounder asleep and still more indifferent
to the fact that he was turned sometimes over on his face, and
sometimes on his back, and that his pretty, dainty clothes, which his
own mother had bought for him, were removed, never to be worn by him
again.

"Now, then," said Mother Rodesia, when she had laid the two children
back again upon the straw, "when they awake, and if Ben is not there,
we must dye their faces with walnut juice; but we can't begin that
now, for they are sure to howl a good bit, and if folks are near, they
will hear them and come to the rescue. Jack, have you got that spade
'andy?"

The man, without a word, lifted a portion of the straw in the cart,
and took out a spade.

"That's right," said the woman. "You make a deep hole under that tree,
and put all the clothes in. Bury 'em well. I'll rescue 'em and pawn
'em myself when we go to the West of England in the winter, but for
the present they must stay under ground. See, I'll wrap 'em up in this
good piece of stout brown paper, and then perhaps they won't get much
spoiled."

Jack took the little bundle (there were the soft, pretty socks, the
neat little shoes, even the ribbon with which Diana's hair was tied),
and twisted them all up into a bundle. Then his mother wrapped the
bundle in the piece of brown paper, and gave it to him to bury.

This being done the pony was once more whipped up, and the cart
proceeded at a rapid rate. They were now on the highroad, and going in
the direction of a large town. The town was called Maplehurst. It was
fifteen miles away from the Rectory of Super-Ashton.

Little Diana slept on and on, and the sun was beginning to send faint
rays of light into the eastern sky, when at last she opened her eyes.

"Where is I?" she said with a gasp.

"With me, my little dear; you are as safe as child can be," said
Mother Rodesia. "Don't you stir, my love; you are just as good as you
was in your little bed. See, let me lay this rug over you."

She threw a piece of heavy tarpaulin, lined with cloth, over the child
as she spoke.

Diana yawned in a comfortable manner.

"Isn't we at Wectory yet?" she asked.

"No, dear; the pony went lame, and we had to stop for a good bit on
the road; but if you like to go to sleep again, you'll be there when
next you wake."

"I isn't s'eepy any longer," said Diana, sitting bolt upright in the
cart. "Oh, what a funny dwess I has on. Where is my nice b'ack dwess,
and my pinafore, and my shoes and socks?"

"Well, dear," said Mother Rodesia, "you were so dead asleep, and the
pony got that lame we couldn't stir hand nor foot, so I thought it
best to put a little nightdress on you."

"But what a funny one," said Diana, gazing with curious admiration at
the stout, sack-like garment.

"It's the best poor Mother Rodesia has, my dear. I'm awful poor, you
know."

"Is you?" asked Diana.

"Yes, dear."

"And does you mind?" asked Diana.

"Yes, dear; 'cos when people are poor they can't get bread to eat, and
then they can't get nice clothes like you, little missy. You are a
very rich little gal; aint you, little dear?"

"My faver's awfu' rich," said Diana. "We used to live in a most
beaut'ful house, and we had a beaut'ful garding to play in. We had
animals there--lots and lots. Woman, is you fond of animals--mices and
that sort?"

"Love--I just adores 'em."

"Then you _is_ a nice sort," answered Diana. She left her place by
Orion and crept up close to the woman.

"May I sit on your lap?" she said.

Mother Rodesia made a place for her at once.

"Put your arm wound me, p'ease; I is still a teeny bit s'eepy."

"You lay your head against my breast, little love, and you'll go off
into a beautiful sleep, and I'll keep you nice and warm, for hot as
the days are, it's chilly in the mornin's."

"When my faver comes home I'll ask him to give you lots of money,
Mother 'Odesia," said Diana.

She closed her eyes as she spoke, and in another moment was once again
slumbering peacefully.

When little Diana next opened her eyes all was completely changed. She
was no longer in the funny cart with the straw. Her nightdress was
still on her, it is true, and there were neither shoes nor stockings
on her bare feet; but she and Orion found themselves in a dirty room
with a nasty smell. Both children looked at one another, and both felt
cold and frightened. The broad daylight was lighting up the room, and
Diana could perceive that there was scarcely any furniture in it. Her
bow was also gone, and her arrow no longer hung round her neck. She
clutched a firm hold of Orion's hand.

"Don't you be afeared, Orion," she said. "Don't you forget you is a
big giant. Don't you forget you has got your belt and your sword."

"But I haven't, that's just it," replied Orion. "Diana, I aren't a
giant, and I'm awfu' frightened."

"Where can us be?" said Diana. "What a keer room! But there's one good
comfort; there isn't no aunts anywheres 'bout."

"I can't remember nothing," said Orion. "Why aren't we in bed? It's
too early to get up. How have we got into this horrid little room?"

"I don't know more nor you," said Diana, "only I do know that we has
got to be bwave. Don't you forget, Orion, that mother gived you your
name, and that you is a giant, whether you likes it or not. Don't you
forget that, and I won't forget that I is Diana, and that mother gived
me my name too, and that I is the bwavest huntwess in all the world."

"But you haven't got a bow and arrow," said Orion.

Diana was silent for a moment.

"Anyhow," she said, with a little shake, "I isn't going to be
fwightened. Let's sit close together, and let's think."

"Why can't we open that door and go out?" said Orion. "Why should we
stay in this horrid room?"

"'Cos our foots is bare," said Diana.

"But don't let's mind that," said Orion; "let's go to the door and
open it, and let's run back to Rectory. I'd rather have Aunt Jane and
Miss Ramsay than this horrid room--and oh, Diana! my tumtum has got a
big hole in it again."

"And mine has too," answered Diana. "I could eat a whole loaf, that I
could."

"Hush!" whispered Orion; "somebody's coming. Oh, come close to me,
Diana!"

"Now, you isn't to be fwightened, little boy," said Diana. "I is near
you, and I isn't fwightened of nobody."

At that moment the door was flung open, and Mother Rodesia,
accompanied by a tall, dark man, with a scowling face, came in.

"Mornin', little dears," said Mother Rodesia. "Now I have got
something to say to you."

"P'ease, where's Wectory?" asked Diana.

"You are not going there just for the present, my dear. This man, Ben
is his name--you told me last night that you were fond of uncles--you
can call 'im Uncle Ben; he's very kind and very, very fond of
children."

"Oh, yes! I'm very fond of children," said the man. He spoke in a
gruff voice which seemed to come right from the bottom of his chest.

"And as you don't like aunts," continued Mother Rodesia, "I have
brought an uncle. You can call 'im Uncle Ben; and if you do just what
he says, why, you'll be as happy as the day is long."

"Look here," said the man; "you stop your talk, Rodesia. Before I
makes myself an uncle to these kids I must see what sort they are. You
stand up along here, little gal, and let me examine you."

Diana scrambled instantly to her feet and went straight up to the man.
She gave him a keen glance from her piercing black eyes.

"What wight has you to speak to me in that sort of style?" she said.
"You isn't my uncle, and I isn't going to have nothing to do with
you."

"There," said Mother Rodesia; "did I say one word too much for her?"

The man burst into a loud laugh.

"No, that you didn't," he said; "and aint you frightened of me,
missy?"

"Fwightened?" replied Diana; "that aren't me." She turned her back and
strode back to Orion.

"'Member you is a giant," she said, in a whisper; "and giants never is
fwightened."

The man laughed again.

"Well, they are a queer little pair," he said. "I tell you what it is,
Rodesia Lee; I'll give you a pund apiece for 'em. Come, now; not a
penny more."

Diana stared very hard indeed when these words were uttered. She had
not the faintest idea what a "pund apiece" meant. Mother Rodesia
seemed to consider.

"And you may think yourself in rare luck," continued the man; "for,
remember, if it is known--" Here he walked to the farthest end of the
room, and Mother Rodesia followed him.

"You had best close up the bargain and be quick about it," he said;
"for not one penny more will you drag out of me. I'll give you a gold
sov. for each of 'em, and that's as much as I can manage. They will
take a sight of training, and then there's the risk."

"Very well," said Mother Rodesia, "I suppose I had best do it; only
they are worth more. There's a fortune in that little gal, and
whenever you are tired of her, why, there's a rich father to fall back
on. I spect he would give a sight of money to have her back again.
Very well, we'll agree; only, if ever you do get a fortune out of that
child, Ben Holt, you might remember poor Rodesia Lee."

The man laughed and patted Mother Rodesia on her shoulder. Then the
pair left the room, locking the door behind them.

"What does it all mean?" said Orion.

"I don't know," said Diana; "but I aren't fwightened; that aren't me."
Her little voice shook as she spoke, and she had great difficulty in
keeping the tears back from her big, black eyes.


CHAPTER XVII.

GREASED LIGHTNING.


At the end of half an hour the door of the small room was again
unlocked, and a woman with a thin, pale face, and somewhat frightened
manner, appeared. She carried a tray in her hand, which contained two
little bowls of porridge, and a small jug of milk. "So you are the two
young 'uns," she said. "Well, you had best be quick and eat up your
breakfast. Uncle Ben is going to have a rehearsal, and he wants you to
see what they are all doing."

"We hasn't got no Uncle Ben," said Diana; "don't be silly, woman.
What's your name?" she added.

"I'm generally called Aunt Sarah," was the reply; "and now, look here,
you two little mites; I'll be good to you if you'll let me. I'm real
sorry you has come, and it's against my wish, you remember that. Now,
eat up your breakfasts, both of you. Uncle Ben, he don't know that I
have brought you porridge and milk; but children as young as you are
can't eat coarse food. Sup up your porridge, my dears."

"Thank you very much indeed, Aunt Sawah," said Diana, slipping down
from her seat close to Orion on the bench, and preparing to attack her
breakfast. "P'w'aps," she continued, as she put great mouthfuls of
porridge into her mouth, "when we has finished this nice bekfus you'll
take us back to Wectory? You see, you isn't our aunt weally, not by no
manner of wights, and Uncle Ben isn't our uncle, and so we ought not
to stay here; and if we go back to Wectory, why, Uncle William, what's
our weal uncle, p'w'aps he would pay you money, if it's money you
wants."

"Yes; it's true enough, it is money we want," replied the woman; "but,
my dear," she added, the tears springing to her eyes, "I can't take
you back to no Rectory. You have just got to stay here and to watch
Uncle Ben when he's going through his rehearsal, and then this
afternoon we are going on a very long journey, and you are coming with
us--and oh, I forgot to say that, when you have finished your
breakfast, I must put something on your faces."

"Something on our faces?" said Diana.

"Yes, my little love; it has to be done. But when we get to another
part of the country I'll wash the ugly stuff off again, and you'll
look as fair and pretty as you do now. It won't make much difference
after all to you, little missy," she added, gazing fixedly at Diana,
"'cos you are very dark by nature. Yes, I had a little kid of my own,
a little gal, and she wasn't unlike you--no, not by no means. I'll be
kind to you for her pretty sake, my little dear. Talbot's which
I would like to record, a curious chronological method of remembering
great occasions and startling events by the food of the day.

Thus, for example, when with eyes that would still fill with tears,
though it was ten years ago, she would tell the story of how her
only boy had been brought home dead one night from an accident at
his workshop, she would fix the date by saying, "It was about six
o'clock at night, and I'd just got a nice little bit of liver and
bacon cooking for your father's dinner, when there came a knock at
the door ..."

Sometimes it was, "I'd just sent Liz out for a little bit of fish," or
it would be Spanish onions maybe, or a lovely little rabbit, that
marked the day.

The night when the attack on Coalchester was planned was marked, as I
have said, by rabbit-pie. Mrs. Talbot would hardly have understood
the significance of that rabbit-pie, though in the course of her
occasional bobbings in and out of the room, to see that the young
men were doing justice to her food,--she had a curious notion that
young men never ate enough,--she would hear snatches of what she called
"deep talk," or shake her old head at her coming son-in-law, whom
she already adored and mothered, with a "Law! what a boy it is!" She
wasn't quite sure sometimes as to the soundness of his "doctrine," but
wisely decided that her business was rather with his stomach than his
brains,--which no doubt God Almighty would look after for himself.

Wit at the expense of Coalchester can only be of interest to Coalchester
wits and their butts, so I shall not record the bright and animated
talk which helped to digest Mrs. Talbot's rabbit-pie, but confine myself
to a practical outcome of it.

What interests me specially about these young men was their rare
practicality. They were no mere dreamers, helpless visionaries,
with ideas they had no notion how to embody.

Dreamers, of course, they were,--otherwise there had been no point in
their being practical,--but they were dreamers who understood something
of how dreams are best got on to the market of realities.

Characteristically, it was the poet of the party from whom the most
practical suggestion came.

In itself, of course, there was no great originality in the idea of a
weekly paper to be called "The Dawn," devoted to the dissemination
of the new light on every possible subject,--politics and municipal
misgovernment; the new social ideals; the newest and most delicate
forms of art, music, and literature.

It was in the suggested method of publication and circulation that the
originality lay. The paper was to be given away and made to pay
its expenses by tradesmen's advertisements, a guarantee of a certain
minimum distribution being given.

This method had, of course, been tried before for purposes of mere
publicity, but never, I think, for the dissemination of truth and
beauty.

The truth about life was to be paid for by lies about bacon and
butter,--or, let us say, business exaggerations rendered innocuous
by custom, and therefore as harmless as truth.

Obviously Mr. Moggridge, who not unnaturally had felt a sense of moving
about in worlds not realised during much of the deep talk, was here
an authority of importance, and the idea at once appealed to him. He
would promise a permanent advertisement, and he even promised
illustrations, in the form of blocks already engraved and occasionally
used by the "Argus," of the flourishing shops at 33, 34, 35 High
Street, and 58, 59 Zion Street.

He had also some blocks of gigantic hams most hammily pictured,
which might also be of use, and he would also be able to bring in a
number of his fellow tradesmen. Invaluable Mr. Moggridge! What were
truth without you!

The poet, on his part, guaranteed to supply all the poetry that
might be required, and indeed agreed to do special rhyming advertisements,
at, say, half a guinea apiece. He would also assist Londonderry in the
political and municipal departments, not only in the higher flights,
but lend a hand even in castigations of local jobs, abuses, and
absurdities.

Gentle James Whalley would write round-about essays, for which he had
a charming gift, and generally take in charge the aesthetic interests
of the paper, though, as all were lovers of art and literature,
those subjects would be handled now by one and now by another.

Even Jenny was to have her place on the staff, and write dress
articles, which would not only tend to improve the aspect of
Coalchester streets, but attract millinery advertisements.

She already announced the title of her first article, which was
very grand: "Dress as a form of self-expression."

It was two in the morning before the proceedings terminated, and even
then good old Mrs. Talbot was still up to press steaming bumpers of
very hot whisky and water upon the wayfarers; "to keep the cold out,"
she explained--though I need hardly say that the project had not
waited till that hour to be suitably recommended to the god of all
enterprises.

CHAPTER IX

"THE DAWN."
Next to the delight of holding new and unpopular opinions is the
delight of having a medium for their unedited expression, though
this is a delight given to few reformers. "The Dawn," however, was to
be such a medium; and when the first number appeared, as it did
nearly a month from the meeting recorded in the last chapter, four
people, nay, five--for we mustn't forget Mr.

Moggridge--were supremely happy. With the exception of the poet, who,
as we have seen, occasionally irradiated the poet's corner of the
"Argus," and Mr.

Moggridge, it was a first appearance in print for three out of the
five contributors; and though each talked most of the articles by
the others, they were secretly longing to get away with the little
paper to some corner where they could gloat over their own special
contribution.

Not that they had any ridiculous ideas of the literary importance
of the articles in question, but because it seemed so strange to
see the warm words of their mouths thus condensed into cold print,
so strange to think that people all over Coalchester were reading
them.

Little Jenny in particular felt quite a cold but pleasant shiver of
notoriety as she thought of it, while to her lover the delighted
perusal and reperusal of a large-type leading article, headed "In
Darkest Coalchester!"

brought a new sense of power.

The poet, as was only to be expected, had his little grievance with
the printer, who, in spite of all his remonstrances and corrections
in proof,--the printer was a little wrong-headed Scotchman,--had
insisted at the last moment in heading his Tyrtean "Proem," a fine
aerial trumpet-blast somewhat Shelleyan in style, with the word
that was evidently intended, namely, "Poem."

However, he was somewhat consoled by reading his caustic column
of notes headed "The World outside Coalchester," the very heading
of which was a revelation.

Then, too, he very much enjoyed his article on "Bad Lighting in
Coalchester," with its evident allegoric insinuation that Coalchester
needed lighting in more ways than one, and that "The Dawn" was
prepared to undertake, free of charge, the top-lighting of which
it was most in need.

James Whalley contributed a review of "Mr. Swinburne's new Poems,"
through which article Mr. Moggridge's illustrated hams plainly
showed from the other side.

New truth is too often printed in very worn-out type, but the promoters
of "The Dawn" had wisely remembered how hard truth is to read, and
had given it good clear type, and generally made it a very comely
and attractive little paper.

It bore a motto that sounded almost like a threat, "We come to
stay,"--a boast which it manfully kept for several years.

As I lift my eyes from this paper, they rest on no less than ten great
half-yearly volumes, which flash "The Dawn"--"The Dawn"--along a
darksome folio shelf, as they have flashed it week after week across
darkest Coalchester; and "The Dawn" ceased, at length, not from
lack of power and encouragement to continue, but because the world
had grown sadder by then, and it had lost the will to go on living.

In spite of this hardy existence, I suppose "The Dawn" will win no
record of itself in the histories of the press, though merely as
spirited journalism it deserves to do so; while in the history of
the human spirit at Coalchester it demands a grateful celebration
such as it will, again, most surely not receive from the literary
and philosophical historian of the town.

At all events, honoured or forgotten as it may be, should you ever come
across its strange young pages, I know you will agree with me that
it was a wonderful little paper.

It was not, you may suspect, conservative, being, as it was, very
alive and very young.

In fact, its radiant radicalism brings tears to one's eyes to-day,
when so many of the noble ideals it championed, to the length and
strength of its little angry arm, are lying smashed beneath the
iron blows of the capitalism that has outlived even the noble
eloquence of Theophilus Londonderry.

Like all young people, it was all for the young, the new; and I think
you will be astonished, if you do ever turn over its pages, at the
remarkable instinct for the crescent life possessed by these young
men; and, were it worth while, I could easily prove that several
of the more exquisite continental writers, now the fashion this
many a year, first found a humble welcome in that quaint little
organ of New Zion.

Yes! it was a triumph for New Zion too. This modest and hitherto
obscure corner of the town suddenly found itself, comparatively, in a
blaze of publicity, for a column headed "Work at New Zion," evidently
meant to be weekly, left no doubt from what quarter of the town the
dawn was to be looked for.

This was perhaps the most delightful thing about the paper,--its
calm assumption that the real aristocracy of the town was to be
found in that little back street, and that, if Coalchester was to
have any spiritual or intellectual life, it must seek it there.

In Zion Street, and nowhere else in Coalchester, were the angels
descending into the waters.

And the best part of the joke was that the assumption was literally
true.

CHAPTER X

HOW THEY BROUGHT THE GOOD NEWS OF A MORRIS WALL-PAPER TO COALCHESTER

Coalchester was too much taken by surprise by "The Dawn" to pretend
to ignore it, and its first recognition was appropriately made in
a ludicrously abusive article in "The Argus,"--"the one-eyed Argus,"
as it was mockingly nicknamed in the next week's issue of the new
paper.

The joke was one that was lost on Coalchester, which had never dreamed
of expecting a hundred eyes in its "Argus," which to it was but the
usual name for a sleeping newspaper.

It was, however, to do them justice, seen and chuckled over by one or
two members of the Literary and Philosophical Society.

"The young beggars know their--classical dictionary, at all events,"
said one of them maliciously, which was quite bright for a
Lit-and-Phil.

One tangible result of the little paper was the almost immediate
doubling of the attendance at New Zion.

Curiosity had been aroused in this militant young minister with the
strange ideas, and Theophilus Londonderry wished for nothing better
than to gratify it.

In the oxygen of success even the dullest metals will scintillate, and
it needed but such small beginnings of his future to make Theophilus
as nearly irresistible as natural gifts and success together can
make a man.

Some people go to chapel to worship, a few to learn, but most, odd
as it may sound, to be entertained.

A vivid and magnetic preacher is as near as many will allow themselves
to approach the theatre. Theophilus was a born actor--of himself; a
part so few can or dare play.

He gave you good stimulating truth; but it was not so much in the
newness of the ideas which he passed on from his books to his
hearers, as in the newness of himself, that of course the charm lay.

A few people, not many or important, disliked him; but all had to
listen, and a good many came to New Zion again.

Above all, the women heard him gladly; and to this sure sign of a
future Theophilus was far from blind. "He has women at his back, he
cannot fail," was a phrase he sometimes recalled out of his favourite
_Brand_.

Yes, and had he not one little angel-woman at his side?

It had been the spring of 1886 when he came to New Zion. It was now the
autumn, and early in September announcements had been made of a
series of autumnal lectures to be given by the Rev. Theophilus
Londonderry; Rob Clitheroe, Esquire; James Whalley, Esquire; and other
distinguished lecturers, at New Zion.

In the list were papers on "The Duty of Novel Reading," "Henrik Ibsen,"
"A Morris Wall-Paper," "The Nude in Art," and "The Darwinian Theory,"
by Mr. Londonderry himself; "Coalchester, its Past and its Future,"
by Mr.

Rob Clitheroe; together with "Ireland's Sacred Right to Home Rule,"
by the same lecturer; "Wagner and the New Music," by Mr.

James Whalley, with a paper on "Some Really New Books," by the same;
and a paper-on "Good Taste in Dress," by Miss Jenny Talbot--the
virago!

The batteries were to be turned on poor Coalchester with a vengeance.

For some time past there had been uneasy suspicions in the town that
strange and somewhat ungodly forms of new learning and beauty were
being stored as in an arsenal in that little house at 3 Zion Place.

A large cast of the Venus of Milo, it was known, had come from Covent
Garden, London, _via_ a poor little dealer in artistic materials in
the town, who on one occasion had shown a bewildering picture to
one of his customers with the remark, "What do you make of this, Mr.

Littlejohn?"
Mr. Littlejohn could make nothing of it, nor indeed could the artists'
colourman, who had been used to pictures all his life.

No wonder, for it was the first Rossetti that had ever been seen in
Coalchester.

And it was the same at the little paperhanger's shop where Theophilus
had ordered some pieces of Morris wall-paper for his room.

"Law! what a taste, to be sure!"

had exclaimed the paperhanger's wife as they opened the parcel. "How
any one dare live with such patterns is beyond me." The paperhanger's
wife verbed better than she knew.

Few are those indeed who dare live with beauty.

When the paper was hung in Theophil's room, so great was the sensation
in the household that even old Mr.

Talbot ventured to look in at it, keeping very close to his wife. It was
so the old man had stood open-mouthed before the first steam-engine,
and here again was the Devil plainly at work.

"Lord a-mercy, Jane," he said to his wife, "what is the world coming
to?"

The world was indeed changing beneath the old man's feet, and the
heavens opening as never before in his time--with, he might be
right, some assistance from beneath; and--it was undoubtedly safer
in the kitchen.

Mrs. Talbot in these matters lived and loved by faith in her boy, as
she called him.

But even she had her doubts, which she expressed in a way that showed,
funny old woman as she was, that she was not without a sort of blind
insight.

"I suppose it's all right, boy," she said, "and it sounds silly to say
about a lot of harmless lines and flowers, but it seems to your
old mother that there's something wrong about that paper,--something
almost wicked in it.

It reminds me of that nasty music you and Jenny are so fond of playing."

Here Theophil enveloped her in a huge hug, and laughingly mocked her
with playful caresses, smiling to himself all the same. For the music
she had referred to was Dvorak.

CHAPTER XI

A LITTLE ABOUT JENNY
Meanwhile, as New Zion moved and hummed and whizzed, and as "The Dawn"
went on dawning week by week,--you couldn't expect the dawn oftener
than once a week in Coalchester,--the love of Jenny and Theophil grew
more and more perfect.

There was a long while to wait yet before Jenny was to bear what
seemed to her the finest of all names, for old Mrs. Talbot, easily
manageable as a rule, had a way of quietly putting her foot down on
occasion that would have surprised you. Jenny was only just passed
nineteen, and was no fit wife for any man yet, least of all for a
great sprawling fellow like that.

Let her get a little more flesh on her bones, something more than
all spirit and nerves, let her get well turned twenty, and it might
be thought of, but not now.

No! it's no use coming with your nonsense, you silly big fellow! You
know when the soft old mother says a thing, she means it.

So it proved. Old Mrs. Talbot on this point remained a homely form of
adamant. However, the lovers were not badly off. Living in the
same house, they saw almost as much of each other as if they had
been married, and from the evenings she spent there, Jenny had
come to regard Theophil's room and his books as hers too.

She had developed wonderfully in these months, had Jenny. She was a
real little great man's wife now; and as Theophil looked at her,
with her lit eager face, her whole soul so alive to help him in
however humble a way, her whole life his, his, his,--such love
seemed almost tragic in its very beauty and joy.

It was so irremediably--love. At times he almost trembled before it.
He would almost chide her with its divine completeness.

What if he were to be taken from her? Oughtn't she to keep just a
little of herself for foothold?

We ought all to belong to ourselves as well as to another. It was
such a risk. Suppose he were to die, Jenny!

No doubt it was very wise, but Jenny was wiser. She could never belong
to herself again. She was his, and his only, for ever; and if he
died--if he were to be taken away ...

But he could never be taken from her any other way? No one else, nothing
but death, could take him ...

"No, nothing but death--and perhaps not even death."

Nevertheless, such was the
case. Mother Rodesia had managed her theft with great skill. The
gypsies had appeared unexpectedly in the Fairy Dell--no one knew they
were there, therefore no one looked for them. Having kidnaped the
children, Mother Rodesia took care immediately to bury their clothes,
and then she sold them to Ben Holt, the great circus manager, who took
them within a few hours right away to the southwest of England. The
little children had not accompanied the _troupe_, but had gone with
Aunt Sarah by train. There had been little fuss and no apparent
attempt at hiding the pair, therefore no one thought of looking for
them in the large southwestern town where Holt established his great
circus.

It was the most popular time of the year for performing shows of all
sorts, and Ben Holt expected to make a considerable sum of money out
of the pretty and vivacious little pair.

Meanwhile, the police were on their track; advertisements about them
were scattered all over the country--considerable rewards were
offered, and there was more than one nearly broken heart in the pretty
Rectory of Super-Ashton.

Even Aunt Jane felt by no means herself. She would not own to having
done anything wrong, but she became wonderfully gentle to Iris and
Apollo. She was unremitting, too, in her efforts to recover the lost
children, and began to look quite peaky about the face and lined round
the mouth.

As to Uncle William, he preached nothing but old sermons, finding it
beyond his powers to devote his attention to anything fresh or new. He
hated the study window where little Diana had lain in his arms--he
hated the memory of the whip which he had used over her. On one
occasion he even went the length of saying to his wife:

"Jane, it was your doing--she was too spirited a child for the
treatment you subjected her to. She ought never to have been whipped.
But for you she would not have run away."

This was a very terrible moment for Aunt Jane, and she was too much
cowed and stricken to reply a single word to her husband. He could not
help, notwithstanding his great anxiety, having a momentary sense of
pleasure when he found that he had got the upper hand of his clever
wife; but Aunt Jane had it out with the servants and the parishioners
afterwards, and so revenged herself after a fashion.

As to Iris, a very sad change came over her. She grew thin and very
pale; she scarcely ate anything, and scarcely ever spoke. Even Apollo,
even little Ann quite failed to comfort her. She did not complain, but
she went about with a drooping look, somewhat like a little flower
which wants water.

"Iris is not well," Miss Ramsay said one morning to Mrs. Dolman. "She
does not eat her food, and when I went into her bedroom last night I
found that she was wide awake, and had evidently been silently crying.
I think she ought to see a doctor!"

"Dear, dear!" replied Mrs. Dolman. "Do you know, Miss Ramsay, I am
almost sorry I undertook the charge of the little Delaneys. They
certainly have turned out, as their poor father expressed it, a
handful. If Iris is really ill, I had better see her. Send her to me.
You don't suppose she is--fretting?"

"Yes; of course she is fretting dreadfully," replied Miss Ramsay. "And
no wonder, poor little girl! For my part, I consider it perfectly
awful to contemplate the fate of those poor lost children."

It was very wonderful, in quite a new way, to meet again. Their
love was no longer hunger and unrest, it had gained the impassioned
peace of great accepted realities. It was married love now. As the
quiet firm hands held each other again, there seemed to be long
retrospects of tried and tender intercourse in their very touch. Their
eyes held a past in them as well as a future. There was no hurry of
the emotions now, no reason for haste in the seeking and giving of
tenderness, no need to snatch and clutch the good gifts of love
as though there was but a short day for the giving.

Their love had grown conscious of its eternity.

It held but one lasting sadness,--that it might not be revealed to
Jenny.

So little did they regard their love as one essentially for concealment,
that the temptation to include Jenny in their bond was at moments a
danger. It was so beautiful, and actually, though unconsciously, she
was so integral a part of its beauty.

Theirs was that dream of a threefold union, in which, so to say,
jealousy shall be so taken into the confidence of, so held to the
heart of, love, that it shall transform itself into love too; and,
from being the lonely tragic third, become, as the other two, one
of an indivisible trinity.

Such unions of natures of especial grace have been born under like
conditions of fated intercourse, and they have been unions of a strange
beauty, the more blest by the sense of a conquest over love's one
unworthiness, its egoism. As the _égoisme à deux_ is finer than an
egoism of one, so this _égoisme à trois_, if you will, is again
finer by its additional inclusiveness.

Perhaps it had proved wiser in the end to yield to this temptation
too.

But the tragic risk was one to dismay experiment. The strength of
such a union is literally the strength of its weakest link.

Jenny loved both Isabel and Theophil, and both Isabel and Theophil
loved Jenny; and in the love of the two girls, there was an element
of affection that was more impassioned than friendship.

Jenny indeed loved Isabel so much that it might well have proved that
her love, with nothing but gladness, could have added its volume
to Theophil's, and the three loves, meeting in one river of love,
flowed on together to the eternal sea.

But the tragic risk!

The alternative was--heart-break, death. They had vowed to save
Jenny from the lightning. Perhaps it would not destroy, but only
transfigure, after all,--yet the test was lightning; and for whom
that we love dare we venture such an ordeal, though it were to win
them Paradise?

No! Jenny must never know. And yet, perhaps, if Jenny had been
told...
Well, the greatest love for another cannot guard all the gates of chance.
And, alas!

these two, loyal as they were, for one unguarded moment were to leave
open a gate of their Paradise,--when we withdraw into Paradise we
should see that all the gates are closed,--and Jenny, by a like
chance, was to take into her soul one blinding glimpse of them there.

"You are pale, and your hands are hot," said Mrs. Dolman.

"I feel hot," answered Iris, "and I am thirsty," she added.

"Oh, come! this will never do," said Aunt Jane. "I shall just take you
away this minute to see the doctor."

She rose impatiently as she spoke. The apathy which was over Iris
irritated her more than she could express. If the child had only burst
into tears, or even defied her as little Diana used to do, she felt
that she could comprehend matters a great deal better.

"If we are quick, we may see Dr. Kent before he goes on his rounds,"
she said. "Run upstairs at once, Iris, and fetch your hat."

Iris immediately left the room.

"The child looks as if something had stunned her," thought Mrs. Dolman
to herself. "I never saw such a queer expression on any little girl's
face. Now, I am quite certain if Philip or Conrad had been kidnaped,
that Lucy and Mary would be a great deal too sensible to act in this
silly way. The worst of it is, too, that there is nothing really to
lay hold of, for the child does not even complain--she simply suffers.
What am I to do? How am I to tell the children's father that two of
them have disappeared, and the eldest, his favorite, too, is very
ill?"

Iris re-entered the room, with her sun-bonnet hanging on her arm.

"Put it on, my dear, put it on; and brisk up a little," said Mrs.
Dolman. "There is no good in giving way to your feelings."

"I never give way to them, Aunt Jane. I try to be patient," answered
Iris.

Mrs. Dolman tied on her own bonnet with her usual vigor. She then took
one of the hot little hands in hers, and, a few moments later, the
aunt and niece were standing outside Dr. Kent's door in the pretty
little village street.

Dr. Kent was at home. He was a young man, and a clever doctor, and he
gave Iris a good overhauling. He listened to her lungs and heart, put
several questions to her, was kind in his manner, and did not express
the least surprise when he heard that the little girl could neither
eat nor sleep.

"I perfectly understand," he said. "And now, my dear, I hope soon to
have you as right as a trivet; but, in the meantime, I should like to
have a little talk with your aunt. Can you find your way into my
dining room? You have only to turn to the left when you leave this
room."

"Thank you," answered Iris. She went to the door, opened it, and shut
it behind her.

"Now, what do you think about her?" said Aunt Jane. "Out with the
truth, please, Dr. Kent. You know I never can stand any beating about
the bush."

"There is nothing of the ordinary nature the matter with your little
niece," began the doctor.

Mrs. Dolman raised her brows in surprise and indignation.

"How can you say that?" she remarked. "The child looks seriously ill."

"Please allow me to finish my speech. There is nothing the matter with
the child in the form of organic or any other disease; but just at
present there is such a severe strain on her mind that, if it is not
completely relieved, she is very likely to die."

"Doctor! What a terrible thing to say!"

"It is true. The child needs rousing--she is losing all interest in
life. She has been subjected to a terrible shock."

"Of course she has," replied Mrs. Dolman; "but the extraordinary thing
is that a child of ten years of age should feel it so much."

"It is not extraordinary in that sort of child," replied the doctor.
"Can you not see for yourself that she has a very delicate and a very
nervous organism. She has lately, too, lost her mother, has she not?"

"Yes; and I believe the child was very fond of her; but, indeed, I may
as well say that I never saw anyone more sensible than little Iris
about that. She scarcely seemed to grieve at all. Of course, I dare
say she was very sorry, but she did not show it."

"All the worse for her," answered Dr. Kent. "If she had given way
about her mother, and allowed her grief to get the upper hand, she
would not be so ill as she is now. Then came the second blow--the
extraordinary loss of the children."

"Then you really think her very ill?" said Mrs. Dolman. "I would do
anything to save her, doctor. These four children were put into my
care by their father."

"Where is the father now?" asked Dr. Kent.

"He must have nearly reached the Himalayas by this time."

"Is it possible for you to communicate with him?"

"To say the truth, I have hesitated to do so. He suffered terribly at
the death of his wife. It would be fearful for him to learn that two
of the children are missing, and one very ill. I have waited, hoping
for better news."

"You did wrong. He ought to know of this calamity. Each day that does
not give you tidings of the missing children lessens the chance of
your ever recovering them. I must say their disappearance is most
mysterious."

"So it is," answered Aunt Jane suddenly. "And in my heart of hearts,"
she added, "I am greatly alarmed."

"Well, if I were you, I would send a cablegram to the address most
likely to find Mr. Delaney."

"If you think it right."

"I do. It is the only thing to do. He ought to come home immediately.
That little girl ought to have her father with her."

"Then your opinion is that Iris is very ill?"

"She is on her way to be very ill. At the same time, if her mind is
relieved, she will be well in a week. Under existing circumstances,
however, there seems but small chance of that. You ought to
communicate with the father, and if I were you I would let the child
do something herself--even if that something is useless--to try to
recover her lost brother and sister."

"What do you mean? It really is impossible for the child to go over
the country looking for Orion and Diana. Oh, what trouble I brought
upon myself when I undertook the care of my brother's family!"

"I am very sorry for you, Mrs. Dolman, but I must give you my true
opinion. Please act on my suggestion; I am sure you will not regret
it. Communicate with the father in the quickest way possible, urge him
to return to London without fail, and give little Iris something to do
which will occupy and satisfy her mind. In the meantime I will order
her a tonic, but medicines are not what she needs. She requires mind
rest, and nothing else will make her well."

Mrs. Dolman left Dr. Kent's house, feeling very uncomfortable. She
took Iris home, was wonderfully gentle to her during the walk, and
sent her up to the schoolroom with a message to Miss Ramsay to say
that she was not to do any more lessons that morning. Having got rid
of Iris, she went immediately to have an interview with her husband in
his study.

"Well, William," she said, "I own myself beaten."

"My dear Jane--beaten? In what way?"

"Here's a pretty mess," continued Mrs. Dolman; "Orion and Diana cannot
be found, and Dr. Kent says that Iris is going to be very ill."

"Iris going to be ill?" repeated Mr. Dolman. "Has she caught anything
taking. If so, Jane, it would be our duty to separate the children
immediately."

"Oh, nonsense, William! Where would she take a catching complaint in a
wholesome, well-sanitated rectory like this? Have you never heard of
nerve troubles?"

Mr. Dolman opened his sleepy eyes and stared full at his wife.

"My dear," he said, "I often thought that _you_ had never heard of
them. So you really believe in them at last?"

"I am forced to when that pretty child is dying from the effects of
them."

Mrs. Dolman then repeated to her husband all that Dr. Kent had said.

"I cannot stand the responsibility any longer," she said. "I will send
a cablegram to David this very day. What will he think of me? Of
course he will never forgive me. In the meantime, William, have you
anything to propose about little Iris?"

"Yes," answered Mr. Dolman. "There may not be much in my suggestion;
but the fact is, I feel dreadfully restless, sitting here day after
day, doing nothing."

"William, what do you mean?" answered his wife. "Sitting here day
after day, doing nothing! Have you not your parish to attend to?"

"Oh, I don't mean that--you attend to the parish, my love."

"Thank you, William, for acknowledging that fact at last."

"I frankly acknowledge it. Then, too, we have no sick poor in the
parish, and everything is really in a prosperous condition; but the
fact is, I hate sitting down to my comfortable meals, and lying down
at night on my comfortable bed, not knowing in what part of the world
dear, spirited little Diana may be. I don't think half so much about
the boy as little Diana."

"You are like all the rest of your sex, William; you are taken by a
child because it happens to be a girl and has a pair of black eyes.
For my part, I never could bear little Diana."

"Please don't say that now."

"Oh, it is not that I am not sorry for her; of course, I am dreadfully
sorry, and I acknowledge--I do acknowledge--that I have been more or
less to blame. But now, please, come to the point--you always were
such a man for going round and round a subject."

"Well, then," said Mr. Dolman, "this is it. The doctor wishes Iris to
be roused. Let me take both her and Apollo, and let us begin to look
for the lost children."

"And do you suppose," answered Mrs. Dolman, with a laugh, "that you
will be more likely to find the children than the clever detectives
who are on their track?"

"We can go to London and take a detective with us. Iris will at once
feel happier if she is doing something. The fact is this: I am certain
the inaction is killing her."

"It is an extraordinary plan," said Mrs. Dolman; "but after all, if it
is the only way to keep Iris alive, I suppose we must consider it.
But, William, I am the suitable one to take Iris and Apollo about.
Indeed, why should Apollo go at all? He at least is in perfect
health."

"The person to consider is Iris," said Mr. Dolman. "She will confide
in Apollo when she will not confide in anyone else; and I think,
Jane," he added, looking very strong and determined, "that she would
rather go with me than with you." Mrs. Dolman flushed. "You know,
Jane," continued her husband, "you have been a little hard on these
children."

"Perhaps so," answered Mrs. Dolman, "and when I have tried to do my
duty, too. But, of course, Evangeline's children were likely to be
unmanageable; they had such extraordinary training when they were
babies. However, as matters stand, I have not a word to say."

"Then, my dear, we will consider the thing arranged. We can easily get
John Burroughs to lend us one of his curates for Sunday, and you will
do all the rest. Now, shall I see Iris and submit the plan to her?"

"An extraordinary plan it is," answered Mrs. Dolman; "but perhaps you
are right, William. At any rate, I have proved myself so completely in
the wrong that I am willing on this occasion to be guided by you."

She rose from her seat, left the room, and went up to the schoolroom.

"Iris," she said to the little girl, "I want you and Apollo to come
downstairs immediately."

Iris sprang to her feet; she grew white to her lips.

"Have you heard anything?" she asked.

"No, my dear, nothing--nothing whatever; only your uncle wishes to
speak to you. Now, come at once, for he is not the sort of man to be
kept waiting."

Mrs. Dolman left the room and the children followed her. When they
reached the study, Iris went straight up to her uncle.

"What do you want with me, Uncle William?" she asked.

"The fact is this," he answered, scarcely looking at her, and speaking
with great eagerness and emphasis for him; "you and I, Iris, have got
to do something, and there is not a moment to delay."

A great flood of color filled Iris' cheeks, a new light darted into
her eyes.

"Oh, yes, Uncle William," she said, panting as she spoke, "we have
been doing nothing too long. It has nearly killed me, Uncle William,"
she added.

"Then, my dear, we will just be our own detectives--you and I and
Apollo. We will start this very afternoon; we will look for the
children ourselves. Why, what is the matter, my dear; what is the
matter? What are you doing?"

For little Iris had fallen on her knees, had caught her uncle's hand
in both of hers, and was pressing it frantically to her lips.

"Oh, Uncle William," she said, "how can I thank you? I promised mother
the day she died that I would be a little mother to the others, and I
have failed, I have failed dreadfully, and it is killing me, Uncle
William. But oh, if I can find them again, and if you will really help
me, and if we do start to-day--oh, if this is true, then I am happy
again."

"You observe, my dear Jane," said Mr. Dolman, "that my proposal seems
to be correct. Now, run off, Iris, and get Simpson to pack some
clothes for you and Apollo. We will leave Super-Ashton by the three
o'clock train."


CHAPTER XIX.

"A PIGMY I CALL HIM."


The seaside town of Madersley was crowded to excess. It was the height
of the summer season, and Holt's circus was doing a roaring trade.
There were two exhibitions daily, and every available corner in the
great tent was crammed to excess. The spectators said that they came
principally to see the little dark-eyed girl ride. For Diana had taken
to the life almost as kindly as a young duck takes to the water. She
had learned her part quickly, and in a very short time she could ride
even the most spirited horse. She was really almost destitute of fear,
and was even seen to laugh when she was put upon the back of a
buck-jumper, who did his utmost to toss her off. There were always men
or women close by to catch her if she did fail to go through any of
the rings, the large paper balloons, or the other obstructions put in
her way. Her piquant little face, the bold expression of her eyes, her
fearless manner, and the unmistakable look of babyhood about her,
roused the spectators to a frenzy of admiration.

But though Diana did well and delighted Ben Holt, Orion by no means
followed her example. Put to the test, poor little Orion had little of
the real giant about him. He was an ordinary little boy, with pretty
black eyes and a good-humored, somewhat touching expression of face,
but Diana was anything but an ordinary girl.

Orion, having slipped once or twice from the back of Greased
Lightning, became terribly afraid of the beast, and always turned
white to his little lips when he was going through his exercises. As a
rule, Ben Holt always trained the novices himself, and although he was
kind to Diana, he soon began to have a thorough contempt for little
Orion.

"He's a peaky little chap," he said to his wife. "Why, he aint even
worth the twenty shillin's I paid for 'im. Now the little 'un--the
gal--there's a fortune in her; but the boy--I have no patience with
the boy."

Meanwhile, he began to use rough language and threats to the child,
and once or twice he even touched the little fellow with his great
whip. On this occasion Orion lost every scrap of nerve he possessed,
and fell flat down upon the sanded floor of the arena, shivering and
crying painfully. Diana did not happen to be present. When she was by,
small child that she was, Uncle Ben never showed at his worst, and
Orion, looking round now in vain for his sister, gave himself up for
lost.

"Now listen to me, you young villain," said the tyrant; "I'll force
you to do what I want. You get on Greased Lightning's back this very
minute."

Little Orion struggled painfully to his feet. A good-natured girl, who
stood near, tried to say a word in his favor.

"Don't you forget that he's very young, Ben Holt," she said. "It will
be all the worse for you if you are too hard on the little kid."

"I'll thank you not to give me any of your sauce, Susan Jenkins," was
the angry reply.

Susan Jenkins, a pretty, slight, fair-haired girl, who went by the
graceful name of Ariel in the circus programme, did not venture to say
anything further, but in her heart she resolved to give Diana a hint
of the true state of the case.

Orion was once more lifted on Greased Lightning's back, and the
manager cracking his whip, the beautiful horse began to trot round and
round the arena. At first the creature went fairly quietly, and Orion
managed to keep his seat. His piteous white face, the black shadows
under his eyes, his little trembling hands were noticed, however, by
Susan. She kept near on purpose and tried to encourage him by smiles
and nods. When he passed close to her he heard her hearty voice
saying, "Well done, little chap! You jest stick on and you'll be as
right as a trivet."

A strangled sob by way of answer rose in Orion's throat. Alas! he knew
only too well that he could not stick on. Louder and faster grew the
crack of the manager's whip, and faster and fleeter trotted Greased
Lightning. It was impossible for Orion to keep his seat; he had
nothing to cling to, nothing to hold on to.

These pieces have all been taken down, as I have heard;* and my
relations will have no heart to put them up again: but if my good
mother chooses to keep back any one piece, (the above capital
piece, as it is called, excepted,) not knowing but some time hence
she may bear the sight of it; I except that also from this general
bequest; and direct it to be presented to her

.

* See Vol. III. Letter LV.

My whole-length picture in the Vandyke taste,* that used to hang in
my own parlour, as I was permitted to call it, I bequeath to my aunt
Hervey, except my mother should think fit to keep it herself.

* Ibid.

I bequeath to the worthy Charles Hickman, Esq. the locket, with the
miniature picture of the lady he best loves, which I have constantly
worn, and shall continue to wear next my heart till the approach of
my last hour.* It must be the most acceptable present that can be
made him, next to the hand of the dear original. 'And, O my dear Miss
Howe, let it not be long before you permit his claim to the latter--for
indeed you know not the value of a virtuous mind in that sex; and how
preferable such a mind is to one distinguished by the more dazzling
flights of unruly wit; although the latter were to be joined by
that specious outward appearance which too--too often attracts the
hasty eye, and susceptible heart

.'

* See Letter II. of this volume.

Permit me, my dear friends, this solemn apostrophe, in this last
solemn act, to a young lady so deservedly dear to me!

I make it my earnest request to my dear Miss Howe, that she will
not put herself into mourning for me.

But I desire her acceptance of a ring with my hair; and that Mr. Hickman
will also accept of the like; each of the value of twenty-five
guineas.

I bequeath to Lady Betty Lawrance, and to her sister, Lady Sarah Sadleir,
and to the right honourable Lord M. and to their worthy nieces,
Miss Charlotte and Miss Martha Montague, each an enamelled ring, with
a cipher Cl.

H. with my hair in crystal, and round the inside of each, the day, month,
and year of my death: each ring, with brilliants, to cost twenty
guineas.

And this as a small token of the grateful sense I have of the honour
of their good opinions and kind wishes in my favour; and of their
truly noble offer t me of a very considerable annual provision,
when they apprehended me to be entirely destitute of any.

To the reverend and learned Dr. Arthur Lewen, by whose instructions I
have been equally delighted and benefited, I bequeath twenty guineas
for a ring. If it should please God to call him to Himself before he
can receive this small bequest, it is my will that his worthy
daughter may have the benefit of it.

In token of the grateful sense I have of the civilities paid me by
Mrs.
and Miss Howe's domestics, from time to time, in my visits there,
I bequeath thirty guineas, to be divided among them, as their dear
young mistress shall think proper.

To each of my worthy companions and friends, Miss Biddy Lloyd, Miss Fanny
Alston, Miss Rachel Biddulph, and Miss Cartright Campbell, I bequeath
five guineas for a ring.

To my late maid servant, Hannah Burton, an honest, faithful creature,
who loved me, reverenced my mother, and respected my sister, and
never sought to do any thing unbecoming of her character, I bequeath
the sum of fifty pounds, to be paid within one month after my
decease, she labouring under ill health: and if that ill-health
continue, I commend her for farther assistance to my good Mrs.

Norton, to be put upon my poor's fund, hereafter to be mentioned.

To the coachman, groom, and two footmen, and five maids, at Harlowe-place,
I bequeath ten pounds each; to the helper five pounds.

To my sister's maid, Betty Barnes, I bequeath ten pounds, to show that
I resent no former disobligations; which I believe were owing
more to the insolence of office, and to natural pertness, than to
personal ill will.

All my wearing-apparel, of whatever sort, that I have not been
obliged to part with, or which is not already bequeathed, (my linen
excepted,) I desire Mrs.

Norton to accept of.

The trunks and boxes in which my clothes are sealed up, I desire
may not be opened, but in presence of Mrs.

Norton (or of someone deputed by her) and of Mrs. Lovick.

To the worthy Mrs. Lovick, above-mentioned, from whom I have received
great civilities, and even maternal kindnesses; and to Mrs. Smith
(with whom I lodge) from whom also I have received great kindnesses;
I bequeath all my linen, and all my unsold laces; to be divided
equally between them, as they shall agree; or, in case of disagreement,
the same to be sold, and the money arising to be equally shared by
them.

And I bequeath to the same good gentlewomen, as a further token of
my thankful acknowledgements of their kind love and compassionate
concern for me, the sum of twenty guineas each.

To Mr. Smith, the husband of Mrs.

Smith above-named, I bequeath the sum of ten guineas, in acknowledgement
of his civilities to me.

To Katharine, the honest maid servant of Mrs.

Smith, to whom (having no servant of my own) I have been troublesome,
I bequeath five guineas; and ten guineas more, in lieu of a suit
of my wearing-apparel, which once, with some linen, I thought of
leaving to her.

With this she may purchase what may be more suitable to her liking
and degree.

To the honest and careful widow, Anne Shelburne, my nurse, over and
above her wages, and the customary perquisites that may belong to
her, I bequeath the sum of ten guineas.

Here is a careful, and (to persons of such humanity and tenderness) a
melancholy employment, attended in the latter part of life with
great watching and fatigue, which is hardly ever enough considered.

The few books I have at my present lodgings, I desire Mrs. Lovick to
accept of; and that she be permitted, if she please, to take a
copy of my book of meditations, as I used to call it; being extracts
from the best of books; which she seemed to approve of, although
suited particularly to my own case.

As for the book itself, perhaps my good Mrs. Norton will be glad
to have it, as it is written with my own hand.

In the middle drawer of my escritoire, at Harlowe-place, are many
letters, and copies of letters, put up according to their dates, which
I have written or received in a course of years (ever since I
learned to write) from and to my grandfather, my father and mother,
my uncles, my brother and sister, on occasional little absences;
my late uncle Morden, my cousin Morden; Mrs.

Norton, and Miss Howe, and other of my companions and friends,
before my confinement at my father's: as also from the three reverent
gentlemen, Dr.

Blome, Mr. Arnold, and Mr.

Tomkins, now with God, and the very reverend Dr. Lewen, on serious
subjects. As these letters exhibit a correspondence that no person
of my sex need to be ashamed of, allowing for the time of life when
mine were written; and as many excellent things are contained in those
written to me; and as Miss Howe, to whom most of them have been
communicated, wished formerly to have them, if she survived me: for
these reasons, I bequeath them to my said dear friend, Miss Anna Howe;
and the rather, as she had for some years past a very considerable share
in the correspondence.

I do hereby make, constitute, and ordain John Belford, of
Edgware, in the county of Middlesex, Esq. the sole executor of this my
last will and testament; having previously obtained his leave so to
do. I have given the reasons which induced me to ask this gentleman
to take upon him this trouble to Miss Howe. I therefore refer to
her on this subject.

But I do most earnestly beg of him the said Mr. Belford, that, in the
execution of his trust, he will (as he has repeatedly promised)
studiously endeavour to promote peace with, and suppress resentments
in, every one; so that all farther mischiefs may be prevented, as well
from, as to, his friend. And, in order to this, I beseech him to cultivate
the friendship of my worthy cousin Morden; who, as I presume to hope,
(when he understands it to be my dying request,) will give him his
advice and assistance in every article where it may be necessary: and
who will perhaps be so good as to interpose with my relations, if
any difficulty should arise about carrying out some of the articles
of this my last will into execution, and to soften them into the
wished-for condescension:-- for it is my earnest request to Mr.

Belford, that he will not seek by law, or by any sort of violence, either
by word or deed, to extort the performance from them. If there be any
articles of a merely domestic nature, that my relations shall think
unfit to be carried into execution; such articles I leave entirely
to my said cousin Morden and Mr.

Belford to vary, or totally dispense with, as they shall agree upon
the matter; or, if they two differ in opinion, they will be pleased
to be determined by a third person, to be chosen by them both.

Having been pressed by Miss Howe and her mother to collect the particulars
of my sad story, and given expectation that I would, in order to
do my character justice with all my friends and companions; but not
having time before me for the painful task; it has been a pleasure
for me to find, by extracts kindly communicated to me by my said
executor, that I may safely trust my fame to the justice done me
by Mr.

Lovelace, in his letters to him my said executor.

And as Mr. Belford has engaged to contribute what is in his power towards
a compliment to be made of all that relates to my story, and knows
my whole mind in this respect; it is my desire, that he will cause
two copies to be made of this collection; one to remain with Miss
Howe, the other with himself; and that he will show or lend his
copy, if required, to my aunt Hervey, for the satisfaction of any
of my family; but under such restrictions as the said Mr.

Belford shall think fit to impose; that neither any other person's
safety may be endangered, nor his own honour suffer, by the
communication.

I bequeath to my said executor the sum of one hundred guineas, as a
grateful, though insufficient acknowledgment of the trouble he
will be at in the execution of the trust he has so kindly undertaken.

I desire him likewise to accept of twenty guineas for a ring: and
that he will reimburse himself for all the charges and expenses
which he shall be at in the execution of this trust.

In the worthy Dr. H. I have found a physician, a father, and a friend.
I beg of him, as a testimony of my gratitude, to accept of twenty
guineas for a ring.

I have the same obligations to the kind and skilful Mr.

Goddard, who attended me as my apothecary. His very moderate bill
I have discharged down to yesterday. I have always thought it incumbent
upon testators to shorten all they can the trouble of their executors.
I know I under-rate the value of Mr.

Goddard's attendances, when over and above what may accrue from yesterday,
to the hour that will finish all, I desire fifteen guineas for a
ring may be presented to him.

To the Reverend Mr. ----, who frequently attended me, and prayed by me
in my last stages, I also bequeath fifteen guineas for a ring.

There are a set of honest, indigent people, whom I used to call My
Poor, and to whom Mrs.

Norton conveys relief each month, (or at shorter periods,) in
proportion to their necessities, from a sum I deposited in her
hands, and from time to time recruited, as means accrued to me; but
now nearly, if not wholly, expended: now, that my fault may be as
little aggravated as possible, by the sufferings of the worthy
people whom Heaven gave me a heart to relieve; and as the produce
of my grandfather's estate, (including the moiety of the sums he
had by him, and was pleased to give me, at his death, as above
mentioned,) together with what I shall further appropriate to the
same use in the subsequent articles, will, as I hope, more than
answer all my legacies and bequests; it is my will and desire, that
the remainder, be it little or much, shall become a fund to be
appropriated, and I hereby direct that it be appropriated, to the
like purposes with the sums which I put into Mrs.

Norton's hands, as aforesaid --and this under the direction and
management of the said Mrs. Norton, who knows my whole mind in this
particular.

And in case of her death, or of her desire to be acquitted of the
management thereof, it is my earnest request to my dear Miss Howe,
that she will take it upon herself, and that at her own death she
will transfer what shall remain undisposed of at the time, to such
persons, and with such limitations, restrictions, and provisoes,
as she shall think will best answer my intention.

For, as to the management and distribution of all or any part of it,
while in Mrs. Norton's hands, or her own, I will that it be entirely
discretional, and without account, either to my executor or any
other person.

Although Mrs. Norton, as I have hinted, knows my whole mind in this
respect; yet it may be proper to mention, in this solemn last act,
that my intention is, that this fund be entirely set apart and
appropriated to relieve temporarily, from the interest thereof, (as
I dare say it will be put out to the best advantage,) or even from
the principal, if need be, the honest, industrious, labouring poor
only; when sickness, lameness, unforeseen losses, or other accidents,
disable them from following their lawful callings; or to assist
such honest people of large families as shall have a child of good
inclinations to put out to service, trade, or husbandry.

It has always been a rule with me, in my little donations, to
endeavour to aid and set forward the sober and industrious poor.

Small helps, if seasonably afforded, will do for such; and so the fund
may be of more extensive benefit; an ocean of wealth will not be
sufficient for the idle and dissolute: whom, therefore, since they
will always be in want, it will be no charity to relieve, if worthier
creatures would, by relieving the others, be deprived of such
assistance as may set the wheels of their industry going, and put
them in a sphere of useful action.

But it is my express will and direction, that let this fund come
out to be ever so considerable, it shall be applied only in support
of the temporary exigencies of the persons I have described; and
that no one family or person receive from it, at one time, or in
one year, more than the sum of twenty pounds.

It is my will and desire, that the set of jewels which was my
grandmother's, and presented to me, soon after her death, be valued;
and the worth of them paid to my executor, if any of my family choose
to have them; or otherwise, that they should be sold, and go to the
augmentation of my poor's fund.--But if they may be deemed an equivalent
for the sums my father was pleased to advance to me since the death
of my grandfather, I desire that they may be given to him.

I presume, that the diamond necklace, solitaire, and buckles, which
were properly my own, presented by my mother's uncle, Sir Josias,
Brookland, will not be purchased by any one of my family, for a too
obvious reason:
in this case I desire that they may be sent to the best advantage,
and apply the money to the uses of my will.

In the beginning of this tedious writing, I referred to the latter
part of it, the naming of the subject of the discourse which I
wished might be delivered at my funeral, if permitted to be interred
with my ancestors.

I think the following will be suitable to my case. I hope the alteration
of the words her and she, for him and he, may be allowable.

'Let not her that is deceived trust in vanity; for vanity shall be
her recompense. She shall be accomplished before her time; and her
branch shall not be green.

She shall shake off her unripe grape as the vine, and shall cut off
her flower as the olive.'*

* Job xv. 31, 32, 33.

But if I am to be interred in town, let only the usual burial-service
be read over my corpse.

If my body be permitted to be carried down, I bequeath ten pounds
to be given to the poor of the parish, at the discretion of the
church-wardens, within a fortnight after my interment.

If any necessary matter be omitted in this my will, or if any thing
appear doubtful or contradictory, as possibly may be the case; since
besides my inexperience in these matters, I am now, at this time,
very weak and ill, having put off the finishing hand a little too
long, in hopes of obtaining the last forgiveness of my honoured
friend; in which case I should have acknowledged the favour with a
suitable warmth of duty, and filled up some blanks which I left to
the very last,* in a more agreeable manner to myself than now I
have been enabled to do--in case of such omissions and imperfections,
I desire that my cousin Morden will be so good as to join with Mr.

I'll wide Pole Star, and Orion, he'll wide
G'eased Lightning, _only_--now, Uncle Ben, is you listening?"

"Yes, to be sure I am, missy," said Uncle Ben, taking another deep
draught from his big glass of stout. "What's the 'only,' little miss?"

"Let's pertend," said Diana.

"Pretend what, missy?"

"That after Orion has done it, after he has wode G'eased Lightning, he
may go 'way."

"Go away, missy?"

"Yes, let's pertend it. If he thinks he's going away after he has done
it, why, there's nothing he won't twy to do, 'cos, you see, he's
longing to go. Let's say this to him: 'Orion, you's good boy, you's
darlin' boy, and when you has done what I want you to do, you shall go
way'--then he'll do it beaut'ful."

"But he aint a-going," said the man, "he's my property. I has bought
him; I has bought you both. You are sort of slaves to me."

"No, I aren't a slave to nobody," said Diana, whose fierce little
blood could not brook this word.

"Well, you are a very good little gal, and so I am to pretend to Orion
that he's going away; but now, when I don't mean him to go, that seems
sort of cruel."

"Oh, you leave it to me!" said Diana; "let him think he's going away
and I'll manage. Tell Susan to tell him, and tell Aunt Sawah to tell
him, and you tell him, and I'll tell him, and then he'll be as good as
good, and as bwave--as bwave as a big giant."

"Well, my dear, manage it your own way," said Uncle Ben; "but, all the
same, it seems a shame. I aint what's called a very soft sort of man,
but it seems a shame to deceive a little kid; only you manage it your
own way, little missy."

"I'll manage it my own way," echoed Diana. "I'm awfu' 'bliged."

She tripped gayly out of the room.


CHAPTER XXI.

POLE STAR.


The next day, at an early hour, the different performers had a grand
rehearsal of their parts. It was a dress rehearsal. Holt was in high
spirits, and Aunt Sarah, who stood just in front of the circus, petted
and encouraged both Diana and Orion as much as possible. Orion felt
shaky and looked very white, but the delicious thought that, after he
had gone through those few minutes of agony, he might really be free
to run away, to leave the dreadful, terrible circus forever, sustained
him wonderfully. Diana had assured him that this could be managed. She
had told him that Uncle Ben had promised that if he was a brave boy
and sat well on Greased Lightning, and stood up when necessary, and,
in short, went through the ordeal set him to do, without a murmur, he
should be allowed to leave the circus that evening. It mattered
nothing at all to little Orion that he did not know where he was to
go, that he was a penniless and very small, very ignorant boy. The one
object on which all his hopes were centered was the desire to get away
from Uncle Ben and the terrible horses which he was forced to ride.

"Now, 'member, you is to be bwave," said Diana; "you isn't to be
fwightened. If you's fwightened, Uncle Ben won't let you go. You just
be as bwave as possible, and never mind nobody. Now, then, it's your
turn. Come 'long."

Orion looked charming in his pretty dress. He wore a little sky-blue
tunic, with small, tight knickers of white; his little legs and feet
were bare, round his waist was a crimson girdle, and at his side was
attached a toy sword.

Diana wore a silk skirt and tights, her curling black hair fell partly
over her forehead; her bold, black eyes were full of a strange mixture
of frolic, affection, and defiance. She looked the personification of
healthy life and courageous fire. In her hand she held the bow of
Diana, and round her neck was slung a couple of arrows. She was a
wonderfully graceful child in all her movements, and looked charming
in her picturesque dress.

The call for the children came, and the two bounded on the stage. The
moment they did so, Diana ran up to Uncle Ben and took hold of the
great whip which he carried.

"You must let me do it my own way," she said; "you have pwomised.
Orion won't be bwave boy if I don't manage him. Give me that whip."

"Oh, but I say, little missy----"

"Give me that whip," repeated Diana, flashing her eyes up at the man.
"I is the gweat Diana and I order you. Give me the whip; I'll slash
it; I know how. Ah, here comes G'eased Lightning. Come 'long, you
beauty; come 'long, you darlin'."

Diana ran fearlessly up to the horse, fondled its nose, and looked
into its eyes; the creature stood perfectly still, bent its graceful
head, and licked her little hand.

"And it's a perfect brute to everyone else," thought Uncle Ben to
himself, but this time he did not utter a word.

The horse stood perfectly motionless until little Orion was mounted on
its back.

"Now, G'eased Lightning, you has got to be a good horse," said Diana,
speaking to him in a confiding voice. "You isn't to fwighten Orion;
'member he's a giant, and it's a gweat honor for you to carry him,
'cos most times he lives up in the stars."

"Come, missy, we have no time for that sort of nonsense," said Uncle
Ben, who began to get impatient. "Give me back my whip."

"No; I is going to slash the whip. Come, G'eased Lightning; twot,
twot, p'ease."

The horse began to amble gently forward. Little Diana went and stood
by Uncle Ben's side.

"I's managing," she said; "you shall have whip to-night; but I's
managing now."

The other performers stood round in breathless silence. Orion kept his
seat manfully. Greased Lightning was as gentle as a lamb.

"Good boy!" called out Diana; "vedy good little boy. Good horse,
G'eased Lightning! you is a vedy good horse. Now then, go faster."
Diana gave the whip a crack.

The horse looked at her out of his big, intelligent eyes, and began to
trot, but still very gently, round and round the circus.

"Good boy," repeated Diana; "good horse! Now then, Orion, get up on to
yous two foots; don't be fwightened. 'Member what will happen when
it's over. Get up on to yous foots this minute."

Poor little Orion scrambled in deadly terror on to his small feet; but
the horse still went swift and smooth, neither budging nor turning to
the right or the left. Diana once again cracked her whip. He went
faster and faster. Orion began to lose his fear; he even laughed with
excitement; the rose bloom came out on his delicate little face. The
terrible hoops were brought, and the child made a manful effort to get
through them. Diana cracked her whip and called out and encouraged
him, and finally brought him successfully through the ordeal. He was
taken off the stage wet with perspiration, and trembling all over, but
at the same time he had a wild sort of triumph in his little heart.

"I did it well; didn't I, Aunt Sarah?" he said.

"You did it splendidly, my little love," said Aunt Sarah; "but I never
did see a little gal like your sister. Oh, merciful Heavens! that man
aint never a-going to let her ride Pole Star!"

A black horse of immense strength and size was now brought upon the
stage. This horse seemed to paw the air as he walked; his eyes were
bloodshot and full of a dangerous light.

"Remember it's your own fault, missy," said Uncle Ben; "this aint the
'orse I'd give you. I don't want any harm to come to you; but if you
insist on that little chap, that aint a patch on you, riding Greased
Lightning, why, there aint nothing for it but for you to ride Pole
Star."

"You don't 'uppose I's fwightened of Pole Star? Why, he's a weal
beauty," said Diana.

"He's the----" The man arrested the words on his lips.

Diana had thrown down her whip and rushed across the stage. With just
the same fearless confidence as, half an hour before, she had gone up
to Greased Lightning--she now approached Pole Star.

"You's pwetty, you's a darlin'," she said. She held out her tiny
brown hand. "Give me a bit of sugar, somebody," she demanded.

A girl who stood near ran away to fetch a lump. The child offered it
to the horse. He looked at her, pawed the ground restlessly, and then,
stooping, licked the sugar off her hand as tenderly as if he were a
kitten.

"Well, I never!" said Uncle Ben, breathing a great sigh of relief.

"It's a beauty horse," repeated Diana; "I like it better nor G'eased
Lightning. Pole Star, I's going to wide you; you's a dear, good
horse." She stroked the creature's nose--the fierce eyes grew
gentle--a moment later the child was mounted on its back.

"Now, gee up, gee up!" called Diana. "P'ease, Uncle Ben, don't cwack
your whip; I can manage Pole Star." She pulled at the reins, and the
creature began, at first gently and then more rapidly, to run round
and round the stage. After all, notwithstanding her bravery, it was an
ordeal, for Pole Star could run double as fast as Greased Lightning.
Soon, from running he seemed to take to flying, and little Diana
gasped and lost her breath; but she sat firm as a statue, and never
touched a hair of the creature's mane.

"Now, Pole Star," she called out, when the horse had stopped for want
of breath; "I's going to stand on you, and you must be vedy good." She
patted the animal on its head; then she scrambled to her feet, and,
holding the reins taut, stood firm as an arrow, while the creature
once more flew round the stage. When her ride was over she had won the
applause of the whole house.

After this Diana and Orion were taken away to rest until the evening.
They were given the best food and a great deal of petting from Aunt
Sarah. As to Diana, she was in excellent spirits.

"Oh, please, Di; nothing will make you stop, nothing will make you
break your word?" said little Orion once to her.

"What I pwomise I do," replied Diana, with dignity.

And so the hours flew by, and at last the time arrived when the
children were to appear before the footlights.

The huge circus tent was packed to the highest gallery. There was, in
short, not standing room in the audience part of the house. Uncle Ben,
in the highest spirits, was darting here and there behind the wings,
giving directions, gesticulating, ordering, rearranging. Little Diana
flew up to him and took his hand.

"What is you 'cited about?" she asked. "Is you fwightened 'bout
anything?"

"No, little gal, no--that is, provided you and your brother do your
parts well."

"We has pwomised," said Diana, with great firmness; "you needn't be
fwightened; we has pwomised."

The children were to appear as the last item of the first part of the
performance. Uncle Ben felt that on them really turned the success of
the evening. At last the crucial moment arrived. Two beautiful horses
were led into the circus, and immediately afterwards little Diana,
holding Orion by the hand, skipped on to the stage. She came lightly
forward, almost up to the footlights, dropped a somewhat pert little
courtesy, turned round, and, taking Orion's hand, danced up to where
the two horses were impatiently pawing the ground. Uncle Ben, with
his big whip in his hand, dressed in evening clothes, was standing at
one side. A man came forward to help Diana to mount Pole Star--another
gave his hand to Orion.

"'Member, Orion, you has pwomised, and it all apends," said Diana, in
a low, but very clear, voice.

The little fellow looked at her. Her spirited action, the splendid
color in her cheeks, the glow of excitement in her great big eyes,
inspired him. He would not ride for those horrid people who were
crowding all the seats in front, those horrid, terrible people who
seemed to rise from the floor to the ceiling. He did not care anything
about those faces, those cruel, staring eyes, those smiling lips; but
he did care for Diana. He would ride his best for her.

"Steady, G'eased Lightning," said the little girl; "you's to be good
horse, 'member. Now, Pole Star, beauty, darlin', do just what Diana
wants."

The horses began to canter forward, going briskly and swiftly side by
side. Greased Lightning's coal-black eye was fixed upon Diana as she
sat on Pole Star's back. Pole Star felt the feather-weight of the hot
hand on his mane, the touch of the little feet somewhere near his
neck. There was a magnetic current of sympathy between the horse and
the child.

"Think you's a giant," she said once to Orion, as she shot past him in
the race.

The crowd, speechless with astonishment and delight for the first
moment or two, now began to clap and cheer loudly. Crack went Uncle
Ben's whip. The circus girls in the wings, the men, the clown, all
watched the little pair with beating hearts. Diana they felt sure of,
but what of little Orion? And yet a change had come over the child.
His face was no longer pale; some of Diana's spirit seemed to have
entered into his soul.

The signal came for the pair to stand upon the bare, backs of their
horses. Little Orion scrambled as quickly and nimbly to his feet as
Diana herself. He caught the reins; crack again went the whip; the
horses flew round and round. Now and then Diana said a soft word to
Greased Lightning; now and then she stamped her small foot on Pole
Star's neck. Each movement, each glance of the child, seemed to thrill
through the willing beast. Incomprehensible as it may seem, both these
wild, half-tamed creatures loved her. They kept straight, veering
neither to left nor right, for her sake.

The first part of the performance went safely through, but now came
the more difficult and dangerous time. The children were now not only
to ride the horses standing, but they were obliged to ride holding one
foot in the air, then to keep on their steeds standing on tiptoe, and
finally they had to spring through great rings made of tissue paper,
and leap again upon the horses as they galloped through. Diana
performed her task with unfailing exactness, always reaching the
horse's back at the right moment, springing up, sitting down, standing
first on one foot, then on the other, being apparently on wires,
afraid of nothing, triumphant through all. Orion made a gallant effort
to follow her example. In two minutes now the whole thing would be
over.

"Don't be fwightened, Orion; time's nearly up," whispered the gay,
brave little voice in his ear.

The horses flew, the children moved as if they were puppets, and all
might now have been well if at that moment Diana herself--Diana the
fearless, the brave, the unconquerable--had not slipped, slipped at
the very moment when she was springing through one of the rings. The
horse galloped on without her, and she lay prone upon the floor of the
circus. Uncle Ben rushed madly to the rescue, and before Orion's horse
had reached the spot he had caught the child in his arms. She was
stunned by the fall, and lay white as death in his embrace. The house
thought the fall had killed her, and there was a horrified murmur; but
Diana was only stunned. In a moment she raised her cheery little
voice.

"I's awfu' sossy; I's all wight now," she said. "Where's Pole Star?"

"Nay, little gal," said Uncle Ben, knowing well the temper of the
house, "you must do no more to-night. The company, I know, will excuse
you."

Seating the child on his shoulder, and patting her hand
affectionately, as if he were her father, he brought little Diana to
the front.

"I hope, ladies and gentlemen," he called out, "that you will excuse
this great lady huntress to-night. But if you wish her to take another
turn round on the back of the great Pole Star, she is willing to
comply."

"No!" shouted voice after voice in the gallery; "let little missy off.
We'll come to see little missy another night. Three cheers for little
missy!"

The next moment Diana and Orion found themselves at the back of the
stage.

"Is it true, Di?" gasped Orion. "Is it all over?"

"Yes; it's all over," answered little Diana. She leaned against the
wall. "I's a bit giddy," she said; "but I'll be all wight by and by."

Aunt Sarah, with tears in her eyes, brought the child a restorative.

"Drink this, little love," she said; "you'll soon be much better, I'm
sure."

The curtain had fallen on the first half of the performance, and Uncle
Ben came up in a huge good humor.

"Missy, I hope you aint hurt," he said.

"Hurt?" answered Diana. "What do a fall matter? I's as wight as wain.
Didn't Orion do well, Uncle Ben?"

"Yes, all things considerin'," said Uncle Ben. "We has a full house,
missy, and I'm very much obliged to you. Now you had best go straight
to bed. Sarah, take the kids off and give them a good supper, for they
has earned it."

Aunt Sarah took Diana's hand and led her to their bedroom.

"But aren't we going away now?" said Orion.

Aunt Sarah sat down at the foot of one of the beds with a white face.

"Come to me, little missy," she said to Diana.

The child went to her.

"I's k'ite well," she said, "only a little giddy. Why, Aunt Sawah,
you's kying."

"I thought you were dead for a minute, my little miss; you that is the
image of my Rachel, what the good God took from me. I thought you were
dead, and it 'most broke my 'eart--oh, little missy, little darlin'!"

"But, Diana, aren't we going away?" Said Orion. "You promised, and you
never broke your word."

"I pwomised, and I never break my word," said Diana. "Yes, Orion, yes;
we is going away."

"I declare," said Aunt Sarah, "I believe it would be the right thing
to do. It would kill me if you was killed, missy--and them 'orses!"

"They is darlin's," interrupted Diana.

"Well, go to sleep now, and I'll fetch some supper," said Aunt Sarah.

She shut the door behind the children, returning in a few minutes with
bowls of bread and milk. Diana sat listlessly down on the nearest
bench.

"I's awfu' s'eepy," she said.

She did not quite know what was the matter with her; it seemed as if
something had suddenly knocked all her spirit away. She did not know
herself without the brave spirit which God had put into her little
breast. Orion gazed at her anxiously.

"You do look queer," he said; "your eyes are bigger than ever, and
they stare so. What's the matter, Di?"

"Nothing," said Diana.

"Aren't you going to eat your supper?"

"I's wather sick," said Diana; "I don't want to eat. You had best eat
all you can, Orion."

"Yes, I had best," answered Orion, "'cos I won't have strength to run
away if I hasn't plenty of food."

He began to eat up his own basin of bread and milk, and, as it was not
too large, he thought he might attack Diana's also; then he gave her
an anxious glance. She was sitting strangely still, her hands lying
idly in her lap, her eyes staring straight at the opposite wall.

"'Member we is going away, and that you promised," he said. "Isn't it
time for us to be off?"

"Yes, Orion," she answered.

"Well, drink off this teeny drop of milk; it will strengthen you." He
brought the bowl to Diana, who sipped of a few spoonfuls; but then she
shook her head.

"I's sick," she said; "it aren't good to eat when you is sick."

"Well, do come now," said Orion. "If you don't go at once they will
find us; and you promised, and you never broke your word yet."

"I underland," said Diana; "I would not bweak my word; that would be
mean."

"Well, let us go now."

Diana slipped off the little bench on which she had seated herself.
She was still in her circus dress; her little bow was hung at her
side, her arrow slung round her neck. Orion was also in his pretty
dress, with his tiny sword and belt, his blue jacket and little white
knickers.

"Let's put on our shoes," he said; "we can't go far in bare feet."

"We can't go far in bare foots," echoed Diana, in a dreary sort of
voice. "I's s'eepy. Shall we wun away in the morning, Orion?"

"No; to-night! to-night!" he said, in terror. "You'll break your
promise if we don't go to-night."

"All wight," she answered.

He brought her shoes, slipped them on her feet, buttoned them, and put
on his own; then he took her hand in his. They opened the door of
their bedroom and ran down a long passage, at the end of which was
another door; it was on the latch. Orion opened it, and the little
children found themselves at the back of the stage. There were no
people about to see them, even Aunt Sarah was far away in one of the
wings.

"There! we is safe," said Orion. "We has runned away, and we are
safe."

"We has wunned away and we is safe," echoed Diana, in that dreary
little voice. "But, Orion, I's drefful s'eepy."

"Never mind," said Orion; "we'll sleep in the fields."

"We'll s'eep in the fields," echoed Diana, in a vague manner.

Orion took her hand; they ran as fast as they could down a shady lane,
for the great circus tent had been put outside the town.


CHAPTER XXII.

THE MILKMAN.


It was a lovely summer's night, and as the children ran, Orion looked
up at the stars.

"Why, it's a starful night!" he cried, in a joyful voice, "and there's
me. Do look at me, Di! There I am up in the sky, ever so big and
'portant."

"So you is," said Diana, laughing and then checking herself. "Is it
far to----"

"To where, Di?"

"To the garding," said Diana; "to the dead-house where Rub-a-Dub is.
Let's go and sit on the little bench and see the dead 'uns--let's
count 'em; I wonder how many there is!" She stopped suddenly and gazed
around her.

"What do you mean?" said Orion, in some alarm. "We are nowhere near
the garden. Don't you know where we are, Diana?"

"Yes, I do now, course," she answered, with a laugh. "I think I was
dweaming; it's my head; it's keer. I want to s'eep awfu'."

"Well, here are the fields," said Orion; "here's a beautiful green
field, and the moon is shining on it. Oh, and there's a hole in the
hedge; let's creep in."

"Let's k'eep in," said Diana.

They pushed their way through the hole and found themselves in a
clover field. The clover, slightly wet with dew, felt very refreshing
to their hot little feet.

"Isn't this 'licious?" said Diana. "Let's lie down on the g'een
g'ass; let's s'eep here; I's awfu' s'eepy."

"It's very near the circus," said Orion. "I'm rather frightened for
fear Uncle Ben will find us."

"No, he won't; it's all wight," said Diana.

She allowed her little brother to lead her as far as the hedge, and
then nothing would persuade her to go any further. Down on the damp
grass she flung herself, and then next moment was fast asleep.

Orion, aged six, did not think it wrong for Diana to sleep on the wet
grass. The moon shone all over her bare little legs. She folded her
arms when she lay down, and now there was not a stir, nor a movement
from her.

Far away, or at least it seemed far away to little Orion, he could see
the blinking lights of the town, and when he stood on tiptoe he could
also see the lights of the merry-go-rounds and the other
accompaniments of the great circus. He knew that he was dreadfully
near his tyrants, and he longed beyond words to awaken Diana and make
her go farther away; but she was asleep--dead tired. He never could
master her. There was nothing, therefore, but for him to lie down
also, close to her.

Accordingly, he flung himself on the grass, laid his head on her
shoulder, nestling up close to her for warmth and protection, and in a
few moments he had also forgotten his fears, and was calmly living in
the blessed land of dreams. The great Orion overhead looked down on
his tiny namesake, and the little boy dreamt that he was a giant in
very truth, and that he and Diana were fighting their way through the
world.

The children slept, and presently the creatures of the night came
out--the owls, and the bats, and the night moths--and looked with
wonder at the queer little pair lying prone amongst the green clover.
Thousands of wonderful night noises also began to awaken in all
directions--the merry chirp of the cricket, the whir of the bat on its
circling flight, the hum of the moths--but the children heard nothing,
although the creatures of the night were curious about these strange
little beings who, by good rights, ought not to be sharing their
kingdom.

At last, just when the first peep of dawn began to tinge the east,
little Orion opened his eyes and rubbed them hard. With a great rush
memory returned to him. He had run away; he had ridden Greased
Lightning and had not fallen from his back; his terrible life in the
circus was at an end. Uncle Ben was nowhere near to chide him. He and
Diana had got off; but it was true that they had not put a great
distance between themselves and Uncle Ben. So at last the two girls
bade each other good-night at the door of Jenny's bedroom, where
Isabel was to sleep.

Masterful youth! So wild to take, so eager to surrender, the Christian
name. Strange, what passion sometimes can be put into a _Christian_
name!

When the door was shut on Isabel, she made no haste to undress. Indeed,
she sat down on the side of the bed as though she had been waiting
to sit down for ever so long, sat very still as in a dream, and
an hour went by and she was still sitting and gazing in front of
her.

And downstairs in the study, where the lamps were still burning,
Theophil was sitting by the fire in just the same curiously
wrought and withdrawn way, with just the same eyes.

Isabel's room was over his. Presently she heard him moving about;
then she heard him coming upstairs.

For a moment the air seemed to grow warm, as she heard him softly pass
her room; then she heard him close his door.

She shook her reverie from her, as though it had been a black veil
full of stars, and began to undress.

Presently her eyes fell on a little pile of handkerchiefs, with needle
and cotton, and little letters printed on dainty tapes, beside it.

Jenny had forgotten to put away her sewing.

Isabel took up one of the handkerchiefs, to which the needle and
thread were still attached, and read "Jenny Lond ..."

(Don't you know that's bad luck, Jenny?)
"So soon as that! Is it so soon as that?"

she sighed.

Happy Jenny!

CHAPTER XIII 

IN WHICH JENNY KISSES MR.

MOGGRIDGE
Isabel was leaving very early next morning for London, so good-byes
must be brief.

Jenny and Theophil saw her off at the station, but before leaving
Zion Place there had been a moment in which for the second time in
their lives she and Theophil had been alone.

They had stood together in the little study and taken each other's
hands, without a word, and they had looked into each other's faces
as those look whom a look must last a long time.

They didn't even say good-bye, for, if they were never to meet
again, the look was not good-bye.

And meet again it was not unlikely they would, for it had been already
arranged that Isabel was to lead off the autumn entertainments;
but the look did not mean that, either.

As life had been planned for them, all subsequent meetings must be
merely trivialities.

They had met once, and fate had decided that they must never meet
like that again.

In that long look each knew that they met and parted for ever, autumn
arrangements notwithstanding.

Each came out of that look as out of a great cathedral, and from that
moment till the train left Theophil, with an unwonted sense of loneliness,
by Jenny's side, they entered that cathedral no more. Their devotions
were done for that day, and they must resume their secular duties,
rippling idly over the great deeps of themselves.

One always leaves a station from which a dear friend has just gone
with a certain subdued air, a certain bereaved hush in the voice,
and even Jenny felt a momentary loneliness too.

But it was not long before the doors of home opened again for her in
the sound of Theophil's voice; and in the sense of the old familiar
nearness to him she was back again safe in the only world she ever
wished to dwell in.

It was more of an effort with Theophil, and the voice that made home
for Jenny had a strange sound in his own ears, as though it
were still talking to Isabel; but the effort was soon made, and though
Jenny teased him a little and said she believed he had quite lost
his, that was to say _her_, heart to Isabel, of course she believed
no such thing.

Doubt is too terrible a toy for true love to play with.

You only dare to doubt as you must sometimes face the fear of
death.

"I wish next October were here," said Jenny, artlessly; "it seems
such a long time to wait to see her again."

Did Theophil wish the same? He hardly knew.

"Distance is such a silly thing," went on Jenny.

"It seems to have been invented just to separate those who want to
be together. It seems so arbitrary, so unnecessary."
"I suppose death is a form of distance," said Theophil, irrelevantly.

"Life too, I'm afraid," said Jenny.

"Yes, indeed, life too," assented Theophil, dreamily.

"If I were to die," said Jenny, suddenly, "would you still do what
we said?"

"Why do you ask that, dear? You're a very serious little woman this
morning. Of course I would. You know. But why do you ask me
now?"
"Oh, only, dear, because I wonder whether we really ought to.

Somehow Isabel's visit has made me feel that life is a bigger,
fuller thing than I had dreamed, and that men like you, at all
events, have duties towards it even greater than your love for a
little thing like me."

"Jenny dear, don't talk like that. Why should you? You don't surely
doubt my love!"
"Of course not, Theophil.

It was only my silly little brain thinking for once in a while,--and
I don't mean to be unkind, but really I rather mean it. Are you still
quite sure there is nothing in the world more important than love?"

"Quite sure," he answered; "surer than ever--if that were possible. You
are not beginning to doubt that?

Certainly it is a silly little brain, if that's what its thinking
is coming to."

    "I don't mean it for myself. Little
               women have
    nothing but love to think of; but great men, men with a mission
in the world ..."

"Please, Jenny!"
"Well, dear, I mean it; and I sometimes think that perhaps, perhaps,
I'm hindering your life; that if you were to be bothered with love
at all, you should have married some clever, wonderful woman,--woman,
say, like Isabel."

"Jenny!"

    "Of course, dear,
      I know you
    don't think so," she continued; and he realised that it was all
artless accident on her part--"Still I cannot help thinking it for
you sometimes, dear, and sometimes I feel very selfish to have your
love,--as though, so to say, I was wearing someone else's crown."

"Jenny dear, will you promise never to talk like that again?

A clever woman! To be a woman is to be a genius, but to be a clever woman
is to be another man of talent."

"That wouldn't be fair to Isabel."
"No," assented Theophil, "Isabel is different too."

And that brought them to Theophil's office and good-bye till the
evening.

For the evening there had been fixed an important church meeting, the
first annual business meeting of minister and deacons since
Londonderry had come to New Zion.

It was an occasion of jubilation all round, particularly for Mr.
Moggridge, who gave voice to New Zion's general satisfaction, you
may be sure, in no uncertain terms of praise.

New Zion was, indeed, _New_ Zion once more, he said, thanks to their
indefatigable young pastor,--a play on words which was received
with the applause due to so unmistakable a union of wit and truth.

Nor did the proceedings result in mere compliments. The church found
itself rich enough to increase its minister's stipend; and when
Theophil took Mr.

Moggridge back to supper, another surprise awaited him, in the form
of a suspicious-looking letter, which, being opened, revealed a
quite unexceptionable £50 note, enclosed in a sheet of note-paper,
on which was written--"From never mind who."

The writing was unknown to Londonderry, but there could be only one
culprit.

"Of course, Mr. Moggridge, this is from you. Really ..."
"No, sir, indeed; you make a mistake there," protested Moggridge, lying
badly, and growing purple.

"Who do _you_ suspect, Jenny?"

"Why, of course, it's Mr. Moggridge!"
"Mr. Moggridge!" exclaimed Jenny impulsively, throwing her arms round
Mr. Moggridge's surprised shoulders, and kissing him somewhere in his
whiskers,--"Mr. Moggridge! you are the dearest, kindest man in the
world!"

And Jenny was not far wrong.

"Mr. Londonderry," said Mr.

Moggridge, by way of changing the subject, and warmly grasping the young
man's hand, "New Zion's proud of you, sir--and so is Eli Moggridge."

And that moment would have been as good for all three, even without
the fifty-pound note.

CHAPTER XIV

THE GREAT EVENT OF MR. TALBOT'S LIFE
I realize that any attempt henceforth to enchain the reader's
interest with church meetings, or the like enthralments, will be
more than hopeless.

That is the worst of allowing love to creep into one's story.

He insists on having the stage to himself, and in that determination
the audience is entirely with him. Previously you may have been
interested in all kinds of peaceable, unexciting things, far more
good for you, but enter love, and all the rest is suddenly fallen
tame beyond endurance.

It is of no use to urge that life's bill of the play includes many
hardly less brilliant and attractive performers.

They are all well enough in their way, till the eternal Paganini is
there with his old fiddle once more at his shoulder; then there
is an end of all seriousness, or a beginning, as you please.

Well, I'll do my best to get over the six months between March and
October as quickly as possible; and, indeed, it will not be very
difficult, after all, for very little happened, to speak of, during
that time to any of the chief actors engaged in making this history.

Perhaps it was this consideration that prompted old Mr. Talbot--O,
bother old Mr. Talbot!--that prompted old Mr. Talbot, I say, to take
the important step of dying, when, poor old man!

his death would give the least possible trouble.

There seemed as little reason for his dying as there had seemed for
his living, for as far as anyone knew there was nothing the matter
with him, except an extreme sleepiness of an evening, which was but
natural in an old weary man who still kept at his stone-masonry
though he was full seventy.

Night after night, for some weeks, he had been getting sleepier and
sleepier.

"Why, dad, I never saw such an old sleepy-head"--his wife had rallied
him good-naturedly one night, looking at him with a sudden odd expression
in her face.

"Eh, lass, but I was noddin' and no mistake," said the old man,
struggling drowsily with the heaviness, and presently succumbing
once more.

"He's off again," said Mrs. Talbot to herself, as she lifted the lid
of a pent saucepan in which some boiled onions were mightily
bubbling in a wild little world of steam.

Presently the old man sighed deeply,--so you would have thought;
but Mrs.

Talbot, hurrying to him, knew that he had tried to say "Jane," and had
said it for the last time.

Yes, he had been getting sleepier and sleepier; all his life he had
been trying to sleep, and at last he slept.

To most people Mr.

Talbot's death was the first intimation of his ever having lived,
and one rather resents for the old man the one day's publicity which
death enforced upon him.

It was indeed well for him that he was dead, for such unwonted excitement
would surely have killed him.
This important coming and going of undertakers; this populous invasion
of friends talking like muffled drums in the front parlour, and passing
up and down and up and down the stairs, in and out and in and out
of his still room; this throng of neighbours awaiting him in the
streets; these plumed impatient horses, and these carriages of dark
grandeur--"Jane, why ever didn't you bury me by the back door?"

would surely have been the old man's pitiful complaint could he
have known.

However, the day passed and the old man was safe at last, where no
front-parlour visitors should affright him more, and where no one
would trouble his old brains for speech any more; and to all, save
one, his death was but as though he had moved a little farther into
the kitchen.

It seemed almost strange that even his wife should miss him. One
had thought so little of them as man and wife.

One could hardly, even by process of thinking, realise that between
these rinded and wrinkled beings love had once hung like a rosy
cloud, from which one day had sprung Jenny.

On one or two occasions, indeed, they had been surprised in an
uncanny semblance of a caress, and once in a while an almost
supernatural retrospect had lit up and vanished again in an
unaccustomed tender word; and to have been present then was to feel
somehow frightened.

Ah! the gay young leaves no longer kiss across in the morning sun,
but the stern old trees have meetings you know not of far beneath
the ground.

Their roots are twisted and twined in a wonderful embrace there; there
in the dark they are very close together, and shall not be wrenched
apart without groanings that cannot be uttered.

Jenny can hardly be said to have missed her father, except through
her mother, who seemed suddenly to grow a little deafer, a little
more dim-sighted, just a trifle less brisk and busy than before,
and with a touch about her of that old-age awesomeness that mutters
to itself in corners and seems to know strange things.

Yes, Jane missed her John.

Her old heart knew that he was no longer sitting in the kitchen.

CHAPTER XV

JENNY'S BOTTOM DRAWER

Jenny and her old mother began to grow closer to each other at this
time.

Perhaps it was because the old woman felt lonelier, and perhaps,
too, because the loss of her old man had sent her thoughts wandering
among the enchanted fields of her young days, that she began to
talk sometimes to Jenny about her marriage, and to give her quaint
advice on the subject of "managing" husbands; "as if," Jenny smilingly
said to herself, "an old man like father was the same, belonged
even to the same race, as Theophil."

Perhaps Mrs.

Talbot scented some such reflection in Jenny's expression; at all
events, she answered it with an "Eh, but all men are alike, my
dear, under their skins,--all alike, and they need humouring and
managing just in the same way, prince or peasant."

The idea of "managing" Theophil had something repulsive in it for
Jenny; there was an element of deceit, of cunning, implied which
didn't go with her ideas of true love and the life beautiful of
which she was dreaming.

She didn't believe that men and women who loved were really different
from each other, and perhaps she was right.

About this time, too, Mrs. Talbot began to produce from mysterious
treasure-caves, entered apparently from an old press in her bedroom,
all kinds of wonderful things which would be useful to Jenny some
day in her house: terrible little ornaments,--very sacred, though,--sad
quaintnesses of the spirit of beauty pathetically fumbling about
in country brains; wool mats worked in the primary colours; and
such wool wonders as a wool basket of flowers, in which real wool
flowers grew out of a wool basket which you held by an over-arching
wool handle, the whole worked with undeniable but how forlorn
ingenuity,--a prehistoric relic of Mrs.

Talbot's legendary school-days: survivals from a period which is best
summed up in the one wonderful word "antimacassar," a period when
for some unrecorded reason men and women had to protect their
furniture against their oleaginous selves, and beautiful locks were
guarded from lover's fingers by coats of triple oil.

But these were things worth having, too,--bits of old lace and
prim embroidery, that bore the stamp of a refinement that is never
old-fashioned; and when Mrs.

Talbot descended from the beautiful she could show you real treasures.

I don't think there was any word in the language, not even Bible words,
which Mrs. Talbot pronounced with such an accent of solemnity as
the word "linen." The words "China" and "cut glass," and perhaps
"silver," ran it close, but "linen" was undoubtedly the word in which
all Mrs.
Talbot's sense of the seriousness of living, her sense of household
distinction, her deep sense of the importance of prosperity, and
her stern love of cleanliness found most impressive utterance.

Mrs. Talbot could never have smiled as she said "linen."
And the linen she had been storing for Jenny might indeed have been
the very stuff of which lilies are made, lilies smelling of lavender.

Such pairs of sheets! A queen might even fear to await her lord lying
amid such linen; for white indeed must be the body that dares
rivalry with Mrs.

Talbot's sheets,--sheets which might indeed be said to settle that old
question of the snows of yester-year.

_Mais ou sont les neiges d'antan_?

Surely they have been settling, flake on flake, year after year, in
Mrs.
Talbot's linen-press, till at last there is quite a snowdrift of
fair white linen for Jenny and Theophil to lie in.

Yes!

another six months and Christmas will be here; and, after Christmas is
turned, the weeks till February the 12th--the second anniversary
of Theophil's coming to New Zion--will fly by in no time.

Meanwhile Mrs. Talbot and Jenny--with occasional contributions from
Theophil--began to busy themselves with Jenny's bottom drawer.

Translated into the language of those more magnificent circles in
which this simple-hearted romance has no desire to move, a "bottom
drawer" might be described as a trousseau, though such translation
would be only partially correct.

A bottom drawer is a good deal more than a trousseau.
It is the corner of a girl's wardrobe, usually its bottom drawer,
where the home that is to be begins to take shape in deposits of various
kissed objects, minor articles of apparel, of ornament or
use,--handkerchiefs such as we have already seen Jenny marking, in
defiance of the old prophecy that the bride who dares even to write
her married name before her marriage will never know a wedding day;
quaint candlesticks that had to be picked up in some old curiosity
shop as come upon or be missed altogether; pretty shoes of a pattern
you weren't likely to meet with again; occasionally, perhaps, even
an anticipatory wedding present, that some friend who would be far
away in Australia when the day came had already contributed; a
pretty tea-service Theophil had suddenly taken a fancy to buy for
Jenny one day,--"any straw will help a nest;" a sweet and rather
naughty picture that must never be hung anywhere but in their little
sacred bedroom,--"O love, our little room!"

How often did Jenny bend lovingly over that drawer, which by now had
spread itself over a whole chest of drawers,--for home was growing,
growing,--only a few more months and it would have grown so big
and real that nothing but a little house would hold it. And Theophil
was brought sometimes to peep in too,--"O love, think of it--our
little home."

CHAPTER XVI

THEOPHIL ALL THIS TIME
Have I seemed to shirk the subject of Theophil's feelings all this
time?

Well, I confess I have rather shrunk from writing down in so many
words that he was in love with Isabel,--obvious as the fact has
been,--just as he himself shrank from admitting the same truth even
to his own soul.

When he had sat up in his study that night of the recital, he had looked
the whole sad splendid truth in its wonderful face, had loved it
wildly for an hour, and then shut his eyes to it for ever.

He knew that Isabel was the woman God had made for him, sweet, dear
Jenny the woman he had made for himself, and he bowed before the
work of the greater artist.

Never voice nor look nor touch of woman had affected Theophil before as
the least tone or glance or movement of Isabel stirred him to the
centre of his being.

To meet her eyes was to release a music that went shuddering through
the whole world; her lightest word was filled with echoes of infinite
things. Not a lover only, but anyone with instincts for such
perceptions, looking at Isabel, would have said: There is a woman who
is needed to make some man a great poet, a great artist, some kind of
great man! She belongs to the history-making women.
How very sound Iris did sleep that night! How happy she felt once
more!

Fortune had dragged in her bed, and laid it on the floor close to the
little girl's side, and the sound of Fortune's snores was the sweetest
music Iris had listened to for a long time.

"Fortune will find the others, and I can be a real mother once more,"
she whispered over and over to herself.

And so she slept sweetly and dreamed happily, and awoke in the morning
with color in her cheeks and hope in her eyes.


CHAPTER XXIV.

ON THE TRAIL.


It was on the very evening that Orion and Diana had left the great
circus that Uncle William and the two children arrived at Delaney
Manor, for Delaney Manor was only five miles distant from the
prosperous seaside town of Madersley.

Now, Uncle Ben had very little idea, when he brought the two children
to the southwest of England, that he was really taking them back to
their native country. These things, however, are ordered, and the
wisest man in the world cannot go against the leadings of Providence.
Uncle Ben thought to hide the children from their best friends,
whereas, in reality, he was taking them home once more.

But two little circus children might wander about at their own sweet
will at Madersley, and be heard nothing whatever of at Delaney Manor,
and these little children might never have been found, and this story
might have had a totally different ending, but for Fortune.

When Fortune, however, lay down on her mattress by Iris' side, she
thought a great deal before she went to sleep. She thought, as she
expressed it to herself, all round the subject, to the right of it,
and to the left of it. She thought of it in its breadth, and she
thought of it in its height, and, having finally settled the matter to
her own satisfaction, she went to sleep, and soothed little Iris with
the comforting music of her snores.

On the following morning she had an interview with Mr. Dolman.

"I want to ask you a straight question, sir," she said. "What is it
the police are doing? It seems a mighty strange thing to me that two
little children should be lost in the middle of a civilized country
like England."

"It seems a stranger thing to me," replied Uncle William. "I am
dreadfully puzzled over the whole matter. We have now four detectives
at work, but up to the present they have not got the slightest clew to
the children's whereabouts."

"As like as not," said Fortune, "these two have been stolen by
gypsies."

"We thought of that at once," said Uncle William.

"Yes," interrupted Fortune, "and then, when you couldn't make the
thing fit, or find your clew, you dropped it. Now let me tell you,
sir, that aint our way in America. When we get the faintest ghost of a
clew we cling on to it as if it were grim death, and we don't let it
go, not for nobody. It's my belief that gypsies are at the bottom of
the matter, and why have not you and your detectives looked in every
gypsy encampment in the length and breadth of England?"

"There were some gypsies in our neighborhood, only we did not know it
the first day," continued Mr. Dolman, "and their camp was of course
thoroughly examined, but no little people in the least resembling the
children were found there."

"Then of course it goes without saying," continued Fortune, "that the
gypsies passed on the little dears to other folk. Now the question is,
What sort of folk would be interested in a little pair like them?
They was both young, both lissom, both handsome, and Miss Diana was
the bravest child I ever come across--maybe they was sold to someone
to train 'em to walk on the tight rope."

Uncle William smiled indulgently.

"The detectives would certainly have found that out by this time," he
said. "Besides, there were no traveling companies of any sort within a
radius of quite fifteen miles."

"Very well," said Fortune; "then, perhaps, sir, you'll allow me to
manage things my own way. I aint a detective, but I'm bent on
detective work for the time being. I'm going straight off to Madersley
this morning. I'm going to have descriptions of those children printed
in very big characters, and posted all over Madersley."

"And why specially all over Madersley?" asked Mr. Dolman.

"'Cos Madersley is, so to speak, their native town," answered Fortune.
"Why, there aint a person in Madersley who don't know Delaney Manor;
and strangers, when they come there, drive out to see Delaney Manor as
they would any other big place, and folks at this time of year travel
from far to stay at Madersley, because the place is bracing and the
coast good for bathing. So you see, Mr. Dolman, there'll be lots of
people who will read my descriptions, and when they read 'em they'll
begin to talk about the children, and there's no saying what may
happen."

"It doesn't sound a bad idea," said Mr. Dolman.

"Bad!" repeated Fortune. "It's a first-rate idea; it's an American
idea. In America we never let the grass grow under our feet. I'm off
to Madersley this minute to see after those posters. Why, we post up
everything in America, every single thing that is lost, let alone
children, and we do it in big type, as big as they make it, and we put
the posters on the walls, and wherever there's a scrap of available
space. By your leave, sir, I'm off to Madersley now."

Fortune was as good as her word. She not only went to Madersley and
interviewed some of the best printers in the place, but she also
visited the police station, and told the police to be on the lookout.

"For the two youngest little Delaneys are missing," she said, "and
found they must be, if heaven and earth are moved to accomplish the
job."

The superintendent of police remembered that he had already had notice
of two children being missing somewhere in the North of England, but
as he thought it extremely unlikely that such children would come to
the southwest, he had not troubled himself much about them. Fortune's
words, however, stimulated his zeal, and he promised to keep a sharp
lookout. The printer also was full of enthusiasm, and agreed to print
posters which should even satisfy Fortune. He certainly did his best;
and a day or two later flaming posters, in red and black ink, were
pasted up all over the little town. In these, Fortune had given a most
accurate description of little black-eyed Diana and Orion. Their ages
were mentioned, their sizes, the color also of their eyes and hair.

The immediate effect of these posters was to frighten Uncle Ben Holt
considerably. He had been in a dreadful rage when first he discovered
that Diana and Orion had taken him at his word and had decamped. He
had been very cruel to every member of the troupe, and in especial to
his poor wife. Yet many Australian tribes possess a moral Supreme
Being.

In fact ghost-worship, in Mr.

Spencer's scheme, cannot be fairly well developed till society reaches
the level of 'settled groups whose burial-places are in their midst.'
Hence the development of a moral Supreme Being among tribes _not_ thus
settled, is inconceivable, on Mr.

Spencer's hypothesis.[6] By that hypothesis, 'worshipped ancestors,
according to their remoteness, were regarded as divine, semi-divine,
and human.'[7] Where we find, then, the Divine Being among nomads who
do not remember their great-grandfathers, the Spencerian theory
is refuted by facts.

We have the effect, the Divine Being, without the cause, worship
of ancestors.

Coming to the Hebrews, Mr.

Spencer argues that 'the silence of their legends (as to ancestor-worship)
is but a negative fact, which may be as misleading as negative facts
usually are.'

They are, indeed; witness Mr. Spencer's own silence about savage
Supreme Beings. But we may fairly argue that if Israel had been given
to ancestor-worship (as might partly be surmised from the mystery
about the grave of Moses) the Prophets would not have spared them
for their crying.

The Prophets were unusually outspoken men, and, as they
undeniably do scold Israel for every other kind of conceivable
heresy, they were not likely to be silent about ancestor-worship,
if ancestor-worship existed.

Mr. Spencer, then, rather heedlessly, though correctly, argues that
'nomadic habits are unfavourable to evolution of the ghost-theory.'[8]
Alas, this gives away the whole case! For, if all men began as nomads,
and nomadic habits are unfavourable even to the ordinary ghost, how
did the Australian and other nomads develop the Supreme Being,
who, _ex hypothesi_, is the final fruit of the ghost-flower? If you
cannot have 'an established ancestor-worship' till you abandon
nomadic habits, how, while still nomadic, do you evolve a Supreme
Being?

Obviously not out of ancestor-worship.

Mr. Spencer then assigns, as evidence for ancestor-worship in Israel,
mourning dresses, fasting, the law against self-bleeding and cutting
off the hair for the dead, and the text (Deut. xxvi. 14) about 'I
have not given aught thereof for the dead.'

'Hence, the conclusion must be that ancestor-worship had developed
as far as nomadic habits allowed, before it was repressed by a higher
worship.'[9] But whence came that higher worship which seems to have
intervened immediately after the cessation of nomadic habits?

There are obvious traces of grief expressed in a primitive way among
the Hebrews. 'Ye shall not cut yourselves, nor make any baldness between
your eyes for the dead' (Deut. xiv. 1). 'Neither shall men lament for
them, nor cut themselves, nor make themselves bald for them;
neither shall men tear themselves for them in mourning, to comfort
them for the dead' (by way of counter-irritant to grief); 'neither
shall men give them the cup of consolation to drink for their father
or their mother,' because the Jews were to be removed from their
homes.[10] 'Ye shall not make any cuttings in your flesh for the
dead, nor print any marks upon you

.'[11]

It may be usual to regard inflictions, such as cutting, by mourners,
as sacrifices to the ghost of the dead.
"I don't seem to take any
interest in anything just now."

"Well, all the same, dear, I would like you to go. The best of us can
but take steps, and when we has taken the steps that Providence seems
to indicate, there's no use a-fretting ourselves into our graves.
Folks are coming to Madersley now from the length and breadth of
England, being such a pretty and such a favorite seaside resort. Let's
go to the circus this afternoon, Miss Iris, and see what is to be
seen."

Iris could not follow Fortune's reasonings, but she submitted to her
desire to pay a visit to the traveling circus, and, accordingly, that
afternoon, the very last of Holt's stay at Madersley, two other little
Delaneys entered the large tent and took their places in the front
row. The children were accompanied both by Uncle William and Fortune.
The curtain rose almost immediately after their entrance, and the
performance began.

For some reason or other it was sadly lacking in spirit, and a
neighbor who sat not far from Fortune began to remark on the fact.

"I wouldn't have paid three shillings for my seat if I had known the
thing was so poor," she said. "Why, my husband was here last week and
said it was downright splendid. But I suppose that was owing to the
performances of the children."

"The children?" inquired Fortune. "I see no children about."

"Oh, well, there were two the other night--a little girl and boy; and
they said the girl rode splendidly, and was the life of the whole
thing. She was simply wonderful; she----"

But here the curtain rose and the performance began anew. Fortune
longed to question her loquacious neighbor, but when she turned
presently to speak to her she found that she had left the tent.

"Ho, ho!" thought the American woman to herself; "they had a boy and a
girl here, had they, and they aren't here no longer. Now I wonder if I
can strike that trail? Being from America it would be hard if I
didn't, and also if I didn't succeed."


CHAPTER XXV.

FOUND!


When the performance came to an end Fortune suggested to Uncle William
that he should go to the best hotel in the place, and give Iris and
Apollo some tea. Iris was loath to leave Fortune's side, but Fortune
bent down and whispered to her to obey.

"I am on the trail," she said, "and I don't want to be interrupted. I
don't mind telling you, Iris, that the tea is all an excuse. You get
your uncle to take you to the hotel, and keep him there until I join
him. Now, go off this minute, like a good girl."

Iris looked into Fortune's small, but honest, eyes, and felt once
again that her feel was leading her in the right direction.

"Uncle William, I should like some tea very much," she said.

"Well, then, my dear, if you want tea you shall have it," replied
Uncle William.

He hailed a fly, and took the children immediately to the best hotel
in the town.

When Fortune found herself alone she turned round, and gazed to right
and left of her. The great tent was almost empty, for the spectators
had all departed; a few, however, were standing in little groups
talking to one another. A mark of veneration I had never before seen
paid, upon any occasion in all my travels, from the under-bred many,
from whom noise is generally inseparable in all their emulations.

At last six maidens were permitted to carry it in by the six handles.

The corpse was thus borne, with the most solemn respect, into the hall,
and placed for the present upon two stools there.

The plates, and emblems, and inscription, set every one gazing upon
it, and admiring it.
The more, when they were told, that all was of her own ordering.Fact is, I'm interested in the
children described in that poster, and as I was sitting inside the
circus, I heard a neighbor say that the children belonging to your
show were not present. Being an American, I never lose any clews, and
there may be just the ghost of a chance that the children who were not
at the performance to-day are the very identical same children that
are written about in that there poster. Maybe you has heard of those
children--that is, if you are Madersley folk?"

"Yes, yes; we are Madersley folk," said the young man, now turning and
speaking eagerly to Fortune.

"Well, sir, do you know anything about the children who were not in
the circus to-day?"

"I have heard of them, of course," said the man. "Don't you remember,
Amelia," he added, "when I came home last Saturday night how I told
you we must go and see Holt's circus, for he had got a little girl who
was riding wonderfully? I could not manage it on Saturday, and to-day,
it seems, she's off."

"And he had a boy as well, hadn't he?" said Fortune.

"Yes, there was talk of a boy; but he didn't seem to have the spirit
of his sister. Anyhow, they are neither of them playing to-day, and,
for my part, I thought the performance lame."

"Well, that's my opinion," said Fortune. "No American would go the
length of the road to see anything so poor and common. And so the
children are off--but the children were on. Now, I wish to goodness I
could see those children."

"I don't suppose they have anything to do with the lost children who
are spoken of in these posters," said the man. "They say they were
brown as gypsies, that the boy was timid, and the girl rode
wonderfully. She must have been trained for some time to ride as well
as she did."

Not being able to get anything more out of these folks, Fortune turned
on her heel and wandered in another direction. She crossed the
entrance to the great tent, and made for the exit at the opposite side
of the field. In doing this she ran right up against a fair-haired,
rather pretty circus girl.

"My dear," said Fortune, "you'll excuse my stopping to speak to you,
but will you tell me if I can get into the town by the gate yonder?"

"It's rather a roundabout way," answered the girl, "but you can go, of
course. You will have to walk quite a way down a country lane, then
turn to your left, and it will bring you to the other side of the
town."

"Fact is," continued Fortune, "I'm anxious to see some more of those
posters. I'm mighty took with them. They seem to describe a most
elegant little pair of children."

The girl uttered a sigh and changed color.

"Maybe, miss," said Fortune, fixing her with her keen eyes, "you can
tell me something about 'em? Now, if you could, and would, it would be
worth your while."

"Oh, I know nothing at all," said the girl, in alarm. "What should I
know?"

"How is it," continued Fortune, "that the little children belonging to
your circus were not present this afternoon? It seems a sort of
cheating of the public."

"The little children belonging to our circus?" repeated the girl. "But
we hasn't no children." She turned very white now, and suddenly
leaving Fortune, ran as fast as ever she could in the direction of the
tent.

Fortune followed her with her eyes. She saw a dark man peeping out.

"That girl is frightened; she's hiding something," thought the woman.
"There's no doubt the trail strengthens, and I, being an
American--well, well, 'taint likely I'm going to leave off now. Yes,
hot grows the trail."

Fortune pursued her way. She had just reached the gate of the opposite
exit of the field when a light hand was laid on her arm. Turning
quickly, she saw the same girl.

--Desires that Mr.
Lovelace may be prevailed upon to take a tour.

LETTER XXXVI. Miss Montague. In answer.

Summary account of proceedings relating to the execution of the
lady's will, and other matters.

Substance of a letter from Mr.

Belford to Mr.
Hickman; of Mr.

Hickman's answer; and of a letter from Miss Howe to Mr.
Belford.

LETTER XXXVII. Lovelace to Belford.-- Describing his delirium as
dawning into sense and recollection.

All is conscience and horror with him, he says. A description of his
misery at its height.

LETTER XXXVIII. From the same.-- Revokes his last letter, as ashamed
of it.

Yet breaks into fits and starts, and is ready to go back again. Why,
he asks, did his mother bring him up to know no controul?

His heart sickens at the recollection of what he was. Dreads the return
of his malady.

Makes an effort to forget all.

LETTER XXXIX. Lovelace to Belford.-- Is preparing to leave the kingdom.
His route. Seasonable warnings, though delivered in a ludicrous
manner, on Belford's resolution to reform.

Complains that he has been strangely kept in the dark of late.

Demands a copy of the lady's will.

LETTER XL. Belford to Lovelace.-- Justice likely to overtake his
instrument Tomlinson. On what occasion.
The wretched man's remorse on the lady's account.

Belford urges Lovelace to go abroad for his health. Answers very
seriously to the warnings he gives him. Amiable scheme for the
conduct of his future life.

LETTER XLI. Lovelace to Belford.-- Pities Tomlinson. Finds that he is
dead in prison.

Happy that he lived not to be hanged. Why. No discomfort so great
but some comfort may be drawn from it. Endeavours to defend himself
by a whimsical case which he puts between A. a miser, and B. a
thief.

LETTER XLII.

From the same.-- Ridicules him on the scheme of life he has drawn out
for himself. In his manner gives Belford some farther cautions and
warnings.

Reproaches him for not saving the lady.

A breach of confidence in some cases is more excusable than to keep
a secret. Rallies him on his person and air, on his cousin Charlotte,
and the widow Lovick.

LETTER XLIII. Mr. Belford to Colonel Morden.-- On a declaration
he had made, of taking vengeance of Mr.

Lovelace. His arguments with him on that subject, from various
topics.

LETTER XLIV. The Lady's posthumous letter to her cousin Morden.--
Containing arguments against DUELLING, as well as with regard to her
particular case, as in general. See also Letter XVI. to her brother,
on the same subject.

LETTER XLV. Colonel Morden to Mr. Belford.-- In answer to his pleas
against avenging his cousin. He paints in very strong colours the
grief and distress of the whole family, on the loss of a child,
whose character and excellencies rise upon them to their torment.

LETTER XLVI. Colonel Morden to Mr. Belford.-- Farther particulars
relating to the execution of the lady's will.

Gives his thoughts of women's friendships in general; of that of Miss
Howe and his cousin, in particular. An early habit of familiar
letter-writing, how improving.

Censures Miss Howe for her behaviour to Mr. Hickman.

Mr.
Hickman's good character. Caution to parents who desire to preserve
their children's veneration for them. Mr.

Hickman, unknown to Miss Howe, puts himself and equipage in mourning
for Clarissa.

Her lively turn upon him on that occasion. What he, the Colonel, expects
from the generosity of Miss Howe, in relation to Mr. Hickman. Weakness
of such as are afraid of making their last wills.

LETTER XLVII. Belford to Miss Howe.-- With copies of Clarissa's
posthumous letters; and respectfully, as from Colonel Morden and
himself, reminding her of her performing her part of her dear
friend's last desires, in making one of the most deserving men in
England happy. Informs her of the delirium of Lovelace, in order
to move her compassion for him, and of the dreadful death of Sinclair
and Tomlinson.
LETTER XLVIII. Miss Howe to Mr. Belford.-- Observations on the
letters and subjects he communicates to her. She promises another
letter, in answer to his and Colonel Morden's call upon her in Mr.
Hickman's favour. Applauds the Colonel for purchasing her beloved
friend's jewels, in order to present them to Miss Dolly Hervey.
LETTER XLIX. From the same.-- She accounts for, though not defends,
her treatment of Mr. Hickman. She owns that he is a man worthy of
a better choice; that she values no man more than him: and assures
Mr. Belford and the Colonel that her endeavours shall not be wanting
to make him happy.
LETTER L. Mr. Belford to Miss Howe.-- A letter full of grateful
acknowledgements for the favour of her's.
LETTER LI. Lord M. to Mr. Belford.-- Acquainting him with his
kinsman's setting out for London, in order to embark.Yes, I'll go to Matty this
very moment; and as there's not any time to lose, I'll take a fly and
drive there."

Fortune hailed the first fly she came across, and was quickly borne to
the abode of her old neighbor, Matty Bell.

Matty Bell was a woman of about sixty years of age. At one time she
had been a servant at Delaney Manor, but having married, and then lost
her husband, she had set up in the laundry line. In that interesting
trade she had done a thriving business, and kept a comfortable roof
over her head. She had never had children, and consequently had plenty
of time to attend to her neighbors' affairs.

"Well, to be sure, Fortune, and what brings you here?" she said, when
Fortune alighted from the fly. "Dear heart! I didn't know that you
would care to leave Delaney Manor with all the troubles about."

"And what troubles do you mean now, Matty Bell?" said Fortune, as she
paid a shilling to the driver, and then tripped lightly into Matty's
little front parlor.

"Why, the death of the poor missus, Heaven bless her memory! and then
the master going off to the other end of nobody knows where, and all
them blessed little children took from their home and carried--oh, we
needn't go into that, Fortune--it's been a trouble to you, and I see
it writ on your face."

"You are right there, Matty," said Fortune; "it has been a bitter
trouble to me, and there's more behind, for the lady who took the
children had no right to interfere, not having a mother's heart in her
breast, for all that Providence granted her five babes of her own to
manage. What do you think she went and did, Matty? Why, lost two of
our children."

"Lost two of 'em? Sakes alive! you don't say so!" replied Matty. "Have
a cup of tea, Fortune, do; I have it brewing lovely on the hob."

"No, thank you," replied Fortune. "I'm in no mood for tea."

"Well, then, do go on with your story, for it's mighty interesting."

"It's simple enough," replied Fortune. "Two of the children are lost,
and now I have traced 'em to a circus in the town."

"A circus here--what, Holt's?" said the woman.

"No less. Why, Matty; you look queer yourself. Do you know anything?"

"I know nothing for certain," said Matty. "I can only tell you--but
there, perhaps I had better not say--only will you excuse me for a
minute or two, Fortune?"

"I'll excuse you, Matty, if you are on the trail of the children, but
if you aren't, you had better stay here and let me talk matters over.
You always were a fearful one for gossip, and perhaps you have picked
up news. Yes, I see you have--you have got something at the back of
your head this blessed minute, Matty Bell."

"That I have," replied Mrs. Bell. "But please don't ask me a word
more, only let me get on my bonnet and cloak."

Mrs. Bell left the room, and quickly returned dressed in her widow's
weeds, for though Bell had been dead for over ten years, his widow was
still faithful to his memory; she slipped a thick crêpe veil over her
face, and went out, looking the very essence of respectability. She
was not more than twenty minutes away, and when she came back she
looked much excited. On each of her smooth, pasty cheeks might even be
seen a little flush of color, and her dull blue eyes were brighter
than their wont.

"Fortune," she cried, "as there's a heaven above me, I've found 'em!"

Without any apparent literary device she contrived to make you,
while you read her letters, do what she was doing, see what she was
seeing, and form, as though acted on by some magic property in the
words, pictures of all she told you.

One piece of news you would not expect her to have told.

I have said that women are both executioners of the tiresome.

In this Isabel, I fear, was no exception to her sex. Like most
independent girls in London, she had a little theatre-guard of devoted
men friends, who took it in turn to companion her to plays or
picture-galleries; and these, with admirable tact, she contrived
to keep in, to them, the unsatisfactory relation of brothers.

One of these, however, had of late been growing dangerously
unfraternal. His presents had been growing expensive. Cigarettes and
chocolates, and pretty editions, like gloves, and boxes of flowers,
are every pretty woman's lawful spoils; but costlier gifts are to
be looked on with suspicion.

Besides, the doomed man's letters had been growing warmer. Indeed,
Isabel remembered with something like a shudder, so soon as she
was back in her little room, with its curious pictures and its
general sense of exotic refinement, that she had allowed him to
kiss her the last time they had been together.

The reminiscence decided her. Theophil could never be hers; but at
least no facile or mediocre attachments should fill his place. So
at once there is posted a letter, as kind as cruelty can make it,
and with it go a little ormolu clock, a pair of mother-of-pearl
opera-glasses, a lovely fan it was hard, Isabel, to part with,--and
there is an end of that.

"Not after Theophil!" she sighed, as she took up her great Persian cat,
and, like it, sat gazing into the fire that flickered dreamily among
her fantastic possessions,--a mystery gazing idly into a mystery.

CHAPTER XVII

"O THAT 'T WERE POSSIBLE ..."
Well, the months have at last gone by,--dark solid bodies of absence,
not a day mercifully lost count of by the old calendar-maker, not
an hour of the long sentence remitted for a brave patience in the
waiting.

They are reckoning by weeks at last, and now, excitedly, by days,
breathlessly now by little fast-dispersing hours.

The blackness that filled the world was a month ago streaked with gray;
three weeks ago there was a line of faint colour in the east; a
fortnight, and there are scarlet plumes in the far heaven, and a
faint twitter of song; a week, and the whole sky is a commotion
of glory and birds.

To meet again! O to meet again, just to look at each other again! We
are philosophers, we are brave, we shall remember Jenny, but O!

the rapture of just beholding each other again.

"Thank God, you are alive! you are real! O Theophil, there is the
little scar on your forehead I've been longing to see."

"Yes! it is Isabel!

She walks just as she did a thousand years ago.

I am carrying her rugs. How well I remember her umbrella!"
"How fantastic absence is!" said Isabel, as the three friends sat once
more that evening in the little study where nothing seemed to have
changed, and where they seemed to have been sitting all the hours of
those now quite disrespectfully forgotten months.

"Yes, but how real!" said Jenny.

It was Jenny who said "how real!"
"I could not hear of her
being moved at present. She must have absolute quiet and good
nursing."

"I'm going to nurse her," said Fortune.

"A properly trained nurse would be best," said the doctor.

"I and no other am going to nurse her," repeated Fortune.

She had taken off her bonnet and mantle and was seated quietly by the
bedside. No one could look more capable, more determined, than the
American woman did on this occasion. The doctor saw that he must give
way.

"Haven't I done for her from the blessed moment when she was sent from
heaven into her mother's arms?" continued Fortune. "I shall nurse her
now, whether it's the will of the Almighty that she lives or dies."

At these words, little Diana opened her great, black eyes.

    "And you'll never know fear
    Any more, little dear,"

she said in a voice of intense satisfaction. Then she looked up at
Fortune, and raised her brow in a puzzled manner.

"I aren't fwightened of G'eased Lightning," she said. A smile broke
over her little face, then the light of reason once more faded, and
she entered the dark region of delirium and danger.

The doctor did all he could and Fortune did all she could, and
presently Aunt Jane appeared on the scene, and insisted on seeing the
child, and shook her head over her and cried a little privately; but,
in spite of all their efforts to get her well again, little Diana
grew weaker, day by day. She did not know Fortune, except at very
rare intervals. Day and night she talked incessantly of her past life,
of the beautiful garden, of the animals, of Rub-a-Dub, and more
especially of Rub-a-Dub's public funeral. She also mentioned Greased
Lightning and Pole Star, and Uncle Ben and the circus; but when she
talked of them her voice changed; it grew high, eager, and excited,
and her little breath panted out of her weary body. She often ended
her delirious talk with a cry of distress.

"Oh, I has fallen," she said, with a sob. "I has fallen from the
wing." Then she would clasp both her hot hands to her aching head, and
moan bitterly.

The doctor was very anxious about her, and Fortune was very sad, and
so was Uncle William, and even Aunt Jane.

The cablegram was sent to father, and they all earnestly hoped that he
was already on his homeward way.

Meanwhile, at the Manor, Iris, Apollo, and Orion had a hard time. It
is true that they were no longer fettered or coerced in any way. Aunt
Jane took scarcely any notice of them, and Uncle William spent most of
his time alone. The three children could come in and out of the house
as they pleased; they could wander about the garden where four used to
play happily; they could visit the old haunts that four used to love;
but because the fourth was now absent, the joy and the mirth of the
old days seemed quite to have left the remaining three.

As time went by, Iris grew whiter and whiter. Often she wandered away
by herself, and flinging herself on the ground, would moan out her
distress.

"Mother, mother," she used to sob, "I have not done what you told me;
I have not been a little mother. Can you ever forgive me? Oh, if Diana
dies, I am certain that I shall never forgive myself."

At last, when a fortnight had passed by, Iris had a dream. She never
told her dream to anyone, but she got up that morning with a very
determined expression on her small face. After breakfast she went
straight downstairs to the library, and spoke to Uncle William.

"Uncle William," she said, "I want to say that I am going to see
Diana."

"My dear," said Uncle William, who was furtively at that moment wiping
a tear from his eye, "I greatly fear that you cannot do so; we have
had bad news of little Diana this morning. I greatly fear, Iris, that
she will not be long with us; her strength is going, and there is
little chance of the fever abating. The doctor has but a small hope of
her recovery--in fact, I may almost say that he has no hope."

"It is a fortnight since Diana was found, and you have never let me
see her yet," continued Iris; "but I am going to her to-day. I had a
dream last night," she continued, "and in my dream I--But I'm not
going to say anything more, only I must see Diana to-day."

"I am afraid you cannot do so, Iris," replied Uncle William.

"And why not, if the child has the wish?" remarked Aunt Jane suddenly.

Until that moment Iris had no idea that Aunt Jane was in the room. She
started now when she heard her voice; but reading the expression on
her face, she ran up to her eagerly.

"If you are for it, Aunt Jane, it will be all right," she cried.
"Please have a carriage ordered this minute and let me go."

"I would not, if I were you, wife," said Uncle William. "You see how
delicate Iris is already, and the sight of her little sister would
shock her dreadfully."

"She may just as well go," said Aunt Jane. "In my opinion, it would be
wrong to leave any stone unturned, and Iris always had a remarkable
influence over the other children. Besides, my dear William, when
David comes back, I should not like Iris to have to tell him that I
refused what, after all, is a very natural request."

"Aunt Jane, I love you for those words," said Iris.

Aunt Jane's face quite flushed when Iris said she loved her. She went
across the room and rang the bell.

"Desire the pony carriage to be sent round directly," was her order to
the servant when he appeared.

Accordingly, in less than half an hour, Iris and Aunt Jane were
driving into Madersley. They went straight to the humble house where
the Darlings lived. The greater part of the house was given up to
little Diana and her nurse.

"Please, Aunt Jane," said Iris, as they approached the door; "may I go
into Diana's room by myself? I don't want anyone to be with me when I
see her."

"You may have it your way, Iris," said Aunt Jane. "I interfered once,
and I believe I did wrong; now you shall have it your own way."

"Thank you, Aunt Jane," answered Iris. She scarcely looked at her
aunt; all her thoughts were centered on the mission which she had
taken in hand. When the carriage drew up at the humble door, the
child ran straight into the house.

"Who may you be, little miss?" said Bessie Darling, who had never seen
her before.

"I am the sister of Diana; I am a mother to the others," said Iris.

"Sakes alive!" exclaimed the woman. "You a mother? Why, you poor
little mite, you look as if you wanted a deal of mothering yourself."

"Please tell me what room my sister is in," said Iris, removing her
hat as she spoke.

Bessie Darling stared at her for a moment, then she pointed to a door.
Iris turned the handle and entered the room.

It was a hot day, and the window was wide open; a green blind was down
to keep out the glare of the sun; there was a quantity of ice in a
great pail in one corner of the room, and, as Iris softly entered,
Fortune was in the act of putting a fresh cold cloth on the sick
child's forehead.

Little Diana was murmuring her ceaseless refrain:

    "You'll never know fear,
    Any more, little dear.
        Good-by."

"Why, Diana!" said Iris.

Iris's voice was quite fresh. It had a different note in it from all
the voices which for weeks had sounded in little Diana's ears. She was
lying in a partial stupor, but now she opened her eyes very wide.

"Iris," she said; "Iris." And a smile broke all over her face.

Iris ran up to the bedside. She was always quiet in her manner; great
excitement only accentuated her quiet. She knelt down at once by the
sick child, and took both her hot hands in hers.

These things would now be explained by 'unconscious suggestion' in the
more sceptical schools of psychological science.

The Revolution interrupted scientific study in France to a great degree,
but 'somnambulism' (the hypnotic sleep) and 'magnetism' were eagerly
examined in Germany.

Modern manuals, for some reason, are apt to overlook these German
researches and speculations.

(Compare Mr. Vincent's 'Elements of Hypnotism,' p. 34.) The Schellings
were interested; Ritter thought he had detected a new force,
'Siderism.'

Mr. Wallace, in his preface to Hegel's 'Philosophie des Geistes,'
speaks as if Ritter had made experiments in telepathy. He may have
done so, but his 'Siderismus' (Tübingen, 1808) is a Report undertaken
for the Academy of Munich, on the doings of an Italian water-finder,
or 'dowser.'

Ritter gives details of seventy-four experiments in 'dowsing' for water,
metals, or coal. He believes in the faculty, but not in 'psychic'
explanations, or the Devil.

He talks about 'electricity' (pp. 170, 190). He describes his precautions
to avoid vulgar fraud, but he took no precautions against unconscious
thought-transference.

He reckoned the faculty 'temperamental' and useful.

Amoretti, at Milan, examined hundreds of cases of the so-called
Divining Rod, and Jung Stilling became an early spiritualist and
'full-welling fountain head' of ghost stories.

Probably the most important philosophical result of the early German
researches into the hypnotic slumber is to be found in the writings
of Hegel. Owing to his peculiar use of a terminology, or scientific
language, all his own, it is extremely difficult to make Hegel's meaning
even moderately clear.

Perhaps we may partly elucidate it by a similitude of Mr.

Frederic Myers.

Suppose we compare the ordinary everyday consciousness of each of
us to a _spectrum_, whose ends towards each extremity fade out of our
view.

Beyond the range of sight there may be imagined a lower or physiological
end: for our ordinary consciousness, of course, is unaware of many
physiological processes which are eternally going on within us.

Digestion, so long as it is healthy, is an obvious example. But hypnotic
experiment makes it certain that a patient, in the _hypnotic_ condition,
can consciously, or at least purposefully, affect physiological
processes to which the _ordinary_ consciousness is blind--for
example, by raising a blister, when it is suggested that a blister
must be raised.

Again (granting the facts hypothetically and merely for the sake
of argument), at the _upper_ end of the spectrum, beyond the view of
ordinary everyday consciousness, knowledge may be acquired of things
which are out of the view of the consciousness of every day. For
example (for the sake of argument let us admit it), unknown
and remote people and places may be seen and described by clairvoyance,
or _vue à distance_.

Now Hegel accepted as genuine the facts which we here adduce merely
for the sake of argument, and by way of illustrations. But he did not
regard the clairvoyant consciousness (or whatever we call it) which,
_ex hypothesi_, is untrammelled by space, or even by time, as occupying
what we style the _upper_ end of the psychical spectrum.

On the contrary, he placed it at the _lower_ end. Hegel's upper
end 'loses itself in light;' the lower end, _qui voit tant de choses_,
as La Fontaine's shepherd says, is _not_ 'a sublime mental phase,
and capable of conveying general truths.'

Time and space do not thwart the consciousness at Hegel's _lower_ end,
which springs from 'the great soul of nature.' But that lower end,
though it may see for Jeanne d'Arc at Valcouleurs a battle at Rouvray,
a hundred leagues away, does not communicate any lofty philosophic
truths.[14] The phenomena of clairvoyance, in Hegel's opinion,
merely indicate that the 'material' is really 'ideal,' which,
perhaps, is as much as we can ask from them.

'The somnambulist and clairvoyant see without eyes, and carry their
visions directly into regions where the waiting consciousness of
orderly intelligence cannot enter' (Wallace).

       

Then, from being half well she became quite well, and
when the autumn really came, and the cool breezes blew in from the
sea, father returned to his home once more, and he and Aunt Jane had a
long talk, and it was finally arranged that the four children were to
remain in the old home, and were to play in the old garden, and that
father was to stay at home himself and look after them as best he
could.

"They are not ordinary children, and I frankly confess I cannot manage
them," said Aunt Jane. "As to Iris, she is without exception the most
peculiar child I ever came across; I know, of course, she is a good
child--I would not say a word to disparage her, for I admire her
strength--but when a child considers that she has got a mission----"

"I know all about that," said David Delaney.

Life is terrible,--like this. I understand it now. I know it was not
you, or Isabel, or me. It was just fate--and we must try and help each
other.
Don't think I have been only sorry for myself. Don't think that of
me.
But I think you should have trusted me, dear."THE END.