"Very superfluous, I should say," amended Cecil.  "I am sure my
father would consent to nothing of the kind.  I shall speak to
Raymond about it."

"Yes," said Anne; "it does seem terrible that a minister should try
to make up for worldly amusements by a quantity of vain ceremonies."

"I wish you would not call him a minister, it sounds like a
dissenter."

"I think ministers their best name, except pastors."

"Both are horrid alike," said Cecil.  "I shall teach all the people
to call Julius the Rector.  That's better than Mr. Charnock--what
Raymond ought to be."

Anne was struck dumb at this fearful display of worldliness; and
Cecil betook herself to the piano, but the moment her husband
appeared she showed him the list.

"He has cut out plenty of work," said Raymond, "but three of them
must want a field for their energies."

"It is preposterous.  I want you to speak to him about it."

"You are not expected to go to them all," Raymond made answer.

"Then there's no sense in having them," responded Cecil.  "Evening
services are very bad for the people, bringing them out late.  You
ought to tell him so."

"He is Rector, and I am not," said Raymond.

"Mr. Venn did nothing without papa's consent," exclaimed

"My dear Cecil, don't let your loyalty make a Harry the Eighth of
your father," said Raymond; "the clergyman ought to be a free
agent."

"You don't approve?"

"I don't approve or disapprove.  It is not a matter I know anything
about."

"But I assure you it has been all thought over at Dunstone."

"Come, my mother wants to go to bed, and you are keeping her
waiting."

Cecil was silenced for the moment, but not daunted; for was it not
the foremost duty of the lady of the manor to keep the clergyman in
order, more especially when he was her own husband's younger
brother? I spurn thy pity, and arrestiere you here as a
Hochverräther. Romeo. How do you want me with violence because
irritate?

Have at it then you yourself, boy. (They fight. Paris falls.) Page.
O God, they fight, I will go and fetch the guard.

Paris. Oh, I am of death; some mercy if you're capable of, so open
the vault and put me to Juliette.

(He dies.) Romeo.

On my honor, I will: Let me this face in the vicinity IS - Mercutio's
cousin! the noble Count Paris! what did my servant underway by storm
in my soul herumgewälzte Eight was not what he said - däucht Mich.,
he told me Paris should have heurathen Juliette.

Did he not? or dreaming's just me? Or am I foolish, that I imagine
it sey so because I am so fond of him talking Juliette heard? - O
gieb me thy hand, thou that the fate of my Unglük has intertwined,
I will send you a grant-beneidenswürdiges grave -A grave?

Oh no, a glory, young man murdered because Juliette ligt here,
and their beauty meets these gray tomb with full light and glory;
Todt, volunteers here, from a buried Todt.

(He places
it in the tomb.)

How often is it already encountered, that the dying shortly before
her last Augenblik yet been cleaned up - O give me such a Augenblik!

- My lover, my wife, the death of the honey of thy Athems absorbed,
has no power over your beauty had , you're not defeated, still floats
the purple flag on the beauty of your lips and cheeks, and the pale
flag of death is not yet aufgestekt - Tybalt, ligst thou here in
thy bloody corpses cloth?

O what can I learn more thun, how can I do better revenge than just
the hand that your young life has geendigt against thy murderer to
use?

Vergieb me Theurer cousin! - Oh! Juliette dearest, why are you still
so beautiful?

Servants bustled about, exclaiming, tramping, or
whisking on the stairs; and Raymond presently appeared to ask
whether his mother were ill, and, when reassured on that score,
hurrying to ascertain whether she were alarmed, before he started
for the scene of action.

"Let me come and stay with her," said Rosamond, a striking figure,
in a scarlet dressing-gown, with a thick plait of black hair hanging
down to her waist on either side.

"Thank you, it will be very kind," said Raymond, running down before
her, and meeting Susan waddling out in a fringe of curl-papers, for
some mysterious instinct or echo had conveyed to her and her
mistress that there was fire somewhere--perhaps at home.  Mrs.
Poynsett was not a nervous woman, and from the time she saw her
eldest son come in, all fright was over, and she could have borne to
hear that the house over her head was burning, in the perfect trust
that he would save her from all peril; nor had he any difficulty in
committing her to Rosamond, when he hurried away to finish dressing
and repair to the spot.

Nothing could be seen from her room, but the little ante-room
between it and the drawing-room had an excellent view, as the ground
fell away from it, and there was an opening among the trees.

"We must get you there!" exclaimed Rosamond, in her excitement,
helping her into some garments, and then running out as she heard a
step--"Here, Julius, help me;" and without more ado, the mother was
transported between them to the broad low couch under the window,
and there bestowed in a nest of pillows, shawls, and rugs, that
seemed to grow up under Rosamond's touch.

Then following Julius out into the hall as he met his brother,
Rosamond clung to him, entreating, "Please, please don't run into
any dangerous places."

"Never fear, dearest; I am not likely."

"Don't let him, pray!" she said, turning to Raymond.  "Make him
remember how blind he is."

"I'll take good care of him, Rosamond," said the elder brother
kindly; "I'm used to it."

"And send for the ---th," she added.  "There is nothing like
soldiers at a fire."

"The glare must have given notice," said Julius, "but we'll send if
needful.  Let go, you foolish girl; I'm not leading a forlorn hope."

Did Raymond, as he mounted his horse, turning from the contact of
the white and black heads, admire the reasonableness of the Cecil
who had never shown any fears for his safety, nor any tendency to
run about the passages in her robe de chambre, though she was now
dressing with all speed?

The women-folk had to depend on their own eyes for intelligence, for
every male, not only of the household but of the village, between
the ages of five and seventy, started for Wil'sbro', and a good many
females followed their example, including the cook and her suite.

However, Susan remained, to find her mistress flown, and in her
fright, give Lady Rosamond as round a scolding as if she had been
Charlie, for her rashness in attempting a transit, which Dr. Hayter
had pronounced to be as much as her mistress's life was worth.
Having thus relieved her mind, and finding that Mrs. Poynsett was
really very comfortable, or else too eager and anxious to find out
if she was not, the good woman applied herself to the making of
coffee.

Anne and Cecil had found their way to the leads, and were thence
summoned to partake of this hasty meal, after which they proposed
going to look from the brow of the hill; and Mrs. Poynsett insisted
that Rosamond should not stay behind on her account; and, glad to
appease the restlessness of anxiety, out went the ladies, to find
the best view of the town,--usually a white object in the distance,
but now blurred by smoke thick and black in the daylight, and now
and then reddened by bursts of flame.

Anne had been reassured as to the need of beating out the fire and
trampling down a place to isolate it, as in the bush-fires of her
experience; and Rosamond related the achievements of the regiment in
quenching many a conflagration in inflammable colonial cities.

It occurred to her that the best place whence to see it was the
tower of the church, which, placed upon a little knoll, was standing
out in full relief against the lurid light.  She found the key at
the sexton's, and led the way up the broken stone stair to the trap-
door, where they emerged on the leads, and, in spite of the cold
wind and furious flapping of the flag above their heads, stood
absorbed in the interest of the sight.

There was a black mass in the open space, whence rose fitful clouds
of smoke, the remnants of the fire, which had there done its worst;
and beyond was a smoky undefined outline, with tongues of flame
darting up, then volumes of dense white smoke, denoting a rush of
water from the engines.  Black beings flitted about like ants round
a disturbed nest; Rosamond hoped she detected some scarlet among
them, and Cecil lamented over not having brought her opera-glass.
Even without this, it was possible to make out two long lines of men
between the fire and the river, and at times they fancied they heard
the shouting, but the wind generally carried it away.  The cold was
bitter, and they had to hold together and keep a tight grip upon
their garments against the gusts that seemed to rock the tower; but
they could not bear to turn away, though the clock beneath pealed
out hour after hour; for still, as the flames were subdued in one
place they broke out in another; but gradually smoke became
predominant, and then grew thinner, and as some of the black specks
began to straggle into the road as if returning to Compton, the
desire to hear became more pressing than that to see, and the three
ladies began to descend--a slow and weary process, cutting them off
from the view, and lasting so long, that the road was no longer
deserted when they finally emerged into the churchyard.

Young Mr. Bowater, grimed, dusty, hatless, and his hair on end, and
Rollo following with his feathery tail singed, hurried up at once.
"I'm not fit to touch, Lady Rosamond," as he showed a black hand,
and bowed to the others.

"Where's Ju--where's my husband?" exclaimed Rosamond.

"Just behind, riding home with Raymond and the rest of them.  Wasn't
it a magnificent flare-up?  But there was no loss of life; and this
dog was of as much use as two men--carried whatever I told him."

"Good old man!  You've suffered too!" said Rosamond.  "Pah! you're
like a singed horse; but never mind, you're a hero."

"And where is Mr. Charnock Poynsett?" said Cecil, retreating from
the dog, which her sisters-in-law were vehemently patting.

"He was arranging with the mayor.  Church, paper-mills, and town-
hall got the worst of it.  It was well he came down; old Briggs, the
mayor, lost his head, and Fuller never had one.  Every one gave
contrary orders till he came down, and then, didn't we work!"

The curate stretched his stalwart limbs, as if they were becoming
sensible of the strain they had undergone.

"Did you say the church was burnt?" asked Cecil.

"Yes; and a very good thing too!  Hideous place, where you couldn't
do right if you died for it!  The fire began there--stoves no doubt--
and there it would have stopped if any one had had any sense; but
there they would run and gape, and the more I tried to get them to
form a chain and drench the warehouses, the more they wouldn't do
it.  And when the flame once got hold of the paper--did you see it?--
it was not a thing to forget.  I verily believe the whole town
would have gone if the Charnocks hadn't come and got a little
discipline into the asses.  It was just life and death work,
fighting the fire to hinder it from getting across Water Lane, and
then it would have been all up with High Street.  The tongues broke
out like live things ready to lick up everything; and it was like
killing dragons to go at them with the hose and buckets.  I declare
my arms are fit to drop out of their sockets.  And the Rector
devoted himself to carrying out bed-ridden old women.  I forgot to
tell you, Lady Rosamond, he has broken his--There now, I never meant
to frighten you--broken his spectacles."

"You did it on purpose," she said, laughing at her own start.

"No, indeed, I did not."

"And is it quite out now?"

"Yes; when the Backsworth engines and the soldiers came up, it was
like the Prussians at Waterloo."

"Oh, then it was done," said Rosamond.  "Take care! my grandfather
was in the Light Division."

"And my uncle in the Guards," said the curate.  But before the
Waterloo controversy could be pursued, four or five figures on
horseback came round the knoll, and Raymond and Julius sprang off
their horses, introducing the three officers who followed their
example.

One was Rosamond's old acquaintance, the Colonel, a friend of her
father; but she had little attention to spare for them till she had
surveyed her husband, who looked nothing worse than exceedingly
dusty, and at fault without his spectacles.

Inquiries were made for Frank and Charlie.  They were walking home.
They had worked gallantly.  The flames were extinguished, but the
engines must go on playing on them for some time longer.  No lives
lost, and very few casualties, but the paper-mills were entirely
destroyed, and about twenty tenements, so that great distress was to
be apprehended.

Such intelligence was being communicated as the party stood together
in a group, when there was a light tinkling of bells, and two ladies
in a light open carriage, drawn by two spirited ponies, dashed round
the knoll; and at the moment something must have gone wrong with
them, for there was a start, a pull, a call of "Raymond!  Raymond!"

Throwing his bridle to Herbert Bowater, he sprang to the horses'
heads.

"Mr. Poynsett!  Thank you!  I beg your pardon," said the lady,
recovering herself; and Rosamond instantly perceived that she must
be Lady Tyrrell, for she was young-looking, very handsome, and in
slight mourning; and her companion was Miss Vivian.  Julius, holding
his surviving glass to his eye, likewise stepped forward.  "Thank
you, it was so stupid," the lady ran on.  "Is not there something
wrong with the traces?  I don't know how they got themselves
harnessed, but there was no keeping at home."

"I think all is right," said Raymond, gravely, making the
examination over to a servant.  "Let me introduce my wife, Lady
Tyrrell."

The lady held out her hand.  "I hope we shall be excellent
neighbours.--My sister.--You remember little Lena," she added to the
brothers.  "She stole a march on us, I find.  I heard of your
encounter on Friday.  It was too bad of you not to come in and let
us send you home; I hope you did not get very wet, Lady Rosamond.--
Ah!  Mr. Strangeways, I did not know you were there," she proceeded,
as the youngest of the officers accosted her; "come over and see us.
You're better provided now; but come to luncheon any day.  I am sure
to be at home at half-past one; and I want so much to hear of your
mother and sisters."  And with a universal bow and smile she
nourished her whip, her ponies jangled their bells, and the ladies
vanished.

"Stunning pair that!" was young Strangeways' exclamation.

"Most beautiful!" murmured Cecil, in a low voice, as if she was
quite dazzled.  "You never said she was like that," she added
reproachfully to Julius.

"Our encounter was in the dark," he answered.

"Oh, I did not mean the young one, but Lady Tyrrell.  She is just
like a gem we saw at Firenze--which was it?"

"Where?" said Raymond, bewildered.

"Firenze--Florence," she said, deigning to translate; and finding
her own reply.  "Ah, yes, the Medusa!" then, as more than one
exclaimed in indignant dismay, she said, "No, not the Gorgon, but
the beautiful winged head, with only two serpents on the brow and
one coiled round the neck, and the pensive melancholy face."

"I know," said Julius, shortly; while the other gentlemen entered
into an argument, some defending the beauty of the younger sister,
some of the elder; and it lasted till they entered the park, where
all were glad to partake of their well-earned meal, most of the
gentlemen having been at work since dawn without sustenance, except
a pull at the beer served out to the firemen.

Cecil was not at all shy, and was pleased to take her place as
representative lady of the house; but somehow, though every one was
civil and attentive to her, she found herself effaced by the more
full-blown Rosamond, accustomed to the same world as the guests; and
she could not help feeling the same sense of depression as when she
had to yield the head of her father's table to her step-mother.

Nor could she have that going to church for the first time in state
with her bridegroom she had professed to dread, but had really
anticipated with complacency; for though Julius had bidden the bells
to be rung for afternoon service, Raymond was obliged to go back to
Wil'sbro' to make arrangements for the burnt-out families, and she
had to go as lonely as Anne herself.

Lady Tyrrell and her sister were both at Compton Church, and
overtook the three sisters-in-law as they were waiting to be joined
by the Rector.

"We shall have to take shelter with you," said Lady Tyrrell, "poor
burnt-out beings that we are."

"Do you belong to Wil'sbro'?" said Rosamond.

"Yes; St. Nicholas is an immense straggling parish, going four miles
along the river.  I don't know how we shall ever be able to go back
again to poor old Mr. Fuller.  You'll never get rid of us from
Compton."

"I suppose they will set about rebuilding the church at once," said
Cecil.  "Of course they will form a committee, and put my husband on
it."

"In the chair, no doubt," said Lady Tyrrell, in a tone that sounded
to Rosamond sarcastic, but which evidently gratified Cecil.  "But we
will have a committee of our own, and you will have to preside, and
patronize our bazaar.  Of course you know all about them."

"Oh yes!" said Cecil, eagerly.  "We have one every year for the
Infirmary, only my father did not approve of my selling at a stall."

"Ah! quite right then, but you are a married woman now, and that is
quite a different thing.  The stall of the three brides.  What an
attraction!  I shall come and talk about it when I make my call in
full form!  Good-bye again."

Cecil's balance was more than restored by this entire recognition to
be prime lady-patroness of everything.  To add to her satisfaction,
when her husband came home to dinner, bringing with him both the
curates, she found there was to be a meeting on Tuesday in the
Assembly-room, of both sexes, to consider of the relief of the work-
people, and that he would be glad to take her to it.  Moreover, as
it was to be strictly local, Rosamond was not needed there, though
Raymond was not equally clear as to the Rector, since he believed
that the St. Nicholas parishioners meant to ask the loan of Compton
Poynsett Church for one service on a Sunday.

"Then I shall keep out of the way," said Julius.  "I do not want to
have the request made to me in public."

"You do not mean to refuse?" said Cecil, with a sort of self-
identification with her constituents.

"The people are welcome to attend as many of our services as they
like; but there is no hour that I could give the church up to Mr.
Fuller on a Sunday."

"Nor would the use of St. Nicholas be very edifying for our people,"
added Mr. Bindon.

His junior clenched it by saying with a laugh, "I should think not!
Fancy old Fuller's rusty black gown up in our pulpit!"

"I rejoice to say that is burnt," rejoined Mr. Bindon.

"What bet will you take that a new one will be the first thing
subscribed for?" said the deacon, bringing a certain grave look on
the faces of both the elder clergy, and a horror-stricken one upon
Anne's; while Cecil pronounced her inevitable dictum, that at
Dunstone Mr. Venn always preached in a gown, and "we" should never
let him think of anything nonsensical.

Rosamond was provoked into a display of her solitary bit of
ecclesiastical knowledge--"A friar's gown, the most Popish vestment
in the church."

Cecil, thoroughly angered, flushed up to the eyes and bit her lips,
unable to find a reply, while all the gentlemen laughed.  Frank
asked if it were really so, and Mr. Bindon made the well-known
explanation that the Geneva gown was neither more nor less than the
monk's frock.

"I shall write and ask Mr. Venn," gasped Cecil; but her husband
stifled the sound by saying, "I saw little Pettitt, Julius, this
afternoon, overwhelmed with gratitude to you for all the care you
took of his old mother, and all his waxen busts."

"Ah! by the bye!" said Charlie, "I did meet the Rector staggering
out, with the fascinating lady with the long eyelashes in one arm,
and the moustached hero in the other."

"There was no pacifying the old lady without," said Julius.  "I had
just coaxed her to the door, when she fell to wringing her hands.
Ah! those lovely models, that were worth thirty shillings each, with
natural hair--that they should be destroyed!  If the heat or the
water did but come near them, Adolphus would never get over it.  I
could only pacify her by promising to go back for these idols of his
heart as soon as she was safe; and after all, I had to dash at them
through the glass, and that was the end of my spectacles."

"Where was Pettitt himself?"

"Well employed, poor little fellow, saving the people in those three
cottages of his.  No one supposed his shop in danger, but the fire
took a sudden freak and came down Long Street; and though the house
is standing, it had to be emptied and deluged with water to save it.
I never knew Pettitt had a mother till I found her mounting guard,
like one distracted, over her son's bottles of perfumery."

"And dyes?" murmured Raymond under his breath; but Frank caught the
sound, and said, "Ah, Julius! don't I remember his inveigling you
into coming out with scarlet hair?"

"I don't think I've seen him since," said Julius, laughing.  "I
believe he couldn't resist such an opportunity of practising his
art.  And for my part, I must say for myself, that it was in our
first holidays, and Raymond and Miles had been black and blue the
whole half-year from having fought my battles whenever I was called
either 'Bunny' or 'Grandfather.'  So when he assured me he could
turn my hair to as sweet a raven-black as Master Poynsett's, I
thought it would be pleasing to all, forgetting that he could not
dye my eyes, and that their effect would have been some degrees more
comical."

"For shame, Julius!" said Rosamond.  "Don't you know that one
afternoon, when Nora had cried for forty minutes over her sum, she
declared that she wanted to make her eyes as beautiful as Mr.
Charnock's.  Well, what was the effect?"

"Startling," said Raymond.  "He came down in shades of every kind of
crimson and scarlet.  A fearful object, with his pink-and-white face
glowing under it."

"And what I had to undergo from Susan!" added Julius.  "She washed
me, and soaped me, and rubbed me, till I felt as if all the
threshing-machines in the county were about my head, lecturing me
all the time on the profanity of flying against Scripture by trying
to alter one's hair from what Providence had made it.  Nothing would
do; her soap only turned it into shades of lemon and primrose.  I
was fain to let her shave my head as if I had a brain fever; and I
was so horribly ashamed for years after, that I don't think I have
set foot in Long Street since till to-day."

"Pettitt is a queer little fellow," said Herbert.  "The most
truculent little Radical to hear him talk, and yet staunch in his
votes, for he can't go against those whose hair he has cut off from
time immemorial."

"I hope he has not lost much," said Julius.

"His tenements are down, but they were insured; and as to his stock,
he says he owes its safety entirely to you, Julius.  I think he
would present you with both his models as a testimonial, if you
could only take them," said Raymond.

Cecil had neither spoken nor laughed through all this.  She was
nursing her wrath; and after marching out of the dining-room, lay in
wait to intercept her husband, and when she had claimed his
attention, began, "Rosamond ought not to be allowed to say such
things."

"What things?"

"Speaking in that improper way about a gown."

"She seems to have said what was the fact."

"It can't be!  It is preposterous!  I never heard it before."

"Nor I; but Bindon evidently is up in those matters."

"It was only to support Rosamond; and I am quite sure she said it
out of mere opposition to me.  You ought to speak to Julius."

"About what?" said Raymond.

"Her laughing whenever I mention Dunstone, and tell them the proper
way of doing things."

"There may be different opinions about the proper way of doing
things."  Then as she opened her eyes in wonder and rebuke, he
continued, in his elder-brotherly tone of kindness, "You know I told
you already that you had better not interfere in matters concerning
his church and parish."

"We always managed things at Dunstone."

Hang Dunstone! was with some difficulty suppressed; but in an extra
gentle voice Raymond said, "Your father did what he thought his
duty, but I do not think it mine, nor yours, to direct Julius in
clerical matters.  It can only lead to disputes, and I will not have
them."

"It is Rosamond.  I'm sure I don't dispute."

"Listen, Cecil!" he said.  "I can see that your position may be
trying, in these close quarters with a younger brother's wife with
more age and rank than yourself."

"That is nothing.  An Irish earl, and a Charnock of Dunstone!"

"Dunstone will be more respected if you keep it in the background,"
he said, holding in stronger words with great difficulty.  "Once for
all, you have your own place and duties, and Rosamond has hers.  If
you meddle in them, nothing but annoyance can come of it; and
remember, I cannot be appealed to in questions between you and her.
Julius and I have gone on these nine-and-twenty years without a
cloud between us, and I'm sure you would not wish to bring one now."

Wherewith he left her bewildered.  She did not perceive that he was
too impartial for a lover, but she had a general sense that she had
come into a rebellious world, where Dunstone and Dunstone's daughter
were of no account, and her most cherished notions disputed.  What
was the lady of the manor to do but to superintend the church,
parsonage, and parish generally?  Not her duty?  She had never heard
of such a thing, nor did she credit it.  Papa would come home, make
these degenerate Charnocks hear reason, and set all to rights.


CHAPTER VI
Wedding Visits


Young Mrs. Charnock Poynsett had plenty of elasticity, and her
rebuffs were less present to her mind in the morning than to that of
her husband, who had been really concerned to have to inflict an
expostulation; and he was doubly kind, almost deferential, giving
the admiration and attention he felt incumbent on him to the
tasteful arrangements of her wedding presents in her own sitting-
room.

"And this clock I am going to have in the drawing-room, and these
Salviati glasses.  Then, when I have moved out the piano, I shall
put the sofa in its place, and my own little table, with my pretty
Florentine ornaments."

Raymond again looked annoyed.  "Have you spoken to my mother?" he
said.

"No; she never goes there."

"Not now, but if ever she can bear any move it will be her first
change, and I should not like to interfere with her arrangements."

"She could never have been a musician, to let the piano stand
against the wall.  I shall never be able to play."

"Perhaps that might be contrived," said Raymond, kindly.  "_Here_
you know is your own domain, where you can do as you please."

"Yes; but I am expected to play in the evening.  Look at all those
things.  I had kept the choicest for the drawing-room, and it is
such a pity to hide them all up here."

Raymond felt for the mortification, and was unwilling to cross her
again, so he said, "I will ask whether my mother would object to
having the piano moved."

"This morning?"

"After eleven o'clock--I never disturb her sooner; but you shall
hear before I go to Backsworth."

"An hour lost," thought Cecil; but she was too well bred to grumble,
and she had her great work to carry on of copying and illustrating
her journal.

Mrs. Poynsett readily consented.  "Oh yes, my dear, let her do
whatever she likes.  Don't let me be a bugbear.  A girl is never at
home till she has had her will of the furniture.  I think she will
find that moving out the piano betrays the fading of the rest of the
paper, but that is her affair.  She is free to do just as she likes.
I dare say the place does look antediluvian to young eyes."

So Raymond was the bearer of his mother's full permission; and Cecil
presided with great energy over the alterations, which she carried
out by the aid of the younger servants, to the great disgust of
their seniors.  She expected the acclamations of her contemporaries;
but it happened that the first of them to cross the room was Julius,
on his way to his mother's room after luncheon, and he, having on a
pair of make-shift glasses, till the right kind could be procured
from London, was unprepared for obstacles in familiar regions,
stumbled over an ottoman, and upset a table with the breakage of a
vase.

He apologized, with much regret; but the younger brothers made an
outcry.  "What has come to the place?  Here's the table all over
everything!"

"And where are the bronzes?"

"And the humming-birds?  Miles's birds, that he brought home after
his first voyage."

"And the clock with the two jolly little Cupids?  Don't you remember
Miles and Will Bowater dressing them up for men-of-war's men?
Mother could not bring herself to have them undressed for a year,
and all the time the clock struck nohow!"

"This is an anatomical study instead of a clock," lamented Frank.
"I say, Cecil, do you like your friends to sit in their bones, like
Sydney Smith?"

"I never saw such a stupid old set of conservatives!" broke in
Rosamond, feeling for Cecil's mortification.  "In an unprejudiced
eye the room looks infinitely better, quite revivified!  You ought
to be much obliged to Cecil for letting you see all her beautiful
things."

"Why don't you favour us with yours?" said Charlie.

"I know better!  Mine aren't fit to wipe the shoes of Cecil's!  When
I get into the Rectory you'll see how hideous they are!" said
Rosamond, with the merriest complacency.  "Couvre-pieds to set your
teeth on edge, from the non-commissioned officers' wives; and the
awfullest banner-screen you ever saw, worked by the drum-major's own
hands, with Her Majesty's arms on one side, and the De Courcy ones
on the other, and glass eyes like stuffed birds' to the lion and
unicorn.  We nearly expired from suppressed laughter under the
presentation."

Then she went round, extorting from the lads admiration for Cecil's
really beautiful properties, and winning gratitude for her own
cordial praise, though it was not the artistic appreciation they
deserved.  Indeed, Cecil yielded to the general vote for the
restoration of the humming-birds, allowing that, though she did not
like stuffed birds in a drawing-room, she would not have banished
them if she had known their history.

This lasted till Charlie spied a carriage coming up the drive, which
could be seen a long way off, so that there was the opportunity for
a general sauve qui peut.  Cecil represented that Rosamond ought to
stay and receive her bridal visits; but she was unpersuadable.  "Oh
no!  I leave all that for you!  My time will come when I get into
the Rectory.  We are going in the dog-cart to the other end of the
parish.--What's its name--Squattlesea Marsh, Julius?"

"Squattlesford!" said Charlie.  "If Julius means to drive you, look
out for your neck!"

"No, it's the other way, I'm going to drive Julius!--Come along, or
we shall be caught!"

Cecil stood her ground, as did Anne, who was too weary and
indifferent to retreat, and Frank, who had taken another view of the
carriage as it came nearer.

"I must apologize for having brought nothing but my father's card,"
said Lady Tyrrell, entering with her sister, and shaking hands:
"there's no such thing as dragging him out for a morning call."

"And Mr. Charnock Poynsett is not at home," replied Cecil.  "He
found so much county business waiting for him, that he had to go to
Backsworth."

"It is the better opportunity for a little private caucus with you,"
returned Lady Tyrrell, "before the meeting to-morrow.  I rather
fancy the gentlemen have one of their own."

"Some are to dine here to-night," said Cecil.

"We ladies had better be prepared with our proposals," said Lady
Tyrrell.

At the same time Frank drew near Miss Vivian with a large book,
saying, "These are the photographs you wished to see."

He placed the book on the ottoman, and would thus have secured a
sort of tete-a-tete; but Eleonora did not choose to leave Mrs Miles
Charnock out, and handed her each photograph in turn, but could only
elicit a cold languid "Thank you."  To Anne's untrained eye these
triumphs of architecture were only so many dull representations of
'Roman Catholic churches,' and she would much rather have listened
to the charitable plans of the other two ladies, for the houseless
factory women of Wil'sbro'.

The bazaar, Lady Tyrrell said, must be first started by the Member's
wife; and there should be an innermost committee, of not more than
three, to dispose of stalls and make arrangements.

"You must be one," said Cecil.  "I know no one yet."

"You will, long before it comes off.  In fact, I am as great a
stranger as yourself.  Ah! there's an opportunity!" as the bell
pealed.  "The Bowaters, very likely; I saw their Noah's ark as I
passed the Poynsett Arms, with the horses taken out.  But now he
wanted to surpass himself.

He considered that these years, days, hours, minutes, yes, if it
endured, in seconds umwechseln could, and he expected and calculated,
and it came out a sum, as he has never seen before.

Schwindelte Him. He had a little rest.

Time was precious, he had always heard, and it surprised him that a
man, a lot of time had not even guarded.

How easy it could be bestohlen. But then came his good, almost
exuberant mood again, he pulled his fur to make something really
broad and handsome, and made the whole fabelhafte capital at present,
he is a bit patronizing anredete: "Nikolaj Kusmitsch," he said
sympathetic and introduced himself, that he also, without fur, thin
and poor on the Roßhaarsofa sitting, "I hope Kusmitsch Nikolai,"
he said, "You are nothing to your wealth imagine.

Remember always that this is not the The main thing is, it giebt
poor people who are perfectly respectable, it giebt even impoverished
nobles and General daughters, on the streets around and sell
something. " And the benefactor still led all throughout the city
well-known examples.

Nikolaj Kusmitsch The other, based on the Roßhaarsofa, the person,
was still without being made, one could assume that it would
be sensible. He changed, in fact, nothing in his modest regular
living, and Sundays, he now to be his account in order. But after
a few weeks it fell on him, that he so much ausgäbe. I will restrict
myself, he thought. He was earlier on, he washed less extensively,
as he drank his tea, he ran into the office and came much too soon.

He saved a bit over time. But on Sunday there was no savings.
Because he understood that he was cheated. I would not be allowed to
change, he said it. How long did it in such a year. But since this
infamous money that goes out, you do not know how. And it was an
ugly afternoon, when he was in the sofa corner and sat on the gentleman
in the fur waited from the time he wanted to reclaim. He wanted the
door locked and it can not continue until he was not so
herausgerückt.

"In notes, he wanted to say" my ten years. " Four bills and one
to ten to five, and the rest should keep it in the devil's name.
Yes, he was ready to submit the rest to give just so that no
difficulties arise.

Irritable Roßhaarsofa he sat and waited, but the Lord did not. And
he, Nikolay Kusmitsch of a few weeks ago was so easily sit see, he
could now that he really was sitting on the other Kusmitsch Nikolaj,
the Fur, the Generous, not imagined. Heaven knows what became
of him, probably it was his fraud came to the track, and he
was now firmly somewhere. Sure he had him alone, not brought into
the accident. Such fraud will always work in the large. It struck
him that there is a public authority must give a kind of time
banking, where he was at least a portion of its paltry seconds
umwechseln could.

True, they were finally. He had never heard of such an institution,
but in the address book would certainly like of which can be found
in Z, or maybe it was called 'Bank of Time', one could easily
under B for details. Possibly was also the letter K to take
into account, because it was assumed that it was imperial
institution, which corresponded to its importance. Nikolaj Later
Kusmitsch always assured that he had on that Sunday evening, although
he was understandably fairly pressed mood was nothing 've
drunk. He was completely sober when the following happened at
all if you can say what happened. Maybe that they are a bit in his
corner was eingeschlummert, which could still think. This little
sleep initially gave him a loud relief. I was with the numbers
appeared, he talked to. Well, I do not understand numbers. But
it is clear that they were not too much significance must admit,
they are, so to speak, but only an institution of state due to the
regulation's sake.

No one had ever yet elsewhere than on the paper seen. It was
impossible that one to the example of a company in a seven or a
twenty-five met.

Since there was simply not true.

And then there was this little confusion occurred which,
from pure absentmindedness: time and money, as if that could not
keep apart.

Nikolaj Kusmitsch almost laughed.

It was good, so if you came to the tricks, and timely, that was the
important thing, time. Now it should be otherwise. The time, yes,
that was an embarrassing thing. But it was about him alone, she not
also the other way as he had found in seconds, even if they did not
know? Nikolaj Kusmitsch was not entirely free of gloating: Maybe
they are still - he just wanted to think , but as something peculiar
happened. It suddenly blew in his face, it moved him past his ears,
he felt it in his hands.

He opened his eyes wide. The window was tightly closed. And how he was
so with wide eyes sat in the dark room, as he began to understand
that what he now felt the time was real, which passed.

He recognized it formally, all these Sekündchen equal lau, a like
the others, but fast, but fast. Heaven knows what they are intended.
The fact that he just had the befall of any kind of wind felt
as an insult. Now would you sit and it would always be to move on,
our whole life long.

He saw all the neuralgia, which you would get it, he was beside
himself with rage. He jumped up, but the SURPRISES were not
yet at an end. Also under his feet was something like a movement, not
just one, several, oddly muddled fluctuating movements. It froze
before the horror: could the Earth be? Certainly, that was the Earth.
They moved anyway. The school had been talked about, it was
something that left hurriedly, and later it was covered up like
it was not suitable to say. But now, because once he had become
sensitive, he also got the feeling.

Whether the other felt it?

Perhaps, but they were not.

Maybe it made them from nothing, these seafarers.

Nikolaj Kusmitsch however, was precisely on this point somewhat
delicate, he avoided even the trams. He stumbled around the room
like on deck and had the right and left. Unfortunately it was still
something of the oblique position of the earth axis one.

No, he was all these movements are not tolerated.

He felt miserable. Loungers and keep quiet, he had once read somewhere.
And since then was Nikolai Kusmitsch. He stood and had their eyes
closed. And there were times, less turbulent days, so to speak,
where it was quite bearable. And then he had invented with the poems.
One should not believe how that helped. If you have a poem hersagte
slowly, with emphasis on uniform Endreime, it was certainly something
stable because, as you could see inside of course.

An happiness, that he knew all of these poems.

But he was always very interested in literature. He complained about
his condition is not, assured me that the student who knew him long.

Only had time with an exaggerated admiration for him has emerged in
which, as the student, herumgingen and the movement of the earth
vertrugen.

I remember this story as accurate, because it calmed me immensely.
I can say I have never again had such pleasant neighbor, Nikolai
Kusmitsch like this, which is certainly also would have admired me.

I took after this experience, in similar cases, always equal to the
facts loszugehen. I noticed how easy and relief they were, compared
to the conjecture. As if I had not known that all of our insights
are retrofitted, closing, nothing more.

Immediately behind it begins a new page with something completely
different, without carryover. What helped me now in the present case,
the few facts that are easily found them. I will enumerate them in
the same if I would have said what I am currently employed:
that they tend to have helped my situation, which (as I now admit)
was quite difficult, yet annoying way.

It was my honor to say, that I have written a lot in those
days, I've written spasmodic.

However, when I expected, so I thought do not like to come home.
I even made little detours and lost in this way for half an hour,
during which I would write. I admit that this was a weakness. But
once I was in my room so I had nothing to be ashamed of. I wrote, I
had my life, and because the next door was a totally different
life, with whom I shared nothing: the life of a student of medicine,
studied for his exams.

I did not have anything similar in front of me, even that was a
crucial difference. And even otherwise, our circumstances as different
as possible. All this shone me. Up to that moment, because I knew
it would, because I forgot that there is no common ground
between us there. I listened so that my heart was quite loud. I had
everything and listened. And then it came: I was never wrong. Almost
everyone knows the noise made by some tinny, round thing, we suppose,
the lid of a tin can, cause if it is entglitten. Usually he is not
even very loud at the bottom, it falls short on, rolls on the edge,
and is really only uncomfortable, if the momentum to an end and he
goes to all sides staggering aufschlägt, eh it comes to lying.

So, that's the whole thing, such a metallic object was next
door, rolled, remained, and in between, at certain intervals,
it is stamped. Like all the noises that are repeated through, also
had this internally organized itself, it turned out, it was never the
same. But it is precisely the language for its legality.

It could be fierce or mild, or melancholy, it could almost pass
rush or infinitely long hingleiten, eh it came to rest.

And the last wavering was always surprising. By contrast, the
Aufstampfen, which added something almost mechanical.

But it told the noise is always different, which seemed to be his
job.

I can understand the details much better now than see the room
beside me is empty. He has traveled back home, in the province.
He should relax. I live on the top floor. Right is another
house below me is nobody recovered: I am without a neighbor.
In this Constitution, I am almost surprised that I did not easily
adopted. Although I have always been warned in advance by my
feeling. That would have been exploited. Erschrick not, would I have
to say, now there, I knew that I was never deceived. But that was
perhaps just the facts that I had to say, since I knew I was still
frightened become defective.

It touched me almost spooky that what this noise triggered, those
small, slow, silent movement, with the eyelid to be handed over
his right eye cut and cleared, while he read. This was the essence
of his story, a trifle. He had been a few times to pass exams to
have his ambition had become sensitive, and people probably rushed
home as often as they wrote.

What remained then left when zusammenzunehmen.

But there was a few months before the decision to set this weakness,
this small, fatigue impossible, so ridiculous, as if a curtain
window will not stay up.

I'm sure for weeks that he felt it would have to dominate
can.

Otherwise I would not be forfeited to the idea, my will to him. One
day I understood that that was his end.

And since then, when I felt it coming, because I stood on my side of
the wall and asked him to serve. And over time it became clear to
me that he has indicated this.

Maybe he would not be allowed to do so, especially when you
consider that there is nothing really helped. Suppose even that we
have the matter a little hinhielten, it remains questionable whether
he really was capable of, the moments that we so won exploit.
And what my expenditure, so I began to feel it. I know, I wondered
whether this should continue, especially in the afternoon, when
someone came into our bunk.

This resulted in the narrow entrance is always a lot of unrest in
the small hotel.

A while later, it seemed to me as you do with my neighbor one. Our
doors were the last in the course of his cross and close to the mean.
I knew however, that he sometimes saw friends with him, and, as I
said, I am not interested for his conditions.

It is possible that his door was still open on several occasions
that it came out and went.

But I was not really responsible.

Now at that same evening it was worse than ever.

It was still not very late, but I was tired from already gone to
bed, I thought it likely that I would sleep. As I drove on, as if
you had touched me.

Immediately thereafter it broke off. It jumped and ran and rolled
and wavered somewhere and went.

The pitching was terrible. In between, we knocked down a stick,
deep, clear and angry against the ceiling. The new tenant was
obviously disturbed.

Now: this had to be his door. I was so awake that I heard his door
said, although he surprisingly cautious so circumvented. It came
to me before, he more than themselves. Sure, he wanted to know which
room it was. What baffled me was really exaggerated its consideration.
He had but just can say that it came to rest not in the House.

Why in the world oppressed his step? For a while I believed him
at my door, and then I heard, it was no doubt that it happened next
door.

He entered without further next one. And now (yes, how should I describe
it?), Now it was quiet. Still, as if a pain to stop. A peculiarly
tactile, tingling silence, as if a wound is healed. I would immediately
able to sleep, I would be able to get their breath and sleep.

Only my surprise, kept me awake. Someone nearby said, but also the
one with the silence.

This must be experienced, as this silence was to play it is not.
Also out was how to balance everything.

I sat, I listened, it was like in the countryside.

Dear God, I thought that his mother is here. They sat next to the
light, she talked to him, maybe he had a little head against her
shoulder made.

Immediately they would bring him to bed. Now I understood the
silent walking outside in the hallway.

Oh, that it existed. Such a system, before the doors are
completely different than before to give us. Yes, we were able to
sleep now. I have my neighbor almost forgotten. I see well that
there is no right to participate was what I had for him. Below, I
sometimes wonder in passing whether news of him since, and which.

And I am glad
if they are good.

But I exaggerate. I did not really need to know. This is no
longer with him, that I sometimes feel a sudden stimulus, next
door to enter.

It is only a step from my door to the other, and the room is not
locked. I would be interested to know how this room is actually
designed. One can easily be any room to imagine, and often it is
true then some.

Only the room, the man next to him, is always quite different than
you are thinking.

I tell myself that it is this circumstance that excites me. But I know
quite well that there are some metallic object, which is waiting on
me. I have assumed that it is a cap gun that although I may be wrong
of course. That worries me. It is now one of my plant, the thing on
a rifle to slide lid. One can think that he has not taken away.
Probably you up, you've got the lid on his rifle set, as it should
be.

And now the two together form the word gun, rifle round, just
expressed in a simple, well-known concept.

I, as entsänne me that they stand on the fireplace, the two who
represent the bush. Yes, they even stand in front of the mirror so
that it is still a rifle, a deceptively similar, imaginary. A rifle,
which we do not want, but after, for example, a monkey would use.

True, there were even two monkeys after use, because the monkey
would be twice as soon as he stands on the edge ankäme fireplace.
So, it's the cover of this rifle, it has on me apart.

Some of us about it: the top of a rifle, a healthy bush, whose edge
is not bent as his own, so a cover would have no other desire to
know when on his rifle to find this would be the extreme, imagine
what he can, one can not be taken satisfaction, the fulfillment of
all his wishes.

There is also something almost ideal, patiently and gently inserted
on the small Gegenwulst evenly aufzuruhen and intrusive edge to
feel resilient and just as sharp as you are on the edge is when you
daliegt individually.
Then, having Mr. Fuller's ear to himself, he
ventured to say, though cautiously, as to one who had been a
clergyman before he was born, "I wish it were possible to dispense
with this bazaar."

Mr. Fuller shrugged his shoulders.  "If every one subscribed in the
style of this family."

"They would be more likely to do so, without the appeal to secondary
motives."

"Try them," said the elder man.

"Exactly what I want to do.  I would put up the four walls, begin
with what you get from the insurance, a weekly offertory, and add
improvements as means came in.  This is not visionary.  I have seen
proof of its success."

"It may serve in new-fashioned city missions, but in an old-
established place like this it would create nothing but offence.
When you have been in Orders as long as I have, you will find that
there is nothing for it but to let people do what they will, not
what one thinks best."

"Mr. Fuller," said Julius, eagerly, "will you try an experiment?
Drop this bazaar, and I promise you our collection every Sunday
evening for the year, giving notice of it to my people, and to such
of yours as may be present."

"I do not despise your offer," said Mr. Fuller, laying his hand upon
his arm.  "You mean it kindly, and if I were in your place, or had
only my own feelings to consider, I might attempt it.  But it would
be only mischievous to interfere with the bazaar.  Lady Tyrrell--all
the ladies, in fact--have set their minds on it, and if I objected
there would instantly be a party cry against me, and that is the one
thing I have always avoided."

His tone of superior wisdom, meek and depressed as he always was,
tried the Rector's patience enough to make his forehead burn and
bring out his white eyebrows in strong relief.  "How about a
blessing on the work?" he asked, suppressing so much that he hardly
knew this was spoken aloud.

Again Mr. Fuller smiled.  He had been a bit of a humorist when he
was an Oxford don.  "Speak of that to Briggs," he said, "and he
would answer, 'Cash for me, and the blessing may take care of
itself.'  As to the ladies--why, they deafen you about blessings on
their humble efforts, and the widow's mite."

"Simply meaning that they want their amusement a little--"

"Buttered over," said Mr. Fuller, supplying the word.  "Though you
are hard on them, Charnock--I don't know about the fine ladies; but
there are quiet folk who will work their fingers to the bone, and
can do nothing else."

"That's true," said Julius; "and one would gladly find a safe outlet
for their diligence."

"You do not trust to it for bringing the blessing," said Mr. Fuller
in a tone that Julius liked even less than the mere hopeless faint-
heartedness, for in it there was sarcasm on faith in aught but
pounds s. d.

The two brothers held another discussion on this matter later that
night, on the stairs, as they were on their way to their rooms.

"Won't you come to this meeting to-morrow, Julius?" asked Raymond.

"I don't see that I should be of any use, unless--"

"Unless what?"

"Unless you would make what seems to me the right proposal, and I
could be any support in it."

"What's that?"

"To use the insurance to put up the mere shells and plain
indispensable fittings of the church and town-hall, then make the
drainage of Water Lane and Hall Street the first object for the
rates, while the church is done by subscription and voluntary
effort."

"You put the drainage first--even before the church?" said Raymond,
smiling, with an elder brother's satisfaction in such an amount of
common sense.

"Of course I do," said Julius.  "An altar and four walls and chairs
are all that ought to be sought for.  Little good can be done to
people's souls while their bodies are in the feverish discomfort of
foul air and water.  This is an opportunity not to be wasted, while
all the houses are down, town-hall and all."

"The very thing I told Briggs and the others this morning," said
Raymond; "but I could not get a hearing; they said there never had
been any illness worth mentioning, and in fact scouted the whole
matter, as people always do."

"Yes, they take it as a personal insult when you mention the
odorous--or odious, savours sweet," said Julius.  "I heard a good
deal of that when we had the spell of cholera at St. Awdry's."

"I shall work on at it, and I trust to get it done in time," said
Raymond; "but it will not be at once.  The subject is too new to
them, and the irritation it produces must subside before they will
hear reason.  Besides, the first thing is to employ and feed these
paper-makers."

"Of course."

"That will pretty well absorb this first meeting.  The ladies will
manage that, I think; and when this is provided for, I will try what
I can do at the committee; but there is no good in bringing it
forward at this great public affair, when every ass can put in his
word.  Everything depends on whom they choose for the new mayor.  If
Whitlock comes in, there is some chance of sense and reason being
heard.  Good night."

As Raymond said, the more immediate object of the meeting fixed for
the ensuing day, was to provide for the employment of the numerous
women thrown out of employment by the destruction of the paper-
mills.  A subscription was in hand, but not adequate to the need;
and moreover, it was far more expedient to let them maintain
themselves.

How this was to be done was the question.  Cecil told her husband
that at Dunstone they made the women knit stockings; and he replied
by recommending the suppression of Dunstone.  How strange it was
that what she had been used to consider as the source of honour
should be here held in what seemed to her disesteem!

Lady Tyrrell's ponies were tinkling up to the door of the hotel
where the meeting was to be held, and her gracious smile recalled
Cecil's good-humour; Raymond saw them to their seats, and then had
to go and take the chair himself on the platform--first, however,
introducing his wife to such of the ladies present as he
recollected.

She thought he wanted her to sit between melancholy white faced Mrs.
Fuller and a bony spinster in a poke-bonnet whom he called Miss
Slater; but Cecil, concluding that this last could have no vote, and
that the Vicarage was secure, felt free to indulge herself by
getting back to Lady Tyrrell, who had scarcely welcomed her before
exclaiming, "Mrs. Duncombe, I did not know you were returned."

"I came back on the first news of your flare-up," said the newcomer.
"I only came down this morning.  I would not have missed this
meeting for anything.  It is a true woman's question.  A fair
muster, I see," looking round with her eye-glass, and bowing to
several on the platform, especially to Raymond, who returned the bow
rather stiffly.

"Ah! let me introduce you," said Lady Tyrrell.  "Mrs. Raymond
Charnock Poynsett."

"I am very glad to see you embarked in the cause," said the lady,
frankly holding out her hand.  "May we often meet in the same
manner, though I honestly tell you I'm not of your party; I should
go dead against your husband if we only had a chance."

"Come, you need not be so aggressive," laughed Lady Tyrrell; "you
haven't a vote yet.  You are frightening Mrs. Poynsett."  It was
true.  Even Cecil Charnock was born too late to be one of the young
ladies who, in the first decades of the reformed Parliament, used to
look on a Liberal as a lusus naturae, whom they hardly believed to
be a gentleman.  But a lady who would openly accost the Member's
bride with a protest against his politics, was a being beyond her
experience, and the contemplation fairly distracted her from her
husband's oratory.

She would have taken Miss Slater for the strong-minded female far
rather than this small slim person, with the complexion going with
the yellower species of red hair and chignon, not unlike a gold-
pheasant's, while the thin aquiline nose made Cecil think of Queen
Elizabeth.  The dress was a tight-fitting black silk, with a
gorgeous many-coloured gold-embroidered oriental mantle thrown
loosely over it, and a Tyrolean hat, about as large as the
pheasant's comb, tipped over her forehead, with cords and tassels of
gold; and she made little restless movements and whispered remarks
during the speeches.

There was to be a rate to renew the town-hall.  The rebuilding of
the paper-mills and dwelling-houses was fairly covered by the
insurance; but the Vicar, in his diffident apologetic voice, stated
that the church had been insufficiently insured, and moreover, that
many more sittings were needed than the former building had
contained.  He then read the list of subscriptions already promised,
expressed hopes of more coming in, invited ladies to take collecting
cards, and added that he was happy to announce that the ladies of
the congregation had come forward with all the beneficence of their
sex, and raised a sum to supply a new set of robes.

Here the chairman glanced at his wife, but she was absorbed in
watching Mrs. Duncombe's restless hands; and the look was
intercepted by Lady Tyrrell's eyes, which flashed back sympathetic
amusement, with just such a glance as used to pass between them in
old times; but the effect was to make the Member's face grave and
impassive, and his eyes fix on the papers before him.

The next moment Cecil was ardently gazing at Mr. Fuller as he
proceeded to his hopes of the bazaar to be held under the most
distinguished patronage, and of which he spoke as if it were the
subject of anticipations as sanguine as any the poor man could ever
appear to indulge in.  And there was, in fact, the greatest stamping
and cheering there had yet been, perhaps in compliment to the M.P.'s
young bride--at least, so Lady Tyrrell whispered, adding that
everybody was trying to see her.

Then Mr. Charnock Poynsett himself took up the exposition of the
third branch of the subject, the support of the poor families thrown
out of work at the beginning of winter.  There could be no
employment at the paper-mills till they were repaired; and after the
heavy losses, they could not attempt to keep their people together
by any payment.  It had been suggested that the readiest way of
meeting the difficulty, would be to employ the subscriptions already
promised in laying in a stock of material to be made up into
garments, and then dispose of them out to the women at their homes;
and appointing a day once a week when the work should be received,
the pay given, and fresh material supplied, by a party of volunteer
ladies.

This was, in fact, what he had been instructed to propose by the
kindly souls who ordinarily formed the St. Nicholas bureau de
charite, who had instructed him to be their mouthpiece.  There was
due applause as the mayor seconded his resolution; but in the midst
a clear, rather high-pitched voice rose up close to Cecil, saying,
"Mr. Chairman, allow me to ask what sale is anticipated for these
garments?"

"I am told that there is a demand for them among the poor
themselves," said Raymond, judiciously concealing how much he was
taken aback by this female interference.

"Allow me to differ.  A permanent work society numbering a few women
otherwise unemployed may find a sufficient sale in the neighbourhood
under the patronage of charitable ladies; but when you throw in
ninety-five or one hundred pair of hands depending on their work for
their livelihood, the supply must necessarily soon go beyond any
demand, even fictitious.  It will not do to think of these women
like fancy knitters or embroiderers whose work is skilled.  Most of
them can hardly mend their own clothes, and the utmost that can be
expected of them is the roughest slop work."

"Do you wish any expedient to be proposed?" asked the chairman, in a
sort of aside.

"Yes, I have one.  I spent yesterday in collecting information."

"Will Captain Duncombe move it?" suggested Raymond.

"Oh no! he is not here.  No, it is no use to instruct anybody; I
will do it myself, if you please."

And before the astonished eyes of the meeting, the gold-pheasant
hopped upon the platform, and with as much ease as if she had been
Queen Bess dragooning her parliament, she gave what even the
astounded gentlemen felt to be a sensible practical exposition of
ways and means.

She had obtained the address of a warehouse ready to give such rough
work as the women could be expected to do; but as they were
unaccustomed to work at home, and were at present much crowded from
the loss of so many houses, and could besides be little depended on
for working well enough without superintendence, her plan was to
hire a room, collect the women, and divide the superintendence
between the ladies; who should give out the work, see that it was
properly done, keep order, and the like.  She finished off in full
order, by moving a resolution to this effect.

There was a pause, and a little consultation among the gentlemen,
ending by Raymond's absolutely telling Mr. Fuller that it was a very
sensible practical arrangement, and that it _must_ be seconded;
which the Vicar accordingly did, and it was carried without
opposition, as in truth nothing so good had been thought of; and the
next thing was to name a committee of ladies, a treasurer and
auditor of accounts.  There would be no work on Saturdays, so if the
ladies would each undertake half a day once a fortnight, the
superintendence need not be a burthen.

Mrs. Duncombe and Miss Slater undertook the first start and
preliminary arrangements, then each would take her half day in
rotation.  Lady Tyrrell and her sister undertook two, Cecil two
more, and others were found to fill up the vacant space.  The
chairman moved a vote of thanks to the lady for her suggestion,
which she acknowledged by a gracious bow, not without triumph; and
the meeting broke up.

Some one asked after Captain Duncombe as she descended into private
life.  "There's a wonderful filly that absorbs all his attention.
All Wil'sbro' might burn as long as Dark Hag thrives!  When do I
expect him?  I don't know; it depends on Dark Hag," she said in a
tone of superior good-natured irony, then gathered up the radiant
mantle and tripped off along the central street of the little old-
fashioned country town, with gravelled not paved side-walks.

"Isn't she very superior?" said Cecil, when her husband had put her
on horseback.

"I suppose she is very clever."

"And she spoke capitally."

"If she were to speak.  What would your father think of her?"

But for the first time Cecil's allegiance had experienced a certain
shock.  Some sort of pedestal had hitherto been needful to her
existence; she was learning that Dunstone was an unrecognized
elevation in this new country, and she had seen a woman attain to a
pinnacle that almost dazzled her, by sheer resource and good sense.

All the discussion she afterwards heard did not tend to shake her
opinion; Raymond recounted the adventure at his mother's kettle-
drum, telling of his own astonishment at the little lady's
assurance.

"I do not see why she should be censured," said Cecil.  "You were
all at a loss without her."

"She should have got her husband to speak for her," said Mrs.
Poynsett.

"He was not there."

"Then she should have instructed some other gentleman," said Mrs.
Poynsett.  "A woman spoils all the effect of her doings by putting
herself out of her proper place."

"Perfectly disgusting!" said Julius.

Cecil had decidedly not been disgusted, except by the present strong
language; and not being ready at repartee, she was pleased when
Rosamond exclaimed, "Ah! that's just what men like, to get
instructed in private by us poor women, and then gain all the credit
for originality."

"It is the right way," said the mother.  "The woman has much power
of working usefully and gaining information, but the one thing that
is not required of her is to come forward in public."

"Very convenient for the man!" laughed Rosamond.

"And scarcely fair," said Cecil.

"Quite fair," said Rosamond, turning round, so that Cecil only now
perceived that she had been speaking in jest.  "Any woman who is
worth a sixpence had rather help her husband to shine than shine
herself."

"Besides," said Mrs. Poynsett, "the delicate edges of true womanhood
ought not to be frayed off by exposure in public."

"Yes," said Raymond.  "The gain of an inferior power of man in
public would be far from compensated by the loss in private of that
which man can never supply."

"Granted," said Rosamond slyly though sleepily, "that it always is
an inferior power of man, which it does not seem to have been in the
actual case."

"It was a point on which she had special knowledge and information,"
said Mrs. Poynsett.

"And you were forced to thank her," said Cecil.

"Yes, in common civility," said Raymond; "but it was as much as I
could do to get it done, the position was a false one altogether."

"In fact, you were all jealous," said Rosamond.

At which everybody laughed, which was her sole intention; but Cecil,
who had said so much less, really thought what Rosamond said in mere
play.  Those extorted thanks seemed to her a victory of her sex in a
field she had never thought of; and though she had no desire to
emulate the lady, and felt that a daughter of Dunstone must remember
noblesse oblige, the focus of her enthusiasm was in an odd state of
shifting.


CHAPTER VIII
Unsatisfactory


On the evening of the party at Strawyers, Mrs. Poynsett lay on her
sofa, thinking, with a trying recurrence, of that unfortunate and
excellent German Dauphine, who was pronounced by the Duchess of
Orleans to have died of her own stupidity.

After a fortnight had brought no improvement, but rather the
reverse, to poor Anne's wan looks and feeble languid deportment,
Mrs. Poynsett had insisted on her seeing the doctor; and had been
assured by him that there was nothing amiss, and that if Mrs Miles
Charnock could only be roused and occupied she would be perfectly
well, but that her pining and depression might so lower her tone as
to have a serious effect on her health.

There was no hope of her husband's return for at least a year,
likely eighteen months.  What was to be done with her?  What could
be a more unpropitious fate than for a Colonial girl, used to an
active life of exertion and usefulness, and trained to all domestic
arts, to be set down in a great English household where there was
really nothing for her to do, and usefulness or superintendence
would have been interfering; besides, as Miles had thoughts of
settling at the Cape, English experience would serve her little.

She had not cultivation enough for any pursuit to interest her.  She
was not musical, could not draw; and when Mrs. Poynsett had, by way
of experiment, asked her to read aloud an hour a day, and selected
the Lives of the Lindsays, as an unexceptionable and improving book,
full of Scottish history, and even with African interest, she
dutifully did her task as an attention to her invalid mother-in-law,
but in a droning husky tone, finding it apparently as severe a
penance as it was to her auditor.

The doctor's chief prescription was horse exercise; but what would a
constitutional canter be to one accustomed to free rides through the
Bush?  And she would generally be alone; for even if Charlie, her
nearest approach to an ally, had not been going away from home in a
few weeks, it could not be expected that he could often ride with
her.

It was plain that every one of the whole family was giving continual
shocks to Mr. Pilgrim's disciple, even when they felt most innocent;
and though the mother was sometimes disposed to be angry, sometimes
to laugh at the little shudder and compression of the lips she began
to know, she perceived what an addition this must be to the
unhappiness of the poor lonely stranger.

"She must be set to some good work," thought Mrs. Poynsett; "Julius
might let her go to his old women.  She might get on with them
better than with the old women here.  And there's Cecil's working
affair, it would be just the thing to give her an object.  I think I
can get through this evening.  I've made Susan bring my desk, with
all Miles's letters from his first voyage.  Shall I suppress the
ball?"

Therewith Cecil made her entrance, in glossy white satin and deep
lace, beautiful to behold, set off with rainbow glistening opals.
She made a quiet complacent show of herself, as one not vain of fine
clothes, but used to an affectionate family appreciation of her best
attire; and it was the most friendly childlike bit of intimacy that
had yet been attained between her and Mrs. Poynsett.

And when she sat down to wait for the others, Mrs. Poynsett ventured
on telling her the prescription and her own perplexity, hoping for a
voluntary offer to employ Anne at Willansborough; but Cecil only
pitied her for having 'no resources'; and when Mrs. Poynsett
ventured to suggest finding a niche for her in the work-room, the
answer was--"Our days are all disposed of."

"You have two, I think?"

"True; but it would never do for me to give up one of my times.  If
I seemed to slacken, every one else would."

"What will you do when the Session begins?"

"I shall make some arrangement.  I do not think Anne could ever take
my place; she would have no authority."

Anne herself here entered, took her knitting, and sat down,
apparently unaware of the little pluming gesture by which Cecil
unconsciously demanded attention to her bridal satin.  One white-
gloved gentleman after another dropped in, but none presumed on a
remark; Jenkins announced the carriages; but Rosamond had not
appeared, and after an excursion up-stairs, Julius returned,
declaring that the first carriage must not wait for her, they would
come afterwards in the van, for there was something amiss in the
dress, she had not had it on since the wedding.

"And she came in so late," said Cecil.

"That was my fault," he said.  "We came through the village to leave
a message at the doctor's;" and he then insisted that the other pair
should set off, taking Frank and Charlie, and prevent dinner from
being kept waiting; at which the boys made faces, and declared that
it was a dodge of his to join Jenny's party in the schoolroom,
instead of the solemn dinner; but they were obliged to submit; and
it was not till twenty minutes later, that in glided something
white, with blue cashmere and swan's-down over it, moving, as usual,
with languid grace.

"Poor Julius!" smiled Rosamond with her dawdling dignity.  "Every
single thing turned out a misfit!  As it is, there's a monstrous
hole in my glove, which demands the benevolent fiction of my having
torn it by the way.  There, one second for the effect!--Good-bye,
dear Mrs. Poynsett;--good-bye, Anne.  Come, you monument of patience
and resignation!"

For one moment she had slipped back her little mantle, then drawn it
on, as, taking her husband's arm, she left the room; but that moment
had set Anne's cheeks aflame, and left Mrs. Poynsett in a startled
state of uncertainty, hoping her glance had been mistaken, wondering
what could have been _more_ amiss, and feeling incapable of entering
on the subject with that severe young judge, of narrow experience.

Never had her eldest son failed to come and bid her good night on
his way to his own room:  it was the great break in her long
sleepless hours, and she used to call it a reversal of the relations
of those days when he used to watch for her kiss on her way to bed.
Nor did he fail her now, but came and stood over her with his
fragmentary tidings.

"An immense party--oh yes, there was he persuading them not to wait.
Mr. Bowater took Rosamond in to dinner, Cecil went with Sir Harry
Vivian.  Yes, Lady Tyrrell was there, wonderfully handsome, but her
expression strikes me as altered; there is the sort of pathetic look
that, as Cecil said, is like the melancholy Medusa--I wonder if it
is genuine.  She seems greatly disposed to cultivate Cecil--I wonder
what she does it for."

"Is Cecil attracted?  I fancied she was."

"Yes, a good deal; and I fear the Wil'sbro' business will throw them
together.  It is unlucky on Frank's account likewise.  I see we
shall have it all over again there."

"I have great hope in his office taking him away.  How was it with
them to-night?"

"What I should call arrant coquetry, such as even Camilla never
indulged in.  The girl kept out of his way--was absolutely chill and
repelling half the evening--throwing herself at the officers from
Backsworth, till at last Frank obtained a waltz, and after that they
were perfectly inseparable."

"If she coquets, she will soon disgust him!  Did Cecil enjoy
herself?"

"Oh yes:  Phil Bowater opened the ball with her, and she dances very
nicely--so quietly, Mrs. Bowater remarked it.  As to Rosamond, she
was in her native element--_is_ indeed, for she would not hear of
coming away when we did."

"And Julius?"

"Standing in a doorway, with others of his kind, absently talking,
and watching Rosamond out of the tail of his eye.  I say, mother,"
lowering his voice, "can't you give Rosamond a hint about her dress?
Cecil says she can't go out with her again like _that_.  Ah," as he
heard a sigh, "I should not have worried you at night."

"No, you have not.  Tell Cecil I will see about it.  Rosamond will
take it best from an old woman like me."

Mrs. Poynsett was quite conscious that Cecil had more high breeding
and refinement than Rosamond, who was essentially the Irish
Colonel's daughter, and that the cold temperament of the one
irritated the warm nature of the other.  More than one flash had
revealed Rosamond's contempt for Cecil's assumptions and intolerance
for her precision--besides, she was five years older, and had not an
ideal in Dunstone.

After revolving what form of remonstrance would be least offensive
during half the night and day, Mrs. Poynsett was not prepared for
the appearance, about noon, of her son Julius, when, coming to what
she termed the confidential side of her couch, he asked
hesitatingly, and colouring, "Mother, I want you to tell me, was
there anything amiss in Rose's dress last night?"

"You did not perceive--"

"I'm not used to the style of thing.  Is it not the way with what
you call full dress?"

"To a certain degree--" she began.

He caught her up.  "And here has Cecil been putting my poor Rose
into a perfect agony!  It is only woman's censorious nonsense, isn't
it, mother?  Mere folly to think otherwise!  I knew you would set my
mind at rest; and if you would tell Cecil that you will not have
Rosamond insulted, it would be as well."

"Stay, Julius," as he was walking off complacently, "I grieve, but I
must confess that I was going to speak to Rosamond myself."

He looked very blank.

"Mind, I am certain that it is only an innocent following of what
she has been brought up to;" and as he signed a sort of hurt
acquiescence, as if trying to swallow the offence, she added, "When
do you go out again?"

"Not till Monday, when we dine at Colonel Ross's.  He is an old
friend of Lord Rathforlane."

"Then I am inclined to let it cool.  Sometimes advice that has been
resented does its work."

"You don't think the interference justifiable?"

"Not from that quarter."

"And can it be needful to attend to it?"

"My dear Julius, it is not a style of dress I could ever have worn,
nor have let my daughters have worn, if I had had any."

"Conclusive, that!" said Julius, getting up, more really angered
with his mother than he had been since his childhood.

However, he conquered himself by the time he had reached the door,
and came back to say, "I beg your pardon, mother, I know you would
not say so without need."

"Thank you, my boy!" and he saw tears in her eyes, the first time he
was conscious of having brought them.  As he bent down to kiss her,
she rallied, and cheerfully said, "I have no doubt it will all come
right--Rosamond is too nice not to feel it at once."

No such thing; Rosamond was still furious.  If he disapproved, she
would submit to him; but he had seen nothing wrong, had he?

"My dear Rose, I told you I was no judge:  you forget what my eyes
are; and my mother--"

"You have been to your mother?"

"My dear, what could I do?"

"And you think I am going to insult my own mother and sisters to
please any woman's finical prudish notions'?  Pray what did Mrs.
Poynsett say?"

The excuse of custom, pleaded by Mrs. Poynsett, only made Rosamond
fiercer.  She wished she had never come where she was to hear that
her own mother was no judge of propriety, and her husband could not
trust her, but must needs run about asking everybody if she were fit
to be seen.  Such a tempest Julius had never seen outside a back
street in the garrison town.  There seemed to be nothing she would
not say, and his attempts at soothing only added to her violence.
Indeed, there was only one thing which would have satisfied her, and
that was, that she had been perfectly right, and the whole world
barbarously wrong; and she was wild with passion at perceiving that
he had a confidence in his own mother which he could not feel in
hers.

Nor would he insist that Raymond should force Cecil to apologize.
"My dear," he said, "don't you know there are things easier to ask
than to obtain?"

To which Rosamond replied, in another gust, that she would never
again sit down to table with Cecil until she had apologized for the
insult, not to herself, she did not care about that, but to the
mother who had seen her dresses tried on:  Julius must tell Raymond
so, or take her away to any cottage at once.  She would not stay
where people blamed mamma and poisoned his mind against her!  She
believed he cared for them more than for her!

Julius had sympathized far longer with her offended feeling than
another could have done; but he was driven to assert himself.
"Nonsense, Rose, you know better," he said, in a voice of
displeasure; but she pouted forth, "I don't know it.  You believe
every one against me, and you won't take my part against that nasty
little spiteful prig!"

"Cecil has behaved very ill to you," said Julius, granting her
rather over much; "but she is a foolish conceited child, who does
not deserve that Raymond should be worried about her.  I foresee
plenty of grievances from her; but, Rosie, we must and will not let
her come between us and Raymond.  You don't know what a brother he
has been to me--I hardly think I could have got through my first
year at school but for him; and I don't think my sweet Rose could
wish to do me such an ill turn as to stir up a feud with such a
brother because his wife is provoking."

The luncheon-bell began to sound, and she sobbed out, "There then,
go down, leave me alone!  Go to them, since you are so fond of them
all!"

"I don't think you could come down as you are," said Julius,
gravely; "I will bring you something."

"It would choke me--choke me!" she sobbed out.

Julius knew enough of the De Lancy temperament to be aware that
words carried them a long way, and he thought solitude would be so
beneficial, that he summoned resolution to leave her; but he had not
the face to appear alone, nor offer fictions to excuse her absence,
so he took refuge in his dressing-room, until he had seen Cecil and
Anne ride away from the hall door together.

For the two sisters-in-law had held a little indignation meeting,
and Rosamond's misdemeanour had so far drawn them together, that
Cecil had offered to take Anne to see the working party, and let her
assist thereat.

The coast being clear, Julius went down, encountering nothing worse
than the old butler, who came in while he was cutting cold beef, and
to whom he said, "Lady Rosamond is rather knocked up; I am going to
take her something up-stairs."

Jenkins received this as the result of a dance, but much wanted to
fetch a tray, which Julius refused, and set off with an ale-glass in
one hand, and in the other the plates with the beef and appliances,
Jenkins watching in jealous expectation of a catastrophe, having no
opinion of Mr. Julius's powers as a waiter.  He was disappointed.
The downfall was deferred till the goal was reached, and was then
most salutary, for Rosamond sprang to pick up the knife and fork,
laughed at his awkwardness, refused to partake without him, produced
implements from her travelling-bag, and was as merry as she had been
miserable.

Not a word on the feud was uttered; and the pair walked down to the
village, where she was exemplary, going into all those more
distasteful parts of her duties there, which she sometimes shirked.

And on her return, finding her long-expected letter from Miss
M'Kinnon awaiting her, she forgot all offences in her ardour to
indoctrinate everybody with the hopes it gave of affording Mrs.
Poynsett a change of room, if not even greater variety.
Unfortunately, this eagerness was not met with a corresponding
fervour.  There was in the household the acquiescence with long-
established invalidism, that sometimes settles down and makes a
newcomer's innovations unwelcome.  Raymond had spoken to the old
doctor, who had been timid and discouraging; Susan resented the
implication that the utmost had not been done for her dear mistress;
and Mrs. Poynsett herself, though warmly grateful for Rosamond's
affection, was not only nervously unwilling to try experiments, but
had an instinctive perception that there was one daughter-in-law to
whom her increased locomotion would scarcely be welcome, and by no
means wished to make this distaste evident to Raymond.  Cecil would
not have been so strong against the risk and imprudence, if her
wishes had been the other way.  Moreover, she had been warned off
from interference with the Rector's wife in the village, and she did
not relish Rosamond's making suggestions as to her province, as she
considered the house--above all, when she viewed that lady as in a
state of disgrace.  It was nothing less than effrontery; and Cecil
became stiffer and colder than ever.  She demanded of her mother-in-
law whether there had been any promise of amendment.

"Oh!  Julius will see to all that," said Mrs. Poynsett.

"It is a woman's question," returned Cecil.

"Not entirely."

"Fancy a clergyman's wife!  It Mrs. Venn had appeared in that way at
Dunstone!"

"You would have left it to Mr. Venn!  My dear, the less said the
sooner mended."

Cecil was silenced, but shocked, for she was far too young and
inexperienced to understand that indecorous customs complied with as
a matter of course, do not necessarily denote lack of innate
modesty--far less, how they could be confounded with home
allegiance; and as to Anne, poor Rosamond was, in her eyes, only too
like the ladies who impeded Christiana on her outset.

So her ladyship retreated into languid sleepy dignity towards both
her sisters-in-law; and on Monday evening showed herself, for a
moment, more decolletee, if possible, than before.  Mrs. Poynsett
feared lest Julius were weak in this matter; but at night she had a
visit from him.

"Mother," he said, "it will not happen again.  Say no more."

"I am only too thankful."

"What do you think settled it?  No less than Lady Tyrrell's
admiration."

"What could she have said?"

"I can't make out.  When you save some regret to point why his inquiries,
and, until they got it, you were kissing my face with your ruby
lips. 52. No parabas to find out, soon applied the remedy,
driving me to the garden to look from there the flowers that I could
strike and comfort. 53. I caught the most beautiful, and hung
on my neck and strung alternating flowers for my sadness out. 54.

If my pain is not calm, your tabs will be flooded with tears, where
are Now those who praise apacigüen my torture? 55. Come, Laura,
now I need your requests for days past, now collects from you helps
your unhappy lover dying. 56.

And now it is my great misfortune, I implore you not tears flow ,
a drop, relieved enough, if you boot from your loving heart. 57.
Palpa now my body, my review is not inferred by sword wound, wash the
blood that flows from the traces of the binding of my hands, feet
and neck. 58 .

Come, my love, my clothes and tasting, and does not want rust stains,
and the rope breaks remúdame, lenitive to find my woes. 59.

Fija in my eyes trace of bitterness echadero, to mitigate the rapid
what race has to end my life. 60.

No one, Laura, you're the only one that can heal these torments;
put your hands on this body, and although outside body, to life
again. 61. But you unhappy me! Woe, in the great tribulation, there
is no longer to call Laura!

Was away, away, and do not want to go, it was unfair to my true
love! 62. In another lap sold the heart that was mine now, and I
deceived, all my love away from them, he forgot his disdain and his
tears. 63.

What is desolate and not have it? Will that still does not suffer
death?

father and adoptive mother, friendless and forgotten for his beloved.
64.

Castigo lost my honor, kneeling poisoned arrow in my heart,
compassion for my father!, nestled dart; me these are burnt
jealousy! 65. Pain pain, infidelity is that of Laura and poison my
life is entombed in the pit of the ill-fated. 66. Oh, Count
Adolfo!

but had unleashed all the evils of the earth, your perfidy would
have appreciated if I would have stolen the heart of Laura. 67.

This is terrifyingly desgañitó, which resounded in the forest
interior, body and spirit him away cravings and desatóse river of
tears. 68.

Abatióse head on the trunk, after the neck by the rope that was
holding it, was pure body, and yolk color in her face, pure white
tornóse. 69.

It happened in the calling forest warrior bold trace, with a turban
on beautiful crest, and dress of the Moorish capital of Persia.
[12] 70.

He scans
with high and look as if they find sites where you can rest, and
suddenly threw pica buckler, and joined hands. 71.

Then he raised his eyes and his eyes stuck in the tree, wall, sky,
statue seemed to stand silent, without pause sighs. 72.

Cansado in that way, sat in the trunk of a tree, and said,
"Oh fate," while dropping from the eyes as tears bolts. 73.

The head is supported on the left hand, then grabbed his forehead
with his right hand as if making a forgotten memory of something
important . 74. reclines After the venture, without giving respite
to the source of their tears, their despair iban stream of words:
"Flerida, oh, the joy is over." 75.

At times the entire planted forest ayes, chanting that with the
melancholy song of the night owls who rested there. [13] 76. Then
he joined astonished, called the pike and shield printed on his
face ferocity of Furies, [14] "will not allow it," he exclaimed. 77.

Flerida If the abductor was different, not my father, whom I respect,
not that this would not cause pica thousand and ten thousand deaths.
78.

Mars fall from above, [15] emerge from the depths of the Fates, [16]
all trigger your anger, driven by the momentum of my arm. 79.

From the nails of the traitor who is snatched half of my soul, and
anyone, except my father, not adhering to the steel that I have. 80.

Oh , sovereign and despotic power of love, that even parents and
children unces your yoke, and when you hold the heart of
anyone, anything to further disparage your out!

81. And how much will trample holy and sacred, wisdom, reason ,
will be in vain, the Authority shall be contempt, and life itself,
hated!

82. The end of my luck so misguided, mirror must be clear is that,
to understand that it is not doomed to adversity than my forces. 83.
That said, tears shed, and then nailed pica moaned; resounded then,
as if replying, the moans that were tied. 84.

Shocking to hear of the warrior, was looking all around, and when
he saw nothing, waited their recurrence, to just one to moan again.
85.

Plus stunning brave warrior, "who moans in this loneliness?" He
came to where they came the groans, and was all ears. 86.

Reached the following complaints: Oh, father amantísimo that store!

why your life was cut before, and left me an orphan in the midst
of the bitterness? 87. When my imagination makes cabal on your
fall into the hands of the traitor, seems to see what happened to
you, and inhuman punishment which Grima. 88.

What punishment does not apply to you Count Adolfo tyrant!

If you were a mirror of prudence in the kingdom!

As you would download the most fury. 89. Your body seems to be your
child Barruntar now prostrate in agony, it crumbles and tears, the
executioner of Sayon hypocrite. 90.

Your flesh and discard the bones, body, hands and fled the head,
which the iban Tobas throwing these traitors, and no pity on anyone
who is buried. 91. So protected and your friends, they are members
of the faction of the traitor, and your enemies are and those that
do not support their cause, they fear also be punished, if your
body are buried. 92.

So far, father, it seems that I hear that your head is below the
blade, your prayers and supplications to heaven that I am free
bloody nails. 93.

Deseabas yet I cover the bodies amid the carnage, to avoid the deadly
hand of Count Adolfo, worse than that of Leon. 94.

Without even finish your prayers, on your neck suddenly dropped the
knife, and left your lips last words: "Goodbye, child," and your
life over. 95.

Oh, my father and father! when I think about what was your love and
your affiliates complacency, the tears of anguish asaetea heart
that flows from their eyes. 96. You have no second parent in
the land, the pampered son who cherishes in his lap, however small
grief that I appear on the face, your mercy to follow you to
tears. 97.

All the joy is over for me until my life is a nuisance. Father! not
much to expect, in the restful home, hug. 98. briefly interrupted
his soliloquy the unfortunate, allowing time to break the tears,
the pious Muslim who heard about the unfortunate outbreak of the
chest. 99.

He put his hand on the heart and articulated: when, say, my tears
gushed forth sympathy for my father, and miss it like the cries
of groaning?

100.

For the love kidnapped weeps, because of my tears stream made he
moans for her love of father died, model parents. 101.

If you are constantly flooded my eyes, lay out under the caresses of
my father and your support, large enough to be my fate and appetizing.
102. But the little stagnant water, often irrigate my face and
chest, it must, indeed, my father, but his cruelty, and not under
their sponsorship. 103.

What we call love my father, is his duplicity, Birla lady, become
hopeless, seized pain and that my life is eliminated. 104.

Will my son, made an unfortunate, whose happiness, by the father, is
sorrow and tears, it did not prove minimal joy of loving mother who
lost presto? 105.

After brief silence, again hear the groans of the tethered, saying:
Oh, Laura, my wishes of happiness, good-bye I give from the heart
of misfortune!

106.

Be bienandanza for you all, in the presence of that promise is not
your husband, and not you threw himself from the path where your
lover despeñó mocked and forgotten. 107.

While you were inhumane and deceptive, you will be provided
north of my desires, and if possible, to bury my bones on you worshiped.
108. Hardly had the this, two lions of outpatient suffocated,
he went with the intent to eat, but they stopped in front of him.
109.

It seems to have mercy, becoming ferocious, who's unhappy trucidarían
image of pain, as if to light up listen to not ceased to sob. 110.

What would, perhaps, linked this, now that you are facing two beasts,
whose teeth and claws can only offer death horrible?

111. Nothing can tell ya, my tears run, mutes my tongue narrator,
my heart felt fatigue mercy blocked by meager sum of torture. 112.
What does not hurt sensitive soul of the precarious situation of
handcuffed, seat of sorrows, and yet seeing that your flesh and bones
deshebrarían? 113.

Believing, then, this height of bitterness that his life had already
transferred the line, felt a fever in my heart, and lost his voice,
which was almost unintelligible moans these: 114.

Goodbye, Albania, the homeland of cruel and perfidious , embaidores
and ferocious, I, your Savior, who gave death, I feel for you
endless mercy. 115.

Do not splashing inside your walls bites the sword of the enemy we
should, that you like to put forward the right hand of your
stronghold that was sure!

116. Basque gave you a promise to make holocaust of their blood, and
preferably beasts shed that had been given you any cause. 117.
From my childhood aspired to anything not in your gift and defense.
Do not you tried to submit your times and my arm was the one who
made you free?

118. affront death was Your cynical award, but you'll be grateful if,
estimation, and not revenge, you cover with the beloved for
whom I mourn and was unfaithful. 119.

Aquella my Laura unbootable or death of my very loyal chest goodbye
, my homeland, goodbye, dear, love that never lied deviates from
the mind. 120.

Fatherland soulless, dear inconstant, cruel Adolfo, Laura trickster,
DELIVERY win today and the joy that your wishes will be fulfilled.
121 .

I already have to face the most harrowing sort of cruel death, and
will fill your perversity and my misfortunes. 122. Infeliz ¡Me!
With that, oh, Laura!

So will die without being loved by you already?

Bitterness of bitterness, who will do me memory? 123. With that, to
my misfortune, you will not have to tear Miajadas • When you rest
in the nothing, I would not devote any memory?

124. These thoughts kill me, corrosive and, my own tears, and my
heart, derrítete; opens, my soul, and leaves the eye, Fall, drops
of my blood to obstinacy. 125. Having made peace with the pain from
this torment forget my beloved; llórese, not my life, but too late
for love. 126. For these anxieties dismay, could not suppress the
warrior's compassion, and ran after the voice searches, its way
through the steel. 127.

The crugía dense thicket of sharp blows to the steel, giving no
respite to give the Moor where the moans were coming. 128.

As the eye was the sun in its career in the West, when found
the whereabouts of the mooring, so no luck. 129. When he came close
and reached the view that their close ties penalties, lost
consciousness and slipped tears, body and heart of prisoners pity.
130. time was left and no speech, the breath that kept him away, and
would adormecérsele, compassion, blood, not for the wild lions
that threatened to walk away. 131. harassed by hunger and morning
eater, charged viciously , inmisericordia, ready teeth and sharp
claws just to, for one, give the tied zarpazo. 132. spiky hair,
tail irguieron terror instilled by the wildness and cruelty of his
catadura, which crugiendo Furia teeth. 133. steeper and prepared
the body strapped nails butchers, iban paw to lend and when Mars
went through the new land. 134. tajos harassment of the two lions,
a snake like Apollo python, [17] no pit was not made of flesh and
probadísimo shear steel. 135.

When the right hand argued deadly, and with the left stop the
beatings, the Lions lost spirited wisdom, which, moments later,
lying dead. 136.

When he won the good warrior their enemies, ferocious beasts, with
tears in her eyes off the bonds of infelicísimo that had lost
consciousness. 137. Possessed of sympathy when the spirit saw the
blood gush from the stigmas, lost the patience to want to undo quickly
entangled coils the rope. 138. Colocóse therefore fofo beside the
body, which fresh corpse, and a slit cut the rope with the sword
of evil proven resistance. 139.

He sat down and placed in your lap, desperate, the body, that he
was overwhelmed breath; passed hands pressed to his face and chest,
that his desire was to recover consciousness. 140.

By looking at the demise of the landmark in his lap so soliviantado,
peering, causing surprise and the beauty of the note as an end. 141.
also amazed at the beautiful continent and its close resemblance
to the valiant warrior, and feel the charm out eyes, deep shame if
not prevent it. 142. Conturbadísimo was his spirit, but when the
move seemed serene in his lap, so downcast, despertándosele dormant
life. 143.

The head shot, opened his eyes, a sigh was his first greeting to
the clarity, followed by a groan that it was a pity: where are
you, Laura, in this trance?

144. Come, my beloved, and my imprisonment undone, if I die,
remember me, and again close our eyes, vanishing complaints.

Whether it was in the arms feared you. 145.

To prevent recayese and finally shut down and the little encouragement.
I hope that the spirit of genuine self-soothe in his lap, a
compendium of spite. 146.

When he returned to open the eyes of awe llenóse, how?

¡Unholy luck! In the hands of the Moor! Blandujo wanted to steal the
body, and when you do not succeed, just grit your teeth. 147.

Then the warrior who has no fear: Serenade and fun mood today are
free from harm, which protects you holds you in his arms. 148.

If you basco my application, and poisonous to your heart not be a
Christian, I am not ashamed acorrerte in such a hurry that trance
lucky you depart. 149.

Tu te reveals Albanian costume, and the Persian mine, you're my
enemy and my sect, [18] but today is your misfortune comrades again.
150.'

m Moro but cheep, subject to the mandates of heaven, and is engraved
in my heart to share the natural law the misfortune of others. 151.

What could I do, I heard your complaints conturban, tied, and ready
to receive two fierce lions zarpazos filled with cruelty? 152.
Suspiro which was in the lap, and responded by requesting moro
If I'd undocking from the trunk of the tree, and be buried in the
belly of Leon. 153. alleviated chest and in this, and yet show
mortal enemy, did not allow pieces of my body, life and suffering.
154. Your crave no mercy, I kill that mercy is the desire not to
suffer the torments know that death is the life I want. 155.
Here is a cry of sympathy escaped the devout Muslim and tears
in response to descuajó heard the words, resting exhausted. 156.

At the end, both were silent, unable to overcome the attacks
of pain, alienated mood, until he hid and slept in his bed Febo
gold. 157.

When he noticed that the devout Muslim clearly weak in the forest
is cleared tracked the footprints where he walked, and he had led
in the arms where appropriate. 158. Wherever the mainland first,
when he entered the forest, the fierce Moor, and in a wide, clean
rock , lovingly recompuso that it trujo. 159. He took some of its
provisions to eat, affectionately called just to prove to the
bite, but he refused, it was persuaded by soft and flattering
words. 160.

Some encouragement came, because hunger and not harassed, and
accidentally fell asleep on the lap of bizarre warrior.
161.

This did not close his eyes all night and watch pasóla in awake,
fearing that he undertook Sañudo beasts in the forest ramp. 162 .
Each light waking him from sleep, troubled burst into complaints
that which darts stuck in his chest and pious benefactor of the
Moor. 163.

In the morning was fast asleep, and rested a bit of their effort,
until Aurora impelió the shadows, [19] do not let groan nor complaint.
164. that was the case five reconciled and turned it sorrows ease
aching heart, becoming the new forces battered body. 165.

Where, in the world by spreading their golden hair the cheerful sun,
slowly joined to heaven and thanked the forces recovered the body.
166. What would be the joy of ínclito warrior who suddenly embraced
the circuit, and if before, of piety, he gushed tears today of
joy, he ran in spurts. 167.

My words are not enough to tell how great was the gratitude of
the wretched, and not the sorrow for her love without luck, all
the joy had vanished. 168. The penalty love born, even escaping
from the chest, ready again, and even more viciously. 169.

So, just managed to touch the joy membrane afflicted heart, the
anguish threw, dart and then drive. 170. Apesaramientos again
tightened his chest (the yoke is love Recio to bear), and if you
do not dwell in Persia consoles of fixed breath would have been ido.
171. I record my appreciation, (said to the Persian escuchimizado
Duke), desire to know the source of your trouble, if there is a
remedy, apply it. 172. Then the circuit that not only the source of
my suffering I have, but a lifetime since I was born, to fulfill
your desires and pray. 173. They sat, side by side at the foot of
the tree, the pious Muslim apesarado and then told, bypassing
the tears, his whole life to fall into unparalleled captivity. 174.
In a duchy of the kingdom of Albania, where I saw the first light,
my debt is to be received from the Duke Briseo Woe!

my father loved. 175. Now you're in that quiet home in the presence
of my mother idolatrada, Princess Floresca, your beloved wife, who
gets tears scalding my face. 176. Why, I saw the light in Albania,
my homeland father, and not in Crotone, [20] bustling city and land
of my mother? So my life was not so worked. 177. The duke my father
was a private consultant Linceo king in any business, [21] of the
second hierarch whole kingdom, and Imam of love of the people. 178.
In prudence, it was a model for all, and in value, the head of the
city, incomparable to learn to love their children, guide them
and teach them their duties. 179. I hallucinations, even now, the
wildcard of my loving father, creature and when it was carrying arms,
"Florante, my singular flower." 180. This is my name as a child
and that mother and father raised me, that says either nickname
"sollozante" and "narrowed by misfortune." 181.

All of my childhood no longer relate to assert nothing has happened,
but as a child was about to be caught by the claws of a vulture, a
bird of prey. [22] 182. My mother said, who was sleeping in the
fifth to gave the hill, entered the bird which reached smell of
dead animals, up to three miles away. 183. For the cries of my
mother idolatrada, my cousin came in from Epirus, on behalf Menalipo,
carrying arrow shot, and the bird died instantly. 184. One day
I started to walk, playing in the middle of the room, entered a hawk
and quickly caught with the jaws [23] the cupidillo diamond adorned
my chest. [24] 185. When the top nine years, my favorite was the fun
collado the arrows in the quiver and the bow on my lap, arrows to
kill animals and birds. 186.

The morning when the son began to seek their busy sun rays, [25] I
entertainment near the forest with a board of cronies. 187.
To get the height in the face of Phoebus, impossible to look at
milestone, reflecting the joy, offering a generous solanera. 188.
"No doubt she did; but we must not take advantage of her
consideration.  Reading is her one great resource, and we must so
contrive that your studies shall not interfere with it."

He waited for some word of regret, but none came; and he was obliged
to add, "I must deprive you of the books for the present, for she
must not be kept waiting any longer; but I will see about getting
them for you in some other way.  I must take the box to the station
in the dog-cart."  He went without a word from her.  It was an
entirely new light to her that her self-improvement could possibly
be otherwise than the first object with everyone.  At home, father
and mother told one another complacently what Cecil was reading, and
never dreamt of obstructing the virtuous action.  Were her studies
to be sacrificed to an old woman's taste for novels?

Cecil had that pertinacity of nature that is stimulated to
resistance by opposition; and she thought of the Egyptian campaign,
and her desire to understand the siege of Acre.  Then she
recollected that Miss Vivian had spoken of reading the book, and
this decided her.  "I'll go to Sirenwood, look at it, and order it.
No one can expect me to submit to have no friends abroad nor books
at home.  Besides, it is all some foolish old family feud; and what
a noble thing it will be for my resolution and independence to force
the two parties to heal the breach, and bridge it over by giving
Miss Vivian to Frank."

In this mood she rang the bell, and ordered her horses; not however
till she had reason to believe the dog-cart on the way down the
avenue.  As she came down in her habit, she was met by Frank,
returning from his tutor.

"Have I made a mistake, Cecil!  I thought we were to go out together
this afternoon!"

"Yes; but Raymond was wanted at Willansborough, and I am going to
lunch at Sirenwood.  I want to borrow a book."

"Oh, very well, I'll come, if you don't mind.  Sir Harry asked me to
drop in and look at his dogs."

This was irresistible; and Frank decided on riding the groom's
horse, and leaving him to conduct Anne to the rendezvous in the
afternoon--for Charlie had been at Sandhurst for the last week--
running in first to impart the change of scheme to her, as she was
performing her daily task of reading to his mother.

He did so thus:  "I say, Anne, Cecil wants to go to Sirenwood first
to get a book, so Lee will bring you to meet us at the Beeches at
2.30."

"Are you going to luncheon at Sirenwood?" asked Mrs. Poynsett.

"Yes; Cecil wants to go," said the dutiful younger brother.

"I wish you would ask Cecil to come in.  Raymond put himself into
such a state of mind at finding me reading Madame de Sevigne, that I
am afraid he carried off her books summarily, though I told him I
was glad of a little space for my old favourites."

Cecil was, however, mounted by the time Frank came out, and they
cantered away together, reaching the portico of Sirenwood in about
twenty minutes.

Cecil had never been in the house before, having only left her card,
though she had often met the sisters.  She found herself in a
carpeted hall, like a supplementary sitting-room, where two
gentlemen had been leaning over the wide hearth.  One, a handsome
benignant-looking old man, with a ruddy face and abundant white
whiskers, came forward with a hearty greeting.  "Ah! young Mrs.
Poynsett!  Delighted to see you!--Frank Charnock, you're come in
good time; we are just going down to see the puppies before
luncheon.  Only I'll take Mrs. Poynsett to the ladies first.
Duncombe, you don't know Mrs. Raymond Poynsett--one must not say
senior bride, but the senior's bride.  Is that right?"

"No papa," said a bright voice from the stairs, "you haven't it at
all right; Mrs. Charnock Poynsett, if you please--isn't it?"

"I believe so," replied Cecil.  "Charnock always seems my right
name."

"And you have all the right to retain it that Mrs. Poynsett had to
keep hers," said Lady Tyrrell, as they went up-stairs to her
bedroom.  "How is she?"

"As usual, thank you; always on the sofa."

"But managing everything from it?"

"Oh, yes."

"Never was there such a set of devoted sons, models for the
neighbourhood."

Cecil felt a sense of something chiming in with her sources of
vexation, but she only answered, "They are passionately fond of
her."

"Talk of despotism!  Commend me to an invalid!  Ah! how delightfully
you contrive to keep your hair in order!  I am always scolding
Lenore for coming in dishevelled, and you look so fresh and compact!
Here is my sanctum.  You'll find Mrs. Duncombe there.  She drove
over in the drag with her husband on their way to Backsworth.  I am
so glad you came, there is so much to talk over."

"If our gentlemen will give us time," said Mrs. Duncombe; "but I am
afraid your senator will not be as much absorbed in the dogs as my
captain."

"I did not come with my husband," said Cecil; "he is gone to
Willansborough to meet the architect."

"Ah, about the new buildings.  I do hope and trust the opportunity
will not be wasted, and that the drainage will be provided for."

"You are longing to have a voice there," said Lady Tyrrell,
laughing.

"I am.  It is pre-eminently a woman's question, and this is a great
opportunity.  I shall talk to every one.  Little Pettitt, the hair-
dresser, has some ground there, and he is the most intelligent of
the tradesmen.  I gave him one of those excellent little hand-bills,
put forth by the Social Science Committee, on sanitary arrangements.
I thought of asking you to join us in ordering some down, and never
letting a woman leave our work-room without one."

"You couldn't do better, I am sure," said Lady Tyrrell; "only,
what's the use of preaching to the poor creatures to live in good
houses, when their landlords won't build them, and they must live
somewhere?"

"Make them coerce the landlords," said Mrs. Duncombe; "that's the
only way.  Upheave the masses from beneath."

"But that's an earthquake," said Cecil.

"Earthquakes are sometimes wholesome."

"But the process is not so agreeable that we had not rather avert
it," said Lady Tyrrell.

"All ours at Dunstone are model cottages," said Cecil; "it is my
father's great hobby."

"Squires' hobbies are generally like the silver trough the lady gave
her sow," said Mrs. Duncombe; "they come before the poor are
prepared, and with a spice of the autocrat."

"Come, I won't have you shock Mrs. Charnock Poynsett," said Lady
Tyrrell.  "You illogical woman!  The poor are to demand better
houses, and the squires are not to build them!"

"The poor are to be fitly housed, as a matter of right, and from
their own sense of self-respect," returned Mrs. Duncombe; "not a few
favourites, who will endure dictation, picked out for the model
cottage.  It is the hobby system against which I protest."

"Without quite knowing what was conveyed by it in this instance?"
said Lady Tyrrell.  "I am sure there is nothing I wish more than
that we had any power of improvement of the cottages here; but
influence is our only weapon."

"By the bye, Mrs. Poynsett," continued Mrs. Duncombe, "will you give
a hint to Mrs. Miles Charnock that it will never do to preach to the
women at the working-room?  I don't mean holding forth," she added,
seeing Cecil's look of amazement; "but improving the occasion,
talking piously, giving tracts, and so forth."

"I thought you gave sanitary tracts!" said Lady Tyrrell.

"That is quite different."

"I doubt whether the women would see the distinction.  A little book
_is_ a tract to them."

"I would abstain rather than let our work get a goody reputation for
indoctrinating sectarianism.  It would be all up with us; we might
as well keep a charity school."

"I don't think the women dislike it," said Cecil.

"Most likely they think it the correct thing, the grain which they
must swallow with our benefits; but for that very reason it injures
the whole tone, and prevents them learning independence.  Put it in
that light; I know you can."

"I don't think Anne would understand," said Cecil, somewhat
flattered.

"I doubt whether there are three women in the neighbourhood who
would," said Lady Tyrrell.

"People always think charity--how I hate the word!--a means of
forcing their own tenets down the throats of the poor," said Mrs.
Duncombe.  "And certainly this neighbourhood is as narrow as any I
ever saw.  Nobody but you and--shall I say the present company?--has
any ideas.  I wonder how they will receive Clio Tallboys and her
husband?"

"Ah! you have not heard about them," said Lady Tyrrell.  "Most
delightful people, whom Mrs. Duncombe met on the Righi.  He is a
Cambridge professor."

"Taillebois--I don't remember the name," said Cecil, "and we know a
great many Cambridge men.  We went to a Commencement there."

"Oh, not Cambridge on the Cam! the American Cambridge," said Mrs.
Duncombe.  "He is a quiet, inoffensive man, great on political
economy; but his wife is the character.  Wonderfully brilliant and
original, and such a lecturer!"

"Ladies' lectures _would_ startle the natives," said Lady Tyrrell.

"Besides, the town-hall is lacking," said Mrs. Duncombe; "but when
the Tallboys come we might arrange a succession of soirees, where
she might gather her audience."

"But where?" said Lady Tyrrell.  "It would be great fun, and you
might reckon on me; but where else?  Mrs. Charnock Poynsett has to
think of la belle mere."

"She has given up the management of all matters of society to me,"
said Cecil with dignity; "you may reckon on me."

"No hope of the Bowaters, of course," said Mrs. Duncombe.

"Miss Bowater is coming to stay with us," volunteered Cecil.

"To be near that unlucky Life Guardsman manque," said Mrs. Duncombe.

"Come, I'll not have honest Herbert abused," said the other lady.
"He is the only one of the Bowaters who has any go in him."

"More's the pity, if he can't use it.  Is his sister coming to help
the Reverend Julius to drill him?"

"On Mrs. Poynsett's account too, I fancy," said Lady Tyrrell; "Jenny
Bowater is her amateur companion.  Indeed, I believe it was no
slight disappointment that her sons' appreciation did not quite
reach the pitch of the mother's."

"Indeed!" asked Mrs. Duncombe; "I thought there had been a foolish
affair with poor young Douglas."

"Cela n'empeche pas.  By the bye, have you finished Fleurange?"

"Oh, you are quite welcome to it.  It is quite as goody as an
English tale in one volume."

This opened the way to Cecil's desire to borrow Lanfrey, not
concealing the reason why; and she was gratified by the full
sympathy of both ladies, who invited her in self-defence to join in
their subscription to Rolandi, to which she eagerly agreed, and
would have paid her subscription at once if there had not been a
term to be finished off first.

The gong summoned them to luncheon, and likewise brought down Miss
Vivian, who shook hands rather stiffly, and wore a cold, grave
manner that did not sit badly on her handsome classical features.
The countenance was very fine, but of the style to which early youth
is less favourable than a more mature development; and she was less
universally admired than was her sister.  Her dress was a dark
maroon merino, hanging in simple, long, straight folds, and there
was as little distortion in her coiffure as the most moderate
compliance with fashion permitted; and this, with a high-bred,
distinguished deportment, gave an air almost of stern severity.
This deepened rather than relaxed at the greeting from Frank--who,
poor fellow! had an uncontrollably wistful eager look in his face, a
sort of shy entreaty, and was under an incapacity of keeping up a
conversation with anybody else, while trying to catch the least word
of hers.

She, however, seemed to have more eyes and ears for her father than
for any one else, and he evidently viewed her as the darling and
treasure of his life.  His first question, after performing the
duties of a host, was, "Well, my little Lenore, what have you been
doing?"

"The old story, papa," raising her clear, sweet voice to reach his
rather deaf ears.

"Got on with your drawing?--The child is competing with a club, you
must know."

"Not exactly, papa:  it is only a little society that was set on
foot at Rockpier to help us to improve ourselves."

"What is your subject this month?" Frank asked.

"A branch of blackberries," she answered briefly.

"Ah!" said Lady Tyrrell, "I saw your pupil bringing in a delicious
festoon--all black and red fruit and crimson and purple leaves.  He
is really a boy of taste; I think he will do you credit."

"The new Joshua Reynolds," said Frank, glad of an excuse to turn
towards Eleonora.  "Rosamond mentioned her discovery."

"You might have seen him just now figuring as Buttons," said Lady
Tyrrell.  "Degradation of art, is it not?  But it was the only way
to save it.  Lenore is teaching him; and if his talent prove worth
it we may do something with him.  Any way, the produce of native
genius will be grand material for the bazaar."

"Card-board prettinesses!" said Mrs. Duncombe; "you spoil him with
them; but that you'll do any way--make him fit for nothing but a
flunkey."

"Unappreciated zeal!" said Lady Tyrrell, glancing at her sister, who
flushed a little, and looked the more grave.

"Eh, Lenore," said her father, "wasn't it to please you that Camilla
made me take your pet to make havoc of my glasses?"

"You meant it so, dear papa," said Eleonora, calling up a smile that
satisfied the old gentleman.  "It was very kind in you."

Fresh subjects were started, and on all the talk was lively and
pleasant, and fascinated Cecil, not from any reminiscence of
Dunstone--for indeed nothing could be more unlike the tone that
prevailed there:  but because it was so different from that of
Compton Poynsett, drifting on so unrestrainedly, and touching so
lightly on all topics.

By the close of the meal, rain had set in, evidently for the
afternoon.  Frank offered to ride home, and send the carriage for
Cecil; but the Duncombes proposed to take her and drop her at home;
and to this she consented, rather to Frank's dismay, as he thought
of their coach appearing at his mother's door.

Lady Tyrrell took her up to resume her hat; and on the way, moved by
distaste to her double surname, and drawn on by a fresh access of
intimacy, she begged to be called Cecil--a privilege of which she
had been chary even in her maiden days; but the caressing manner had
won her heart, and spirit of opposition to the discouragement at
home did the rest.

The request was reciprocated with that pensive look which was so
touching.  "I used to be Camilla to all the neighbourhood, and here
I find myself--miles'--no, leagues further off--banished to
Siberia."

"How unjust and unkind!" cried Cecil.

"My dear, you have yet to learn the gentle uncharitableness of
prejudice.  It is the prevailing notion that my married life was a
career of dissipation.  Ah! if they only knew!"

"The drag is round," said Mrs. Duncombe's voice at the door, in all
its decisive abruptness, making both start.

"Just ready," called Lady Tyrrell; adding, in a lower tone, "Ah! she
is startling, but she is genuine!  And one must take new friends
when the old are chilly.  She is the only one--"

Cecil's kiss was more hearty than any she had given at Compton, and
she descended; but just as she came to the door, and was only
delaying while Frank and Captain Duncombe were discussing the merits
of the four horses, the Compton carriage appeared in the approach,
and Raymond's head within.  Lady Tyrrell looked at Cecil, and saw it
was safe to make a little gesture with the white skin of her fair
brow, expressing unutterable things.

Mrs. Duncombe lost no time in asking if any steps were being taken
for improving the drainage; to which Raymond replied, "No, that was
not the business in hand.  This was the architecture of the town-
hall."

"Splendour of municipality above, and fever festering below," said
Mrs. Duncombe.

"Wilsborough is not unhealthy," said Raymond.

She laughed ironically.

"The corporation have been told that they have an opportunity," said
Raymond; "but it takes long to prepare people's minds to believe in
the expedience of such measures.  If Whitlock could be elected mayor
there would be some chance, but I am afraid they are sure to take
Truelove; and as things are at Wilsborough, we must move all at once
or not at all.  Individual attempts would do more harm than good."

"Ah! you fear for your seat!" said the plain-spoken lady.

Raymond only chose to answer by a laugh, and would not pursue the
subject so treated.  He was politeness itself to all; but he
withstood Lady Tyrrell's earnest entreaties to come in and see some
Florentine photographs, growing stiffer and graver each moment,
while his wife waxed more wrathful at the treatment which she knew
was wounding her friend, and began almost to glory in having
incurred his displeasure herself.  Indeed, this feeling caused the
exchange of another kiss between the ladies before Sir Harry handed
Cecil into the carriage, and Raymond took the yellow paper books
that were held out to her.

Looking at the title as they drove off, he said quietly, "I did not
mean to deprive you, Cecil; I had ordered Lanfrey from Bennet for
you."

She was somewhat abashed, but was excited enough to answer, "Thank
you.  I am going to join Lady Tyrrell and Mrs. Duncombe in a
subscription to Rolandi's."

He started, and after a pause of a few moments said gently, "Are you
sure that Mr. and Mrs. Charnock would like to trust your choice of
foreign books to Mrs. Duncombe?"

Taking no notice of the point of this question, she replied, "If it
is an object to exchange books at home faster than I can read them
properly, I must look for a supply elsewhere."

"You had better subscribe alone," he replied, still without manifest
provocation.

"That would be uncivil now."

"I take that upon myself."

Wherewith there came a silence; while Cecil swelled as she thought
of the prejudice against her friend, and Raymond revolved all he had
ever heard about creatures he knew so little as women, to enable him
to guess how to deal with this one.  How reprove so as not to make
it worse?  Ought not his silent displeasure to suffice?  And in such
musings the carriage reached home.

It had been an untoward day.  He had been striving hard against the
stream at Willansborough.  The drainage was not only scouted as an
absurd, unreasonable, and expensive fancy, but the architect whom he
had recommended, in the hope that he would insist on ground-work
which might bring on the improvement, had been rejected in favour of
a kinsman of Mr. Briggs, the out-going mayor, a youth of the lower
walk of the profession--not the scholar and gentleman he had
desired, for the tradesman intellect fancied such a person would be
expensive and unmanageable.

Twin plans for church and town-hall had been produced, which to
Raymond's taste savoured of the gimcrack style, but which infinitely
delighted all the corporation; and where he was the only cultivated
gentleman, except the timid Vicar, his reasonings were all in vain.
The plan was accepted for the town-hall, and the specifications were
ordered to be made out for competition, and a rate decided on.  The
church was to wait for subscription and bazaar; the drains, for
reason in Wil'sbro', or for the hope of the mayoralty of Mr.
Whitlock, a very intelligent and superior linendraper.


CHAPTER XI
Rosamond's Apologue


Pray, sir, do you laugh at me?--Title of Old Caricature

Was Cecil's allegiance to Dunstone, or was it to the heiress of
Dunstone?  Tests of allegiance consist in very small matters, and it
is not always easy to see the turning-point.  Now Cecil had always
stood on a pinnacle at Dunstone, and she had found neither its
claims nor her own recognized at Compton.  One kind of allegiance
would have remained on the level, and retained the same standard,
whether accepted or not.  Another would climb on any pinnacle that
any one would erect for the purpose, and become alienated from
whatever interfered with such eminence.

So as nobody seemed so willing to own Cecil's claims to county
supremacy as Lady Tyrrell, her bias was all towards Sirenwood; and
whereas such practices as prevailed at Dunstone evidently were
viewed as obsolete and narrow by these new friends, Cecil was
willing to prove herself superior to them, and was far more
irritated than convinced when her husband appealed to her former
habits.

The separation of the welfare of body and soul had never occurred to
the beneficence of Dunstone, and it cost Cecil a qualm to accept it;
but she could not be a goody in the eyes of Sirenwood; and besides,
she was reading some contemporary literature, which made it plain
that any religious instruction was a most unjustifiable interference
with the great law, "Am I my brother's keeper?" and so, when she met
Anne with a handful of texts neatly written out in printing letters,
she administered her warning.

Cecil and Anne had become allies to a certain extent, chiefly
through their joint disapproval of Rosamond, not to say of Julius;
and the order was so amazing that Anne did not at first take it in;
and when she understood that all mention of religion was forbidden,
she said, "I do not think I ought to yield in this."

"Surely," said Cecil, "there is no connection between piety and
cutting out."

"I don't know," said Anne; "but it does not seem to me to be right
to go on with a work where my Master's Name is forbidden."

"Religion ought never to be obtruded," said Cecil.

"The Word ought to flavour everything, in season or out of season,"
said Anne, thoughtfully.

"Oh! that's impossible.  It's your narrow view.  If you thrust
preaching into everything, we can never work together."

"Oh, then," said Anne, quickly, "I must give it up!"  And she turned
away with a rapid step, to carry her texts back to her room.

"Anne!" called Cecil, "I did not mean _that_!"

Anne paused for a moment, looked over the baluster, and repeated
firmly, "No, Cecil; it would be denying Christ to work where His
Name is forbidden."

Perhaps there was something in the elevation and the carved rail
that gave the idea of a pulpit, for Cecil felt as if she was being
preached at, and turned her back, indignant and vexed at what she
had by no means intended to incur--the loss of such a useful
assistant as she found in Anne.

"Such nonsense!" she said to herself, as she crossed the hall alone,
there meeting with Rosamond, equipped for the village.  "Is not Anne
going to-day?" she said, as she saw the pony-carriage at the door.

"No.  It is so vexatious.  She is so determined upon preaching to
the women, that I have been obliged to put a stop to it."

"Indeed!  I should not have thought it of poor Anne; but no one can
tell what those semi-dissenters think right."

"When she declared she ought to do it in season or out of season,
what was one to do?" said Cecil.

"I thought that was for clergymen," said Rosamond, hitting the right
nail on the head in her ignorance, as so often happened.

"She sees no difference," said Cecil.  "Shall I drive you down?" she
added graciously, according to the fashion of uniting with one
sister-in-law against the other; and Rosamond not only accepted, but
asked to be taken on to Willansborough, to buy a birthday present
for her brother Terry, get stamps for an Indian letter, and perform
a dozen more commissions that seemed to arise in her mind with the
opportunity.  Her two brothers were to spend the Christmas holidays
with her, and she was in high spirits, and so communicative about
them that she hardly observed how little interest Cecil took in
Terry's achievements.

"Who is that," she presently asked, "with those red-haired children?
It looked like Miss Vivian's figure."

"I believe it was.  Julius and I often see her walking about the
lanes; but she passes like--like a fire-flaught, whatever that is--
just bows, and hardly ever speaks."

"She is a strange girl," said Cecil.  "Lady Tyrrell says she cannot
draw her into any of her interests, but she will go her own way."

"Like poor Anne?"

"No, not out of mere moping and want of intellect, like Anne.  But
Lady Tyrrell says she feels for her; she was brought a great deal
too forward, and was made quite mistress of the house at Rockpier,
being her father's darling and all, and now it is trying to her,
though it is quite wholesome, to be in her proper place.  It is a
pity she is so bitter over it, and flies off her own way."

"That boy!" said Rosamond; "I hope she does something for his good."

"She teaches him, I believe; but there's another instance of her
strange ways.  She was absolutely vexed when Lady Tyrrell took him
into the house, though he was her protege, only because it was not
done in _her_ way.  It is a great trial to Camilla."

"I could fancy a reason for that," said Rosamond.  "Julius does not
like the tone of the household at all."  But she added hastily, "Who
could those children be?  They did not look _quite_ like poor
children."

"Ah! she is always taking up with some odd person in her own away,"
said Cecil.  "But here we are.  Will you drive on to the hotel, or
get out here?"

When, at the end of two hours, the sisters-in-law met at the work-
room, and Rosamond had taken a survey of the row of needle-women,
coming up one by one to give their work, be paid and dismissed,
there was a look of weariness and vexation on Cecil's face.  She had
found it less easy to keep order and hinder gossip, and had hardly
known how to answer when that kind lady, Mrs. Miles Charnock, had
been asked after; but she would have scorned to allow that she had
missed her assistant, and only politely asked how Rosamond had sped.

"Oh! excellently.  People were so well advised as to be out, so I
paid off all my calls."

"You did not return your calls without Julius?"

"There's nothing he hates so much.  I would not have dragged him
with me on any account."

"I think it is due to one's self."

"Ah! but then I don't care what is due to myself.  I saw a friend of
yours, Cecil."

"Who?"

"Mrs. Duncombe," said Rosamond.  "I went to Pettitt's--the little
perfumer, you know, that Julius did so much for at the fire; and
there she was, leaning on the counter, haranguing him confidentially
upon setting an example with sanatory measures."

"Sanitary," corrected Cecil; "sanitas is health, sano to cure.
People never know the difference."

"Certainly I don't," said Rosamond.  "It must be microscopic!"

"Only it shows the difference between culture and the reverse," said
Cecil.

"Well, you know, I'm the reverse," said Rosamond, leaning sleepily
back, and becoming silent; but Cecil was too anxious for
intelligence to let her rest, and asked on what Mrs. Duncombe was
saying.

"I am not quite sure--she was stirring up his public spirit, I
think, about the drainage; and they were both of them deploring the
slackness and insensibility of the corporation, and canvassing for
Mr. Whitlock, as I believe.  It struck me as a funny subject for a
lady, but I believe she does not stick at trifles."

"No real work can be carried out by those who do," said Cecil.

"Oh!" added Rosamond, "I met Mrs. and Miss Bowater, and they desired
me to say that Jenny can't come till the dinner-party on the 20th,
and then they will leave her."

"How cool to send a message instead of writing!"

"Oh! she has always been like one of themselves, like a sister to
them all."

"I can't bear that sort of people."

"What sort?"

"Who worm themselves in."

"Miss Bowater could have no occasion for worming.  They must be
quite on equal terms."

"At any rate, she was only engaged to their poor relation."

"What poor relation?  Tell me!  Who told you?"

"Raymond.  It was a young attorney--a kind of cousin of the Poynsett
side, named Douglas."

"What?  There's a cross in the churchyard to Elizabeth Douglas,
daughter of Francis Poynsett, and wife of James Douglas, and at the
bottom another inscription to Archibald Douglas, her son, lost in
the Hippolyta."

"Yes, that must be the man.  He was flying from England, having been
suspected of some embezzlement."

"Indeed!  And was Jenny engaged to him?  Julius told me that Mrs.
Douglas had been his mother's dearest friend, and that this Archie
had been brought up with them, but he did not say any more."

"Perhaps he did not like having had a cousin in an attorney's
office.  I am sure I had no notion of such a thing."

Rosamond laughed till she was exhausted at the notion of Julius's
sharing the fastidious objections she heard in Cecil's voice; and
then, struck by the sadness of the story, she cried, "And that makes
them all so fond of Miss Bowater.  Poor girl, what must she not have
gone through!  And yet how cheerful she does look!"

"People say," proceeded Cecil, unable to resist the impulse to
acquire a partaker in her half-jealous aversion, "that it was a
great disappointment that Mrs. Poynsett could not make her sons like
her as much as she did herself."

"Oh!" cried Rosamond, "how little peace we should have if we always
heeded what people say!"

"People that know," persisted Cecil.

"Not very wise or very kind people to say so," quoth Rosamond;
"though, by the bye, the intended sting is happily lost, considering
that it lies among five."

"Why should you assume a sting?"

"Because I see you are stung, and want to sting me," said Rosamond,
in so merry a tone that the earnestness was disguised.

"I!  I'm not stung!  What Mrs. Poynsett or Miss Bowater may have
schemed is nothing to me," said Cecil, with all her childish
dignity.

"People talk of Irish imagination," said Rosamond in her lazy
meditative tone.

"Well?" demanded Cecil, sharply.

"Only it is not _my_ Irish imagination that has devised this
dreadful picture of the artful Jenny and Mrs. Poynsett spinning
their toils to entrap the whole five brothers.  Come, Cecil, take my
advice and put it out of your head.  Suppose it were true, small
blame to Mrs. Poynsett."

"What do you mean?" said Cecil, in a voice of hurt dignity.

"I may mean myself."  And Rosamond's peal of merry laughter was most
amazing and inexplicable to her companion, who was not sure that she
was not presuming to laugh at her.

There was a silence, broken at last by Rosamond.  "Cecil, I have
been tumbled about the world a good deal more than you have, and I
never found that one got any good by disregarding the warnings of
the natives.  There's an immense deal in the cat and the cock."

"I do not understand, said Cecil.

Whereupon Rosamond, in a voice as if she were telling the story to a
small child, began:  "Once upon a time there was a wee bit
mousiekie, that lived in Giberatie O--that trotted out of her hole
upon an exploring expedition.  By and by she came scuttling back in
a state of great trepidation--in fact, horribly nervous.  'Mother,
mother!' said the little mouse, 'I've seen a hideous monster, with a
red face, and a voice like a trumpet, and a pair of spurs.'"

"Of course, I know that," broke in Cecil.

"Ah, you haven't heard all.  'I should have died of terror,' said
the little mouse, 'only that I saw a dear sweet graceful creature,
with a lovely soft voice, and a smooth coat, and the most beautiful
eyes, and the most exquisite pathetic expression in her smile; and
she held out her velvet paw to me, and said, 'Dear little mousiekie-
pousie, you're the loveliest creature I ever met, quite
unappreciated in these parts.  That horrid old cock is terribly
vulgar and commonplace; and never you believe your mother if she
tells you he is better worth cultivating than one who has such a
deep genuine love and appreciation of all the excellences of all
mice, and of you in particular with your dun fur.'"

Rosamond could not for her very life help putting in that word dun;
and Cecil, who had been driving straight on with her eyes fixed on
her pony's ears, and rather a sullen expression of forced endurance,
faced about.  "What you mean by all this I don't know; but if you
think it applies to me or my friends, you are much mistaken."

"I told you," said Rosamond, with the same languor, looking out
under her half-shut eyes, "that I apply things to myself.  I've met
both sorts in my time."

And silence reigned for the rest of the way.  Cecil had read many
more books, knew much more, and was altogether a far more cultivated
personage than the Lady Rosamond; but she was not half so ready in
catching the import of spoken words; and all this time she was by no
means certain whether all this meant warning or meant mockery,
though either was equally impertinent, and must be met with the same
lady-like indifference, which Cecil trusted that she had never
transgressed.

Neither of them, nor indeed any other living creature, knew of a
little episode which had occurred about eighteen months previously,
when Joanna Bowater had been taking care of Mrs Poynsett during
Raymond's first absence from home after her accident.  Of course he
took her back to Strawyers as soon as he arrived; and about half-
way, after a prolonged and unusual silence, he said, "Jenny, I
believe we know one another's histories pretty well.  It would be a
great happiness and blessing if you could bring yourself to sink the
past so far as to take me, and become indeed my mother's daughter.
Do not answer me in haste.  Think it over, and tell me if it is
possible."

Jenny let him drive on more than a mile before she spoke; and when
she did, the tears stood on her cheek, and it was quite an effort
that her voice was made steady.  "No, Raymond, I am very sorry, but
it will not do.  Two griefs will not make one joy."

"Yes, they would, to my mother."

"Ah! there it lies!  Indeed, Raymond, I do feel for you all so much,
especially your dear mother, that I would bring myself to it, if I
could; but the very thought brings Archie up so vividly before me
that I cannot!  He has almost seemed to be sitting by me all this
time.  It seems as though beginning again would kill my right to
think of him foremost of all."

"I could bear with that and trust to time," said Raymond.  "Think it
over, Jenny.  I will be candid with you.  The old delusion was too
strong for any repetition of that kind, as you may see by the lame
performance I am making now."

Jenny gave a little agitated laugh, and ejaculated, "Dear Raymond!"
then added, "It is not on your account, but mine."

"But," he added, "my marriage is becoming a necessity, if only for
my mother's sake; and you stand far before any other woman with me,
if that would but satisfy you.  I verily believe that in a short
time we should be just as comfortable together as if we could start
with more romance."

"I dare say we should, dear Raymond," said Jenny; "but I cannot feel
that it is the right thing, while I have not _that_ feeling for you
which overpowers everything else; it seems to me that I ought not to
give up my place at home.  Papa depends on me a good deal, and they
both will want me more and more."

"Less than my mother."

"I don't know; and they are my first duty.  I can always come to
your mother when I am wanted, and I know in your secret soul you
prefer me on those terms."

He made no answer, only when passing the lodge he said, "Will you
consider it a little longer, Jenny?"

But this only resulted in a note:--

"DEAR RAYMOND,--Considering only shows me that I must be Archie
Douglas's now and for ever.  I can't help it.  It is better for
you; for you can find some young girl who can wake your heart
again, as never could be done by your still affectionate J. B."

Raymond and Jenny had met so often since, that the matter was
entirely past, and no one ever guessed it.

At any rate, Rosamond, the most ready to plunge into counsel to
Cecil, was the least likely to have it accepted; Rosamond had
foibles of her own that Cecil knew of, and censured freely enough
within herself.

That never-ending question, whether what became the Colonel's
daughter became the clergyman's wife, would crop up under endless
forms.  Rosamond, in all opinions, was good-natured and easy, and
always for pardon and toleration to an extent that the Compton code
could not understand.  She could not bear that anybody should be
punished or shut out of anything; while there was no denying that,
now the first novelty was passing, she was very lazy as to her
parochial work, and that where her feelings were not stirred she was
of little use.

Julius seemed shamefully tolerant of her omissions, and likewise of
her eagerness for all gaieties.  He would not go himself, would not
accept a dinner invitation for any of the three busy nights of the
week, and refused all those to dances and balls for himself, though
he never hindered Rosamond's going.

She used absolutely to cry with passionate entreaties that he would
relent and come with her, declaring that he was very unkind, he knew
it took away all her pleasure--he was a tyrant, and wanted her not
to go.  And then he smiled, and owned that he hoped some day she
would be tired of it; whereat she raged, and begged him to forbid
her, if he really thought her whole life had been so shocking,
declaring in the same breath that she would never disown her family,
or cast a slur on her mother and sisters.

It always ended in her going, and though never again offending as by
her bridal gown, she seldom failed to scandalize Cecil by an excess
of talking and of waltzing, such as even Raymond regretted, and
which disabled her for a whole day after from all but sofa, sleep,
novels, and yawns.

Was this the person whose advice the discreet heiress of Dunstone
was likely to follow?

It may be mentioned here, among other elements of difficulty, that
Cecil's maid Grindstone was a thorough Dunstonite, who 'kept herself
to herself,' was perfectly irreproachable, lived on terms of distant
civility with the rest of the household, never complained, but
constantly led her young mistress to understand that she was
enduring much for her sake.

Cecil was too well trained, and so was she, for a word of gossip or
censure to pass between them; but the influence was not the less
strong.


CHAPTER XII
Pastoral Visiting


A finger's breadth at hand may mar
A world of light in heaven afar;
A mote eclipse a glorious star,
   An eyelid hide the sky.--KEBLE.

The dinner was over, and Cecil was favouring the audience with a
severely classical piece of music, when, under cover thereof, a low
voice said to Julius, "Now, really and truly, tell me how he is
getting on?"

"Really and truly, Jenny?"

"Well, not as you would tell mamma, for instance; but as you think
in your secret soul."

"I am sorry you think me so duplex."

"Come, you understand how anxious I am about the boy."

"Exactly."  And they both laughed.

"Is that all?" said Joanna Bowater.

"_Really and truly_ it is!  It's still bad. But I want to utilize
my time.

That is me, for example, never came to mind is how much it giebt
faces. It giebt a lot of people but a lot more faces, because
everyone has several. There are people who wear a face for years,
of course, uses it, it is dirty, it breaks in the folds, it
spreads like gloves, one on the journey has taken. They are economical,
simple people, they do not change it, they can not even clean.

It was good enough, they say, and who can they prove the opposite?

Now it asks itself, since they have several faces, what do they do
with the other?

They lift them. Your children will carry them. But it also
happened, so that their dogs out. Why not? Face is face.
Other people incredibly quickly put on their faces, one after another,
and bear it. It seems to them first, they had forever, but they
are hardly forty, there is already the last.

Of course his tragedy.

They are not accustomed to faces to spare, is in its last eight days
through, has holes, is in many places thin as paper, and since then
after the paper published, not the face, and they go with it. But
the woman, the woman she was very into it like that, forward in her
hands. It was at the corner of rue Notre-Dame-des-Champs. I started
to go quietly, and I had seen. If poor people think they should not
interfere. Maybe they have a. The street was empty, its emptiness
bored and moved me to step under his feet and went away with him
around over there and there, like a wooden shoe.

The woman was shocked and stood out from emerging, too fast, too
violently, so that the face in two hands remained.

I could lie to see his hollow form. It cost me indescribable effort,
in these hands to stay and not to look at what they had demolished.
Mir dawned, a face from the inside to see, but I was afraid but am
much more naked before the sore head with no face. I am afraid.

Against the fear you have to do something, even if it has. It
would be very ugly, ill be here, and someone would come to me in
the Hôtel-Dieu to create, then I would certainly die.

This hotel is a pleasant hotel, visit tremendously. It is hardly the
facade of the cathedral of Paris, look no danger of one of
the many cars that as soon as possible on the free plan then it
must go over them.

These are small buses, which are still ringing, and even the Duke of
Sagan would keep his team, if a little dying as it is in their
heads has geradenwegs Hôtel in God to want. Moribund are stubborn,
and Paris falters, when Madame Legrand, brocanteuse from the rue
des Martyrs, after a certain place in the Cité's mileage.

It should be noted that these small cars deuced immensely stimulating
milk have glass windows, behind which is the most splendid agony
before can stand that satisfies the imagination of a concierge. If
you have more imagination and propose them to other directions,
then the conjecture almost unlimited.

But I also have open cabs arriving to see Zeitdroschken with its
open roof, according to the usual taxi drove two francs for the
death hour.

This excellent hotel is very old, already king Clovis times you died
in some beds. Now in 559 beds died. Of course factory. With such
enormous production is the individual's death is not so well
executed, but that is also irrelevant. The mass makes it. Who giebt
still something I can not wait for a death?

Nobody. Even the rich, but which it could make detailed die, start,
careless and indifferent to, the desire to own death, it is increasingly
rare. For a while yet, and he will be just as rare as a separate
life.

God, that's all there. One comes, one finds a life, get ready, one
has only to attract.
Anne was sitting in a corner of the sofa, with a straight back and
weary face, having been driven out into the throng by the old
friends who came to sit with Mrs. Poynsett; but she brightened as
Miss Bowater took a seat beside her, and accepted her inquiries for
Captain Charnock far more graciously than the many which had
preceded them.  Was not her likeness in his album?  And had he not
spoken of her as one whom Anne would like?

Soon Joanna had led her to tell not only of Miles's last letter, but
of those from Glen Fraser, of which she had spoken to no one, under
the impression that nobody cared.  She even spoke of the excellent
farm and homestead which Mr. Van Dorp wanted to sell before going to
the Free State, and which her father thought would exactly suit
Miles.

"Does he mean to settle there?"

"Oh, yes; he promised me to leave the navy and take me home as soon
as this voyage is over," said Anne, eagerly.  "If the Salamanca only
puts in for long enough, he might run up to Glen Fraser, and see
Bocksfeld Stoop, and settle it all at once.  I am sure he would be
delighted with it, and it is only two miles from Mr. Pilgrim's."

"I'm afraid you can never feel this like home," said Jenny.

"Miles wanted me to know his family, and thought I should be useful
to his mother," said Anne; "but she does not want anything I could
do for her.  If she has Raymond, she seems to need nobody else."

"And have you nothing to do?"

"I have letters to write to Miles and to them all at home; and I am
making a whole set of shirts and stockings for papa and the boys--it
will spare mamma and Jeanie, and I have plenty of time."

"Too much, I am afraid!  But Herbert said you were very useful at
the Work Society at Wil'sbro'."

"Not now."

"Indeed!"

"No," in the old cold dry tone.  But while Jenny was doubting
whether to inquire further, innate sympathy conquered, and Anne
added, "I wonder whether I did wrong!"

"As how?" asked Joanna, kindly.

"They said"--she lowered her voice--"I must never speak on religious
subjects."

"How do you mean?  What had you done?"

"One day I found a woman crying because her husband had gone away to
seek work, so I told her my husband was further away and repeated
the texts I like.  She was so much comforted that I printed them on
a card for her."

"Was that all?"

"No; there was another poor dear that was unhappy about her baby;
and when I bade her pray for it, she did not know how, so I had to
tell her a little.  There is one who does know her Saviour, and I
did love to have a few words of peace with her."

"And was that what was objected to?"

"Yes; they said it would change the whole character of the
institution."

"Who did?"

"Cecil--Mrs. Charnock Poynsett.  I think Lady Tyrrell and Mrs.
Duncombe desired her.  I thought it was no place for me where I
might not speak one word for Christ, and I said so; but since I have
wondered whether the old Adam did not speak in me, and I ought to
have gone on."

"My wonder," said Jenny, indignantly, "would be what right they had
to stop you.  This was private interference, not from the Vicar or
the committee."

"But I am not a real visiting lady.  I only go to help Cecil."

"I see; but why didn't you ask Julius what was right?  He would have
told you."

"Oh, no, I could not."

"Why not?"

"It would seem like a complaint of Cecil.  Besides--"

"Besides?"

"I don't think Julius is a Christian."

The startling announcement was made in so humble and mournful a
voice as almost to disarm Jenny's resentment; and before she had
recovered enough for a reply, she was called to take leave of her
parents.

Her brother was the professed object of her visit, and she was only
at the Hall because there was no accommodation at his lodgings, so
that she had no scruple in joining the early breakfast spread for
the Rector and his wife, so as to have the morning free for him; but
she found Julius alone, saying that his wife was tired after the
party; and to Jenny's offer to take her class, he replied, "Thank
you, it will be a great kindness if you will teach; but Rose has no
regular class.  Teaching is not much in her line; and it is a pity
she should have to do it, but we have to make the most of the single
hour they allow us for godliness."

"Don't you utilize Mrs. Charnock? or is she not strong enough for
early hours?"

"Poor Anne!  The truth is, I am afraid of her.  I fancy all her
doctrine comes out of the Westminster Catechism."

"Could Calvinism be put in at seven years old?  Would not it be a
pouring of stiff glue into a narrow-necked phial?"

"Result--nil."

"A few pure drops might got in--and you could give her books."

"It had struck me that it might be wholesome work for her; but the
children's good must stand first.  And, timid and reserved as she
seems, she insisted on preaching at the work-room, so that Cecil had
to put a stop to it."

"Are you certain about that preaching?"

"Rose heard of it from Cecil herself."

"Did she ask what it amounted to?"

"I don't know; perhaps I had better find out.  I remember it came
after that ride to Sirenwood.  By the bye, Jenny, I wish Cecil could
be hindered from throwing herself into that oak of Broceliande!"

"Are not you so suspicious that you see the waving arms and magic
circles everywhere?"

"A friendship with any one here is so unnatural, that I can't but
think it a waving of hands boding no good.  And there is worse than
friendship in that quarter too."

"Oh, but Lenore is quite different!"

"A Vivienne still!" said Julius, bitterly.  "If she costs poor Frank
nothing more than his appointment, it will be well."

"I don't understand!"

"She caught him in her toils two years ago at Rockpier; and now she
is playing fast and loose with him--withdrawing, as I believe; and
at any rate keeping the poor foolish boy in such an agitation, that
he can't or won't settle to his reading; and Driver thinks he will
break down."

"I can't think it of Lenore.--Oh! good morning, Raymond!"

"Good morning!  May I come to breakfast number one?  I have to go to
Backsworth."

"Yes," said Jenny; "we told papa it was too bad to put you on the
Prison Committee.  What does your wife say?"

"My wife has so many occupations, that she is very sufficient for
herself," said Raymond.  "I hope you will get on with her, Jenny.
If she could only be got to think you intellectual!"

"Me?  O, Raymond! you've not been telling her so?" exclaimed Jenny,
laughing heartily.

"A very superior coach in divinity, &c.," said Julius, in a tone
half banter, half earnest.

But Jenny exclaimed in distress, "No, no, no; say nothing about
that!  It would never do for Herbert to have it known.  Don't let
him guess that you know."

"Quite right, Jenny; never fear," said Julius; "though it is
tempting to ask you to take Frank in hand at the same time."

"Have you seen anything of the Vivians?" asked Raymond.

"Very little.  I hoped to see something of Eleonora from hence."

"I can't understand that young lady," said Julius.  "She was very
friendly when first we met her; but now she seems absolutely
repellant."

"Tant mieux," Raymond

"They seem inclined to take up all the good works in hand," said
Jenny.  "By the bye, what is all this story about Raymond affronting
Wil'sbro' by stirring up their gutters?  Papa has been quite in a
state of mind for fear they should take offence and bring in Mr.
Moy."

"Julius only thinks I have not stirred the gutters enough," said
Raymond.  "And after all, it is not I, but Whitlock.  I was in hopes
that matters might have been properly looked after if Whitlock had
been chosen mayor this year; but, somehow, a cry was got up that he
was going to bring down a sanitary commission, and put the town to
great expense; and actually, this town-council have been elected
_because_ they are opposed to drainage."

"And Truelove, the grocer, is mayor?"

"Yes; one of the most impracticable men I ever encountered.  One
can't get him so much as to understand anything.  Now Briggs does
understand, only he goes by pounds s. d."

"Posterity has done nothing for me, and I will do nothing for
posterity, is his principle," said Julius.  "Moreover, he is a
Baptist."

"No chance for the Church in his time," said Jenny.

"There's the less harm in that," said Raymond, "that the plan is
intolerable.  Briggs's nephew took the plan of what he calls a
German Rat-house, for the town-hall, made in gilt gingerbread; and
then adapted the church to a beautiful similarity.  If that could be
staved off by waiting for the bazaar, or by any other means, there
might be a chance of something better.  So poor Fuller thinks,
though he is not man enough to speak out at once."

"Then the bazaar is really fixed?"

"So far as the resolution goes of the lady population, though Julius
is sanguine, and hopes to avert it.  After all, I believe the
greatest obstructive to improvement is Moy."

"Old Mr. Proudfoot's son-in-law?" said Jenny.  "I know he has
blossomed out in great splendour on our side of the county, and his
daughter is the general wonder.  Papa is always declaring he will
set up in opposition to you."

"Not much fear of that," said Raymond.  "But the man provokes me, he
has so much apparent seriousness."

"Even to the persecution of Dr. Easterby," put in Julius.  "And yet
he is the great supporter of that abominable public-house in Water
Lane, the Three Pigeons--which, unluckily, escaped the fire.  He
owns it, and all those miserable tenements beyond it, and nothing
will move him an inch towards doing any good there!"

"I remember," said Jenny, "papa came home very angry on the
licensing day; the police had complained of the Three Pigeons, and
the magistrates would have taken away the license, but that Mr. Moy
made such a personal matter of it."

"You don't mean that he is a magistrate!" exclaimed Julius.

"Yes," said Raymond.  "He got the ear of the Lord-Lieutenant."

"And since he has lived at the Lawn, they have all quite set up for
county people or anything you please," said Jenny, a little
bitterly.  "Mrs. Moy drives about with the most stylish pair of
ponies; and as to Miss Gussie, she is making herself into a proverb!
I can't bear them."

"Well done, Jenny!" exclaimed Julius.

"Perhaps it is wrong," said Jenny, in a low voice.  "I dare say I am
not just.  You know I always did think Mr. Moy could have cleared
Archie if he would," she added, with a slightly trembling tone.

"So did I," said Raymond.  "I gave him the opportunity after George
Proudfoot's death; but when the choice lay between two memories, one
could hardly wonder if he preferred to shield his brother-in-law."

"Or himself!" said Jenny, under her breath.

"Come, Jenny," said Julius, feeling that the moment for interruption
had come, "it is time we should be off.  Methinks there are sounds
as if the whole canine establishment at Mrs. Hornblower's were
prancing up to meet us."

So it proved; and Jenny had to run the gauntlet through the
ecstasies of all the dogs, whose ecclesiastical propriety was quite
overthrown, for they danced about her to the very threshold of the
church, and had to have the door shut on their very noses.  That
drop of bitterness, which her sad brief story could not fail to have
left in poor Joanna's heart, either passed out of mind in what
followed, or was turned into the prayer, "And to turn their hearts;"
and she was her bright self again for her promised assistance at the
school.

Then Herbert's address was, "Come, Joan, I promised to take you to
see the Reeves's pheasant at the Outwood Lodge.  Such a jolly old
woman!"

"The pheasant?"

"No; the keeper's mother.  Tail a yard long!  I don't see why we
shouldn't turn them out at home.  If father won't take it up, I
shall write to Phil."

"Thank you, Herbs.  Hadn't you better secure a little reading first?
I could wait; I've got to write to Will."

"The post doesn't go till five."

"But I want to get it done.  The mail goes to-morrow."

"You'll do it much better after a walk.  I can't understand anything
after the fumes of the school, unless I do a bit of visiting first;
and that pheasant is a real stunner.  It really is parish work,
Jenny.  Look here, this is what I'm reading her."

"_Learn to die_!" said Jenny, laughing heartily.  "Nothing could be
more appropriate, only you should have begun before October."

"You choose to make fun of everything!" answered Herbert, gruffly;
and Jenny, deciding that she would see a specimen day, made her
peace by consenting to share in the pastoral visit, whether to
pheasant or peasant.  Indeed, a walk with Herbert was one of the
prime pleasures of her life--and this was delightful, along broad
gravelled drives through the autumnal woods with tinted beech-leaves
above, and brackens of all shades of brown, green, and yellow
beneath.  And it was charming to see Herbert's ways with the old
woman--a dainty old dame, such as is grown in the upper ranks of
service, whom he treated with a hearty, bantering, coaxing manner,
which she evidently enjoyed extremely.  His reading, for he _did_
come to more serious matters, was very good--in a voice that without
effort reached deaf ears, and with feeling about it that did a great
deal to reassure his sister that there was something behind the big
bright boy.

But by the time he had done the honours of all the pheasants, and
all the dogs, and all the ferrets, and all the stuffed birds, and
all the eggs (for the keeper was a bit of a naturalist), and had
discussed Mr. Frank's last day's shooting, it was so late, that
Jenny had only just time to walk back to the Hall at her best pace,
to see Mrs. Poynsett for a few minutes before luncheon; and her
reception was, "Is that Herbert's step?  Call him in, my dear!--You
must make the most of your sister, Herbert.  Come in to all meals
while she is here."

He heard with gratitude--his sister with consternation.  If forenoon
pastoral visits were to be on that scale, and he dined out whenever
he was not at school or at church, how would his books fare? and yet
she could not grudge his pleasure.  She could not help looking half
foolish, half sad, when she met the Rector's eye.

Julius thought so much of her advice, as to knock at Cecil's
sitting-room door, and beg to ask her a question; and as she liked
to be consulted, she welcomed him hospitably into that temple,
sacred to culture and to Dunstone--full of drawings, books, and
china.

"I was thinking," he said, "of offering Anne some parish work.  I
wanted to know if you saw any objection?"

"Certainly not; I have not been able to make acquaintance yet with
all our tenants, but they seem quite to understand the difference in
our positions," said Cecil, with due deliberation.

Julius choked his amusement, and waived that point.  "But did you
not feel obliged to decline her services at the Wil'sbro' work-
room?"

"That was quite another thing.  What was most undesirable in such an
institution would be all very well for your old women."

"What kind of thing?"

"Talking piously, giving away texts, and so on; just the way to make
the women think we intended to impose religious instruction and give
a sectarian character, defeating our own object."

"Was there any flaw in what she said?"

"I can't tell what she said.  It was just a little murmur over the
work."

"Not preaching?"

"Not in that sense," said Cecil, with a little compunction.

"I am glad to hear it; it makes a great difference."

"You see," said the lady, "our institution is merely intended to
support these women in the time of want; and if we were to couple
our assistance with religion we should just sink into a mothers'
meeting, and make the women think--"

"Think that you prize the soul more than the body," said Julius, as
she halted in search of a word.  "I understand, Cecil; you would not
be in the prevailing fashion.  I don't want to argue that point,
only to understand about Anne."

So saying, he went at once to Anne's abode, the old schoolroom,
which, like everything else belonging to Mrs. Miles Charnock, had a
sad-coloured aspect, although it had been fitted up very prettily.
The light was sombre, and all the brighter pictures and ornaments
seemed to have been effaced by a whole gallery of amateur
photographs, in which the glories of the African bush were
represented by brown masses of shade variegated by blotches of
white.  Even in Miles's own portrait on the table, the gold seemed
overwhelmed by the dark blue; and even as Julius entered, she shut
it up in its brown case, as too sacred for even his brother's eyes.

However, a flush of pleasure came to her pale face at the invitation
to take a class, and to read to a good old woman, whom in his secret
soul he thought so nearly a dissenter, that she could not be made
more so.  She promised her help with some eagerness for as long as
she should remain in England, and accepted the books he gave her
without protest.  Nay, that same evening she took Jenny off into her
gray abode, to consult her whether, since she must now join the
early breakfast, she could go to daily service without becoming
formal.

She even recurred to her question, whether Julius was a Christian,
without nearly as much negation in her tones as before; and Jenny,
taking it as it was meant, vouched for his piety, so as might render
it a little more comprehensible to one matured on Scottish Calvinism
and English Methodism, diluted in devout undogmatic minds, with no
principle more developed than horror of Popery and of worldliness.
Turned loose in solitude, reserve, and sadness, on her husband's
family, who did nothing but shock her with manifestations of the
latter, she could hardly turn even to the clerical portion of it,
while Julius, as well as his curates, bore all the tokens by which
she had been taught to know a Papist.  Daily intercourse was perhaps
drawing her a little towards her brother-in-law; but Herbert Bowater
united these obnoxious externals to a careless tongue, and joyous
easy-going manner, and taste for amusement, which so horrified Anne,
that she once condoled with his sister, and proposed to unite in
prayer for his conversion; but this was more than Joanna could bear,
and she cried, "I only wish I were as good a Christian as dear
Herbert!"

For indeed, the sister's heart intensely esteemed his sweetness,
honesty, and simplicity, even while she found it an uphill task to
coax him to steady work.  After that first morning he was indeed
ashamed to let her see the proportion between his pastoral visits
and his theological reading; but the newspapers (he had two or three
weekly ones) had a curious facility of expansion, and there was a
perilous sound in "I'll just see where the meet is,"--not that he
had the most distant idea of repairing thither; it was pure filial
interest in learning where his father and Edith would be.

Jenny could not tell whether her presence conduced to diligence or
to chatter, but he minded her more than any one else, and always
stuck close to her, insisting on her admiring all his proteges.
There was one with whom he was certainly doing a work, which, as
Julius truly said, no one more clerical could have done so well--
namely, the son of his landlady, a youth who held a small clerkship
in an office at Willansborough, and who had fallen this year under
the attraction of the Backsworth races, so as to get into serious
difficulties with his master, and narrowly escape dismissal for the
sake of his mother.

The exceeding good-nature and muscular Christian side of the
lodger's character was having a most happy effect on the lad.  He
had set up a regular hero-worship, which Herbert encouraged by
always calling for him when going to the choral practices, getting
him into the choir, lending him books, and inviting him to read in
his room in the evening.  How much they played with the dogs was not
known; but at any rate, Harry Hornblower was out of mischief, and
his mother was so grateful to Mr. Bowater, that she even went the
length of preferring his sermons to those of both his seniors.

The discovery that most vexed Jenny was that Sirenwood had so much
of his time.  He seemed to be asked to come to dinner whenever Sir
Harry saw him, or a chair was left vacant at a party; and though his
Rector was inexorable as to releasing him on casual notice from the
parish avocations of three nights in the week, the effect was
grumbling as savage as was possible from so good-humoured a being;
and now and then a regular absence without leave, and a double growl
at the consequent displeasure.  It was true that in ten minutes he
was as hearty and friendly as ever to his colleagues, but that might
be only a proof of his disregard of their reproofs, and their small
effect.

Eleonora Vivian was not the attraction.  No; Herbert thought her a
proud, silent, disagreeable girl, and could see no beauty in her;
but he had a boy's passion for the matured splendour of her sister's
beauty; and she was so kind to him!

What could Jenny mean by looking glum about it?  She was stunningly
good, and all that.  She had done no end of good with clubs and
mothers' meetings at her married home; and it was no end of a pity
she was not in Compton parish, instead of under poor wretched old
Fuller, whom you could not stir--no, not if you tied a firebrand to
his tail.


CHAPTER XIII
Withered Leaves and Fresh Buds


Lady Rosamond and Joanna Bowater could not fail to be good friends;
Herbert was a great bond of union, and so was Mrs. Poynsett.
Rosamond found it hard to recover from the rejection of her scheme
of the wheeled-chair, and begged Jenny to become its advocate; but
Mrs. Poynsett listened with a smile of the unpromising kind--"You
too, Jenny?"

"Why not, dear Mrs. Poynsett?  How nice it would be to see you in
your own corner again!"

"I don't think my own corner remains."

"Oh! but it could be restored at once."

"Do you think so?  No, no, Jenny my dear; cracked china is better
left on the shelf out of the way, even if it could bear the move,
which it can't."

Then Jenny understood, and advised Rosamond to bide her time, and
wait till the session of parliament, when the house would be
quieter; and Rosamond nodded and held her peace.

The only person who held aloof was Cecil, who would not rise to the
bait when Raymond tried to exhibit Miss Bowater as a superior
intellectual woman.

Unluckily, too, Jenny observed one evening at the five o'clock tea,
"I hear that Mrs. Duncombe has picked up some very funny people--a
lady lecturer, who is coming to set us all to rights."

"A wonderful pair, I hear!" said Frank.  "Mrs. Clio Tallboys, she
calls herself, and a poor little husband, whom she carries about to
show the superiority of her sex."

"A Cambridge professor and a great political economist!" observed
Cecil, in a low but indignant voice.

"The Yankee Cambridge!" quoth Frank.

"The American Cambridge is a distinguished university," returned
Cecil.

"Cecil is right, Master Frank," laughed his mother; "Cam and Isis
are not the only streams of learning in the world."

"I never heard of him," said Jenny; "he is a mere satellite to the
great luminary."

"They are worth seeing," added Frank; "she is one of those regular
American beauties one would pay to get a sight of."

"Where did you get all this information?" asked Cecil.

"From Duncombe himself.  They met on the Righi; and nothing is more
comical than to near him describe the ladies' fraternization over
female doctors and lawyers, till they rushed into each other's arms,
and the Clio promised to come down on a crusade and convert you
all."

"There are two ways of telling a story," said Cecil.

"No wonder the gentlemen quake!" said Mrs. Poynsett.

"I don't," said Frank, boyishly.

"Because you've no wife to take you in hand," retorted Jenny.

"For my part," said Mrs. Poynsett, "I can't see what women want.  I
have always had as many rights as I could exercise."

"Ah! but we are not all ladies of the manor," said Jenny, "nor do we
all drive coaches."

"I observe," said Cecil, with dignity, "that there is supposed to be
a license to laugh at Mrs. Duncombe and whatever she does."

"She would do better to mind her children," said Frank.

"Children!  Has she children?" broke in Anne and Rosamond, both at
once.

"Didn't you know it?" said Jenny.

"No, indeed!  I didn't think her the sort of woman," said Rosamond.
"What does she do with them?"

"Drops them in the gutter," said Frank.  "Literally, as I came home,
I heard a squeak, and found a child flat in a little watercourse.  I
picked it out, and the elder one told me it was Ducky Duncombe, or
some such word.  Its little boots had holes in them, mother; its
legs were purple, and there was a fine smart foreign woman flirting
round the corner with young Hornblower."

"Boys with long red hair, and Highland dresses?" exclaimed Rosamond.
"Yes, the same we saw with Miss Vivian!"

"Exactly!" said Frank, eagerly.  "She is quite a mother to those
poor little wretches; they watch for her at the Sirenwood gate, and
she walks with them.  The boy's cry was not for mother or nurse, but
for Lena!"

"Pray, did she come at his call?"

"No; but when I carried the brat home, poor Duncombe told me almost
with tears, how good she is to them.  I fancy he feels their
mother's neglect of them."

"I'm sure I gave her credit for having none," said Rosamond.

"Ah!" said Jenny, "you should have heard her condolences with my
sister Mary on her last infliction.  Fancy Mary's face!"

"No doubt it was to stem a torrent of nursery discussions," said
Cecil.  "Such bad taste!"

"Which?" murmured Rosamond under her breath, with an arched eyebrow.

"Plain enough," said Frank:  "if a woman is a woman, the bad taste
is to be ashamed of it."

"Yes," said Cecil, "that is the way with men; they would fain keep
us down to the level of the nursery."

"I thought nurseries were usually at the top of the house."

"Perhaps," said Mrs. Poynsett, disregarding this mischievous
suggestion, "they mean that organization, like charity, should begin
at home."

"You say that meaningly," said Rosamond.  "I have heard very odd
stories of domestic affairs at Aucuba Villa, and that she can't get
a servant to stay there."

"That man, Alexander, has always been there," said Frank.

"Yes; but he has occasionally to do all the work of the house.  Yes,
I can't help it, Cecil, Susan will regale me with cook-stories
sometimes; and I have heard of the whole establishment turning out
on being required to eat funguses."

"I shall beware of dining there!" said Rosamond.

"Don't they dine here to-morrow?" asked Frank.

"No, they are engaged to the Moys," said Cecil.

"But the Vivians come?"

"Oh yes."

Every one knew that already; but Frank could not help having it
repeated.  It was a mere formal necessity to ask them, and had been
accepted as such; but there was some amazement when Cecil brought
home Lady Tyrrell and Miss Vivian to lunch and spend the afternoon.
It might be intended as one of her demonstrations; for though it was
understood that any of the inmates were free to bring home friends
to luncheon, it was not done--except with a casual gentleman--
without notice to the mistress of the house.  Cecil, however,
comported herself entirely as in that position, explaining that Lady
Tyrrell was come to give her advice upon an intended fernery, and
would perform her toilette here, so as to have plenty of time.
Frank, little knowing what was passing, was working the whole day at
his tutor's for the closely imminent examination; Julius and Raymond
were gravely polite; Eleonora very silent; and as soon as the meal
was over, Rosamond declared that she should not come out to stand
planning in the cold; and though Herbert would have liked nothing
better in that company, his Rector carried him off to arrange an
Advent service in a distant hamlet; Anne's horse came to the door;
and only Joanna remained to accompany the gardening party, except
that Raymond came out with them to mark the limits of permissible
alteration.

"How unchanged!" exclaimed Lady Tyrrell.  "Time stands still here;
only where is the grand old magnolia?  How sweet it used to be!"

"Killed by the frost," said Raymond, shortly, not choosing to
undergo a course of reminiscences, and chafing his wife by his
repressive manner towards her guest.  When he had pointed out the
bed of Americans that were to be her boundary, he excused himself as
having letters to finish; and as he went away Cecil gave vent to her
distaste to the old shrubs and borders, now, of course, at their
worst--the azaleas mere dead branches, the roses with a few yellow
night-capped buds still lingering, and fuchsias with a scanty bell
or two.

Jenny fought for their spring beauty, all the more because Lady
Tyrrell was encouraging the wife to criticize the very things she
had tried to sentimentalize over with the husband; but seeing that
she was only doing harm, she proposed a brisk walk to Eleonora, who
gladly assented, though her sister made a protest about damp, and
her being a bad walker.  The last things they heard was Cecil's
sigh, "It is all so shut in, wherever there is level ground, that
the bazaar would be impossible."

"I should hope so!" muttered Jenny.

"What do you mean to do about this bazaar?" asked Eleonora, as they
sped away.

"I don't know.  Those things so often go off in smoke, that I don't
make up my mind till they become imminent."

"I am afraid this will go on," said Eleonora.  "Camilla means it and
she always carries out her plans; I wish I saw the right line."

"About that?"

"About everything.  It seems to me that there never was any one so
cut off from help and advice as I am;" then, as Joanna made some
mute sign of sympathy, "I knew you would understand; I have been
longing to be with you, for there has been no one to whom I could
speak freely since I left Rockpier."

"And I have been longing to have you.  Mamma would have asked you to
stay with us before, only we had the house full.  Can't you come
now?"

"You will see that I shall not be allowed.  It is of no use to think
about it!" said the girl, with a sigh.  "Here, let us get out of
this broad path, or she may yet come after us--persuade Mrs.
Charnock Poynsett it is too cold to stand about--anything to break
up a tete-a-tete."

Jenny saw she really was in absolute fear of pursuit; but hardly yet
understood the nervous haste to turn into a not very inviting side-
path, veiled by the trees, whose wet leaves were falling.

"Do you mind the damp?" asked the girl, anxiously.

"No, not at all; but--"

"You don't know what it is never to feel free, but be like a French
girl, always watched--at least whenever I am with any one I care to
speak to."

"Are you quite sure it is not imagination?"

"O, Joanna, don't be like all the rest, blinded by her!  You knew
her always!"

"Only from below.  I am four years younger; you know dear Emily was
my contemporary."

"Dear Emily!  I miss her more now than even at Rockpier.  But you,
who were her friend, and knew Camilla of old, I know you can help me
as no one else can."

Jenny returned a caress; and Eleonora spoke on.  "You know I was
only eight years old when Camilla married, and I had scarcely seen
her till she came to us at Rockpier, on Lord Tyrrell's death, and
then she was most delightful.  I thought her like mother and sister
both in one, even more tender than dear Emily.  How could I have
thought so for a moment?  But she enchanted everybody.  Clergy,
ladies, and all came under the spell; and I can't get advice from
any of them--even from Miss Coles--you remember her?"

"Your governess?  How nice she was!"

"Emily and I owed everything to her!  She was as near being a mother
to us as any one could be; and Camilla could not say enough of
gratitude, or show esteem enough, and fascinated her like all the
rest of us; but she never rested till she had got her off to a
situation in Russia.  I did not perceive the game at the time, but I
see now how all the proposals for situations within reach of me were
quashed."

"But you write to her?"

"Yes; but as soon as I showed any of my troubles she reproved me for
self-will and wanting to judge for myself, and not submit to my
sister.  That's the way with all at Rockpier.  Camilla has gone
about pitying me to them for having to give way to my married
sister, but saying it was quite time that she took charge of us; and
on that notion they all wrote to me.  Then she persuaded papa to go
abroad; and I was delighted, little thinking she never meant me to
go back again."

"Did she not?"

"Listen!  I've heard her praise Rockpier and its church to the skies
to one person--say Mr. Bindon.  To another, such as our own Vicar,
she says it was much too ultra, and she likes moderation; she tells
your father that she wants to see papa among his old friends; and to
Mrs. Duncombe, I've heard her go as near the truth as is possible to
her, and call it a wearisome place, with an atmosphere of incense,
curates, and old maids, from whom she had carried me off before I
grew fit for nothing else!"

"I dare say all these are true in turn, or seem so to her, or she
would not say them before you."

"She has left off trying to gloss it over with me, except so far as
it is part of her nature.  She did at first, but she knows it is of
no use now."

"Really, Lenore, you must be going too far."

"I have shocked you; but you can't conceive what it is to live with
perpetual falsity.  No, I can't use any other word.  I am always
mistrusting and being angered, and my senses of right and wrong get
so confused, that it is like groping in a maze."  Her eyes were full
of tears, but she exclaimed, "Tell me, Joanna, was there ever
anything between Camilla and Mr. Poynsett?"

"Why bring that up again now?"

"Why did it go off?" insisted Lenore.

"Because Mrs. Poynsett could not give up and turn into a dowager, as
if she were not the mistress herself."

"Was that all?"

"So it was said."

"I want to get to the bottom of it.  It was not because Lord Tyrrell
came in the way."

"I am afraid they thought so here."

"Then," said Eleonora, in a hard, dry way, "I know the reason of our
being brought back here, and of a good deal besides."

"My dear Lena, I am very sorry for you; but I think you had better
keep this out of your mind, or you will fall into a hard, bitter,
suspicious mood."

"That is the very thing.  I am in a hard, bitter, suspicious mood,
and I can't see how to keep out of it; I don't know when opposition
is right and firm, and when it is only my own self-will."

"Would it not be a good thing to talk to Julius Charnock?  You would
not be betraying anything."

"No!  I can't seem to make up to the good clergyman!  Certainly not.
Besides, I've heard Camilla talking to his wife!"

"Talking?"

"Admiring that dress, which she had been sneering at to your mother,
don't you remember?  It was one of her honey-cups with venom below--
only happily, Lady Rosamond saw through the flattery.  I'm ashamed
whenever I see her!"

"I don't think that need cut you off from Julius."

"Tell me _truly_," again broke in Lenore, "what Mrs. Poynsett really
is.  She is a standing proverb with us for tyranny over her sons;
not with Camilla alone, but with papa."

"See how they love her!" cried Jenny, hotly.

"Camilla thinks that abject; but I can't forget how Frank talked of
her in those happy Rockpier days."

"When you first knew him?" said Jenny.

They must have come at length to the real point, for Eleonora began
at once--"Yes; he was with his sick friend, and we were so happy;
and now he is being shamefully used, and I don't know what to do!"

"Indeed, Lenore," said Jenny, in her downright way, "I do not
understand.  You do not seem to care for him."

"Of course I am wrong," said the poor girl; "but I hoped I was doing
the best thing for him."  Then, as Jenny made an indignant sound,
"See, Jenny, when he came to Rockpier, Camilla had been a widow
about three months.  She never had been very sad, for Lord Tyrrell
had been quite imbecile for a year, poor man!  And when Frank came,
she could not make enough of him; and he and I both thought the two
families had been devotedly fond of each other, and that she was
only too glad to meet one of them."

"I suppose that was true."

"So do I, as things stood then.  She meant Frank to be a sort of
connecting link, against the time when she could come back here; but
we, poor children, never thought of that, and went on together, not
exactly saying anything, but quite understanding how much we cared.
Indeed, I know Camilla impressed on him that, for his mother's sake,
it must go no farther then, while he was still so young; and next
came our journey on the Continent, ending in our coming back here
last July."

Jenny remembered that Raymond's engagement had not been made known
till August, and Frank had only returned from a grouse-shooting
holiday a week or two before the arrival of the brides.

"Now," added Eleonora, "Camilla has made me understand that nothing
will induce her to let papa consent; and though I know he would, if
he were left to himself, I also see how all this family must hate
and loathe the connection."

"May I ask, has Frank ever spoken?"

"Oh no!  I think he implied it all to Camilla when she bade him wait
till our return, fancying, I suppose, that one could forget the
other."

"But why does she seem so friendly with him?"

"It is her way; she can't be other than smooth and caressing, and
likes to have young men about; and I try to be grave and distant,
because--the sooner he is cured of me the better for him," she
uttered, with a sob; "but when he is there, and I see those grieved
eyes of his, I can't keep it up!  And papa does like him!  Oh! if
Camilla would but leave us alone!  See here, Jenny!" and she showed,
on her watch-chain, a bit of ruddy polished pebble.  "Is it wrong to
keep this?  He and I found the stone in two halves, on the beach,
the last day we were together, and had them set, pretending to one
another it was only play.  Sometimes I think I ought to send mine
back; I know he has his, he let me see it one day.  Do you think I
ought to give it up?"

"Why should you?"

"Because then he would know that it must be all over."

"But _is_ it all over?  Within, I mean?"

"Jenny, you know better!"

"Then, Lenore, if so, and it is only your sister who objects, not
your father himself, ought you to torment poor Frank by acting
indifference when you do not feel it?"

"Am I untrue?  I never thought of that.  I thought I should be
sacrificing myself for his good!"

"His good?  O, Lenore, I believe it is the worst wrong a woman can
do a man, to let him think he has wasted his heart upon her, and
that she is trifling with him.  You don't know what a bad effect
this is having, even on his prospects.  He cannot get his brain or
spirits free to work for his examination."

"How hard it is to know what is right!  Here have I been thinking
that what made me so miserable must be the best for him, and would
it not make it all the worse to relax, and let him see?"

"I do not think so," returned Jenny.  "His spirits would not be worn
by doubt of _you_--the worst doubt of all:  and he would feel that
he had something to strive for."

Eleonora walked on for some steps in silence, then exclaimed, "Yes,
but there's his family.  It would only stir up trouble for them
there.  They can't approve of me."

"They don't know you.  When they do, they will.  Now they only see
what looks like--forgive me, Lena--caprice and coquetry; they will
know you in earnest, if you will let them."

"You don't mean that they know anything about it!" exclaimed
Eleonora.

Jenny almost laughed.  "Not know where poor Frank's heart is?  You
don't guess how those sons live with their mother!"

"I suppose I have forgotten what sincerity and openness are," said
Eleonora, sadly.  "But is not she very much vexed?"

"She was vexed to find it had gone so deep with him," said Jenny;
"but I know that you can earn her affection and trust by being
staunch and true yourself--and it is worth having, Lena!"

For Jenny knew Eleonora of old, through Emily's letters, and had no
doubt of her rectitude, constancy, and deep principle, though she
was at the present time petrified by constant antagonism to such
untruthfulness as, where it cannot corrupt, almost always hardens
those who come in contact with it.  And this cruel idea of self-
sacrifice was, no doubt, completing the indurating process.

Jenny knew the terrible responsibility of giving such advice.  She
had not done it lightly.  She had been feeling for years past that
"'Tis better to have loved and lost, than never to have loved at
all;" and she knew that uncertainty of the right to love and trust
would have been a pang beyond all she had suffered.  To give poor
Eleonora, situated as she now was, admission to the free wholesome
atmosphere of the Charnock family, was to her kind heart
irresistible; and it was pleasant to feel the poor girl clinging to
her, as people do to those who have given the very counsel the heart
craved for.

It was twilight when the walk was over, and the drawing-room was
empty; but Anne came to invite them to Mrs. Poynsett's tea, saying
that Cecil had Lady Tyrrell in her own sitting-room.  Perhaps Mrs.
Poynsett had not realized who was Jenny's companion, for she seemed
startled at their entrance; and Jenny said, "You remember Lenore
Vivian?"

"I must have seen you as a child," said Mrs. Poynsett, courteously.
"You are very like your sister."

This, though usually a great compliment, disappointed Eleonora, as
she answered, rather frigidly, "So people say."

"Have you walked far?"

"To the Outwood Lodge."

"To-day?  Was it not very damp in the woods?"

"Oh no, delightful!"

"Lena and I are old friends," said Jenny; "too glad to meet to heed
the damp."

Here Raymond entered, with the air of a man who had just locked up a
heavy post-bag at the last possible moment; and he too was amazed,
though he covered it by asking why the party was so small.

"Rosamond has gone to meet her husband, and Cecil has her guest in
her own domains."

Then Jenny asked after his day's work--a county matter, interesting
to all the magistracy, and their womankind in their degree; and
Eleonora listened in silence, watching with quiet heedfulness
Frank's mother and brother.

Basically, it was still too closed and on all sides, and the more
you hinaussah, the more you stir affairs to God knows where it came
from. But it probably grew to a limit and then broke in a day. It
was easy to observe that the adults of which very little has been
disturbed, they went around and judged and acted, and if they were
ever in trouble, it was the to external conditions. At the beginning
of such changes, I also moved the reading. Then you would with
books as you know, it would take time to be there, a certain, and
equally pleasing passing time, just as much as a newly fitted.

Of course would be closer to an individual, and it is not to say that
it certainly would be now and then half an hour on them to be
missed: a stroll, a conspiracy, beginning in the theater or an
urgent letter.

But that in a hair twisted and confused, as if it had been that
glowing ears and hands got cold as metal, that a candle next to a
long herunterbrannte and the chandeliers inside, which would then,
thank God, completely excluded.

I'll do these appearances, because I quite striking to me was, back
in those Ulsgaard on holiday, so when I suddenly fell into the
reading.

Because it just showed that I could not. I did it certainly started
before the time that I favor the prospect had. But this year in
Sorø louder among others about the same age had made me suspicious
of such calculations.

There were rapid, unexpected experiences come to me, and it was clear
to see that they sent me as an adult treated.

There were life-size experiences that are so difficult to make,
as they were.

In the same extent, but when I really understood her, I went also to
the infinite reality of my child's eyes on one. I knew it would not
stop, as little as the others began.

I said to myself that it was free of any course, to make sections,
but they were invented.

And it turned out that I was too clumsy, which I imagine.
Whenever I tried it, gave my life to understand that it knew nothing
of them.

Stock but I insist that my childhood was gone, so was in that moment
everything Upcoming continued, and I was just as much as a Bleisoldat
among themselves in order to be able to stand.

This discovery isolates me from even more understandably. You had me
in me and filled me with a kind of definitive Frohheit that
I took for Kümmernis because they are far above my age. It disturbed
me, as I myself correctly, that you now that nothing for a certain
period, was much more than could ever miss.

And so when I returned after Ulsgaard and saw all the books, I
made myself about her, quite in a hurry, with almost a bad conscience.
What I later had so often felt that I knew was somehow ahead: not
that we had the right, a book aufzuschlagen if you are not committed,
all to read.

With each row
broke the world.

Among the books she was healing and maybe completely behind.

But how should I, who could not read it all begin? As they stood, even
in this modest book rooms in such a hopeless outnumbered and held
together. I crashed my defiant and desperate from book to book and
beat me through the pages as if something has to be disproportionate.
Then I read Schiller and Baggesen, and Öhlenschläger Schack
Staffeldt what Walter Scott was there, and Calderon. Some things came
into my hands, what would have been like to be read, for otherwise
it was much too early, was due almost nothing for my then-present.
And yet I read. In later years, it happened to me sometimes at
night, that I awoke, and the stars were really there, and were
so important before, and I could not understand how it has brought
so much world to fail.

So I was like, I think, reasonable, whenever I get from the books
aufsah and also where the summer was where Abelone cried. It came
very unexpectedly, that they call and that I had not even
replied. It was in the midst of our blessed time. But since I am
now covered once had, I was desperately to read and hid me, important
and stubborn, in our daily holidays.

How clumsy I was, the many, often inconspicuous occasions exploit
a natural happiness, I did not dislike of the growing reconciliation
Zerwürfnis future promise, the more irritating were the more they
hinausschob.

Incidentally, my Leseschlaf one day come to an end as suddenly as it
had begun, and angry because we see each other thoroughly.

For me now Abelone spared no scorn and superiority, and when I
arrived in the bower, she claimed to read.

At one Sunday morning while the book was closed next to her, but she
seemed more than enough with the currants, built them carefully using
a fork out of their small grape grazed.

There must be one of those days earlier been as such in July giebt
new, rested hours, anywhere where something happy happens ill. For
millions of small irrepressible movement is a mosaic convincing
test life together, things are swinging into each other over and
out into the air, and their coolness makes clear the shadows and
the sun to a slight, mental note.

Since it giebt no merits in the garden, everything is everywhere,
and we should all be in order not to miss. Abelonens In small act
but was the whole thing again. It was invented so happy just to do
it and exactly as they did. Your hands in the shadowy light worked
together so easily and agree to, and jumped in front of the fork
willfully round her berries in the wine tauduffem sheet designed
shell inside, where others have already accumulated, red and blonde,
glamorous lichternd with healthy nuclei in the harsh interior.

I wish in these circumstances is nothing but watch, but because it
probably was that you referred me, grabbed me, even for me
at ease to give the book, sat me on the other side of the table and
let me, without a long scroll , so that somewhere.

"If you at least according Laes, Leserich," said Abelone after a
while. That sounded a long time so quarrelsome, and since there
is, in my opinion, was seriously time to be in balance, I
immediately read aloud to stay up to one section and the next
headline: To Bettine. "No, not the answers" , broke Abelone and
put me at once how exhausted the little fork down. Immediately
thereafter they laughed over his face, which I do installations.
"My God, what have you read badly, Malte." Since I now had to admit
that I have not a moment when the thing was. "I read just to let you
unterbrichst me," I confessed, and was hot and scrolls back to the
title of the book. Now I only knew what it was. "Why is not the
answer?"

I asked curiously. It was as if Abelone not hear me. They sat
there in her light dress, as if they were everywhere would quite dark
inside, as her eyes were. "Gieb her," she said suddenly, as in
anger and I took the book from his hand and beat it right there,
where she it wanted. And then read a letter of Bettine. I do not know
what I understand of it, but it was as if I solemnly promise that
everything returned.

And while her voice rose, and finally almost resembled those that
I knew her from singing, I am ashamed that our reconciliation,
I had so low. Because I understood well that it was. But now it
happened somewhere on the Great, far above me, where I do not
sufficed.

The promise is still true, at some point is the same book under my
books advised, among the few books that I am not separate. Now it is
me in the places that I just mean, and when I read it, so it remains
undecided whether I think or to Bettine Abelone. No, Bettine is
real in me become Abelone, which I knew was how to prepare for
it, and now it is me in Bettine risen as in their own involuntary
care. That wondrous Bettine has with all her letters, where
space, spacious design. She has from the beginning is so spread
out in its entirety, as if after her death. Everywhere, it has
very far into his hineingelegt, belonging to her and what happened,
that was eternal in nature, where they saw themselves and broke out
almost painful; erriet is painstakingly back as traditions, conjured
up as a ghost and held off.

Eben you were still, Bettine; I see you. Is not the earth still
warm from you, and the birds leave some room for your voice. The
dew is another, but the stars are still the stars of your
nights. Or is not the world at all of you? After all, how often
do you have it set on fire with your love and they've seen
and blaze aufbrennen and they've secretly replaced by another,
when all were asleep.

You felt you really in line with God, if you every morning a new
earth from him, but all drankämen so that he had made. It came
armsälig before thee, to save and auszubessern you consuming test
it and held out his hands still around the world. Because your
love was all grown. How is it possible that not even tell all of
your love? What's happened since then, what was strange? What she
want? You yourself knewest value to your love, you said it, according
to thy greater density before that he do it humanely, because
it was still element. But he has the people ausgeredet, since you
wrote it. All these answers have read and believe them more, because
the poet is significant to them than nature. But perhaps it will
again show that the limit of its size. This lover was imposed on
him, and he has not passed. What does it mean that he does not have
to reciprocate? Such love does not require a reply, and she has
Lockruf answer in itself, they heard themselves humble But he must
have been before her in his state, and write what they dictated,
with both hands, as John on Patmos, kneeling. There was no voice
against this choice, the "angel of the Office to perform", which
came to him and einzuhüllen to escape into the eternal into it.

There was the fiery car of his ascension. Since his death, was the
dark myth is that it was empty. Fate loves it, patterns and
characters to invent. His difficulty is based on complicated. Life
itself is hard but from simplicity. It only has a few things beyond
our reasonable size. The Saints, by the fate refuses to elect them,
God.

But that the woman, by nature, in relation to the man the same choice
must calls the fate of all love relationships up: schicksalslos
determined and how an eternal, it stands beside him, who transforms.
Always exceeds the lovers the lovers, because life is greater
than fate. Your dedication will be immense: this is their luck.
The nameless suffering, but their love is always been this: that it
is required, this devotion to restrict. There is no other application
ever been sued by women: the first two letters contain Heloise only
they, and five hundred years later it rises from the letters of
the Portuguese, you can see them again like a Vogelruf.

And suddenly the light goes through this area of insight Sappho
distant figure, which for centuries was not, as they searched in
fate. I have never dared to him by a newspaper to buy. I'm not
sure that he really always some numbers with them when he is
outside on the Luxembourg garden slowly moves back and forth all
evening long. He returns to the back of the grid, and his hand
touches the stone edge, where the rods up.

He is so flat that many a day pass, which he never saw. Although
he still has a balance of voice and in acts, but that is not unlike
a noise in a lamp or in the oven or if it is peculiar intervals in
a cave drips.

And the world is set up so that people giebt that all her life
in the break coming when he, silent as everything that moves, moves
more like a pointer as a pointer shadow, like the time.

What was wrong I am reluctant to look.

I am ashamed to note that I often near the step of accepting others,
as I knew him not. Then I heard it in him, "La Presse" and then
say again and a third time in quick spaces.

And the people next to me looked around and looked at the vote.

Only urgent than I did all as if nothing struck me as I would be very
busy inside. And I was, in fact. I was busy, introduce him to me,
I undertook the work, it einzubilden, and the sweat came from me
before exertion.

Because I had to make him like a dead man makes for no more evidence
there are no elements, the interior entirely to be done.

I know now that I helped a little, to the many Christs removed from
streaky ivory to think at all Althändlern lying around.

The idea of any Pietà came before and since -: all this is only
likely to cause a certain tendency in his long face is stopped,
and the desolate young Bart in Wang shade and painful blindness finally
sealed his expression, the upward sloping held was. But it was also
so much of what belonged to him, because that I understood even
then that nothing is irrelevant to him: not the way the skirt or
jacket, rear protruding over the collar to see him, this low collar,
in a large arc around the stretched, nischigen neck stand without
touching him and not the greenish-black tie, to the extent the whole
thing was herumgeschnallt, and especially not the hat, an old,
hochgewölbter, stiff felt hat that he wore Like all blind people
wear their hats: without reference to the lines of the face, without
the possibility of this additional and himself a new external unit
to form, not unlike any concerted foreign object.

In my cowardice, not to see, I brought it so far that the image of
this man finally often without reason and very painful to me to be
so hard zusammenzog misery, that I threatened them, decided the
increasing skill of my imagination by Foreign intimidate the fact
and should be repealed. It was towards evening. I took me immediately
to alert him pass. Now you must know: it went to the spring. The
Tagwind had laid, the streets were long and satisfied, at its
output shone houses, new as fresh fracture of a white metal.

But it was a metal, a surprised by its lightness. In the broad, rolling
roads, many people were confused, the car almost without fear,
which were rare. It had to be a Sunday. The essays tower of
Saint-Sulpice Fair and showed unexpectedly high in the calm and
through the narrow streets almost Roman saw involuntarily into the
season. In the garden, and before that was so much movement of people
that I saw him not. Or I saw it first did not distinguish between
the quantity? I knew immediately that my idea was worthless. The
no caution or limited adjustment gave his misery exceeded my budget.
I had neither the inclination angle of his stance had yet grasped
the horror with which the inside of his eyelids he seemed continually
to meet.

I had never thought of his mouth, which was recovered as the
opening of a process. Perhaps he had memories, but now was no
longer something to his soul than this daily amorphous feeling
of the stone edge behind him on which his hand is abnutzte. I was
stehngeblieben, and while almost everything I looked at the
same time, I felt that he had a different hat and a Sunday without
a doubt, neck binding, it was slanted in yellow and purple patterned
squares, and what the hat, it was a cheaper new straw hat with a
green band.

It is of course nothing in these colors, and it is petty, that I've
kept it. I just want to say to him that they were as soft on the
underside of a bird.

He himself had no desire to, and who by all (I saw around me) was
allowed to think this state would be to him? My God, it fell to me
with vehemence, so are you also. It giebt evidence of your
existence. I've forgotten them all and have not ever required,
because the obligation would be approximately heuere in
your certainty. And yet, now is shown me. This is your taste,
here hast thou pleasure. The fact that we have learned above all
to endure and not judge. What are the major things? What are the
merciful? Thou knowest it.

If it is winter again and I must have a new cloak, - gieb me that I
wear it so, as long as he is new. It's not that I differ from them
will, if I live in a better from the start my own clothes around
and think that, somewhere to live.

I'm not so far. I do not have the heart to their lives.

When I received the arm, I think I hid it.

But (I do not know who else it was), they appeared every day in
front of the cafe terraces of houses, and though it was very difficult
for them to dismiss the mantle and from the obscure stuff out and
under stuff, they spared no effort to and did and moved out so long,
that man could hardly expect more.

And then they stood before us, modestly, with its barren, stunted
piece, and you saw that it was rare.

No, it's not that I differ from them will, but I überhübe me, I
wanted them equal.

I'm not. I would have neither their strength nor their degree. I
feed myself, and I am from meal to meal, geheimnislos completely,
but they get almost as eternal.

They are in their daily corners, also in November, but not before
yelling winter.

The fog comes and makes it unclear and uncertain, they are nonetheless.
I was traveling, I was sick a lot, I passed: but they are not dead.

(I know not even how it is possible that the school Aufstehn in the
chambers fully grauriechender cold; who they define the skeleton
Chen hasty that they also run into the adult city in the tilt of
the cloudy night, in the eternal school still small, always full
anticipation, always late.

I have no idea of the amount of assistance, which are still to be
consumed.) This city is full of those who slowly to them hinabgleiten.

Most balk at first, but then it giebt This faded, aging girls who
continually without resistance hinüberlassen, strong, inwardly
unused, have never been loved.

Maybe you think, my God, that I should leave everything and to
love them. Or why is it so difficult to me, not to pursue them if
they overtake me?

Why I invent all at once the sweetest, nightly words and my voice
is gently between my throat and heart.

Why do I imagine, as I carefully unutterable would hold my breath,
these dolls, with which life has played them spring to spring for
nothing and nothing is hitting the arms deal until they were loose
in the shoulders.

You are never very high hopes of a fallen, they are not broken, but
behind them and are already living on the poor.

Only lost cats come to them in the evening the board and scrape
them secretly and sleep on them.

Sometimes I follow a two-lanes wide. They go to the houses that
people continually come, they hide it behind them continue to
dwindle to nothing.

And yet, I know now if one tried, they liebzuhaben, they would be
hard on him as Zuweitgegangene, go to the stop .

I believe that only Jesus ertrüge them, yet the rise in all limbs
has, but it is nothing to them.

Only the lovers seduce him, not those who wait with a little talent
to lover like a cold lamp.

I know if I'm destined to extremes, so it will not help me that I
adjust my clothes better. He has not slipped in the middle of the
kingdom under the last?

He, instead of positions hinabsank to the bottom. It is true that
I have at times to the other kings believed that although the Parke
nothing more to prove. But it is night, it's winter, I freeze, I
believe in him.

After all, the glory is only a moment, and we have never seen anything
longer than the misery. But the king will take. Is not this the
only one who got under his own madness as wax flowers under a glass
fall?

For others they prayed in the churches to long life, but he demanded
the Chancellor Jean Charlier Gerson, that he ever had, and that
was when he was already poor, bad and sheer poverty, despite its
crown.
CHAPTER XV
Plot and Counterplot


A lady a party of pleasure made,
   And she planned her scheme full well,
And day and night the party filled
   The head of the demoiselle.--FABER

Though Frank had no reason to expect that the tidings of his success
would be hailed with much satisfaction at home, yet his habit of
turning to his mother for sympathy would have been too much for his
prudence, but for the fact that Terry De Lancey had dragged into her
room a massive volume of prints from the Uffizi Gallery, and was
looking it over with her, with a zest she had not seen since the
days when her father gloried in his collection.

His victory could only be confided to Charlie, who might laugh, but
fully appreciated the repose of mind with which he could now
encounter the examiners, and promised to do his part to cover the
meetings of the lovers the next day.  But even then the chances of
another performance on the lake, or of a walk among the icicles
afterwards, were departing.  Thaw was setting in and by breakfast-
time there was a down-pouring rain.  Frank lingered about Cecil in
hopes of a message to serve as an excuse for a rush to Sirenwood;
but she proved to be going to drive to the working-room, and then to
lunch at Mrs. Duncombe's, to meet the Americans and the ladies from
Sirenwood, according to a note sent over in early morning at first
sight of the wet.

Thereupon Frank found he had a last reference to make to his tutor,
and begged for a lift.  A touch of warmth in Cecil would have opened
the flood-gates of his confidence, but she was exercised about a
mistake in the accounts, and claimed his aid in tracking a defective
seven-pence.  When she heard him utter the monstrous statement that
a hundred and five farthings were almost nine shillings, she looked
at him with withering compassion, as sure to fail, and a small loss
to Her Majesty; nor would she listen to any of his hints that he was
very curious to see her working-room.

His question to the tutor judiciously lasted till twelve, when he
dropped in to consult Captain Duncombe about horse-hire in London;
and that gentleman, who had been undergoing a course of political
economy all the morning, eagerly pounced on him for a tour of his
stables, which lasted till luncheon was due, and he could casually
enter the dining-room, where Lady Tyrrell held out her hand good-
naturedly to him, laughing at the blankness he could not entirely
conceal.  "Only me!" she said.  "It can't be helped!  Poor Lenore
caught such a dreadful sore throat last night, that I have shut her
up in her room with a mustard poultice."

"Indeed!  I am very sorry."

"You may well look horrified!  You were the guilty party, I suspect.
Taking her all across the park under those dank trees!"

He coloured up to the eyes, little expecting to be thus convicted;
but Mrs. Duncombe came to his aid.  "My impartiality would impute
the damage to her standing about with those wretched little dogs of
mine."

"It is your climate," said Mrs. Tallboys.  "In our dry atmosphere
there would be no risk with a far lower temperature."

"I hope it is nothing serious," said Frank, anxiously.

"I hope so too," said Lady Tyrrell, looking archly into his face,
which had not learnt such impenetrability as poor Lenore's.

"No; but really?" he said, in anxiety that would not be rallied
away.

"This is the way," said Lady Tyrrell.  "Young gentlemen persuade
young ladies to do the most imprudent things--saunter about in the
cold after skating, and dawdle under trees, and then wonder when
they catch cold.--Do they do such things in your country, Mrs.
Tallboys, and expect the mammas and elder sisters to be gratified?"

"Mammas and elder sisters are at a discount with you, are not they?"
said Mrs. Duncombe.

"Our young women are sufficient to protect themselves without our
showing tacit distrust, and encumbering them with guardianship,"
returned the Professor.

"Mr. Charnock wishes we had reached that point," said Lady Tyrrell.

She had put him completely out of countenance.  He had not supposed
her aware of his having been Lenore's companion, and was not certain
whether her sister had not after all confided in her, or if he
himself had not been an unconscious victim.  The public banter
jarred upon him; and while Cecil was making inquiries into the
extent of the young ladies' privileges in America, he was mentally
calculating the possibilities of rushing up to Sirenwood, trying to
see Lenore in spite of her throat, and ascertaining her position,
before his train was due; but he was forced to resign the notion,
for Raymond had made an appointment for him in London which must not
be missed; and before luncheon was over the dog-cart, according to
agreement with Charlie, called for him.

"Good-bye, Mr. Frank," said Mrs. Duncombe; "will you have an old
shoe thrown after you for luck?"

"The time is not come for that yet," said Cecil, gravely.

"Tending in that direction.  Eh, Charnock?" said the Captain.
"Here's to your success--now, and in what's to come!"

"Thank you, Captain," said Frank, shaking his hand, liking the
hearty voice.  "Lady Tyrrell, won't you give me your good wishes?"
he asked, half diffidently.

"For the examination--yes, certainly," she replied.  "It is safer
not to look too far into your wishing-well."

"And--and will you give my--my best regards to Le--to Miss Vivian,
and say I grieve for her cold, and trust to her--to her good wishes--
" he uttered, quick and fast, holding her hand all the time.

"Yes, yes," she said quickly; "but last messages won't do when
trains are due."

"Not due yet," said Frank; "but I must go home.  I've not seen my
mother to-day, and I shall not have a moment.--Good-bye, Cecil; have
you any commands for Raymond?"

"No, thank you," said Cecil, gravely; and with a bow to the
Americans, he was gone.

"That is one of your products of the highest English refinement?"
said Mrs. Tallboys, whom in his preoccupation he had scarcely
noticed.

"How does he strike you?" said Cecil.  "He is my brother-in-law, but
never mind that."

"He looks fitted for the hero of a vapid English novel.  I long to
force him to rough it, and to rub off that exquisite do-nothing air.
It irritates me!"

"Frank Charnock has done a good deal of hard work, and is not to
lead the life of an idle man," said Captain Duncombe.  "I know I
should not like to be in his shoes if he succeeds--grinding away in
an office ten months out of the twelve."

"In an office!  I should like to set him to work with an axe!"

"Well, those dainty-looking curled darlings don't do badly in the
backwoods," said Lady Tyrrell.

"Ah!  I understand!  You stand up for him because there's a little
tendresse for your sister," said the plain-spoken American.

"Poor fellow!  I am afraid he is far gone.  It is an impossible
thing, though, and the sooner he can be cured of it the better,"
said Lady Tyrrell.  "I am sorry that walk took place yesterday.--Did
he mention it at home, Cecil?"

"You are a very inconsistent woman, Lady Tyrrell," broke in Mrs.
Duncombe in her abrupt way.  "Here you are come to uphold the
emancipation of woman, and yet, when we come to your own sister
taking one poor walk--"

"I beg your pardon, Bessie," said Lady Tyrrell, with her most
courteous manner.  "I never said I was come to uphold the
emancipation of woman; only to subject myself to Mrs. Tallboys'
influence--she has to make a convert of me."

For, of course, Lady Tyrrell was only drawn into the controversy as
a matter of amusement, and possibly as something specially
distasteful to the house of Charnock Poynsett; and Cecil was a good
deal influenced by the fascination of her example, as well as by the
eagerness of Mrs. Duncombe and the charms of the Americans; and
above all, they conspired in making her feel herself important, and
assuming that she must be foremost in all that was done.  She did
not controvert the doctrines of Dunstone so entirely as to embrace
the doctrines of emancipation, but she thought that free ventilation
was due to every subject, most especially when the Member's wife was
the leading lady in bringing about such discussion.  The opposition
made in the town to Mrs. Duncombe's sanitary plans, and the contempt
with which they had been treated as ladies' fancies, had given a
positive field of battle, with that admixture of right and wrong on
either side which is essential to championship.  And in truth Cecil
was so much more under the influence of Camilla Tyrrell and Bessie
Duncombe than under that of any other person, that she was ready to
espouse any cause that they did.

How to arrange for the intended instruction was the difficulty,
since Wil'sbro' was without a town-hall, and, moreover, the
inhabitants were averse to all varieties of change, either as to the
claims of women, the inequality of social laws, the improvement of
education, or the comprehension of social science--the regular
course which Mrs. Clio W. Tallboys was wont to lecture.

The matter could only be managed by arranging a series of soirees at
different houses.  Mrs. Duncombe's rooms were far too small; but if
some person of more note--'some swell' as she said--would make the
beginning, there would be no difficulty in bringing others to follow
suit.

"You must do it, Lady Tyrrell," said Mrs. Duncombe.

"I!  If there's nobody else; but it would come much better from
another quarter," nodding at Cecil.

"Don't you wish you may get it?" muttered the slang-loving Bessie.

"That's one point in which we leave you far behind," said Mrs.
Tallboys.  "We issue our invitations quite independently of the
other members of the household.  Each has a separate visiting list."

"There need be no difficulty," said Cecil; "all matters of visiting
are in my hands.  It is necessary in our position; and if Lady
Tyrrell thinks it proper that I should give the first party, I will
do so."

"Bravo, what fun!" cried Mrs. Duncombe, clapping her hands.  "You
won't get into a jolly row, though?" she added, anxiously.

"I am perfectly sure of my ground," said Cecil, with the dignity of
one to whom a 'row' was unheard of.  "It is the simple duty of a
Member to come forward in promoting free discussion of opinions."

"You are a public-spirited woman, Cecil," said Lady Tyrrell.  "When
you have made the first move, I'll follow.  Then whom shall we ask
next?"

"Mrs. Moy," said Bessie.  "She is a nonentity herself, but if Gussie
were to be strongly bitten she could do more than any one else, and
make her father reform that nest of horrors in Water Lane!"

"I'm afraid the freedom side will bite her more than the sanitary
side," said Lady Tyrrell.

"She is capital fun, though, and a great ally of ours," said Mrs.
Duncombe; "and the rooms at Proudfoot Lawn are worth anything!"

Other details were fixed, even to the day of Cecil's opening party,
which must take place on the first practicable day; but there was
none to be found till the Wednesday week, the day before Raymond
would return home.  Cecil did not recollect this till the day had
been unanimously agreed on, and it was with a little alarm; but
after what she had asserted about her freedom of action, she could
not retract before the eyes of the American lady; and, as she said
to herself, she could receive her own ladies' party, without
interfering with any one else, in the library, so that no one had a
right to object.  However, she had a certain anticipation of
opposition, which caused her to act before announcing her intention;
and thus it was that Rosamond found her dropping a number of notes
through the slit in the lid of the post-box.  "Another dinner?" was
the question.

"No, this is a soiree in the library, entirely for ladies; Mrs.
Tallboys is to explain her views in the evenings at the Principal
houses in the neighbourhood.  She will begin here on Wednesday
week."

"Why, that's before Raymond comes back!"

"This is entirely for women."

"Women! women's rights!  How have you got Mrs. Poynsett to consent?"

"I have carte blanche in these matters."

"Do you mean that you have not consulted her?  Does Raymond know?
Oh!  Yes, I see I have no right to ask; but, Cecil, for your own
sake, I entreat you to consider what you are about, before running
into such a frightful scrape!" and Rosamond impulsively caught the
hand that was still putting in a letter; but Cecil stood still, not
withdrawing or moving a muscle, perfectly impassive.  Rosamond went
on more eagerly, "Oh yes, I know you don't like me--I'm only a poor
battered soldier's daughter, quite an unworthy associate for a
Charnock of the Charnocks; but I can't help begging you to consider
the consequences of sending out invitations to hear this strange
woman hold forth in Mrs. Poynsett's own house, in your husband's
absence."

"Thank you for your solicitude," said Cecil, dropping in her
envelope the instant the obstructive hand was removed, and going on
her way with dignified self-possession; while Rosamond, in a tumult
of indignation, which made her scarcely comprehensible, rushed up to
her husband at his writing, and poured out her story.

Clio advocating female supremacy in Mrs. Poynsett's own house,
without notice to her!  Should she be warned in time to stop the
letters?  Should Raymond be written to?  Rosamond was for both,
Julius for neither.  He said that either way would begin a system
that could never be forgiven; and that they had better consider
themselves as practically at the Rectory, and not interfere.

"How can you be so cold-blooded?" cried she.

"I do not want to do worse harm.  My mother will learn what is to
happen sooner or later; and then she can put a stop to it in any way
she chooses."

"I wish she would send in Mrs. Crabtree with her tawse!" said
Rosamond.  "But is it right by Raymond to let his wife bring this
Yankee muse to talk her nonsense in his very rooms?"

"You have argued with her?"

"Or with a block--a stock--a stone!" raved Rosamond.

"Then depend upon it, to inform against her would be far worse than
letting any amount of absurdity be talked.  I should like to know
how you would get over being so served!"

"Don't make comparisons, sir!  Poor things! they would not be the
worse for a little of our foolishness!"

Things settled themselves according to Julius's prediction; for Mr.
Bowater, coming up with his son Herbert to see his old friend, said,
"What grand doings are you having here?  What is Raymond's wife up
to?  Ladies' conversazione--that's a new thing in these parts!"

"I gave such matters up to her," said Mrs. Poynsett.  "Young people
like a little freedom of action; and there are changes in the
neighbourhood since I was laid up."  It was a temporizing speech, to
avoid showing her total ignorance.

Mr. Bowater cleared his throat.  "Young folk may like freedom of
action, but it don't always follow that it is good for them.  I hope
she won't get Raymond into a scrape, that's all--committing him and
herself to a course of lectures by that Yankee woman on woman's
rights."

"It does not commit him; it is before he comes home, on Wednesday,"
said Herbert.

"Never mind that; what a woman does her husband does.  Look here,
Mrs. Edipo to exit from the womb of his mother his father gave him
a shepherd to kill him, because the oracle of Apollo said that if
man did, he would kill his father.

Pitying the pastor, it hung, upside down in a tree in the forest;
their whining attracted Forbante, pastor of Polivio, king of
Corinth, and entrusted their care to Forbante Queen Merope, wife
of Polivio, as it did not stem the queen, took the creature.

Gleaned When Oedipus went to Thebes, and their raids had killed her
father, King Layo, who never knew, and married his mother, who does
not know, were his sons Eteocles and pollinates, who fought until
want to be succumbed by the crown. [35] _Venus_, goddess of love
and beauty, the daughter of Jupiter and Diana, and others that arose
spontaneously from the sea foam. [36] _Cupido_, god of love, son
of Venus and Mars. [37] _Fama_, goddess worshiped by the pagans,
and who disseminates any act of man, good or bad; unmatched in speed
and thundering voice. [38] _Desjarretadera_ or _Medialuna_, so
appointed a flag or banner of the Moors, because it is painted half
moon. [39] _Emir_, governor or viceroy of the Moors. [40] _Diana_,
goddess daughter of Jupiter and Latona, fond of hunting, beauty
model and has control over the nymph. [41] _Houríes_, beautiful
maidens of Paradise created by the Prophet Muhammad from the Moors,
he promised to give happiness to those who wholeheartedly believed
in their erroneous sect. [42] In a dark and lonely forest, where
the thorny bejuco no space left, and where it was difficult to see
the sun inside enmarañadísimo.

Large trees offered only grief, sadness and melancholy: the birds
were singing a funeral, even for most bustling and joyful hearts.

All the vines that wraps itself in the branches of the trees were
covered with thorns, the fruit was Velluda and the forest produce
to any disease that was going to close.

"Hurrah!" cried Rosamond.  "You mean that we should have plenty of
fun--and, in fact, drum out the rights of woman."

"At any rate, present a counter attraction.  You and Charlie and
your brothers, with the Bowaters, might do something?"

"Trust me!" cried Rosamond.  "Oh! I am so thankful to Mr. Bowater.
Julius and I had our blood boiling; and I said as much or more to
Cecil than woman could, but she minded me no more than the old white
cockatoo; and Julius said our telling would only make more
mischief."

"He was quite right," said his mother.  "Let there not be one word
of opposition, you know; only swamp it.  You could get up some
charades, and have something going on all the evening."

"Trust me for that!  Oh! if my darling Aileen were but here!  But
Tom is the very model of an actor, and Terry is grand, if only we
can keep him out of the high tragedy line.  King Lear is the mildest
thing he condescends to!"

"Could you manage a Christmas-tree?  The taking up a room beforehand
is inconvenient; but I should like to offer some little substantial
bait, even to the grown-up;" and her eyes twinkled merrily.

"I know a better thing," said Rosamond; "an enchanted grove with a
beneficent witch.  We did it at St. Awdry's, with bon-bons and
trumpery, in a little conservatory, hardly large enough to turn
round in.  If I may have the key of the conservatory, I'll manage."

"You shall have what you please; and perhaps you would kindly go and
choose the things at Backsworth.  There is a very good fancy shop
there."

"Thank you, thank you!  How sweet!--Now, Anne, you will see what you
shall see!"

"Is there to be dancing?" asked Anne, humbly yet resolutely.

"There shall not be, my dear, if it will spoil the evening for you,"
said Mrs. Poynsett.

"I promised," said Anne.

At that moment the servants came in with the preparations for the
afternoon tea, closely followed by the ever punctual Cecil.

Mrs. Poynsett asked her whether she would require the barouche on
the morrow, since Rosamond and Anne would want it to go to
Backsworth, to obtain requisites for a children's entertainment to
take place on Wednesday.

"Some friends of mine are coming on Wednesday," said Cecil

"Indeed!  In Raymond's absence?"

"This is not a dinner, but a ladies' party."

"Then it will combine the better."

"Certainly not," replied Cecil.  "Mine is simply intellectual--only
a few intelligent women to meet Mrs. Tallboys in the library.  It
will be quite apart from any amusements Rosamond may like to have
for the children in the drawing-room."

"Pray, will they require nothing but this feast of reason and flow
of soul?--for the housekeeper will need warning."

"They will have dined.  Nothing but coffee will be wanted."

"For how many?"

"About twelve or fourteen, thank you.  Excuse me--I have something
to finish in my own room."

They were very glad to excuse her, and the following note was
concocted to serve both for those she might have invited and those
she might not; and it was copied by the two daughters for all the
acquaintance who had young folks in their houses.  Anmuthsvolle flower!
To sprinkle 'I with flowers thy bridal bed: Beautiful Juliette,
now the mistress of the angels, take this last characteristic of
love, from one of the ladies in your life, and now in death - (the
boy hisses) The boy giebt a sign it is approaching what - what
cursed feet wander in these late night hieher me in the gentle
traditions of love for traurenden stören?

- How? a light? Hide me for a while, o night - (He goes Bey page.)
Fourth Scene. (Romeo and Balthasar with a light.) Romeo. Gieb me the
Karst and the Heb-iron. Here, take this letter and that you
see him tomorrow morning to my Lord and Father überlieferst.

Gieb me the
light, so fond of thy life, commanding 'ichs thee, thou mayest see
or hear what you want, then stay far away from , and under brich
am not in my plans.

Why I descend into the crypt, it and
some my lover again to see, but mainly from their Todt a precious
ring finger to draw a ring which I use to be an important Nöthiger
did, away from here so you go -- unterfängst you but Fürwiz
zurükzukehren to see what I'm even more in the sense thun have Beyme
sky, so I want you to articular joints in Stüke fails, and this
hungry churchyard with thy limbs breadcrumbs.

The time and my intentions are cruel and wild, fierce and relentless
as a blood-lechzende Tyger and the wailing sea. Balthasar. I want to
go, Gracious Lord, and you do not disturb. Romeo. Kanst So you
show me your friends - Take thou the; leb and sey glüklich, fahrwohl,
good boy.

Balthasar (leaving in front of you.) All this gives me more stronger
motivation for me around here to hide. I fear his Blik, and doubt
that he was in good sense. Romeo. Schlund you vile, accursed mouth
of death, the most precious of what the world had swallowed,
so I Zwing your rotten Kinnbaken to öfnen, (he breaks at the tomb)
to thee with violence with even more dining vollzustopfen. Paris
(comes out.) Diss is banished übermüthige Montague, the lovers killed
my cousin, (which by the grief she had about how to believe that
the cause of her death was), and now he is come to some sort of
vile affront to their corpses to exercise: I want him to stop -
stop with your damn job, no decent Montague: Willt your Wuthe to
extend the Todt?

Oh no!  That was the cruel cut!  It was with little Miss
Marks, whose father had just risen from the ranks.  Such a figure
she was, enough to set your teeth on edge; when, behold! this
reverend minister extracts her from the wall-flowers, and goes
through the Lancers with her in first-rate style, I assure you.  It
had such an effect, do you know, that what does my father do but go
and ask her next; and I heard an old lady remarking that there were
only two gentlemen in the room, Mr. Charnock and Lord Rathforlane.
So you see it was all worldliness after all, Anne."

"I suppose it was good-nature," said Anne.

"Indignation, I fancy," said Julius.

"Now, was he very wicked for it, Anne?"

"N--no, if dancing be not wrong."

"But why should it?"

"All the bad people danced in the Bible."

"Miriam--King David, eh?"

"That was part of their religious service."

"The welcome to the prodigal son?" further suggested Julius.  "Does
not this prove that the exercise is not sinful in itself?"

"But you would not do it again?" repeated Anne.

"I certainly should not make a practice of it, nor go to balls any
more than I would be a sportsman or a cricketer, because I am bound
to apply my whole self to the more direct service; but this does not
show that there is evil necessarily connected with these amusements,
or that they may not safely be enjoyed by those who have time, and
who need an outlet for their spirits, or by those who wish to guard
these pleasures by presiding over them."

"Don't persuade me!" exclaimed Anne.  "I gave my word to Mr. Pilgrim
that nothing should induce me to dance or play at cards."

"Mr. Pilgrim had no right--" began Rosamond; but Julius hushed her,
saying, "No one wishes to persuade you, Anne.  Your retirement
during Miles's absence is very suitable and becoming."

"Till we live in the Bush, out of the way of it all," said Anne.

"I wish you could have seen one of our real old Christmas parties;
but those can never be again, without mother herself or Mrs.
Douglas."

"Do tell me about those Douglases," said Rosamond.  "Cecil hinted at
some romance, but seemed to think you had suppressed the connection
because he was an attorney."

"Not exactly," said Julius, smiling; "but it is a sad story, though
we have no doubt he bore the guilt of others."

"Something about two thousand pounds!"

"Yes.  It was the year that my mother and Raymond were abroad.  She
had been buying some property near, and sent home an order from
Vevay.  It did not come, and was inquired for; but as it was an
order, not a draft, it was not stopped at the bank; and in about a
fortnight more it was presented by a stranger, and paid without
hesitation, as it was endorsed "Proudfoot and Moy."  Old Proudfoot
was away at Harrogate, and came home to investigate; young Proudfoot
denied all knowledge of it, and so did his brother-in-law Moy; but
Raymond, working at the other end, found that the waiter at the
hotel at Vevay had forgotten to post the letter for more than a
week, and it was traced through the post to Wil'sbro', where the
postman remembered delivering a foreign-looking letter to Archie
Douglas at the door of the office.  It came alone by the afternoon
post.  His account was this:  They were all taking it rather easy in
old Proudfoot's absence; and when a sudden summons came to take the
old farmer's instructions for his will, Archie, as the junior, was
told off to do it.  He left George Proudfoot and Moy in a private
room at the office, with Tom Vivian leaning over the fire talking,
as he had a habit of doing in old Proudfoot's absence.  As he opened
the office door the postman put the letter into his hand; and
recognizing the writing, he ran back, and gave it in triumph to
George Proudfoot, exclaiming that there it was at last, but he was
in danger of being late for the train, and did not wait to see it
opened; and when he came back he was told that it had been merely a
letter of inquiry, with nothing in it, and destroyed at once.  That
was his account; but Proudfoot, Moy, and Vivian all denied any
knowledge of this return of his, or of the letter.  The night of
this inquiry he was missing.  Jenny Bowater, who was with an aunt in
London, heard that a gentleman had called to see her while she was
out for a couple of days; and a week later we saw his name among the
passengers lost in the Hippolyta off Falmouth."

"Poor Jenny!  Was she engaged to him?"

"On sufferance.  On her death-bed Mrs. Douglas had wrung from Mr.
Bowater a promise that if Archie did well, and ever had means
enough, he would not refuse consent; but he always distrusted poor
Archie, because of his father, and I believe he sent Jenny away to
be out of his reach.  If any of us had only been near, I think we
could have persuaded him to face it out, and trust to his innocence;
but Raymond was abroad, Miles at sea, I at Oxford, and nothing like
a counsellor was near.  If Jenny had but seen him!"

"And has nothing happened to clear him?"

"No.  Raymond hurried home, and did his best, but all in vain.
George Proudfoot was indeed known to have been in debt to Vivian;
but Moy, his brother-in-law, an older man, was viewed as a person
whose word was above all question, and they both declared the
signature at the back of the order not to be genuine.  Archie's
flight, you see, made further investigation impossible; and there
was no putting on oath, no cross-examination."

"Then you think those three had it?"

"We can think nothing else, knowing Archie as we did.  Raymond
showed his suspicions so strongly, that old Proudfoot threw up all
agencies for our property, and there has been a kind of hostility
ever since.  Poor Vivian, as you know, came to his sad end the next
year, but he had destroyed all his papers; and George Proudfoot has
been dead four or five years, but without making any sign.  Moy has
almost risen above the business, and--see, there's Proudfoot Lawn,
where he lives with the old man.  He claims to compete with the
county families, and would like to contest Wils'bro' with Raymond."

"And Jenny?" asked Anne.  "Did she bear it as a Christian?  I know
she would."

"She did indeed--most nobly, most patiently.  Poor girl! at her own
home she knew she stood alone in her faith in Archie's innocence;
but they were kind and forbearing, and kept silence, and the
knowledge of our trust in him has bound her very close to us."

"Was that call, when she did not see him, all she ever heard of
him?"

"All! except that he left a fragment of paper with the servant, with
the one pencil scrawl, 'A Dieu!'--a capital D to mark the full
meaning.  She once showed it to me--folded so as to fit into the
back of a locket with his photograph."

"Dear Jenny!  And had you traced him on board this ship?"

"No, but his name was in the list; and we knew he had strong fancy
for South Africa, whither the Hippolyta was bound.  In fact he ought
to have been a sailor, and only yielded to his mother's wishes."

"We knew a Mr. Archibald Douglas once," said Anne; "he came and
outspanned by us when he was going north after elephants.  He stayed
a fortnight, because his wagon had to be mended."

"O, Julius! if we could but find him for her again!" cried Rosamond.

"I am afraid Archibald Douglas is not much more individual a name
than John Smith," said Julius, sadly.

"That tells as much against the Hippolyta man," said Rosamond.

"Poor Archie would not be difficult to identify," said Julius; "for
his hair was like mine, though his eyes were blue, and not short-
sighted."

"That is all right, then," cried Anne; "for we had a dispute whether
he were young or old, and I remember mamma saying he had a look
about him as if his hair might have turned white in a single night."

"Julius!  Now won't you believe?" cried Rosamond.

"Had he a Scotch accent?" said Julius.

"No; I recollect papa's telling him he never should have guessed him
to be a Scot by his tongue; and he said he must confess that he had
never seen Scotland."

"Now, Julius!" pleaded Rosamond, with clasped hands, as if Jenny's
fate hung on his opinion.

"How long ago was this?" asked he.

"Four years," said Anne, with a little consideration.  "He came both
in going and returning, and Alick was wild to join him if he ever
passed our way again.  My father liked him so much that he was
almost ready to consent; but he never came again.  Ivory hunters go
more from Natal now."

"You will trace him!  There's a dear Anne!" exclaimed Rosamond.

"I will write to them at home; Alick knows a good many hunters, and
could put Miles into the way of making inquiries, if he touches at
Natal on his way home."

"Miles will do all he can," said Julius; "he was almost broken-
hearted when he found how Archie had gone.  I think he was even more
his hero than Raymond when we were boys, because he was more
enterprising; and my mother always thought Archie's baffled passion
for the sea reacted upon Miles."

"He will do it!  He will find him, if he is the Miles I take him
for!  How old was he--Archie, I mean?"

"A year older than Raymond; but he always seemed much younger, he
was so full of life and animation--so unguarded, poor fellow!  He
used to play tricks with imitating hand-writing; and these, of
course, were brought up against him."

"Thirty-four!  Not a bit too old for the other end of the romance!"

And our love why not taken root? Where is the time when you had a
look my life, soul and heaven? 15.

Why, when we parted, not cut the thread of my fucking life?
Your Memory my death, because in my heart, Celia, live forever. 16.

This affliction without fee, because you, or for that he fled,
which I was invited to sing, narrate the life of an unfortunate. 17.
Celia , too timid and ignorant to understand how my muse, and how
melancholy is the song on trivial, asperísimo, but, your ears
séanle supportive and understanding. 18.

This is the first fruit of my short ranges, which offends your noble
footsteps; recíbelo although, of worth, others, because it comes
from a sincere and loving heart. 19.

Even when you make insults and meat in it, my Desvelos will be well
paid, if you start reading a sob to remind the offering. 20.

Alegres nymphs of the Lagoon Bay, sirens song ineffable, he
relies on you today, with enough pain, my poor muse. 21. arisen
surrounding the banks and margins, and accompanied with your lira
my poor song, that although the speaker life is cut, it is their
wish that the faithful spread love. 22.

You, my flower of dreams, Celia, under the motto MAR, the Virgin Mother
prays for your server that is devoted FB AL LECTOR 1.

Thank you, reader dear, if my Desvelos das assert, that poetry,
though little shoot my flow, the probe who want to build 2..

If the first change appears Acedo and acre, and the immaturity
of agrura crust, try the pulpy fruit and vanilla Cathar palatable
the learned reader. 3. I do not claim too much esteem, make chacota
and ludibrio my poor verses, do whatever you want, that the harp is
in your hands but do not change only the verse 4. .

If you read verse improper Hallas, before giving raspadillo or
wrong, good examínalo upside down, and you'll see it clean and smooth.
5. If you come, anotado any foot of verse, if you do not understand
why a scholar is to say, set down the hearing and will include all
meaning. 6. I point here, oh reader discreet!

So no matter what I Sigismund, a so sweet and tasty cut into salty
language, a force change the verse.

COMMENCEMENT OF NARRATIVE 1. Once upon a dark, gloomy forest, [1]
thicket of thorny bejuco without interstices, where fatigue
struggling too Febo rays [2] to visit the inside of Sobejano thick.
2.

Gigantic there were only trees apesaramientos, heartbreak and tristura,
still singing of the birds brought to the amazement and joy serene
mood. 3. sarmentosa are many ivy tangled in the branches, armed
spiked iban and fruits, toweling, which picaban approached and
played 4..

The flowers of trees enhiestos, paraments outgoing leaves were black
and in line with the odor causing dizziness. 5.

"And what's the harm of betting when you've got the money?"

"And when you haven't?"

"That's another question."

"Do you approve it at the best?"

"It's a man's own concern."

"That's arguing against your better sense."

"Can't be helped, with two such solemn companions!  There would be
no bearing you if I didn't take you down sometimes, when you get so
didactic, and talk of fictitious excitement, indeed!  And now you
are going to Rood House, what will you be coming back?"

Rood House stood about two miles on the further side of Backsworth.
It was an ancient almshouse, of which the mastership had been wisely
given to Dr. Easterby, one of the deepest theological scholars,
holiest men, and bravest champions of the Church, although he was
too frail in health to do much, save with his pen, and in council
with the numerous individuals who resorted to him from far and wide,
and felt the beautiful old fragment of a monastic building where he
dwelt a true court of peace and refreshment, whence they came forth,
aided by prayer and counsel, for their own share of the combat.

Julius Charnock had, happily for himself, found his way thither when
his character and opinions were in process of formation, and had
ever since looked to Rood House for guidance and sympathy.  To be
only fourteen miles distant had seemed to him one great perfection
of Compton Poynsett; but of course he had found visits there a far
more possible thing to an unoccupied holiday son of the great house
than to a busy parish priest, so that this opportunity was very
valuable to him.

And so it proved; not so much for the details as for the spirit in
which he was aided in looking at everything, from the mighty
questions which prove the life of the Church by the vehement emotion
they occasion, down to the difficulties of theory and practice that
harassed himself--not named, perhaps, but still greatly unravelled.

Those perpetual questions, that have to be worked out again and
again by each generation, were before him in dealing with his
parish; and among them stood in his case the deeper aspects of the
question that had come forward on the drive, namely, the lawfulness
and expedience of amusement.

Granting the necessity of pastimes and recreation for most persons,
specially the young, there opened the doubtful, because ever-
varying, question of the kind and the quantity to be promoted or
sanctioned, lest restraint should lead to reaction, and lest
abstinence should change from purity and spirituality to moroseness
or hypocrisy.  And if Julius found one end of the scale represented
by his wife and his junior curate, his sister-in-law and his senior
curate were at the other.  Yet the old recluse was far more inclined
to toleration than he had been in principle himself, though the spur
of the occasion had led him to relaxations towards others in the
individual cases brought before him, when he had thought opposition
would do more harm than the indulgence.  His conscience had been
uneasy at this divergence, till he could discuss the subject.

The higher the aspiration of the soul, the less, of course, would be
the craving for diversion, the greater the shrinking from those evil
accompaniments that soon mar the most innocent delights.  Some
spirits are austere in their purity, like Anne; some so fervent in
zeal, as to heed nothing by the way, like Mr. Bindon; but most are
in an advanced stage of childhood, and need play and pleasure almost
as much as air or food; and these instincts require wholesome
gratification, under such approval as may make the enjoyment bright
and innocent; and yet there should be such subduing of their excess,
such training in discipline, as shall save them from frivolity and
from passing the line of evil, prevent the craving from growing to a
passion, and where it has so grown, tone it back to the limits of
obedience and safety.

Alas! perhaps there lay the domestic difficulty of which Julius
could not speak; yet, as if answering the thought, Dr. Easterby
said, "After all, charity is the true self-acting balance to many a
sweet untaught nature.  Self-denials which spring out of love are a
great safeguard, because they are almost sure to be both humble and
unconscious."

And Julius went away cheered as he thought of his Rosamond's wells
of unselfish affection, confident that all the cravings for variety
and excitement, which early habit had rendered second nature, would
be absorbed by the deeper and keener feelings within, and that these
would mount higher as time went on, under life's great training.

Pleasant it was to see the triumphant delight of the two sisters
over their purchases.  Such a day's English shopping was quite a new
experience to Anne; and she had not been cautioned against it, so
her enjoyment was as fresh and vivid as a child's; and they both
chattered all the way home with a merriment in which Julius fully
shared, almost surprised to see Anne so eager and lively, and--as
her cheeks glowed and her eyes brightened--beginning to understand
what had attracted Miles.

Mrs. Poynsett had not had quite so pleasant a day, for Cecil knocked
at her door soon after luncheon with an announcement that Lady
Tyrrell wished for admission.  Expecting an exposition of the Clio
scheme, she resigned herself, looking with some curiosity at the
beautiful contour of face and drooping pensive loveliness, that had
rather gained than lost in grace since the days when she had deemed
them so formidable.

"This is kind, dear Mrs. Poynsett," said the soft voice, while the
hand insisted on a pressure.  "I have often wished to come and see
you, but I could not venture without an excuse."

"Thank you," was the cold reply.

"I have more than an excuse--a reason, and I think we shall be fully
agreed; but first you must let me have the pleasure of one look to
recall old times.  It is such a treat to see you so unchanged.  I
hope you do not still suffer."

"No, thank you."

"And are you always a prisoner here?  Ah!  I know your patience."

"What was the matter on which you wanted to speak to me?" said Mrs.
Poynsett, fretted beyond endurance by the soft, caressing tone.

"As I said, I should hardly venture if I did not know we agreed--
though perhaps not for the same reasons.  We do agree in our love
and high opinion of your dear Frank!"

"Well!" repressing a shudder at the 'dear.'

"I am afraid we likewise agree that, under all circumstances, our
two young people are very unfortunately attached, and that we must
be hard-hearted, and let it go no further."

"You mean your sister?"

"My dear Lena!  I cannot wonder!  I blame myself excessively, for it
was all through my own imprudence.  You see, when dear Frank came to
Rockpier, it was so delightful to renew old times, and they both
seemed such children, that I candidly confess I was off my guard;
but as soon as I had any suspicion, I took care to separate them,
knowing that, in the state of my poor father's affairs, it would be
most unjustifiable to let so mere a youth be drawn into an
attachment."

"Frank is no prize," said his mother with some irony.

"I knew you would say that, dear Mrs. Poynsett.  Pecuniarily
speaking, of course, he is not; though as to all qualities of the
heart and head, he is a prize in the true sense of the word.  But,
alas! it is a sort of necessity that poor Lena, if she marry at all,
should marry to liberal means.  I tell you candidly that she has not
been brought up as she ought to have been, considering her
expectations or no expectations.  What could you expect of my poor
father, with his habits, and two mere girls?  I don't know whether
the governess could have done anything; but I know that it was quite
time I appeared.  I tell you in confidence, dear Mrs. Poynsett,
there was a heavy pull on my own purse before I could take them away
from Rockpier; and, without blaming a mere child like poor dear Lena
you can see what sort of preparation she has had for a small
income."

It is hard to say which tried Mrs. Poynsett's patience most, the
'dears' or the candour; and the spirit of opposition probably
prompted her to say, "Frank has his share, like his brothers."

"I understand, and for many girls the provision would be ample; but
poor Lena has no notion of economizing--how should she?  I am afraid
there is no blinking it, that, dear children as they both are,
nothing but wretchedness could result from their corning together;
and thus I have been extremely sorry to find that the affair has
been renewed."

"It was not an unnatural result of their meeting again."

"Ah! there I was to blame again; but no one can judge whether an
attachment be real between such children.  I thought, too, that
Frank would be gone out into the world, and I confess I did not
expect to find that he had absolutely addressed her, and kept it
secret.  Well, it inhibits but finally this outbreak of impatience and
despair! All these dreary woe your actions can not heal: The sky
and you had Antheil at this amiable girl, now it has all of the
heavens, and the better it is for them.

Euern Antheil to her Could you not keep in front of the death: But
the heavens Bey receives his eternal life. All you looking
was her collection - and her cries now, they have the clouds as
high as the sky itself is collected to see?

What a perverted love euerm is the child that you want to come to
their senses, as you can see that it is glüklich! Troknet your
Thränen, umstekt this beautiful corpse with rosemary and traget
them, as the use is, in her best suit in the church.

Capulets. Zurüstungen All that we have made our festival, is now
transforming into a full trauer corpses Gepränge. Our music music
instruments in melancholy Todt-Gloken our high temporal banquet in
a schwermüthiges corpses meal, our festive Lobgesänge in anxious
Klaglieder, and our wedding flower wreaths are now a Todt Baar-to
schmüken - O pitiful change! Brother Lawrence. Gracious Lord, goes
inside, and you, madam, go with him, her, Signor Paris, each one
ready to leave such beautiful corpse on her grave to accompany and
guard you, through the impatience of grumbling about you floating
anger of heaven nor more to irritate.

(They go from.) Sixth Scene. (The nurse and the Musicanten remain,
as of course, back. The last few are so fine that it has of itself
to realize that they are no longer nuzen, and the wise Amme
says they are still part of the abundance they Stekene So its
Pfeiffer, and want to go.

But to the great pleasure of spectators in the upper areas of
Peter, and demands that she sent a funny Stükchen be jungle, this
giebt then rise to a little) Divertissement (from word games and
fun in the taste of the Vienna-Harlequins, one variety, the freylich,
(as the spirit of Mr.

Voltaire wisely noted) the taste of our author and his contemporaries
little worthy, but the advantages with leads that the audience,
(which at the end but in the Comödie went to get a fun to make)
by the pitiful Scenes not stirred too much.) Fifth lift. Erste Scene.
(Mantua.) (Romeo meets on.) Romeo.

If I were the inspirations flattering sleep should marry, so my dreams
were pleasant news omen. An unusual spirit of Frölich fulfilled my
bosom, and raises me with pleasant thoughts about the ground up, I
dreamed that my lover would find me and would Todt - (What a strange
thing is a dream that he still Todt people permission giebt to
think!)

- and breathed through their kisses such a life in my lips that I
am back from the dead and Todt was Kayser. O heavens! how sweet is
the würkliche enjoyment of love, because their shade is so full of
delight are! (Balthasar occurs.) Newspapers of Verona's New - What's
Balthasar? Teach me letters from the Father? What is my mistress?
Is my father well? What makes my Juliette? I must ask again, because
if she is, so nothing is amiss. Balthasar. So it is probably because
nothing is amiss.

Your body sleeps in the funerals of the Capulets, and their immortal
lives with angels Theil.

I saw them in the vault of the family, and took it immediately
to post your own report.

Forgiveness, Gracious Lord, that my service nöthigt me to give you
such a nasty newspaper to bring! Romeo. Würklich Is it so?
- Sun biet 'ich euch Troz their star - You know my apartment,
go, get me Dinter and paper, and to order post-horses - I want this
night still continues. Balthasar. To pardon, Gracious Lord, I can
not leave you. Your Blik are bleak and wild, and mean nothing good.
Romeo. Silence! you cheat yourself.

Thu and leave me what I say to thee: Hast thou no letters from the
Father in me? Balthasar. No, Gracious Lord. Romeo. That does not
mean: go and order the horses, and I will like you Seyn Bey.
(Balthasar goes ab.) Well, Juliette, tonight I want you unicellular
Bey - Let's see how we do it?

How quickly will doom the entrance into a despairing Gemüth! - Erinnre
I am a pharmacist who lived here at some, and I lezthin in a ragged
coat, with the overhang Augbrauen, was looking for
herbs. I took the man into the eye; Blik saw his lean and starved
out, grief and misery seemed to him to the bone abgenuzt to have
in his squalid shack hieng a turtle, a stuffed alligator, and a few
other skins from mißgeschaffnen fish; and around on the racks stuhnd
like a mendicant Gepränge of empty cans, green irdnen pots, bladders,
musty Saame, remnants of Pakfaden, and old roses cake thinly scattered
enough so that it should see something similar.

Pettitt,
it is only on business."

"Ay!" said the other voice--female, and entirely untamed.  "He's
your great ally about your gutters and drains, isn't he?"

"The only landowner in Wil'sbro' who has a particle of public
spirit!" said Mrs. Duncombe.

Whereat good-natured Lady Rosamond could not but smile
congratulation to the hair-cutter, who looked meekly elevated, while
Tom whispered, "Proverb contradicted."

But the other voice replied, "Of course--he's a perfumer, learned in
smells!  You'd better drop it, Bessie! you'll never make anything of
it."

"I'll never drop what the health and life of hundreds of my fellow-
creatures depend on!  I wish I could make you understand, Gussie!"

"You'll never do anything with my governor, if that's your hope--you
should hear him and the mum talking!  'It's all nonsense,' he says;
'I'm not going to annoy my tenants, and make myself unpopular, just
to gratify a fashionable cry.'  'Well,' says mumsey, 'it is not what
was thought the thing for ladies in my time; but you see, if Gussie
goes along with it, she will have the key to all the best county
society.'  'Bother the county society!' says I.  'Bessie Duncombe's
jolly enough--but such a stuck-up set as they all are at Compton,
I'll not run after, behaving so ill to the governor, too!'  However--"

"There's a proverb about listeners!" said Rosamond, emerging when
she felt as if she ought to hearken no longer, and finding Mrs.
Duncombe leaning with her back to the counter, and a tall girl, a
few degrees from beauty, in a riding-habit, sitting upon it.

They both laughed; and the girl added, "If you had waited a moment,
Lady Rosamond, you would have heard that you were the only jolly one
of all the b'iling!"

"Ah! we shall see where you are at the end of Mrs. Tallboys'
lectures!" said Mrs. Duncombe.

"On what?" asked Rosamond.  "Woman's rights, or sanitary measures?
for I can't in the least understand why they should be coupled up
together."

"Nor I!" said Miss Moy.  "I don't see why we shouldn't have our own
way, just as well as the men; but what that has to do with drains
and gutters, I can't guess."

"I'm the other way," said Rosamond.  "I think houses and streets
ought to be made clean and healthy; but as for woman's rule, I fancy
we get more of it now than we should the other way."

"As an instance," said Mrs. Duncombe, "woman is set on cleansing
Wil'sbro'.  Man will not stir.  Will it ever be done till woman has
her way?"

"Perhaps, if woman would be patient, man would do it in the right
way, instead of the wrong!" quoth Rosamond.

"Patient!  No, indeed!  Nothing is to be done by that!  Let every
woman strive her utmost to get the work done as far as her powers
go, and the crusade will be accomplished for very shame!"

Just then Tom, looking highly amused, emerged, followed by Mr.
Pettitt, the only enlightened landlord on whom Mrs. Duncombe had
been able to produce the slightest impression.  He had owned a few
small tenements in Water Lane, which he was about to rebuild, and
which were evidently the pivot of operations.

At the door they met Cecil, and Rosamond detained her a moment in
the street to say, "My dear Cecil, is _that_ Miss Moy coming on
Wednesday?"

"Of course she is.  We greatly want to move her father.  He has the
chief house property there."

"It is too late now," said Rosamond; "but do you think it can be
pleasant to Jenny Bowater to meet her?"

"I know nothing of the old countrified animosities and gossipings,
which you have so heartily adopted," replied Cecil, proudly.
"Firstly, I ignore them as beneath me; secondly, I sacrifice them
all to a great cause.  If Miss Bowater does not like my guests, let
her stay away."

Here Mrs. Duncombe stood on the step, crying out, "Well, Cecil, how
have you sped with Mrs. Bungay?"

"Horrid woman!" and no more was heard, as Cecil entered Mr.
Pettitt's establishment.

"That might be echoed," said Tom, who was boiling over at the speech
to his sister.  "I knew that ape was an intolerable little prig of a
peacock, but I didn't think she could be such a brute to you, Rosie!
Romeo. Also pays' I do not thy will, but thy weakness. Pharmacist.
Pours it into what kind of liquor you want, and drink it, and if
it the strength of twenty men would have, so it will take you into
the other world send .

Romeo. Here is thy gold, a harmful poison for the souls of the people,
and what more Mordthaten-free healing in this world caused when
these poor Quaksalbereyen, you do not verkauffen kanst: I have sold
poison you, not me - go well, you buy to eat, and do, that thou
comest to flesh - Come on, heart-strengthening, not poison, come
with me where I need you to Juliette grave.

(They go from.) Zweyte Scene. (Transforms in the monastery to Verona.)
(brother Johann occurs.)

"What?  He took her part?"

"No such thing!  Hold your tongue, Tommy, and don't talk of married
folk till you're one yourself!"

"Papa never meant it," repeated the indignant Tom.  "I've a great
mind to write and tell him how you are served!"

"Now, Tom," cried Rosamond, stopping short, "if you do that, I
solemnly declare I'll never have you here again!  What could papa
do?  Do you think he could cure Raymond's wife of being a ridiculous
little prig?  And if he could--why, before your letter got to
Meerut, she will be gone up to London; and by the time she comes
back we'll be safe in our own Rectory.  Here, come in, and get our
string and basket at Mrs. Bungay's."

"I'll pay her out!" muttered Tom, as he followed his sister into
Mrs. Bungay's shop, one of much smaller pretensions, for the sale of
baskets, brushes, mats, &c.

The mistress, a stout, red-faced woman, looked as if she had been
'speaking a bit of her mind,' and was at first very gruff and
ungracious, until she found they were real customers; and moreover,
Tom's bland Irish courtesy perfectly disarmed her, when Rosamond,
having fixed her mind on a box in the very topmost pigeon-hole, they
not only apologized for the trouble they were giving, but Tom
offered to climb up and bring it down, when she was calling for the
errand-boy in vain.

